 In 1781 , Greenup helped settle the area now known as Lincoln County , Kentucky where he spent time as a surveyor and a land speculator . He was admitted to practice law in the county court in 1782 . Following Virginia 's creation of Kentucky County in 1783 , he was admitted to the bar of the district court of Harrodsburg and served as clerk from 1785 to 1792 . In 1783 , he became one of the original trustees of Transylvania Seminary ( later to become Transylvania University . ) He purchased two lots of land in Lexington and served as the clerk of the town 's trustees . 
 In 1785 , Greenup was elected to represent Fayette County for a single term in the Virginia House of Delegates . During his service , he was appointed to a committee with Benjamin Logan and James Garrard to make recommendations on ways to further divide the area that would become Kentucky . The committee was also responsible for revising acts and surveys related to land and water surveys in the area . The committee ultimately recommended the creation of three new counties – Bourbon , Madison , and Mercer . When Mercer County was created later that year , Greenup was appointed a justice there . 
 During this time , Greenup continued to practice law in Fayette County and pursued various other interests . He was a founding member of the Danville Political Club and in 1787 , he joined the Kentucky Society for Promoting Useful Knowledge . Future Kentucky Governors Isaac Shelby and James Garrard , as well as future Supreme Court justice Thomas Todd were also members of the Society . In 1789 , he helped organize the Kentucky Manufacturing Society . Later , he was appointed to the Kentucky River Company , a group dedicated to improving infrastructure on the Kentucky River . 
 On July 9 , 1787 , during a brief return to Virginia , Greenup married Mary Catherine ( " Cathy " ) Pope of Hanover County , Virginia ; the couple had two children – Nancy and William . [ b ] 
 = = Political career in Kentucky = = 
 Greenup served as clerk of the first Kentucky statehood convention in Danville in 1784 . He was elected as a delegate to the second and sixth statehood conventions in 1785 and 1788 , respectively , and was a trustee of the city of Danville in 1787 . H.E. Everman , biographer of fellow delegate James Garrard , noted that despite Greenup 's excellent legal background and legislative experience , his lack of oratorical skills prevented him from taking more of a leadership role in the conventions . 
 When Kentucky was admitted to the Union in 1792 , Greenup moved to Frankfort where he was rewarded for his efforts on behalf of the state by being chosen as an elector for the state 's senators and governor . He also served in the first Kentucky Senate . Following this , he was appointed to the court of oyer and terminer , but resigned immediately to accept a seat in the U.S. House of Representatives . He was one of Kentucky 's first two representatives in the House , and was elected to three successive terms , serving from November 9 , 1792 to March 3 , 1797 . In 1798 , he was elected to the Kentucky House of Representatives , representing Mercer County . He also served as clerk of the state senate from 1799 to 1802 . 
 Greenup was a candidate for governor of Kentucky in 1800 , but was runner @-@ up to James Garrard in a four @-@ man race that also included Benjamin Logan and Thomas Todd . Greenup garnered a majority of the vote in fifteen counties , just one fewer than Garrard , but Garrard enjoyed strong support in the populous central Kentucky counties and received 8 @,@ 390 votes , compared with 6 @,@ 746 for Greenup , 3 @,@ 996 for Logan , and 2 @,@ 166 for Todd . Garrard appointed Greenup judge of the circuit court in 1802 . After the Kentucky Senate refused to confirm Garrard 's Secretary of State , Harry Toulmin , as registrar of the land office , Garrard nominated Greenup . Greenup , however , intended to make another run at the governorship , and at his request , Garrard withdrew the nomination days later . 
 Greenup resigned his circuit judgeship on June 5 , 1804 , to make another run for governor . Immensely popular , he ran unopposed , and served as governor from September 4 , 1804 to September 1 , 1808 . During Greenup 's administration , the state chartered the Bank of Kentucky and the Ohio Canal Company ; Greenup became a director of the former in 1807 . Despite his popularity , however , he was unable to pass much of his proposed agenda , which included provision of public education and reforms to the militia , courts , revenue system , and penal system . 
 A partisan Frankfort newspaper implicated Greenup in the Burr conspiracy , but he successfully defended himself and preserved his reputation . He deployed the Kentucky militia along the Ohio River to defend the state from any threat that might result from the Burr conspiracy , but that threat had largely dissipated by 1807 . 
 On October 22 , 1807 , Greenup 's wife Mary died in the Governor 's Mansion . According to legend , her ghostly image has appeared in clock faces and mirrors inside the mansion . 
 Following his term as governor , Greenup was chosen as a presidential elector for the ticket of James Madison and George Clinton . In 1812 , he became a justice of the peace in Franklin County . In August 1812 , Kentucky Secretary of State Martin D. Hardin recommended to Governor Isaac Shelby that Greenup be appointed Assistant Secretary of State . Shelby made the appointment , and when Hardin , resigned December 15 , 1812 , Shelby nominated Greenup as his replacement . The Kentucky Senate approved the nomination on February 3 , 1813 , and Greenup served until his resignation on March 13 , 1813 . 
 Greenup died April 27 , 1818 , at Blue Lick Springs Resort , where he had traveled seeking relief from his rheumatism . He is buried in the Frankfort Cemetery . Greenup County , Kentucky was named in his honor , as was its county seat of Greenup , Kentucky . 
 = The Pasha 's Daughter = 
 The Pasha 's Daughter is a 1911 American silent short drama produced by the Thanhouser Company . The film focuses on an American named Jack who is traveling in Turkey . He befriends an aged Turk and is arrested as a conspirator against the government . His first attempt to flee the jail failed , but the second succeeds . Jack flees into the courtyard of the Pasha and is hidden from the guards by the Pasha 's daughter . Disguised as a woman , Jack makes his escape with her aid , but she refuses his offer to flee with him . A year later , the Pasha 's daughter is ushered in and announces that she wants to be his bride . 
 The only known cast credits are for William Garwood and William Russell and the production credits are unknown . The film was released on January 3 , 1911 and was met with positive reviews . The film survives in The Museum of Modern Art and it has been released on DVD as part of the Thanhouser Collection . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The film begins with Jack Sparks , a young American , who is traveling in Turkey . He befriends an aged Turk during a carriage ride and the Turk invites Jack into his home . The man smokes from a hookah and several of other men arrive and speak with the Turk whilst Jack wanders about the house . Soon afterwards , the men are all arrested for conspiracy against the government and Jack is imprisoned as one of the conspirators . In jail , Jack tries to make his escape and throws the guard to the ground , no sooner has he left the cell is he forced back by two more guards . He struggles in vain , but is once again locked in his cell . Jack gets an idea to escape when he sees the bed sheet and the cell window . Using his pocket knife , he digs out the bar of the cell window and drops to freedom . He struggles and overpowers a guard before climbing over the wall and into the courtyard of the Pasha 's palace . 
 The Pasha 'a daughter , <unk> , finds him hiding and orders her servant to assist in Jack 's escape . Guards appear and announce that they are looking for the escaped prisoner , but they are turned away . Dressed up as a woman , Jack tries to have <unk> flee with him . She says that one day she cannot marry him now , but she may come to his country one day . Jack trades a flower for his business card and departs . A year later , Jack and his mother have a visitor ushered and they stand in confusion at the beautiful young woman . Jack does not recognize her until she covers her face with her veil and she announces her intention to be his bride . 
 = = Cast = = 
 William Garwood as Jack Sparks 
 William Russell 
 = = Production = = 
 The writer of the scenario is unknown , but it was most likely Lloyd Lonergan . He was an experienced newspaperman employed by The New York Evening World while writing scripts for the Thanhouser productions . The film director is unknown , but it may have been Barry O 'Neil or Lucius J. Henderson . Cameramen employed by the company during this era included Blair Smith , Carl Louis Gregory , and Alfred H. Moses , Jr. though none are specifically credited . The role of the cameraman was uncredited in 1910 productions . The other cast credits are unknown , but many Thanhouser productions are fragmentary . In late 1910 , the Thanhouser company released a list of the important personalities in their films . The list includes G.W. Abbe , Justus D. Barnes , Frank H. Crane , Irene Crane , Marie Eline , Violet Heming , Martin J. Faust , Thomas Fortune , George Middleton , Grace Moore , John W. Noble , Anna Rosemond , Mrs. George Walters . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 The single reel drama , approximately 1 @,@ 000 feet long , was released on January 3 , 1911 . The film had a wide national release , advertising theaters include those in Indiana , Kansas , Utah , Wisconsin , North Carolina , South Dakota , Pennsylvania , New Hampshire , Illinois , Missouri , and Ohio . The Billboard reviewed the film and offered praise for the production , " This picture presents a story that is decidedly original and away from beaten paths . The settings in Turkey are elaborate and faithful to Turkish customs . All the players portray their respective parts in an excellent manner . The photography is very good . " The New York Dramatic Mirror provided a summary of the film and concluded that the film " was well enacted and the sets were fully adequate , creating a fair illusion of the Oriental land depicted . " The Moving Picture World was also provided a positive review , stating " The scenic effects are interesting and the story is lively enough to keep the audience wondering what the end will be . " One advertisement for the film erroneously claimed that the film was shot in the Orient , unaware that the film was shot in Thanhouser 's studio . 
 A print of the film survives in the archives of the Museum of Modern Art . The complete film as intended for its release is 13 minutes and 39 seconds long . As the original film did not have official musical accompaniment , a new original music score was composed and performed by Ben Model . The film was exhibited by The Museum of Modern Art on October 29 , 2009 , it was organized by Charles Silver and film historians Ben Model and Steve Massa . The film was released in Volume 10 of the Thanhouser Collection . 
 = Arrested Development ( TV series ) = 
 Arrested Development is an American television sitcom created by Mitchell Hurwitz , which originally aired on Fox for three seasons from November 2 , 2003 to February 10 , 2006 . A fourth season of 15 episodes was released on Netflix on May 26 , 2013 . The show follows the fictitious Bluth family , a formerly wealthy and habitually dysfunctional family . It is presented in a continuous format , incorporating handheld camera work and voice @-@ over narration , as well as the use of occasional archival photos and historical footage . The show also utilizes several long @-@ running " easter egg " jokes throughout each season . Ron Howard serves as both an executive producer and the series ' uncredited narrator . Set in Newport Beach , California , Arrested Development was filmed primarily in Culver City and Marina del Rey . 
 After its debut in 2003 , the series received widespread critical acclaim , six Primetime Emmy Awards , and one Golden Globe Award , and has attracted a cult following , including several fan @-@ based websites . In 2007 , Time listed the show among its " All @-@ TIME 100 TV Shows " ; in 2008 , it was ranked 16th on Entertainment Weekly 's " New TV Classics " list . In 2011 , IGN named Arrested Development the " funniest show of all time " . Its humor has been cited as a key influence on later single @-@ camera sitcoms such as 30 Rock and Community . 
 Despite critical acclaim , Arrested Development received low ratings and viewership on Fox , which canceled the series in 2006 . Rumors of an additional season and a feature film persisted until 2011 , when Netflix agreed to license new episodes and distribute them exclusively on its video streaming service . These episodes were later released in 2013 . Netflix has also commissioned a fifth season of Arrested Development , which is expected to premiere in 2016 . A script for an Arrested Development film has also been in development , with the main cast reported to reprise their original roles in both the fifth season and the film . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Conception = = = 
 Discussion that led to the creation of the series began in the summer of 2002 . Ron Howard had the original idea to create a comedy series in the style of handheld cameras and reality television , but with an elaborate , highly comical script resulting from repeated rewritings and rehearsals . Howard met with David Nevins , the President of Imagine Television , Katie O 'Connell , a senior vice president , and two writers , including Mitchell Hurwitz . In light of recent corporate accounting scandals , such as Enron and Adelphia , Hurwitz suggested a story about a " riches to rags " family . Howard and Imagine were immediately interested in using this idea , and signed Hurwitz to write the show . The idea was pitched and sold in the fall of 2002 . There was a bidding war for the show between Fox and NBC , with the show ultimately selling to Fox as a put pilot with a six @-@ figure penalty . 
 Over the next few months , Hurwitz developed the characters and plot for the series . The script of the pilot episode was submitted in January 2003 and filmed in March 2003 . It was submitted in late April to Fox and was added to the network 's fall schedule that May . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Alia Shawkat was the first cast in the series . Michael Cera , Tony Hale , and Jessica Walter were cast from video tapes and flown in to audition for Fox . Jason Bateman and Portia de Rossi both read and auditioned for the network and were immediately chosen . The character of Gob was apparently the most challenging to cast . When Will Arnett auditioned , he played the character " like a guy who thought of himself as the chosen son , even though it was obvious to everyone else that he was the least favorite " ; he was chosen immediately for his unique portrayal . The characters of Tobias and George Sr. were originally going to have minor roles , but David Cross and Jeffrey Tambor 's portrayals mixed well with the rest of the characters , and they were given more significant parts . Howard provided the narration for the initial pilot , and his narrating meshed so well with the tone of the program that the decision was made to keep his voice . Howard also aided in the casting of " Lucille 2 " ; the producers told him that their dream actress for the role was Liza Minnelli but assumed no one of her stature would take the part . She agreed when Ron Howard asked her himself , because they were old friends ; she had been his babysitter when he was a teenager . 
 = = = Production design = = = 
 Arrested Development uses several elements rare for American live @-@ action sitcoms . It was shot on location and on videotape with multiple cameras , parodying tactics often employed in documentary film and reality television , straying from the " fixed @-@ set , studio audience , laugh track " style long dominant in comedy production . The show also makes heavy use of cutaway gags , supplementing the narrative with visual punchlines like security camera footage , Bluth family photos , website screenshots , archive films , and flashbacks . An omniscient third @-@ person narrator ( producer Ron Howard ) ties together the multiple plot threads running through each episode , while humorously undercutting and commenting on the characters . Arrested Development also developed a unique self @-@ referentiality through use of in @-@ jokes that evolved over multiple episodes , which rewarded longtime viewership ( and in turn may have discouraged new viewers and contributed to the show 's ratings issues ) . 
 = = = Lawsuit = = = 
 In November 2003 , the producers of the show were sued by the hip hop group Arrested Development over the alleged use of their name . Rapper " Speech " from the group said " The use of our name by Fox is not only confusing to the public , but also has the potential to significantly dilute what the ' Arrested Development ' name means to our fans " . The lawsuit was quietly settled for an undisclosed sum . 
 This incident was referenced in the episode " Motherboy XXX " . The narration refers to a band called " Motherboy " , which the narration claims the show is " legally required to make a distinction " from , with respect to the " Motherboy " event happening in the episode . 
 = = = Cancellation and revival = = = 
 During the series ' third season in 2006 , despite months @-@ long rumors of Arrested Development having been picked up by the cable television network Showtime , creator Hurwitz declined to move the show to another network . As Hurwitz explained , " I had taken it as far as I felt I could as a series . I told the story I wanted to tell , and we were getting to a point where I think a lot of the actors were ready to move on . " He said that he was " more worried about letting down the fans in terms of the quality of the show dropping " than he was about disappointing fans by not giving them more episodes . He also said , " If there 's a way to continue this in a form that 's not weekly episodic series television , I 'd be up for it " . 
 On October 2 , 2011 , the entire cast of Arrested Development reunited for a panel at The New Yorker Festival in New York . At the panel , Hurwitz declared his intention of producing a truncated fourth season as a lead @-@ in to a film adaptation . 
 Six years after the series had been canceled by Fox , filming for a revived fourth season began on August 7 , 2012 . Fifteen episodes of the show 's revival season were released simultaneously on Netflix on May 26 , 2013 . 
 = = = = Future = = = = 
 Rumors of a possible full @-@ length Arrested Development film circulated after the possibility was referenced in season 3 's final episode , " Development Arrested " . In 2008 , Howard was slated to direct the film , though it is not clear if he still is . Reportedly , all original members of the main cast are expected to reprise their original roles . As of July 11 , 2013 , Netflix was in discussions for a fifth season . In August 2013 , Hurwitz commented " I 'm working on the movie right now " and his plan is to do another season after the movie is completed . In August 2014 , Netflix chief content officer Ted Sarandos stated in an interview with USA Today that there is a strong possibility of a fifth season . " It 's just a matter of when . " In April 2015 , executive producer Brian Grazer confirmed that a fifth season is in development and will consist of 17 episodes . However , in February 2016 , Jason Bateman said regarding a fifth season , " There is no plan . I haven 't heard of anything solid going forward . " On June 9 , 2016 , Tony Hale posted a photo on his Instagram account of him and Alia Shawkat , saying , " Arrested Season 5 . Been a few changes . " 
 = = Characters = = 
 = = = Main characters = = = 
 The plot of Arrested Development revolves around the members of the Bluth family , who lead extravagant lifestyles , and are also often drawn into interactions with incestuous undertones . At the center of the show is Michael Bluth ( Jason Bateman ) , the show 's straight man , who strives to do the right thing and keep his family together , despite their materialism , selfishness , and manipulative natures . Michael is a widowed single father . His teenage son , George Michael ( Michael Cera ) , has the same qualities of decency but feels a constant pressure to live up to his father 's expectations and is often reluctant to follow his father 's plans . 
 Michael 's father , George Bluth Sr. ( Jeffrey Tambor ) , is the patriarch of the family , who often goes to considerable lengths to manipulate and control his family . His wife , and Michael 's mother , Lucille ( Jessica Walter ) , is equally manipulative , materialistic , and hypercritical of every member of her family , as well as being a perpetual drunk . In particular , she has a tight grip on her youngest son , Byron " Buster " Bluth ( Tony Hale ) , who , as a result of her over @-@ mothering , is socially inept and prone to panic attacks . 
 Michael 's older brother is George Oscar Bluth ( " <unk> " ) ( Will Arnett ) , an unsuccessful professional magician whose business and personal schemes usually fail or become tiresome and are quickly abandoned . His name is an acronym for George Oscar Bluth II , pronounced / <unk> / , like the Biblical figure Job . Michael 's twin sister Lindsay ( Portia de Rossi ) is spoiled and materialistic , continually desiring to be the center of attention and attracted to various social causes . She is married to Tobias Fünke ( David Cross ) , a discredited psychiatrist @-@ turned @-@ aspiring actor . Tobias is a self @-@ diagnosed " never @-@ nude " ( a disorder comparable to <unk> ) , whose language and behavior have heavily homosexual overtones to which he seems completely oblivious and which are the center of much tongue @-@ in @-@ cheek comedy throughout the series . Their daughter is Mae " Maeby " Fünke ( Alia Shawkat ) , a rebellious teen , whose chief motivation is defying her parents , in an effort to get their attention . 
 = = = Recurring characters = = = 
 Several other characters regularly appear in recurring roles . George Sr. ' s identical twin brother , Oscar ( also played by Jeffrey Tambor ) , is a lethargic ex @-@ hippie seeking the affection of George 's wife , Lucille . The family 's lawyer , Barry <unk> ( Henry Winkler ) , is an incompetent sexual deviant who often hinders the family 's legal battles rather than helping them . He is eventually replaced by Bob Loblaw ( Scott Baio ) . Lucille Austero , or " Lucille 2 " , played by Liza Minnelli , is Lucille 's " best friend and chief social rival " as well as a sometimes @-@ love interest of Buster and , later , Gob . Steve Holt ( Justin Grant Wade ) is a high school senior and football star at the high school George Michael and Maeby attend , and is later discovered to be Gob 's son . Carl Weathers plays a parodied version of himself as Tobias ' acting coach . 
 Beginning in the second season , Mae Whitman plays Ann Veal , George Michael 's sternly Christian girlfriend , often forgotten or disparaged by Michael . Ann was also played by Alessandra Torresani , and first appeared in the season 1 episode " Let ' Em Eat Cake " . Marta Estrella was originally played by Leonor Varela and later by Patricia Velasquez , and appears as Gob 's girlfriend , which causes conflict between him and Michael . J. Walter Weatherman ( Steve Ryan ) , a one @-@ armed amputee , is an old employee of George Sr. Weatherman appears in flashbacks in many episodes where , as hired by George Sr. , he would teach George Sr. ' s children lessons . 
 A British mentally handicapped woman named Rita Leeds ( Charlize Theron ) appears in five episodes in the third season as Michael 's female companion . Judy Greer plays George Bluth Senior 's assistant and lover ( and partner @-@ in @-@ crime ) , Kitty Sanchez , for 10 episodes of the series . Ed Begley , Jr. plays Stan Sitwell , the owner of Sitwell Enterprises , a rival company to the Bluth Company . Christine Taylor plays Sally Sitwell , Stan Sitwell 's daughter and a consistent love interest for Michael . Justin Lee plays Annyong , the adopted Korean son of Lucille and George Sr. Julia Louis @-@ Dreyfus plays Maggie Lizer , an attorney and compulsive liar who has a recurring relationship with Michael . Rob Corddry plays Moses Taylor , the star of the fictional TV show " Frank Wrench " and a noted gun rights activist . Ben Stiller plays magician and Gob 's chief rival Tony Wonder , well known for baking himself into a loaf of bread to feed the troops . Amy Poehler plays Gob 's unnamed and frequently forgotten wife who married Gob as the final in a long line of escalating dares . Jane Lynch plays Cindi <unk> , a government mole who tries to gather incriminating information from an incarcerated George Sr. but ends up falling in love with him instead . 
 = = Episodes = = 
 = = = Season one ( 2003 – 04 ) = = = 
 George Bluth Sr. , patriarch of the Bluth family , is the founder and former CEO of the Bluth Company which markets and builds mini @-@ mansions among many other activities . His son Michael serves as manager of the company , and , after being passed over for a promotion , decides to leave both the company and his family . Just as he makes this decision , however , George Sr. is arrested by the Securities and Exchange Commission for defrauding investors and gross spending of the company 's money for " personal expenses " . His wife Lucille becomes CEO , and immediately names as the new president her extremely sheltered youngest son Buster , who proves ill @-@ equipped , as his only experience with business is a class he took concerning 18th century agrarian business . Furious at being passed over again , Michael secures another job with a rival company and plans on leaving his family behind for good . Realizing that they need Michael , the family asks him to come back and run the company , which Michael scoffs at until he sees how much the family means to his teenaged son George Michael . To keep the family together , Michael asks his self @-@ centered twin sister Lindsay , her husband Tobias and their daughter Maeby to live together in the Bluth model home with him and George Michael . 
 Throughout the first season , different characters struggle to change their identities . Buster works to escape from his mother 's control by bonding with brothers Michael and Gob as well as with love interest Lucille Austero , Lucille Bluth 's neighbor and chief social rival . George Michael nurses a forbidden crush on his cousin Maeby , while continually trying to meet his father 's expectations . Lindsay 's husband Tobias searches for work as an actor , with the aid of Carl Weathers . Michael falls in love with his screw @-@ up older brother Gob 's neglected girlfriend Marta , and is torn between being with her and putting " family first " . After seeing Michael physically fight with Gob , Marta realizes that they do not share the same family values and she leaves them both . To spite Buster , Lucille adopts a Korean son whom she calls " Annyong " after she mistakes the Korean word for " hello " as his name . Through an escalating series of dares , Gob gets married to a woman he just met , played by Will Arnett 's real @-@ life then @-@ wife Amy Poehler , but cannot get an annulment because he refuses to admit that he did not consummate the marriage . Kitty , George Sr. ' s former assistant and mistress , tries to blackmail the company . She is caught in the Bluth family yacht 's explosion , as used in one of Gob 's magic acts , but survives with a cooler full of damning evidence labeled " H <unk> " . After previous failed attempts , and a brief religious stint in Judaism , George Sr. finally escapes from prison by faking a heart attack . It is also revealed that George Sr. committed " light treason " by using the company to build mini @-@ palaces for Saddam Hussein in Iraq . 
 = = = Season two ( 2004 – 05 ) = = = 
 Because of his father 's latest prison break deception ( a faked heart attack ) , Michael decides to leave his family and move to Phoenix , Arizona with George Michael , but discovers that he cannot leave the state , due to the Bluth Company being under investigation and him having to go jail as a replacement for his father . Lucille appoints Gob the new Bluth Company president , but since Gob proves utterly incompetent , the position 's real duties revert to Michael . During the rest of the season Gob serves as figurehead president ; Michael is still under scrutiny for George Sr. ' s illegal activity . 
 George Sr. is not , in fact , gone . After faking his death in Mexico by paying off the cops , George Sr. returns to the family model home , where George Michael discovers him and hides him in the attic . To protect his son from legal implications , Michael hides George Sr. in Gob 's Aztec Tomb , orchestrates a diversion , and tells the family that George Sr. has escaped once more . Throughout the rest of the season , Michael sneaks George Sr. provisions , and George Sr. keeps tabs on the Bluth family through the ventilation system . George Sr. also faces onslaught from the outside world ; the press begins looking for him in Iraq , <unk> surround the house while he 's still in the attic , and Kitty returns to steal a sample of his semen to make her own Bluth baby . 
 Buster meanwhile joins the army , but escapes serving in Iraq when his hand is bitten off by a loose seal ( a play on " Lucille " ) Gob mistakenly gave a taste for mammal flesh . Buster is refitted with a sharp hook , which he is known to brandish dangerously near his relatives ' faces . During Buster 's long psychological recovery , he bonds with George Sr. ' s stoner twin brother Oscar , who moves in with Lucille in an attempt to rekindle a past love affair . Uncle Oscar slowly reveals himself as Buster 's presumptive biological father . Eventually , George Sr. takes revenge on the adulterous Oscar and Lucille by kidnapping Oscar , knocking him unconscious , exchanging appearances with him , and sending him to prison in his place . 
 Lindsay and Tobias continue their disastrous open relationship . Lindsay tries — but fails — to secure a lover , while Tobias paints himself blue each night in a futile attempt to join the Blue Man Group . When Lindsay kicks him out of the house , Tobias disguises himself as a singing British nanny named " Mrs. <unk> " ( an idea he gets from the film Mrs. Doubtfire ) so he can watch over his daughter Maeby . The family sees right through this incompetent disguise , but they humor Tobias since — in the guise of Mrs. <unk> — he does their chores . 
 George Michael begins dating a deeply religious girl , Ann Veal , who encourages him to smash pop music CDs and to run for student body president against perennial favorite Steve Holt . Michael dislikes her and tries to disrupt the kids ' relationship , most notably by breaking up Ann and George Michael 's pre @-@ engagement . Meanwhile , Maeby cons her way into an after school job as a film studio executive . When Maeby 's studio remakes " Les Cousins <unk> " , George Michael abandons Ann to pursue his crush on Maeby . George Michael and Maeby kiss while the living room of the model home collapses . 
 = = = Season three ( 2005 – 06 ) = = = 
 Michael again searches for his runaway father , George Sr. Gob receives an invitation to a father / son reunion outing , and believes it to be George Sr. trying to contact him . In reality , the invitation was meant to reunite Gob with Steve Holt , son of Eve Holt , a girl Gob slept with in high school . Meanwhile , George Michael and Maeby deal with their previous kiss by avoiding each other . 
 In an attempt to remain in disguise , George Sr. joins the Blue Man Group . Michael discovers this and arranges to have his father placed under house arrest . George Sr. claims that he was set up by an underground British group . Michael goes to Wee Britain , a fictional British @-@ themed city district , to investigate , and in the process meets a new love interest , Rita Leeds ( Charlize Theron ) . Michael and the audience are led to believe that Rita is a mole for the underground British group , working for a man named " Mr. F " . However , love @-@ struck Michael proposes to her , and the couple run off to wed . Finally , it is revealed that Rita is actually an " MRF " , or " mentally retarded female " . Despite Rita 's " condition " , the family pushes him to go forward with the marriage because Rita is wealthy and they want her money . Michael is not persuaded and gently ends the relationship just as he and Rita are about to walk down the aisle . Meanwhile , Tobias and Lindsay seek legal help from Bob Loblaw ( Scott Baio ) concerning their troubled marriage . 
 With the family 's retainer used up because of Lindsay 's and Tobias 's advances , Bob Loblaw chooses to no longer represent the Bluth family . Attorney Jan <unk> offers to represent the family , on the condition that they participate in a mock trial in a new reality courtroom show called " Mock Trial with J. Reinhold " . Musical accompaniment for the show 's theme song and perceived jokes from testifying witnesses is provided by " William Hung And His Hung Jury " . Michael uses an illegal threat from prosecutor Wayne Jarvis to have the mock case " dismissed " . Gob and Franklin briefly appear in another courtroom show presided over by Bud Cort . Meanwhile , Maeby and George Michael perform a mock wedding for Alzheimer 's patients that is accidentally conducted by a real priest ; the two become legally married . 
 The family members are afraid to testify at the mock trial and at the real deposition ; Buster fakes a coma , Lindsay and Lucille fake entering rehab , and Gob flees the country to perform in a USO Tour in Iraq . The deceptions are all uncovered by the prosecution , and in Iraq Gob is arrested for inadvertently inciting an anti @-@ US riot . Buster and Michael travel to Iraq to rescue Gob , and while there , uncover evidence that the mini @-@ palaces George Sr. built in Iraq were actually ordered and paid for by the CIA for wiretapping purposes . After this discovery , the US government drops all of the charges against George Sr. In the general confusion , everyone except George Michael forgets Maeby 's sixteenth birthday . 
 To celebrate their victory in Iraq , the <unk> throw a shareholders ' party on the RMS Queen Mary . During preparation for the party , it is revealed that Lindsay was adopted , meaning that George Michael and Maeby are not blood relatives . At the party , the Bluth 's other adopted child , Annyong , reappears . He reveals that he is there to avenge the Bluth family 's theft of his grandfather 's frozen banana idea and the cause of his subsequent deportation , an event orchestrated many years earlier by Lucille Bluth . Annyong has turned over evidence implicating Lucille in the Bluth Company 's accounting scandals . Before the police arrive , Michael and George Michael flee on Gob 's yacht , the C @-@ Word , and depart to Cabo with half a million dollars in cashier 's checks , finally leaving the family to fend for themselves . However , it is revealed in the epilogue that George Sr. is also on the yacht , having lured his brother Oscar into taking his place once again . Also in the epilogue , Maeby tries to sell the television rights to the story of the Bluth family to Ron Howard , who tells her that he sees it as a movie rather than a series . 
 = = = Season four ( 2013 ) = = = 
 Filming for a revived fourth season began on August 7 , 2012 , seven years after the series had been canceled by Fox . The season consists of 15 new episodes , all debuting at the same time on Netflix on May 26 , 2013 in the United States , Canada , the United Kingdom , Ireland , Latin America , and the Nordic countries . Several actors who had recurring roles in the original series returned to reprise their roles , including Carl Weathers as himself , Henry Winkler as Barry <unk> , Ben Stiller as Tony Wonder , Mae Whitman as Ann Veal , Scott Baio as Bob Loblaw , Judy Greer as Kitty Sanchez , and Liza Minnelli as Lucille Austero ; while new characters are played by Debra Mooney , John Slattery , Tommy Tune , Terry Crews , Isla Fisher and John Krasinski . Kristen Wiig and Seth Rogen appear as Lucille and George Sr. , respectively , in flashbacks . 
 Each episode of the season occurs over approximately the same stretch of time , but focuses on a different character . Information on events depicted in a given episode is often partial and filled in a later episode . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Television ratings = = = 
 The show , while critically acclaimed , did not gain a sizable audience . According to the Nielsen ratings system , the show 's first season was the 120th most popular show among households and the 88th among viewers aged 18 to 49 , averaging 6 @.@ 2 million viewers . 
 U.S. ratings in the second season averaged about six million viewers , while the third season averaged about four million viewers . Fox announced that it would halt the production of the second season at eighteen episodes — four episodes short of the planned season . 
 For the third season , Fox positioned the show on Mondays at 8 : 00 p.m. ET . Ratings dropped further than previous seasons . On November 9 , 2005 , Fox announced that the show would not be airing in November sweeps , and that they had cut the episode order for the third season from 22 to 13 . Fox ended up showing the last four episodes in a two @-@ hour timeslot — directly opposite the opening ceremonies of the 2006 Winter Olympics . The series finale episode received 3 @.@ 43 million viewers . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Throughout its original run , Arrested Development received overwhelming critical acclaim . It is widely regarded as one of the defining comedies of the 2000s and has been praised by many critics as one of the greatest comedies of all time . In 2007 , the show was listed as one of Time magazine 's " 100 Best TV Shows of All @-@ TIME " . 
 Tim Stack of Entertainment Weekly praised the series , saying " Is it beating a dead horse to once again state that this underappreciated gem is the best sitcom on TV ? Too bad . Arrested Development is the best sitcom on TV ! " 
 David Bianculli from the New York Daily News stated " If you 're not watching this series on Fox , the least you can do is buy it on DVD . You 'll love it , and it 's such a dense show ( in the best sense of the word ) that it rewards repeated viewing . Like Scrubs and the British version of The Office , it is the sort of show that truly deserves to be seen uninterrupted , several episodes at a time , for maximum enjoyment . The laughs @-@ per @-@ minute quotient here is insanely high , making it great value as a home library purchase . " 
 Alison Powell of The Guardian said " As Hollywood agents worry about the demise of the town 's lowing cash cow , the multi @-@ camera , staged sitcom , here to save the day is Arrested Development , a farce of such blazing wit and originality , that it must surely usher in a new era in comedy . " 
 Gillian Flynn of Entertainment Weekly named Arrested Development the best television show of 2005 and said in her review that " As oddball as Arrested is , it 's also humane . A flawless cast — from Will Arnett 's breathy , bombastic Gob to Jessica Walter 's boozy Lucille — grounds it , aided by Ron Howard 's affable narration . Of course , the center of sensibility is good son Michael ( Jason Bateman ) and his even better son , George Michael ( Michael Cera ) . Bateman and Cera give the best reacts around — the former all weary exasperation , the latter adorably bunny @-@ stunned . Together , they 're the sweetest , <unk> straight men on the smartest , most shockingly funny series on TV ... which is likely canceled , despite six Emmy wins . It 's a perversion not even the <unk> deserve . " In 2012 , Entertainment Weekly listed the show at No. 2 in the " 25 Best Cult TV Shows from the Past 25 Years " , praising its " fast , delirious , interlocking jokes that don 't pander to the masses ; <unk> gags ( e.g. fake preview scenes for the following week 's episode ) ; and a cast of absurd characters " . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 In 2004 , the first season received seven Emmy Award nominations with five wins . It won for Outstanding Comedy Series , Outstanding Directing for a Comedy Series , Outstanding Casting for a Comedy Series , Outstanding Single @-@ Camera Picture Editing for a Comedy Series and Outstanding Writing for a Comedy Series , for the pilot episode written by Mitchell Hurwitz and directed by brothers Anthony and Joe Russo . Jeffrey Tambor was nominated that year for Outstanding Supporting Actor in a Comedy Series . 
 In 2005 , the second season received eleven Emmy nominations in seven categories with one win . Notable nominations included Outstanding Comedy Series , Outstanding Lead Actor in a Comedy Series ( Jason Bateman ) , Outstanding Supporting Actor in a Comedy Series ( Jeffrey Tambor ) , Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Comedy Series ( Jessica Walter ) as well as three nominations for Outstanding Writing for a Comedy Series , in which it won for " Righteous Brothers " , written by Mitchell Hurwitz and Jim Vallely . 
 In 2006 , the third season received four Emmy nominations , for Outstanding Comedy Series , Outstanding Supporting Actor in a Comedy Series ( Will Arnett ) , Outstanding Single @-@ Camera Picture Editing for a Comedy Series and Outstanding Writing for a Comedy Series for the series finale " Development Arrested " . 
 In 2013 , the fourth season received three Emmy nominations , for Outstanding Actor in a Comedy Series ( Jason Bateman ) , Outstanding Music Composition for a Series ( Original Dramatic Score ) and Outstanding Single @-@ camera Picture Editing for a Comedy Series . 
 Other awards include : 
 The 2004 TV Land Award for " Future Classic " , the first recognition the series received . The award presentation is included on the season one DVD release . 
 The 2004 Television Critics Association Awards for Outstanding Comedy and Outstanding New Program , and the 2005 award for Outstanding Achievement in Comedy . 
 The 2005 Golden Globe Award for Best Performance by an Actor in a Television Series – Musical or Comedy for Jason Bateman . 
 The 2004 Writers Guild of America Award for Episodic Comedy , for the episode " Pier Pressure " , written by Mitchell Hurwitz and Jim Vallely . 
 The 2004 Satellite Award for Best Television Series – Comedy or Musical , along with Jeffrey Tambor and Jessica Walter for Best Performance by an Actor and Actress in a Supporting Role in a Series – Comedy or Musical . In 2005 , Jason Bateman and Portia de Rossi won for Best Actor and Actress in a Series – Comedy or Musical . Jason Bateman also won the same award the following ceremony . 
 The 2005 Young Artist Award for Best Performance in a TV Series ( Comedy or Drama ) – Supporting Young Actress for Alia Shawkat . 
 = San Sebastian Church ( Manila ) = 
 The Basílica Menor de San Sebastián , better known as San Sebastian Church , is a Roman Catholic minor basilica in Manila , Philippines and the seat of the Parish of San Sebastian . 
 Completed in 1891 , San Sebastian Church is noted for its architectural <unk> an example of the revival of Gothic architecture in the Philippines , it is the only all @-@ steel temple in the Philippines , and is the only prefabricated steel church in the world . In 2006 , San Sebastian Church was included in the Tentative List for possible designation as a World Heritage Site . It was designated as a National Historical Landmark by the Philippine government in 1973 . 
 San Sebastian Church is under the care of The Order of the Augustinian Recollects , who also operate a college adjacent to the basilica . It is located at Plaza del Carmen , at the eastern end of Recto Avenue , in Quiapo , Manila . 
 = = History = = 
 In 1621 , Bernardino Castillo , a generous patron and a devotee of the 3rd @-@ century Roman martyr Saint Sebastian , donated the land upon which the church stands . The original structure , made of wood , burned in 1651 during a Chinese uprising . Succeeding structures , which were built of brick , were destroyed by fire and earthquakes in 1859 , 1863 , and 1880 . 
 In the 1880s , Esteban Martínez , the parish priest of the ruined church , approached the Spanish architect Genaro Palacios , with a plan to build a fire and earthquake @-@ resistant structure made entirely of steel . Palacios completed a design that fused Earthquake Baroque with the Neo @-@ Gothic style . His final design was said to have been inspired by the famed Gothic Burgos Cathedral in Burgos , Spain . 
 = = = Construction = = = 
 The prefabricated steel sections that would compose the church were manufactured in Binche , Belgium . According to the historian Ambeth Ocampo , the knockdown steel parts were ordered from the Societe <unk> des Enterprises de <unk> <unk> in Brussels . In all , 52 tonnes ( 51 long tons ; 57 short tons ) of prefabricated steel sections were transported in eight separate shipments from Belgium to the Philippines , the first shipment arriving in 1888 . Belgian engineers supervised the assembly of the church , the first column of which was erected on September 11 , 1890 . The walls were filled with mixed sand , gravel , and cement . The stained glass windows were imported from the Heinrich <unk> Company , a German stained glass firm , while local artisans assisted in applying the finishing touches . 
 The church was raised to the status of a minor basilica by Pope Leo XIII on June 24 , 1890 . Upon its completion the following year , on August 16 , 1891 , the Basílica Menor de San Sebastián was consecrated by Bernardino <unk> y Villa OP , the 25th Archbishop of Manila . 
 According to Jesús Pastor Paloma , an <unk> Recollect priest , the structure was also supposed to have a prefabricated retablo ( reredos ) altar , which was lost at sea when the ship carrying it from Belgium capsized in a storm ; a wooden altar was made locally in its stead . Paloma also noted that the bottom part of the church was designed to resemble a ship 's hull , so that it would sway during an earthquake . 
 = = = Gustave Eiffel = = = 
 It has long been reputed that Gustave Eiffel , the French engineer behind the Eiffel Tower and the steel structure within the Statue of Liberty , was involved in the design and construction of San Sebastián , but this was never confirmed . 
 = = Features = = 
 San Sebastian Church has two openwork towers and steel vaulting . From its floor , the basilica 's nave rises 12 meters ( 39 ft ) to the dome , and 32 meters ( 105 ft ) to the tip of the twin spires . 
 The faux finished interior of the church incorporates groined vaults in the Gothic architecture style permitting very ample illumination from lateral windows . The steel columns , walls and ceiling were painted by Lorenzo Rocha , <unk> <unk> and Félix Martínez to give the appearance of marble and jasper . Trompe l 'oeil paintings of saints and martyrs by Rocha were used to decorate the interiors of the church . True to the Gothic revival spirit of the church are its confessionals , pulpit , altars and five retablos designed by Lorenzo Guerrero and Rocha . The sculptor Eusebio Garcia carved the statues of holy men and women . Six holy water fonts were constructed for the church , each crafted from marble obtained from Romblon . 
 Above the main altar is an image of Our Lady of Mount Carmel , given to the church by Carmelite sisters from Mexico City in 1617 . The image withstood all the earthquakes and fires which had destroyed previous incarnations of San Sebastian Church , but its ivory head was stolen in 1975 . 
 = = Cultural and historical declarations = = 
 San Sebastian Church was a declared National Historical Landmark by President Ferdinand Marcos through Presidential Decree No. 260 in 1973 . State funding was accorded to the church through the National Historical Institute which undertook restoration in 1982 . The Recollect community has likewise expended funds for the church 's maintenance and restoration . 
 On May 16 , 2006 , San Sebastian Church was included in the Tentative List for possible designation as a World Heritage Site , on account of its architectural and historical heritage . 
 The church was declared a National Cultural Treasure by the National Museum of the Philippines on August 15 , 2011 and unveiling of the marker on January 20 , 2012 . 
 = = Preservation = = 
 In recent years , San Sebastian Church has encountered threats to its structural integrity . The steel structure has been beset by rust and corrosion due to sea breezes from nearby Manila Bay . In 1998 , it was placed on the biennial watchlist of the 100 Most Endangered Sites by the World Monuments Fund , though it was not retained in the subsequent watchlists . 
 = Waterfalls in Ricketts Glen State Park = 
 There are 24 named waterfalls in Ricketts Glen State Park in the U.S. state of Pennsylvania along Kitchen Creek as it flows in three steep , narrow valleys , or glens . They range in height from 9 feet ( 2 @.@ 7 m ) to the 94 @-@ foot ( 29 m ) Ganoga Falls . Ricketts Glen State Park is named for R. Bruce Ricketts , a colonel in the American Civil War who owned over 80 @,@ 000 acres ( 32 @,@ 000 ha ) in the area in the late 19th and early 20th centuries , but spared the old @-@ growth forests in the glens from clearcutting . The park , which opened in 1944 , is administered by the Bureau of State Parks of the Pennsylvania Department of Conservation and Natural Resources ( DCNR ) . Nearly all of the waterfalls are visible from the Falls Trail , which Ricketts had built from 1889 to 1893 and which the state park rebuilt in the 1940s and late 1990s . The Falls Trail has been called " the most magnificent hike in the state " and one of " the top hikes in the East " . 
 The waterfalls are on the section of Kitchen Creek that flows down the Allegheny Front , a steep escarpment between the Allegheny Plateau to the north and the Ridge @-@ and @-@ Valley Appalachians to the south . The glens are made of sedimentary rocks from the Huntley Mountain and Catskill Formations that formed up to 370 million years ago in the Devonian and Carboniferous periods . The waterfalls are the result of increased flow in Kitchen Creek from glaciers enlarging its drainage basin during the last Ice Age . 
 Ricketts named 21 of the waterfalls , mostly for Native American tribes and places , and his family and friends . There are ten named falls in Ganoga Glen , eight named falls in Glen Leigh , and between four and six named waterfalls in Ricketts Glen . The DCNR names 22 falls , the United States Geological Survey ( USGS ) Geographic Names Information System ( GNIS ) names 23 falls , and Scott E. Brown 's 2004 book Pennsylvania waterfalls : a guide for hikers and photographers names 24 . The falls are described in order going upstream along the creek for each of the three glens . 
 = = Geology = = 
 The waterfalls in Ricketts Glen State Park are on the Allegheny Front , which is the boundary between the Allegheny Plateau to the north and the Ridge @-@ and @-@ Valley Appalachians to the south . The headwaters of Kitchen Creek are on the dissected plateau , from which the stream drops approximately 1 @,@ 000 feet ( 300 m ) in 2 @.@ 25 miles ( 3 @.@ 62 km ) as it flows down the steep escarpment of the Allegheny Front . Much of this drop occurs in Glen Leigh and Ganoga Glen , two narrow valleys carved by branches of Kitchen Creek , which come together at Waters Meet . The branch in Glen Leigh has eight named waterfalls and lies north of the confluence , while the branch in Ganoga Glen has ten named waterfalls and lies to the northwest . Ricketts Glen lies south of and downstream from Waters Meet ; here the terrain becomes less steep , and there are fewer named waterfalls . The DCNR names only four in Ricketts Glen , all on Kitchen Creek ; the USGS GNIS names these and one more on the creek , and Brown 's book on Pennsylvania waterfalls adds a sixth named falls on a tributary . 
 The rocks exposed in the park were formed between 370 and 340 million years ago , when the land was part of the coastline of a shallow sea that covered a great portion of what is now North America . The high mountains to the east of the sea gradually eroded , causing a build @-@ up of sediment made up primarily of clay , sand and gravel . Tremendous pressure on the sediment caused the formation of the rocks that are found in the park and in the Kitchen Creek drainage basin : sandstone , shale , siltstone , and conglomerates . 
 About 300 to 250 million years ago , the Allegheny Plateau , Allegheny Front , and Appalachian Mountains all formed in the <unk> orogeny . This happened long after the sedimentary rocks in the park were deposited , when the part of Gondwana that became Africa collided with what became North America , forming Pangaea . In the years since , up to 5 @,@ 000 feet ( 1 @,@ 500 m ) of rock has been eroded away by streams and weather . At least three major glaciations in the past million years have been the final factor in shaping the land that makes up the park today . 
 The effects of glaciation have made Kitchen Creek " unique compared to all other nearby streams that flow down the Allegheny Front " , as it is the only one with an " almost continuous series of waterfalls " . Prior to the last ice age , Kitchen Creek and Phillips Creek to the east had drainage basins of similar area and slope , and both watersheds were confined to the Allegheny Front . This changed when receding glaciers formed temporary dams on two of Kitchen Creek 's neighboring streams on the Allegheny Plateau , South Branch Bowman Creek to the northeast and Big Run , a tributary of Fishing Creek to the northwest . The headwaters of South Branch Bowman Creek were very close to those for the Glen Leigh branch of Kitchen Creek , and the headwaters for Big Run were very close to those for the Ganoga Glen branch . 
 As the glaciers retreated to the northeast about 20 @,@ 000 years ago , glacial lakes formed . Drainage from the melting glacier and lakes cut a <unk> , or channel , that diverted the headwaters of South Branch Bowman Creek into the Glen Leigh branch of Kitchen Creek . The retreating glaciers also left deposits of debris 20 to 30 feet ( 6 @.@ 1 to 9 @.@ 1 m ) thick , which formed a dam blocking water from draining into Big Run . Instead water from Ganoga Lake and the area that later became Lake Jean was diverted into the Ganoga Glen branch of Kitchen Creek . These diversions added about 7 square miles ( 18 km ² ) to the Kitchen Creek drainage basin , increasing it by just over 50 percent to 20 @.@ 1 square miles ( 52 km ² ) . 
 The result was increased water flow in Kitchen Creek , which has been cutting the falls in the glens since . The gradient or slope of Kitchen Creek was fairly stable for its flow when it had a much smaller drainage basin , as Phillips Creek still does . The increased basin size means that Kitchen Creek in the glens is too steep for its present amount of water flow . As Kitchen Creek continues to cut into the rock and erode it up the Allegheny Front , the creek 's slope will decrease and become less steep . In the future , the creek 's flow and slope are predicted to become similar to those of other nearby creeks with similar size drainage basins . This process could take so long that a new glacial period might occur before the transformation is complete . 
 = = = Formations and falls = = = 
 The park 's waterfalls expose two distinct rock formations from the Devonian and Carboniferous periods . The higher and more recent of these is the Huntley Mountain Formation , from the late Devonian and early Mississippian . This is made of layers of olive green to gray sandstone and gray to red shale . The lower and older layer is the Catskill Formation , which is composed of red shale and siltstone up to 370 million years old . The harder Huntley Mountain Formation caps the Allegheny Front and has kept it from eroding as much as the softer Catskill Formation to the south . The portions of the Allegheny Front within the park are named North Mountain and Red Rock Mountain , with the latter name coming from an exposed band of Huntley Formation red shale and sandstone visible along Pennsylvania Route 487 . 
 Geologists classify the falls at Ricketts Glen State Park into two types . Wedding @-@ cake falls descend in a series of small steps , forming waterfalls that are said to resemble a wedding cake . Within the park , this type of falls usually flows over thin layers of Huntley Mountain Formation sandstone . In bridal @-@ veil falls , the second type , water falls over a ledge and drops vertically into a plunge pool in the stream bed below . Within the park , this type of falls flows over Catskill Formation rocks or the red shale and sandstone of the Huntley Formation . In the park , the harder caprock which forms the ledge from which the bridal @-@ veil falls drops is grey sandstone . The softer red shale below is eroded away by water , sand and gravel to form the plunge pool . 
 While the official Ricketts Glen State Park web page also classifies waterfalls as either the bridal @-@ veil or wedding @-@ cake type , Brown 's Pennsylvania waterfalls : a guide for hikers and photographers uses four types for classification : falls , cascade , slide , and chute . The first , falls , is the same as the DCNR 's bridal @-@ veil type , with water that falls freely from a ledge . Brown divides the wedding @-@ cake class into three types : cascade , where water falls down a " vertical to nearly vertical " surface that has terraces ; slide , where water falls down a " near vertical to less than vertical " wide surface that is smoother than a cascade ; and chute , where the water is confined by rock as it falls down " a narrow slide or <unk> feature " . 
 = = History = = 
 Ricketts Glen State Park is in the Susquehanna River drainage basin , the earliest recorded inhabitants of which were the Iroquoian @-@ speaking Susquehannocks . Their numbers were greatly reduced by disease and warfare with the Five Nations of the Iroquois , and by 1675 they had died out , moved away , or been assimilated into other tribes . After this , the lands of the Susquehanna valley were under the nominal control of the Iroquois , who encouraged displaced tribes from the east to settle there , including the Shawnee and Lenape ( or Delaware ) . 
 On November 5 , 1768 , the British acquired land , known in Pennsylvania as the New Purchase , from the Iroquois in the Treaty of Fort Stanwix ; this included what is now Ricketts Glen State Park . After the American Revolutionary War , Native Americans almost entirely left Pennsylvania . Luzerne County was formed in 1786 from part of Northumberland County , and Fairmount Township , where the waterfalls are , was settled in 1792 and incorporated in 1834 . About 1890 a Native American pot , decorated in the style of " the peoples of the Susquehanna region " , was found under a rock ledge on Kitchen Creek by Murray Reynolds , for whom a waterfall is named . 
 The Ricketts family began acquiring land in and around what became the park in 1851 , when Elijah Ricketts and his brother Clemuel bought about 5 @,@ 000 acres ( 2 @,@ 000 ha ) on North Mountain around what is now known as Ganoga Lake . By 1852 they had built a stone house on the lake shore , which they ran " as a lodge and tavern " . Elijah 's son Robert Bruce Ricketts , for whom the park is named , joined the Union Army as a private at the outbreak of the American Civil War and rose through the ranks to become a colonel . After the war , R. B. Ricketts returned to Pennsylvania and began purchasing the land around the lake from his father in 1869 ; eventually he controlled or owned more than 80 @,@ 000 acres ( 32 @,@ 000 ha ) , including the glens and waterfalls . 
 Ricketts and the other settlers living in the area were not aware of the glens and their waterfalls until about 1865 , when they were discovered by two of the Ricketts ' guests who went fishing and wandered down Kitchen Creek . In 1872 Ricketts built a three @-@ story wooden addition to the stone house ; this opened as the North Mountain House hotel in 1873 , and was run by Ricketts ' brother Frank until 1898 . 
 Ricketts named 21 of the waterfalls ; most have Native American names , and others are named for relatives and friends . In 1879 Ricketts started the North Mountain Fishing Club , and he renamed Long Pond as Ganoga Lake in 1881 , based on a suggestion by Pennsylvania senator Charles R. Buckalew . Ricketts also used the name Ganoga for the tallest waterfall and the glen it flows through . In 1889 Ricketts hired Matt <unk> and five other men to build the trails along Kitchen Creek . It took them four years to complete the trails and stone steps through the glens . The wooden addition to the stone house was torn down in 1897 , and the hotel and fishing club closed in 1903 ; the stone house remained the Ricketts ' summer home . 
 Ricketts was a lumberman who made his fortune clearcutting nearly all his land , but the glens were " saved from the lumberman 's axe through the foresight of the Ricketts family " . Ricketts died in 1918 ; between 1920 and 1924 the Pennsylvania Game Commission bought 48 @,@ 000 acres ( 19 @,@ 000 ha ) from his heirs , via the Central Pennsylvania Lumber Company . This became most of Pennsylvania State Game Lands Number 13 , west of the park in Sullivan County . These sales left the Ricketts heirs with over 12 @,@ 000 acres ( 4 @,@ 900 ha ) surrounding Ganoga Lake , Lake Jean and the glens . The area was approved as a national park site in the 1930s , and the National Park Service planned a Civilian Conservation Corps camp at " Ricketts Glynn " ( sic ) . Budget problems and World War II brought an end to national plans for development . 
 In 1942 the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania bought 1 @,@ 261 acres ( 510 ha ) , including the glens and their waterfalls , from the heirs for $ 82 @,@ 000 . Ricketts Glen State Park opened in 1944 . The state bought a total of 16 @,@ 000 acres ( 6 @,@ 500 ha ) more from the heirs in 1945 and 1950 for $ 68 @,@ 000 ; the park today has about 10 @,@ 000 acres ( 4 @,@ 000 ha ) from the Ricketts family and about 3 @,@ 000 acres ( 1 @,@ 200 ha ) acquired from others . A 1947 newspaper article estimated that the new park would have 50 @,@ 000 visitors that year , and detailed the work the state had done since acquiring the land . The Falls Trail through the glens was rebuilt , all the stone steps were replaced , and signs were added . Out of concern for greater safety , footbridges with handrails replaced those made from hewn logs , overhanging rock ledges were removed in places , and the trail was rerouted near some falls . The Evergreen Trail past Adams Falls was built at this time . 
 In 1969 the Glens Natural Area was named a National Natural Landmark , and it became a Pennsylvania State Park Natural Area in 1993 , which guarantees it " will be protected and maintained in a natural state " . In 1996 heavy rains washed out two bridges on the Falls Trail ; because of the difficulty of transporting materials on the trail , an Army National Guard helicopter dropped 36 @-@ foot ( 11 m ) poles into the glens to rebuild the bridges in early 1997 . In the winter of 1997 ice climbing was allowed in the Ganoga Glen section of the park for the first time . That same year local fire companies trained to rescue people injured in the park when icy conditions make reaching and transporting them treacherous . In 1998 a four @-@ year project to " repair and improve the Falls Trail " began , with three park employees carrying materials in on foot to stabilize the trail , fix steps , reduce erosion , and repair some bridges . In 2001 , John Young in Hike Pennsylvania : An Atlas of Pennsylvania 's Greatest Hiking Adventures wrote of the Falls Trail : " This is not only the most magnificent hike in the state , but it ranks up there with the top hikes in the East . " The readers of Backpacker magazine chose the Falls Trail as the best hike in Pennsylvania in 2009 , and as one of the best hikes in the Northeast in 2010 . 
 = = Overview = = 
 Kitchen Creek flows through the park 's three glens , which the descriptions of the waterfalls are organized by : Ricketts Glen , Glen Leigh , and Ganoga Glen . The falls are listed in order going upstream along Kitchen Creek , starting with the southernmost and ending at the northernmost in each glen . This is also the order in which a hiker would encounter the falls while traveling north along the creek on the Falls Trail . 
 The Falls Trail is a 7 @.@ 1 @-@ mile ( 11 @.@ 4 km ) loop hike . Starting at PA 118 , it is 1 @.@ 8 miles ( 2 @.@ 9 km ) north along the creek through Ricketts Glen to Waters Meet , where the trail divides . Following the Glen Leigh branch , it is 1 @.@ 2 miles ( 1 @.@ 9 km ) north through the glen to the Highland Trail , then 1 @.@ 0 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) west along the Highland Trail to Ganoga Glen . Turning southeast , it is 1 @.@ 3 miles ( 2 @.@ 1 km ) through Ganoga Glen back to Waters Meet , then the 1 @.@ 8 miles ( 2 @.@ 9 km ) through Ricketts Glen is retraced , but heading south back to PA 118 . 
 The description of each waterfall starts with the name . While the Pennsylvania Department of Conservation and Natural Resources ( DCNR ) Bureau of State Parks names 22 waterfalls in Ricketts Glen State Park ( all but Kitchen Creek and Shingle Cabin ) , the United States Geological Survey ( USGS ) Geographic Names Information System ( GNIS ) names 23 ( all but Shingle Cabin ) , and Scott E. Brown 's 2004 book Pennsylvania waterfalls : a guide for hikers and photographers names 24 . There are also several unnamed waterfalls in the park , with the total number of falls given as 33 or 34 . For each waterfall the height is given next , followed by the elevation above sea level , and the latitude and longitude . Each waterfall in the table is classified according to the four types used in Brown 's book ( falls , cascade , slide , and chute ) , with some classified as combinations of types . For each waterfall there are notes , which can give more information on the waterfall , the etymology of the name , and the location on the Falls Trail , followed by a photograph . 
 = = Ricketts Glen = = 
 Ricketts Glen is the name given to the Kitchen Creek valley south and downstream of Waters Meet . It is 1 @.@ 8 miles ( 2 @.@ 9 km ) between Pennsylvania Route 118 and Waters Meet on the Falls Trail , making this the longest glen . The three northernmost waterfalls are all within 0 @.@ 5 miles ( 0 @.@ 80 km ) of Waters Meet , and are only a short hike from the bottom of Ganoga Glen or Glen Leigh . The southern part of this glen has large areas of old @-@ growth forest , chiefly hemlocks . Ricketts Glen is entirely in the Catskill Formation and all of the falls on this section of Kitchen Creek have plunge pools . 
 Ricketts Glen is the only glen where sources differ on the number of named waterfalls . Only Brown 's book names Shingle Cabin Falls , which is the sole named falls in the park on a tributary of Kitchen Creek . The names of the waterfalls at the southern end of Ricketts Glen , under and just south of PA 118 , are the most disputed . The USGS GNIS names Kitchen Creek Falls ( with coordinates very near the PA 118 bridge ) and Adams Falls ( with coordinates further south of PA 118 ) . Brown 's book also names both as separate falls and gives the height of Kitchen Creek Falls as 9 feet ( 2 @.@ 7 m ) . A 1947 newspaper article on the new state park notes the unnamed falls under the highway bridge and refers to " Adam 's Falls a short distance away " . The official park map only names Adams Falls , shows it a short distance south of the bridge , and notes it is 36 feet ( 11 m ) tall . However , the DCNR Pennsylvania Trail of Geology guide to the park says Kitchen Creek Falls is just another name for Adams Falls , and notes that " At the bridge on Pa . Route 118 , Kitchen Creek plunges over three picturesque cascades ( 18 , 25 and 10 feet high ) " ( 5 @.@ 5 , 7 @.@ 6 , and 3 @.@ 0 m high ) . 
 = = Glen Leigh = = 
 Marcia Bonta in Outbound Journeys in Pennsylvania : A Guide to Natural Places for Individual and Group <unk> calls this " the loveliest part of the entire trail — rugged , steep Glen Leigh " . Bonta goes on to note that Glen Leigh " resembles a remote wilderness , hemmed in on one side by rock and on the other by surging water , and it has some of the most spectacular waterfalls in the park " . 
 Glen Leigh was named for Lake Leigh , which R. B. Ricketts named for his second daughter Frances Leigh ( 1881 – 1970 ) . She married William S. McLean , Jr . , a judge , in 1921 . Leigh was also the middle name of R.B. Ricketts ' mother , Margaret Leigh <unk> Ricketts ( 1810 – 1891 ) . In 1907 , R. B. Ricketts built a dam upstream of the waterfalls on the Glen Leigh branch of Kitchen Creek , hoping to use the resulting Lake Leigh for hydroelectric power generation . The dam was " poorly constructed " and could not be used to generate power ; it was condemned by the state and the lake drained in 1956 . Almost all of Glen Leigh is in the Huntley Mountain Formation , but a small region at the southern end , including Waters Meet , is in the Catskill Formation . 
 Glen Leigh has eight named waterfalls in 0 @.@ 64 miles ( 1 @.@ 03 km ) . It is 1 @.@ 8 miles ( 2 @.@ 9 km ) from PA 118 in the south to Waters Meet and the southern end of Glen Leigh . The glen is also accessible from the north ; it is 1 @.@ 04 miles ( 1 @.@ 67 km ) from the Lake Leigh trailhead parking lot by Lake Jean to Onondaga , the northernmost waterfall . The Highland Trail is the 1 @.@ 2 @-@ mile ( 1 @.@ 9 km ) path between the northern ends of Glen Leigh and Ganoga Glen . It meets the Falls Trail just north of Onondaga Falls and has a short connector to F. L. Ricketts , the next waterfall south . The Falls Trail by both of these northernmost waterfalls had to be rebuilt in the early 2000s . 
 = = Ganoga Glen = = 
 By 1875 Ricketts had named the tallest waterfall on Kitchen Creek Ganoga Falls , and in 1881 , he renamed Long Pond as Ganoga Lake . Pennsylvania senator Charles R. Buckalew suggested the name Ganoga , an Iroquoian word which he said meant " water on the mountain " in the Seneca language . Donehoo 's A History of the Indian Villages and Place Names in Pennsylvania identifies it as a Cayuga language word meaning " place of floating oil " and the name of a Cayuga village in New York . Whatever the meaning , Ganoga Lake is the source of the branch of Kitchen Creek that flows through Ganoga Glen , which has the tallest waterfall . 
 A dam was built upstream of the waterfalls on the Ganoga Glen branch of Kitchen Creek in 1842 . Ricketts strengthened the dam circa 1905 as part of a hydroelectric power generation scheme , and renamed the body of water Lake Rose ( Rose is a Ricketts family name ) . However , both the Lake Rose and Lake Leigh dams were " poorly constructed " and could not be used to generate power ; both dams were condemned by the state and Lake Rose was drained in 1969 . Ganoga Glen is not as steep as Glen Leigh ; both glens are almost entirely in the Huntley Mountain Formation , with a small region at the southern end , including Waters Meet , in the Catskill Formation . Ganoga Glen has ten named waterfalls in 1 @.@ 1 miles ( 1 @.@ 8 km ) . It is 1 @.@ 8 miles ( 2 @.@ 9 km ) from PA 118 in the south to Waters Meet and the southern end of Ganoga Glen . From the north , it is 0 @.@ 3 miles ( 0 @.@ 48 km ) from the Lake Rose trailhead parking lot by Lake Jean to Mohawk , the northernmost waterfall . There is also the 2 @.@ 8 @-@ mile ( 4 @.@ 5 km ) Ganoga View Trail , which leads from Pennsylvania Route 487 in the west to Ganoga Falls . The Highland Trail , which meets the Falls Trail a short distance north of Mohawk Falls , is the 1 @.@ 2 @-@ mile ( 1 @.@ 9 km ) connector between the northern ends of Ganoga Glen and Glen Leigh . 
 Jeff Mitchell writes in Hiking the Endless Mountains : Exploring the Wilderness of Northeast Pennsylvania that Ganoga Glen has his " favorite place " in the park : " Here the trail wraps around ledges and underneath overhanging rocks , right next to the waterfalls . The roar of the falls reverberates against their rocky confines . The state park trail map says that Seneca , Delaware , and Mohican Falls are here , but it is hard to discern which falls are which because they explode from everywhere and are continuous . " 
 = = Note = = 
 = 2003 Football League Cup Final = 
 The 2003 Football League Cup Final was a football match played between Liverpool and Manchester United on 2 March 2003 at the Millennium Stadium , Cardiff . It was the final match of the 2002 – 03 Football League Cup , the 43rd season of the Football League Cup , a football competition for the 92 teams in the Premier League and The Football League . Liverpool were appearing in their ninth final ; they had previously won six and lost two , while Manchester United were appearing in the final for the fifth time . They had previously won once and lost three times . 
 As both teams were in the Premier League , they entered the competition in the third round . Liverpool 's matches were generally close affairs , with only two victories secured by two goals or more . They beat Southampton 3 – 1 in the third round , while their match in the next round against Ipswich Town went to a penalty @-@ shootout , which they won 5 – 4 . Manchester United 's matches were also close affairs , their biggest margin of victory of was by two goals . A 2 – 0 win over Burnley in the fourth round was followed by a 1 – 0 victory over Chelsea in the fifth round . 
 Watched by a crowd of 74 @,@ 500 , the first half was goalless until Liverpool took the lead in the 39th minute when midfielder Steven Gerrard scored . The score remained the same until the 86th minute when striker Michael Owen scored to make the score 2 – 0 to Liverpool . No further goals were scored and Liverpool won to secure their seventh League Cup victory . 
 Liverpool goalkeeper Jerzy Dudek was awarded the Alan Hardaker Trophy as man of the match . Liverpool manager Gérard Houllier praised Dudek 's performance and claimed that he had a premonition that Dudek would perform well in the match . Manchester United manager Alex Ferguson also praised Dudek 's performance , stating , " Their goalkeeper has won them the game . " 
 = = Route to the final = = 
 = = = Liverpool = = = 
 As Liverpool were competing in the Premier League , they entered the competition in the third round and were drawn against fellow Premier League side Southampton . Despite resting a number of first @-@ team players , Liverpool won 3 – 1 courtesy of goals from Patrik Berger , El @-@ Hadji Diouf and Milan Baroš at their home ground Anfield . Their opposition in the fourth round were Ipswich Town . They took the lead in the 14th minute , in the match held at Anfield , when Tommy Miller scored . Diouf equalised in the 54th minute , but the score remained the same through full @-@ time and extra @-@ time to take the match to a penalty shootout . Liverpool won 5 – 4 to progress to the fifth round . 
 Fellow Premier League side Aston Villa were the opposition in the match at their home ground , Villa Park . They took the lead in the 20th minute when striker Darius Vassell scored a penalty . Midfielder Danny Murphy levelled the score seven minutes later . Liverpool took the lead in the second half when Baros scored and extended it when Steven Gerrard scored in the 67th minute . Two goals for Villa courtesy of midfielder Thomas Hitzlsperger and an own goal by defender Stéphane Henchoz levelled the score at 3 – 3 late in the match . However , a Murphy goal in the 90th minute of the match meant Liverpool won 4 – 3 to progress to the semi @-@ finals . 
 Their opposition were Sheffield United of the First Division in the semi @-@ final , which was held over two @-@ legs . The first leg at United 's home ground Bramall Lane saw Liverpool take the lead in the 36th minute when striker Neil Mellor scored . However , two goals in the second half from United midfielder Michael Tonge meant they won the match 2 – 1 . The second leg was held at Liverpool 's home ground , Anfield . Liverpool took the lead in the ninth minute when Diouf scored . This levelled the tie at 2 – 2 and as no further goals were scored upon reaching full @-@ time , the match went into extra @-@ time . Liverpool extended their lead in the 107th minute when striker Michael Owen scored . No further goals were scored in the remaining minutes of extra @-@ time and Liverpool progressed to the final courtesy of a 3 – 2 aggregate victory . 
 = = = Manchester United = = = 
 First Division side Leicester City were the opposition as United entered the competition in the third round , due to being in the Premier League . The match , held at United 's home ground Old Trafford , was goalless until the 80th minute when midfielder David Beckham scored from a penalty . They extended their lead in the 90th minute when Kieran Richardson scored to win the match 2 – 0 . 
 United were drawn against First Division side Burnley in the fourth round . The match held at Burnley 's home ground , Turf Moor , saw United take the lead in the 35th minute when striker Diego Forlán scored . They extended their lead in the 65th minute when striker Ole Gunnar Solskjær scored to secure a 2 – 0 victory for United . Fellow Premier League side Chelsea were the opposition in the quarter @-@ final . A goal in the 80th minute by striker Forlán was enough to secure a 1 – 0 victory and progression to the semi @-@ final . 
 United were drawn against fellow Premier League side Blackburn Rovers in the semi @-@ final . The first leg at Old Trafford was goalless in the first half , but United took the lead in the 58th minute when midfielder Paul Scholes scored . However , three minutes later Blackburn equalised when David Thompson scored . The match finished at 1 – 1 . The second leg held at Blackburn 's home ground , Ewood Park , saw them take the lead when striker Andy Cole scored early in the match . However , United responded and two goals from Scholes in the remainder of the first half gave United the lead . They scored a third in the second half when striker Ruud van Nistelrooy converted a penalty . United won the match 3 – 1 and progressed to the final after winning the tie 4 – 2 . 
 = = Match = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Liverpool were appearing in their ninth final they had won six ( 1981 , 1982 , 1983 , 1984 , 1995 , 2001 ) and lost two ( 1978 , 1987 ) . This was Manchester United 's fifth appearance in the final . They had won once in 1992 and lost three times in 1983 , 1991 and 1994 . The teams had met once before in the 1983 final , a match which Liverpool won 2 – 1 . The last match between the two sides before the final was on 1 December 2002 , which United won 2 – 1 courtesy of goals from striker Diego Forlán . Both sides last match before the final was in European competition . Liverpool beat French team Auxerre 2 – 0 in the second leg of their 2002 – 03 UEFA Cup fourth round tie , while United beat Italian team Juventus 3 – 0 in the second group stage of the 2002 – 03 UEFA Champions League . 
 Liverpool midfielder Vladimír Šmicer was looking forward to playing a part in the final : " Everyone wants to play in the final , I 'm no different . I was just happy to be on the pitch against Auxerre because I didn 't know even the day before whether I 'd be fit enough after my injury problem . I 'm still not 100 % fit , I just wanted to train well this week and be fit for the final . " Šmicer was hopeful that victory in the final would rescue Liverpool 's season : " I hope that this re @-@ ignites our season . Our season is not good , we know , but there is still plenty to play for . We have not said this is a bad season , let 's forget about it and concentrate on the next one , we have been criticised and we are intent on responding on the pitch . " Liverpool midfielder Danny Murphy was eager to win the match : " Winning in Cardiff would be a massive result for us , we have to be honest , we haven 't been as good as Manchester United over the last 10 years . And winning would bring European football next year , which isn 't guaranteed at the moment . " 
 Manchester United manager Alex Ferguson revealed that captain Roy Keane would return to his midfield role after playing in central defence in their win over Juventus . " It took Roy about 15 minutes to settle into Tuesday 's game but once he started to make sure he could see his opponent , he grasped the role very quickly , in the end , he could have played with a bowler hat and white gloves on it was so easy for him . He is a marvellous player and choosing him in defence is certainly an option but Mikaël Silvestre and John O 'Shea should be fit and I have a back four in my mind . " The final was United 's first since the 1999 UEFA Champions League Final and Ferguson was determined to win : That is too long for us , and we are delighted . We have always looked at the League Cup as an extra to blood young players , but the format now has encouraged teams to have a go . We 've played Liverpool once in Cardiff – in the Charity Shield – and lost so I hope this time it will be a different result . " 
 Both sides had injury concerns heading into the final . Liverpool defender Stéphane Henchoz was a doubt after he suffered a thigh injury in Liverpool 's win over Auxerre . However , Liverpool midfielder Šmicer had recovered from an ankle problem and would be available for selection . United had a number of injury concerns . Wes Brown , Scholes and Ryan Giggs were all doubts for the final , after they had picked up knocks in the week before the final . They would also be without striker Diego Forlán , who had injured his ankle against Juventus , however , defender Mikaël Silvestre was declared fit to start . 
 = = = First half = = = 
 Liverpool kicked @-@ off the match and they had first chance of the match in the 4th minute , but the free @-@ kick by midfielder Murphy was caught by United goalkeeper Fabien Barthez . Defender Henchoz was shown a yellow card in the 12th minute and United midfielder Giggs had the first shot of the match , which was saved by Liverpool goalkeeper Jerzy Dudek . Twice in the next few minutes Liverpool had chances from moves down the right @-@ hand side of the pitch . However , on both occasions the pass into the penalty area was intercepted . United had a chance to score in the 20th minute . Keane passed to Scholes , who found Giggs on the left @-@ hand side of the pitch . His cross into the penalty area found striker Ruud van Nistelrooy , but his shot went wide of the Liverpool goal . 
 Liverpool began to get a foothold in the match after 30 minutes , their best chance came in the 36th minute when a shot by Murphy went over the crossbar . Three minutes later their approach paid off as they scored . A long @-@ range shot from Steven Gerrard deflected off United midfielder David Beckham and into the United goal to give Liverpool a 1 – 0 lead . Three minutes after the goal , United had a chance to equalise . A shot by midfielder Juan Sebastian Verón was saved by Dudek , but the ball rebounded to Scholes , his subsequent shot was blocked by Henchoz . After a free @-@ kick by Beckham just before half @-@ time was saved by Dudek , Liverpool counter @-@ attacked through midfielder El Hadji Diouf down the right @-@ hand side of the <unk> , his subsequent cross into the penalty area was intercepted by Keane . 
 = = = Second half = = = 
 Almost immediately after the restart , Liverpool had the first attack . Striker Michael Owen went past United defender Brown , but he was unable to shoot when the ball got stuck in between his feet . A minute later , Liverpool had an appeal for a penalty after striker Emile Heskey went down in the United penalty area , but referee Paul Durkin did not award a penalty . They had another chance in the 52nd minute after an exchange of passes between Murphy and Heskey , but Murphy 's shot went over the bar . United began to exert more pressure on Liverpool after this . A minute later a shot by Keane was blocked by Liverpool defender Sami Hyypiä . The ball went out for a United , which resulted in a throw @-@ in , that was headed into the arms of Dudek . Five minutes van Nistelrooy had a chance to score as he turned and shot at the Liverpool goal , but it was saved by Dudek . Heskey was replaced by striker Milan Baroš following an injury . 
 United had another chance in the 66th minute when Verón crossed from the right @-@ hand side of the pitch to Scholes , but his shot was saved by Dudek . A Liverpool attack in the 72nd minute ended after Baros put the ball out for a goal @-@ kick . From the subsequent kick , Barthez found Giggs , who ran through the middle of the pitch , but his pass to Beckham was intercepted by Liverpool . United subsequently replaced Brown with striker Ole Gunnar Solskjær . United had an appeal for a penalty in the 77th minute when Scholes went down near Liverpool midfielder Dietmar Hamann , but Durkin turned down the appeal . Minutes later van Nistelrooy had another chance to score , but his shot from inside the Liverpool penalty area was saved by Dudek . Five minutes later Liverpool scored through Owen . A pass by Silvestre was intercepted by Liverpool , Hamann passed to Owen , who beat Barthez to give Liverpool a 2 – 0 lead . Four minutes later Liverpool had a chance to extend their lead . However Šmicer , who had replaced Baros , missed the target . No further goals were scored and Liverpool won 2 – 0 to win the League Cup for the seventh time . 
 = = = Details = = = 
 = = Post @-@ match = = 
 Following the match Liverpool manager Gérard Houllier claimed he had a premonition that goalkeeper Dudek would be the hero of the final : " I told Jerzy three days ago ' I can feel you will be the hero . You were too unlucky when we played them , today he was man of the match . But football can be like that . Sometimes you can be at the bottom and then be a hero again . I just had a feeling . I 'm a great believer that when you have the right attitude everything else follows . He had a good run after the World Cup but then he made some mistakes and we had to support him . The squad get on very well . There was no finger @-@ pointing after that game . He has saved us before in games and we had to keep faith in him . " Houllier also praised Manchester United manager Alex Ferguson : " I wished him the best in the Champions League because he represents the best in English football , he congratulated every Liverpool player after the final whistle and that shows that he is not just a great manager but a great man . " 
 United manager Ferguson also praised Dudek 's performance in the match : " Their goalkeeper has won them the game , sometimes you just have to put your hands up on these occasions . Dudek has won them the cup . He deserved to be man of the match . We didn 't get a break . Dudek 's performance encouraged them to stay near their penalty box . In tough games like that the first goal is very important . It 's a test for us . We can either accept defeat or we can fight back . " Captain Keane was disappointed with the defeat : " The players , managers , staff are all upset but I suppose nowhere near as bad as the fans , if you don 't win a match in football you feel as though you have let the fans down . " His focus turned to United 's participation in the UEFA Champions League , as they looked to end the season with a trophy : " It would have been nice to get a piece of silverware in the cabinet , especially with the opposition being Liverpool , we 've just got to lick our wounds . We 've got a game against Leeds on Wednesday and we 'll get on with training for Wednesday . The players know we 'll have to get together , get ready and try to keep the pressure on Arsenal . But we are eight points behind them , which puts them in a very strong position and again we are pinning our hopes on the European Cup , which is a dangerous game to play as we saw last season . " 
 = The Number Devil = 
 The Number Devil : A Mathematical Adventure ( German : Der <unk> . Ein <unk> für alle , die Angst vor der Mathematik haben ) is a book for children and young adults that explores mathematics . It was originally written in 1997 in German by Hans Magnus Enzensberger and illustrated by <unk> Susanne Berner . The book follows a young boy named Robert , who is taught mathematics by a sly " number devil " called Teplotaxl over the course of twelve dreams . 
 The book was met with mostly positive reviews from critics , approving its description of math while praising its simplicity . Its colorful use of fictional mathematical terms and its creative descriptions of concepts have made it a suggested book for both children and adults troubled with math . The Number Devil was a bestseller in Europe , and has been translated into English by Michael Henry Heim . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Robert is a young boy who suffers from mathematical anxiety due to his boredom in school . His mother is Mrs. Wilson . He also experiences recurring dreams — including falling down an endless slide or being eaten by a giant fish — but is interrupted from this sleep habit one night by a small <unk> creature who introduces himself as the Number Devil . Although there are many Number Devils ( from Number Heaven ) , Robert only knows him as the Number Devil before learning of his actual name , Teplotaxl , later in the story . 
 Over the course of twelve dreams , the Number Devil teaches Robert mathematical principles . On the first night , the Number Devil appears to Robert in an oversized world and introduces the number one . The next night , the Number Devil emerges in a forest of trees shaped like " ones " and explains the necessity of the number zero , negative numbers , and introduces hopping , a fictional term to describe exponentiation . On the third night , the Number Devil brings Robert to a cave and reveals how prima @-@ donna numbers ( prime numbers ) can only be divided by themselves and one without a remainder . Later , on the fourth night , the Number Devil teaches Robert about rutabagas , another fictional term to depict square roots , at a beach . 
 For a time after the fourth night , Robert cannot find the Number Devil in his dreams ; later , however , on the fifth night , Robert finds himself at a desert where the Number Devil teaches him about triangular numbers through the use of coconuts . On the sixth night , the Number Devil teaches Robert about the natural occurrence of Fibonacci numbers , which the Number Devil shortens to Bonacci numbers , by counting brown and white rabbits as they reproduce multiple times . By this dream , Robert 's mother has noticed a visible change in Robert 's mathematical interest , and Robert begins going to sleep earlier to encounter the Number Devil . The seventh night brings Robert to a bare , white room , where the Number Devil presents Pascal 's triangle and the patterns that the triangular array displays . On the eighth night , Robert is brought to his classroom at school . The Number Devil arranges Robert 's classmates in multiple ways , teaches him about permutations , and what the Number Devil calls vroom numbers ( <unk> ) . 
 On the ninth night , Robert dreams he is in bed , suffering from the flu , when the Number Devil appears next to him . The Number Devil teaches Robert about natural numbers , which the Number Devil calls garden @-@ variety numbers , the unusual characteristics of infinite , and infinite series . Robert finds himself at the North Pole , where the Number Devil introduces irrational numbers ( unreasonable numbers ) , as well as aspects of Euclidean geometry , such as vertices ( dots ) and edges ( lines ) . By the eleventh night , Robert has shown considerable increased interest in mathematics , but questions its validity , to which the Number Devil introduces the concept of mathematical proofs , ending with the Number Devil showing Robert a complicated proof of basic arithmetic . On the twelfth night , Robert and the Number Devil receive an invitation ( which names the Number Devil as Teplotaxl ) to Number Heaven , as Robert 's time with the Number Devil has finished . At Number Heaven , Robert learns of imaginary numbers , which Teplotaxl describes as imaginative numbers , as well as the Klein bottle . Walking through Number Heaven , Teplotaxl introduces Robert to various famous mathematicians , such as Fibonacci , whom Teplotaxl calls Bonacci , and George Cantor , or Professor Singer . The book ends with Robert in class using his newfound mathematical knowledge . 
 = = History = = 
 Enzensberger fostered a passion for mathematics and numbers , although he was not a mathematician by trade . In 1998 , he delivered a speech at the International Congress of Mathematicians criticizing the isolation of mathematics from popular culture . The Number Devil was ultimately written on suggestion from Enzensberger 's eleven @-@ year @-@ old daughter Theresia . Because he was displeased with the way mathematics was taught to students at school , the German author decided to pen a book that teaches mathematics in an innovative way . German illustrator <unk> Susanne Berner provided many full @-@ page illustrations , as well as smaller drawings , for the book . The Number Devil was first published in German in 1997 . The Number Devil has been noted for its unorthodox abandonment of standard notation ; instead , Enzensberger created a variety of fictional terms to help describe mathematical concepts . For instance , exponentiation takes the term hopping , and the fictional term unreasonable numbers was coined for irrational numbers . The UCLA Professor of Slavic Languages Michael Henry Heim translated the book from German to English . The translation was particularly difficult in that it required special attention to the numerical aspect of the book . He was also challenged by the necessity to use simple English words appropriate for the target audience of The Number Devil — that is , children aged eleven to fourteen . The mathematics book was then published in English in 1998 . 
 The book was a hit across Europe , becoming a best seller in at least Spain , Germany , the Netherlands , and Italy . The Number Devil also had considerable success in Japan . After the success of The Number Devil , Enzensberger wrote a follow @-@ up , called Where Were You , Robert ? , a children 's book focusing on history rather than math . The German author has since stated he will not write any more young adult 's books , but instead direct his effort towards poetry . Viva Media later published an educational computer game , similarly titled The Number Devil : A Mathematical Adventure , based on the book . An audiobook was also released for The Number Devil . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The Number Devil received mostly positive reviews from critics . Mathematics professor John Allen Paulos of Temple University wrote an article for The New York Review of Books , praising The Number Devil as a " charming numerical fairy tale for children . " Likewise , mathematics writer Martin Gardner of the Los Angeles Times applauded Enzensberger 's introduction of mathematics " in such an entertaining way . " In a book review for The Baltimore Sun , Michael Pakenham approved of the book 's simplicity , writing , " it 's not incomprehensible . Not for a minute . " 
 Not all reviews were positive , however . The American Mathematical Society 's Deborah <unk> Ball and Hyman Bass reviewed the book from a mathematical perspective . Although they praised its " attractive and imaginative fantasy , " the two mathematicians found several issues . Ball and Bass were concerned with the The Number Devil 's negative characterization of math teachers , its apparent presentation of mathematics as magical rather than factual , and a number of other contentions . Ted Dewan , writing for the Times Educational Supplement , believed it to be " far more compelling than a standard text , " but found it less adventurous than he hoped for . He also criticized its use in mathematics education , stating " I suspect this is the sort of book that well @-@ meaning adults will mistakenly thrust upon children because it will be good for them . " 
 = Vojislav Lukačević = 
 Vojislav Lukačević ( Serbian Cyrillic : <unk> <unk> ; 1908 – 14 August 1945 ) was a Serbian Chetnik commander in the Kingdom of Yugoslavia during World War II . At the outbreak of war , he held the rank of captain of the reserves in the Royal Yugoslav Army . 
 When the Axis powers invaded Yugoslavia in April 1941 , Lukačević became a leader of Chetniks in the Sandžak region and joined the movement of Draža Mihailović . While the Chetniks were an anti @-@ Axis movement in their long @-@ range goals and did engage in marginal resistance activities for limited periods , they also pursued almost throughout the war a tactical or selective collaboration with the occupation authorities against the Yugoslav Partisans . They engaged in cooperation with the Axis powers to one degree or another by establishing modi vivendi or operating as auxiliary forces under Axis control . Lukačević himself collaborated extensively with the Italians and the Germans in actions against the Yugoslav Partisans until mid @-@ 1944 . 
 In January and February 1943 , while under the overall command of Major Pavle Đurišić , Captain Lukačević and his Chetniks participated in several massacres of the Muslim population of Bosnia , Herzegovina and the Sandžak . Immediately after this , Lukačević and his Chetniks participated in one of the largest Axis anti @-@ Partisan operations of the war , Case White , where they fought alongside Italian , German and Croatian ( NDH ) troops . The following November , Lukačević concluded a formal collaboration agreement with the Germans and participated in a further anti @-@ Partisan offensive , Operation Kugelblitz . 
 In February 1944 , Lukačević travelled to London to represent Mihailović at the wedding of King Peter of Yugoslavia . After returning to Yugoslavia in mid @-@ 1944 , and in anticipation of an Allied landing on the Yugoslav coast , he decided to break with Mihailović and fight the Germans , but this was short @-@ lived , as he was captured by the Partisans a few months later . After the war , he was tried for collaboration and war crimes and sentenced to death . He was executed in August 1945 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Lukačević was born in 1908 in Belgrade , Kingdom of Serbia to a wealthy banking family . At one point , he was employed by the French civil engineering company Société de Construction des Batignolles . He attained the rank of captain in the reserves of the Royal Yugoslav Army before World War II . 
 = = Invasion and occupation = = 
 After the outbreak of World War II , the government of Regent Prince Paul of Yugoslavia declared its neutrality . Despite this , and with the aim of securing his southern flank for the pending attack on the Soviet Union , Adolf Hitler began placing heavy pressure on the Kingdom of Yugoslavia to sign the Tripartite Pact and join the Axis . After some delay , the Yugoslav government conditionally signed the Pact on 25 March 1941 . Two days later a bloodless coup d 'état deposed Prince Paul and declared 17 @-@ year @-@ old Prince Peter II of Yugoslavia of age . Following the subsequent German @-@ led invasion of Yugoslavia and the Yugoslav capitulation 11 days later , Lukačević went into hiding in the forests . He soon returned to Belgrade , where he became aware of the activities of Draža Mihailović . He then left the capital with some other officers and soldiers to form a Chetnik detachment in the Novi Pazar area of the Sandžak region . On 16 November 1941 Muslim forces from Novi Pazar and Albanian forces from Kosovo attacked Raška and quickly advanced toward the town . They were commanded by <unk> <unk> . The situation for the defenders became very difficult , so Lukačević personally engaged himself in the defence of the town . On 17 November they stopped the advance of <unk> 's forces and forced them to retreat . On 21 November Lukačević took part in the attack of Chetnik forces on Novi Pazar . In the summer of 1942 , Lukačević and his Chetniks fought the Partisans in Herzegovina . 
 = = Massacres of Muslims = = 
 In December 1942 , Chetniks from Montenegro and Sandžak met at a conference in the village of Šahovići near Bijelo Polje . The conference was dominated by Montenegrin Serb Chetnik commander Major Pavle Đurišić and its resolutions expressed extremism and intolerance , as well as an agenda which focused on restoring the pre @-@ war status quo in Yugoslavia implemented in its initial stages by a Chetnik dictatorship . It also laid claim to parts of the territory of Yugoslavia 's neighbors . At this conference , Mihailović was represented by his chief of staff , Major Zaharije Ostojić , who had previously been encouraged by Mihailović to wage a campaign of terror against the Muslim population living along the borders of Montenegro and the Sandžak . 
 The conference decided to destroy the Muslim villages in the Čajniče district of Bosnia . On 3 January 1943 , Ostojić issued orders to " cleanse " the Čajniče district of Ustaše @-@ Muslim organisations . According to the historian Radoje Pajović , Ostojić produced a detailed plan which avoided specifying what would be done with the Muslim population of the district . Instead , these instructions were to be given orally to the responsible commanders . Delays in the movement of Chetnik forces into Bosnia to participate in the anti @-@ Partisan Case White offensive alongside the Italians enabled Chetnik Supreme Command to expand the planned " cleansing " operation to include the Pljevlja district in the Sandžak and the Foča district of Bosnia . A combined Chetnik force of 6 @,@ 000 was assembled , divided into four detachments , each with its own commander . Lukačević commanded a force of 1 @,@ 600 , consisting of Chetniks from Višegrad , Priboj , Nova Varoš , Prijepolje , Pljevlja and Bijelo Polje . His force formed one of the four detachments , and Mihailović ordered that all four detachments be placed under the overall command of Đurišić . 
 In early February 1943 , during their advance northwest into Herzegovina in preparation for their involvement in Case White , the combined Chetnik force massacred large numbers of the Muslim population in the targeted areas . In a report to Mihailović dated 13 February 1943 , Đurišić reported that the Chetnik forces under his command had killed about 1 @,@ 200 Muslim combatants and about 8 @,@ 000 old people , women , and children , and destroyed all property except for livestock , grain and hay , which they had seized . Đurišić reported that : 
 The operations were executed exactly according to orders . [ ... ] All the commanders and units carried out their tasks satisfactorily . [ ... ] All Muslim villages in the three above mentioned districts are entirely burnt , so that not one of the houses remained undamaged . All property has been destroyed except cattle , corn and hay . In certain places the collection of fodder and food has been ordered so that we can set up warehouses for reserved food for the units which have remained on the terrain in order to purge it and to search the wooded areas as well as establish and strengthen the organization on the liberated territory . During operations complete annihilation of the Muslim population was undertaken , regardless of sex and age . 
 The orders for the " cleansing " operation stated that the Chetniks should kill all Muslim fighters , communists and Ustaše , but that they should not kill women and children . According to Pajović , these instructions were included to ensure there was no written evidence regarding the killing of non @-@ combatants . On 8 February , one Chetnik commander made a notation on their copy of written orders issued by Đurišić that the detachments had received additional orders to kill all Muslims they encountered . On 10 February , Jovan <unk> , the commander of the Pljevlja Brigade , who was subordinated to Lukačević , told one of his battalion commanders that he was to kill everyone , in accordance with the orders of their highest commanders . According to the historian Professor Jozo Tomasevich , despite Chetnik claims that this and previous " cleansing actions " were countermeasures against Muslim aggressive activities , all circumstances point to it being Đurišić 's partial achievement of Mihailović 's previous directive to clear the Sandžak of Muslims . 
 = = Case White = = 
 Lukačević and his Chetniks were drawn into closer collaboration with the Axis during the second phase of Case White , which took place in the Neretva and Rama river valleys in late February 1943 and was one of the largest anti @-@ Partisan offensives of the war . Despite the fact that the Chetniks were an anti @-@ Axis movement in their long @-@ range goals and did engage in marginal resistance activities for limited periods , their involvement in Case White is one of the most significant examples of their tactical or selective collaboration with the Axis occupation forces . In this instance , the participating Chetniks received Italian logistic support and included those operating as legalized auxiliary forces under Italian control . During this offensive , between 12 @,@ 000 and 15 @,@ 000 Chetniks fought alongside Italian forces , and Lukačević and his Chetniks also fought alongside German and Croatian troops against the Partisans . 
 In February 1943 , during the second phase of Case White , Lukačević and his Chetniks jointly held the town of Konjic on the Neretva river alongside Italian troops . After being reinforced by German and NDH troops and some additional Chetniks , the combined force held the town against concerted attacks by the Partisans over a seven @-@ day period . The first attack was launched by two battalions of the 1st Proletarian Division on 19 February and was followed by repeated attacks by the 3rd Assault Division between 22 and 26 February . Unable to capture the town and its critical bridge across the Neretva , the Partisans eventually crossed the river downstream at Jablanica . Ostojić was aware of Lukačević 's collaboration with the Germans and NDH troops at Konjic but , at his trial , Mihailović denied that he himself was aware of it , claiming that Ostojić controlled the communications links and kept the information from him . During the fighting at Konjic , the Germans also supplied Lukačević 's troops with ammunition . Both Ostojić and Lukačević were highly critical of what they described as Mihailović 's bold but reckless tactics during Case White , indicating that Mihailović was largely responsible for the Chetnik failure to hold the Partisans at the Neretva . 
 In September 1943 , immediately following the Italian capitulation , the Italian Venezia Division , which was garrisoned at Berane , surrendered to the British Special Operations Executive Colonel S.W. " Bill " Bailey and Major Lukačević , but Lukačević and his troops were unable to control the surrendered Italians . Partisan formations arrived in Berane shortly afterward and were able to convince the Italians to join them . 
 = = Collaboration with the Germans = = 
 In September 1943 , United States Lieutenant Colonel Albert B. Seitz and Lieutenant George Musulin parachuted into the Territory of the Military Commander in Serbia , along with British Brigadier Charles Armstrong . In November , Seitz and another American liaison officer , Captain Walter R. Mansfield , conducted a tour of inspection of Chetnik areas , including that of Lukačević . During their tour they witnessed fighting between Chetniks and Partisans . Due to their relative freedom of movement , the Americans assumed that the Chetniks controlled the territory they moved through . However , despite the praise that Seitz expressed for Lukačević , the Chetnik leader was collaborating with the Germans at the same time that he was hosting the visiting Americans . 
 In mid @-@ November 1943 , Major Lukačević was the chief of the Chetnik detachments based near Stari Ras , near Novi Pazar in the Sandžak . On 13 November , his representative concluded a formal collaboration agreement ( German : <unk> @-@ <unk> ) with the representative of the German Military Commander in southeast Europe , General der Infanterie ( Lieutenant General ) Hans Felber . The agreement was signed on 19 November , and covered a large portion of the Sandžak and the Territory of the Military Commander in Serbia , bounded by <unk> <unk> , the Drina river , the Tara river , Bijelo Polje , <unk> , Kosovska Mitrovica , the Ibar river , Kraljevo , Čačak and Užice . Under the agreement , a special German liaison officer was assigned to Lukačević to advise on tactics , ensure cooperation , and facilitate arms and ammunition supply . British Prime Minister Winston Churchill read the decrypted text of the agreement between Lukačević and Felber , which had a significant influence on the changing attitude of the British towards Mihailović . 
 In early December 1943 , Lukačević 's Chetniks participated in Operation Kugelblitz , the first of a series of German operations alongside the 1st Mountain Division , 7th SS Volunteer Mountain Division Prinz Eugen , and parts of the 187th Reserve Division , the 369th ( Croatian ) Infantry Division and the 24th Bulgarian Division . The Partisans avoided decisive engagement and the operation concluded on 18 December . Also during December , the Higher SS and Police Leader in the Sandžak , SS @-@ Standartenführer Karl von Krempler , posted notices authorising local Serbs to join Lukačević 's Chetniks . On 22 December , shortly after the conclusion of Operation Kugelblitz , Oberst ( Colonel ) Josef <unk> issued an order of the day commending Lukačević for his enthusiasm in fighting the Partisans in the Sandžak , and allowed him to keep some of the arms he had captured . 
 = = Break with Mihailović = = 
 In mid @-@ February 1944 , Lukačević , Baćović and another officer accompanied Bailey to the coast south of Dubrovnik and were evacuated from Cavtat by a Royal Navy gunboat . Their passage through German @-@ occupied territory was probably facilitated by Lukačević 's accommodation with the Germans . At one point , Lukačević was invited to have a meal with the German garrison commander of a nearby town , but declined the offer . Lukačević and the others then travelled via Cairo to London , where Lukačević represented Mihailović at King Peter 's wedding on 20 March 1944 . After the British government decided to withdraw support from Mihailović , Lukačević and his Chetnik companions were not allowed to return to Yugoslavia until the British mission to Mihailović headed by Armstrong had been safely evacuated from occupied territory . Lukačević and the others were detained by the British in Bari and thoroughly searched by local authorities , who suspected them of a robbery that had occurred in the Yugoslav consulate in Cairo a short time before . Most of the money , jewelry and uncensored letters that they were carrying were impounded . The men were flown out of Bari on 30 May , and landed on an improvised airfield at Pranjani northwest of Čačak shortly after . Because their landing at Pranjani coincided with Armstrong 's departure , Lukačević and Baćović demanded that Armstrong be held as a hostage until their impounded belongings could be returned from Bari . The Chetniks at the airfield refused to keep Armstrong any further , and he was allowed to depart without incident . 
 In mid @-@ 1944 , after Mihailović was removed from his post as Minister of the Army , Navy and Air Force as a result of the dismissal of the <unk> government by King Peter , Lukačević attempted to independently contact the Allies in Italy in the hope of " reaching an understanding on a common fight against the enemy " . When these attempts failed , Lukačević announced in August 1944 that he and other Chetnik commanders in eastern Bosnia , eastern Herzegovina and Sandžak were no longer obeying orders from Mihailović , and were forming an independent resistance movement to fight the occupiers and those collaborating with them . In early September , he issued a proclamation to the people explaining his reasons for attacking the Germans . On 19 October , Lukačević proposed that the Chetniks change their policy to greet the Red Army as liberators and ask to be taken under the command of a Russian general . He also tried to arrange a non @-@ aggression pact with the Partisans . Subsequently , he deployed his 4 @,@ 500 Chetniks into southern Herzegovina and for several days from 22 September they attacked the 369th ( Croatian ) Infantry Division and the Trebinje – Dubrovnik railway line , capturing some villages and taking hundreds of prisoners . Mihailović formally relieved Lukačević of his command and asked other Chetnik commanders to act against him . However , the Partisans , concerned Lukačević was trying to link up with a feared British landing on the Adriatic coast , attacked his forces on 25 September , first capturing his stronghold at Bileća and then comprehensively defeating him . With several hundred remaining Chetniks , Lukačević withdrew as far as Foča before returning to the Bileća area in the hope of linking up with small detachments of British troops that had been landed to support Partisan operations . Instead he was captured by the Partisans . 
 = = Trial and execution = = 
 Lukačević , along with other defendants , was tried by a military court in Belgrade between 28 July and 9 August 1945 . He was accused of conducting the massacre at Foča , participating in the extermination of the Muslim population , collaboration with the occupying forces and the Serbian puppet government of General Milan Nedić and the commission of crimes against the Partisans . He was found guilty of various offences and executed by firing squad on 14 August 1945 . 
 = Carlos Menem = 
 Carlos Saúl Menem ( born July 2 , 1930 ) is an Argentine politician who was President of Argentina from 1989 to 1999 . He has been a Senator for La Rioja Province since 2005 . 
 Born in <unk> , he became a Peronist during a visit to Buenos Aires . He led the party in his home province of La Rioja , and was elected governor in 1973 . He was deposed and detained during the 1976 Argentine coup d 'état , and was elected governor again in 1983 . He defeated the Buenos Aires governor Antonio Cafiero in the primary elections for the 1989 presidential elections , which he won . Hyperinflation forced outgoing president Raúl Alfonsín to resign early , shortening the presidential transition . 
 Menem supported the Washington Consensus , and tackled inflation with the Convertibility plan in 1991 . The plan was complemented by a series of privatizations , and was a success . Argentina re @-@ established diplomatic relations with the United Kingdom , suspended since the 1982 Falklands War , and developed special relations with the United States . The country suffered two terrorist attacks . The Peronist victory in the 1993 midterm elections allowed him to force Alfonsín to sign the Pact of Olivos for the 1994 amendment of the Argentine Constitution . This amendment allowed Menem to run for re @-@ election in 1995 , which he won . A new economic crisis began , and the opposing parties formed a political coalition that won the 1997 midterm elections and the 1999 presidential election . 
 Menem ran for the presidency again in 2003 , but unsure of winning against Néstor Kirchner , he resigned . He was elected senator for La Rioja in 2005 . 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 Carlos Saúl Menem was born in 1930 in <unk> , a small town in the mountainous north of La Rioja Province , Argentina . His parents , Saúl Menem and <unk> Akil , were Syrian nationals from <unk> who had emigrated to Argentina . He attended elementary and high school in La Rioja , and joined a basketball team during his university studies . He visited Buenos Aires in 1951 with the team , and met the president Juan Perón and his wife Eva Perón . This influenced Menem to become a Peronist . He studied law at the National University of Córdoba , graduating in 1955 . 
 After President Juan Perón 's overthrow in 1955 , Menem was briefly incarcerated . He later joined the successor to the Peronist Party , the Justicialist Party ( Partido <unk> ) ( PJ ) . He was elected president of its La Rioja Province chapter in 1973 . In that capacity , he was included in the flight to Spain that brought Perón back to Argentina after his long exile . According to the Peronist politician Juan Manuel <unk> Medina , Menem played no special part in the event . 
 = = Governor of la Rioja = = 
 = = = 1st term ( 1973 – 1976 ) and detainment = = = 
 Menem was elected governor in 1973 , when the proscription over Peronism was lifted . He was deposed during the 1976 Argentine coup d 'état that deposed the president Isabel Martínez de Perón . He was accused of corruption , and having links with the guerrillas of the Dirty War . He was detained on March 25 , kept for a week at a local regiment , and then moved to a temporary prison at the ship " 33 Orientales " in Buenos Aires . He was detained alongside former ministers Antonio Cafiero , Jorge <unk> , Miguel <unk> , José <unk> , and Pedro Arrighi , the unionists Jorge <unk> , Diego Ibáñez , and Lorenzo Miguel , the diplomat Jorge Vázquez , the journalist Osvaldo <unk> , and the former president Raúl <unk> . He shared a cell with Pedro Eladio Vázquez , Juan Perón 's personal physician . During this time he helped the chaplain Lorenzo Lavalle , despite being a Muslim . In July he was sent to Magdalena , to a permanent prison . His wife Zulema visited him every week , but rejected his conversion to Christianity . His mother died during the time he was a prisoner , and dictator Jorge Rafael Videla denied his request to attend her funeral . He was released on July 29 , 1978 , on the condition that he live in a city outside his home province without leaving it . He settled in Mar del Plata . 
 Menem met Admiral Eduardo Massera , who intended to run for president , and had public meetings with personalities such as Carlos Monzón , Susana Giménez , and Alberto Olmedo . As a result , he was forced to reside in another city , Tandil . He had to report daily to Chief of Police Hugo Zamora . This forced residence was lifted in February 1980 . He returned to Buenos Aires , and then to La Rioja . He resumed his political activities , despite the prohibition , and was detained again . His new forced residence was in Las <unk> , in Formosa Province . He was one of the last politicians to be released from prison by the National Reorganization Process . 
 = = = 2nd and 3rd terms ( 1983 – 1989 ) = = = 
 Military rule ended in 1983 , and the radical Raúl Alfonsín was elected president . Menem run for governor again , and was elected by a clear margin . The province benefited from tax regulations established by the military , which allowed increased industrial growth . His party got control of the provincial legislature , and he was re @-@ elected in 1987 with 63 % of the vote . The PJ was divided in two factions , the conservatives that still supported the political doctrines of Juan and Isabel Perón , and those who proposed a renovation of the party . The internal disputes ceased in 1987 . Menem , with his prominent victory in his district , was one of the leading figures of the party , and disputed its leadership . 
 = = Presidential elections = = 
 Antonio Cafiero , who had been elected governor of Buenos Aires Province , led the renewal of the PJ , and was considered their most likely candidate for the presidency . Menem , on the other hand , was seen as a populist leader . Using a big tent approach , he got support from several unrelated political figures . As a result , he defeated Cafiero in the primary elections . He sought alliances with Bunge and Born , union leaders , former members of Montoneros , and the AAA , people from the church , " Carapintadas " , etc . He promised a " revolution of production " and huge wage increases ; but it was not clear exactly which policies he was proposing . The rival candidate , Eduardo Angeloz , tried to point out the mistakes made by Menem and Alfonsín . Jacques de <unk> , a French ideologue of the Peronist movement ( and former Vichy collaborator ) , was photographed campaigning for Menem . 
 The elections were held on May 14 , 1989 . Menem won by a wide margin , and became the new president . He was scheduled to take office on December 10 , but inflation levels took a turn for the worse , growing into hyperinflation , causing public riots . The outgoing president Alfonsín resigned and transferred power to Menem five months early , on July 8 . Menem 's accession marked the first time since Hipólito Yrigoyen took office in 1916 that an incumbent government was peacefully succeeded by a president from an opposition party . 
 = = Presidency = = 
 = = = Economic policy = = = 
 When Menem began his presidency , there was massive hyperinflation and a recession . Most economists of the time thought that the ideal solution was the Washington Consensus : reduce expenditures below the amount of money earned by the state , and open international commerce to free trade . Alfonsín had proposed similar plans in the past , alongside some privatization ; but those projects were resisted by the PJ . The plan was resisted by factions benefiting from the protectionist policies , but the magnitude of the crisis convinced most politicians to change their minds . Menem , fearing that the crisis might force him to resign as well , embraced the Washington Consensus and rejected the traditional policies of Peronism . He invited the conservative politicians Álvaro <unk> and María Julia <unk> into his cabinet , as well as businessmen from Bunge and Born . 
 Congress sanctioned the economic emergency law and the state reform law . The first allowed the president to reduce or remove subsidies , and the latter to privatize state enterprises – the first being telephones and airlines . These privatizations were beneficial to foreign creditors , who replaced their bonds with company shares . Despite increased tax revenue , and the money from privatizations , the economy was still unstable . The Bunge and Born businessmen left the government in late 1989 , amid a second round of hyperinflation . The first measure of the new minister of economy , <unk> González , was a mandatory conversion of time deposits into government bonds : the <unk> plan . It generated more recession , but hyperinflation was reduced . 
 His fourth minister of economy , Domingo Cavallo , was appointed in 1991 . He deepened the neoliberal reforms . The Convertibility plan was sanctioned by the Congress , setting a one @-@ to @-@ one fixed exchange rate between the United States dollar and the new Argentine peso , which replaced the Austral . The law also limited public expenditures , but this was frequently ignored . There was increased free trade to reduce inflation , and high taxes on sales and earnings to reduce the deficit caused by it . Initially , the plan was a success : the capital flights ended , interest and inflation rates were lowered , and economic activity increased . The money from privatizations allowed Argentina to repurchase many of the Brady Bonds issued during the crisis . The privatizations of electricity , water , and gas were more successful than previous ones . YPF , the national oil refinery , was privatized as well , but the state kept a good portion of the shares . The project to privatize the pension funds was resisted in Congress , and was approved as a mixed system that allowed both public and private options for workers . The national state also signed a fiscal pact with the provinces , so that they reduced their local deficits as well . Buenos Aires Province was helped with a fund that gave the governor a million pesos daily . 
 Although the Convertibility plan had positive consequences in the short term , it caused problems that surfaced later . Large numbers of employees of privatized state enterprises were fired , and unemployment grew to over 10 % . Big compensation payments prevented an immediate public reaction . The free trade , and the expensive costs in dollars , forced private companies to reduce the number of workers as well , or risk bankruptcy . Unions were unable to resist the changes . People with low incomes , such as retirees and state workers , suffered under tax increases while their wages remained frozen . The provinces of Santiago del Estero , Jujuy and San Juan had their first violent riots . To compensate for these problems , the government started a number of social welfare programs , and restored protectionist policies over some sectors of the economy . It was difficult for Argentine companies to export , and easy imports damaged most national producers . The national budget soon slid into deficit . 
 Cavallo began a second wave of privatizations with the Correo Argentino and the nuclear power plants . He also limited the amount of money released to the provinces . He still had the full support of Menem , despite growing opposition within the PJ . The Mexican Tequila Crisis impacted the national economy , causing a deficit , recession , and a growth in unemployment . The government further reduced public expenditures , the wages of state workers , and raised taxes . The deficit and recession were reduced , but unemployment stayed high . External debt increased . The crisis also proved that the economic system was vulnerable to capital flight . The growing discontent over unemployment and the scandals caused by the privatization of the Correo led to Cavallo 's removal as minister , and his replacement by Roque Fernández . Fernández maintained Cavallo 's fiscal austerity . He increased the price of fuels , sold the state shares of YPF to Repsol , fired state employees , and increased the value @-@ added tax to 21 % . He also undertook more privatization . A new labor law was met with resistance , both by Peronists , opposition parties , and unions , and could not be approved by Congress . The 1997 Asian financial crisis and the 1998 Russian financial crisis also affected the country with consequences that lasted longer than the <unk> Crisis and started a depression . 
 = = = Domestic policy = = = 
 Menem began his presidency assuming a non @-@ confrontational approach , and appointing people from the conservative opposition , and business people to his cabinet . To prevent successful legal cases against the projected privatizations , the Supreme Court 's numbers were increased from five to nine judges ; the new judges ruled in support of Menem and usually had the majority . Other institutions that restrained or limited executive power were controlled as well . When Congress resisted some of his proposals , he used the Necessity and <unk> Decree as an alternative to send bills to it . He even considered it feasible to dissolve Congress and rule by decree , but this step was never implemented . In addition , he developed a bon vivant lifestyle , taking advantage of his authority . For instance , he made a journey from Buenos Aires to <unk> driving a Ferrari <unk> in less than two hours , violating speed limits . He divorced his wife Zulema Yoma and expanded the Quinta de Olivos presidential residence with a golf course , a small zoo , servants , barber , and even a buffoon . 
 The <unk> scandal broke out in 1990 , as American investors were damaged by a case of corruption , and asked for assistance from the United States ' Ambassador Terence Todman . Most of the ministers resigned as a result of it . Cavallo was reassigned as minister of economy , and his successful economic plan turned him into a prominent figure in Menem 's cabinet . Cavallo brought a number of independent economists to the cabinet , and Menem supported him by replacing Peronist politicians . Both teams complemented each other . Both Menem and Cavallo tried to be recognized as the designer of the convertibility plan . 
 Antonio Cafiero , a rival of Menem in the PJ , was unable to amend the constitution of the Buenos Aires province to run for a re @-@ election . Duhalde stepped down from the vice presidency and became the new governor in the 1991 elections , turning the province into a powerful bastion . Menem also selected famous people with no political background to run for office in those elections including the singer <unk> Ortega and racing driver Carlos Reutemann . The elections were a big success for the PJ . After these elections , all of the PJ was aligned with Menem 's leadership , with the exception of a small number of legislators known as the " Group of Eight " . The opposition from the UCR was minimal , as the party was still discredited by the 1989 crisis . With such political influence , Menem began his proposal to amend the constitution to allow a re @-@ election . The party did not have the required super majority in the Congress to call for it . The PJ was divided , as other politicians intended to replace Menem in 1995 , or negotiate their support . The UCR was divided as well , as Alfonsín opposed the proposal , but governors Angeloz and <unk> were open for negotiations . The victory in the 1993 elections strengthened his proposal , which was approved by the Senate . Menem called for a non @-@ binding referendum on the proposal , to increase pressure on the radical deputies . He also sent a bill to the Congress to modify the majority requirements . Alfonsín met with Menem and agreed to support the proposal in exchange for amendments that would place limits on presidential power . This negotiation is known as the Pact of Olivos . The capital city of Buenos Aires would be allowed to elect its own chief of government . Presidential elections would use a system of ballotage , and the president could only be re @-@ elected once . The electoral college was abolished , replaced by direct elections . The provinces would be allowed to elect a third senator ; two for the majority party and one for the first minority . The Council of Magistrates of the Nation would have the power to propose new judges , and the Necessity and <unk> Decrees would have a reduced scope . 
 Despite of the internal opposition of Fernando de la Rúa , Alfonsín got his party to approve the pact . He reasoned that Menem would be supported by the eventual referendum , that many legislators would turn to his side , and he would eventually be able to amend the constitution reinforcing presidential power rather than limiting it . Still , as both sides feared a betrayal , all the contents of the pact were included as a single proposal , not allowing the Constituent Assembly to discuss each one separately . The Broad Front , a new political party composed of former Peronists , led by Carlos Álvarez , grew in the elections for the Constituent Assembly . Both the PJ and the UCR respected the pact , which was completely approved . Duhalde made a similar amendment to the constitution of the Buenos Aires province , in order to be re @-@ elected in 1995 . Menem won the elections with more than 50 % of the vote , followed by José Octavio <unk> , and Carlos Álvarez . The UCR finished third in the elections for the first time . 
 Growing unemployment increased popular resistance against Menem after his re @-@ election . There were several riots and demonstrations in the provinces , unions opposed the economic policies , and the opposing parties organized the first cacerolazos . Estanislao Esteban <unk> replaced Antonio <unk> as the head of the Argentine Episcopal Conference , which led to a growing opposition to Menem from the Church . The teachers ' unions established a " white tent " at the Congressional plaza as a form of protest . The first piqueteros operated in <unk> Có , and this protest method was soon imitated in the rest of the country . His authority in the PJ was also held in doubt , as he was unable to run for another re @-@ election and the party sought a candidate for the 1999 elections . This led to a fierce rivalry with Duhalde , the most likely candidate . Menem attempted to undermine his chances , and proposed a new amendment to the constitution allowing him to run for an unlimited number of re @-@ elections . He also started a judicial case , claiming that his inability to run for a third term was a proscription . Several scandals erupted , such as the scandal over Argentine arms sales to Ecuador and Croatia , the Río Tercero explosion that may have destroyed evidence , the murder of the journalist José Luis Cabezas , and the suicide of Alfredo <unk> , who may have ordered it . The PJ lost the 1997 midterm elections against the UCR and the <unk> united in a political coalition , the Alliance for Work , Justice and Education ( Alianza ) . The Supreme Court confirmed that Menem was unable to run for a third re @-@ election . Duhalde became the candidate for the presidential elections , and lost to the candidate for the Alianza ticket , Fernando de la Rúa . 
 = = = Armed forces = = = 
 Argentina was still divided by the aftermath of the Dirty War . Menem proposed an agenda of national reconciliation . First , he arranged the repatriation of the body of Juan Manuel de Rosas , a controversial 19th century governor , and proposed to reconcile his legacy with those of Bartolomé Mitre and Domingo Faustino Sarmiento , who also fought in the Argentine Civil Wars . Menem intended to use the reconciliation of these historical Argentine figures as a metaphor for the reconciliation of the Dirty War . However , although the repatriation and acceptance of Rosas was a success , the acceptance of the military regime was not . 
 The military leaders of the National Reorganization Process , convicted in the 1985 Trial of the Juntas , received presidential pardons , despite popular opposition to them . This was an old request of the Carapintadas in previous years . However , Menem did not apply their proposed changes to the military . The colonel , Mohamed Alí Seineldín , who was also pardoned , started a new mutiny , killing two military men . Unlike the mutinies that took place during the presidency of Alfonsín , the military fully obeyed Menem 's orders for a forceful repression . Seineldín was utterly defeated , and sentenced to life imprisonment . This was the last military mutiny in Argentina . 
 The president effected drastic cuts to the military budget , and privatized military factories . Menem appointed Lt. Gen. Martín <unk> , who had performed well during the repression of Seineldín 's mutiny , as the Army 's General Chief of Staff ( head of the military hierarchy ) . The death of a conscript soldier in 1994 , victim of abuses by his superiors , led to the abolition of conscription in the country . The following year , <unk> voiced the first institutional self @-@ criticism of the armed forces during the Dirty War , saying that obedience did not justify the actions committed in those years . 
 = = = Terrorist attacks = = = 
 The Israeli embassy suffered a terrorist attack on March 17 , 1992 . It was perceived as a consequence of Argentina 's involvement in the Gulf War . Although Hezbollah claimed responsibility for it , the Supreme Court investigated several other hypotheses . The Court wrote a report in 1996 suggesting that it could have been the explosion of an arms cache stored in the basement . Another hypothesis was that the attack could have been performed by Jewish extremists , in order to cast blame on Muslims and thwart the peace negotiations . The Court finally held Hezbollah responsible for the attack in May 1999 . 
 The Argentine Israelite Mutual Association suffered a terrorist attack with a car bomb on July 18 , 1994 , which killed eighty @-@ five people . It was the most destructive terrorist attack in the history of Latin America . The attack was universally condemned and 155 @,@ 000 people manifested their concern in a demonstration at the Congressional plaza ; but Menem did not attend . The legal case stayed unresolved during the remainder of Menem 's presidency . Menem had suggested , in the first press conference , that former <unk> leaders may be responsible of the attack , but this idea was rejected by the minister of defense several hours later . The CIA office in Buenos Aires initially considered it a joint Iranian @-@ Syrian attack , but some days later considered it just an Iranian attack . Menem and Mossad also preferred this line of investigation . As a result of the attack , the Jewish community in Argentina had increased influence over Argentine politics . Years later , the prosecutor Alberto <unk> charged Menem with covering up a local connection to the attack , as the local terrorists may have been distant Syrian relatives of the Menem family . However , Menem was never tried for this suspected cover up . 
 = = = Foreign policy = = = 
 During his presidency , Argentina aligned with the United States , and had special relations with the country . Menem had a positive relation with US president George H. W. Bush , and maintained it with his successor Bill Clinton . The country left the Non @-@ Aligned Movement , and the <unk> missile program was discontinued . Argentina supported all the international positions of the US , and sent forces to the Gulf War , and the peace keeping efforts after the Kosovo War . The country was accepted as a Major non @-@ NATO ally , but not as a full member . 
 Menem 's government re @-@ established relations with the United Kingdom , suspended since the Falklands War , after Margaret Thatcher left office in 1990 . The discussions on the Falkland Islands sovereignty dispute were temporarily given a lower priority , and the focus shifted to discussions of fishing rights . He also settled all remaining border issues with Chile . The Lago del Desierto dispute had an international arbitration , favourable to Argentina . The only exception was the dispute over the Southern Patagonian Ice Field , which is still open . 
 In 1991 Menem became the first head of state of Argentina to make a diplomatic visit to Israel . He proposed to mediate between Israel and Syria in their negotiations over the Golan Heights . The diplomatic relations were damaged by the lack of results in the investigations over the two terrorist attacks . 
 = = Post @-@ presidency = = 
 Menem ran in 2003 and won the greatest number of votes , 24 % , in the first round of the April 27 , 2003 presidential election ; but votes were split among numerous parties . 45 % is required for election ( or 40 % if the margin of victory is 10 or more percentage points ) . A second @-@ round run @-@ off vote between Menem and second @-@ place finisher , and fellow Peronist , Néstor Kirchner , who had received 22 % , was scheduled for May 18 . By that time , Menem had become very unpopular . Polls predicted that he faced almost certain defeat by Kirchner in the runoff . Most polls showed Kirchner taking at least 60 percent of the vote , and at least one poll showed Menem losing by as many as 50 points . To avoid a humiliating electoral defeat , Menem withdrew his candidacy on May 14 , effectively handing the presidency to Kirchner . 
 Ángel Maza , the elected governor of La Rioja , was allied with Menem , and had campaigned for him . However , weak provincial finances forced Maza to switch his support to Kirchner , which weakened Menem 's influence even further . In June 2004 Menem announced that he had founded a new faction within the PJ , called " People 's Peronism . " He announced his intention to run in the 2007 election . In 2005 , the press reported that he was trying to form an alliance with his former minister of economy Cavallo to fight in the parliamentary elections . Menem said that there had been only preliminary conversations and an alliance did not result . In the October 23 , 2005 elections , Menem won the minority seat in the Senate representing his province of birth . The two seats allocated to the majority were won by President Kirchner 's faction , locally led by Ángel Maza . 
 Menem ran for Governor of La Rioja in August 2007 , but was defeated . He finished in third place with about 22 % of the vote . This was viewed as a catastrophic defeat , signaling the end of his political dominance in La Rioja . It was the first time in 30 years that Menem had lost an election . Following this defeat in his home province , he withdrew his candidacy for president . At the end of 2009 he announced that he intended to run for the presidency again in the 2011 <unk> but ran for a new term as senator instead . 
 = = = Corruption charges = = = 
 On June 7 , 2001 , Menem was arrested over a weapons export scandal . It was based on exports to Ecuador and Croatia in 1991 and 1996 . He was held under house arrest until November . He appeared before a judge in late August 2002 and denied all charges . Menem and his second wife Cecilia <unk> , who had had a child since their marriage in 2001 , moved to Chile . Argentine judicial authorities repeatedly requested Menem 's extradition to face embezzlement charges . This request was rejected by the Chilean Supreme Court as under Chilean law , people cannot be extradited for questioning . On December 22 , 2004 , after the arrest warrants were cancelled , Menem returned with his family to Argentina . He still faced charges of embezzlement and failing to declare illegal funds in a Swiss bank . He was declared innocent of those charges in 2013 . 
 In August 2008 , the BBC reported that Menem was under investigation for his role in the 1995 Río Tercero explosion , which is alleged to have been part of the weapons scandal involving Croatia and Ecuador . Following an Appeals Court ruling that found Menem guilty of aggravated smuggling , he was sentenced to seven years in prison on June 13 , 2013 , for his role in illegally smuggling weapons to Ecuador and Croatia ; his position as senator earned him immunity from incarceration , and his advanced age ( 82 ) afforded him the possibility of house arrest . His minister of defense during the weapons sales , Oscar <unk> , was concurrently sentenced to 5 and a half years . 
 In December 2008 , the German multinational Siemens agreed to pay an $ 800 million fine to the United States government , and approximately € 700 million to the German government , to settle allegations of bribery . The settlement revealed that Menem had received about US $ 2 million in bribes from Siemens in exchange for awarding the national ID card and passport production contract to Siemens ; Menem denied the charges but nonetheless agreed to pay the fine . 
 On December 1 , 2015 , Menem was also found guilty of embezzlement , and sentenced four and half years to prison . Domingo Cavallo , his economy minister , and Raúl <unk> Ocampo , Menem 's former minister of justice , also received prison sentences of more than three years for participating in the scheme , and were ordered to repay hundreds of thousands of pesos ’ worth of illegal bonuses . 
 = = Public image = = 
 In his initial times , Menem sported an image similar to the old caudillos , such as Facundo Quiroga and <unk> <unk> . He also groomed his sideburns in a similar style . His presidential inauguration was attended by several gauchos . Contrary to Peronist tradition , Carlos Menem did not prepare huge rallies in the Plaza de Mayo to address the people from the balcony of the Casa Rosada . Instead of that , he took full advantage of mass communication media , such as television . 
 = = Honour = = 
 = = = Foreign honour = = = 
 Malaysia : Honorary Recipient of the Order of the Crown of the Realm ( 1991 ) 
 = Pacer ( album ) = 
 Pacer is an album released in October 1995 by the Amps , Kim Deal 's side project from her group the Breeders , who took a break from playing together beginning in late 1994 . Deal recruited two new musicians and named the group the Amps . The band recorded Pacer at several studios in the USA and in Ireland , with different engineers each time , including Steve Albini , Bryce Goggin , and John Agnello . 
 The album received mixed reviews , ranging from highly enthusiastic to quite dismissive . Despite radio airplay for its single , " Tipp City " , Pacer did not sell well . The Amps toured in 1995 and 1996 with groups such as Sonic Youth , Guided By Voices , and Foo Fighters . In 1996 , Deal changed the band 's name back to the Breeders , making Pacer the Amps ' only album . 
 = = Background = = 
 Kim Deal 's band the Breeders released Last Splash in August 1993 ; the album was very successful , and its release was followed by much touring . The Breeders then took an extended break from activity . One reason was that Deal 's sister Kelley , who was also in the group , was arrested on drug charges in November 1994 . Member Josephine Wiggs likewise took time away from the band , although Wiggs and Deal have different memories of the circumstances surrounding this . Wiggs recalls offering to be involved if Deal 's next album was going to be a Breeders record , but having the impression that Deal wanted to do a solo release ; Deal remembers Wiggs declining to be part of any immediate Breeders ' recording , but offering to be on the one after that . 
 Regardless of the causes of the Breeders ' hiatus , by early 1995 Deal believed her next album would be a solo one , and at first intended to play all instruments on it herself . Back at her home in Dayton , Ohio , she practiced the drums and initially prepared six songs for recording . Around the same time , she produced some tracks for Guided by Voices at Easley Studios in Memphis , Tennessee . While there , Deal used a portion of the studio time to record demos for some of her new songs . As an attempt to distract her sister from her drug problems , Deal recruited Kelley to play on three songs at this initial recording session . Kelley 's involvement changed Deal 's mind about playing all the instruments herself , and she began to conceptualize the album as a band project . 
 After the Easley recording session , Deal returned to Dayton . She asked Breeders ' drummer Jim Macpherson to play drums in the new project , and Dayton musicians Luis Lerma and Nate Farley to play bass and guitar , respectively . Deal adopted a stage persona for herself named Tammy Ampersand , and called the band " Tammy and the Amps " ; this later evolved into simply " the Amps " . The group began by performing at small shows , and learned the songs well to prepare for recording the album . At some point during the recording sessions , Kelley 's drug difficulties and rehabilitation prevented her from continuing as a member of the band . 
 = = Recording = = 
 Pacer was recorded at seven studios in total , with different engineers each time . The track " Tipp City " was used from the original session at Easley Studios , recorded in February 1995 and engineered by Doug Easley and Davis McCain . The Amps ' next session was with engineer Steve Albini at his Chicago studio . Deal had previously worked with Albini on the Pixies ' Surfer Rosa and the Breeders ' Pod releases . The Amps and Albini recorded songs including further versions of " Tipp City " , which are unreleased , and " <unk> " ; an earlier version of the latter song had previously been released on the Breeders ' " Divine Hammer " single in October 1993 . Other recording sessions , whose various engineers included Bryce Goggin and John Agnello , took place at studios in Long Island and Woodstock , New York , as well as Dayton , Los Angeles , and Dublin , Ireland . 
 In a 1996 interview , Deal said that for Pacer , she focused on the vocals : " Usually , I tend to spend more time with the instruments . Last Splash had quite a few instrumentals and quite a few songs where I might say five words . [ On Pacer , the ] songs are all vocal @-@ heavy . The vocal leads , and if you take the vocal away , you don 't have much of a song . " The sound of the album has been described as " lo @-@ fi " . 
 = = Release = = 
 Pacer was released in late October 1995 . It peaked at No. 60 on the UK Album Chart , and No. 29 on the American Heatseekers Album chart . " Tipp City " was released as the album 's single and included an alternate version of " Empty Glasses " , as well as a cover of the Tasties ' " Just Like a Briar " . The single received some radio airplay in the USA , and reached No. 61 on the UK Singles Chart , but Pacer did not sell well . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Critical appraisal of Pacer has been mixed . Allmusic 's Stephen Thomas Erlewine describes the album as " exciting , gut @-@ level rock & roll " . The Rough Guide to Rock calls Pacer " satisfyingly lo @-@ fi " . In Spin magazine , reviewer Joy Press writes that the album includes " a half @-@ dozen gems " but that its overall " foggy sound " and " indecipherable lyrics " prevent the listener from fully embracing the work . Robert Christgau considers the album 's songs to be " definitely slight " and " uneven " but praises the vocals , stating that " speedy or dreamy , Kim Deal sounds so sane , so unpretentious , so goddamn nice that you want to take her home and give her a shampoo " . In The Trouser Press Guide to ' 90s Rock , critic Ira Robbins writes that " Other than the fine title track and a few others , the performances are forced and lackluster ; the production varies between flat and colorless . " The New Rolling Stone Album Guide similarly praises the title song while dismissing the rest of the album as " forgettable " . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The Amps toured in 1995 and 1996 , with bands including Guided by Voices , Sonic Youth , Brainiac , the Tasties , Helium , and Foo Fighters . Later in 1996 , the group added member Carrie Bradley ( who had played on Pod ) , and Deal changed its name back to the Breeders . The band 's lineup continued to evolve , and within a few years , Deal was the only of the former Amps left in the group . Pacer is the sole album that the Amps released . 
 A number of artists have covered songs from Pacer . The Muffs included a version of " Pacer " on their compilation albums Hamburger and <unk> . On Gigantic : A Tribute to Kim Deal , released on American <unk> Records , the German Art Students covered " Bragging Party " and Tara King Theory , " Tipp City " . Musician Girl Talk included a sample of " Tipp City " on " Touch 2 Feel " on his album Unstoppable . The Breeders themselves released a new version of " Full on Idle " on Title TK and over the years have sometimes performed Amps ' songs at their concerts . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written and composed by Kim Deal , except where noted . 
 = = Chart positions = = 
 = Gravity ( Lecrae album ) = 
 Gravity is the sixth studio album by American Christian hip hop artist Lecrae , released on September 4 , 2012 . The album features appearances from Big K.R.I.T. , Mathai , Ashthon Jones , and Mali Music , along with labelmates Trip Lee , Andy Mineo , Derek Minor , who was formerly known as PRo , and Tedashii . Producers on the album include DJ Khalil , Street Symphony 's Heat Academy , and The Watchmen . The first single off the album , " I Know " , was released on July 24 , 2012 , and was followed by " Tell the World " featuring Mali Music on August 15 , 2012 , and " Mayday " featuring Big K.R.I.T. and Ashthon Jones on August 30 , 2012 . Reach Records released five music videos for the album : " Lord Have Mercy " , featuring Tedashii along with No Malice of Clipse , on August 1 , 2012 , " Tell the World " , featuring Mali Music , on October 19 , 2012 , " Mayday " , featuring Big K.R.I.T. and Ashthon Jones , on December 13 , 2012 , " Fakin ' " , featuring Thi 'sl , on February 1 , 2013 , and " Confe $ $ ions " , featuring David Banner , on April 30 , 2013 . 
 The first week of sales for the album set a new record for Lecrae , with Gravity debuting at No. 3 on the Billboard 200 with 72 @,@ 000 units sold , and was the biggest sales week ever for a Christian hip hop album . The bonus track " Fuego " featuring KB and Suzy Rock from the iTunes deluxe edition of the album peaked at No. 20 on the Billboard Top Heatseekers Songs , No. 13 on the R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Digital charts , and No. 64 on the Hot Digital Songs charts . Critically , Gravity was very well received , and is considered Lecrae 's strongest , most mainstream work to date . It won Best Gospel Album at the 2013 Grammy Awards and Best Rap / Hip Hop Album at the 2013 Dove Awards . 
 = = Background = = 
 Gravity is a follow @-@ up to the mixtape Church Clothes , which was released earlier in 2012 , and Lecrae 's two previous studio albums , Rehab , which was released in September 2010 , and Rehab : The Overdose , which followed five months later . The Church Clothes mixtape was released for free on May 10 , 2012 , and was hosted by DJ Don Cannon . It was considered Lecrae 's step into the mainstream due to his collaboration with artists such as No Malice of Clipse and the producers 9th Wonder , Boi @-@ 1da , S1 and Street Symphony . The featuring of mainstream artists , particularly Don Cannon , was controversial within Christian circles . The mixtape was downloaded on <unk> almost 100 @,@ 000 times within 48 hours and in less than a month reached 250 @,@ 000 downloads , a platinum rating on <unk> 
 Lecrae said in a statement to AllHipHop : " With the release of Gravity , I really wanted to expand on my previous work while still making sure to keep it all very authentic to who I am as an artist as well as a person [ . ] When I released Church Clothes earlier this year , it was the precursor of what 's come with this album . It introduced my music to new audiences , allowing me to impact others . " 
 = = Recording and production = = 
 Lecrae stated in an exclusive video with AllHipHop that after recording Church Clothes in March , he was on the road before beginning recording for Gravity in May . In an article by <unk> , Lecrae revealed that he had started work on the album in February , then wrapped up recording during the mid @-@ year . The album was recorded over the next couple months at Music House Studios in Atlanta , Georgia . On July 10 , 2012 , Christian hip hop website Rapzilla reported that Lecrae had shot a music video with No Malice of Clipse and with his labelmate Tedashii . The report included photographs from the video set . 
 Much of the production on the album was handled by producers with whom Lecrae has worked with in the past , chiefly The Watchmen and Heat Academy . The Watchmen consists of the producers J.R. , Alex Medina , and Wit while Heat Academy is led by Street Symphony . DJ Khalil , whose past production work includes Recovery by Eminem , produced the track " Mayday " , which features Big K.R.I.T. and American Idol season 10 finalist Ashthon Jones . <unk> , who previously contributed to a track from Church Clothes , co @-@ produced the song " Violence " with <unk> . Other producers include Dirty Rice , DJ Official , Dru Castro , and Joseph <unk> . 
 Besides Big K.R.I.T. and Ashthon Jones , the album also features appearances by The Voice finalist Mathai , Mali Music , and Reach Records artists Trip Lee and Tedashii . On working with Big K.R.I.T. , Lecrae stated to Billboard that K.R.I.T. had already reached out to him before the collaboration to show his appreciation for Lecrae 's honesty . In an interview with AllHipHop , Lecrae mentioned that both he and Big K.R.I.T. have similar backgrounds , having both grown up in the Southern United States and struggled with religion under the influence of a religious grandmother . 
 = = Promotion and marketing = = 
 On May 31 , 2012 , Rapzilla posted an article featuring photos and tweets from the Gravity recording sessions . A teaser video for the album was released on YouTube on June 20 , 2012 , and announced that the album would be released in the latter half of 2012 . On July 10 , 2012 , Family Christian made the album available for pre @-@ order , and Rapzilla used this information to announce the following day that the release date was September 4 , 2012 . Also on July 10 , Lecrae posted photos from his video shoot with No Malice and Tedashii . Rapzilla responded a few days later with speculation over the possibility that in one photo Lecrae 's T @-@ shirt bore the logo of Gravity . 
 On July 17 , 2012 , Lecrae performed with his labelmate Andy Mineo at an Apple Store in SoHo , New York City . The performance included live renderings of songs from Rehab and Gravity . The following day , Lecrae held an exclusive preview session of the album at The Cutting Room with his industry friends and select publications including AllHipHop and Billboard . The cover art to Gravity was revealed the day after , along with an official announcement of the release date . 
 The lead single from the album , " I Know " , was released on July 24 , 2012 , as a complimentary free download upon pre @-@ ordering of the album . On July 27 , 2012 , Billboard reported about Gravity in its daily news show The Beat . Rapzilla also made the single available for streaming on SoundCloud . On the same day , the album 's tracklist was revealed . The music video for " Lord Have Mercy " was released on August 1 , 2012 . On August 7 , 2012 , a deluxe version of Gravity was made available for preorder on iTunes . This version includes three bonus songs featuring appearances from Suzy Rock , Tenth Avenue North , and KB , and according to Rapzilla , the album already reached the No. 9 spot on the iTunes Hip @-@ Hop / Rap Chart . Later the same day , the deluxe version moved up the No. 2 spot on the iTunes Hip @-@ Hop / Rap Chart and No. 18 overall on iTunes . On August 14 , 2012 , Lecrae launched a website for the album , and released the single " Tell the World " featuring Mali Music on August 15 , 2012 . According to a photo posted on Lecrae 's Instagram account , on August 15 , 2012 , Lecrae held another private listening session at New Era Flagship Store in Atlanta . On August 23 , 2012 , Rapzilla reported that Lecrae had shot a music video with Mali Music for the single " Tell the World " . The following day , a promotional video for the album , entitled " It All Comes Down " , was released . The fourth single for the album , " Mayday " , featuring Big K.R.I.T. and Ashthon Jones , was released on August 30 , 2012 . The music video for " Tell the World " was released on October 19 , 2012 , and announcements were been made that Lecrae had filmed music videos for " Fakin ' " , featuring Thi 'sl , and " Mayday " . The video for " Mayday " aired December 13 , 2012 on the MTV Networks channels MTV Jams , mtvU , and MTV2 . On February 1 , 2013 , Lecrae released the music video for " Fakin ' " on MTV and MTV2 , and it quickly reached No. 1 on the MTV.com Top Video Picks . Lecrae released the fifth and final music video from the album , " Confe $ $ ions " , on April 30 , 2013 , on BET 's 106 & Park It features an acting appearance by David Banner . 
 = = Lyrics and style = = 
 When asked what sets Gravity apart from his previous releases , Lecrae stated that " Obviously , there 's more risk involved in terms of just making more mature music that 's not as straight [ and ] <unk> it 's dealing with bigger issues . People may have to think a little bit more . The production is a lot bigger and more advanced than it 's been . Lyrically , as an artist , I think I 've written some of the best lyrics I 've ever written . " Lecrae provided insight into the album 's concept during an interview with Family Christian , stating that " Gravity is loosely based on Ecclesiastes and I think what Solomon was trying to do was bring some weight to life and that ’ s really what I want to do , to paint some sober pictures . " He described that " there ’ s a sober picture of how it ’ s only for a short period of time , it ’ s short @-@ lived , or that we still have Jesus . So that ’ s what I would call a weighty part , a gravitational pull to remind us of who we are in Jesus . " Billboard stated that Lecrae increased his level of production for Gravity and " mixed reggae and soul influences with his signature brash sound . " AllHipHop described the album as opening with " an influx of instruments like violin , drums , guitars " . " I Know " was described as having one of the hardest beats on the album , while " Mayday " was considered one of the most " organic " sounding tracks . " Violence " was considered one of the most energetic tracks , and was described as " caribbean @-@ esque " with a dancehall vibe . After the music video for " Lord Have Mercy " was released , an article in The Christian Post article compared the song to the Kanye West single " Mercy " , both in its title and musical style . The article elaborated that " like Kanye West 's song , " ' Lord Have Mercy ' features slowed down sampled vocals for its chorus along with heavy bass and an overall dark tone . " It noted the appearance of No Malice in the video , stating that " the chorus seems to sample his voice . " 
 = = Artwork and packaging = = 
 In a blog for the Houston Chronicle , hip @-@ hop writer Sketch the Journalist posted an article on the cover and promotional artwork for Gravity . He compared the cover as a combination of those from Quarantine by <unk> and Get Rich or Die Tryin ' by 50 Cent , and compared the promotional art to that of Braille and S1 's <unk> . Sketch subsequently updated the post based off a reader comment , and added the cover of De La Soul 's <unk> : <unk> in combination with the promo art for <unk> in his comparison of Gravity 's cover art . 
 = = Touring = = 
 Three release parties were held for the album . The first occurred on September 28 , 2012 , in Manchester , United Kingdom , followed by Denver , Colorado on the 27th and Houston , Texas , on the 28th . 
 In support of the album , Lecrae toured with his entire label roster , consisting of Tedashii , Trip Lee , KB , Andy Mineo , and PRo , along with special guests Propaganda and Thi 'sl . The tour ran from October through November and stopped at 30 cities across the United States and Canada . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Commercial reception = = = 
 Upon its release , Gravity debuted at No. 3 on the Billboard 200 , with 72 @,@ 000 units sold . This set a career high for Lecrae , whose previous highest sales week was 27 @,@ 000 units with Rehab , and was the best sales week ever for a Christian hip hop album . By September 23 , 2012 , the album had sold 103 @,@ 000 copies . In the first week of sales , the iTunes deluxe edition of the album reached number No. 1 on that vendor 's hip @-@ hop / rap albums chart , while the regular version of the album came in second place , a feat that prompted writ @-@ up on Lecrae in Time . Rapzilla initially reported that the deluxe edition of the album had also reached the No. 2 spot on the overall iTunes album chart , and this report was subsequently updated to reflect deluxe version of Gravity reaching No. 1 on that chart . In addition , the bonus song " Fuego " from the deluxe edition reached No. 5 on the iTunes top hip @-@ hop / rap songs chart . The song charted at No. 20 on the Billboard Top Heatseekers Songs , No. 13 on the R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Digital charts , and No. 64 on the Hot Digital Songs charts . According to Inquisitr , in the same week of the release of Gravity , the iTunes version of Church Clothes jumped to the No. 4 spot on the top hip @-@ hop / rap albums chart . As of November 28 , 2012 , the album has sold 150 @,@ 000 copies in the U.S. 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Both AllHipHop and Billboard were very positive toward Gravity after a preview listening session , considering it Lecrae 's strongest and most mainstream work to date . AllHipHop stated that " overall , it appears that Lecrae is ready to offer one of his most broad and , dare @-@ we @-@ say , mainstream albums in terms of sound ; yet , it still manages to capture the <unk> of what he has always stood for and rapped about . If anything , Gravity is a giant step forward for his expanding career , and it will surely be a welcome addition to many ' Top 10 ' lists when 2012 comes to a close . " Indie Vision Music in announcing the cover of Gravity called the album " likely the biggest Christian hip hop album yet " . AllHipHop listed " Mayday " as one of the standout tracks on the album , noting the " beautiful " melody and hook by Ashthon Jones . The reviewer considered " Violence " a personal favorite , calling Lecrae 's line " Grew up under Tupac , bible verse and two <unk> " one of the most powerful lines on the album . <unk> Magazine also was favorable to the song , stating " That track is definitely going places . " Jonathan Landrum of The Associated Press was favorable to the album , saying that " in his sixth album ' Gravity , ' Lecrae delivers a strong piece of work . He 's not afraid to rap about his past mistakes , supplying inspirational rhymes filled with Christian values backed by well @-@ produced secular hip @-@ hop beats . " In its track @-@ by @-@ track review of the album , The Boombox stated that " based on the warm reception to Church Clothes , this LP is set to stir the pot further in the realm of both of hip @-@ hop and Christianity . " David Jeffries of Allmusic gave the album four out of five stars , declaring that Lecrae makes Gravity 's various genre experiments and jumps in style " sound effortless and natural " . He asserted that " while Rehab is the more rewarding album in the end , this one is more persuasive and immediate , making it an easy entry point into this gifted artist 's discography . " 
 In an initial review by Jesus Freak Hideout , Kevin Hoskins rated the album four out of five stars , calling the album solid but finding that the album 's R & B passages " pale in comparison to the other tracks stylistically and are not necessarily needed . " Hoskins listed the songs " Falling Down , " " Power Trip , " " Lord Have Mercy , " and " I Know " as some of the best tunes , and called " Lucky Ones " a " perfect song . " New Release Tuesday called Gravity one of the most anticipated releases of the year . In its review , the site gave the album four out of five stars , stating that the recording in many ways lives up to the anticipation , but had three or four too many songs that detract from the album 's whole . Rapzilla was very favorable to the album , rating it four @-@ point @-@ five out of five and calling it the most important album in the history of Christian hip hop . The reviewer , Armond Goss , listed the tracks " Lord Have Mercy " , " Fakin ' " , and " Buttons " the low points on the album , but said that those were the only problems that they found . " Confe $ $ ions " , " Power Trip " , and " Gravity " were all listed by as extremely strong , but Goss considered the track " Mayday " as the best track " sonically , lyrically and conceptually " on the album , stating that DJ Khalil 's production work " provides the perfect backdrop for K.R.I.T. to walk into your church in the middle of service and express his frustrations with hypocrisies and for <unk> to walk in behind him and calm the mob down while still co @-@ signing K.R.I.T. ’ s verse . " The Houston Press summarized the album by stating that " by and large , Gravity acts and dresses like a stand along rap album built from the same organ drenched and string heavy foundation that Houston 's style of G @-@ funk did in the ' 90s . It 's another " heavy " rap album to drive away from the same escapism tactics rap loves to dwell in . " 
 At CCM Magazine , Andy Argyrakis said that Lecrae has " officially arrived as the top star in the scene " , and that the artist has " his finger on today 's production trends ( and certainly being ahead of the curve on a few occasions ) , his rhymes are packed with so much authenticity that even the most mainstream @-@ minded listener has the potential to connect . " Anthony <unk> of Christian Music Zine rated the album 4 @.@ 75 out of five , and said that " loosely inspired by the book of Ecclesiastes , Gravity is so far the most important <unk> album ever made and bridges the gap between Christian and the secular rap scenes . " At Cross Rhythms , Steve Hayes wrote that this is Lecrae 's " finest project to date " , called it " brilliantly produced [ and ] explosively impacts the listener " , and said the release would be " enjoyed for years to come . " New Release Tuesday 's Mark Ryan noted that " there are 3 or 4 songs too many on the album that detract from the album as a whole " , which is the reason he did not " get overly excited " , but he did affirm that " fans and newcomers alike will enjoy the album " . 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 Gravity won Best Gospel Album for the 2013 Grammy Awards . This was the first time that a hip @-@ hop artist has won this award . At the 2013 Dove Awards , the album won Rap / Hip Hop Album , and the song " Tell the World " , featuring Mali Music , won Rap / Hip Hop Recorded Song of the Year . Gravity also won Best Rap , Hip Hop Gospel CD of the Year at the 2014 Stellar Awards . The album was also nominated for Top Christian Album at the 2013 Billboard Music Awards . 
 = = = Initial release competition with T.I. = = = 
 On July 19 , 2012 , Rapzilla posted an article entitled " Is Lecrae and T.I. similar to Kanye vs 50 Cent ? " , which noted that Trouble Man by T.I. was scheduled for release the same day as Gravity . The article speculated that the potential cultural impact of Gravity could be like that of Kanye West after his 2007 competition with 50 Cent . The writer , Steven Patton , stated that " we may be on the cusp of another watershed moment this coming September . Two artists living in Atlanta and largely the front runners of two different ideologies are releasing a new album on the same day . " A few hours after being posted , the article was updated stating that the release date for Trouble Man was being pushed back to September 19 . However , the release date was subsequently returned to September 4 , before T.I. announced that he was pushing the album back indefinitely . Trouble Man ultimately was released on December 18 , 2012 , and debuted at No. 2 on the Billboard 200 , selling 179 @,@ 000 copies . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = = Music Videos = = = 
 " Lord Have Mercy " ( featuring Tedashii ) 
 " Tell the World " ( featuring Mali Music ) 
 " Mayday " ( featuring Big K.R.I.T. & Ashthon Jones ) 
 " Fakin ' " ( featuring Thi 'sl ) 
 " Confessions " 
 = = = Samples listing = = = 
 " Walk with Me " featuring Novel – sampled " I Want Jesus to Walk With Me " by Solomon Burke . 
 " Fakin ' " featuring Thi 'sl – sampled " Spend It " by 2 Chainz 
 " Confe $ $ ions " – sampled " Fallin ' " by Trip Lee featuring J. Paul 
 " Power Trip " featuring PRo , Sho Baraka , and Andy Mineo – sampled " Juicy " by The Notorious B.I.G. and " Money , Power , & Respect " by The LOX featuring DMX and Lil ' Kim 
 " Lord Have Mercy " featuring Tedashii – sampled " Darkest Hour " by Lecrae and No Malice 
 = = Gravity : The Remix EP = = 
 On December 26 , 2012 , DJ Official and Alex Medina released a remix version of the album , Gravity : The Remix EP , as a free digital download . It features the producers <unk> ( formerly known as G @-@ Styles ) , Big Juice , D @-@ Flow , Black Knight , and <unk> . 
 = = = Track listing = = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 = = = Performance = = = 
 Lecrae - primary artist 
 = = = = Featured artists = = = = 
 = = = = Additional vocals = = = = 
 Tasha <unk> 
 Michael Jefferson 
 <unk> Medina 
 Jennifer Rosa 
 Bradley Tomlinson 
 = = = = Instrumentation = = = = 
 = = = Production and engineering = = = 
 = = = Additional composition = = = 
 = = = Packaging = = = 
 Zack Arias - photography 
 = = = Artists and repertoire = = = 
 Torrance " Street Symphony " Esmond 
 Joseph <unk> 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Tropical Storm Edouard ( 2002 ) = 
 Tropical Storm Edouard was the first of eight named storms to form in September 2002 , the most such storms in the North Atlantic for any month at the time . The fifth tropical storm of the 2002 Atlantic hurricane season , Edouard developed into a tropical cyclone on September 1 from an area of convection associated with a cold front east of Florida . Under weak steering currents , Edouard drifted to the north and executed a clockwise loop to the west . Despite moderate to strong levels of wind shear , the storm reached a peak intensity of 65 mph ( 100 km / h ) on September 3 , but quickly weakened as it tracked westward . Edouard made landfall on northeastern Florida on September 5 , and after crossing the state it dissipated on September 6 while becoming absorbed into the larger circulation of Tropical Storm Fay . 
 Tropical Storm Edouard dropped moderate rainfall across Florida , exceeding 7 inches ( 175 mm ) in the western portion of the state . Though Edouard was a tropical storm at landfall , wind speeds along the storm 's path over land were light . The rain flooded several roads ; however , there were no casualties , and damage was minimal . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 An area of cloudiness and <unk> developed several hundred miles east @-@ southeast of Bermuda on August 25 , likely in association with a low @-@ level disturbance that formed along a cold front . For several days , it moved southwestward , and , while located on the southwestern end of an upper @-@ level trough to the north of Puerto Rico , deep convection throughout the system increased . The system tracked westward , and initially remained disorganized while surface pressures remained high . The system turned to a northwest drift , and began to slowly organize on August 30 while located a few hundred miles northeast of the Bahamas . A broad low @-@ pressure area developed on August 31 though convection remained disorganized as winds of 20 to 25 mph ( 32 to 40 km / h ) were reported in squalls . Conditions remained favorable for continued organization , and convection increased and persisted across the system . The system developed into Tropical Depression Five on September 1 after developing a low @-@ level circulation while located about 140 miles ( 225 km ) east of Daytona Beach , Florida . 
 Upon first forming , the tropical depression was located in an area of light to moderate westerly wind shear . With a ridge to the north and west of the depression , the system moved to the northwest under weak steering currents . The depression slowly strengthened and intensified into Tropical Storm Edouard on September 2 while located about 120 miles ( 190 km ) east of Jacksonville , Florida . The storm remained disorganized with wind shear displacing most of the deep convection from the low @-@ level circulation . Upon becoming a tropical storm , forecasters initially predicted Edouard to gradually turn to the northeast , and within three days be located a short distance off the coast of South Carolina with winds of 60 mph ( 95 km / h ) . However , forecasters admitted little confidence in the prediction , and later forecasts predicted the storm to execute a loop and track westward into northern Florida or southern Georgia . Shortly after the tropical cyclogenesis of Edouard , steering currents became weak , resulting in the storm to turn sharply eastward . Late on September 2 deep convection developed over the center , though the center quickly became exposed again . The environment appeared to become more hostile on September 2 and 3 with increasing shear and dry air <unk> the center . Despite the conditions , the storm maintained vigorous convection over the eastern portion of the circulation , and it quickly intensified on September 3 to reach peak winds of 55 mph ( 90 km / h ) . A Reconnaissance Aircraft flight into the system estimated surface winds of up to 60 mph ( 95 km / h ) and reported flight level winds of 82 mph ( 132 km / h ) . 
 Shortly after peaking in intensity , Tropical Storm Edouard began to weaken as convection diminished from vertical shear and dry air , and later on September 3 the center was exposed from the steadily decreasing convection . The development of a weak and narrow mid @-@ level ridge turned the storm to the west @-@ southwest towards northeastern Florida . Despite strong levels of wind shear , Edouard remained a tropical storm while producing sporadic amounts of deep convection , and on September 4 the banding structure improved . Early on September 5 , Edouard made landfall near Ormond Beach , Florida as a minimal tropical storm , and almost immediately weakened to a tropical depression over land . It tracked across the state for about 13 hours and entered the Gulf of Mexico near Crystal River . Initial forecasts predicted Edouard to restrengthen to a tropical storm over the northeastern Gulf of Mexico , though uncertainty was noted due to the development of Tropical Storm Fay in the northwestern portion of the gulf . Upon entering the Gulf of Mexico , the depression encountered strong wind shear from the outflow of Tropical Storm Fay . Edouard generated minimal amounts of intermittent convection along the southeastern portion of its circulation , enough for it to remain a tropical cyclone . By September 6 the remaining convection dissipated , and Edouard dissipated while becoming absorbed into the larger circulation of Tropical Storm Fay . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 Three hours after developing , the National Hurricane Center issued a tropical storm watch from Titusville , Florida , to Brunswick , Georgia , due to uncertainty in the track of the storm . Hours after becoming a tropical storm , a tropical storm warning was issued from Fernandina Beach , Florida , to the mouth of the Savannah River , with a tropical storm watch further northward to the mouth of the South Santee River in South Carolina , though these were cancelled after Edouard turned to the east . About 10 hours before landfall , the National Hurricane Center issued another tropical storm warning from Titusville , Florida to Brunswick , Georgia , with a tropical storm watch further south to Sebastian Inlet , Florida . 
 Two days before the storm made landfall , several Florida counties were monitoring the progress of the storm . Though no serious impact was anticipated , Brevard County officials identified possible shelters if warranted . Putnam County officials placed several shelters on standby , and utility crews in Duval County were placed on standby in the event of power failure . Several media releases of information were issued regarding the storm . The State Emergency Operation Center was on Level 2 , or partial activation , and the state government organized two conferences to discuss county actions in regards to the storm . The National Weather Service issued a flood watch hours before Edouard made landfall for much of eastern Florida due to the expected rainfall from the storm . 
 The South Carolina Emergency Management Division monitored the progress of the storm , and the Division increased its awareness level in response to the storm . Important state agencies in South Carolina government were notified to be ready to respond if the need arose . 
 = = Impact = = 
 In Bermuda , the outflow from the storm produced cloudy conditions throughout the island . <unk> conditions were reported a short distance to the west of the island , though no rain was reported on Bermuda . 
 While moving erratically off the east coast of Florida , Tropical Storm Edouard produced rough surf conditions and rip currents along many beaches . <unk> and visitors were advised to exercise extreme caution . The storm produced water levels about 6 inches above normal near Cape Canaveral , though elsewhere wave action and storm tides were not significant . Despite being a tropical storm at landfall , sustained tropical storm force winds were not observed . A rainband ahead of the storm produced a 39 mph ( 63 km / h ) wind gust at Patrick Air Force Base , and a station in St. Augustine recorded a wind gust of 38 mph ( 61 km / h ) . Sustained winds peaked at 31 mph ( 50 km / h ) at Patrick Air Force Base . Edouard dropped light to moderate rainfall in eastern Florida , primarily during 2 to 3 hour periods . The highest official rainfall total peaked at 2 @.@ 5 inches ( 64 mm ) at Orlando Executive Airport , though unofficial totals reached as high as 4 @.@ 8 inches ( 122 mm ) in Rockledge . Rainfall was higher in western Florida , peaking at 7 @.@ 64 inches ( 194 mm ) in DeSoto County with an area near Tampa reporting over 7 inches ( 175 mm ) . 
 Moderate rainfall resulted in river flooding along the St. Johns River , resulting in flooding along roads in Seminole County . Roadway , urban , and lowland flooding was also reported in Brevard and Orange counties . Roadway flooding was extensive in some areas , resulting in road closures in Oviedo , Cocoa Beach , and Cape Canaveral . Heavy rainfall in Pinellas Park caused heavy street flooding along an intersection on U.S. Highway 19 . No casualties were reported , and damage was minor . 
 = Major urinary proteins = 
 Major urinary proteins ( Mups ) , also known as <unk> @-@ globulins , are a subfamily of proteins found in abundance in the urine and other secretions of many animals . Mups provide a small range of identifying information about the donor animal , when detected by the vomeronasal organ of the receiving animal . They belong to a larger family of proteins known as lipocalins . Mups are encoded by a cluster of genes , located adjacent to each other on a single stretch of DNA , that varies greatly in number between species : from at least 21 functional genes in mice to none in humans . Mup proteins form a characteristic glove shape , encompassing a ligand @-@ binding pocket that accommodates specific small , organic chemicals . 
 Urinary proteins were first reported in rodents in 1932 , during studies by Thomas Addis into the cause of proteinuria . They are potent human allergens , and are largely responsible for a number of animal allergies , including to cats , horses and rodents . Their endogenous function within an animal is unknown , but may involve regulating energy expenditure . However , as secreted proteins they play multiple roles in chemical communication between animals , functioning as pheromone transporters and stabilizers in rodents and pigs . Mups can also act as protein pheromones themselves . They have been demonstrated to promote aggression in male mice , and one specific Mup protein found in male mouse urine is sexually attractive to female mice . Mups can also function as signals between different species : mice display an instinctive fear response on the detection of Mups derived from predators such as cats and rats . 
 = = Discovery = = 
 Humans in good health excrete urine that is largely free of protein . Therefore , since 1827 physicians and scientists have been interested in proteinuria , the excess of protein in human urine , as an indicator of kidney disease . To better understand the etiology of proteinuria , some scientists attempted to study the phenomenon in laboratory animals . Between 1932 and 1933 a number of scientists , including Thomas Addis , independently reported the surprising finding that some healthy rodents have protein in their urine . However , it was not until the 1960s that the major urinary proteins of mice and rats were first described in detail . It was found that the proteins are primarily made in the liver of males and secreted through the kidneys into the urine in large quantities ( milligrams per day ) . 
 Since they were named , the proteins have been found to be differentially expressed in other glands that secrete products directly into the external environment . These include lacrimal , parotid , submaxillary , sublingual , preputial and mammary glands . In some species , such as cats and pigs , Mups appear not to be expressed in urine at all and are mainly found in saliva . Sometimes the term urinary Mups ( <unk> ) is used to distinguish those Mups expressed in urine from those in other tissues . 
 = = Mup genes = = 
 Between 1979 and 1981 , it was estimated that Mups are encoded by a gene family of between 15 and 35 genes and pseudogenes in the mouse and by an estimated 20 genes in the rat . In 2008 a more precise number of Mup genes in a range of species was determined by analyzing the DNA sequence of whole genomes . 
 = = = Rodents = = = 
 The mouse reference genome has at least 21 distinct Mup genes ( with open reading frames ) , and a further 21 Mup pseudogenes ( with reading frames disrupted by a nonsense mutation or an incomplete gene duplication ) . They are all clustered together , arrayed side by side across 1 @.@ 92 megabases of DNA on chromosome 4 . The 21 functional genes have been divided into two sub @-@ classes based on position and sequence similarity : 6 peripheral Class A Mups , and 15 central Class B Mups . The central Class B Mup gene cluster formed through a number of sequential duplications from one of the Class A Mups . As all the Class B genes are almost identical to each other , researchers have concluded that these duplications occurred very recently in mouse evolution . Indeed , the repetitive structure of these central Mup genes means they are likely to be unstable and may vary in number among wild mice . The Class A Mups are more different from each other and are therefore likely to be more stable , older genes but what , if any , functional differences the classes have are unknown . The similarity between the genes makes the region difficult to study using current DNA sequencing technology . Consequently , the Mup gene cluster is one of the few parts of the mouse whole genome sequence with gaps remaining , and further genes may remain undiscovered . 
 Rat urine also contains homologous urinary proteins ; although they were originally given a different name , <unk> @-@ globulins , they have since become known as rat Mups . Rats have 9 distinct Mup genes and a further 13 pseudogenes clustered together across 1 @.@ 1 megabases of DNA on chromosome 5 . Like in mice , the cluster formed by multiple duplications . However , this occurred independently of the duplications in mice , meaning that both rodent species expanded their Mup gene families separately , but in parallel . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Most other mammals studied , including the pig , cow , cat , dog , <unk> , macaque , chimpanzee and orangutan , have a single Mup gene . Some , however , have an expanded number : horses have three Mup genes and gray mouse lemurs have at least two . Insects , fish , <unk> , birds and marsupials appear to have disrupted <unk> at the chromosomal position of the Mup gene cluster , suggesting the gene family may be specific to placental mammals . Humans are the only placental mammals found not to have any active Mup genes ; instead they have a single Mup pseudogene containing a mutation that causes <unk> , rendering it dysfunctional . 
 = = Function = = 
 = = = Transport proteins = = = 
 Mups are members of a large family of low @-@ molecular weight ( ~ 19 kDa ) proteins known as lipocalins . They have a characteristic structure of eight beta sheets arranged in an anti @-@ parallel beta barrel open on one face , with alpha helices at both ends . Consequently , they form a characteristic glove shape , encompassing a cup @-@ like pocket that binds small organic chemicals with high affinity . A number of these ligands bind to mouse Mups , including 2 @-@ sec @-@ butyl @-@ 4 @,@ 5 @-@ <unk> ( abbreviated as SBT or DHT ) , 6 @-@ hydroxy @-@ 6 @-@ methyl @-@ 3 @-@ <unk> ( HMH ) and 2 @,@ 3 dihydro @-@ exo @-@ <unk> ( <unk> ) . These are all urine @-@ specific chemicals that have been shown to act as pheromones — molecular signals excreted by one individual that trigger an innate behavioural response in another member of the same species . Mouse Mups have also been shown to function as pheromone stabilizers , providing a slow release mechanism that extends the potency of volatile pheromones in male urine scent marks . Given the diversity of Mups in rodents , it was originally thought that different Mups may have differently shaped binding pockets and therefore bind different pheromones . However , detailed studies found that most variable sites are located on the surface of the proteins , and appear to have little effect on ligand binding . 
 Rat Mups bind different small chemicals . 1 @-@ <unk> is the most common ligand , with 2 @-@ methyl @-@ N @-@ phenyl @-@ 2 @-@ <unk> , <unk> and 2 @,@ 6 @,@ 11 @-@ <unk> <unk> found to be less prominent . Rat Mups also bind limonene @-@ 1 @,@ 2 @-@ epoxide , resulting in a disease of the host 's kidney , hyaline @-@ droplet nephropathy , that progresses to cancer . Other species do not develop this disorder because their Mups do not bind that particular chemical . Accordingly , when transgenic mice were engineered to express the rat Mup their kidneys developed the disease . The Mup found in pigs , named salivary <unk> ( SAL ) , is expressed in the salivary gland of males where it tightly binds <unk> and <unk> , both pheromones that cause female pigs to assume a mating stance . 
 <unk> titration calorimetry studies performed with Mups and associated ligands ( pyrazines , alcohols , <unk> , 6 @-@ hydroxy @-@ 6 @-@ methyl @-@ 3 @-@ <unk> , and N @-@ <unk> , ) revealed an unusual binding phenomena . The active site has been found to be <unk> hydrated , resulting in ligand binding being driven by <unk> dispersion forces . This is contrary to most other proteins , which exhibit entropy @-@ driven binding forces from the reorganisation of water molecules . This unusual process has been termed the " <unk> hydrophobic effect . " 
 = = = Pheromones = = = 
 Studies have sought to find the precise function of Mups in pheromone communication . Mup proteins have been shown to promote puberty and accelerate the estrus cycle in female mice , inducing the Vandenbergh and Whitten effects . However , in both cases the Mups had to be presented to the female dissolved in male urine , indicating that the protein requires some urinary context to function . In 2007 Mups normally found in male mouse urine were made in transgenic bacteria , and therefore created devoid of the chemicals they normally bind . These Mups were shown to be sufficient to promote aggressive behaviour in males , even in the absence of urine . In addition , Mups made in bacteria were found to activate olfactory sensory neurons in the vomeronasal organ ( VNO ) , a subsystem of the nose known to detect pheromones via specific sensory receptors , of mice and rats . Together , this demonstrated that Mup proteins can act as pheromones themselves , independent of their ligands . 
 Consistent with a role in male @-@ male aggression , adult male mice secrete significantly more Mups into their urine than females , juveniles or castrated male mice . The precise mechanism driving this difference between the sexes is complex , but at least three hormones — testosterone , growth hormone and thyroxine — are known to positively influence the production of Mups in mice . Wild house mouse urine contains variable combinations of four to seven distinct Mup proteins per mouse . Some inbred laboratory mouse strains , such as <unk> / c and <unk> / 6 , also have different proteins expressed in their urine . However , unlike wild mice , different individuals from the same strain express the same protein pattern , an artifact of many generations of inbreeding . One unusual Mup is less variable than the others : it is consistently produced by a high proportion of wild male mice and is almost never found in female urine . When this Mup was made in bacteria and used in behavioural testing , it was found to attract female mice . Other Mups were tested but they did not have the same attractive qualities , suggesting the male @-@ specific Mup acts as a sex pheromone . Scientists named this Mup <unk> as a humorous reference to Fitzwilliam Darcy , the romantic hero from Pride and Prejudice . Taken together , the complex patterns of Mups produced has the potential to provide a range information about the donor animal , such as gender , fertility , social dominance , age , genetic diversity or kinship . Wild mice ( unlike laboratory mice that are genetically identical and which therefore also have identical patterns of Mups in the urine ) have individual patterns of Mup expression in their urine that act as a " barcode " to uniquely identify the owner of a scent mark . 
 In the house mouse , the major MUP gene cluster provides a highly polymorphic scent signal of genetic identity . Wild mice breeding freely in semi @-@ natural enclosures showed inbreeding avoidance . This avoidance resulted from a strong deficit in successful matings between mice sharing both MUP haplotypes ( complete match ) . In another study , using white @-@ footed mice , it was found that when mice derived from wild populations were inbred there was reduced survival when such mice were reintroduced into a natural habitat . These findings suggest that inbreeding reduces fitness , and that scent signal recognition has evolved in mice as a means of avoiding inbreeding depression . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 In addition to serving as social cues between members of the same species , Mups can act as kairomones — chemical signals that transmit information between species . Mice are instinctively afraid of the smell of their natural predators , including cats and rats . This occurs even in laboratory mice that have been isolated from predators for hundreds of generations . When the chemical cues responsible for the fear response were purified from cat saliva and rat urine , two homologous protein signals were identified : Fel d 4 ( Felis domesticus allergen 4 ) , the product of the cat Mup gene , and Rat n 1 ( Rattus norvegicus allergen 1 ) , the product of the rat <unk> gene . Mice are fearful of these Mups even when they are made in bacteria , but mutant animals that are unable to detect the Mups showed no fear of rats , demonstrating their importance in initiating fearful behaviour . It is not known exactly how Mups from different species initiate disparate behaviours , but mouse Mups and predator Mups have been shown to activate unique patterns of sensory neurons in the nose of recipient mice . This implies the mouse perceives them differently , via distinct neural circuits . The pheromone receptors responsible for Mup detection are also unknown , though they are thought be members of the <unk> receptor class . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Along with other members of the <unk> protein family , major urinary proteins can be potent allergens to humans . The reason for this is not known , however molecular mimicry between Mups and structurally similar human lipocalins has been proposed as a possible explanation . The protein product of the mouse <unk> gene , known as Mus m 1 , <unk> or <unk> , accounts for much of the allergenic properties of mouse urine . The protein is extremely stable in the environment ; studies have found 95 % of inner city homes , and 82 % of all types of homes in the United States have detectable levels in at least one room . Similarly , Rat n 1 is a known human allergen . A US study found its presence in 33 % of inner city homes , and 21 % of occupants were sensitized to the allergen . Exposure and sensitization to rodent Mup proteins is considered a risk factor for childhood asthma , and is a leading cause of laboratory animal allergy ( LAA ) — an occupational disease of laboratory animal technicians and scientists . One study found that two @-@ thirds of laboratory workers who had developed asthmatic reactions to animals had antibodies to Rat n 1 . 
 Mup genes from other mammals also encode allergenic proteins , for example Fel d 4 is primarily produced in the submandibular salivary gland and is deposited onto dander as the cat grooms itself . A study found that 63 % of cat allergic people have antibodies against the protein . Most had higher titres of antibodies against Fel d 4 than against Fel d 1 , another prominent cat allergen . Likewise , <unk> c1 ( Equus caballus allergen 1 ) is the protein product of a horse Mup gene that is found in the liver , sublingual and submaxillary salivary glands . It is responsible for about 80 % of the antibody response in patients who are chronically exposed to horse allergens . 
 = = = Metabolism = = = 
 While the detection of Mups excreted by other animals has been well studied , the functional role in the producing animal is less clear . However , in 2009 , Mups were shown to be associated with the regulation of energy expenditure in mice . Scientists found that genetically induced obese , diabetic mice produce thirty times less Mup RNA than their lean siblings . When they delivered Mup protein directly into the bloodstream of these mice , they observed an increase in energy expenditure , physical activity and body temperature and a corresponding decrease in glucose intolerance and insulin resistance . They propose that Mups ' beneficial effects on energy metabolism occurs by enhancing mitochondrial function in skeletal muscle . Another study found Mups were reduced in diet @-@ induced obese mice . In this case , the presence of Mups in the bloodstream of mice restricted glucose production by directly inhibiting the expression of genes in the liver . 
 = Li Jiawei = 
 Li Jiawei ( Chinese : <unk> ; pinyin : Lǐ <unk> ; born 9 August 1981 ) is a Chinese @-@ born Singaporean table tennis player who is ranked among the top ten athletes in her sport . Spotted by Singapore talent scouts in Beijing in 1995 , she moved to Singapore and commenced her international career in competitive table tennis in 1996 . She became a Singapore citizen at the age of 18 years under the Foreign Sports Talent Scheme . 
 As a singles player , Li was ranked sixth in the world as of August 2008 . Her highest ranking was in December 2005 , when she was third . Li is also a key player for women 's team and doubles , and mixed doubles events . She finished in fourth place in singles at both the 2004 Summer Olympics in Athens and the 2008 Summer Olympics in Beijing . On 15 August , the Singapore women 's team composed of Li and her teammates Feng Tianwei and Wang Yuegu defeated South Korea 3 – 2 in the semifinals . However , in the finals on 17 August , the team lost to China and earned a silver medal , marking the first time that Singapore had won an Olympic medal since the nation 's independence in 1965 . The medal came 48 years after Tan Howe Liang won the country 's first medal , a silver in weightlifting at the 1960 Summer Olympics in Rome . Li ended 2008 on a high , winning gold in the women 's team event with Feng and Wang at the ITTF Pro Tour ERKE German Open in Berlin in November , and in the doubles with Sun Beibei at the ITTF Volkswagen Pro Tour Grand Finals in Macau in December 2008 . 
 Li won the women 's team bronze medal with Feng and Wang at the 2012 Summer Olympics in London . She announced her retirement from competitive sports on 27 December 2012 . 
 = = Early years = = 
 Li Jiawei , the only daughter of a government official and a housewife , was born on 9 August 1981 in Beijing , People 's Republic of China . In 1990 , Li was a student at the Beijing <unk> Sports School . She then entered the Beijing provincial team in 1994 . Her skill in table tennis was recognized by Singaporean talent scouts and she was invited to train in Singapore under the Foreign Sports Talent Scheme in 1996 , returning to China once a year to visit her parents . She began representing Singapore internationally in competitive table tennis the following year . At 18 , she became a Singapore citizen . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 Ranked 18th in the world in 2000 , Li achieved gold medals in the women 's team , women 's doubles and mixed doubles events at the XVII Commonwealth Games held between 25 July and 4 August 2002 in Manchester , and was ranked eighth in November 2002 . The following year , in December 2003 , Li was a member of the Singapore team which swept the top awards at the 23rd Southeast Asian Games in the women 's team , women 's singles , women 's doubles and mixed doubles . 
 On 3 July 2004 , Li took gold in the women 's singles at the International Table Tennis Federation ( ITTF ) Pro Tour US Open in Chicago . Subsequently , at the 2004 Summer Olympics in Athens , she defeated the second @-@ seeded China player Wang Nan but eventually finished in fourth place . In 2005 , she was second in the ITTF Pro Tour Grand Finals , and gained silver medals for the women 's singles and mixed doubles at the 23rd Southeast Asian ( SEA ) Games held between 28 November and 4 December 2005 in Manila . She was also the key player in the gold @-@ winning women 's team and women 's doubles events . In December 2005 , she was ranked third in the world as a singles player . She won an individual Singapore Youth Award in 2005 and was Her World magazine 's Young Woman Achiever of 2005 . 
 At the 2006 Commonwealth Games in Melbourne , Li won gold for the women 's team and women 's doubles , and the silver medal for the women 's singles and mixed doubles events . Subsequently , she won the women 's singles at the ITTF Pro Tour Russia Open . She also achieved third place in the ITTF Pro Tour Grand Finals and the Women 's World Cup , which are two of the most prestigious and difficult competitions in the table tennis arena . At the 15th Asian Games held from 29 November to 7 December 2006 in Doha , Qatar , she achieved three medals : a silver for the women 's team event and two bronzes for the women 's singles and mixed doubles . The next year , she won gold in the singles at the ITTF Pro Tour Chinese Taipei Open in Taipei , and helped Singapore to the top spots in the women 's team and mixed doubles events at the 2007 SEA Games in Nakhon Ratchasima ( Korat ) , Thailand . 
 As at August 2008 , Li was ranked sixth in the world . She won the accolade of Sportswoman of the Year from the Singapore National Olympic Council five times in a row between 2002 and 2006 , and received a Meritorious Award in 2007 . 
 At the club competition level , Li plays in the Chinese Table Tennis Super League . In 2008 , she represented Peking University club , and in 2010 , she played for Beijing Holdings which consists of world champion Ding Ning as well . 
 = = = 2008 Summer Olympics = = = 
 Li represented Singapore for the third time in the Olympic Games at the 2008 Summer Olympics in Beijing . She was the flag @-@ bearer for Team Singapore at the opening ceremony of the Games on 8 August , having requested the honour . She explained : " There has been so much debate over the foreign talent scheme . This is my way of showing everyone that everything I 've ever achieved is because of Singapore . " 
 At the Beijing Olympics , table tennis team events are played in a best @-@ of @-@ five @-@ matches format . Teams play two single matches followed by a doubles match . If there is no winner after these matches , the teams play a fourth singles match , and if necessary a rubber match to determine the winning team . On 13 August , the Singapore women 's table tennis team coached by Liu Guodong , comprising Li as the team captain and her teammates Feng Tianwei and Wang Yuegu , beat teams from the United States and Nigeria with comfortable 3 – 0 wins . On 14 August , the Singapore team also defeated the Netherlands 3 – 0 to reach the semifinals , but not before a gruelling five @-@ game doubles match against the Dutch players Li Jie and Elena <unk> which Li Jiawei and Wang Yuegu eventually won 3 – 2 . The next day , 15 August , the Singapore team defeated the South Korean team of Dang Ye @-@ Seo , Kim Kyung @-@ Ah and Park Mi @-@ Young 3 – 2 in the semifinals , which went to five matches . Li lost her singles match to Korea 's Kim , but beat Kim and Park in the doubles with her partner Wang . Singapore 's Feng won both her singles matches against Dang and Park . 
 On 17 August , Li and her teammates gained Singapore a silver medal in women 's table tennis after losing to China in three matches . Li won the first game of her singles match , but was then defeated by her former Beijing Sports School teammate Zhang Yining . In the doubles match , China 's Zhang and Guo Yue bested Singapore 's Li and Wang Yuegu . This marked the first time that Singapore had won an Olympic medal since the nation 's independence in 1965 . The medal came 48 years after Tan Howe Liang won the country 's first medal , a silver in weightlifting in the lightweight category at the 1960 Summer Olympics in Rome . Prime Minister Lee Hsien Loong requested that the live English @-@ language broadcast of his National Day Rally speech , which coincided with the table tennis finals , be postponed by a day . He also provided the audience with updates on the score , and made a conference call to Tan Eng Liang , Team Singapore 's chef de mission , to congratulate the team . 
 Li and her teammates received byes into the third round of the singles tournament . Asked if she stood a chance of winning any more medals , she said : " I will try my best in every match . I definitely hope to win one more medal for Singapore . " She beat Croatia 's Tamara <unk> in the third round , Hong Kong 's Lin Ling in the fourth round , and the USA 's Wang Chen in the quarter @-@ finals . However , on 22 August she was defeated in the semifinals 4 – 1 by Zhang Yining of China , ranked number one in the world , and lost the bronze medal 4 – 2 to China 's Guo Yue . Thus placed fourth in the singles tournament , she equalled her performance in the 2004 Athens Olympics but again failed in her quest for an individual Olympic medal . After the bronze medal match , a tearful Li told reporters this would be her final Olympics . At a victory celebration in Singapore on 25 August , Vivian Balakrishnan , the Minister for Community Development , Youth and Sports , announced that Li , Feng and Wang would be presented with the Pingat Jasa Gemilang ( Meritorious Service Medal ) . This is only the third time the medal will be awarded to athletes , the two previous recipients being weightlifter Tan Howe Liang ( 1962 ) and swimmer Joscelin Yeo ( 2006 ) . 
 Li has expressed interest in pursuing a communications degree at Peking University . In October 2008 the Singapore Table Tennis Association said the Association and the Singapore Sports Council were prepared to offer her a scholarship to do so . Nevertheless , Li said that she wished to continue her career and to compete in the 2012 Summer Olympics . 
 In May 2009 , the national table tennis women 's team , composed of Li and her teammates Feng , Wang and Sun Beibei , were awarded the Team of the Year ( Event ) prize at the Singapore Sports Awards . 
 = = = Events between 2008 and 2012 = = = 
 On 22 November 2008 , despite crashing out of the singles event earlier , Li and her teammates Feng and Wang won the top title and US $ 8 @,@ 000 at the ITTF Pro Tour ERKE German Open in Berlin . Li ended the year as top seed with Sun Beibei , achieving gold in the women 's doubles at the ITTF Volkswagen Pro Tour Grand Finals in Macau on 14 December 2008 , the first time that Singapore had won this event . They beat South Koreans Kim Kyung Ah and Park Mi @-@ Young 11 – 5 , 6 – 11 , 11 – 9 , 11 – 8 , 11 – 4 . Li was named Today newspaper 's Singapore Athlete of the Year 2008 . 
 Li returned to the international stage in February 2010 after taking a year off from competitive table tennis to give birth to a child . Her first major competition – the World Team Table Tennis Championships in Moscow – saw her and her teammates beating China in the finals to clinch gold . Li also had a series of good performances after her return . She guided the women 's team to gold at the 2010 Commonwealth Games in New Delhi and went on to win the women 's doubles title with Sun Beibei . She ended 2010 with a bang by winning the silver medal in the women 's team event of the 16th Asian Games . 
 = = = 2012 Summer Olympics = = = 
 Li represented Singapore at the 2012 Summer Olympics in London . She participated in the women 's team competition with Feng Tianwei and Wang Yuegu . They were beaten 0 – 3 by Japan in the semifinals , but took the bronze medal on 7 August 2012 by edging South Korea out 3 – 0 . Feng defeated Kim Kyung Ah 11 – 9 , 11 – 8 , 4 – 11 , 13 – 11 ; and Li also successfully fended off Seok Ha Jung 11 – 5 , 11 – 8 , 6 – 11 , 11 – 8 . Li and Wang then succeeded in the doubles game against Seok and Dang Ye Seo 11 – 9 , 11 – 6 , 6 – 11 , 11 – 5 . This marked the first time Singapore had won more than one medal at an Olympic Games . Li , who was said to have been instrumental to the team 's win , called the achievement " the perfect birthday present " and commented : " It 's been a really significant and meaningful Olympics for me . ... I managed to be very focused today and I would say this is one of my best performances . " Asked whether she would compete at the 2016 Summer Olympics , she said that she had not given serious thought to retirement but would need to take a break to allow her long @-@ standing knee injury to recover . " [ W ] e 'll have to see how the situation is closer to the date . " 
 = = Retirement = = 
 Li announced her retirement from competitive sports on 27 December 2012 . Although she planned to relocate to Beijing with her husband and son , she said she hoped to continue her involvement with table tennis in Singapore . The Singapore Table Tennis Association was said to be helping Li find employment in a Singapore company with operations based in China . 
 = = Medals = = 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Li first met Singaporean badminton player and fellow Olympian Ronald Susilo in 2002 at a sports meet . They began dating after participating together in the Athens Olympics , and the " golden sports couple " , as they were dubbed by the media , announced their engagement in September 2004 . About two years later there were rumours that they were breaking up , but these were denied by them at the time . On 15 January 2008 , when queried by a journalist , Susilo confirmed that he and Li had broken up amicably the previous week . Following a report in The Sunday Times that Susilo was contemplating legal action against her to recover money he claimed to have spent in buying their condominium apartment and car , Li disagreed that Susilo had a share in the apartment and implied he was trying to affect her mood and thus her chances of winning a medal at the Beijing Olympics . Susilo declined to discuss the matter with the press , saying it was a private matter between Li and himself ; he wished her all the best for the Olympics . In October 2008 it was announced that Li and Susilo had settled their property dispute amicably . The terms of the settlement were confidential . 
 On 26 September 2008 , Li registered a marriage in Beijing with Li Chao , a businessman based in that city ; they were introduced by a mutual friend in March 2008 . Sources quoted by The Straits Times said Li had long wanted her children to bear her surname . A lavish wedding banquet was held at the Beijing Hotel on 25 April 2009 . In November 2008 Li said she wished to have two to three children before turning 35 , though this would not affect her table tennis career . On 13 October 2009 , she and her husband had their first child , a boy weighing 3 @.@ 575 kilograms ( 7 @.@ 88 lb ) . Her husband confirmed that they were " hoping for at least three kids , the more the <unk> " , and it was reported that Li would try for more children following the 2012 Summer Olympics . Li started training again in February 2010 and competed in the Commonwealth Games and Asian Games . 
 = P.T. ( video game ) = 
 P.T. ( short for " playable teaser " ) , is a first @-@ person psychological survival horror video game directed by Hideo Kojima in collaboration with Guillermo Del Toro , developed by Kojima Productions under the fake pseudonym " <unk> Studio " , and published by Konami . 
 Released for the PlayStation 4 on 12 August 2014 as a free download on the PlayStation Network , P.T. served primarily as an interactive teaser for the game Silent Hills , a cancelled installment in the Silent Hill series . After the cancellation , Konami removed P.T. from the PlayStation Store and eliminated re @-@ installing the game , a decision that later spawned criticism and fan efforts to allow P.T. to be re @-@ downloaded . 
 P.T. received critical acclaim for its direction , visuals , story complexity , and supernatural tension , but was both criticized and acclaimed for the puzzles and solutions . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Unlike the third @-@ person perspective in Silent Hill games , P.T. uses a first @-@ person perspective , which centers on an unknown protagonist , whom the player controls , who awakens in a haunted suburban house and experiences supernatural occurrences . Available areas to explore in the home consist of an L @-@ shaped corridor with two rooms adjacent to it : a bathroom , and a staircase which leads to the room in which the player starts a loop , or a continuous reincarnation of the corridor . The only actions the player can use are walking and zooming . To progress , the player must investigate frightening events and solve cryptic puzzles . Each time a loop is successfully completed , changes appear in the corridor . Additionally , the player encounters a hostile ghost named Lisa . If she catches the protagonist , the player experiences a startling jump scare and is sent back to the beginning of the current loop . 
 After the player solves the final puzzle , a cryptic and unrevealed puzzle that allows the player to escape , a trailer reveals that P.T. is a " playable teaser " for a new game in the Silent Hill series , called Silent Hills , directed by Hideo Kojima and Guillermo del Toro , with the protagonist portrayed by Norman Reedus . 
 = = Plot = = 
 P.T. centers on an unnamed protagonist who awakens in a concrete @-@ lined room , and opens a door to a haunted corridor , in which he can only walk through a hallway which continuously loops and redecorates itself . The first time he passes , a radio reports on a <unk> , which was committed by the father , and later mentions two other cases exactly like it , while the radio issues other messages in various languages , including a Swedish message referencing the 1938 radio drama The War of the Worlds . 
 The protagonist soon encounters a hostile and unstable female apparition , presumably named Lisa , and upon entering the bathroom and being locked , he obtains a flashlight and finds a creature resembling an underdeveloped fetus in the sink . He soon gets out , but finds out that the apparition is watching him . If the protagonist is attacked by the ghost , he reawakens in the first room of the game , beginning the loop again , but it 's possible to avoid her completely . In the room , a bloody moving paper bag speaks to him , speaking of a disturbing experience , and revealing the same words the player sees when they start the game - " Watch out . The gap in the door ... it 's a separate reality . The only me is me . Are you sure the only you is you ? " 
 The next few loops feature a refrigerator hanging from the ceiling , leaking blood , whilst the sound of a crying baby can be heard . This happens several times , each time being more severe than the last . As it transitions , the lamps turn completely red , the player 's vision blurs , and the character moves abnormally quickly , with a set of disturbing illusions . Eventually , the protagonist hears the sounds of a murder being committed in the bathroom through the bathroom peephole . Upon the bathroom door opening by itself , the protagonist enters and the fetus @-@ like creature addresses the protagonist , revealing that ten months earlier , he lost his job and turned to alcoholism , with his wife landing a part @-@ time cashier job from the manager who was sexually attracted to her . The corridor then corrects itself and the protagonist eventually gets locked in . As he tries to escape , the same " Paper Bag " voice utters " <unk> " repeatedly and the player 's perspective distorts , before the game displays a false crash message . 
 Upon restarting , the protagonist awakens in the beginning room . The player continues the loop with only the flashlight as a light source . The player then discovers the torn pieces of a photograph , scattered throughout the hall and reassembles it in its frame . After the picture is completed and a set of tasks are done , a telephone rings and the radio 's voice says " You 've been chosen . " The protagonist sees the door unlock and leaves the building . 
 In the subsequent cutscene , the radio 's voice remarks about having lived a life of regularity until his father killed him and his family without any creativity ; he then voices his intention to return with his " new toys " . The protagonist steps out into the streets of a deserted city and is revealed to be Norman Reedus . The credits then reveal the nature of the Playable Teaser . 
 = = Development = = 
 Kojima Productions used their game engine , the Fox Engine , to develop <unk> .. Hideo Kojima 's intention when creating P.T. was to scare people in a unique way , as well as to deliver an interactive teaser experience instead of releasing trailers and screenshots of Silent Hills . 
 = = = Game design = = = 
 P.T. was designed to take players at least a week to complete , and Kojima intended the puzzles to be very enigmatic and difficult . Despite this , a few gamers reportedly finished the game within hours after the release , surprising him . Kojima also intended for P.T. to be a mystery in order to make it a more frightening experience . There is little , if not cryptic , information given in the game on events that take place , and there are few clues as to how to solve the puzzles . He chose the corridor as the setting as opposed to " a ruin " because he wanted the teaser to emotionally affect the player regardless of " cultural background " . Kojima elaborated that P.T. and Silent Hills have no canonical and direct relation , and that Silent Hills would have been enhanced by elements that were never in P.T. He based his concept of P.T. on horror films and other media that he found frightening . When creating the game , Kojima refrained from using graphic violence to build up suspense , as he felt that too many horror games rely on the trope . He wanted to elicit a more " genuine , thoughtful and permeating " type of fear . 
 = = Release = = 
 P.T. was originally announced at Gamescom 2014 as a demo for an eponymous mystery horror video game . It was released on 12 August 2014 , on the PlayStation Network . Instead of formally announcing a new Silent Hill game , director Hideo Kojima decided to release P.T. as a game demo from a nonexistent gaming studio called <unk> Studio . In September 2014 , Sony announced during its pre @-@ Tokyo Game Show press conference that P.T. had been downloaded over a million times . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Erik Kain of Forbes enjoyed the game for its anxiety @-@ inducing horror , and wrote that it succeeded as marketing for the upcoming Silent Hills . David Houghton of GamesRadar praised it for its immersive , well @-@ executed horror and for how the game 's difficulty created online discourse : " By spreading out into the real world , by forcing solutions by way of hearsay , internet whispers , and desperate , rumoured logic , it has become its own urban myth . " Eurogamer 's Jeffrey Matulef wrote that , through its emphasis on " sound effects , visual design , choreography , and difficult to decipher enemy placements " over traditional progress , the game became immersive and terrifying . However , the puzzles in P.T. received criticism . Klepek panned the puzzles , describing them as an " exercise in frustration " . Matthew Reynolds of Digital Spy wrote that the final puzzle was a " source of frustration " which lacked a clear solution . In contrast , <unk> stated that , while the puzzles ranged in cleverness and difficulty , they added to the horror of the game by being emotionally " uncomfortable " . 
 P.T. was also placed on some " best @-@ of " lists in 2014 . GameSpot awarded it the " Game of the Month " for August 2014 . IGN 's Marty Sliva chose P.T. as an honorable mention on his list of the best video game trailers of the year , describing it as " one of the most interesting , gorgeous , and terrifying " games he played that year . Another reviewer for IGN , Lucy O 'Brien , described the game as " the most genuinely frightening interactive experience in recent years " , making it her choice for game of the year . Giant Bomb gave the Best Horror Game of the year award to P.T. , saying that " P.T. reminded us what happens when unlimited resources are thrown at a horror experience . " P.T. won " Scariest Game " at Bloody Disgusting 's <unk> Awards . Polygon ranked it as the tenth best game of the year , and Slant Magazine 's staff ranked it as the eighth best video game of the year . Patrick Klepek of Kotaku originally listed the game as number one on a list of the ten best easily available horror games in February 13 , describing it as " the new king of horror . " The game was replaced by Amnesia : The Dark Descent as number one when Silent Hills was cancelled and P.T. removed . 
 = = Themes and analysis = = 
 Reviewers have identified several themes in P.T. According to Eurogamer 's Jeffrey Matulef , the game 's main theme is " cyclical mental anguish " , supported by the obtuse and confusing nature of the puzzles . Danielle <unk> of Polygon wrote that P.T. uses two primary themes from the Silent Hill series , " a sense of family trauma and domestic violence and the duality of the ' real world ' and the nightmare world . " She suggested that P.T. and Eraserhead shared thematic content , writing that both included a crying , deformed infant and that the film 's protagonist journeyed from reality into a terrifying world . 
 P.T. ' s ceaselessly looping hallway has been a source of critical discussion . Rob Crossley of GameSpot wrote that it induced " mild claustrophobia " and " a familiarity with your surroundings " . He remarked that while the length of the first part of the corridor worked to create tension , the design of the second part intentionally prevented the player from being able to keep everything in view , causing the player to feel vulnerable . David Houghton of GamesRadar described the looping corridor as " the conduit for everything that it builds " , along with saying that " it fills that structure with an unbroken feedback loop of ' horror ' ... every time you leave is a monumental relief , and every simultaneous instance of returning is a moment of primal foreboding at how things might , and almost certainly will , escalate , compounded by the knowledge of the seemingly countless iterations before . " Houghton felt that the game understood how to evoke horror by working " within the realm of psychology " . Polygon quoted a game player who said that " P.T. ' s greatest asset is its looping hallway " , elaborating that it not only invokes fear , but also " curiosity , or a desire to know what will happen next " . Matulef said that the claustrophobic and repetitive environment displayed in the game can hypnotize the player into a sense of vulnerability . 
 The majority of what is said and depicted in the game is open to interpretation , leading fans to develop and discuss theories about the nature of the events that occur in the game . Let 's Players <unk> and Bob opined that the open @-@ ended nature of the game is one of its greatest aspects . They also said that there may be something in the game that has not been discovered yet . They noted the colored lights as something they still had not figured out , and they felt that the game hinted that the radio may be the main culprit behind the father 's killing . The game also contained a Swedish line in the radio describing a radio drama from 1938 being true , which gamers suggested may be a nod to Orson Welles 's radio adaptation of The War of the Worlds . This possible reference to alien invasions was noted as a continuation of a Silent Hill tradition of having secret endings that included aliens . Another theory commonly discussed is deciphering the identity of the player character . The fetus talking to the player character about his remembering moments " ten months back " seems to imply that he is the father who killed Lisa and the kids , although <unk> and Bob believe that the player character may be the protagonist that was to be in Silent Hills , as shown in the trailer following the ending of P.T. 
 = = Media description = = 
 Journalists have expressed confusion about whether the game should be described as a teaser , video game , or demo . Despite ongoing debate , the game won awards for best trailer while also winning game of the month and best horror game of the year awards . While naming P.T. as an honorable mention for best trailer , Marty Sliva from IGN felt that P.T. was more of an " interactive experimental film / puzzle game " . " Demo " has been one of the more common descriptions , though GameSpot was reluctant to categorize it as such . Despite it being commonly called a demo of Silent Hills , there is no evidence that it was going to be a part of Silent Hills aside from the reveal of the trailer and title after the end of the game . Hideo Kojima himself explained that it was not a demo of Silent Hills and described it as a " teaser " in a tweet . 
 Christopher Grant from Polygon likened P.T. to Pixar 's animated shorts shown before its full @-@ length animated feature films . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Following news of the cancellation of Silent Hills , it was announced that P.T. would be removed from the PlayStation Network on 29 April 2015 . Originally , it was reported that the demo could be re @-@ downloaded , but in May 2015 it was no longer re @-@ downloadable from the PlayStation Store . Cancellation of the game led to criticism of Konami . Patrick Klepek from Kotaku stated " It 's fine that Konami doesn 't want to make Silent Hills " but that the deletion of P.T. was wrong since the demo had become part of gaming culture . Nick Robinson of Polygon described Konami 's removal as the " most irresponsible , cowardly decision possible " , but that the subsequent unavailability had also made the demo " one of the coolest , most fascinating games in the history of our medium " . After the cancellation , PlayStation 4 consoles with P.T. installed were listed on eBay for over $ 1000 ; eBay later pulled the auctions down . The incident has been compared to the mass selling of iPhones containing <unk> Bird after that game 's removal from the iOS App Store . Guillermo del Toro , the intended future director of Silent Hills , commented on P.T. ' s popularity , speculating that there were people who still have a passion for the Silent Hill series . 
 P.T. has also been alluded to in other video games . The antagonist , Lisa , made a cameo in another video game directed by Kojima , Metal Gear Solid V : The Phantom Pain ( 2015 ) . Additionally , the now @-@ cancelled first @-@ person survival @-@ horror video game Allison Road was heavily inspired by P.T. Allison Road was to take place in a haunted townhouse in the United Kingdom and feature a male protagonist who attempts to unravel the mystery behind his missing family over five nights . In the demo , some wall graffiti directly alludes to P.T. by repeating a statement made in the game . The Park , a spin @-@ off game from The Secret World , has a sequence inspired by P.T. , and the horror game Layers of Fear was heavily inspired by P.T. as well . 
 On February 2016 , the YouTube channel known collectively as " <unk> of the Odd " , released a short film titled " Silent Hills P.T. in real life " . The film draws heavily from its source material , as an unseen protagonist explores a two @-@ story hallway loop in the first person camera perspective . The short film was featured by IGN describing it as " incredible " while <unk> 's Alexander Pan described the video as being " complete with the demo 's much @-@ touted disturbing content and eerie atmosphere . " 
 = Katyusha rocket launcher = 
 Katyusha multiple rocket launchers ( Russian : <unk> ́ <unk> ; IPA : [ <unk> ] ) are a type of rocket artillery first built and fielded by the Soviet Union in World War II . Multiple rocket launchers such as these deliver explosives to a target area more quickly than conventional artillery , but with lower accuracy and requiring a longer time to reload . They are fragile compared to artillery guns , but are inexpensive , easy to produce , and usable on any chassis . Katyushas of World War II , the first self @-@ propelled artillery mass @-@ produced by the Soviet Union , were usually mounted on ordinary trucks . This mobility gave the Katyusha ( and other self @-@ propelled artillery ) another advantage : being able to deliver a large blow all at once , and then move before being located and attacked with counter @-@ battery fire . 
 Katyusha weapons of World War II included the BM @-@ 13 launcher , light BM @-@ 8 , and heavy BM @-@ 31 . Today , the nickname is also applied to newer truck @-@ mounted Soviet ( and not only Soviet ) multiple rocket launchers — notably the common BM @-@ 21 — and derivatives . 
 = = Nickname = = 
 Initially , concerns for secrecy kept their military designation from being known by the soldiers who operated them . They were called by code names such as <unk> guns ( after the head of the <unk> , the Reaction @-@ Engine Scientific Research Institute ) , and finally classed as Guards Mortars . The name BM @-@ 13 was only allowed into secret documents in 1942 , and remained classified until after the war . 
 Because they were marked with the letter K ( for Voronezh Komintern Factory ) , Red Army troops adopted a nickname from Mikhail Isakovsky 's popular wartime song , " Katyusha " , about a girl longing for her absent beloved , who has gone away on military service . Katyusha is the Russian equivalent of Katie , an endearing diminutive form of the name Katherine : Yekaterina → Katya → Katyusha . 
 German troops coined the nickname Stalin 's organ ( German : Stalinorgel ) , after Soviet leader Joseph Stalin , prompted by the visual resemblance of the launch array to a church organ and the sound of the weapon 's rocket motors . Weapons of this type are known by the same name in Denmark ( Danish : Stalinorgel ) , Finland ( Finnish : <unk> <unk> ) , France ( French : <unk> de <unk> ) , Norway ( Norwegian : Stalinorgel ) , the Netherlands and Belgium ( Dutch : Stalinorgel ) , Hungary ( Hungarian : <unk> ) , and in Sweden ( Swedish : Stalinorgel ) . 
 The heavy BM @-@ 31 launcher was also referred to as <unk> ( <unk> , an affectionate diminutive of " Andrew " ) . 
 = = World War II = = 
 Katyusha rocket launchers invented in Voronezh , were mounted on many platforms during World War II , including on trucks , artillery tractors , tanks , and armoured trains , as well as on naval and riverine vessels as assault support weapons , Soviet engineers also mounted single Katyusha rockets on lengths of railway track to serve in urban combat . 
 The design was relatively simple , consisting of racks of parallel rails on which rockets were mounted , with a folding frame to raise the rails to launch position . Each truck had 14 to 48 launchers . The M @-@ 13 rocket of the BM @-@ 13 system was 80 cm ( 2 ft 7 in ) long , 13 @.@ 2 cm ( 5 @.@ 2 in ) in diameter and weighed 42 kg ( 93 lb ) . 
 The weapon is less accurate than conventional artillery guns , but is extremely effective in saturation bombardment , and was particularly feared by German soldiers . A battery of four BM @-@ 13 launchers could fire a salvo in 7 – 10 seconds that delivered 4 @.@ 35 tons of high explosives over a 400 @,@ 000 @-@ square @-@ metre ( 4 @,@ 300 @,@ 000 sq ft ) impact zone , making its power roughly equivalent to that of 72 guns . With an efficient crew , the launchers could redeploy to a new location immediately after firing , denying the enemy the opportunity for counterbattery fire . Katyusha batteries were often massed in very large numbers to create a shock effect on enemy forces . The weapon 's disadvantage was the long time it took to reload a launcher , in contrast to conventional guns which could sustain a continuous low rate of fire . 
 The distinctive howling sound of the rocket launching terrified the German troops and could be used for psychological warfare . 
 = = = Development = = = 
 In June 1938 , the Soviet Jet Propulsion Research Institute ( <unk> ) in Leningrad was authorized by the Main Artillery Directorate ( GAU ) to develop a multiple rocket launcher for the RS @-@ 132 aircraft rocket ( RS for <unk> <unk> , ' rocket @-@ powered shell ' ) . I. <unk> led a design team in Chelyabinsk , Russia , which built several prototype launchers firing the modified 132 mm M @-@ 132 rockets over the sides of ZiS @-@ 5 trucks . These proved unstable , and V.N. <unk> proposed mounting the launch rails longitudinally . In August 1939 , the result was the BM @-@ 13 ( BM stands for <unk> <unk> ( translit . <unk> <unk> ) , ' combat vehicle ' for M @-@ 13 rockets ) . 
 The first large @-@ scale testing of the rocket launchers took place at the end of 1938 , when 233 rounds of various types were used . A salvo of rockets could completely straddle a target at a range of 5 @,@ 500 metres ( 3 @.@ 4 mi ) . But the artillery branch was not fond of the Katyusha , because it took up to 50 minutes to load and fire 24 rounds , while a conventional howitzer could fire 95 to 150 rounds in the same time . Testing with various rockets was conducted through 1940 , and the BM @-@ 13 @-@ 16 with launch rails for sixteen rockets was authorized for production . Only forty launchers were built before Germany invaded the Soviet Union in June 1941 . 
 After their success in the first month of the war , mass production was ordered and the development of other models proceeded . The Katyusha was inexpensive and could be manufactured in light industrial installations which did not have the heavy equipment to build conventional artillery gun barrels . By the end of 1942 , 3 @,@ 237 Katyusha launchers of all types had been built , and by the end of the war total production reached about 10 @,@ 000 . 
 The truck @-@ mounted Katyushas were installed on ZiS @-@ 6 6 × 4 trucks , as well as the two @-@ axle ZiS @-@ 5 and ZiS @-@ <unk> . In 1941 , a small number of BM @-@ 13 launchers were mounted on STZ @-@ 5 artillery tractors . A few were also tried on KV tank chassis as the KV @-@ 1K , but this was a needless waste of heavy armour . Starting in 1942 , they were also mounted on various British , Canadian and U.S. Lend @-@ Lease trucks , in which case they were sometimes referred to as BM @-@ 13S . The cross @-@ country performance of the Studebaker US6 2 ½ ton truck was so good that it became the GAU 's standard mounting in 1943 , designated BM @-@ <unk> ( <unk> , ' standardized ' ) , and more than 1 @,@ 800 of this model were manufactured by the end of World War II . After World War II , BM @-@ 13s were based on Soviet @-@ built ZiL @-@ 151 trucks . 
 The 82 mm BM @-@ 8 was approved in August 1941 , and deployed as the BM @-@ 8 @-@ 36 on truck beds and BM @-@ 8 @-@ 24 on T @-@ 40 and T @-@ 60 light tank chassis . Later these were also installed on GAZ @-@ 67 jeeps as the BM @-@ 8 @-@ 8 , and on the larger Studebaker trucks as the BM @-@ 8 @-@ 48 . In 1942 , the team of scientists Leonid <unk> , Moisei <unk> and engineer Yakov Shor received the Stalin prize for the development of the BM @-@ 8 @-@ 48 . 
 Based on the M @-@ 13 , the M @-@ 30 rocket was developed in 1942 . Its bulbous warhead required it to be fired from a grounded frame , called the M @-@ 30 ( single frame , four round ; later double frame , 8 round ) , instead of a launch rail mounted on a truck . In 1944 it became the basis for the BM @-@ 31 @-@ 12 truck @-@ mounted launcher . 
 A battery of BM @-@ 13 @-@ 16 launchers included four firing vehicles , two reload trucks and two technical support trucks , with each firing vehicle having a crew of six . Reloading was executed in 3 – 4 minutes , although the standard procedure was to switch to a new position some 10 km away due to the ease with which the battery could be identified by the enemy . Three batteries were combined into a division ( company ) , and three divisions into a separate mine @-@ firing regiment of rocket artillery . 
 = = = Variants = = = 
 Soviet World War II missile systems were named according standard templates which are the following : 
 BM @-@ x @-@ y ( names used for ground vehicles ) 
 M @-@ x @-@ y ( names used for towed trailers and sledges ) 
 y @-@ M @-@ x ( names used for navy ) 
 where : 
 x is a model of a missile . 
 y is a number of launch rails / tubes . 
 In particular , BM @-@ 8 @-@ 16 is a vehicle which fires M @-@ 8 missiles and has 16 rails . BM @-@ 31 @-@ 12 is a vehicle which fires M @-@ 31 missiles and has 12 launch tubes . Short names such as BM @-@ 8 or BM @-@ 13 were used too . Number of launch rails / tubes is absent here . Such names describe launchers only no matter a vehicle they are mounted on . In particular BM @-@ 8 @-@ 24 had a number of variants : vehicle mounted ( ZiS @-@ 5 truck ) , tank mounted ( T @-@ 40 ) and tractor mounted ( STZ @-@ 3 ) . All of them had the same name : BM @-@ 8 @-@ 24 . Other launchers had a number of variants mounted on different vehicles too . Typical set of vehicles for soviet missile systems is the following : 
 <unk> @-@ 5 ( truck ) , 
 <unk> @-@ 6 ( truck ) , 
 GAZ @-@ AA ( truck ) , 
 STZ @-@ 3 ( tractor ) , 
 T @-@ 40 ( tank ) , 
 Studebaker US6 ( truck ) , 
 Armored train car , 
 River boat , 
 Towed sledge , 
 Towed trailer , 
 Backpack ( portable variant , so called " mountain Katyusha " ) , 
 ZiS @-@ 151 ( truck , used after the war ) ; 
 Note : There was also an experimental KV @-@ 1K – Katyusha mounted on KV @-@ 1 tank which was not taken in service . 
 A list of some implementations of the Katyusha follows : 
 = = = Rocket variants = = = 
 Rockets used in the above implementations were : 
 The M @-@ 8 and M @-@ 13 rocket could also be fitted with smoke warheads , although this was not common . 
 = = = Combat history = = = 
 The multiple rocket launchers were top secret in the beginning of World War II . A special unit of the NKVD troops was raised to operate them . On July 14 , 1941 , an experimental artillery battery of seven launchers was first used in battle at <unk> in Smolensk Province of Russia , under the command of Captain Ivan Flyorov , destroying a concentration of German troops with tanks , armored vehicles and trucks at the marketplace , causing massive German Army casualties and its retreat from the town in panic . Following the success , the Red Army organized new Guards mortar batteries for the support of infantry divisions . A battery 's complement was standardized at four launchers . They remained under NKVD control until German Nebelwerfer rocket launchers became common later in the war . 
 On August 8 , 1941 , Stalin ordered the formation of eight special Guards mortar regiments under the direct control of the General Headquarters Reserve ( Stavka @-@ <unk> ) . Each regiment comprised three battalions of three batteries , totalling 36 BM @-@ 13 or BM @-@ 8 launchers . Independent Guards mortar battalions were also formed , comprising 12 launchers in three batteries of four . By the end of 1941 , there were eight regiments , 35 independent battalions , and two independent batteries in service , fielding a total of 554 launchers . 
 In June 1942 heavy Guards mortar battalions were formed around the new M @-@ 30 static rocket launch frames , consisting of 96 launchers in three batteries . In July , a battalion of BM @-@ 13s was added to the establishment of a tank corps . In 1944 , the BM @-@ 31 was used in motorized heavy Guards mortar battalions of 48 launchers . In 1943 , Guards mortar brigades , and later divisions , were formed equipped with static launchers . 
 By the end of 1942 , 57 regiments were in service — together with the smaller independent battalions , this was the equivalent of 216 batteries : 21 % BM @-@ 8 light launchers , 56 % BM @-@ 13 , and 23 % M @-@ 30 heavy launchers . By the end of the war , the equivalent of 518 batteries were in service . 
 = = Post @-@ war development = = 
 The success and economy of multiple rocket launchers ( MRL ) have led them to continue to be developed . During the Cold War , the Soviet Union fielded several models of Katyusha @-@ like MRL , notably the BM @-@ 21 launchers somewhat inspired by the earlier weapon , and the larger BM @-@ 27 . Advances in artillery munitions have been applied to some Katyusha @-@ type multiple launch rocket systems , including <unk> submunitions , remotely deployed land mines , and chemical warheads . 
 With the breakup of the Soviet Union , Russia inherited most of its military arsenal including its large complement of MRLs . In recent history , they have been used by Russian forces during the First and Second Chechen Wars and by Armenian and Azerbaijani forces during the Nagorno @-@ Karabakh War . Georgian government forces are reported to have used BM @-@ 21 or similar rocket artillery in fighting in the 2008 South Ossetia war . 
 Katyusha @-@ like launchers were exported to Afghanistan , Angola , Czechoslovakia , Egypt , East Germany , Hungary , Iran , Iraq , Mongolia , North Korea , Poland , Syria , and Vietnam . They were also built in Czechoslovakia , the People 's Republic of China , North Korea , and Iran . 
 Proper Katyushas ( BM @-@ 13s ) also saw action in the Korean War , used by the Chinese People 's Volunteer Army against the South and United Nations forces . Soviet BM @-@ 13s were known to have been imported to China before the Sino @-@ Soviet split and were operational in the People 's Liberation Army . 
 Israel captured BM @-@ 24 MRLs during the Six @-@ Day War ( 1967 ) , used them in two battalions during the Yom Kippur War ( 1973 ) and the 1982 Lebanon War , and later developed the MAR @-@ 240 launcher for the same rockets , based on a Sherman tank chassis . 
 During the 2006 Lebanon War , Hezbollah fired between 3 @,@ 970 and 4 @,@ 228 rockets , from light truck @-@ mounts and single @-@ rail man @-@ portable launchers . About 95 % of these were 122 mm ( 4 @.@ 8 in ) Syrian @-@ manufactured M @-@ <unk> type artillery rockets which carried warheads up to 30 kg ( 66 lb ) and had a range of 20 km , perhaps up to 30 km ( 19 mi ) . Hamas has launched 122 @-@ mm Grad @-@ type Katyusha rockets from the Gaza Strip against several cities in Israel , although they are not reported to have truck @-@ mounted launchers . Although Katyusha originally referred to the mobile launcher , today the rockets are often referred to as Katyushas . 
 Some allege that the CIA bought Katyushas from the Egyptian military and supplied them to the Mujahideen ( via Pakistan 's ISI ) during the Soviet Afghan war . 
 Katyusha @-@ like MRLs were also allegedly used by the Rwandan Patriotic Front during its 1990 invasion of Rwanda , through the 1994 genocide . They were effective in battle , but translated into much anti @-@ Tutsi sentiment in the local media . 
 It was reported that BM @-@ 21 launchers were used against American forces during the 2003 invasion of Iraq . They have also been used in the Afghanistan and Iraq insurgencies . In Iraq , according to Associated Press and Agence France @-@ Presse reports , Katyusha @-@ like rockets were fired at the Green Zone late March 2008 . 
 Katyusha rockets were reportedly used by both Gaddafi Loyalists and anti @-@ Gaddafi forces during the Libyan Civil War . 
 Also , several countries have continued to build and operate Katyusha @-@ like systems well into the 21st century , as for example the Teruel MRL of the Spanish Army . 
 In February 2013 , the Defense Ministry of Yemen reported seizing an Iranian ship , and that the ship 's cargo included ( among its other weapons ) Katyusha rockets . 
 In August 2013 the Irish republican dissident group Óglaigh na hÉireann was blamed for planting a Katyusha @-@ style rocket in undergrowth next to a field near <unk> in South Armagh in an area used by soldiers on training exercises . The weapon was to be triggered using a mobile phone . 
 The Russian army has mounted some multiple rocket launchers on turretless T @-@ 72 tanks and called the weapon a TOS @-@ 1 . These were developed in the 1980s , but have been modernized and are in very limited service . 
 = Typhoon Nora ( 1973 ) = 
 Typhoon Nora was the third @-@ most intense tropical cyclone on record . Originating from an area of low pressure over the western Pacific , Nora was first identified as a tropical depression on October 2 , 1973 . Tracking generally westward , the system gradually intensified , attaining typhoon status the following evening . After turning northwestward , the typhoon underwent a period of rapid intensification , during which its central pressure decreased by 77 mb ( hPa ; 2 @.@ 27 inHg ) in 24 hours . At the end of this phase , Nora peaked with winds of 295 km / h ( 185 mph ) and a pressure of 877 mb ( hPa ; 25 @.@ 91 inHg ) , making it the most @-@ intense tropical cyclone on record ( alongside Typhoon Ida in 1958 ) at the time ; however , this pressure has since been surpassed by two other typhoons and one hurricane . The typhoon subsequently weakened and turned northwestward as it approached the Philippines . After brushing Luzon on October 7 , the system passed south of Taiwan and ultimately made landfall in China on October 10 . Once onshore , Nora quickly weakened and dissipated the following day . 
 The Philippines and Taiwan sustained the most extensive losses from Typhoon Nora , with 36 people losing their lives collectively . In the former , more than 1 million residents were left homeless as high winds and flooding wrecked homes . Damage in the country reached $ 2 million ( 1973 USD ) . In Taiwan , more than 1 @,@ 000 homes were destroyed and 8 @,@ 000 people were left homeless . The typhoon was also responsible for several maritime incidents that killed at least four people . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 On September 30 , a weak surface low developed within the monsoon trough about 195 km ( 120 mi ) south of Yap . Drifting northwestward , the system gradually organized into a tropical depression by October 2 . Later that day , aircraft reconnaissance revealed the system to have intensified into a tropical storm , at which time it was assigned the name Nora . The system 's movement soon became slow and erratic , with Nora executing a counter @-@ clockwise loop on October 3 . After completing the loop , it attained typhoon status and acquired a temporary northward trajectory . Due to the cyclone 's proximity to the Philippines , the Philippine Atmospheric , Geophysical and Astronomical Services Administration also monitored the storm and assigned it with the local name Luming . Late on October 4 , Nora began to undergo a period of rapid intensification . Several aircraft reconnaissance missions were flown by the U.S. Air Force 54th Weather Reconnaissance Squadron into the storm between October 5 and 6 , documenting the typhoon 's dramatic strengthening . 
 By the evening of October 5 , Nora had attained winds in excess of 260 km / h ( 160 mph ) , ranking it as a Category 5 @-@ equivalent super typhoon on the Saffir – Simpson hurricane scale . A recon mission into the storm at this time revealed concentric eyewalls , measured at 14 km ( 9 mi ) and 32 km ( 20 mi ) . Initially , the aircraft was unable to penetrate into the core of the eye due to severe turbulence ; however , they were successful after a second attempt . Once inside the eye , they discovered an almost cloud @-@ free center with " an amphitheater or bowl @-@ like appearance . " Stratocumulus clouds were suppressed to an unusually low altitude of 1 @.@ 2 km ( 0 @.@ 75 mi ) . The core of Nora was exceptionally warm , with temperatures reaching a near @-@ record 30 ° C ( 86 ° F ) at the 700 mb level . At 0020 UTC on October 6 , a dropsonde released by the reconnaissance team recorded a surface pressure of 877 mb ( hPa ; 25 @.@ 91 inHg ) just inside the eyewall of the typhoon . At this time , maximum winds were estimated to have peaked at 295 km / h ( 185 mph ) . This intensity ranked Nora as the most @-@ intense tropical cyclone on record in the world , alongside Typhoon Ida in 1958 . However , in post @-@ storm analysis , it was noted that since the dropsonde did not record a pressure at the storm 's center , Nora was likely slightly stronger than indicated . Since then , Nora 's intensity has been surpassed by three other storms : Typhoon June in 1975 , Typhoon Tip in 1979 , and Hurricane Patricia in 2015 . 
 Despite the storm 's extreme intensity , it quickly began to weaken as it approached the Philippines on October 6 . Within ten hours , the pressure rose to 894 mb ( hPa ; 26 @.@ 40 inHg ) and later dropped below Category 5 status . That morning , Nora turned more northwesterly in response to a weakening in a subtropical ridge and an approaching shortwave trough over China . Steady weakening continued over the following days , with the storm brushing the northeastern tip of Luzon , Philippines , with winds of 175 – 185 km / h ( 110 – 115 mph ) on October 7 . Nora 's intensity leveled out around 130 km / h ( 80 mph ) on October 8 as it tracked between the Philippines and Taiwan . After passing within 95 km ( 60 mi ) of Taiwan , Nora turned more northerly before making landfall near Xiamen , Fujian as a minimal typhoon early on October 10 . Once onshore , the storm rapidly degenerated into an area of low pressure before dissipating the following day . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 Prior to the typhoon 's arrival in the Philippines , all domestic flights in and out of Manila were cancelled ; however , international travel was unaffected . The United States Air Force also moved its planes from Clark Air Base to other bases in Asia . Additionally , all schools in Manila were closed . Brushing the coast of Luzon in the Philippines as a Category 3 @-@ equivalent typhoon , Nora caused considerable damage in the region . Gale @-@ force winds were measured across much of western Luzon , with a peak reading of 126 km / h ( 78 mph ) at Manila port . These winds caused scattered power and communication losses throughout the Peninsula . The city of Baguio ( population 100 @,@ 000 ) lost power for approximately six hours . Crop losses were extensive , with the storm striking close to harvest time . Heavy rains from the storm , peaking at 338 mm ( 13 @.@ 3 in ) in Baguio , triggered significant flooding and caused a breach in the <unk> Dike in <unk> , Pampanga . Eight towns along a 45 km ( 30 mi ) stretch downstream were flooded ; however , roads remained passable . Flooding in Manila also prompted the evacuation of 400 residents . In Caloocan , a child died after being electrocuted by downed wires . Across the Philippines , 24 people were killed and over 1 million were left homeless . Damage to crops and property reached $ 2 million ( 1973 USD ) . Nora was the first of three typhoons to impact the Philippines in the span of a week , with Patsy and Ruth striking the country on October 12 and 15 respectively . 
 While passing south of Taiwan , rough seas spawned by the typhoon were responsible for several maritime incidents over the Taiwan Strait and South China Sea . The Philippine Freighter Asian Mariner , though all 38 crewmen were rescued . The Greek freighter Baltic <unk> capsized about 150 km ( 90 mi ) southwest of the Penghu Islands , with three crewmen confirmed dead and several others missing and presumed dead . Additionally , the Taiwanese fishing vessel Jai Tai <unk> became stranded amid 9 @.@ 1 m ( 30 ft ) seas , with its bow split open . One of the crew perished ; however , the frigate USS Worden was able to rescue seven fishermen despite the dangerous seas . As the storm neared landfall in China , two ships became stranded over the South China Sea and sent out distress signals . 
 Passing within 95 km ( 60 mi ) of Taiwan , the storm brought gale @-@ force winds and torrential rain to the island . A peak gust of 126 km / h ( 78 mph ) was measured in <unk> , Penghu Islands . The most significant impacts came from the rains , which amounted to 523 mm ( 20 @.@ 6 in ) in <unk> over a 20 ‑ hour span . Widespread flooding and many landslides destroyed at least 1 @,@ 000 homes , and washed out bridges , roads , and railroads . Twelve people lost their lives and twenty @-@ eight others were reported missing . Additionally , 8 @,@ 000 people were left homeless . In Hong Kong , the typhoon produced gusty winds , peaking at 95 km / h ( 60 mph ) , though no rainfall was recorded . Although Nora struck China as a typhoon , there were no reports of damage received . 
 = Falcon 's Fury = 
 Falcon 's Fury is a free @-@ standing Sky Jump drop tower attraction at the Busch Gardens Tampa amusement park in Tampa , Florida , United States . Manufactured by Intaride ( a subsidiary of Intamin ) , the ride reaches a maximum height of 335 feet ( 102 m ) making it North America 's tallest free @-@ standing drop tower . Riders experience about five seconds of free fall , reaching a speed of 60 miles per hour ( 100 km / h ) . The ride 's name was chosen to invoke a falcon 's ability to dive steeply at high speed to capture prey . 
 The project was originally planned to begin in 2012 with the ride opening in 2013 , but it was delayed by one year . Construction began in 2013 with a scheduled opening date of May 1 , 2014 ; however , the opening was delayed due to mechanical and technical issues . Following a preview opening to park employees in early August and a soft opening on August 16 , 2014 , Falcon 's Fury officially opened to the public on September 2 , 2014 . Public response to the ride has been positive , praising the height of the tower and the drop experience . 
 = = History = = 
 Planning for Falcon 's Fury began around the time the park completed its Cheetah Hunt ride in 2011 . Ground tests in the Timbuktu area ( now known as <unk> ) revealed " interesting soil conditions " , with steel beams and concrete required to reinforce the site . 
 Rumors that Busch Gardens Tampa might replace its Sandstorm ride with a 200 @-@ foot ( 61 m ) drop tower surfaced in the fall of 2011 when its sister park , Busch Gardens Williamsburg , opened Mäch Tower that August . Construction surveying was observed in January 2012 . Two months later plans were filed with the city to build a drop tower , possibly for the 2013 season . Speculation about the new attraction 's name began when SeaWorld Parks & Entertainment , owners of Busch Gardens Tampa , filed trademark applications for " Desert Dive " and " Falcon 's Fury " on May 2 and July 11 , 2012 , respectively , and bought the <unk> domain name . When permits for the new ride differed from those for Mäch Tower in November 2012 , rumors began that the seats would tilt forward . Due to the height of the attraction , approval from the Federal Aviation Administration was required . According to the FAA and the city of Tampa , the tower was supposed to be built in December 2012 and open to the public in 2013 . For unknown reasons the project was delayed , with its construction pushed back to the second half of 2013 . 
 On May 31 , 2013 , it was announced that Sandstorm would close on June 2 to make room for a new attraction . About two weeks later , on June 11 , Busch Gardens Tampa announced plans for Falcon 's Fury and construction began that month . During the fourth quarter of 2013 , the park drove steel piles for the ride 's foundation nightly for about a month . 
 On September 20 , the tower for Falcon 's Fury was shipped from Spain in nine sections , arriving at the park near the end of October ; the ride 's smaller parts had been delivered earlier from several European countries . Installation of one of the nine tower pieces was planned for every other night , with the last piece in place by New Year 's Eve . Construction was done by the Adena Corporation , and on November 18 the first piece was installed . The ride 's second piece was installed on December 2 , and two more were installed by December 6 . The fifth section was placed by December 21 , and the sixth was erected by New Year 's Day . The seventh tower piece was installed by January 3 , 2014 , and the eighth by January 5 , reaching a height of about 300 feet ( 91 m ) , and Falcon 's Fury 's gondola was seen at the park on January 12 . The ride 's counterweight was installed on January 22 , and the tower was capped during the weekend of February 1 . Work on the ride 's electrical components then began . Assembly of the gondola was completed by the end of March . Testing was originally scheduled to begin in February , but due to construction delays the first drop tests were not made until April 15 . Tower painting began in June , with its sunset motif estimated to take 60 hours over a three @-@ week period . 
 At the end of February , Busch Gardens Tampa announced that Falcon 's Fury would open on May 1 , and on April 3 the park began a sweepstakes contest for its " Falcon 's Fury First @-@ to @-@ Ride Party " . A second , similar contest began on April 11 , with fifty winners from each contest being among the first riders . A week later , the park announced that the ride 's opening would be delayed , and several media events scheduled for April and May ( including the First @-@ to @-@ Ride party ) were cancelled . It was later disclosed that the delay was due to manufacturing and technical issues with the cables which pull the gondola up the tower . During the week of August 10 , Falcon 's Fury opened for park employees . On August 16 the ride soft @-@ opened to the public , and two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half weeks later Falcon 's Fury officially opened . 
 = = Ride experience = = 
 Falcon 's Fury has two shaded queue lines : a standby line which can hold guests for about 45 minutes , and a Quick Queue for guests with passes that allow them to bypass the standby line . Although the Quick Queue system will not initially be used for the ride , it may be added later . Riders must be between 54 inches ( 137 cm ) and 77 inches ( 196 cm ) . 
 When the riders are seated a catch car connects to the gondola and raises it to the top of the tower , which takes about one minute . Although the tower is 335 feet ( 102 m ) high , the gondola stops 25 feet ( 7 @.@ 6 m ) lower . When it reaches the maximum height the seats tilt forward , with a computer @-@ randomized wait time from one to five seconds . When the wait time ends , the gondola is released from the catch car into a five @-@ second free fall reaching a maximum speed of 60 miles per hour ( 97 km / h ) . As the gondola passes through the pre @-@ braking section , the seats rotate back into a vertical position . After the pre @-@ brake the gondola enters the main magnetic @-@ brake run , where riders experience approximately 3 @.@ 5 g ( 34 m / s2 ) of deceleration as the gondola slows . When it comes to a full stop at the base of the tower , the riders disembark . One cycle of the ride lasts about one and a half minutes . Busch Gardens Tampa placed an Easter egg in the form of a painted Falcon 's Fury logo on top of one of its buildings , which can be seen only from a certain side of the gondola . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 The tower and gondola were manufactured by Intaride , a subsidiary of Intamin . The ride covers an area of about 3 @,@ 600 square feet ( 330 m2 ) . 
 = = = Tower = = = 
 The Falcon 's Fury tower is 335 feet ( 102 m ) tall , the tallest free @-@ standing drop tower in North America , and can bend 3 feet ( 0 @.@ 9 m ) in any direction from the top to withstand hurricane @-@ force winds . The tower is composed of nine sections , including the machine house . Each piece of the tower weighs up to 105 tonnes ( 103 long tons ; 116 short tons ) , and the entire structure weighs about 519 tonnes ( 511 long tons ; 572 short tons ) . The 77 tonnes ( 76 long tons ; 85 short tons ) machine house at the top contains four DC motors used to lift the gondola . Inside the tower is a 68 tonnes ( 67 long tons ; 75 short tons ) counterweight , composed of hundreds of lead weights , to help raise the gondola . The tower 's foundation is made up of 105 steel piles , varying in depth from 75 feet ( 23 m ) to 205 feet ( 62 m ) . A 138 @-@ foot ( 42 m ) eddy current brake system on the tower slows the gondola after its free fall . The structure is painted yellow , aqua and two shades of red . 
 = = = Gondola = = = 
 The ride 's single gondola has 32 seats , grouped octagonally around the tower . Each of the eight sides seats four riders , and each seat has an over @-@ the @-@ shoulder restraint and seat belt . Falcon 's Fury can theoretically accommodate 800 riders per hour . Carbon @-@ fiber wings buttress each end of a group of seats , protecting outside riders ' arms and legs during the drop . The gondola reaches a height of 310 feet ( 94 m ) , 25 feet ( 7 @.@ 6 m ) below the top of the tower . When it reaches its maximum height the seats tilt 90 degrees forward , with the riders facing the ground ( the first use of this feature on a drop tower ) . 
 = = Records = = 
 When Falcon 's Fury opened it became North America 's tallest free @-@ standing drop tower . Although taller drop towers exist on the continent — such as Lex Luthor : Drop of Doom at Six Flags Magic Mountain and Zumanjaro : Drop of Doom at Six Flags Great Adventure , which reach drop heights of 400 feet ( 120 m ) and 415 feet ( 126 m ) respectively — those attractions were added to existing structures . Despite its height , the ride 's maximum speed of 60 miles per hour ( 97 km / h ) does not set a speed record . Other drop towers — such as Drop Tower at Kings Dominion , which reaches 72 miles per hour ( 116 km / h ) — are faster . However , Falcon 's Fury is the world 's first drop tower whose seats tilt 90 degrees . Although tilting seats were first used by Intamin in 2001 on <unk> at Six Flags Over Georgia , their tilt angle is smaller . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The initial reception after the ride 's announcement was positive . According to Lance Hart , a theme park enthusiast from Screamscape , " Instead of selling your picture ... they should sell baby wipes and clean underwear at the exit " and the ride could be the most frightening drop tower in the world . Robb Alvey of Theme Park Review called the ride the world 's best drop tower , later ranking it one of the top 14 new attractions for 2014 ; Dave Parfitt and Arthur Levine of USA Today ranked Falcon 's Fury in their top ten . Brady MacDonald of the Los Angeles Times originally ranked Falcon 's Fury his seventh @-@ most @-@ anticipated ride for 2014 ; on an updated list , he ranked it 17th . 
 For safety reasons , construction on Falcon 's Fury was done primarily at night . Residents near the park complained about noise from the pile driver during the laying of the foundation , and complaints about the ride 's operating noise continued into August 2014 . 
 According to the park and Twitter posts selected by news media , public response during the soft opening was positive ; Total Orlando gave the ride five stars for teenagers and four stars for adults . On <unk> " Ashley " said that although the restraints were tight , they were comfortable and not as tight as those on other rides , adding : " The drop on Falcon 's Fury is different from any ride I have ever ridden . The best way I can describe it is that instead of leaving your stomach at the top of the tower , you take it with you to the bottom . " According to Florida Trip Guides , the ride was a good addition to the park 's attraction lineup : " Falcon 's Fury is not for the faint of heart . I have ridden dozens of drop towers but this one is different . Something about facing straight down and falling really makes you nervous . " Robert Niles of Theme Park Insider said that Falcon 's Fury and other recent attractions were nearing the extreme of human tolerance ; as a result , " You 're getting to the point where instead of making an attraction more popular by having it achieve some type of record , you 're actually limiting the audience for that . " Randi Nissenbaum of Bay News 9 called the view from the top of the tower incredible , and although she was nervous at first she wanted to ride again . Sue Carlton of the Tampa Bay Times said , " it was terrifying and thrilling and I held on as hard as I could and yelled and closed my eyes and afterward stepped off rubber @-@ kneed and exhilarated . " 
 For the 2014 season , Busch Gardens Tampa expected attendance to increase by three to eight percent . However ( as predicted in June 2014 by IBISWorld Research ) , combined attendance for the second quarter of the year increased by about 0 @.@ 3 percent for SeaWorld Orlando , SeaWorld San Diego , SeaWorld San Antonio , Busch Gardens Williamsburg and Busch Gardens Tampa . Compared to the same period in 2013 , combined attendance for the first half of the year dropped by just over four percent . Busch Gardens Tampa blamed the lack of its anticipated attendance increase partially on the Falcon 's Fury delays . 
 = Battle of Logorište = 
 The Battle of Logorište was fought east of Duga Resa and south of Karlovac , Croatia , from 4 – 6 November 1991 during the Croatian War of Independence , between the Croatian National Guard ( Zbor narodne garde – ZNG ) and the Yugoslav People 's Army ( Jugoslovenska Narodna Armija – JNA ) . The ZNG placed the JNA @-@ held Logorište barracks under a blockade as part of the countrywide Battle of the Barracks , which aimed to pin down JNA units isolated in their bases and force them to surrender weapons and ammunition to the ZNG . However , the JNA garrison broke out from the besieged barracks with part of its stored equipment before the ZNG claimed the vacant base . The breakout was supported by JNA units and SAO Krajina units deployed to lift the blockade of the barracks and other JNA garrisons in Karlovac . A battle ensued as the ZNG attempted to contain advancing JNA units , ending with a ceasefire signed in The Hague . 
 Although both sides claimed victory , neither achieved all their objectives ; the JNA garrison evacuated the Logorište barracks , but Croatian defences elsewhere held . Particularly heavy fighting was reported in the Karlovac suburb of Turanj , identified as the primary axis of the JNA effort . While the JNA removed some weapons and equipment stored in the Logorište barracks , the remaining supplies were removed by the ZNG over a one @-@ week period after the battle . 
 = = Background = = 
 In 1990 , after the electoral defeat of the government of the Socialist Republic of Croatia , ethnic tensions between Croats and Croatian Serbs worsened . The Yugoslav People 's Army ( Jugoslovenska Narodna Armija – JNA ) confiscated the Croatian Territorial Defence Force 's ( Teritorijalna obrana – TO ) weapons to minimize resistance . On 17 August , tensions escalated into an open revolt by the Croatian Serbs centred on the predominantly Serb @-@ populated areas of the Dalmatian hinterland around Knin , parts of Lika , Kordun , Banovina and Slavonia . 
 After two unsuccessful attempts by Serbia ( supported by Montenegro and the Serbian provinces of Vojvodina and Kosovo ) to obtain the Yugoslav Presidency 's approval for a JNA operation to disarm Croatian security forces in January 1991 — and a bloodless skirmish between Serb insurgents and Croatian special police in March — the JNA , supported by Serbia and its allies , asked the federal presidency for wartime powers and the declaration of a state of emergency . The request was denied on 15 March , and the JNA came under the control of Serbian President Slobodan Milošević . Milošević , preferring a campaign to expand Serbia rather than preserve Yugoslavia , publicly threatened to replace the JNA with a Serbian army and declared that he no longer recognized the authority of the federal presidency . The threat caused the JNA to gradually abandon plans to preserve Yugoslavia in favour of Serbian expansion . By the end of March the conflict escalated with its first fatalities , during the Plitvice Lakes incident . The JNA stepped in , supporting the insurgents and preventing the Croatian police from intervening . In early April , leaders of the Serb revolt in Croatia declared their intention to integrate the area under their control with Serbia ; this was seen by the Croatian government as an intention to secede from Croatia . 
 At the beginning of 1991 Croatia had no regular army , and in an effort to bolster its defence the country doubled its police force to about 20 @,@ 000 . The force 's most effective component was its 3 @,@ 000 @-@ strong special police , deployed in 12 battalions with a military structure . There were also a 9 @,@ 000 – 10 @,@ 000 @-@ strong regionally @-@ organized reserve police , grouped into 16 battalions and 10 companies . The reserve police carried only small arms , and a portion of the force was unarmed . Although the Croatian government responded in May by forming the Croatian National Guard ( Zbor narodne garde – ZNG ) , its development was hampered by a United Nations arms embargo introduced in September . On 12 September the ZNG was ordered to blockade all JNA facilities it could reach , beginning the Battle of the Barracks . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 In late September and early October 1991 , the blockade of JNA barracks in and around Karlovac and Croatian defences in the city were maintained by about 900 police and ZNG troops . The troops were assigned to the 110th Infantry Brigade and the under @-@ strength 3rd Battalion of the 2nd Guards Brigade . The 110th Infantry Brigade , at one @-@ third of its planned strength due to poor organisation and a shortage of weapons , was commanded by Lieutenant Colonel Rudolf <unk> . 
 The JNA 's Stjepan <unk> @-@ Seljo barracks in Logorište , south of Karlovac , was one of the largest weapons @-@ storage facilities in Croatia . The barracks contained weapons and equipment for the 8th Proletarian Motorised Brigade , the 471st Mixed Antitank Artillery Brigade , elements of the logistics battalion of the <unk> Mixed Artillery Brigade , an armoured battalion of the 236th Proletarian Motorised Brigade and 200 tonnes of fuel and stockpiled food assigned to the <unk> Logistics Base . During the summer of 1990 , a mechanised battalion of the 4th Armoured Brigade was moved from Jastrebarsko to the Logorište barracks . When the battalion was deployed to Lika in late March 1991 , about 40 men remained at the barracks ( whose fortifications were improved ) . The barracks commander was Lieutenant Colonel Boro <unk> , who was also commanding officer of the 8th Proletarian Motorised Brigade . 
 The 1st Battalion of the ZNG 's 110th Infantry Brigade blockaded the barracks on 19 September to contain the JNA and prevent the removal of weapons . The blockade was poorly organised , allowing a pair of tanks to leave the barracks and raid a nearby settlement two days later ; however , according to Croatian sources one tank was destroyed during the raid . To relieve blockaded garrisons in the Karlovac area the JNA redeployed the 169th Motorised Brigade from Loznica and three detachments of the TO from Vojnić , assigning them to Operational Group 1 ( OG @-@ 1 ) . OG @-@ 1 attacked Croatian defences on 4 October , reaching the east bank of the Korana River on 8 October . The 169th Motorised Brigade collapsed due to inadequate manpower , and was replaced by the 9th Motorised Brigade ( brought in from Serbia ) on 15 October . 
 = = = Order of battle = = = 
 According to the JNA an additional 450 troops were deployed to the barracks ( despite the blockade ) from 22 October to 4 November , primarily tank crews assigned to the 9th Motorised Brigade and two companies of SAO Krajina TO from Vojnić . The reinforcements crossed the Korana River , adjacent to the barracks , and their movements led to several skirmishes . By 4 November , the barracks housed a 685 @-@ strong garrison . During the second half of October , the 129th and 137th Infantry Brigades were established in Karlovac and nearby Duga Resa to bolster Croatian defences . The two new brigades were assigned areas of responsibility ( AORs ) on 29 November by the Karlovac Operational Zone commanding officer , Colonel <unk> Češnjaj ; the 110th and 137th Brigade AORs were just south of the Logorište barracks . The 137th Infantry Brigade was commanded by Major <unk> Katušin . The 110th Infantry Brigade deployed three companies of its 1st Battalion north and west of the Logorište barracks , while three companies of its 3rd Battalion were deployed south of the barracks . Further south , three companies of the 3rd Battalion of the 137th Infantry Brigade faced the Korana . The 1 / 110th Brigade was supported by two companies of police ( including an antitank and sniper group of special police reserve troops commanded by Želimir Feitl ) in Sv . <unk> , north of the barracks . The 3 / 137th Brigade was supported by an additional company of police . The 3rd Battalion of the 2nd Guards Brigade was ordered to redeploy to Banovina ; most of its troops were on leave or had left the area , and only a squad remained in the rear of the 137th Infantry Brigade . 
 = = Timeline = = 
 The JNA 5th Military District command instructed OG @-@ 1 to relieve blockaded JNA garrisons in the Karlovac and Zagreb areas . During the first stage of the advance , OG @-@ 1 intended to reach the Kupa River via Turanj ( breaking through the ZNG positions ) while the second stage relieved JNA garrisons blockaded in Karlovac . On 2 November OG @-@ 1 began artillery bombardment in the Karlovac area , forcing the 2nd Battalion of the 110th Infantry Brigade to abandon its positions in Turanj the following day . The abandoned defences were occupied by elements of the brigade 's 1st Battalion . 
 On 3 November , the ZNG was renamed the Croatian Army ( Hrvatska vojska – HV ) . OG @-@ 1 supplemented its orders with instructions to capture the village of Barilović and its surroundings ( south of the Logorište barracks ) to facilitate the evacuation of the barracks . Anticipating the JNA advance , the General Staff of the Armed Forces of the Republic of Croatia instructed the Karlovac Operational Zone and the 110th Infantry Brigade to capture the Logorište and <unk> barracks and secure ammunition for HV ( whose stock was dwindling ) . <unk> ordered the police force , commanded by Feitl , to capture the barracks that night ; Feitl refused , and the order was rescinded by Češnjaj . The JNA artillery bombarded Karlovac during the night of 3 – 4 November . 
 = = = 4 November = = = 
 The breakout from the Logorište barracks began on 4 November at 7 : 30 a.m. , after an hour @-@ long artillery bombardment and airstrikes on battalion and company command posts . The JNA simultaneously attacked HV defences at Turanj ( further north ) , threatening Karlovac . The breakout was commanded by the OG @-@ 1 chief of staff , Colonel Mirko <unk> . 
 While most of the JNA garrison in the Logorište barracks remained in place , a group of 10 to 16 tanks deployed south ( without significant resistance ) toward the villages of Belajske Poljice and Belaj . The armoured force went through Belaj before it was stopped at Gornji <unk> and about 1 kilometre ( 0 @.@ 62 miles ) north of the village of Carevo Selo by elements of the 2nd Guards Brigade and the 137th Infantry Brigade . The JNA force retreated to Belaj after losing two tanks , mounting another attack on the road to Barilović . The four tanks dispatched to Barilović were also stopped by 137th Brigade troops before reaching their objective . By evening the 137th Infantry Brigade was reinforced by two companies redeployed from Generalski Stol and <unk> , elements of the 3rd Battalion of the 2nd Guards Brigade , one tank , three armoured personnel carriers ( APCs ) and an antitank missile system to contain the JNA advance . During the night of 4 – 5 November , the civilian population was evacuated . 
 A secondary force of four JNA tanks , supported by infantry , was deployed from the Logorište barracks to secure high ground north and east of the barracks and protect the flank of the armoured force in Belaj . According to the HV , advancing troops were met by the 2nd Company of the 3rd Battalion of the 110th Brigade ( supported by a T @-@ 55 tank ) in Mala Vinica after the JNA force secured its immediate objectives . The JNA lost three tanks and a truck in the clash . According to them one tank was destroyed and another damaged , forcing the remaining two to retreat to the barracks . The secondary force was limited to within 400 metres ( 1 @,@ 300 feet ) from Belajske Poljice after the HV secured Vinica Hill , which was attacked by a Yugoslav Air Force Mikoyan @-@ Gurevich MiG @-@ 21 at 2 : 00 p.m. 
 The Karlovac Operational Zone did not assist the 137th Infantry Brigade , instead directing subordinated units to lift JNA sieges of Slunj and Saborsko and securing the Karlovac – Slunj road . This prompted Katušin to request help from Zagreb Operational Zone commander Colonel Stjepan Mateša . Mateša , a native of Duga Resa , ordered the 7th Brigade of the Croatian TO to deploy a battalion to Karlovac . Although the General Staff approved the order ( instructing the 8th Brigade of the Croatian TO to add one of its battalions ) , no 8th Brigade troops were sent . 
 = = = 5 November = = = 
 The JNA , warned about reinforcements to the 137th Infantry Brigade , abandoned its plan to advance to Barilović . It reoriented its efforts to reach the Korana Bridge in the village of Malići , down the road from Gornji <unk> and Carevo Selo ( where its tanks were stopped the day before ) . The battle resumed in the morning when JNA tanks ( supported by the Yugoslav Air Force , artillery and multiple rocket launchers ) broke through positions held by the 2nd Guards Brigade at 1 : 00 p.m. , reaching Carevo Selo before they were stopped again by the HV . Shortly afterwards , the 2nd Battalion of the 7th Brigade arrived from Zagreb to Duga Resa and were attached to the 137th Infantry Brigade . One company of the battalion was deployed to Vinica Hill , and a second was deployed west of Carevo Selo ( where it relieved troops from the 2nd Guards Brigade ) . 
 The 110th Infantry Brigade assigned secondary importance to the fighting around the Logorište barracks , since it was struggling to hold its positions at Turanj ( where the HV estimated a two @-@ battalion @-@ strong attack was in progress , with artillery and air support ) . At 5 : 00 a.m. the Vinica Hill positions were reinforced by the Sports Company ( composed of Zagreb University Faculty of Kinesiology students ) and a platoon of 82 @-@ millimetre ( 3 @.@ 2 in ) mortars attached to the 3rd Battalion of the 110th Infantry Brigade . The battalion was tasked with blocking the Logorište – Belajske Poljice road leading south from the Logorište barracks and capturing Belajske Poljice by noon . 
 Since there were only 40 trained drivers in the Logorište barracks , Boro <unk> ordered soldiers who had never operated military vehicles to drive in a column starting from the barracks under fire at 3 : 30 p.m. As the column advanced south towards Malići , elements of the 110th Infantry Brigade retreated from the village of <unk> ( on the right bank of the Korana River ) . The evacuating JNA column sustained casualties , although it was supported by the 9th Motorised Brigade and two detachments of the SAO Krajina TO from Vojnić . The SAO Krajina TO were later accused of killing civilians in the area . 
 = = = 6 November = = = 
 During the night of 5 – 6 November , fighting died down after a ceasefire was brokered in The Hague . The lull was used by the 137th Infantry Brigade to extract its encircled troops and civilians near the Korana River , east of Malići . The JNA column began moving south again at dawn ; it reached Malići at about 9 : 00 a.m. , crossed the Korana River ( over the village bridge and a pontoon bridge ) by 11 : 00 and proceeded to Vojnić . Shortly afterwards , the Logorište barracks and its surroundings were secured by the HV . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Both sides claimed victory after the battle , with the JNA hailing the evacuation of the garrison as its greatest success . However , they achieved only part of their objectives ; the JNA failed to secure the area surrounding the barracks or remove all the weapons and equipment in it , and the planned coordinated advance against Turanj also failed . Croatian forces failed in their primary objective : containing the garrison . Nonetheless , the JNA threat from the Logorište barracks was removed ( freeing up forces assigned to the blockade of the barracks ) and a large number of weapons were captured . 
 The 137th Infantry Brigade had 17 fatalities in the battle , and the 2nd Guards Brigade had one . The 110th Infantry Brigade had 14 killed and 26 wounded , but the brigade sustained most of its casualties at Turanj rather than Logorište . The JNA had 14 dead and 33 wounded troops . In addition , 14 civilians were killed and 14 captured and held by the JNA and the SAO Krajina TO . One prisoner died in captivity , and the remainder were later exchanged . Seven of the exchanged prisoners had been severely injured , and died shortly after the exchange . The Central Intelligence Agency estimated that the JNA lost most of its tanks which had been housed in the Logorište barracks . 
 The JNA evacuated 21 T @-@ 55 tanks , nine T @-@ 34s , an armoured recovery vehicle , an armoured vehicle @-@ launched bridge , ten APCs ( including an armoured command vehicle ) and 50 vehicles carrying military equipment . Elements of the 110th Infantry Brigade entered the Logorište barracks on the morning of 6 November , removing some of the military hardware in the barracks before pulling out at 1 : 00 p.m. after being informed that the JNA was planning an artillery attack . Captured equipment continued to be removed from the barracks until 13 November . 
 = = = Command @-@ system failure = = = 
 The destruction of property caused outrage in Duga Resa , largely directed at <unk> Katušin ( who fled for his life to Karlovac and then to Zagreb Operational Zone headquarters on the morning of 6 November ) . The 110th Infantry Brigade blamed the 137th Brigade for all mistakes , including the breakout from the barracks ( which occurred in the brigade 's AOR ) . <unk> Češnjaj also blamed Katušin . However , Katušin was supported by the General Staff and was soon appointed commanding officer of the 140th Infantry Brigade based in Jastrebarsko . In fact , Croatian command and control systems failed ( especially the Karlovac Operational Zone command , in the immediate vicinity of the battlefield ) . Communications were poor , and the zone command issued no instructions to the troops fighting near Logorište . The 110th Infantry Brigade was focused on the fighting at Turanj , paying little attention to Logorište , and the 137th Infantry Brigade made poor use of reinforcements deployed from Zagreb . The JNA command was more effective , probably because of the proximity of its command post on <unk> Hill , 500 metres ( 1 @,@ 600 feet ) away ( permitting direct observation of part of the battlefield ) . 
 = = = War crimes trial = = = 
 Croatian authorities charged two former members of the SAO Krajina TO with shooting two HV soldiers who had tried to surrender to the JNA on 4 November . One of the two was arrested in October 2010 , and was convicted and sentenced to nine years in prison in November 2013 . 
