 Two weeks after taking over service , Amtrak added the Boston @-@ New Haven Bay State , which restored service on the B & A as far west as Springfield . Never successful , it was ended on March 1 , 1975 . The MBTA began subsidizing Penn Central commuter rail service between Boston and Framingham – but not the lone commuter trip to Worcester – in January 1973 . Penn Central discontinued the Worcester trip on October 27 , 1975 ; in response , Amtrak revived the dormant New York @-@ Chicago Lake Shore Limited on October 31 , with a new section running Boston @-@ Albany and thus restoring service to Pittsfield . The Lake Shore Limited stopped at the east @-@ of @-@ downtown station that had been used from 1965 to 1971 . 
 An <unk> ( a small aluminum and Plexiglas bus shelter ) with a bare asphalt platform was built in downtown Pittsfield near the former Union Station . The ' station ' opened on April 26 , 1981 . The 1965 @-@ built station was converted to a yard office , used by Conrail and later CSX Transportation for their adjacent Pittsfield Yard . 
 = = = Scelsi ITC = = = 
 In the late 1980s , local officials began to consider constructing a new station to serve both Amtrak trains and the Berkshire Regional Transit Authority , which had taken over private bus services in the area in 1974 . Between 1993 and 1999 , BRTA administrator Diane Smith worked to advance plans for an intermodal transit center . A study completed in January 1998 provided cost @-@ benefit analysis and preliminary costs and recommended eight sites for further study . Based on this , Congressman John W. Olver obtained $ 8 @.@ 615 million in federal earmarks to fund the project ; the state provided the 20 % local match to reach the full $ 11 million cost . 
 The Wallace Floyd Design Group was responsible for the station 's architecture . Groundbreaking was held in August 2002 ; completion was originally scheduled within a year but delayed due to an unusually cold winter and the primary steel supplier going bankrupt . The station officially opened on November 22 , 2004 . Olver and Senator Edward Kennedy placed bricks from the 1914 Union Station into the columns of the new station . The building was named after Joseph Scelsi for his activism regarding Union Station . 
 The Scelsi ITC houses BRTA offices , a waiting room , concession vendors , and other office tenants . The second floor of the building houses two classrooms used by Berkshire Community College and Massachusetts College of Liberal Arts . On May 19 , 2013 , the Pittsfield Visitor 's Center moved into the first floor of the ITC , to be staffed by local volunteers . 
 = Hans @-@ Joachim Marseille = 
 Hans @-@ Joachim Marseille ( 13 December 1919 – 30 September 1942 ; German pronunciation : [ <unk> <unk> <unk> ] ) was a Luftwaffe fighter pilot and flying ace during World War II . He is noted for his aerial battles during the North African Campaign and his Bohemian lifestyle . One of the most successful fighter pilots , he was nicknamed the " Star of Africa " . Marseille claimed all but seven of his " official " 158 victories against the British Commonwealth 's Desert Air Force over North Africa , flying the Messerschmitt Bf 109 fighter for his entire combat career . No other pilot claimed as many Western Allied aircraft as Marseille . 
 Marseille , of French Huguenot ancestry , joined the Luftwaffe in 1938 . At the age of 20 he graduated from one of the Luftwaffe 's fighter pilot schools just in time to participate in the Battle of Britain , without notable success . A charming person , he had such a busy night life that sometimes he was too tired to be allowed to fly the next morning . As a result , he was transferred to another unit , which relocated to North Africa in April 1941 . 
 Under the guidance of his new commander , who recognised the latent potential in the young officer , Marseille quickly developed his abilities as a fighter pilot . He reached the zenith of his fighter pilot career on 1 September 1942 , when during the course of three combat sorties he claimed 17 enemy fighters shot down , earning him the Ritterkreuz mit Eichenlaub , Schwertern und Brillanten ( Knight 's Cross with Oak Leaves , Swords , and Diamonds ) . Only 29 days later , Marseille was killed in a flying accident , when he was forced to abandon his fighter due to engine failure . After he exited the smoke @-@ filled cockpit , Marseille 's chest struck the vertical stabiliser of his aircraft . The blow either killed him instantly or incapacitated him so that he was unable to open his parachute . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Hans @-@ Joachim " Jochen " Walter Rudolf Siegfried Marseille was born to Charlotte ( maiden name : Charlotte Marie Johanna Pauline Gertrud <unk> ) and Hauptmann Siegfried Georg Martin Marseille , a family with paternal Huguenot ancestry , in Berlin @-@ Charlottenburg Berliner Strasse 164 on 13 December 1919 at 11 : 45 pm . As a child , he was physically weak , and he nearly died from a serious case of Influenza . His father Siegfried was an Army officer during World War I , and later left the armed forces to join the Berlin Police force . Siegfried later rejoined the Army in 1933 , and was promoted to General in 1935 . Promoted again he attained the rank of Generalmajor on 1 July 1941 . He served on the Eastern Front from the beginning of Operation Barbarossa . Siegfried Marseille was killed by partisans near <unk> on 29 January 1944 . He was buried in the cemetery of <unk> . Hans @-@ Joachim also had a younger sister , Ingeborg " Inge " . While on sick leave in Athens at the end of December 1941 , he was summoned to Berlin by a telegram from his mother . Upon arriving home , he learned his sister had been " slain by a jealous lover " ; Hans @-@ Joachim never recovered emotionally from this blow . 
 When Marseille was still a young child his parents divorced and his mother subsequently married a police official named Reuter . Marseille initially assumed the name of his stepfather at school ( a matter he had a difficult time accepting ) but he reverted to his father 's name of Marseille in adulthood . He acquired the reputation of being a rebel from a lack of discipline , a characteristic that would plague him early on in his Luftwaffe career . Marseille also had a difficult relationship with his natural father whom he refused to visit in Hamburg for some time after the divorce . Eventually he attempted a reconciliation with his father , who subsequently introduced him to the nightlife that was to initially hamper his military career during his early years in the Luftwaffe . However , the <unk> with his father did not last and he did not see him again thereafter . 
 Marseille attended the 12th Volksschule Berlin ( 1926 – 1930 ) , and from the age of 10 , the Prinz Heinrich Gymnasium in Berlin @-@ Schöneberg ( 1930 – 1938 ) . He was considered to be a lazy student at first , and was constantly playing pranks and getting into trouble . Toward the end of his school years he started to take his education more seriously and qualified as one of the youngest ( at 17 years , six months ) to achieve his Abitur , graduating in early 1938 . Marseille then expressed his desire to become a " flying officer . " 
 = = = Entry into the Luftwaffe = = = 
 Although not athletic in physique , Marseille received a good report for a term with the Reichsarbeitsdienst ( " State Labour Service " ) <unk> . 1 / 177 in <unk> @-@ <unk> near Bremen , between 4 April and 24 September 1938 . 
 He joined Luftwaffe on 7 November 1938 , as a Fahnenjunker ( officer candidate ) and received his military basic training in Quedlinburg in the Harz region . On 1 March 1939 Marseille was transferred to the Luftkriegsschule 4 ( <unk> 4 — air war school ) near Fürstenfeldbruck . Among his classmates was Werner Schröer . Schröer reports that Marseille was often in breach of military discipline . Consequently Marseille was ordered to stay on base while his class mates were on weekend leave . Quite frequently Marseille ignored this and left Schröer a note : " Went out ! Please take my chores . " On one occasion , while performing a slow circuit , Marseille broke away and performed an imaginary weaving dogfight . He was reprimanded by his commanding officer , Hauptmann Mueller @-@ <unk> , and taken off flying duties and his promotion to Gefreiter postponed . Soon after , during a cross @-@ country flight , he landed on a quiet stretch of Autobahn ( between Magdeburg and Braunschweig ) and ran behind a tree to relieve himself . Some farmers came to enquire if he needed assistance , but by the time they arrived Marseille was on his way , and they were blown back by his slipstream . Infuriated , the farmers reported the matter and Marseille was again suspended from flying . Those he graduated with had been made full officers by early 1940 , while Marseille 's indiscipline left him with the rank of Oberfähnrich at the end of 1941 . 
 Marseille completed his training at Jagdfliegerschule 5 ( 5th fighter pilot school ) in Wien @-@ Schwechat to which he was posted on 1 November 1939 . Jagdfliegerschule 5 at the time was under the command of the World War I flying ace and recipient of the Pour le Mérite Eduard Ritter von <unk> . One of his teachers at the Jagdfliegerschule 5 was the Austro @-@ Hungarian World War I ace Julius <unk> . Marseille graduated from Jagdfliegerschule 5 with an outstanding evaluation on 18 July 1940 and was assigned to Ergänzungsjagdgruppe Merseburg . Marseille 's unit was assigned to air defence duty over the Leuna plant from the outbreak of war until the fall of France . 
 On 10 August 1940 he was assigned to I. Jagd / Lehrgeschwader 2 , based in Calais @-@ Marck , to begin operations over Britain and again received an outstanding evaluation this time by his Hauptmann and Gruppenkommandeur , Herbert Ihlefeld . 
 = = World War II = = 
 = = = Battle of Britain = = = 
 In his first dogfight over England on 24 August 1940 , Marseille was involved in a four @-@ minute battle with a skilled opponent . He defeated his opponent by pulling up into a tight <unk> , to gain an altitude advantage before diving and firing . The British fighter was struck in the engine , pitching over and diving into the English Channel ; this was Marseille 's first victory . Marseille was then engaged from above by more enemy fighters . By pushing his aircraft into a steep dive then pulling up metres above the water , Marseille escaped from the machine gun fire of his opponents : " skipping away over the waves , I made a clean break . No one followed me and I returned to Leeuwarden [ sic — Marseille was based near Calais , not Leeuwarden ] . " 
 Marseille did not take any pleasure in this victory and found it difficult to accept the realities of aerial combat . 
 On his second sortie , he scored another victory , and by the 15 September 1940 , had claimed his fourth victory . Marseille became an ace on 18 September after claiming a fifth enemy aircraft . While returning from a bomber @-@ escort mission on 23 September 1940 flying Werk Nummer ( W.Nr ) 5094 , his engine failed 10 miles off Cap Gris Nez after combat damage sustained over Dover . Pilot Officer George <unk> from 41 Squadron may have shot Marseille down . According to another source , W.Nr 5094 was destroyed in this engagement by Robert Stanford Tuck , who had pursued a Bf 109 to that location and whose pilot was rescued by a He 59 naval aircraft . Marseille is the only German airman known to have been rescued by a He 59 on that day and in that location . Tuck 's official claim was for a Bf 109 destroyed off Griz Nez at 09 : 45 — the only pilot to submit a claim in that location . 
 Marseille tried to radio his position but was forced to bail out over the sea . He paddled around in the water for three hours before being rescued by a Heinkel He 59 float plane based at <unk> . Severely worn out and suffering from exposure , he was sent to a field hospital . I. ( Jagd ) / LG 2 claimed three aerial victories for the loss of four Bf 109s that day . Marseille was in serious trouble when arriving back at the airfield . He had abandoned his leader Staffelkapitän Adolf Buhl , who was shot down and killed . He received a stern rebuke and final warning from Herbert Ihlefeld , during which he tore up his flight evaluations with a visibly upset Marseille looking on . Other pilots were voicing their dissent concerning Marseille . Because of his alienation of other pilots , his arrogance and unapologetic nature , Ihlefeld would eventually dismiss Marseille from LG 2 . 
 Another account recalled how Marseille once ignored an order to turn back from a fight when outnumbered by two to one , but seeing an enemy aircraft closing on his wing leader , Marseille broke formation and shot the attacking aircraft down . Expecting nothing but " a well done Jochen " when he landed , he was thoroughly criticised for his actions , receiving three days of confinement for failing to carry out an order . Days later , Marseille was passed over for promotion and was now the sole Fähnrich in the Geschwader . This was a humiliation for him , suspecting that his abilities were being suppressed so the squadron leaders could take all the glory in the air . 
 Shortly afterwards , in early October 1940 , after having claimed seven aerial victories all them flying with I. ( Jagd ) / LG 2 Marseille was transferred to 4 . / Jagdgeschwader 52 , flying alongside the likes of Johannes Steinhoff and Gerhard Barkhorn . He wrote off four aircraft as a result of operations during this period . Steinhoff , later recalled : 
 " Marseille was extremely handsome . He was a very gifted pilot , but he was unreliable . He had girl friends everywhere , and they kept him so busy that he was sometimes so worn out that he had to be grounded . His sometime irresponsible way of conducting his duties was the main reason I fired him . But he had irresistible charm . " 
 As punishment for " insubordination " — rumoured to be his penchant for American jazz music , womanising and an overt " playboy " lifestyle — and inability to fly as a wingman , Steinhoff transferred Marseille to Jagdgeschwader 27 on 24 December 1940 . When he joined his new unit , it was difficult to foresee his outstanding career . His new Gruppenkommandeur , Eduard Neumann , later recalled , " His hair was too long and he brought with him a list of disciplinary punishments as long as your arm . He was tempestuous , temperamental and unruly . Thirty years later , he would have been called a playboy . " Nevertheless , Neumann quickly recognised Marseille 's potential as a pilot . He stated in an interview : " Marseille could only be one of two , either a disciplinary problem or a great fighter pilot . " Jagdgeschwader 27 was soon relocated to North Africa . 
 = = = Arrival in North Africa = = = 
 Marseille 's unit briefly saw action during the invasion of Yugoslavia , deployed to Zagreb on 10 April 1941 , before transferring to Africa . On 20 April on his flight from Tripoli to his front airstrip Marseille 's Bf 109 developed engine trouble and he had to make a forced landing in the desert short of his destination . His squadron departed the scene after they had ensured that he had got down safely . Marseille continued his journey , first hitchhiking on an Italian truck , then , finding this too slow ; he tried his luck at an airstrip in vain . Finally he made his way to the general in charge of a supply depot on the main route to the front , and convinced him that he should be available for operations next day . Marseille 's character appealed to the general and he put at his disposal his own Opel Admiral , complete with chauffeur . " You can pay me back by getting fifty victories , Marseille ! " were his parting words . Nevertheless he caught up with his squadron and arrived on 21 April . 
 He scored two more victories on 23 and 28 April , his first in the North African Campaign . However , on 23 April , Marseille himself was shot down during his third sortie of that day by Sous @-@ Lieutenant James Denis , a Free French pilot with No. 73 Squadron RAF ( 8 @.@ 5 victories ) , flying a Hawker Hurricane . Marseille 's Bf 109 received almost 30 hits in the cockpit area , and three or four shattered the canopy . As Marseille was leaning forward the rounds missed him by inches . Marseille managed to crash @-@ land his fighter . Just a month later , records show that James Denis shot down Marseille again on 21 May 1941 . Marseille engaged Denis , but overshot his target . A turning dogfight ensued , in which Denis once again bested Marseille . 
 Neumann ( a Geschwaderkommodore as of 10 June 1942 ) encouraged Marseille to self @-@ train to improve his abilities . By this time , he had crashed or damaged another four Bf 109E aircraft , including a tropicalised aircraft he was ferrying on 23 April 1941 . Marseille 's kill rate was low , and he went from June to August without a victory . He was further frustrated after damage forced him to land on two occasions : once on 14 June 1941 and again after he was hit by ground fire over Tobruk and was forced to land blind . 
 His tactic of diving into enemy formations often found him under fire from all directions , resulting in his aircraft being damaged beyond repair ; consequently , Eduard Neumann was losing his patience . Marseille persisted , and created a unique self @-@ training programme for himself , both physical and tactical , which resulted not just in outstanding situational awareness , marksmanship and confident control of the aircraft , but also in a unique attack tactic that preferred a high angle deflection shooting attack and shooting at the target 's front from the side , instead of the common method of chasing an aircraft and shooting at it directly from behind . Marseille often practiced these tactics on the way back from missions with his comrades . Marseille became known as a master of deflection shooting . 
 As Marseille began to claim enemy aircraft regularly , on occasion he would organise the welfare of the downed pilot personally , driving out to remote crash sites to rescue downed Allied airmen . On 13 September 1941 Marseille shot down Pat Byers of the Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) No. 451 Squadron . Marseille flew to Byers ' airfield and dropped a note informing the Australians of his condition and treatment . He returned several days later to second the first note with news of Byers ' death . Marseille repeated these sorties after being warned by Neumann that Göring had forbade any more flights of this kind . After the war , Marseille 's JG 27 comrade Werner Schröer stated that Marseille attempted these gestures as " penance " for a group that " loved shooting down aircraft " but not killing a man ; " we tried to separate the two . Marseille allowed us that escape , our penance I suppose . " 
 Finally on 24 September 1941 , his practice came to fruition , with his first multiple victory sortie , claiming four Hurricanes of No. 1 Squadron , South African Air Force ( SAAF ) . By mid December , he had reached 25 victories and was duly awarded the German Cross in Gold . His Staffel was rotated to Germany in November / December 1941 to convert to the Bf 109F @-@ 4 / trop , the variant that was described as the Experten ( experts ) " mount . " These victories represented his 19 – 23rd victory . 
 = = = The " Star of Africa " = = = 
 Marseille always strove to improve his abilities . He worked to strengthen his legs and abdominal muscles , to help him tolerate the extreme g forces of air combat . Marseille also drank an abnormal amount of milk and shunned sunglasses , to improve his eyesight . 
 To counter German fighter attacks , the Allied pilots flew " Lufbery circles " ( in which each aircraft 's tail was covered by the friendly aircraft behind ) . The tactic was effective and dangerous as a pilot attacking this formation could find himself constantly in the sights of enemy pilots . Marseille often dived at high speed into the middle of these enemy defensive formations from either above or below , executing a tight turn and firing a two @-@ second deflection shot to destroy an enemy aircraft . The successes Marseille had begun to become readily apparent in early 1942 . He claimed his 37 – 40th victories on 8 February 1942 and 41 – 44th victories four days later which earned him the Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross ( Ritterkreuz des Eisernen Kreuzes ) that same month for 46 victories . 
 Marseille attacked under conditions many considered unfavourable , but his marksmanship allowed him to make an approach fast enough to escape the return fire of the two aircraft flying on either flank of the target . Marseille 's excellent eyesight made it possible for him to spot the enemy before he was spotted , allowing him to take the appropriate action and manoeuvre into position for an attack . 
 In combat , Marseille 's unorthodox methods led him to operate in a small leader / wingman unit , which he believed to be the safest and most effective way of fighting in the high @-@ visibility conditions of the North African skies . Marseille " worked " alone in combat keeping his wingman at a safe distance so he would not collide or fire on him in error . 
 In a dogfight , particularly when attacking Allied aircraft in a Lufbery circle , Marseille would often favour dramatically reducing the throttle and even lowering the flaps to reduce speed and shorten his turn radius , rather than the standard procedure of using full throttle throughout . Emil Clade said that none of the other pilots could do this effectively , preferring instead to dive on single opponents at speed so as to escape if anything went wrong . Clade said of Marseille 's tactics : 
 Marseille developed his own special tactics , which differed significantly from the methods of most other pilots . ( When attacking a Lufbery circle ) he had to fly very slowly . He even took it to the point where he had to operate his landing flaps as not to fall down , because , of course he had to fly his curve ( turns ) more tightly than the upper defensive circle . He and his fighter were one unit , and he was in command of that aircraft like no @-@ one else . 
 Friedrich Körner ( 36 victories ) also recognised this as unique : " Shooting in a curve ( deflection shooting ) is the most difficult thing a pilot can do . The enemy flies in a defensive circle , that means they are already lying in a curve and the attacking fighter has to fly into this defensive circle . By pulling his aircraft right around , his curve radius must be smaller , but if he does that , his target disappears in most cases below his wings . So he cannot see it anymore and has to proceed simply by instinct . " 
 His success as a fighter pilot also led to promotions and more responsibility as an officer . 1 May 1942 saw him receive an unusually early promotion to Oberleutnant followed by appointment to Staffelkapitän of 3 . / JG 27 on 8 June 1942 , thus succeeding Oberleutnant Gerhard <unk> who took command of I. / JG 27 . 
 In a conversation with his friend Hans @-@ Arnold Stahlschmidt , Marseille commented on his style , and his idea of air @-@ to @-@ air combat : 
 I often experience combat as it should be . I see myself in the middle of a British [ sic ] swarm , firing from every position and never getting caught . Our aircraft are basic elements , Stahlschmidt , which have got to be mastered . You 've got to be able to shoot from any position . From left or right turns , out of a roll , on your back , whenever . Only this way can you develop your own particular tactics . Attack tactics , that the enemy simply cannot anticipate during the course of the battle – a series of unpredictable movements and actions , never the same , always stemming from the situation at hand . Only then can you plunge into the middle of an enemy swarm and blow it up from the inside . 
 Marseille had a narrow escape on 13 May 1942 , when his Bf 109 was damaged during a dogfight with 12 Kittyhawks ( Mk I ) from No. 3 Squadron RAAF , southeast of Gazala and over the Gulf of Bomba ( " Gazala Bay " ) . With a wingman , Marseille bounced the Kittyhawks . After he downed one of the Australian pilots , Flying Officer Graham Pace in <unk> , Marseille 's Bf 109 took hits in the oil tank and propeller , likely from Flying Officer Geoff Chinchen ( 1919 – 2005 ) , who reported damaging one of the Messerschmitts . Marseille nevertheless managed to shoot down another Kittyhawk ( Sergeant Colin McDiarmid ; <unk> ) , before nursing his overheating aircraft back to base . The repairs to Marseille 's Bf 109 took two days . The aerial victories were recorded as numbers 57 – 58 . 
 Weeks later , on 30 May , Marseille performed another mercy mission after witnessing his 65th victory — Pilot Officer Graham George Buckland of No. 250 Squadron RAF — strike the tail plane of his fighter and fall to his death when the parachute did not open . After landing he drove out to the crash site . The P @-@ 40 had landed over Allied lines but they found the dead pilot within German territory . Marseille marked his grave , collected his papers and verified his identity , then flew to Buckland 's airfield to deliver a letter of regret . Buckland died two days before his 21st birthday . 
 His attack method to break up formations , which he perfected , resulted in a high proportion of kills , and in rapid , multiple victories per attack . On 3 June 1942 , Marseille attacked alone a formation of 16 Curtiss P @-@ 40 fighters and shot down six aircraft of No. 5 Squadron SAAF , five of them in six minutes , including three aces : Robin Pare ( six victories ) , Cecil Golding ( 6 @.@ 5 victories ) and Andre Botha ( five victories ) . This success inflated his score further , recording his 70 – 75th victories . Marseille was awarded the Ritterkreuz mit Eichenlaub on 6 June 1942 . His wingman Rainer Pöttgen , nicknamed <unk> <unk> the ( " Flying Counting Machine " ) , said of this fight : 
 All the enemy were shot down by Marseille in a turning dogfight . As soon as he shot , he needed only to glance at the enemy plane . His pattern [ of gunfire ] began at the front , the engine 's nose , and consistently ended in the cockpit . How he was able to do this not even he could explain . With every dogfight he would throttle back as far as possible ; this enabled him to fly tighter turns . His expenditure of ammunition in this air battle was 360 rounds ( 60 per aircraft shot down ) . 
 Schröer , did however , place Marseille 's methods into context : 
 He was the most amazing and ingenious combat pilot I ever saw . He was also very lucky on many occasions . He thought nothing of jumping into a fight outnumbered ten to one , often alone , with us trying to catch up to him . He violated every cardinal rule of fighter combat . He abandoned all the rules . 
 On 17 June 1942 , Marseille claimed his 100th aerial victory . He was the 11th Luftwaffe pilot to achieve the century mark . Marseille then returned to Germany for two months leave and the following day was awarded the Ritterkreuz mit Eichenlaub und Schwertern . On 6 August , he began his journey back to North Africa accompanied by his fiancée Hanne @-@ Lies <unk> . On 13 August , he met Benito Mussolini in Rome and was presented with the highest Italian military award for bravery , the Medaglia d 'Oro al Valor Militare . While in Italy Marseille disappeared for some time prompting the German authorities to compile a missing persons report , submitted by the Gestapo head in Rome , Herbert Kappler . He was finally located . According to rumours he had run off with an Italian girl and was eventually persuaded to return to his unit . Unusually , nothing was ever said about the incident and no repercussions were visited upon Marseille for this indiscretion . 
 Leaving his fiancée in Rome , Marseille returned to combat duties on 23 August . 1 September 1942 was Marseille 's most successful day , destroying 17 enemy aircraft ( nos . 105 – 121 ) , and September would see him claim 54 victories , his most productive month . The 17 enemy aircraft shot down included eight in 10 minutes ; as a result of this feat , he was presented with a Volkswagen Kübelwagen by a Regia Aeronautica squadron , on which his Italian comrades had painted " Otto " ( Italian language : Otto = eight ) . This was the most aircraft from Western Allied air forces shot down by a single pilot in one day . Only one pilot , Emil " Bully " Lang , on 4 November 1943 , would better this score , against the Soviet Air Force on the Eastern Front . On 3 September 1942 Marseille claimed six victories ( nos . 127 – 132 ) but was hit by fire from the British @-@ Canadian ace James Francis Edwards . Der Adler , a biweekly Nazi propaganda magazine published by the Luftwaffe , also reported his actions in volume 14 of 1942 . 
 Three days later Edwards likely killed Günter Steinhausen , a friend of Marseille . The next day , 7 September 1942 , another close friend Hans @-@ Arnold Stahlschmidt was posted missing in action . These personal losses weighed heavily on Marseille 's mind along with his family tragedy . It was noted he barely spoke and became more morose in the last weeks of his life . The strain of combat also induced consistent sleepwalking at night and other symptoms that could be construed as posttraumatic stress disorder . Marseille never remembered these events . 
 Marseille continued scoring multiple victories throughout September , including seven on 15 September ( nos . 145 – 151 ) . Between 16 and 25 September , Marseille failed to increase his score due to a fractured arm , sustained in a force landing soon after the 15 September mission . As a result , he had been forbidden to fly by Eduard Neumann . But the same day , Marseille borrowed the Macchi C.202 ' 96 – 10 ' of the Italian ace Tenente Emanuele <unk> , from <unk> Squadriglia , 9 ° Gruppo , 4 ° <unk> , based at Fuka , for a test flight . But the one @-@ off flight ended in a wheels @-@ up landing , when the German ace accidentally switched the engine off , as the throttle control in Italian aircraft was opposite to that of the German aircraft . 
 Marseille had nearly surpassed his friend Hans @-@ Arnold Stahlschmidt 's score of 59 victories in just five weeks . However , the massive material superiority of the Allies meant the strain placed on the outnumbered German pilots was now severe . At this time , the strength of German fighter units was 112 ( 65 serviceable ) aircraft against the British muster of some 800 machines . Marseille was becoming physically exhausted by the frenetic pace of combat . After his last combat on 26 September , Marseille was reportedly on the verge of collapse after a 15 @-@ minute battle with a formation of Spitfires , during which he scored his seventh victory of that day . 
 Of particular note was Marseille 's 158th claim . After landing in the afternoon of the 26 September 1942 , he was physically exhausted . Several accounts allude to his Squadron members being visibly shocked at Marseille 's physical state . Marseille , according to his own post @-@ battle accounts , had been engaged by a Spitfire pilot in an intense dogfight that began at high altitude and descended to low @-@ level . Marseille recounted how both he and his opponent strove to get onto the tail of the other . Both succeeded and fired but each time the pursued managed to turn the table on his attacker . Finally , with only 15 minutes of fuel remaining , he climbed into the sun . The RAF fighter followed and was caught in the glare . Marseille executed a tight turn and roll , fired from 100 metres range . The Spitfire caught fire and shed a wing . It crashed into the ground with the pilot still inside . Marseille wrote , " That was the toughest adversary I have ever had . His turns were fabulous ... I thought it would be my last fight " . Unfortunately the pilot and his unit remain unidentified . 
 = = = Aircraft = = = 
 The following Bf 109 E @-@ 7 aircraft are among those that Marseille flew : 
 Werk Nummer ( W.Nr ) <unk> , sustained 50 % damage on 2 September 1940 in aerial combat and crash landed near Calais @-@ Marck . 
 W.Nr <unk> , sustained 75 % damage on 11 September 1940 in aerial combat and made an emergency landing near Wissant . 
 W.Nr 5094 , sustained 100 % damage on 23 September 1940 Marseille bailed out after aerial combat near Dover . 
 W.Nr <unk> , sustained 35 % damage on 28 September 1940 Marseille made an emergency landing after engine failure near <unk> . 
 W.Nr 1259 , sustained 80 % damage on 20 April 1941 Marseille made an emergency landing after engine failure near <unk> . 
 W.Nr <unk> , sustained 100 % damage on 23 April 1941 Marseille made an emergency landing after combat and belly landing near Tobruk . 
 W.Nr 1567 , sustained 40 % damage on 21 May 1941 in aerial combat and made an emergency landing near Tobruk . 
 Marseille flew four different Bf 109F @-@ 4 / Z aircraft : 
 Werk Nummer ( W.Nr ) <unk> , in which his score rose to 50 on 23 February 1942 
 W.Nr. <unk> , with 68 victory bars on the rudder . On 15 September 1942 this aircraft lost a wing in a midair collision when its pilot Leutnant Friedrich Hoffmann of 3 . / JG 27 collided with a Bf 109 piloted by Unteroffizier Heinrich Pein of 5 . / JG 27 . Unteroffizier Pein was killed in the resulting crash . Leutnant Hoffmann bailed out only to succumb to his injuries five weeks later . 
 W.Nr. <unk> , with the number " 70 " within an open @-@ topped wreath and 31 victory bars on the rudder 
 His final F @-@ 4 / trop , W.Nr. <unk> with the early @-@ F Variant rear @-@ fuselage horizontal support bars welded along the lower rear fuselage seam joining the fin / rudder and the stabiliser / elevators to the next forward fuselage section , a black @-@ outlined yellow 14 , and , on the rudder , " 100 " enclosed within a wreath , atop 51 victory bars . 
 = = = Death = = = 
 The two missions of 26 September 1942 had been flown in Bf 109G @-@ 2 / trop , in one of which Marseille had shot down seven enemy aircraft . The first six of these machines were to replace the Gruppe 's Bf 109Fs . All had been allocated to Marseille 's 3 Staffel . Marseille had previously ignored orders to use these new aircraft because of its high engine failure rate , but on the orders of Generalfeldmarschall Albert Kesselring , Marseille reluctantly obeyed . One of these machines , WK @-@ Nr. <unk> ( Engine : Daimler @-@ Benz DB 605 A @-@ 1 , W.Nr. 77 411 ) , was to be the final aircraft Marseille flew . 
 Over the next three days Marseille 's Staffel was rested and taken off flying duties . On 28 September Marseille received a telephone call from Generalfeldmarschall Erwin Rommel asking to return with him to Berlin . Hitler was to make a speech at the Berlin Sportpalast on 30 September and Rommel and Marseille were to attend . Marseille rejected this offer , citing that he was needed at the front and had already taken three months ' vacation that year . Marseille also revealed he wanted to take leave at Christmas , to marry his fiancée Hanne @-@ Lies <unk> . 
 On 30 September 1942 , Hauptmann Marseille was leading his Staffel on a Stuka escort mission , covering the withdrawal of the group and relieving the outward escort , III . / Jagdgeschwader 53 ( JG 53 ) , which had been deployed to support JG 27 in Africa . Marseille 's flight was vectored onto enemy aircraft in the vicinity but the enemy withdrew and did not take up combat . Marseille vectored the heading and height of the formation to Neumann who directed III . / JG 27 to engage . Marseille heard 8 . / JG 27 leader Werner Schröer claim a Spitfire over the radio at 10 : 30 . While returning to base , his new Messerschmitt Bf 109G @-@ 2 / trop 's cockpit began to fill with smoke ; blinded and half asphyxiated , he was guided back to German lines by his wingmen , Jost <unk> and Lt Rainer Pöttgen . Upon reaching friendly lines , " Yellow 14 " had lost power and was drifting lower and lower . Pöttgen called out after about 10 minutes that they had reached the White Mosque of Sidi Abdel Rahman , and were thus within friendly lines . At this point , Marseille deemed his aircraft no longer flyable and decided to bail out , his last words to his comrades being " I 've got to get out now , I can 't stand it any longer " . 
 Eduard Neumann was personally directing the mission from the command post : 
 I was at the command post and listening to the radio communication between the pilots . I realised immediately something serious had happened ; I knew they were still in flight and that they were trying to bring Marseille over the lines into our territory and that his aircraft was emitting a lot of smoke . 
 His Staffel , which had been flying a tight formation around him , peeled away to give him the necessary room to manoeuvre . Marseille rolled his aircraft onto its back , the standard procedure for bail out , but due to the smoke and slight disorientation , he failed to notice that the aircraft had entered a steep dive ( at an angle of 70 – 80 degrees ) and was now travelling at a considerably faster speed ( about 640 km / h ( 400 mph ) ) . He worked his way out of the cockpit and into the rushing air only to be carried backwards by the slipstream , the left side of his chest striking the vertical stabiliser of his fighter , either killing him instantly or rendering him unconscious to the point that he could not deploy his parachute . He fell almost vertically , hitting the desert floor 7 kilometres ( 4 @.@ 3 mi ) south of Sidi Abdel Rahman . As it transpired , a gaping 40 cm ( 16 in ) hole had been made in his parachute and the canopy had spilled out , but after recovering the body , the parachute release handle was still on " safe , " revealing Marseille had not even attempted to open it . Whilst checking the body , <unk> Dr Bick , the regimental doctor for the 115th Panzergrenadier @-@ Regiment , noted Marseille 's wristwatch had stopped at exactly 11 : 42 am . Dr. Bick had been the first to reach the crash site , having been stationed just to the rear of the forward mine defences , he had also witnessed Marseille 's fatal fall . 
 In his autopsy report , Dr. Bick stated : 
 " The pilot lay on his stomach as if asleep . His arms were hidden beneath his body . As I came closer , I saw a pool of blood that had issued from the side of his crushed skull ; brain matter was exposed . I turned the dead pilot over onto his back and opened the zipper of his flight jacket , saw the Knight 's Cross with Oak Leaves and Swords ( Marseille never actually received the Diamonds personally ) and I knew immediately who this was . The paybook also told me . " 
 Oberleutnant Ludwig Franzisket collected the body from the desert . Hans @-@ Joachim Marseille lay in state in the Staffel sick bay , his comrades coming to pay their respects throughout the day . As a tribute they put on the record " <unk> Azul " that he had enjoyed listening to ; it played over and over until the close of day . Marseille 's funeral took place on 1 October 1942 at the Heroes Cemetery in Derna with Generalfeldmarschall Albert Kesselring and Eduard Neumann delivering a eulogy . 
 The last entry in his flight book by Eduard Neumann read : " Flight duration 54 minutes , time of landing " black cross " . Took to parachute 7 kilometres ( 4 @.@ 3 mi ) south of Sidi Abdel Rahman . Remarks : Engine damage . Flights 1 – 482 , 388 combat flights and a total of 158 kills : Certified in the field 30 September 1942 " . 
 An enquiry into the crash was hastily set up . The commission 's report ( <unk> 52 , <unk> 270 / 42 ) concluded that the crash was caused by damage to the differential gear , which caused an oil leak . Then a number of teeth broke off the spur wheel and ignited the oil . Sabotage or human error was ruled out . The aircraft , W. Nr. <unk> , was ferried to the unit via Bari , Italy . The mission that ended in its destruction was its first mission . 
 = = = = Impact of Marseille 's death = = = = 
 JG 27 was moved out of Africa for about a month because of the impact Marseille 's death had on morale . The deaths of two other German aces , Günter Steinhausen and Marseille 's friend Hans @-@ Arnold Stahlschmidt , just three weeks earlier reduced spirits to an all @-@ time low . One biographer suggests these consequences were instigated by a failure in the command style of Marseille , although it was not entirely within his control . The more success Marseille had , the more his staffel relied on him to carry the greater share of aerial victories claimed by the unit . So his death , when it came , was something which JG 27 had seemingly not prepared for . 
 Historians Hans Ring and Christopher Shores also point to the fact that Marseille 's promotions were based on personal success rates more than any other reason , and other pilots did not get to score air victories , let alone become Experten themselves . They flew support as the " maestro showed them how it was done " , and often " held back from attacking enemy aircraft to build his score still higher " . As a result there was no other Experten to step into Marseille 's shoes if he was killed . Eduard Neumann explained : 
 " This handicap [ that very few pilots scored ] was partially overcome by the morale effect on the whole Geschwader of the success of pilots like Marseille . In fact most of the pilots in Marseille 's staffel acted in secondary role as escort to the " master " . " 
 Still Neumann , who was himself one of the Luftwaffe 's most able operational leaders , in the assessment of his subordinate commander 's quality was not necessarily easily <unk> : 
 " As a fighter pilot Marseille was absolutely supreme ... Above all , he possessed lightning reflexes and could make a quicker judgment in a bigger orbit than anyone else ... Marseille was unique ... " 
 Marseille 's impact on enemy fighter pilots and their morale is unclear . Andrew Thomas quoted Pilot Officer Bert Houle of No. 213 Squadron RAF ; " He was an extremely skilled pilot and a deadly shot . It was a helpless feeling to be continually bounced , and to do so little about it . " Robert Tate on the other hand is sceptical that enemy pilots would have been familiar with each other , " How well was Marseille known to DAF personnel in the Desert ? Apparently not so well . Although there is little indication that some Allied pilots may have heard of Marseille , this information did not readily make its way down to Allied Squadrons . Fanciful stories abound of how pilots knew of one another and hoped to duel with each other in the skies . This was more than likely not the case . " 
 = = Memorials = = 
 Hans @-@ Joachim Marseille appeared four times in the Deutsche Wochenschau . The first time on Wednesday 17 February 1942 when Oberst Galland , the General der Jagdflieger , visited an airport in the desert . The second time on Wednesday 1 July 1942 when Marseille travelled to Rastenburg to receive the Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross with Oak Leaves and Swords from Adolf Hitler . The third time on Wednesday 9 September 1942 announcing Marseille 's 17 aerial victories from 1 September 1942 and that he had been awarded the Diamonds to his Knight 's Cross . His last appearance dates from Wednesday 30 September 1942 showing Hauptmann Marseille visiting Erwin Rommel . 
 A wartime pyramid was constructed by Italian engineers at the site of Marseille 's fall but over time it decayed . On 22 October 1989 , Eduard Neumann and other JG 27 survivors in co @-@ operation with the Egyptian government , erected a new pyramid that stands there to this day . 
 In the weeks following Marseille 's death morale was low . In an attempt to improve morale Oberleutnant Fritz <unk> persuaded Eduard Neumann to rename 3 . / JG 27 the " Marseille Staffel " ( seen in photographs as " Staffel Marseille " ) . 
 His grave bears a one @-@ word epitaph : Undefeated . It is understood that after the war , Hans @-@ Joachim Marseille 's remains were brought from Derna and reinterred in the memorial gardens at Tobruk ; it was there that his mother visited his grave in 1954 . His remains are now in a small clay coffin ( sarcophagus ) bearing the number <unk> . 
 In 1957 , a German film , Der Stern von Afrika ( The Star of Africa ) directed by Alfred <unk> , was made starring Joachim Hansen as Hans @-@ Joachim Marseille . 
 On 24 October 1975 , the <unk> 's <unk> @-@ <unk> Barracks was renamed the " Marseille Barracks " . 
 The Memorial of the Reuter @-@ Marseille family can be found in the graveyard in Berlin , Alt @-@ Schöneberg . The left side bears the insignia . 
 The tail rudder of his second to last Messerschmitt Bf 109F @-@ 4 / trop ( Werknummer <unk> ) now bearing 158 victory marks is on display at Luftwaffenmuseum der Bundeswehr in Berlin Gatow . It had initially been given to his family as a gift by Hermann Göring and was donated to the museum in the 1970s . 
 Twenty @-@ five years after Marseille 's death , fighter pilot veterans of World War II gathered to honour Marseille at an " International Fighter Pilots Meeting " on 7 – 8 October 1967 at Fürstenfeldbruck . Attending this meeting were fighter pilots from six different countries , including Erich Hartmann , Robert Stanford Tuck , Adolf Galland , Günther Rall and Mike Martin , who was shot down by Marseille on 3 June 1942 . The guests of honour at this meeting were Marseille 's mother , Frau Charlotte Reuter @-@ Marseille and his ex @-@ fiancée Hanne @-@ Lies . 
 The 16th Deutsches Afrikakorps reunion took place on 1 – 2 September 1984 in Stuttgart . The German <unk> invited as guest of honour Corporal Mathew P. <unk> from South Africa . Matthew , alias Mathias to everyone in JG 27 , was a black South African soldier taken prisoner of war by German troops on the morning of 21 June 1941 at fortress Tobruk . Mathias initially worked as a volunteer driver with 3 . Staffel then befriended Marseille and became his domestic helper in Africa . 
 = = Victory claims and notable actions = = 
 Fähnrich Hans @-@ Joachim Marseille was transferred to his first combat assignment with the I. ( Jagd ) / Lehrgeschwader 2 at the time stationed at Calais @-@ Marck on Sunday 10 August 1940 . Two days later he arrived at this unit on 12 August 1940 . 
 He was assigned to the 1 . Staffel of this Gruppe . Staffelkapitän was Oberleutnant Adolf Buhl . One of the Schwarmführer was Oberfeldwebel Helmut <unk> , to whom Marseille was assigned as wingman . Marseille already flew his very first combat mission on the next day , Wednesday 13 August 1940 and claimed his first aerial victory on 24 August 1940 . In over little more than two years he would amass another 157 aerial victories . His 158 aerial victories were claimed in 382 combat missions . 
 This and the ♠ ( Ace of spades ) indicates those days which made Marseille an ace @-@ in @-@ a @-@ day , a term which designates a fighter pilot who has shot down five or more airplanes in a single day . This indicates that the aerial combat report is missing from the German Federal Archives . This indicates that Australian historian Russell Brown has expressed doubt regarding the veracity of Marseille 's claims . 
 Marseille 's 151 claims in North Africa included : 
 101 Curtiss P @-@ 40 Tomahawk / Kittyhawk fighters ; 
 30 Hawker Hurricane fighters ; 
 16 Supermarine Spitfire fighters ; 
 Two Martin A @-@ 30 Baltimore bombers ; 
 One Bristol Blenheim bomber ; and 
 One Martin Maryland bomber . 
 The German Federal Archives still hold records for 109 of Marseille aerial victories . A further biographer of Marseille , Walter <unk> , has made an attempt to link these records to Allied units , squadrons and when possible even to individual pilots , in order to verify the claims as much as possible . 
 = = = Dispute over claims = = = 
 Some serious discrepancies between Allied squadron records and German claims have caused some historians and Allied veterans to question the accuracy of Marseille 's official victories , in addition to those of JG 27 as a whole . Attention is often focused on the 26 claims made by JG 27 on 1 September 1942 , of which 17 were claimed by Marseille alone . Another biographer , Franz Kurowski , claims that 24 of the 26 victories were verified through Allied records after the war . A USAF historian , Major Robert Tate states : " [ f ] or years , many British historians and militarists refused to admit that they had lost any aircraft that day in North Africa . Careful review of records however do show that the British [ and South Africans ] did lose more than 17 aircraft that day , and in the area that Marseille operated . " Tate also reveals 20 RAF single @-@ engined fighters and one twin engined fighter were destroyed and several others severely damaged , as well as a further USAAF P @-@ 40 shot down . However , overall Tate reveals that Marseille 's kill total comes close to 65 – 70 percent corroboration , indicating as many as 50 of his claims may not have been actually kills . Tate also compares Marseilles rate of corroboration with the top six P @-@ 40 pilots . While only the Canadian James Francis Edwards ' records shows a verification of 100 percent other aces like Clive Caldwell ( 50 % to 60 % corroboration ) , Billy Drake ( 70 % to 80 % corroboration ) , John Lloyd Waddy ( 70 % to 80 % corroboration ) and Andrew Barr ( 60 % to 70 % corroboration ) are at the same order of magnitude as Marseille 's claims . Christopher Shores and Hans Ring also support Tate 's conclusions . British historian Stephen Bungay gives a figure of 20 Allied losses that day . 
 However , the claims for 15 September 1942 are in serious doubt , following the first detailed scrutiny of the records of individual Allied squadrons by Australian historian Russell Brown . Moreover , Brown lists three occasions on which Marseille could not have downed as many aircraft as claimed . 
 Stephan Bungay has pointed out the low military value of shooting down DAF fighters , rather than the bombers that , by mid @-@ 1942 , were having a highly damaging effect on Axis ground units and convoy routes . Referring to 1 September 1942 , Bungay points out that even if Marseille shot down 15 of the 17 he claimed that day , " the rest of the 100 or so German fighter pilots between them only got five . The British [ sic ] lost no bombers at all ... During this period the DAF lost only a few bombers , but all fell to anti @-@ aircraft defences and evidence shows that Rommel was forced onto the defensive because of the losses inflicted by bombers . 
 = = Summary of career = = 
 = = = Decorations = = = 
 Sometime in the early 1990s , one of Marseille 's biographers , Robert Tate , visited the former Marseille @-@ Kaserne base and Museum to see and photograph Marseille 's medals . When he arrived , Tate was informed the Knights Cross , Oak Leaves , Swords and Diamonds belonging to Marseille had already been stolen . 
 = = = Wehrmachtbericht references = = = 
 = = = Dates of rank = = = 
 Hans @-@ Joachim Marseille joined the military service in Wehrmacht on 7 November 1938 . His first station was Quedlinburg in the Harz region where he received his military basic training as a Luftwaffe recruit . 
 = = = Stations of operation = = = 
 Hans @-@ Joachim Marseille , after he had completed his training at the Jagdfliegerschule 5 , was assigned to the Ergänzungsjagdgruppe Merseburg stationed at the airport in Merseburg @-@ West . 
 Ergänzungsjagdgruppe Merseburg 
 I. ( Jagd ) / LG 2 
 II . / JG 52 
 I. / JG 27 
 = = = Absence from the Geschwader = = = 
 = = Marseille and his environment = = 
 Several biographers of Hans @-@ Joachim Marseille have written about his <unk> for authority and for the National Socialist movement in general . This first came to the fore in the movie , The Star of Africa , the fictionalised 1957 movie about his life , which described an incident that occurred shortly after Marseille was presented the Swords to the Knight 's Cross . The young Oberleutnant , while on visit in Germany , was presented with evidence of the Final Solution ( Holocaust ) . Shocked by this information , he did not return to North Africa but went into hiding in Italy instead . Only after the Gestapo established his whereabouts and pressured him did he return to his Geschwader . 
 Further research by other biographers has unearthed some truth to this story and his attitude to the ruling Nazi movement . Marseille demonstrated his lack of respect for the Nazi elite during his visit to Germany in June – August 1942 . Marseille was a gifted pianist and was invited to play a piece at the home of Willy Messerschmitt , an industrialist and designer of the Messerschmitt Bf 109 fighter Marseille had achieved so much success in . Guests at the party included Adolf Hitler , party chairman Martin Borman , Hitler 's deputy and Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief of the Luftwaffe , Hermann Göring , head of the SS , Heinrich Himmler and Reich Minister of Propaganda Joseph Goebbels . After impressing with a display of piano play for over an hour , including Ludwig van Beethoven 's Für Elise , Marseille proceeded to play American Jazz , which was considered degenerate in Nazi ideology . Hitler stood , raised his hand , and said " I think we 've heard enough " and left the room . Magda Goebbels found the prank amusing and Artur Axmann recalled how his " blood froze " when he heard this " Ragtime " music being played in front of the Führer . 
 Later that month Marseille was invited to another function , despite his stunt . Obergruppenführer Karl Wolff , <unk> Stab Reichsführer @-@ SS to the Reichsführer @-@ SS Heinrich Himmler , confirmed that during his visit Marseille overheard a conversation which mentioned the mistreatment of Jews . He stated : 
 Globocnik and I were talking about Operation Reinhard , which was in full effect following Heydrich 's murder , and also the construction of Sobibor and Treblinka . I know I asked him about Höss , who was also standing there and had been summoned by Himmler regarding logistics or something regarding the new camp ( Auschwitz ) . Then Globocnik mentioned to me and Kaltenbrunner that Lidice had been cleared , and all the Jews and Czechs had been dealt with . I noticed that this young pilot , who I later learned was Marseille , must have overheard , and I debated whether I should go over and say something to him . I decided against it . 
 When Marseille returned to his unit he asked his friends Franzisket , Clade and Schröer , whether they had heard what was happening to Jews and if perhaps something was underway that they did not know about . <unk> recalled that he had heard Jews were being relocated to territory gained in the East but no more . Marseille recounted how he had attempted to ask questions about Jews who had vanished from his neighbourhood , including the family doctor that had delivered him at birth . Regardless of his hero status , when he attempted to bring the subject into any conversation with people who approached him , his enquiries were either met with awkward silences , or people changed the subject or even turned away . Franzisket noticed a change in Marseille 's attitude toward his nation 's cause . He never spoke of this with his comrades again . 
 = Indigenous people of the Everglades region = 
 The indigenous people of the Everglades region arrived in the Florida peninsula of what is now the United States approximately 14 @,@ 000 to 15 @,@ 000 years ago , probably following large game . The Paleo @-@ Indians found an arid landscape that supported plants and animals adapted to prairie and xeric scrub conditions . Large animals became extinct in Florida around 11 @,@ 000 years ago . Climate changes 6 @,@ 500 years ago brought a wetter landscape . The Paleo @-@ Indians slowly adapted to the new conditions . Archaeologists call the cultures that resulted from the adaptations Archaic peoples . They were better suited for environmental changes than their ancestors , and created many tools with the resources they had . Approximately 5 @,@ 000 years ago , the climate shifted again to cause the regular flooding from Lake Okeechobee that gave rise to the Everglades ecosystems . 
 From the Archaic peoples , two major tribes emerged in the area : the Calusa and the Tequesta , who were of Taíno origin , an Arawak people , originating from the Caribbean and South America . The earliest written descriptions of these people come from Spanish explorers who sought to convert and conquer them . Although they lived in complex societies , little evidence of their existence remains today . The Calusa were more powerful in number and political structure . Their territory was centered on modern @-@ day Ft . Myers , and extended as far north as Tampa , as far east as Lake Okeechobee , and as far south as the Keys . The Tequesta lived on the southeastern coast of the Florida peninsula around what is today Biscayne Bay and the Miami River . Both societies were well adapted to live in the various ecosystems of the Everglades regions . They often traveled through the heart of the Everglades , though they rarely lived within it . 
 After more than 210 years of relations with the Spanish , both indigenous societies lost cohesiveness . Official records indicate that survivors of war and disease were transported to Havana in the late 18th century . Isolated groups may have been assimilated into the Seminole nation , which formed in northern Florida when a band of Creeks consolidated surviving members of pre @-@ Columbian societies in Florida into their own to become a distinct tribe . Seminoles were forced into the Everglades by the U.S. military during the Seminole Wars from 1835 to 1842 . The U.S. military pursued the Seminoles into the region , which resulted in some of the first recorded explorations of much of the area . Seminoles continue to live in the Everglades region , and support themselves with casino gambling on six reservations located throughout the state . 
 = = Prehistoric peoples = = 
 Humans first inhabited the peninsula of Florida approximately 14 @,@ 000 to 15 @,@ 000 years ago when it looked vastly different . The west coast extended about 100 miles ( 160 km ) to the west of its current location . The landscape had large dunes and sweeping winds characteristic of an arid region , and pollen samples show foliage was limited to small stands of oak , and scrub bushes . As Earth 's glacial ice retreated , winds slowed and vegetation became more prevalent and varied . The Paleo @-@ Indian diets were dominated by small plants and the wild game available , which included saber @-@ toothed cats , ground sloths , and spectacled bears . The Pleistocene megafauna died out around 11 @,@ 000 years ago . Around 6 @,@ 500 years ago , the climate of Florida changed again during the Holocene climatic optimum and became much wetter . Paleo @-@ Indians spent more time in camps and less time traveling between sources of water . 
 The Paleo @-@ Indians that survived are now known as the Archaic peoples of the Florida peninsula . They lived on after the extinction of most big game and were primarily hunter @-@ gatherers who depended on smaller game and fish . They relied on plants for food more than their ancestors . They were able to adapt to the shifting climate and the resulting change of animal and plant populations . 
 Florida experienced a prolonged drought at the onset of the Early Archaic era that lasted until the Middle Archaic period . Although the population decreased overall on the peninsula , the use of tools increased significantly during this time . Artifacts demonstrate that these people used drills , knives , choppers , atlatls , and awls made from stone , antlers , and bone . 
 During the Late Archaic period , the climate became wetter again and by approximately 3000 BCE the rise of water tables allowed an increase in population . Cultural development also took place . Florida Indians formed into three similar but distinct cultures : Okeechobee , Caloosahatchee , and Glades , named for the bodies of water where they were centered . 
 The Glades culture is divided into three periods based on evidence found in middens . In 1947 , archaeologist John Goggin described the three periods after examining shell mounds . He excavated one on Matecumbe Key , another at Gordon Pass near modern @-@ day Naples , and a third south of Lake Okeechobee near modern @-@ day Belle Glade . The Glades I culture , lasting from 500 BCE to 800 CE , was apparently focused around Gordon Pass and is considered the least sophisticated due to the lack of artifacts . What has been found — primarily pottery — is gritty and plain . With the advent of a well @-@ established culture in 800 CE , the Glades II period is characterized by more ornate pottery , wide use of tools throughout the South Florida region , and the appearance of religious artifacts at burial sites . By 1200 , the Glades III culture exhibited the height of their development . Pottery became ornate enough to be subdivided into types of decoration . More importantly , evidence of an expanding culture is revealed through the development of ceremonial ornaments made from shell , and the construction of large earthworks associated with burial rituals . From the Glades III culture developed two distinct tribes that lived in and near the Everglades : the Calusa and the Tequesta . 
 = = Calusa = = 
 What is known of the inhabitants of Florida after 1566 was recorded by European explorers and settlers . Juan Ponce de León is credited as the first European to have contact with Florida 's indigenous people in 1513 . Ponce de León met with hostility from tribes that may have been the Ais and the Tequesta before rounding Cape Sable to meet the Calusa , the largest and most powerful tribe in South Florida . Ponce de León found at least one of the Calusa fluent in Spanish . The explorer assumed the Spanish @-@ speaker was from Hispaniola , but anthropologists have suggested that communication and trade between Calusa and native people in Cuba and the Florida Keys was common , or that Ponce de León was not the first Spaniard to make contact with the native people of Florida . During his second visit to South Florida , Ponce de León was killed by the Calusa , and the tribe gained a reputation for violence , causing future explorers to avoid them . In the more than 200 years the Calusa had relations with the Spanish , they were able to resist their attempts to <unk> them . 
 The Calusa were referred to as Carlos by the Spanish , which may have sounded like <unk> , a variation of the Muskogean word <unk> meaning " black " or " powerful " . Much of what is known about the Calusa was provided by Hernando de Escalante Fontaneda . Fontaneda was a 13 @-@ year @-@ old boy who was the only survivor of a shipwreck off the coast of Florida in 1545 . For seventeen years he lived with the Calusa until explorer Pedro Menéndez de Avilés found him in 1566 . Menéndez took Fontaneda to Spain where he wrote about his experiences . Menéndez approached the Calusa with the intention of establishing relations with them to ease the settlement of the future Spanish colony . The chief , or cacique , was named Carlos by the Spanish . Positions of importance in Calusa society were given the adopted names Carlos and Philip , transliterated from Spanish royal tradition . However , the cacique Carlos described by Fontaneda was the most powerful chief during Spanish colonization . Menéndez married his sister in order to facilitate relations between the Spanish and the Calusa . This arrangement was common in societies in South Florida people . Polygamy was a method of solving disputes or settling agreements between rival towns . Menéndez , however , was already married and expressed discomfort with the union . Unable to avoid the marriage , he took Carlos ' sister to Havana where she was educated , and where one account reported that she died years later , the marriage never consummated . 
 Fontaneda explained in his 1571 memoir that Carlos controlled fifty villages located on Florida 's west coast , around Lake Okeechobee ( which they called <unk> ) and on the Florida Keys ( which they called <unk> ) . Smaller tribes of Ais and Jaega who lived to the east of Lake Okeechobee , paid regular tributes to Carlos . The Spanish suspected the Calusa of harvesting treasures from shipwrecks and distributing the gold and silver between the Ais and Jaega , with Carlos receiving the majority . The main village of the Calusa , and home of Carlos , bordered Estero Bay at present @-@ day Mound Key where the Caloosahatchee River meets the Gulf of Mexico . Fontaneda described human sacrifice as a common practice : when the child of a cacique died , each resident gave up a child to be sacrificed , and when the cacique died , his servants were sacrificed to join him . Each year a Christian was required to be sacrificed to appease a Calusa idol . The building of shell mounds of varying sizes and shapes was also of spiritual significance to the Calusa . In 1895 Frank Hamilton Cushing excavated a massive shell mound on Key Marco that was composed of several constructed terraces hundreds of yards long . Cushing unearthed over a thousand Calusa artifacts . Among them he found tools made of bone and shell , pottery , human bones , masks , and animal carvings made of wood . 
 The Calusa , like their predecessors , were hunter @-@ gatherers who existed on small game , fish , turtles , alligators , shellfish , and various plants . Finding little use for the soft limestone of the area , they made most of their tools from bone or teeth , although they also found sharpened reeds effective . Weapons consisted of bows and arrows , atlatls , and spears . Most villages were located at the mouths of rivers or on key islands . They used canoes for transportation , as evidenced by shell mounds in and around the Everglades that border canoe trails . South Florida tribes often canoed through the Everglades , but rarely lived in them . Canoe trips to Cuba were also common . 
 Calusa villages often had more than 200 inhabitants , and their society was organized in a hierarchy . Apart from the cacique , other strata included priests and warriors . Family bonds promoted the hierarchy , and marriage between siblings was common among the elite . Fontaneda wrote , " These Indians have no gold , no silver , and less clothing . They go naked except for some breech cloths woven of palms , with which the men cover themselves ; the women do the like with certain grass that grows on trees . This grass looks like wool , although it is different from it " . Only one instance of structures was described : Carlos met Menéndez in a large house with windows and room for over a thousand people . 
 The Spanish found Carlos uncontrollable , as their priests and the Calusa fought almost constantly . Carlos was killed when a Spanish soldier shot him with a crossbow . Following the death of cacique Carlos , leadership of the society passed to two caciques who were captured and killed by the Spanish . Estimated numbers of Calusa at the beginning of the occupation of the Spanish ranged from 4 @,@ 000 to 7 @,@ 000 . The society endured a decline of power and population after Carlos ; by 1697 their number was estimated to be about 1 @,@ 000 . In the early 18th century , the Calusa came under attack from the Yamasee to the north ; many asked to be removed to Cuba , where almost 200 died of illness . Some of these later relocated to Florida , and remnants may have been eventually assimilated into the Seminole culture , which developed during the 18th century . 
 = = Tequesta = = 
 Second in power and number to the Calusa in South Florida were the Tequesta ( also called <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> ) . They occupied the southeastern portion of the lower peninsula in modern @-@ day Dade and Broward counties . They may have been controlled by the Calusa , but accounts state that they sometimes refused to comply with the Calusa caciques , which resulted in war . Like the Calusa , they rarely lived within the Everglades , but found the coastal prairies and pine rocklands to the east of the freshwater sloughs habitable . To the north , their territory was bordered by the Ais and Jaega . Like the Calusa , the Tequesta societies centered on the mouths of rivers . Their main village was probably on the Miami River or Little River . A large shell mound on the Little River marks where a village once stood . Though little remains of the Tequesta society , a site of archeological importance called the Miami Circle was discovered in 1998 in downtown Miami . It may be the remains of a Tequesta structure . Its significance has yet to be determined , though archeologists and anthropologists continue to study it . 
 The Spanish described the Tequesta as greatly feared by their sailors , who suspected the natives of torturing and killing survivors of shipwrecks . Spanish priests wrote that the Tequesta performed child sacrifices to mark the occasion of making peace with a tribe with whom they had been fighting . Like the Calusa , the Tequesta hunted small game , but depended more upon roots and less on shellfish in their diets . They did not practice cultivated agriculture . They were skilled canoeists and hunted in the open ocean for what Fontaneda described as whales , but were probably manatees . They lassoed the manatees and drove a stake through their snouts . 
 The first contact with Spanish explorers occurred in 1513 when Juan Ponce de León stopped at a bay he called Chequescha , or Biscayne Bay . Finding the Tequesta unwelcoming , he left to make contact with the Calusa . Menéndez met the Tequesta in 1565 and maintained a friendly relationship with them , building some houses and setting up a mission . He also took the chief 's nephew to Havana to be educated , and the chief 's brother to Spain . After Menéndez visited , there are few records of the Tequesta : a reference to them in 1673 , and further Spanish contact to convert them . The last reference to the Tequesta during their existence was written in 1743 by a Spanish priest named Father <unk> , who described their ongoing assault by another tribe . The survivors numbered only 30 , and the Spanish transported them to Havana . In 1770 a British surveyor described multiple deserted villages in the region where the Tequesta had lived . Archeologist John Goggin suggested that by the time European Americans settled the area in 1820 , any remaining Tequesta were assimilated into the Seminole people . Common descriptions of Native Americans in Florida by 1820 identified only the " Seminoles " . 
 = = Seminole / Miccosukee = = 
 Following the demise of the Calusa and Tequesta , Native Americans in southern Florida were referred to as " Spanish Indians " in the 1740s , probably due to their friendlier relations with Spain . Between the Spanish defeat in the Seven Years ' War in 1763 and the end of the American War of Independence in 1783 , the United Kingdom ruled Florida . The first known use of the term " <unk> " is from a British Indian agent in a document dated 1771 . The beginnings of the tribe are vague , but records show that Creeks invaded the Florida peninsula , conquering and assimilating what was left of pre @-@ Columbian societies into the Creek Confederacy . The mixing of cultures is evident in the language influences present among the Seminoles : various Muskogean languages , notably <unk> , and Creek , as well as Timucuan . In the early 19th century , a US Indian agent explained the Seminoles this way : " The word Seminole means runaway or broken off . Hence ... applicable to all the Indians in the Territory of Florida as all of them ran away ... from the Creek ... Nation " . Linguistically , the term " Seminole " comes from the Creek words Sua ( Sun God ) , ma ( mother , although in this connotation it is pejorative ) , and ol ( people ) to mean " people whom the Sun God does not love " , or " accursed " . 
 Creeks , who were centered in modern @-@ day Alabama and Georgia , were known to incorporate conquered tribes into their own . Some Africans escaping slavery from South Carolina and Georgia fled to Florida , lured by Spanish promises of freedom should they convert to Catholicism , and found their way into the tribe . Seminoles originally settled in the northern portion of the territory , but the 1823 Treaty of Moultrie Creek forced them to live on a 5 @-@ million @-@ acre ( 20 @,@ 000 km2 ) reservation north of Lake Okeechobee . They soon ranged farther south , where they numbered approximately 300 in the Everglades region , including bands of <unk> — a similar tribe who spoke a different language — who lived in The Big Cypress . Unlike the Calusa and Tequesta , the Seminole depended more on agriculture and raised domesticated animals . They hunted for what they ate , and traded with European @-@ American settlers . They lived in structures called chickees , open @-@ sided palm @-@ thatched huts , probably adapted from the Calusa . 
 In 1817 , Andrew Jackson invaded Florida to hasten its annexation to the United States in what became the First Seminole War . After Florida became a U.S. territory and settlement increased , conflicts between colonists and Seminoles became more frequent . The Second Seminole War ( 1835 – 1842 ) resulted in almost 4 @,@ 000 Seminoles in Florida being displaced or killed . The Seminole Wars pushed the Indians farther south and into the Everglades . Those who did not find refuge in the Everglades were relocated to Oklahoma Indian territory under Indian Removal . 
 The Third Seminole War lasted from 1855 to 1859 . Over its course , 20 Seminoles were killed and 240 were removed . By 1913 , Seminoles in the Everglades numbered no more than 325 . They made their villages in hardwood hammocks , islands of hardwood trees that formed in rivers or pine rockland forests . Seminole diets consisted of hominy and coontie roots , fish , turtles , venison , and small game . Villages were not large , due to the limited size of hammocks , which on average measured between one and 10 acres ( 40 @,@ 000 m2 ) . In the center of the village was a cook @-@ house , and the largest structure was reserved for eating . When the Seminoles lived in northern Florida , they wore animal @-@ skin clothing similar to their Creek predecessors . The heat and humidity of the Everglades influenced their adapting a different style of dress . Seminoles replaced their heavier buckskins with clothing of unique calico patchwork designs made of lighter cotton , or silk for more formal occasions . 
 The Seminole Wars increased the U.S. military presence in the Everglades , which resulted in the exploration and mapping of many regions that had not previously been recorded . The military officers who had done the mapping and charting of the Everglades were approached by Thomas Buckingham Smith in 1848 to consult on the feasibility of draining the region for agricultural use . 
 = = = Modern times = = = 
 Between the end of the Third Seminole War and 1930 , a few hundred Seminoles continued to live in relative isolation in the Everglades area . Flood control and drainage projects in the area beginning in the early 20th century opened up much land for development and significantly altered the natural environment , inundating some areas while leaving former swamps dry and arable . These projects , along with the completion of the Tamiami Trail which bisected the Everglades in 1930 , simultaneously ended old ways of life and introduced new opportunities . A steady stream of white developers and tourists came to the area , and the native people began to work in local farms , ranches , and souvenir stands . They cleared land for the town of Everglades , and were " the best fire fighters [ the National Park Service ] could recruit " when Everglades National Park caught fire in times of drought . 
 As metropolitan areas in South Florida began to grow , the Miccosukee branch of the Seminoles became closely associated with the Everglades , simultaneously seeking privacy and serving as a tourist attraction , wrestling alligators , selling crafts , and giving eco @-@ tours of their land . As of 2008 , there were six Seminole and Miccosukee reservations throughout Florida ; they feature casino gaming that supports the tribe . 
 = Mikhail Suslov = 
 Mikhail Andreyevich Suslov ( Russian : <unk> ́ л Андре ́ евич Су ́ <unk> ; 21 November [ O.S. 8 November ] 1902 – 25 January 1982 ) was a Soviet statesman during the Cold War . He served as Second Secretary of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union from 1965 , and as unofficial Chief Ideologue of the Party until his death in 1982 . Suslov was responsible for party democracy and the power separation within the Communist Party . His hardline attitude toward change made him one of the foremost anti @-@ reformist Soviet leaders . 
 Born in rural Russia in 1902 , Suslov became a member of the All @-@ Union Communist Party ( Bolsheviks ) in 1921 and studied economics for much of the 1920s . He left his job as a teacher in 1931 to pursue politics full @-@ time , becoming one of the many Soviet politicians who took part in the mass repression begun by Joseph Stalin 's regime . Suslov impressed the Soviet leadership to such an extent in the pre @-@ Eastern Front Soviet Union that he was made First Secretary of Stavropol Krai administrative area . During the war , Suslov headed the local Stavropol guerrilla movement . He became a member of the Organisational Bureau ( Orgburo ) of the Central Committee in 1946 and , four years later , was elected to the Presidium ( Politburo ) of the All @-@ Union Communist Party . 
 Suslov lost much of the recognition and influence he had earned following the reshuffle of the Soviet leadership after Stalin 's death . However , by the late 1950s , Suslov had risen to become the leader of the hardline opposition to Nikita Khrushchev 's revisionist leadership . After Khrushchev was ousted in 1964 , Suslov supported the establishment of a collective leadership . He also supported inner @-@ party democracy and opposed the reestablishment of the one @-@ man rule as seen during the Stalin and Khrushchev Eras . During the Brezhnev Era , Suslov was considered to be the Party 's Chief Ideologue and second @-@ in @-@ command . His death on 25 January 1982 is viewed as starting the battle to succeed Leonid Brezhnev in the post of General Secretary . 
 = = Early years and career = = 
 Suslov was born in <unk> , a rural locality in Pavlovsky District , Ulyanovsk Oblast , Russian Empire on 21 November 1902 . Suslov began work in the local Komsomol organisation in Saratov in 1918 , eventually becoming a member of the Poverty Relief Committee . After working in the Komsomol for nearly three years , Suslov became a member of the All @-@ Union Communist Party ( the Bolsheviks ) in 1921 . After graduating from the rabfak , he studied economics at the Plekhanov Institute of National Economy between 1924 – 1928 . In the summer of 1928 , after graduating from the Plekhanov institute , he became a graduate student ( research fellow ) in economics at the Institute of Red Professors , teaching at Moscow State University and at the Industrial Academy . 
 In 1931 he abandoned teaching in favour of the party apparatus . He became an inspector on the Communist Party 's Party Control Commission and on the People 's Commissariat of the Workers ' and Peasants ' Inspectorate . His main task there was to adjudicate on large numbers of " personal cases " , breaches of discipline , and appeals against expulsion from the party . In 1933 and 1934 Suslov directed a commission charged with purging the party in the Ural and Chernigov provinces . The purge was organised by Lazar Kaganovich , then Chairman of the Soviet Control Commission . Author Yuri <unk> contends that Suslov was involved with setting up several show trials , and contributed to the Party by expelling all members deviating from the Party line , meaning Trotskyists , <unk> , and other left @-@ wing <unk> . On the orders of Joseph Stalin , Suslov purged the city of Rostov in 1938 . Suslov was made First Secretary of the Stavropol Krai 's Communist Party in 1939 . 
 = = = Wartime activities = = = 
 On the Eastern Front in World War II ( also known in Russia as the " Great Patriotic War " ) , Suslov was a member of the Military Soviet of the Northern Group of Forces and led the Stavropol Krai Headquarters of the Partisan Divisions ( the local guerrilla movement ) . According to Soviet historiography , Suslov 's years as a guerrilla fighter were highly successful ; however , testimonies from participants differ from the official account . These participants claim that there were a number of organisational problems which reduced their effectiveness on the battlefield . During the war , Suslov spent much of his time mobilising workers to fight against the German invaders . The guerrilla movement he led was operated by the regional party cells . During the liberation of the Northern Caucasus , Suslov maintained close contact with the Red Army . 
 During the war , Suslov supervised the deportations of Chechens and other Muslim minorities from the Caucasus . In 1944 – 1946 , he chaired the Central Committee Bureau for Lithuanian Affairs . Anti @-@ Soviet samizdat literature from the height of his power in the 1970s would accuse him of being personally responsible for the deportation and killings of nationalist Lithuanians who became political opponents of the Soviets during the course of Soviet re @-@ entry into the Baltic states on their drive to Berlin in 1944 . Suslov , in the words of historian Simon Sebag @-@ Montefiore , " brutally purged " the Baltics in the aftermath of the Great Patriotic War . 
 = = = Stalin 's protégé = = = 
 In 1946 , Suslov was made a member of the Orgburo , and immediately became the Head of the Foreign Policy Department of the Central Committee . Within a year , Suslov was appointed Head of the Central Committee Department for Agitation and Propaganda . He also became a harsh critic of the Jewish Anti @-@ Fascist Committee in the post @-@ war years . In 1947 Suslov was transferred to Moscow and elected to the Central Committee Secretariat ; he would retain this seat for the rest of his life . Suslov had the full confidence of Stalin , and in 1948 , he was entrusted with the task of speaking on behalf of the Central Committee before a solemn meeting on the twenty @-@ fourth anniversary of Vladimir Lenin 's death . From September 1949 to 1950 he was editor @-@ in @-@ chief of the central Party daily Pravda . 
 In 1949 Suslov became a member , along with Georgy Malenkov , Lavrentiy Beria , and Lazar Kaganovich , of a commission created to investigate charges levied against Moscow 's local Communist Party First Secretary , Georgy Popov . Russian historian Roy Medvedev speculates in his book , <unk> Stalin , that Stalin had made Suslov his " secret heir " . In June 1950 Suslov was elected to the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet . He was promoted to the CPSU Presidium ( later known as the Politburo ) in 1952 following the 19th Party Congress . He suffered a temporary reversal when Stalin died , and was dismissed from the Presidium in 1953 . He continued to work in the Supreme Soviet , even becoming Chairman of the Commission of Foreign Affairs in the years immediately following Stalin 's death . 
 = = Khrushchev era = = 
 Suslov recovered his authority in 1955 , and was elected to a seat in the Presidium , bypassing the customary candidate membership . In the 20th Party Congress of 1956 , Khrushchev delivered the famous Secret Speech about Stalin 's cult of personality . In Suslov 's ideological report on 16 February , he updated his criticism of Stalin and his personality cult : 
 " ( They ) caused considerable harm to both organisational and ideological party work . They belittled the role of the masses and the role of the Party , disparaged collective leadership , undermined inner @-@ party democracy , suppressed the <unk> of party members , their initiative and enterprise , led to lack of control , irresponsibility , and even arbitrariness in the work of individuals , prevented the development of criticism and self @-@ criticism , and gave rise to one @-@ sided and at times mistaken decisions . " 
 During the Hungarian Revolution of 1956 , Suslov , along with Anastas Mikoyan , operated in close proximity to Budapest in order to direct the activities of the Soviet troops and to lend assistance to the new Hungarian leadership . Suslov and Mikoyan attended the Politburo meeting of the Hungarian Socialist Workers ' Party which elected János Kádár to the General Secretaryship . In a telegram to the Soviet leadership , Suslov and Mikoyan acknowledged that the situation had become more dire , but both were content with the dismissal of Ernő Gerő as General Secretary and the choice of Kádár as his successor . The Presidium of the Supreme Soviet criticised Suslov 's and Mikoyan 's concessions to the new revolutionary government in the People 's Republic of Hungary . Despite his initial reservations , Suslov eventually supported the Presidium 's decision to intervene in Hungary militarily and replace the counterrevolutionary government 's leadership there . 
 In June 1957 Suslov backed Khrushchev during his struggle with the Anti @-@ Party Group led by Georgy Malenkov , Vyacheslav Molotov , Lazar Kaganovich , and Dmitry <unk> . Mikoyan later wrote in his memoirs that he convinced Suslov to support Khrushchev by telling him that Khrushchev would emerge the winner even if he did not have enough support in the Presidium . The following October Suslov accused Georgy Zhukov , the Minister of Defence , of " <unk> " at the Central Committee plenum that removed him from all Party and government posts . The removal of Zhukov had the effect of firmly subordinating the armed forces to Party control . 
 In a speech on 22 January 1958 , Khrushchev officially proposed to dissolve the Machine and Tractor Stations ( MTS ) . This reform had a particular salience on Soviet ideology . In a socialist society , cooperative ownership of property was considered a " lower " form of public ownership than state ownership . Khrushchev 's proposal to expand cooperative ownership ran contrary to the Marxist theory as interpreted by Stalin . Suslov , who supported Stalin 's economic policy , regarded Khrushchev 's proposal as unacceptable on ideological grounds . In an election speech to the Supreme Soviet in March 1958 , Suslov refused to recognise the ideological significance of Khrushchev 's reform , preferring instead to focus on the reform 's practical benefits in improving productivity . Unlike other Party leaders , Suslov avoided mentioning Khrushchev as the MTS reform 's initiator . 
 The 21st Party Congress convened in January 1959 . Khrushchev wanted to consider the draft of a new Seven @-@ Year plan . Suslov cautiously demonstrated against Khrushchev 's statement that the country had developed from the socialist state of development to the higher state of communist development . He saw Khrushchev 's view as flawed , and countered that his view had not been approved by the Party . To discredit Khrushchev 's assertion further , Suslov deferred to Karl Marx and Vladimir Lenin : 
 " Marx and Lenin teach us that communism doesn 't appear suddenly , but comes into existence , matures , develops , passes in its development through definite stages or phases .... The new period in the development of Soviet society will be marked by the gradual drawing together of two forms of socialist property – state and kolkhoz ... The process of these social changes will be long , and understandably , cannot end in the course of a seven year period . " 
 Suslov was becoming progressively more critical of Khrushchev 's policies , his political intransigence , and his campaign to eliminate what was left of the old Stalinist guard . There were also deep @-@ seated divergences in foreign and domestic policy between Suslov and Khrushchev . Suslov opposed the idea of improving Soviet – United States relations , and was against Khrushchev 's attempts at rapprochement with Yugoslavia . Domestically , Suslov opposed Khrushchev 's policy of de @-@ Stalinisation and his economic decentralisation scheme . 
 Suslov visited the United Kingdom in 1959 as a parliamentarian for the Supreme Soviet . The visit was a success , and Hugh Gaitskell , the Leader of the Labour Party , travelled to the Soviet Union later that year as a guest . 
 Sino – Soviet relations had long been strained , and as Suslov told the Central Committee in one his reports , " The crux of the matter is that the Leadership of the CCP has recently developed tendencies to exaggerate the degree of maturity of socialist relations in China ... There are elements of conceit and haughtiness . [ These shortcomings ] are largely explained by the atmosphere of the cult of personality of comrade Mao Zedong ... who , by all accounts , himself has come to believe in his own infallibility . " Suslov compared Mao 's growing personality cult with that seen under Joseph Stalin . 
 In the years following the failure of the Anti @-@ Party Group , Suslov became the leader of the opposition faction in the Central Committee , known as the " Moscow faction " , to Khrushchev 's leadership . Khrushchev was able to hold on to power by conceding to various opposition demands in times of crisis , such as during the 1960 U @-@ 2 incident and the Cuban Missile Crisis . In the aftermath of the U @-@ 2 Crisis Suslov was able to remove , and replace , several of Khrushchev 's appointees in the Politburo with new anti @-@ <unk> members . Khrushchev 's position was greatly weakened after the failure of the Cuban Missile Crisis , and Suslov 's power greatly increased . A campaign to oust Khrushchev from office was initiated in 1964 . Although leader of the opposition , Suslov had fallen seriously ill during his trip to the People 's Republic of China the previous year ; instead , Leonid Brezhnev and Alexei Kosygin led the opposition . 
 = = Brezhnev era = = 
 = = = Collective leadership = = = 
 In October 1964 Khrushchev was ousted . Suslov played a crucial role in the event . Suslov was , alongside Premier Alexei Kosygin and First Secretary Leonid Brezhnev , one of the most influential Soviet politicians of the 1960s following the ouster of Khrushchev . Having led the opposition against Khrushchev for years , Suslov had acquired and wielded great power within the Central Committee when Brezhnev rose to power . However , Suslov was never interested in becoming the leader of the Soviet Union , and was content to remain the man behind the scenes . During most of his term , Suslov was one of four people who had both a seat in the Secretariat and the Politburo ; the three others were Brezhnev , Andrei Kirilenko and Fyodor Kulakov . 
 A collective leadership was founded immediately after Khrushchev 's ouster , consisting of Brezhnev as First Secretary , Kosygin as head of government , and Anastas Mikoyan ( and later Nikolai Podgorny ) as head of state . From the beginning , Suslov was a vocal critic of one @-@ man rule such as that seen under Joseph Stalin and Khrushchev . While he condemned Stalin 's one @-@ man rule , he equally criticised the individualistic assertiveness of Khrushchev 's de @-@ Stalinisation policy . A strong supporter of democratic centralism , Suslov prevented Brezhnev from taking over Kosygin 's post as head of government in 1970 . Kirilenko , Brezhnev , and Suslov were members of an unofficial Troika within the Communist Party leadership . 
 Throughout the Brezhnev Era , Suslov became increasingly hardline . He blocked any radical reforms , such as the 1965 Soviet economic reform initiated by Kosygin , and was opposed to détente because it undermined socialist world revolution . Suslov was opposed to any sort of radical reforms attempted by the Eastern Bloc leaders , but voted against Soviet military intervention in both the People 's Republic of Hungary in 1956 ( initially ) , and in the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic in 1968 during the Prague Spring . Suslov was regarded , according to Christian Schmidt @-@ <unk> , as the " pope " for " Orthodox communists " in the Eastern Bloc . Throughout his political career , Suslov became increasingly concerned that the Soviet Union 's leading role in the communist movement would be compromised . <unk> , in his book Gorbachev : The Path to Power , argues that Suslov " was a Russian nationalist " who believed " Russia was the centre of the universe " . 
 It was during the Brezhnev Era that Suslov was given the unofficial title " Chief Ideologue of the Communist Party " . Suslov spent much time in memorializing the legacies of Vladimir Lenin , Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels . However , Suslov followed the party line and supported the retreat from some of the beliefs of Marxism @-@ Leninism . Examples of ideological retreat include the end of single , Party @-@ approved natural science versions of biology , chemistry and physics . There still existed a tight ideological control over literature . This included not only literature critical of Soviet rule : much of Lenin 's work was also routinely censored . 
 = = = Later life and death = = = 
 At the beginning of the 1980s , the political and economic turmoil in the People 's Republic of Poland had seriously eroded the authority of the Polish United Workers ' Party . Suslov 's position on this matter carried particular weight as he chaired a Politburo Commission , established on 25 August 1980 , on how to deal with the Polish crisis . Members of the commission included such high @-@ ranking Soviets as Andropov , Minister of Defence Dmitriy Ustinov , Andrei Gromyko , the Minister of Foreign Affairs and Brezhnev 's long @-@ time associate Konstantin Chernenko . On 28 August , the Commission considered Soviet military intervention to stabilise the region . Wojciech Jaruzelski , First Secretary of the Polish United Workers ' Party , was able to persuade the Commission that a Soviet military intervention would only aggravate the situation . Suslov agreed with Jaruzelski 's argument , stating that " if troops are introduced , that will mean a catastrophe . I think that we all share the unanimous opinion here that there can be no discussion of any introduction of troops " . Suslov was able to persuade Jaruzelski and the Polish leadership to establish martial law in Poland . 
 In January 1982 , Yuri Andropov revealed to Suslov that Semyon Tsvigun , the First Deputy Chairman of the KGB , had shielded Galina and Yuri , Brezhnev 's children , from corruption investigations . When these facts were revealed to him , Suslov challenged Tsvigun to make a statement on the matter . Suslov even threatened Tsvigun with an expulsion from the Communist Party , but Tsvigun died on 19 January 1982 before he could challenge Suslov 's statement . Two days later , Suslov had a coronary , and died on 25 January of arteriosclerosis and diabetes . His death is viewed as starting the battle to succeed Brezhnev , in which Andropov , who assumed Suslov 's post as the Party 's Second Secretary , sidelined Kirilenko and Chernenko during the last days of Brezhnev 's rule . Suslov was buried on 29 January at the Kremlin Wall Necropolis . Brezhnev expressed great sadness at Suslov 's passing . 
 = = Recognition = = 
 Suslov was awarded several decorations and medals during his life ; among them were two Hero of Socialist Labour awards , five Orders of Lenin , one Order of the October Revolution , and one first degree Order of the Patriotic War . The USSR Academy of Sciences awarded Suslov with the Gold Medal of Karl Marx . Suslov was awarded the highest state awards of the German Democratic Republic , the Mongolian People 's Republic , and the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Suslov married Yelizaveta Alexandrovna ( 1903 – 1972 ) , who worked as the Director of the Moscow Institute for <unk> . In her life , she badly suffered from internal diseases , especially diabetes in a severe form , but ignored her physician 's recommendations . Bernard Lown , a Lithuanian @-@ born American M.D. , was once requested to see her in the Kremlin Hospital ; it was one of the few cases where a renowned foreign doctor was invited to visit the Kremlin Hospital . Suslov expressed his gratitude for Lown 's work , but avoided meeting Lown in person because he was a representative of an " imperialistic " country . Yelizaveta and Suslov had two children , <unk> ( born 1929 ) , named after the Russian Revolution , and his second child , Maya ( born 1939 ) , named after May Day . 
 = James Jabara = 
 James " <unk> " Jabara ( 10 October 1923 – 17 November 1966 ) was the first American ( Lebanese American ) and United States Air Force jet ace in history . Born in Oklahoma , he lived in Kansas where he enlisted as an aviation cadet at Fort Riley after graduating from high school . Jabara attended four flying schools in Texas before he received his pilot 's wings and was commissioned as a Second Lieutenant . Jabara flew two tours of combat duty in Europe during World War II as a North American P @-@ 51 Mustang pilot , and scored 1 @.@ 5 air victories against German aircraft . 
 Jabara flew his first jet aircraft in 1948 , the USAF Lockheed F @-@ 80 Shooting Star before transitioning to the USAF North American F @-@ 86 Sabre . Jabara used this aircraft to shoot down multiple Soviet @-@ built MiG @-@ 15 jets during the Korean War . He achieved his first confirmed air victory of the war on 3 April 1951 . A month later he scored his fifth and sixth victories , making him the first American jet ace in history . He eventually scored 15 victories , giving him the title of " triple ace " . Jabara was ranked as the second @-@ highest @-@ scoring U.S. ace of the Korean War . He received the Distinguished Service Cross , Silver Star , Distinguished Flying Cross , Air Medal , and the British Distinguished Flying Cross for his accomplishments in combat . 
 Jabara next held a series of commands at various Air Force bases across the United States . He flew the Lockheed F @-@ 104 Starfighter and later the Convair B @-@ 58 Hustler . In 1966 , while on leave from service in Vietnam , Colonel Jabara was traveling with his family in two cars to their new home when his daughter crashed the car she was driving and he was riding in , killing them both . They were buried together at Arlington National Cemetery . In recognition of his contributions to military aviation , an airport outside of Wichita , Kansas was named in his honor . Each year the United States Air Force Academy alumni association bestows the Jabara Award upon an Academy graduate whose aerospace accomplishments demonstrate superior performance . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Jabara was born in Muskogee , Oklahoma , of Lebanese descent ; his father , John , and mother came from <unk> , a town in Southern Lebanon . 
 Jabara joined the Boy Scouts , eventually becoming an Eagle Scout . At an early age , he was set on becoming a pilot , " I used to read articles about [ Eddie ] Rickenbacker and all these novels you read about air combat , and I guess from the sixth grade it was my ambition to be a fighter pilot . " He worked at his parents ' grocery store and graduated from Wichita North High School in Wichita , Kansas in May 1942 . Standing five feet , five inches ( 165 cm ) tall , Jabara was short for a potential fighter pilot ( and was reportedly required to wear corrective eyewear ) , but this did not prevent him from immediately enlisting as an aviation cadet of the United States Army Air Corps at Fort Riley , Kansas . In an attempt to improve his eyesight for flying , he ate 20 carrots a day in the mistaken belief that this would improve his vision . After attending four flying schools in Texas , he received his pilot 's wings and a commission as Second Lieutenant at Moore Field , Texas in October 1943 . Jabara with his wife , Nina , had four children : James William ( b . 1949 ) , Carol Ann ( b . 1950 ) , Cathy ( b . 1952 ) , and Jeanne ( b . 1957 ) . 
 = = World War II = = 
 During World War II , the Allied forces fought German aircraft across the European Theater . The Allies used several fighter aircraft , including the North American P @-@ 51 Mustang . Jabara was assigned to two tours of combat duty as a P @-@ 51 pilot across Europe . His first tour lasted from January to October 1944 with the <unk> Fighter Group of the Ninth Air Force . On his first mission he was assigned to attacking German railroad targets in Belgium . In a March 1944 mission while Jabara was escorting bombers to Germany , a German pilot shot off his canopy . Although he faced below freezing temperatures at the high altitude , he was able to shoot down a German aircraft before returning to base . During one mission , while in formation , he and another P @-@ 51 pilot collided in midair . They both safely bailed out while the aircraft were destroyed . In another incident , while Jabara engaged a German aircraft , they collided in mid @-@ air , and when both pilots safely floated to the ground , they met and shook hands . When Jabara 's first tour ended , he returned to the United States as an instructor for other pilots . He returned to Europe again for his second tour from February to December 1945 with the 355th Group of the Eighth Air Force . During his European combat ( and known then as " the <unk> Kid " for his penchant for smoking cigars ) , Jabara flew 108 combat missions . He was credited with the destruction of one and a half German aircraft in aerial combat ( the half considered shared with another pilot ) and four on the ground . He received a Distinguished Flying Cross with one Oak Leaf Cluster for his 1 @.@ 5 victories as well as an Air Medal with 18 Oak Leaf Clusters . 
 After World War II , Jabara considered leaving the military to attend college , but later decided to attend the Tactical Air School at Tyndall Air Force Base , Florida . From 1947 to 1949 he was stationed on Okinawa with the 53d Fighter Group . At Okinawa in 1948 , Jabara flew his first jet aircraft , the Lockheed F @-@ 80 Shooting Star . Reflecting on the transition to jet aircraft , he said " It was entirely different . I was at 10 @,@ 000 feet before I remembered to raise my landing gear . ... It was so quiet and fast . ... I guess that was probably the happiest moment of my life . " Jabara returned to the United States and was assigned as a flight commander , now at the rank of captain , with the 4th Fighter @-@ Interceptor Wing , flying the newly operational North American F @-@ 86 Sabre jet fighter at the New Castle County Airport in Delaware . 
 = = Korean War = = 
 Before the start of the Korean War , the Korean Peninsula was split by an American @-@ backed government at the south and a Soviet @-@ backed opposing government at the north . Divided by the 38th Parallel , both the United States and the Soviet Union agreed to maintain the division until a mutual decision was made about the future of the peninsula . On 25 June 1950 , North Korean troops crossed the parallel and attacked several key South Korean targets . As the United States prepared military assistance with the South Koreans , the Soviet Union also helped the North Koreans by training pilots and providing MiG @-@ 15 aircraft . Jabara arrived in Korea on 13 December 1950 with the 334th Fighter @-@ Interceptor Squadron of the 4th Fighter @-@ Interceptor Wing . The squadron was the first F @-@ 86 Sabre unit deployed to the Fifth Air Force to counter the threat by the Soviet MiG @-@ 15s . By 2 January 1951 , he had flown five combat missions in F @-@ 86s and had damaged one MiG @-@ 15 Korean jet fighter in air combat . Jabara achieved his first confirmed victory on 3 April 1951 when 12 F @-@ 86 Sabres took on 12 MiG @-@ 15s in MiG Alley , a region in northwestern North Korea . He was credited with another on 10 April , a third on 12 April , and a fourth on 22 April . Eager to get his fifth victory to be deemed a flying ace , Jabara voluntarily transferred to the 335th Fighter @-@ Interceptor Squadron when the 334th was rotated back to the United States . 
 On 20 May , two flights of F @-@ 86 Sabres encountered multiple MiG @-@ 15s in MiG Alley , and through radio communications , two additional flights of F @-@ 86 Sabres joined the battle , including Jabara . In preparation for the oncoming battle , Jabara and the other F @-@ 86 Sabre pilots were ordered to jettison their auxiliary fuel tanks to improve their maneuverability . Jabara 's fuel tank failed to separate from his wing , and protocol required he return to base as the aircraft would be impeded by the extra weight and imbalance , and limit his potential to match off with a MiG . However , Jabara decided to continue to the air battle , where he was able to still handle his aircraft well enough to be credited with shooting down two MiG @-@ 15s with .50 caliber machine gun fire . The first was in a group of three MiGs and the other was the last in a six @-@ plane group . Jabara was able to see the first aircraft explode from his gunfire , but he only saw his second victory go into a tailspin as he was avoiding being targeted by another MiG . His fifth and sixth victories made Jabara the first American in history to use jet aircraft to become an ace . The Americans said the 20 @-@ minute air battle had included 36 F @-@ 86 Sabres against nearly 50 MiG @-@ 15s ( Russian data shows 30 MiGs ) , and the American pilots recorded Jabara 's two victories and another pilot 's " probable " . While returning to base , Jabara 's F @-@ 86 Sabre was so low on fuel , he turned off the engine and glided towards the base before turning it on prior to landing . Data @-@ matching with Soviet records made available since the end of the Cold War has since shown that only one MiG was lost in the combat , and that Jabara 's jet @-@ versus @-@ jet tally was four at best . Nevertheless , American military forces claimed that Jabara was the first jet @-@ versus @-@ jet ace . Jabara later stated in an interview , " That was my bag for the day , and it made me feel pretty good to know that I was the first jet ace in the history of aerial warfare . " The mission was his 63rd Korean mission of an eventual 163 ; he was awarded a Distinguished Service Cross , the nation 's second @-@ highest decoration . 
 Against his wishes , Jabara received a stateside leave for a publicity tour . The Jabara family grocery store in Wichita was thronged with people for days , and both he and his father John appeared on local and national radio and television . Wichita mounted one of its most @-@ attended parades in the city 's history . Jabara was even sent on a goodwill tour with his father through the Middle East , and gave a speech in his father 's hometown of <unk> , Lebanon . Film newsreels included footage of his aircraft and other accolades included his own song ( " That Jabara Bird " ) and a ritual rewarding of his Distinguished Service Cross at a Boston baseball game . Jabara returned to the United States in May 1951 for temporary assignment to Air Force Headquarters , Washington , D.C. Two months later he was transferred to the Air Training Command at Scott Air Force Base , Illinois . Upon his request , he returned for another tour of duty overseas , arriving in Korea in January 1953 . 
 By then a major , on his second tour , Jabara was credited with shooting down nine more MiGs for a total of 15 victories . On 16 May 1953 he recorded his seventh victory , and on 26 May he shot down two additional MiGs for a total of nine for the war . On 10 June , Jabara shot down two more MiGs . Eight days later his flight group encountered four MiGs , and he encountered mechanical problems that nearly caused his aircraft to crash into an elevated hill . After resolving his aircraft 's issues , he returned to the battle and was able to shoot down an already damaged MiG . On 30 June , his first of two missions for the day resulted in one MiG victory . The second mission involved escorting F @-@ 86 Sabre fighter @-@ bombers and he shot down a MiG before he came under heavy fire by other MiGs . In an attempt to evade their attack , he quickly accelerated but his engine flamed out . He maneuvered his aircraft for the ocean for a potential water rescue if he crashed , but he was able to restart the engine and return to base . Jabara recorded his final victory on 15 July . Two days later he flew his last two missions , and although he was eager to find more MiGs in an attempt to tie or surpass Joseph C. McConnell 's 16 air victories , he did not see any opposing aircraft . His 15 victories gave him the title of " triple ace " , and his Korean War victories were all against MiG @-@ 15s . He received a Silver Star , an Oak Leaf Cluster for his Distinguished Service Cross , as well as another Distinguished Flying Cross for his additional air victories . During the Korean War , Jabara was second in American air victories to McConnell , who recorded 16 . The Soviet Union had four other pilots who exceeded or tied Jabara 's victories : Yevgeny <unk> with 22 @.@ 5 , Nikolay V. <unk> with 22 , and both Alexandr P. <unk> and Lev K. <unk> with 15 . 
 = = After Korea = = 
 Jabara returned to the United States in July 1953 , and was assigned as commander of the <unk> Training Squadron at Yuma Air Force Base ( later renamed Vincent AFB ) , Arizona . By January 1957 Jabara was at Eglin Air Force Base , Florida to join the <unk> Test Group to test Lockheed F @-@ 104 Starfighters . He was first reassigned to Headquarters of the <unk> Air Division at Syracuse , New York , then assumed command of the 337th Fighter @-@ Interceptor Squadron at Westover Air Force Base , Massachusetts . In 1958 , Jabara flew combat missions over Taiwan in the F @-@ 104 Starfighter . From July 1960 to June 1961 , he attended and graduated from the Air War College in Montgomery , Alabama . At Carswell Air Force Base , Texas , Jabara piloted the first supersonic bomber , the Convair B @-@ 58 Hustler as part of the 43d Bomb Wing . Jabara also helped train NATO pilots on the F @-@ 104 Starfighter in July 1964 , when he was stationed at Luke Air Force Base , Arizona and he wrote of the aircraft 's significant technological improvement over the F @-@ 86 Sabre . 
 In 1965 , Jabara was given command of the 31st Tactical Fighter Wing at Homestead Air Force Base , Florida . By 1966 Jabara had risen to the rank of colonel — the youngest at that rank at the time , and he volunteered to fly combat missions for the Vietnam War . He flew his first mission in July 1966 , joining a F @-@ 100 Super Sabre flight group for a bombing run that damaged several buildings held by the Viet Cong in South Vietnam . He returned on leave to Homestead about a week after the mission . 
 = = Death = = 
 While traveling to Myrtle Beach , South Carolina , where his family would stay while he returned to combat in Vietnam , Jabara and his 16 @-@ year @-@ old daughter Carol Anne died in a car accident in Delray Beach , Florida , on 17 November 1966 . The Jabara family were in two cars that day , on their way to a new home in South Carolina where his wife Nina and their children — James Jr . , Carol Anne , Jeanne , and Cathy — would reside during Jabara 's combat tour . Carol Anne was driving a Volkswagen with her father as a passenger in the back seat . She lost control of the car going through a construction zone , when she initially veered onto a grass median . She swerved back onto the highway but during the rapid turn , she lost control and the vehicle returned to the median where it rolled several times . Jabara sustained head injuries and was pronounced dead on arrival at a Delray hospital , and Carol Anne died two days later . A memorial service was held for Jabara at Homestead Air Force Base with a missing man formation fly @-@ by . Jabara and his daughter were buried together in a single grave at Arlington National Cemetery . 
 His grandson , 2d Lt Nicholas Jabara , USAF , a 2001 graduate of the United States Air Force Academy , was killed during pilot training in a T @-@ 37 accident at Laughlin AFB , Texas on 31 January 2002 . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 An airport just north of Wichita , Kansas , was named the Colonel James Jabara Airport in his honor . Each year since 1968 , the United States Air Force Academy alumni association bestows the Jabara Award upon the Academy graduate whose accomplishments demonstrate superior performance in fields directly involved with aerospace vehicles . The James Jabara Memorial Foundation was founded by a friend of Jabara , and the foundation constructed a statue of him at the Air Force Academy in Colorado Springs , Colorado in 2004 . 
 In 1950 , the Air Force Association ( AFA ) named him " Most Distinguished Aviator of the Year " and in 1957 , was named by AFA as one of 25 U.S. men " who had done the most to promote aviation through the years " . The Kansas Aviation Museum named him to the Kansas Aviation Hall of Fame in 2006 . 
 = = Awards and decorations = = 
 During World War II , Colonel Jabara was awarded the Distinguished Flying Cross with one Oak Leaf Cluster and the Air Medal with 23 Oak Leaf Clusters . While in Korea he received the Distinguished Service Cross with one Oak Leaf Cluster and another Oak Leaf Cluster for his Distinguished Flying Cross . He was also awarded the Silver Star for two missions flown on 10 and 12 April 1951 , where he shot down two MiGs while defending American bombers . He received the Distinguished Service Cross for shooting down his fifth and sixth MiG victories on 20 May 1951 . Another Silver Star was received in 1953 with an Oak Leaf Cluster . The United Kingdom awarded him the British Distinguished Flying Cross for his accomplishments in combat on 1 December 1955 . 
 = Hall of Fame ( Big Sean album ) = 
 Hall of Fame is the second studio album by American hip hop recording artist Big Sean . It was released on August 27 , 2013 , by GOOD Music and Def Jam Recordings . Recording sessions took place from 2011 to 2013 , at the variety of the recording studios ; primarily in Los Angeles , California . The album features guest appearances from Nas , 2 Chainz , Nicki Minaj and Jeezy , while the production on the album was primarily handled by No I.D. , Key Wane , Da Internz , Mano , Young Chop and Hey DJ among others . The album was supported by six singles : " Guap " , " Switch Up " , " Beware " , " Fire " , " Ashley " and " You Don 't Know " . 
 Hall of Fame received generally positive reviews from critics . At Metacritic , the album received an average score of 72 , based on 14 reviews . The album debuted at number 3 on the US Billboard 200 , selling 72 @,@ 000 copies in its first week . As of February 2015 , the album has sold 155 @,@ 000 copies in the United States . 
 = = Background = = 
 On September 27 , 2012 , Big Sean announced his second studio album with the title Hall of Fame : Memoirs of a Detroit Player , and then has announced a release date for December 2012 . Sean explains why chose this to be the title , stating that " its because it 'll represent who he is " . He then said that he feels " like situations are really going to be relatable to people . " He then stated that he " didn 't want to just do another club song " , and he didn 't even wanted to follow these popular music standards . " This is just what the fuck I want to do . Some people are going to like it . Some people are going to hate it ; regardless , I 'm just doing me . " Sean then said that Hall of Fame will be a far more inspirational and a more conceptually @-@ driven project than his debut album . He even went on by saying the fact that he wants to teach , while making his lasting impact on peoples ' lives with this second album . During an interview with Power 105 , Sean stated that he would include some skits on the album to give it a " classic feel " . He even indicated that the song " Mula " featuring French Montana ( which also this track was included on the mixtape Detroit ) , could be featuring as the track for his deluxe edition . 
 In December 2012 , Sean said that this album will be featuring all types of songs , so that everyone can hear the album at this point to make them being " blown away " , including its contributions from his label @-@ mate Kanye West , alongside with No I.D. and J. Cole . The single " Clique " from GOOD Music 's album Cruel Summer , which was rumored to be featured on Hall of Fame . Starting off the year , the album was included on multiple " Most Anticipated Albums of 2013 " lists , including those by MTV , XXL , who ranked it fourth and Complex ranked it eleventh . 
 = = Recording and production = = 
 During the recording sessions on the album , Sean revealed Kanye West , Nas , Tyga , Common and Jhené Aiko were going to be appearing as featured artists , while West , No I.D. , Key Wane , Hit @-@ Boy and Young Chop will provide production on the album . He then announced the final guest appearances from Miguel , Kid Cudi and other members of GOOD Music . 
 On November 28 , 2012 , in an interview with Tim Westwood , Sean revealed that he had to invited Eminem to come to the studio , along with him announcing that he had renamed the album from Hall of Fame : Memoirs of a Detroit Player to just titled Hall of Fame . On March 12 , 2013 , along with revealing a slew of songs on the album , Big Sean stated that there will be songs featuring Lil Wayne , Juicy J and 2 Chainz on the album . He also revealed that he worked with DJ Camper , DJ Mano , Da Internz and Rio on the album , production wise . 
 On April 26 , 2013 , Sean then finally had some studio session with Eminem , which included Royce da 5 ' 9 " and Mr. Porter . On June 8 , 2013 , Big Sean spoke with MTV News ; about his almost full day studio session with Eminem , he 'd promised a potential final product and labeling it a " Detroit classic " , but was not sure whether it will appear on Hall of Fame or on Eminem 's upcoming eighth studio album . However , he explained Eminem was too busy working on his album to get on Hall of Fame . 
 In July 2013 , Sean revealed Ellie Goulding would be featured on the album . In the following month , during a listening session , he revealed additional guest appearances on the album from Nicki Minaj , Young Jeezy and <unk> <unk> . In August 2013 , Big Sean told Rolling Stone the album was primarily produced by No I.D. and Sean 's childhood friend Key Wane , with Kanye West having a much smaller presence on the album then Sean 's debut album . The final track listing contained guest appearances from Ellie Goulding , Lil Wayne , Jhené Aiko , Nas , Kid Cudi , Nicki Minaj , Juicy J , Young Jeezy , Payroll of <unk> <unk> , James Fauntleroy , Miguel , 2 Chainz , Meek Mill , <unk> Mac , Pharrell Williams and Common . 
 = = Release and promotion = = 
 While garnering the anticipation for the album , Big Sean released the mixtape Detroit on September 5 , 2012 . The mixtape consisted of previously unreleased songs . The mixtape features guest appearances from fellow rappers J. Cole , Juicy J , King Chip , French Montana , Royce da 5 ' 9 " , Kendrick Lamar , Tyga , Chris Brown , Wale and Wiz Khalifa , along with track narrations by Common , Young Jeezy and Snoop Dogg . Production was provided by Hit @-@ Boy , Da Internz , Lex Luger and Key Wane . Before the album 's release , Big Sean released a handful of his inspirational video blogs , which gets in touch on how far he has gotten to where he ’ s at throughout his career and what he plans on doing to further his position in music . Most of his vlogs feature cameo appearances from Kanye West , 2 Chainz , Pusha T , Common , No I.D. , Rita Ora , Trey Songz , Wale , Wiz Khalifa , Lupe Fiasco , Teyana Taylor and T @-@ Pain , among others . Starting on February 23 , 2013 , Sean began a European tour in promotion of the album , which continued until March 13 , 2013 . On September 28 , 2013 , Sean released a 23 @-@ minute documentary covering the development and making of the album , which began 269 days before the project 's release . 
 After initially announcing a December 18 , 2012 , release date for the album , it was revealed the album would be pushed back to February 2013 , because it was not ready yet . However , the album 's release date was yet again delayed . At the beginning of February , Sean stated the album was almost finished , and the second single would be released in the same month . He revealed the expected release date of June 2013 . On June 22 , he released a video on YouTube , where he previewed one of the songs , " Nothing Is Stopping You " , and announced a final release date of August 27 , 2013 , for the album . A little over a month later , Sean revealed the standard and deluxe edition album covers via his Instagram . 
 Sean intended to include on the album the track titled " Control " , a track produced by No I.D. and featuring guest vocals from Kendrick Lamar and Jay Electronica . However , he could not include it on the album due to sample clearing issues . On August 14 , 2013 , the song was sent to mainstream urban radio as one of the album 's promotional singles . Lamar 's verse caused controversy as he " called out " J. Cole , Big K.R.I.T. , Wale , Pusha T , Meek Mill , ASAP Rocky , Drake , Sean , Jay Electronica , Tyler , The Creator and Mac Miller and referred to himself as the " King of New York " . Many rappers were offended by the lyrics , even though they were not explicitly mentioned . Rappers including Lupe Fiasco , Papoose , Joell Ortiz , Cassidy , Joe Budden , ASAP Ferg , King Los , The Mad Rapper , Uncle <unk> and B.o.B , among others released their responses or diss songs , within the following week . The song has since peaked at number 11 on the Billboard Bubbling Under Hot 100 Singles and number 43 on the Billboard Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs charts . 
 = = Singles = = 
 The album 's lead single , " Guap " was released on October 26 , 2012 . The song was produced by Key Wane and Young Chop . The song has since peaked at number 21 on the US Billboard Hot 100 . 
 The album 's second single , " Switch Up " was announced , along with its artwork by Big Sean on April 5 , 2013 , after its audio was premiered . The single featured fellow rapper Common , while the production was handled by DJ Mano and No I.D .. The song was released for digital download on the following day . The song has since peaked at number 50 on the US Billboard Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs . 
 The album 's third single , " Beware " featuring Lil Wayne and Jhené Aiko , became digitally available on June 25 , 2013 . On August 16 , 2013 , the music video was released for " Beware " featuring Lil Wayne and Jhené Aiko . The song has since reached a peak of number 10 on the Billboard Hot 100 . 
 " Fire " was released on August 20 , 2013 , as the album 's fourth single , before the release of its music video starring singer Miley Cyrus was released . The song has since peaked at number 19 on the US Billboard Bubbling Under Hot 100 Singles . 
 " Ashley " featuring guest vocals from R & B recording artist Miguel , which impacted urban contemporary radio in October 2013 , as the album 's fifth single , becoming the most @-@ added song to urban radio on the Nielsen BDS chart in the week following its release . On January 31 , 2014 , Big Sean released the music video for " Ashley " . Luke <unk> of XXL described the video as dark , intense and " undeniably dope . " 
 " You Don 't Know " was released as the album 's sixth single in the United Kingdom on March 24 , 2014 . 
 = = = Other songs = = = 
 On August 30 , 2013 , the music video was released for " 10 2 10 " . The remix to " 10 2 10 " featuring Rick Ross and Travis Scott was released as a single on January 28 , 2014 . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Hall of Fame received generally positive reviews from critics . At Metacritic , which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream critics , the album received an average score of 72 , based on 14 reviews . Kyle Anderson of Entertainment Weekly positively compared the album to the late 90 's releases by Bad Boy and said that Big Sean easily outshines all the featured artists on the album . At USA Today , Edna Gunderson called this , an " outstanding second album " that he " occasionally stumbles " in an effort that is a " smart set of slick club thumpers , tear @-@ <unk> and introspective yarns . " Jon Dolan of Rolling Stone commented saying , " The Detroit MC gets over on <unk> and crisp delivery , even when his lyrics are pro forma . " He also praised the album 's production . At The Oakland Press , Gary Graff noted that " Hall of Fame is still a solid , confident and diverse set that shows how much he 's grown as both an MC and a writer since ' Finally Famous ' came out in 2011 . " Andrea Aguilar of HipHopDX summarized the album stating , " As a whole , the feel @-@ good album ’ s set of eclectic beats doesn ’ t disappoint , but it lacks diversity . Most of Sean ’ s content still teems with predictable material risking leaving listeners disinterested . Random skits also slightly interrupt the flow of the album , but if you ’ re looking for motivational music centered on the money , the cars , the clothes and hoes , this album is sure to get plenty of replays on your iPod and local radio stations alike . " 
 Evan Rytlewski of The A.V. Club said , " Hall Of Fame doubles down on the carefree spirit of its predecessor . The mood is so consistently upbeat and agreeable that nearly everything works , especially the tracks that pair Sean with a strong singer . " Eric Diep of XXL commented that , " Hall Of Fame moves along at a steady pace for the most part , " but there are instances where the album is less than consistent . Concluding that , " even these minor shortcomings don 't supersede the fact that the album is filled with radio @-@ friendly cuts and compelling storytelling . " David Jeffries of AllMusic said , while Hall of Fame provides plenty of vibrant , sexual , exciting moments , the " classic feel " that was intended is " nowhere to be found . " Erin Lowers of Exclaim ! commented that , " While Hall of Fame escapes the dreaded sophomore curse , it doesn 't do so unscathed . [ ... ] Big Sean may not have solidified his position in the rap hall of fame , but is certainly in the process of paving his way . " David Turner of Spin said , " Kanye 's My Beautiful Dark Twisted Fantasy is an immediate parallel to this album of relationship struggle and soul @-@ searching , and while Sean obviously lacks his mentor 's star power or ambition , he shows more heart than he typically gets credit for . " Jesal Padania of RapReviews.com called the individual tracks distinct , big and bold , while the album remains consistent . However , said that the album lacks any classic material . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 The album was ranked at number 16 on XXL 's list of the best albums of 2013 . Complex placed the album at number 50 on their list of the best albums of 2013 , saying that " It 's fitting that he and Kendrick had that moment on " Control , " because Hall of Fame clearly owes some sort of debt to Good Kid , M.A.A.D City . K @-@ Dot opened up a space for rap to do that , or at least reminded folks of the sorts of things Pete Rock & C.L. Smooth used to do with the art form . Before hearing Hall of Fame , the title sounded pretentious . After hearing it , it 's clear that Sean is ready to earn his place . " 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 Hall of Fame debuted at number 3 on the Billboard 200 , with first @-@ week sales of 72 @,@ 000 copies in the United States . That was a 17 % decline in sales from his debut studio album Finally Famous , which also debuted at number 3 on the US Billboard 200 and sold 87 @,@ 000 copies in its first week . David Drake of Complex named the album an example of a sophomore slump . In its second week , the album sold 18 @,@ 000 copies in the United States . As of February 2015 , the album has sold 155 @,@ 000 copies according to Nielsen SoundScan . 
 The album also charted internationally , peaking at number 56 on the UK Albums Chart and number 10 on the Canadian Albums Chart . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Notes 
 ^ [ a ] signifies a co @-@ producer . 
 ^ [ b ] signifies an additional producer . 
 " Nothing Is Stopping You " features additional vocals by James Fauntleroy , Kanye West , Zeno Jones , Myra Anderson and DJ Mo Beatz . 
 " Fire " contains additional vocals by Melanie Fiona , Nicole <unk> , James Fauntleroy and Elijah Blake . 
 " You Don 't Know " features additional vocals from Elijah Blake . 
 " First Chain " features additional vocals from Kaye Fox and Nicole <unk> . 
 " <unk> " features additional vocals from Niko Clark , Terron Clark and <unk> Hudson . 
 " Sierra Leone " features additional vocals from Roscoe Dash , Key Wane Mike Posner and James Fauntleroy . 
 " It 's Time " features additional vocals from Key Wane and Roscoe Dash . 
 " World Ablaze " features additional vocals from James Fauntleroy and Elijah Blake . 
 " All <unk> Out " features additional vocals by James Fauntleroy . 
 " Guap " features additional vocals from Kanye West and Key Wane . 
 Samples credits 
 " Nothing Is Stopping You " contains samples of " Rocket ’ s Theme " , written and performed by Pharrell Williams . 
 " Beware " contains an interpolation of " Ain 't No Woman ( Like the One I 've Got ) " written by Dennis Lambert and Brian Potter , and performed by The Four Tops 
 " Freaky " and " <unk> " contain a sample of " The Sensuous Black Woman Meets the Sensuous Black Man " , written by Rudy Ray Moore , and preformed by Rudy Ray Moore and Lady Reed . 
 " Sierra Leone " contains a sample of " Lonely Girl " , written by Redd Evans , Neal Hefti and Jay Livingston , and performed by Dorothy Ashby . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Album credits adapted from AllMusic . 
 = = Chart positions = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = The Compleat Housewife = 
 The Compleat Housewife , or , Accomplish 'd Gentlewoman 's Companion is a cookery book written by Eliza Smith and first published in London in 1727 . It became extremely popular , running through 18 editions in fifty years . 
 It was the first cookery book to be published in the Thirteen Colonies of America : it was printed in Williamsburg , Virginia , in 1742 . It contained the first published recipe for " <unk> " , and appears to be the earliest source for bread and butter pudding . 
 The book includes recipes not only for foods but for wines , cordial @-@ waters , medicines and salves . 
 = = Book = = 
 The title page describes The Compleat Housewife as a 
 collection of several hundred of the most approved receipts , in cookery , pastry , confectionery , preserving , pickles , cakes , creams , jellies , made wines , cordials . And also bills of fare for every month of the year . To which is added , a collection of nearly two hundred family receipts of medicines ; viz. drinks , syrups , salves , ointments , and many other things of sovereign and approved efficacy in most distempers , pains , aches , wounds , sores , etc. never before made publick in these parts ; fit either for private families , or such publick @-@ spirited gentlewomen as would be beneficent to their poor neighbours . 
 The book was the first to publish a recipe for " <unk> " ; it included mushrooms , anchovies and horseradish . The title The Compleat Housewife may owe something to Gervase Markham 's 1615 The English Huswife . 
 Little is known of Smith beyond what she writes of herself in the preface . She spent her life working as a cook or housekeeper in wealthy households , and unlike Elizabeth Raffald who left service to run her own shop , continued in that profession despite the success of her book . It is possible that she worked at Beaulieu Abbey , Hampshire . She is critical of cookery books written by men who conceal their secrets , preventing readers from using their recipes successfully . 
 The preface contains the following passage : 
 It being grown as fashionable for a book now to appear in public without a preface , as for a lady to appear at a ball without a hoop @-@ petticoat , I shall conform to the custom for fashion @-@ sake and not through any necessity . The subject being both common and universal , needs no argument to introduce it , and being so necessary for the gratification of the appetite , stands in need of no encomiums to allure persons to the practice of it ; since there are but a few nowadays who love not good eating and drinking 
 The passage was lightly adapted from an earlier book with a similar title , John Nott 's The Cooks and <unk> Dictionary : or , the Accomplish ’ d Housewife ’ s Companion ( 1723 ) , which declared he had added an introduction because fashion had made it as odd for a book to be printed without one as for a man to be seen " in church without a neck cloth or a lady without a hoop @-@ petticoat . " 
 = = = Contents = = = 
 The following refer to the 9th edition , 1739 . 
 Preface 
 A Bill of Fare for every Season of the Year . 
 Cookery , & c . Page 1 . [ Soups , meats , pies , pickles , fish , hams , sausages , cheese ] 
 All Sorts of Pickles . Page 78 . 
 All Sorts of Puddings . Page 100 . 
 All Sorts of Pastry . Page 122 . 
 All Sorts of Cakes . Page 144 . 
 Creams and <unk> . Page 160 . 
 Preserves , <unk> , and <unk> . Page 173 . 
 All Sorts of Made Wines . Page 213 . 
 All Sorts of <unk> @-@ waters . Page 232 . 
 Medicines and <unk> . Page 272 . 
 = = = Approach = = = 
 Smith offers no general advice , either at the start of the book or at the start of chapters ; each chapter consists entirely of recipes . There are no lists of ingredients , these simply being mentioned as needed in the recipes . Most recipes do not mention either oven temperature or cooking time , though for example " To candy Orange Flowers " instructs " set your glasses in a stove with a moderate heat " , and " To Stew a Rump of Beef " states " this requires six or seven hours stewing . " 
 The recipes are predominantly English , but dishes include French and other foreign names , and imported ingredients such as spices . 
 Recipes are described tersely , and do not generally spell out basic techniques such as how to make pastry ; the recipe for " A Battalia Pye " does not mention pastry at all , though it is called for with the instruction to " close the pye " : 
 A Battalia Pye 
 Take four small chickens , four squab pigeons , four sucking <unk> ; cut them in pieces , season them with savoury spice , and lay ' em in the pye , with four sweetbreads sliced , and as many sheep 's tongues , two shiver 'd palates , two pair of lamb @-@ stones , twenty or thirty <unk> , with savoury balls and oysters . Lay on butter , and close the pye . A Lear . 
 However , a few frequently @-@ used components of dishes are described , such as " A Lear for Savoury <unk> " and " A <unk> for made Dishes " . The " Lear " is a thickened sauce made with claret , gravy , " oyster liquor " , anchovies , herbs , onion and butter . The " <unk> " contains similar ingredients , with the addition of sliced meats and mushrooms ; the recipe ends with " use it when called for " , such as in the Battalia Pye . 
 Recipes are provided for home @-@ made medicines and remedies such as " To promote Breeding " for women wanting to become pregnant . The recipe calls for a spoonful of " stinking <unk> " syrup to be taken night and morning , and for " good ale " to be boiled with " the <unk> of 3 ox @-@ backs , half a handful of <unk> , a handful of <unk> ( or cat @-@ bos ) " , dates , raisins , and nutmegs . The woman drinking this mixture " at your going to @-@ bed " is enjoined " as long as it lasts , accompany not with your husband . " 
 = = Publication = = 
 = = = Britain = = = 
 The book was first published in 1727 and ran through 18 editions by 1773 . The first four editions were published under the byline " E — S — " , but Smith did reveal she was a woman " constantly employed in fashionable and noble Families ... for the Space of thirty Years and upwards " . The fifth edition of 1732 gave the author 's name as " E. Smith " . 
 The bibliographer William Carew Hazlitt recorded that the 7th edition included " near fifty Receipts being communicated just before the author 's death " . 
 = = = America = = = 
 The Compleat Housewife was the first cookery book to be published in America , when William Parks , an ambitious and enterprising printer ( originally from Shropshire ) printed it in Williamsburg , Virginia in 1742 . His version of The Compleat Housewife , a " cookery book of ambitious scope " , was based on the fifth London edition of 1732 , altered to suit American taste , and without recipes " the ingredients or materials for which are not to be had in this country . " Copies of the 1742 edition have become very rare , but " happily , one copy has returned to the city of its origin " , and is in the Library of Colonial Williamsburg , Incorporated . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In 1893 , the bibliographer William Carew Hazlitt allocated 54 pages of his history of cookery books to the Compleat Housewife , commenting that " the highly curious contents of E. Smith ... may be securely taken to exhibit the state of knowledge in England upon this subject in the last quarter of the seventeenth and the first quarter of the eighteenth [ century ] " . 
 Christine Mitchell , reviewing the Chawton House reprint in 2010 for the Jane Austen Society of North America , wrote that Eliza Smith 's book " met the growing need for a text to assist women with their task of maintaining a household . " She quotes Elizabeth Wallace 's introduction as saying that it gives modern readers reason to appreciate having a refrigerator and a global food system that brings us out @-@ of @-@ season produce . Yet , she observes , the English housewife had many varieties of vegetables , 30 kinds of seafood and 35 kinds of poultry ( including hares and rabbits ) . She notes that the book also describes home remedies , the housewife having to function as " chef , doctor , pharmacist , exterminator , chemist , laundress , and all @-@ around handy @-@ woman . " Reflecting that the recipes would " probably never " be used today , and the medicines are useless , the book remains invaluable for researchers , gives readers a glimpse into the world of Jane Austen and her contemporaries , and richly documents eighteenth @-@ century English life . 
 Patrick Spedding , in Script & Print , notes that the book was very popular in the eighteenth century , with 20 London editions in fifty years . However , he roundly criticises the 1983 Arlon House facsimile reprint of the 16th edition for deliberately omitting recipes including " To promote Breeding " , suggesting this was because the publisher was concerned they might be harmful . 
 The historian Sandra Sherman comments that The Compleat Housewife " is the first female @-@ authored blockbuster . " 
 The bibliographer Genevieve Yost comments that " E. Smith 's popularity in eighteenth century England was challenged perhaps most seriously by Hannah Glasse , who admittedly is better remembered today " , adding at once that Glasse is recalled mainly for the controversy over whether she actually existed , and for the recipe that people supposed started with " First catch your hare . " Yost suggests that the book 's popularity in the colonies was probably increased by the publication of an American edition . She concludes that 
 The quantities and ingredients render many of the recipes unsuitable to the modern kitchen , but these old cookbooks are increasing in value and interest to libraries , bibliophiles , and collectors , who find in them a truly revealing and fascinating glimpse of the past . 
 1n the Spring 2006 issue of Prairie Schooner , Sarah Kennedy published a poem called " The Compleat Housewife , 1727 " , with the gloss " the first popular cookbook published in Great Britain " . The poem begins : 
 Learning to thigh a pigeon or tame a crab 
 was now within any woman 's grasp , 
 even a maid could be taught to carve . 
 = = Editions = = 
 1st edition , London : J. Pemberton , 1727 . 
 2nd edition , London : J. Pemberton , 1728 . 
 3rd edition , London : J. Pemberton , 1729 . Corrected and improved . 
 4th edition , London : J. Pemberton , 1730 . Corrected and improved . 
 5th edition , London : J. Pemberton , 1732 . With very large additions . 
 --- Reprinted Williamsburg , VA : W. Parks , 1742 . 
 6th edition , London : J. Pemberton , 1734 . With very large additions . 
 7th edition , London : J. and J. Pemberton , 1736 . With very large additions . 
 8th edition , London : J. and J. Pemberton , 1737 . 
 9th edition , London : 1739 . J. and J. Pemberton , 1739 . With very large <unk> another copy 
 10th edition , London : J. and H. Pemberton , 1741 . With very large additions . 
 11th edition , London : J. and H. Pemberton , 1742 . With very large additions . 
 12th edition , London : J. and J. Pemberton , 1744 . With very large additions . 
 13th edition , London : H. Pemberton , 1746 . With very large additions . 
 --- reprinted 1747 . 
 14th edition , London : R. Ware and others , 1750 . Prefixed with directions for marketing . 
 15th edition , London : R. Ware and others , 1753 . With additions . 
 --- London : Literary Services & Production , 1968 , 1973 . 
 --- London : Studio Editions , 1994 . 
 --- With introduction by E. K. Wallace . Chawton House Library , 2009 . 
 16th edition , London , 17 _ _ . With additions . 
 17th edition , London , 17 _ _ . 
 18th edition , London , 1773 . 
 = Greece in the Eurovision Song Contest 2005 = 
 Greece participated in and won the Eurovision Song Contest 2005 , its first Eurovision Song Contest victory . Greek national broadcaster Ellinikí Radiofonía Tileórasi ( ERT ) internally selected Helena Paparizou who sang " My Number One " in Kiev , winning the competition with 230 points . The song is written by Christos Dantis and Natalia <unk> , and composed by Christos Dantis . " My Number One " was selected through a national final on March 2 , 2005 , where the public and a professional jury chose it over three other candidate songs . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Eurovision Song Contest 2005 marked Greece 's twenty @-@ sixth entry in the Eurovision Song Contest since its debut in 1974 . Prior to the contest , its best result was third place which was achieved twice : in 2001 with the song " Die for You " performed by the duo Antique and in 2004 with " Shake It " performed by Sakis Rouvas . Greece 's least successful result was in 1998 when it placed twentieth with the song " Mia Krifi Evesthisia " by Thalassa , receiving only twelve points in total , all from Cyprus . 
 The Greek national broadcaster , Ellinikí Radiofonía Tileórasi ( ERT ) broadcasts the event in Greece each year and organizes the selection process for its entry . Its selection techniques have varied from national finals where the public selects the entry , to internal selections like used in 2004 , where the broadcaster has complete control over the selection . For the Eurovision Song Contest 2005 , ERT decided to hold a televised national final after internally selecting an artist . 
 = = Performer = = 
 Throughout the months preceding the national selection , rumors flooded Eurovision news websites about which artist would be representing Greece in the Eurovision Song Contest 2005 . There was an internal selection for the artist , being chosen by the broadcaster , while there would be a national final for the song , with the public having a say in the choice . 
 The first artist given an official proposal to represent Greece in the 2005 contest was Sakis Rouvas , the Greek entrant in the 2004 contest . During a press conference on 15 June 2004 discussing plans for the 50th contest , the network announced that they would like to have him represent them again if he liked . ERT was expecting an answer by mid @-@ July but Rouvas ' response did not come until the 22nd of the month . He considered it , but ultimately felt that another artist should receive the opportunity . <unk> mentioned that Rouvas ' " decision is expected to sadden Greek fans , who generally supported the idea of him competing again . " ERT would continue to ask Rouvas to represent them every year until he finally accepted again in 2009 . Meanwhile , in June 2004 , Anna Vissi stated that she " would go to Eurovision if she was asked to " . The network kept the internal format , seeking high profile acts . A few months later on November 27 , 2004 , it was reported that Despina Vandi was " ready to sign the necessary contracts " though nothing was officially announced by ERT . The rumored contract , brokered between Vandi 's record label Heaven Music and ERT would have included a term that required all of Vandi 's songs to be written by popular Greek songwriter Phoebus . The next day , November 28 , 2004 , ERT 's Eurovision spokeswoman Daphne Bokota stated that Despina Vandi and ERT were close to a deal , but had concluded that she was too expensive to send to the contest . She also said that Vandi was worried about participating in the Eurovision Song Contest while her international career was going well . " Here at ERT , we don 't understand [ why ] Greek artists are so insecure to participate " , she stated . Bokota ended by saying that they would announce the artist within the next five to ten days and that a possible backup was Helena Paparizou . Around the same time , another name , Annette Artani also became a popular rumour . The Greek @-@ American songwriter was still participating in Fame Story at the time and rumours expected her to pull out of the competition . On December 5 , 2004 , Anna Vissi was reportedly also in negotiations with ERT and on December 8 , 2004 , Daphne Bokota once again spoke on the issue saying that there would be a delay in the decision because of some sort of " obstacle " within the broadcaster . On January 15 , 2005 , ERT held a meeting with Franz Ferdinand which was reported by Star Channel to be the front runner , but ERT soon excluded them as they had " no idea how Eurovision works and thus they proposed to compose a remake of a past song of theirs " , a violation of contest rules ; they were also requesting more money . 
 Finally on January 22 , 2005 , ERT announced that it had selected Helena Paparizou , former member of the Greek @-@ Swedish duet Antique which had represented Greece at the 2001 contest , achieving 3rd place . Deals with Artani and Vissi that were also going on at the time failed to materialize . In Vissi 's case , one factor may have been scheduling issues , as during the time of the contest she was in the United States promoting " Call Me " . In a press release , ERT stated that Paparizou 's singing career in Sweden was " a factor which surely contributed to the final choice of Paparizou , since the ' northern ' votes are considered to be important " . Shortly before the announcement of Paparizou 's participation , Bokota was fired from ERT for unknown reasons ; she was the one who had originally proposed to her . 
 = = National final = = 
 After selecting Paparizou , ERT decided to pick four candidate songs , and host a national final where the Greek public , along with a jury , would select their favorite song . Voting to select the song at the national final would be conducted through televoting and SMS texting by the public , and a nine @-@ member " expert jury " , weighted 60 % and 40 % respectively . The jury would be made up of Mimis <unk> , Antonis Andrikakis , Kostas <unk> , Željko Joksimović , Betty <unk> , Ion <unk> , <unk> <unk> , Sietse Bakker , and Christos <unk> . 
 Out of 100 the songs that were sent in by Greek and foreign artists , a committee made up of representatives from ERT , Sony BMG , and Paparizou , chose 15 songs initially and then narrowed the selection down to four . On a special show broadcast on February 18 titled <unk> , the four songs were presented to the Greek public as : " My Number One " composed by Christos Dantis with lyrics by Dantis and Natalia <unk> , " OK " composed by <unk> Siganos with lyrics by Siganos and Valentino , " Let 's Get Wild " written by Douglas <unk> and " The Light in Our Soul " written by Kostas <unk> . On February 19 , it was revealed that " The Light in Our Soul " had been released and made available on Amazon.de by a band named " Big Alice " on May 25 , 2004 and therefore disqualifying the song from the competition . According to contest rules , a song cannot be released before October 1 of the previous year . This revelation trimmed down the four candidate songs to three . The choreography for all songs was arranged by <unk> <unk> . Following the selection of the songs , a second special Eurovision show was broadcast on February 25 , 2005 , to familiarize the Greek public with the artist . 
 The national final took place on March 2 , 2005 at " Club Fever " and was hosted by Greek @-@ Swede journalist and television @-@ presenter Alexandra <unk> . In between Paparizou singing her three candidate songs , the Greek musical group C : Real performed some of its songs , while several acts from other countries performed to both entertain and promote their own Eurovision songs . The 2005 representatives from the Netherlands and Andorra were present with Glennis Grace singing " My Impossible Dream " and Marian van de Wal singing " La <unk> interior " . Eurovision Song Contest 2004 's runner @-@ up Željko Joksimović sang " Lane <unk> " and the Swedish band Alcazar , which was still taking part in Melodifestivalen 2005 , the Swedish national final , sang " <unk> " . 
 = = = Result = = = 
 ERT received 229 @,@ 368 televotes and SMS texts of which 152 @,@ 269 votes came in for the song " My Number One " , which made the song the clear winner . " OK " received around 73 @,@ 500 votes and " Let 's Get Wild " got around 20 @,@ 500 . The nine jury members gave points between 1 and 10 for the songs in a school @-@ grade style system , giving the best song 10 points . Seven jury members voted for " My Number One " , one gave the maximum points to " OK " and one voted for " Let 's Get Wild " . " My Number One " won with 83 points , while " Let 's Get Wild " placed third with 48 points , and " OK " third with 46 points . Although " Let 's Get Wild " received a higher score from the jury than " OK " , it placed third when the televoting and SMS texts were taken into account . 
 = = Promotion = = 
 Before her appearance at the contest , Paparizou went on a promotional tour sponsored by the Greek Ministry of Tourism and the Greek National Tourism Organization , singing her song in several Eurovision countries . The tour started off on March 12 , 2005 in Berlin , Germany , where she visited the International Tourism Exchange Show and performed " My Number One " . The next stop was Moscow , Russia , where Paparizou taped a show for MTV Russia and then presented the Greek song at the International Tourism Exhibit , the largest tourism exhibit in the world . She also gave several interviews to the press and before leaving , attended a Greek Independence Day reception at the Greek embassy . Upon return to Greece , she was greeted at the airport by fans along with the music video of " My Number One " playing on the video monitors . While in Greece , she attended the opening ceremony of the European final four for the Volleyball Champions League in <unk> , where her song was played as she appeared on stage with cheerleaders . On March 29 , Paparizou arrived in Valletta , Malta where she signed autographs , appeared on television stations , and gave interviews to the local media . Following Malta , she traveled to Serbia and Montenegro where she gave additional interviews before moving on to Andorra on April 10 . She was soon in Lisbon , Portugal where she promoted not only her song , but also Greek export products , as she was sponsored by the Greek tourism industry . She attended an international exhibition of food and drink where the song was played for the many tourists , while its music video was seen on a large monitor . On April 20 , 2005 , Paparizou arrived in Sweden where she had started her singing career as part of Antique . She was interviewed by many of the local media outlets and could be heard on radio stations around Stockholm . Following her stay in Sweden , Paparizou flew to Istanbul , Turkey where the Greek delegation met with Patriarch Bartholomew I of Constantinople , who told her that it was good luck that the contest fell on her name @-@ day of May 21 . While in Turkey , she also posed for magazines and was interviewed by the media . She soon returned to Greece before leaving for a short trip to Kiev , the location of the contest . 
 = = At Eurovision = = 
 As Greece had finished the Eurovision Song Contest 2004 in third place , its 2005 song was pre @-@ qualified for the final in 2005 . Greece was drawn to perform nineteenth on the night , following Croatia 's Boris <unk> and Lado with " <unk> <unk> <unk> " and preceding Russia 's Natalia <unk> with " Nobody Hurt No One " . Paparizou appeared confident on stage and her dancers prepared an extravagant show with carefully choreographed stage moves . She wore a short orange @-@ yellow dress while the dancers wore tan colored clothing . The performance included Paparizou playing the lyra , a Greek musical instrument and the backing dancers forming the number 1 on stage . The final was hosted and commentated on Greek television by Alexandra <unk> , who also hosted the national final , while the spokesperson who revealed Greece 's votes for other countries was Alexis <unk> , an ERT Board member who had been the spokesperson since 1998 . 
 " My Number One " won with a total of 230 points . It received 12 points , the maximum number of points a country can give to another country , from Albania , Belgium , Bulgaria , Cyprus , Germany , Hungary , Serbia & Montenegro , Sweden , United Kingdom , and unexpectedly Turkey . The highest viewing ratings in the history of Greek television were recorded during the presentation of the pure gold trophy to Helena Paparizou by the Ukrainian President Viktor Yushchenko , with 94 @.@ 2 % of the Greek population tuned in . 
 = = = Points awarded to Greece = = = 
 = = = Points awarded by Greece = = = 
 = = After Eurovision = = 
 Paparizou 's first words after winning the 50th Eurovision Song Contest were " We showed the modern face of Greece . I reckon that ’ s the face everybody loves . Europe is our home ! " Upon arrival back in Greece , she was greeted by crowds of fans at Eleftherios Venizelos Airport and the National Fire Brigade created a water @-@ jet archway for her airplane , suggestively bearing the number " 001 " , to pass through after it had landed . On the way to ERT Studios for a welcome party for Paparizou and the Greek delegation , people were standing on either side of the road throwing rose petals along the route of Paparizou 's bus . When she reached ERT Studios , she was " met with deafening applause " and after moving from sight for a few minutes , she emerged on stage dressed in the Greek flag and holding the Eurovision trophy . 
 " My Number One " did very well in the music charts , being certified platinum in Greece and gold in Sweden while climbing to number one on both charts and charting for an extended number of weeks . It also charted in other European countries such as Germany , Switzerland , and Austria . It was later released in the United States as a CD Single with remixes and reached number eight on the US Billboard Hot Dance Club Play charting for eight weeks . 
 = SMS Hansa ( 1872 ) = 
 SMS Hansa was a German ironclad warship built in 1868 – 1875 . She was the first ironclad built in Germany ; all previous German ironclads had been built in foreign shipyards . She was named after the Hanseatic League , known in Germany simply as Hanse , Latinized Hansa . The ship was launched in October 1872 and commissioned into the German Imperial Navy ( Kaiserliche Marine ) in May 1875 . Designed for overseas service , Hansa was classed as an armored corvette and armed with eight 21 cm ( 8 @.@ 3 in ) guns in a central battery . 
 Hansa served abroad for the first nine years of her career in the German navy . In 1884 , it was found that her iron hull was badly corroded , which rendered the ship unfit for further active service . She was therefore removed from active duty and used for a variety of secondary roles . From 1884 to 1888 , she served as a guard ship in Kiel , where she also trained engine and boiler room personnel . In 1888 , she was stricken from the naval register and used as a barracks ship in Kiel . She was moved to <unk> in 1905 , where she continued to train boiler room personnel , until 1906 when she was sold to ship @-@ breakers and dismantled for scrap . 
 = = Design = = 
 = = = General characteristics and machinery = = = 
 Hansa was 71 @.@ 73 meters ( 235 @.@ 3 ft ) long at the waterline and 73 @.@ 50 m ( 241 @.@ 1 ft ) long overall . She had a beam of 14 @.@ 10 m ( 46 @.@ 3 ft ) and a draft of 5 @.@ 74 m ( 18 @.@ 8 ft ) forward and 6 @.@ 80 m ( 22 @.@ 3 ft ) aft . The ship was designed to displace 3 @,@ 950 metric tons ( 3 @,@ 890 long tons ; 4 @,@ 350 short tons ) at a normal loading , and up to 4 @,@ 404 t ( 4 @,@ 334 long tons ; 4 @,@ 855 short tons ) with a combat load . The ship 's hull was formed with transverse iron frames and mixed iron and timber construction . The underwater portion of the hull was plated with copper to reduce fouling . It contained six watertight compartments . 
 The German navy found the ship to be very stiff in her sea @-@ keeping qualities . Hansa was very maneuverable and was easily controlled while under sail ; under steam the ship remained highly maneuverable but control suffered . The ship 's crew numbered 28 officers and 371 enlisted men . She carried a number of smaller boats aboard , including two launches , one pinnace , two cutters , one yawl , and one dinghy . The ship also carried an unknown number of picket boats and barges . Anti @-@ torpedo nets were briefly fitted to the ship from 1885 to 1888 . 
 Hansa was powered by a single horizontal three @-@ cylinder single @-@ expansion steam engine built by AG Vulcan in Stettin . The engine drove a single three @-@ bladed screw that was 6 m ( 20 ft ) in diameter . Steam , at a pressure of at 2 standard atmospheres ( 200 kPa ) , was supplied by four trunk boilers in a single boiler room . The boilers were ducted into a single large funnel that could be retracted when the ship was operated under sail . The powerplant was rated at 450 nominal horsepower with a top speed of 12 knots ( 22 km / h ; 14 mph ) . On trials , her propulsion system managed 3 @,@ 275 indicated horsepower ( 2 @,@ 442 kW ) and 12 @.@ 7 knots ( 23 @.@ 5 km / h ; 14 @.@ 6 mph ) . The ship carried 310 t ( 310 long tons ; 340 short tons ) of coal for the boilers , which enabled a maximum range of 1 @,@ 330 nautical miles ( 2 @,@ 460 km ; 1 @,@ 530 mi ) at a cruising speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . Hansa was fully rigged , and had a sail area of 1 @,@ 760 m2 ( 18 @,@ 900 sq ft ) . Steering was controlled by a single rudder . 
 = = = Armament and armor = = = 
 Hansa was armed with eight 21 @-@ centimeter ( 8 @.@ 3 in ) L / 19 hooped guns , each of which was provided with 110 rounds of ammunition . The guns were placed in a two @-@ story arrangement amidships ; four were mounted in a broadside casemate , two on either side of the ship . The other four guns were mounted in casemates on the corners of the lower casemate , which gave the ship a degree of end @-@ on fire capability . The lower guns could depress to − 5 ° and elevate to 13 ° ; at maximum elevation , the guns could reach targets out to 3 @,@ 200 m ( 10 @,@ 500 ft ) . The upper guns had a wider range of elevation ; they could depress to − 8 ° and elevate to 14 ° . At maximum elevation , the guns had a range of 5 @,@ 700 m ( 18 @,@ 700 ft ) . 
 Hansa 's armor consisted of teak @-@ backed wrought iron , which was manufactured in Great Britain . Her armored belt was 152 mm ( 6 @.@ 0 in ) thick amidships , where it protected the ship 's vitals . On the bow and stern , the belt was reduced to 114 mm ( 4 @.@ 5 in ) in thickness . The entire belt was backed with 306 mm ( 12 @.@ 0 in ) of timber . The casemates were armored with 114 mm thick sloping iron plates . The lower battery casemate had 114 mm thick transverse armored bulkheads on either end of the side armor . 
 = = Service history = = 
 Hansa was laid down at the Royal Dockyard in Danzig in 1868 . She was the first ironclad warship to be built in a German shipyard ; her predecessors had all been built in French and British shipyards . The ship was launched on 26 October 1872 and moved to the AG Vulcan shipyard in Stettin for fitting out work . The work proceeded very slowly , and Hansa was not commissioned into the German fleet until 19 May 1875 , two and a half years after her launch . By comparison , all of the earlier foreign @-@ built ironclads were completed in less than a year . 
 Designed for overseas service protecting Germany 's maritime trade , Hansa spent the first nine years of her career abroad . In 1884 , it was found that her hull was badly corroded ; this stemmed from the lengthy construction period , during which the iron had already begun to corrode . As a result of the poor shape of her hull , Hansa was removed from active service in 1884 and used as a guard ship in Kiel . While in Kiel , she was also used as a training ship for engine @-@ room personnel and stokers . She was formally stricken from the naval register on 6 August 1888 . She was then used as a floating barracks in Kiel , until 1905 . Hansa was then moved to <unk> , hulked , and used to train stokers . The ship did not last long in this service , and was sold in March 1906 for 96 @,@ 000 marks . Hansa was broken up later that year in Swinemünde . 
 = Battle of Ridgefield = 
 The Battle of Ridgefield was a battle and a series of skirmishes between American and British forces during the American Revolutionary War . The main battle was fought in the village of Ridgefield , Connecticut on April 27 , 1777 and more skirmishing occurred the next day between Ridgefield and the coastline near modern Westport , Connecticut . 
 On April 25 , 1777 a British force under the command of the Royal Governor of the Province of New York , Major General William Tryon landed between Fairfield and Norwalk ( in what is now Westport ) , and marched from there to Danbury . There they destroyed Continental Army supplies after chasing off a small garrison of troops . When word of the British troop movements spread , Connecticut militia leaders sprang into action . Major General David Wooster , Brigadier General Gold S. Silliman , and Brigadier General Benedict Arnold raised a combined force of roughly 700 Continental Army regular and irregular local militia forces to oppose the British , but could not reach Danbury in time to prevent the destruction of the supplies . Instead , they set out to harass the British on their return to the coast . 
 The company led by General Wooster twice attacked Tryon 's rear guard during their march south on April 27 . In the second encounter , Wooster was mortally wounded ; he died five days later . The main encounter then took place at Ridgefield , where several hundred militia under Arnold 's command confronted the British and were driven away in a running battle down the town 's main street , but not before inflicting casualties on the British . Additional militia forces arrived , and the next day they continued to harass the British as they returned to Compo Beach , where the fleet awaited them . Arnold regrouped the militia and some artillery to make a stand against the British near their landing site , but his position was flanked and his force scattered by artillery fire and a bayonet charge . 
 The expedition was a tactical success for the British forces , but their actions in pursuing the raid galvanized Patriot support in Connecticut . While the British again made raids on Connecticut 's coastal communities ( including a second raiding expedition by Tryon in 1779 and a 1781 raid led by Arnold after his defection to the British side ) , they made no more raids that penetrated far into the countryside . 
 = = Background = = 
 In the first two years of the American Revolutionary War , the state of Connecticut had not been the scene of conflict , even though the war had begun in neighboring Massachusetts in April 1775 , and New York City had been taken by the British in a campaign in the fall of 1776 . Major General William Howe , commanding the British forces in New York , drafted a plan for 1777 in which the primary goal was the taking of the rebel capital , Philadelphia . Troops left to defend New York were to include a brigade of 3 @,@ 000 provincial troops under the command of the former royal governor of New York , William Tryon , who was given a temporary promotion as " major general of the provincials " in spring 1777 . Howe 's plan included authorization for Tryon to " operate on Hudson 's River , or ... enter Connecticut as circumstances may point out . " Tryon was given one of the early operations of the season , a raid against a Continental Army depot at Danbury , Connecticut . Howe had learned of the depot 's existence through the efforts of a spy working for British Indian agent Guy Johnson , and had also met with some success in an earlier raid against the Continental Army outpost at Peekskill , New York . 
 A fleet consisting of 12 transports , a hospital ship , and some small craft was assembled and placed under the command of Captain Henry Duncan . The landing force consisted of 1 @,@ 500 regulars drawn from the 4th , 15th , 23rd , 27th , 44th and 64th regiments , 300 Loyalists from the Prince of Wales American Regiment led by Montfort Browne , and a small contingent of the 17th Light Dragoons , all led by Generals Sir William Erskine and James Agnew . Command of the entire operation was given to General Tryon , and the fleet sailed from New York on April 22 , 1777 . 
 The Danbury depot had been established by order of the Second Continental Congress in 1776 , and primarily served forces located in the Hudson River valley . In April 1777 the army began mustering regiments for that year 's campaigns . When Tryon 's expedition landed in Connecticut , there were about 50 Continental Army soldiers and 100 local militia at Danbury under the command of Joseph Platt Cooke , a local resident and a colonel in the state militia . 
 = = Danbury = = 
 Commodore Duncan anchored his fleet on April 25 at the mouth of the Saugatuck River , and landed Tryon 's troops on the eastern shore at a place called Compo Point in what is now Westport , but was then still part of Fairfield . They then moved inland about 8 miles ( 13 km ) and encamped in an area that is now part of Weston . The march continued the next day , and they reached Danbury early that afternoon . All along the march militia fired on them , attempting to slow their advance . They drove off Cooke 's troops , who had been attempting to remove supplies , killing at least three and capturing at least two in skirmishes . Before their departure early the next morning , the British destroyed 4 @,@ 000 to 5 @,@ 000 barrels of pork , beef , and flour , 5 @,@ 000 pairs of shoes , 2 @,@ 000 bushels of grain , and 1 @,@ 600 tents among other supplies ; the troops were also reported to consume significant quantities of rum . The tory houses had marks on their chimneys so they avoided the torch . 
 The British fleet was first spotted when it passed Norwalk . When the troops landed , Patriot messengers were dispatched to warn Danbury and local militia leaders of the movements . Major General David Wooster and Brigadier General Benedict Arnold were in New Haven when messengers reached them on April 26 . Wooster immediately sent the local militia to Fairfield . When he and Arnold reached Fairfield , they learned that General Silliman , the commander of the Fairfield County militia , had already departed for Redding , with orders that any militia raised should follow as rapidly as possible . Wooster and Arnold immediately moved in that direction . Including their troop of volunteers , Silliman assembled a force numbering about 500 militia members and 100 Continental Army regulars . Messages broadcasting the alarm went as far as Peekskill , where Alexander McDougall began mobilizing Continental Army troops garrisoned there to intercept Tryon in case he entered Westchester County . The force then moved out , heading toward Danbury in a pouring rain . By 11 pm they had only reached Bethel , about 2 miles ( 3 km ) short of Danbury . Since their wet gunpowder would make battle impossible , they chose to spend the night there rather than press on to Danbury . 
 = = Ridgefield = = 
 Tryon was alerted to the presence of the Americans in Bethel around 1 am on April 27 , cutting short thoughts of remaining for another day in Danbury . <unk> the troops , he ordered the houses of Patriots to be burned ; in all , more than twenty structures were destroyed . The troops then left Danbury around dawn , and marched south toward the village of Ridgefield in an attempt to avoid General Wooster 's force . Hoping to delay General Tryon until overwhelming reinforcements arrived , General Wooster split his force . The main body , about 400 men , went with Generals Arnold and Silliman across the countryside to Ridgefield , where they were met by another 100 militiamen , and erected crude barricades on the road through town . General Wooster personally chased after the British column with the remaining 200 ; his effort was assisted by local Patriots who created impediments before the British column , including the destruction of at least one bridge . Taking advantage of the element of surprise , Wooster engaged Tryon 's rear guard as it paused for breakfast about 3 miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) north of the town of Ridgefield . Killing at least two British soldiers , Wooster took about forty prisoners in this first engagement , and then retreated for cover in nearby woods . He struck again an hour later , but the British were more prepared for a second engagement , having positioned three artillery pieces with their rear guard , spraying the colonials with grape shot . Rallying his men , the 67 @-@ year @-@ old General Wooster was mortally wounded moments after yelling " Come on my boys ! Never mind such random shots ! " about 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) from Ridgefield 's town center ; his inexperienced militia dissolved in confusion . Wooster died five days later in Danbury at the home of Nehemiah Dibble , whose house had also served as General Tryon 's temporary quarters in Danbury . Wooster 's last words were reported to be " I am dying , but with a strong hope and persuasion that my country will gain her independence . " Wooster 's harassment of the British column had provided enough time for Arnold and Silliman to prepare a crude defensive position at Ridgefield . 
 The British column arrived at the base of Arnold 's barricade at the northern end of Ridgefield 's town center sometime after noon . Following an hour @-@ long artillery barrage of the barricade , Tryon dispatched flanking parties to test both sides of the American position . Having anticipated this move , General Silliman posted forces at both flanks that blunted initial thrusts . <unk> the Patriot forces by more than three to one , Tryon chose to advance on all three fronts including a 600 @-@ man column under covering artillery fire against the barricade itself under the leadership of General Erskine . Tryon directed General Agnew to send out flankers , whose enfilading fire helped breach the barricade . The British then pursued the Patriot forces in a running battle the length of Town Street , and gained control of the town . With 12 dead and 24 wounded , the Americans withdrew under General Arnold 's orders . After the barricade was breached , Arnold was positioned between his men and an advancing enemy platoon when his horse was struck by nine musket shots . The horse went down , and Arnold was pinned and tangled in its trappings . A British soldier charged him shouting for Arnold to surrender . Arnold shouted " Not Yet " and shot and killed the solder . He then ran off with his troops with a slightly injured leg . This entire engagement took around fifteen minutes . 
 = = British return to the fleet = = 
 After encamping for the night just south of Ridgefield , the British forces departed the next morning , leaving six houses and the Episcopal church ( a Patriot supply depot and field hospital ) in flames . During the night , the militia had regrouped under the command of Continental Army Colonel Jedediah Huntington , and were expanded to about 500 men by the arrival of more militia from Connecticut , as well as a militia force from neighboring Dutchess County , New York led by Colonel Henry Ludington . This force engaged in a swarming harassment of the British column as it moved south that resembled the British retreat from Concord at the start of the war . From behind convenient stone walls , trees , and buildings the militia constantly fired at the British column as it headed back toward Compo Beach . 
 In the meantime , General Arnold had gathered about 500 reinforcements further south , including a small company of Continental artillery led by Colonel John Lamb . Arnold adopted a strong position on Compo Hill that commanded the roads leading across the Saugatuck River toward the beach , and waited for the British to arrive . Tryon 's force forded the Saugatuck River well above Arnold 's position . This prompted Arnold and the chasing militia , now led by General Silliman , to attempt an entrapment of the British before they reached the beach . However , the British column , moving at full speed , was able to gain the high ground , and was joined by some fresh marines landed from the ships to provide cover for the embarkation . Arnold then prepared his force to attack the British , but a well @-@ timed bayonet charge by Erskine 's men broke the formation in spite of determined action by Lamb 's artillery and Arnold 's attempts to rally the troops . During the skirmish , Arnold had a second horse shot out under him , and Lamb was injured . The British successfully embarked and sailed for New York . 
 The official British report listed 26 killed , 117 wounded , and 29 missing . The Pennsylvania Journal reported on May 14 , 1777 that the British casualties were 14 enlisted men killed , with 10 officers and 80 enlisted men wounded . The New York Gazette of May 19 , 1777 published a Patriot account stating that 40 British prisoners were taken by the Americans . Douglas Southall Freeman , on the other hand , gave the British loss as 154 killed and wounded . 
 The Americans were reported to lose about 20 killed , with between 40 and 80 wounded , although the British claimed in their reports that more than 100 Americans were killed , and over 250 were wounded . They also incorrectly reported that Colonel Lamb was killed ; his injuries were severe enough that he appeared to be dead on the field . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Although Tryon 's raid on Danbury and actions in Ridgefield were tactical British successes , the resistance by American forces and a consequent rise in American military enrollments in the area deterred the British from ever again attempting a landing by ship to attack inland colonial strongholds during the war . The British also would never again conduct inland operations in Connecticut , despite western Connecticut 's strategic importance in securing the Hudson River Valley . 
 The British destroyed at least 19 houses and 22 stores and barns , along with many military and medical supplies . The town estimated that the expedition caused more than £ 16 @,@ 000 in damage , and submitted claims to Congress for recompense . Congress issued a payment of £ 500 to the town selectmen in response . Further applications were made to the state 's General Assembly in 1787 , which resulted in the awarding of land in the Ohio Country that now includes Sandusky , Ohio . 
 The raid increased support in the area for the Patriot cause , thus negating the short @-@ term gains by Tryon against Patriots in territory that had previously been neutral . Soon after Tryon sailed away from Compo Beach , approximately 3 @,@ 000 Connecticut citizens joined the Connecticut Army of Reserve . In May , Lieutenant Colonel Return Jonathan Meigs led a reprisal raid from Connecticut against a British position in Sag Harbor , New York . Connecticut later sent a company of cavalry and two full regiments to assist Major General Horatio Gates in the defeat of Lieutenant General John Burgoyne at the pivotal Battles of Saratoga in September and October 1777 , and sent militia companies to assist in the defense of the Hudson at Peekskill . Tryon again raided Connecticut in 1779 , but the expedition was limited to raiding port towns . The last major raiding expedition the British conducted was ironically led by Benedict Arnold after he changed sides ; his 1781 raid on New London included stiff resistance by the militia at Groton Heights . 
 Benedict Arnold was well rewarded for his role in the affair . He had planned , after visiting his family in New Haven , to travel to Philadelphia to protest to the Second Continental Congress the promotion of other , more junior officers , to major general ahead of him . In recognition for his role at Ridgefield he received a promotion to major general , although his command seniority over those other officers was not restored . He was also awarded a horse " properly caparisoned as a token of ... approbation of his gallant conduct ... in the late <unk> to Danbury . " ( Arnold 's seniority was restored after his important contributions to the success at Saratoga . ) 
 = = Sybil 's ride = = 
 Sybil Ludington , the 16 @-@ year @-@ old daughter of Dutchess County 's Colonel Henry Ludington , performed a significant service for the Patriot cause before the battle . When an exhausted messenger arrived at the Ludington house to inform them of the British advance on Danbury , she volunteered to ride throughout the county to round up the local militia . In an act favorably comparable to the ride of Paul Revere to raise the alarm at Lexington and Concord , she rode more than 40 miles ( 64 km ) through a rainy night , alerting Patriots and avoiding Loyalists to raise the troops . Although Ludington 's men were too late to assist at Ridgefield , they formed part of the force that harassed the British on their return to the beach . The American animated children 's educational series Liberty 's Kids retold the story of Sybil Ludington and of the Battle of Danbury in its twenty @-@ first episode . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Beginning in 1877 , residents of Ridgefield have remembered the battle with some form of anniversary ceremony every twenty @-@ five years . A full day tribute was hosted at former Connecticut Governor Phineas C. <unk> 's Town Street mansion in conjunction with the town 's bicentennial celebration in 1908 . The 150th anniversary affair in 1927 featured the publication of George <unk> Rockwell 's History of Ridgefield , and the 200th anniversary was held a year early to tie in with America 's bicentennial celebration in 1976 . The bicentennial and 225th anniversary celebrations included re @-@ enactments of the battle , for which portions of Town Street ( now Main Street ) were covered with dirt for sake of authenticity . 
 In 1854 , a monument was erected in Ridgefield to honor David Wooster . The Keeler Tavern , now a local museum , features a British cannonball still lodged in the side of the building . Educational markers are maintained at various points of significance throughout the town , including the locations where David Wooster was mortally wounded and Benedict Arnold was pinned by his shot horse . A stone marker near the site of the barricade marks a spot where both Patriot and British troops were buried together . In New Haven , a public square was named for Wooster , as was Wooster Street . 
 The battle is depicted in the Newbery Honor @-@ winning book My Brother Sam is Dead by Christopher and James Lincoln Collier . 
 = Philosophy of mind = 
 Philosophy of mind is a branch of philosophy that studies the nature of the mind , mental events , mental functions , mental properties , consciousness , and their relationship to the physical body , particularly the brain . The mind – body problem , i.e. the relationship of the mind to the body , is commonly seen as one key issue in philosophy of mind , although there are other issues concerning the nature of the mind that do not involve its relation to the physical body , such as how consciousness is possible and the nature of particular mental states . 
 Dualism and monism are the two major schools of thought that attempt to resolve the mind – body problem . Dualism can be traced back to the Sankhya and Yoga schools of Hindu philosophy , and Plato , but it was also formulated by René Descartes in the 17th century . Substance dualists argue that the mind is an independently existing substance , whereas property dualists maintain that the mind is a group of independent properties that emerge from and cannot be reduced to the brain , but that it is not a distinct substance . 
 <unk> is the position that mind and body are not ontologically distinct kinds of entities ( independent substances ) . This view was first advocated in Western philosophy by Parmenides in the 5th century BC and was later espoused by the 17th century rationalist Baruch Spinoza . <unk> argue that only entities postulated by physical theory exist , and that mental processes will eventually be explained in terms of these entities as physical theory continues to evolve . <unk> maintain various positions on the prospects of reducing mental properties to physical properties ( many of whom adopt compatible forms of property dualism ) , and the ontological status of such mental properties remains unclear . Idealists maintain that the mind is all that exists and that the external world is either mental itself , or an illusion created by the mind . Neutral monists such as Ernst Mach and William James argue that events in the world can be thought of as either mental ( psychological ) or physical depending on the network of relationships into which they enter , and dual @-@ aspect monists such as Spinoza adhere to the position that there is some other , neutral substance , and that both matter and mind are properties of this unknown substance . The most common monisms in the 20th and 21st centuries have all been variations of physicalism ; these positions include behaviorism , the type identity theory , anomalous monism and functionalism . 
 Most modern philosophers of mind adopt either a reductive or non @-@ reductive physicalist position , maintaining in their different ways that the mind is not something separate from the body . These approaches have been particularly influential in the sciences , especially in the fields of sociobiology , computer science , evolutionary psychology and the various neurosciences . <unk> <unk> assert that all mental states and properties will eventually be explained by scientific accounts of physiological processes and states . Non @-@ reductive <unk> argue that although the mind is not a separate substance , mental properties supervene on physical properties , or that the predicates and vocabulary used in mental descriptions and explanations are indispensable , and cannot be reduced to the language and lower @-@ level explanations of physical science . Continued neuroscientific progress has helped to clarify some of these issues ; however , they are far from being resolved . Modern philosophers of mind continue to ask how the subjective qualities and the intentionality of mental states and properties can be explained in naturalistic terms . 
 = = Mind – body problem = = 
 The mind – body problem concerns the explanation of the relationship that exists between minds , or mental processes , and bodily states or processes . The main aim of philosophers working in this area is to determine the nature of the mind and mental states / processes , and how — or even if — minds are affected by and can affect the body . 
 Our perceptual experiences depend on stimuli that arrive at our various sensory organs from the external world , and these stimuli cause changes in our mental states , ultimately causing us to feel a sensation , which may be pleasant or unpleasant . Someone 's desire for a slice of pizza , for example , will tend to cause that person to move his or her body in a specific manner and in a specific direction to obtain what he or she wants . The question , then , is how it can be possible for conscious experiences to arise out of a lump of gray matter endowed with nothing but electrochemical properties . 
 A related problem is how someone 's propositional attitudes ( e.g. beliefs and desires ) cause that individual 's neurons to fire and his muscles to contract . These comprise some of the puzzles that have confronted <unk> and philosophers of mind from at least the time of René Descartes . 
 = = <unk> solutions to the mind – body problem = = 
 Dualism is a set of views about the relationship between mind and matter ( or body ) . It begins with the claim that mental phenomena are , in some respects , non @-@ physical . One of the earliest known formulations of mind – body dualism was expressed in the eastern Sankhya and Yoga schools of Hindu philosophy ( c . 650 BCE ) , which divided the world into purusha ( mind / spirit ) and <unk> ( material substance ) . Specifically , the Yoga Sutra of Patanjali presents an analytical approach to the nature of the mind . 
 In Western Philosophy , the earliest discussions of dualist ideas are in the writings of Plato who maintained that humans ' " intelligence " ( a faculty of the mind or soul ) could not be identified with , or explained in terms of , their physical body . However , the best @-@ known version of dualism is due to René Descartes ( 1641 ) , and holds that the mind is a non @-@ extended , non @-@ physical substance , a " res cogitans " . Descartes was the first to clearly identify the mind with consciousness and self @-@ awareness , and to distinguish this from the brain , which was the seat of intelligence . He was therefore the first to formulate the mind – body problem in the form in which it still exists today . 
 = = = Arguments for dualism = = = 
 The most frequently used argument in favour of dualism appeals to the common @-@ sense intuition that conscious experience is distinct from inanimate matter . If asked what the mind is , the average person would usually respond by identifying it with their self , their personality , their soul , or some other such entity . They would almost certainly deny that the mind simply is the brain , or vice versa , finding the idea that there is just one ontological entity at play to be too mechanistic , or simply unintelligible . Many modern philosophers of mind think that these intuitions are misleading and that we should use our critical faculties , along with empirical evidence from the sciences , to examine these assumptions to determine whether there is any real basis to them . 
 Another important argument in favor of dualism is that the mental and the physical seem to have quite different , and perhaps irreconcilable , properties . Mental events have a subjective quality , whereas physical events do not . So , for example , one can reasonably ask what a burnt finger feels like , or what a blue sky looks like , or what nice music sounds like to a person . But it is meaningless , or at least odd , to ask what a surge in the uptake of glutamate in the dorsolateral portion of the hippocampus feels like . 
 Philosophers of mind call the subjective aspects of mental events " qualia " or " raw feels " . There is something that it is like to feel pain , to see a familiar shade of blue , and so on . There are qualia involved in these mental events that seem particularly difficult to reduce to anything physical . David Chalmers explains this argument by stating that we could conceivably know all the objective information about something , such as the brain states and wavelengths of light involved with seeing the color red , but still not know something fundamental about the situation – what it is like to see the color red . 
 If consciousness ( the mind ) can exist independently of physical reality ( the brain ) , one must explain how physical memories are created concerning consciousness . Dualism must therefore explain how consciousness affects physical reality . One possible explanation is that of a miracle , proposed by Arnold <unk> and Nicolas <unk> , where all mind – body interactions require the direct intervention of God . 
 Another possible argument that has been proposed by C. S. Lewis is the Argument from Reason : if , as monism implies , all of our thoughts are the effects of physical causes , then we have no reason for assuming that they are also the consequent of a reasonable ground . Knowledge , however , is apprehended by reasoning from ground to consequent . Therefore , if monism is correct , there would be no way of knowing this — or anything else — we could not even suppose it , except by a fluke . 
 The zombie argument is based on a thought experiment proposed by Todd Moody , and developed by David Chalmers in his book The Conscious Mind . The basic idea is that one can imagine one 's body , and therefore conceive the existence of one 's body , without any conscious states being associated with this body . Chalmers ' argument is that it seems possible that such a being could exist because all that is needed is that all and only the things that the physical sciences describe about a zombie must be true of it . Since none of the concepts involved in these sciences make reference to consciousness or other mental phenomena , and any physical entity can be by definition described scientifically via physics , the move from <unk> to possibility is not such a large one . Others such as Dennett have argued that the notion of a philosophical zombie is an incoherent , or unlikely , concept . It has been argued under physicalism that one must either believe that anyone including oneself might be a zombie , or that no one can be a zombie — following from the assertion that one 's own conviction about being ( or not being ) a zombie is a product of the physical world and is therefore no different from anyone else 's . This argument has been expressed by Dennett who argues that " Zombies think they are conscious , think they have qualia , think they suffer pains — they are just ' wrong ' ( according to this lamentable tradition ) in ways that neither they nor we could ever discover ! " See also the problem of other minds . 
 = = = <unk> dualism = = = 
 <unk> dualism , or simply interactionism , is the particular form of dualism first espoused by Descartes in the Meditations . In the 20th century , its major defenders have been Karl Popper and John Carew Eccles . It is the view that mental states , such as beliefs and desires , causally interact with physical states . 
 Descartes ' famous argument for this position can be summarized as follows : Seth has a clear and distinct idea of his mind as a thinking thing that has no spatial extension ( i.e. , it cannot be measured in terms of length , weight , height , and so on ) . He also has a clear and distinct idea of his body as something that is spatially extended , subject to quantification and not able to think . It follows that mind and body are not identical because they have radically different properties . 
 At the same time , however , it is clear that Seth 's mental states ( desires , beliefs , etc . ) have causal effects on his body and vice versa : A child touches a hot stove ( physical event ) which causes pain ( mental event ) and makes her yell ( physical event ) , this in turn provokes a sense of fear and protectiveness in the caregiver ( mental event ) , and so on . 
 Descartes ' argument crucially depends on the premise that what Seth believes to be " clear and distinct " ideas in his mind are necessarily true . Many contemporary philosophers doubt this . For example , Joseph Agassi suggests that several scientific discoveries made since the early 20th century have undermined the idea of privileged access to one 's own ideas . Freud claimed that a psychologically @-@ trained observer can understand a person 's unconscious motivations better than the person himself does . Duhem has shown that a philosopher of science can know a person 's methods of discovery better than that person herself does , while Malinowski has shown that an anthropologist can know a person 's customs and habits better than the person whose customs and habits they are . He also asserts that modern psychological experiments that cause people to see things that are not there provide grounds for rejecting Descartes ' argument , because scientists can describe a person 's perceptions better than the person herself can . The weakness common to all these arguments against interactionism is that they put all introspective insight in doubt . We know people make mistakes about the world ( including another 's internal states ) , but not always . Therefore , it is logically absurd to assume persons are always in error about their own mental states and judgements about the nature of the mind itself . 
 = = = Other forms of dualism = = = 
 = = = = <unk> parallelism = = = = 
 <unk> parallelism , or simply parallelism , is the view that mind and body , while having distinct ontological statuses , do not causally influence one another . Instead , they run along parallel paths ( mind events causally interact with mind events and brain events causally interact with brain events ) and only seem to influence each other . This view was most prominently defended by Gottfried Leibniz . Although Leibniz was an ontological monist who believed that only one type of substance , the <unk> , exists in the universe , and that everything is reducible to it , he nonetheless maintained that there was an important distinction between " the mental " and " the physical " in terms of causation . He held that God had arranged things in advance so that minds and bodies would be in harmony with each other . This is known as the doctrine of pre @-@ established harmony . 
 = = = = <unk> = = = = 
 <unk> is the view espoused by Nicholas <unk> that asserts that all supposedly causal relations between physical events , or between physical and mental events , are not really causal at all . While body and mind are different substances , causes ( whether mental or physical ) are related to their effects by an act of God 's intervention on each specific occasion . 
 = = = = Property dualism = = = = 
 Property dualism is the view that the world is constituted of just one kind of substance – the physical kind – and there exist two distinct kinds of properties : physical properties and mental properties . In other words , it is the view that non @-@ physical , mental properties ( such as beliefs , desires and emotions ) <unk> in some physical bodies ( at least , brains ) . How mental and physical properties relate causally depends on the variety of property dualism in question , and is not always a clear issue . Sub @-@ varieties of property dualism include : 
 Strong emergentism asserts that when matter is organized in the appropriate way ( i.e. in the way that living human bodies are organized ) , mental properties emerge in a way not fully accountable for by physical laws . Hence , it is a form of emergent materialism . These emergent properties have an independent ontological status and cannot be reduced to , or explained in terms of , the physical substrate from which they emerge . They are dependent on the physical properties from which they emerge , but opinions vary as to the coherence of top – down causation , i.e. the causal effectiveness of such properties . A form of property dualism has been espoused by David Chalmers and the concept has undergone something of a renaissance in recent years , but was already suggested in the 19th century by William James . 
 <unk> is a doctrine first formulated by Thomas Henry Huxley . It consists of the view that mental phenomena are causally ineffectual , where one or more mental states do not have any influence on physical states or mental phenomena are the effects , but not the causes , of physical phenomena . Physical events can cause other physical events and physical events can cause mental events , but mental events cannot cause anything , since they are just causally inert by @-@ products ( i.e. <unk> ) of the physical world . This view has been defended most strongly in recent times by Frank Jackson . 
 Non @-@ reductive Physicalism is the view that mental properties form a separate ontological class to physical properties : mental states ( such as qualia ) are not reducible to physical states . The ontological stance towards qualia in the case of non @-@ reductive physicalism does not imply that qualia are causally inert ; this is what distinguishes it from epiphenomenalism . 
 <unk> is the view that all matter has a mental aspect , or , alternatively , all objects have a unified center of experience or point of view . Superficially , it seems to be a form of property dualism , since it regards everything as having both mental and physical properties . However , some <unk> say mechanical behaviour is derived from primitive mentality of atoms and molecules — as are sophisticated mentality and organic behaviour , the difference being attributed to the presence or absence of complex structure in a compound object . So long as the reduction of non @-@ mental properties to mental ones is in place , panpsychism is not a ( strong ) form of property dualism ; otherwise it is . 
 = = = = Dual aspect theory = = = = 
 Dual aspect theory or dual @-@ aspect monism is the view that the mental and the physical are two aspects of , or perspectives on , the same substance . ( Thus it is a mixed position , which is monistic in some respects ) . In modern philosophical writings , the theory 's relationship to neutral monism has become somewhat ill @-@ defined , but one proffered distinction says that whereas neutral monism allows the context of a given group of neutral elements and the relationships into which they enter to determine whether the group can be thought of as mental , physical , both , or neither , dual @-@ aspect theory suggests that the mental and the physical are manifestations ( or aspects ) of some underlying substance , entity or process that is itself neither mental nor physical as normally understood . Various formulations of dual @-@ aspect monism also require the mental and the physical to be complementary , mutually irreducible and perhaps inseparable ( though distinct ) . 
 = = = = Experiential dualism = = = = 
 A philosophy of mind that regards the degrees of freedom between mental and physical well @-@ being as not necessarily synonymous and thus implying an experiential dualism between body and mind . As example of these disparate degrees of freedom is given by Allan Wallace who notes that it is , " <unk> apparent that one may be physically uncomfortable — for instance , while engaging in a strenuous physical workout — while mentally cheerful ; conversely , one may be mentally distraught while experiencing physical comfort . " Experiential dualism notes that our subjective experience of merely seeing something in the physical world seems qualitatively different than mental processes like grief that comes from losing a loved one for instance . This philosophy also is a proponent of causal dualism which is defined as the dual ability for mental states and physical states to affect one another . Mental states can cause changes in physical states and vice versa . 
 However , unlike cartesian dualism or some other systems , experiential dualism does not posit two fundamental substances in reality : mind and matter . Rather , experiential dualism is to be understood as a conceptual framework that gives credence to the qualitative difference between the experience of mental and physical states . Experiential dualism is accepted as the conceptual framework of Madhyamaka Buddhism . 
 <unk> Buddhism goes even further , finding fault with the monist view of physicalist philosophies of mind as well in that these generally posit matter and energy as the fundamental substance of reality . Nonetheless , this does not imply that the cartesian dualist view is correct , rather Madhyamaka regards as error any affirming view of a fundamental substance to reality . 
 In denying the independent self @-@ existence of all the phenomena that make up the world of our experience , the Madhyamaka view departs from both the substance dualism of Descartes and the substance monism — namely , physicalism — that is characteristic of modern science . The physicalism propounded by many contemporary scientists seems to assert that the real world is composed of physical things @-@ in @-@ themselves , while all mental phenomena are regarded as mere appearances , devoid of any reality in and of themselves . Much is made of this difference between appearances and reality . 
 Indeed , physicalism or the idea that matter is the only fundamental substance of reality is explicitly rejected by Buddhism . 
 In the Madhyamaka view , mental events are no more or less real than physical events . In terms of our common @-@ sense experience , differences of kind do exist between physical and mental phenomena . While the former commonly have mass , location , velocity , shape , size , and numerous other physical attributes , these are not generally characteristic of mental phenomena . For example , we do not commonly conceive of the feeling of affection for another person as having mass or location . These physical attributes are no more appropriate to other mental events such as sadness , a recalled image from one ’ s childhood , the visual perception of a rose , or consciousness of any sort . Mental phenomena are , therefore , not regarded as being physical , for the simple reason that they lack many of the attributes that are uniquely characteristic of physical phenomena . Thus , Buddhism has never adopted the physicalist principle that regards only physical things as real . 
 = = = = <unk> dualism = = = = 
 = = <unk> solutions to the mind – body problem = = 
 In contrast to dualism , monism does not accept any fundamental divisions . The fundamentally disparate nature of reality has been central to forms of eastern philosophies for over two millennia . In Indian and Chinese philosophy , monism is integral to how experience is understood . Today , the most common forms of monism in Western philosophy are physicalist . <unk> monism asserts that the only existing substance is physical , in some sense of that term to be clarified by our best science . However , a variety of formulations ( see below ) are possible . Another form of monism , idealism , states that the only existing substance is mental . Although pure idealism , such as that of George Berkeley , is uncommon in contemporary Western philosophy , a more sophisticated variant called panpsychism , according to which mental experience and properties may be at the foundation of physical experience and properties , has been espoused by some philosophers such as Alfred North Whitehead and David Ray Griffin . 
 <unk> is the theory that representations ( or sense data ) of external objects are all that exist . Such a view was briefly adopted by Bertrand Russell and many of the logical positivists during the early 20th century . A third possibility is to accept the existence of a basic substance that is neither physical nor mental . The mental and physical would then both be properties of this neutral substance . Such a position was adopted by Baruch Spinoza and was popularized by Ernst Mach in the 19th century . This neutral monism , as it is called , resembles property dualism . 
 = = = <unk> monisms = = = 
 = = = = <unk> = = = = 
 <unk> dominated philosophy of mind for much of the 20th century , especially the first half . In psychology , behaviorism developed as a reaction to the inadequacies of <unk> . <unk> reports on one 's own interior mental life are not subject to careful examination for accuracy and cannot be used to form predictive generalizations . Without <unk> and the possibility of third @-@ person examination , the behaviorists argued , psychology cannot be scientific . The way out , therefore , was to eliminate the idea of an interior mental life ( and hence an ontologically independent mind ) altogether and focus instead on the description of observable behavior . 
 Parallel to these developments in psychology , a philosophical behaviorism ( sometimes called logical behaviorism ) was developed . This is characterized by a strong verificationism , which generally considers unverifiable statements about interior mental life pointless . For the behaviorist , mental states are not interior states on which one can make introspective reports . They are just descriptions of behavior or dispositions to behave in certain ways , made by third parties to explain and predict another 's behavior . 
 Philosophical behaviorism has fallen out of favor since the latter half of the 20th century , coinciding with the rise of <unk> . <unk> reject behaviorism due to several perceived problems . For example , behaviorism could be said to be counter @-@ intuitive when it maintains that someone is talking about behavior in the event that a person is experiencing a painful headache . 
 = = = = Identity theory = = = = 
 Type physicalism ( or type @-@ identity theory ) was developed by John Smart and <unk> Place as a direct reaction to the failure of behaviorism . These philosophers reasoned that , if mental states are something material , but not behavioral , then mental states are probably identical to internal states of the brain . In very simplified terms : a mental state M is nothing other than brain state B. The mental state " desire for a cup of coffee " would thus be nothing more than the " firing of certain neurons in certain brain regions " . 
 Despite its initial plausibility , the identity theory faces a strong challenge in the form of the thesis of multiple realizability , first formulated by Hilary Putnam . It is obvious that not only humans , but many different species of animals can , for example , experience pain . However , it seems highly unlikely that all of these diverse organisms with the same pain experience are in the identical brain state . And if this is the case , then pain cannot be identical to a specific brain state . The identity theory is thus empirically unfounded . 
 On the other hand , even granted the above , it does not follow that identity theories of all types must be abandoned . According to token identity theories , the fact that a certain brain state is connected with only one mental state of a person does not have to mean that there is an absolute correlation between types of mental state and types of brain state . The type – token distinction can be illustrated by a simple example : the word " green " contains four types of letters ( g , r , e , n ) with two tokens ( occurrences ) of the letter e along with one each of the others . The idea of token identity is that only particular occurrences of mental events are identical with particular occurrences or <unk> of physical events . Anomalous monism ( see below ) and most other non @-@ reductive <unk> are token @-@ identity theories . Despite these problems , there is a renewed interest in the type identity theory today , primarily due to the influence of <unk> Kim . 
 = = = = Functionalism = = = = 
 Functionalism was formulated by Hilary Putnam and Jerry Fodor as a reaction to the inadequacies of the identity theory . Putnam and Fodor saw mental states in terms of an empirical computational theory of the mind . At about the same time or slightly after , D.M. Armstrong and David Kellogg Lewis formulated a version of functionalism that analyzed the mental concepts of folk psychology in terms of functional roles . Finally , Wittgenstein 's idea of meaning as use led to a version of functionalism as a theory of meaning , further developed by Wilfrid Sellars and Gilbert Harman . Another one , <unk> , is an approach adopted by the naturalistic philosophy of mind associated with Jerry Fodor and Zenon <unk> . 
 What all these different varieties of functionalism share in common is the thesis that mental states are characterized by their causal relations with other mental states and with sensory inputs and behavioral outputs . That is , functionalism abstracts away from the details of the physical implementation of a mental state by characterizing it in terms of non @-@ mental functional properties . For example , a kidney is characterized scientifically by its functional role in filtering blood and maintaining certain chemical balances . From this point of view , it does not really matter whether the kidney be made up of organic tissue , plastic nanotubes or silicon chips : it is the role that it plays and its relations to other organs that define it as a kidney . 
 = = = = Non @-@ reductive physicalism = = = = 
 Non @-@ reductionist philosophers hold firmly to two essential convictions with regard to mind – body relations : 1 ) Physicalism is true and mental states must be physical states , but 2 ) All reductionist proposals are unsatisfactory : mental states cannot be reduced to behavior , brain states or functional states . Hence , the question arises whether there can still be a non @-@ reductive physicalism . Donald Davidson 's anomalous monism is an attempt to formulate such a physicalism . 
 Davidson uses the thesis of <unk> : mental states supervene on physical states , but are not reducible to them . " <unk> " therefore describes a functional dependence : there can be no change in the mental without some change in the physical – causal reducibility between the mental and physical without ontological reducibility . 
 Because non @-@ reductive physicalist theories attempt to both retain the ontological distinction between mind and body and to try to solve the " surfeit of explanations puzzle " in some way ; critics often see this as a paradox and point out the similarities to epiphenomenalism , in that it is the brain that is seen as the root " cause " not the mind , and the mind seems to be rendered inert . 
 <unk> regards one or more mental states as the byproduct of physical brain states , having no influence on physical states . The interaction is one @-@ way ( solving the " surfeit of explanations puzzle " ) but leaving us with non @-@ reducible mental states ( as a byproduct of brain states ) – causally reducible , but ontologically irreducible to physical states . Pain would be seen by <unk> as being caused by the brain state but as not having effects on other brain states , though it might have effects on other mental states ( i.e. cause distress ) . 
 = = = = Weak emergentism = = = = 
 Weak emergentism is a form of " non @-@ reductive physicalism " that involves a layered view of nature , with the layers arranged in terms of increasing complexity and each corresponding to its own special science . Some philosophers hold that emergent properties causally interact with more fundamental levels , while others maintain that higher @-@ order properties simply supervene over lower levels without direct causal interaction . The latter group therefore holds a less strict , or " weaker " , definition of emergentism , which can be rigorously stated as follows : a property P of composite object O is emergent if it is metaphysically impossible for another object to lack property P if that object is composed of parts with intrinsic properties identical to those in O and has those parts in an identical configuration . 
 Sometimes <unk> use the example of water having a new property when Hydrogen H and Oxygen O combine to form H2O ( water ) . In this example there " emerges " a new property of a transparent liquid that would not have been predicted by understanding hydrogen and oxygen as gases . This is analogous to physical properties of the brain giving rise to a mental state . <unk> try to solve the notorious mind – body gap this way . One problem for emergentism is the idea of " causal closure " in the world that does not allow for a mind @-@ to @-@ body causation . 
 = = = = Eliminative materialism = = = = 
 If one is a materialist and believes that all aspects of our common @-@ sense psychology will find reduction to a mature cognitive neuroscience , and that non @-@ reductive materialism is mistaken , then one can adopt a final , more radical position : eliminative materialism . 
 There are several varieties of eliminative materialism , but all maintain that our common @-@ sense " folk psychology " badly misrepresents the nature of some aspect of cognition . Eliminativists such as Patricia and Paul Churchland argue that while folk psychology treats cognition as fundamentally sentence @-@ like , the non @-@ linguistic vector / matrix model of neural network theory or connectionism will prove to be a much more accurate account of how the brain works . 
 The Churchlands often invoke the fate of other , erroneous popular theories and ontologies that have arisen in the course of history . For example , Ptolemaic astronomy served to explain and roughly predict the motions of the planets for centuries , but eventually this model of the solar system was eliminated in favor of the Copernican model . The Churchlands believe the same eliminative fate awaits the " sentence @-@ <unk> " model of the mind in which thought and behavior are the result of manipulating sentence @-@ like states called " propositional attitudes " . 
 = = = Non @-@ physicalist monisms = = = 
 = = = = Idealism = = = = 
 Idealism is the form of monism that sees the world as consisting of minds , mental contents and or consciousness . Idealists are not faced with explaining how minds arise from bodies : rather , the world , bodies and objects are regarded as mere appearances held by minds . However , accounting for the mind – body problem is not usually the main motivation for idealism ; rather , idealists tend to be motivated by skepticism , intentionality , and the unique nature of ideas . Idealism is prominent in Eastern religious and philosophical thought . It has gone through several cycles of popularity and neglect in the history of Western philosophy . 
 Different varieties of idealism may hold that there are 
 multiple minds ( pluralistic idealism ) 
 only one human mind ( solipsism ) 
 or a single Absolute , Anima Mundi , One or Over @-@ soul . 
 = = = = Neutral monism = = = = 
 Neutral monism , in philosophy , is the metaphysical view that the mental and the physical are two ways of organizing or describing the same elements , which are themselves " neutral " , that is , neither physical nor mental . This view denies that the mental and the physical are two fundamentally different things . Rather , neutral monism claims the universe consists of only one kind of stuff , in the form of neutral elements that are in themselves neither mental nor physical . These neutral elements might have the properties of color and shape , just as we experience those properties . But these shaped and colored elements do not exist in a mind ( considered as a substantial entity , whether <unk> or <unk> ) ; they exist on their own . 
 = = <unk> = = 
 Some philosophers take an epistemic approach and argue that the mind – body problem is currently unsolvable , and perhaps will always remain unsolvable to human beings . This is usually termed New <unk> . Colin McGinn holds that human beings are cognitively closed in regards to their own minds . According to McGinn human minds lack the concept @-@ forming procedures to fully grasp how mental properties such as consciousness arise from their causal basis . An example would be how an elephant is cognitively closed in regards to particle physics . 
 A more moderate conception has been expounded by Thomas Nagel , which holds that the mind body problem is currently unsolvable at the present stage of scientific development and that it might take a future scientific paradigm shift or revolution to bridge the explanatory gap . Nagel posits that in the future a sort of " objective phenomenology " might be able to bridge the gap between subjective conscious experience and its physical basis . 
 = = Linguistic criticism of the mind – body problem = = 
 Each attempt to answer the mind – body problem encounters substantial problems . Some philosophers argue that this is because there is an underlying conceptual confusion . These philosophers , such as Ludwig Wittgenstein and his followers in the tradition of linguistic criticism , therefore reject the problem as illusory . They argue that it is an error to ask how mental and biological states fit together . Rather it should simply be accepted that human experience can be described in different ways — for instance , in a mental and in a biological vocabulary . Illusory problems arise if one tries to describe the one in terms of the other 's vocabulary or if the mental vocabulary is used in the wrong contexts . This is the case , for instance , if one searches for mental states of the brain . The brain is simply the wrong context for the use of mental vocabulary — the search for mental states of the brain is therefore a category error or a sort of fallacy of reasoning . 
 Today , such a position is often adopted by interpreters of Wittgenstein such as Peter Hacker . However , Hilary Putnam , the originator of functionalism , has also adopted the position that the mind – body problem is an illusory problem which should be dissolved according to the manner of Wittgenstein . 
 = = Externalism and internalism = = 
 Where is the mind located ? If the mind is a physical phenomenon of some kind , it has to be located somewhere . According to some , there are two possible options : either the mind is internal to the body ( internalism ) or the mind is external to it ( externalism ) . More generally , either the mind depends only on events and properties taking place inside the subject 's body or it depends also on factors external to it . 
 Proponents of internalism are committed to the view that neural activity is sufficient to produce the mind . Proponents of externalism maintain that the surrounding world is in some sense constitutive of the mind . 
 Externalism differentiates into several versions . The main ones are semantic externalism , cognitive externalism , phenomenal externalism . Each of these versions of externalism can further be divided whether they refer only to the content or to the vehicles of mind . 
 Semantic externalism holds that the semantic content of the mind is totally or partially defined by state of affairs external to the body of the subject . Hilary Putnam 's Twin earth thought experiment is a good example . 
 Cognitive externalism is a very broad collection of views that suggests the role of the environment , of tools , of development , and of the body in fleshing out cognition . Embodied cognition , the extended mind , and enactivism are good examples . 
 Phenomenal externalism suggests that the phenomenal aspects of the mind are external to the body . Authors who addressed this possibility are Ted <unk> , Edwin Holt , Francois <unk> , Kevin O 'Regan , Riccardo <unk> , <unk> Rockwell and Max <unk> . 
 = = Naturalism and its problems = = 
 The thesis of physicalism is that the mind is part of the material ( or physical ) world . Such a position faces the problem that the mind has certain properties that no other material thing seems to possess . Physicalism must therefore explain how it is possible that these properties can nonetheless emerge from a material thing . The project of providing such an explanation is often referred to as the " naturalization of the mental " . Some of the crucial problems that this project attempts to resolve include the existence of qualia and the nature of intentionality . 
 = = = Qualia = = = 
 Many mental states seem to be experienced subjectively in different ways by different individuals . And it is characteristic of a mental state that it has some experiential quality , e.g. of pain , that it hurts . However , the sensation of pain between two individuals may not be identical , since no one has a perfect way to measure how much something hurts or of describing exactly how it feels to hurt . Philosophers and scientists therefore ask where these experiences come from . The existence of cerebral events , in and of themselves , cannot explain why they are accompanied by these corresponding qualitative experiences . The puzzle of why many cerebral processes occur with an accompanying experiential aspect in consciousness seems impossible to explain . 
 Yet it also seems to many that science will eventually have to explain such experiences . This follows from an assumption about the possibility of reductive explanations . According to this view , if an attempt can be successfully made to explain a phenomenon <unk> ( e.g. , water ) , then it can be explained why the phenomenon has all of its properties ( e.g. , fluidity , transparency ) . In the case of mental states , this means that there needs to be an explanation of why they have the property of being experienced in a certain way . 
 The 20th @-@ century German philosopher Martin Heidegger criticized the ontological assumptions underpinning such a reductive model , and claimed that it was impossible to make sense of experience in these terms . This is because , according to Heidegger , the nature of our subjective experience and its qualities is impossible to understand in terms of Cartesian " substances " that bear " properties " . Another way to put this is that the very concept of qualitative experience is incoherent in terms of — or is semantically incommensurable with the concept of — substances that bear properties . 
 This problem of explaining introspective first @-@ person aspects of mental states and consciousness in general in terms of third @-@ person quantitative neuroscience is called the explanatory gap . There are several different views of the nature of this gap among contemporary philosophers of mind . David Chalmers and the early Frank Jackson interpret the gap as ontological in nature ; that is , they maintain that qualia can never be explained by science because physicalism is false . There are two separate categories involved and one cannot be reduced to the other . An alternative view is taken by philosophers such as Thomas Nagel and Colin McGinn . According to them , the gap is epistemological in nature . For Nagel , science is not yet able to explain subjective experience because it has not yet arrived at the level or kind of knowledge that is required . We are not even able to formulate the problem coherently . For McGinn , on other hand , the problem is one of permanent and inherent biological limitations . We are not able to resolve the explanatory gap because the realm of subjective experiences is cognitively closed to us in the same manner that quantum physics is cognitively closed to elephants . Other philosophers liquidate the gap as purely a semantic problem . This semantic problem , of course , led to the famous " Qualia Question " , which is : Does Red cause <unk> ? 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 <unk> is the capacity of mental states to be directed towards ( about ) or be in relation with something in the external world . This property of mental states entails that they have contents and semantic referents and can therefore be assigned truth values . When one tries to reduce these states to natural processes there arises a problem : natural processes are not true or false , they simply happen . It would not make any sense to say that a natural process is true or false . But mental ideas or judgments are true or false , so how then can mental states ( ideas or judgments ) be natural processes ? The possibility of assigning semantic value to ideas must mean that such ideas are about facts . Thus , for example , the idea that Herodotus was a historian refers to Herodotus and to the fact that he was a historian . If the fact is true , then the idea is true ; otherwise , it is false . But where does this relation come from ? In the brain , there are only electrochemical processes and these seem not to have anything to do with Herodotus . 
 = = Philosophy of perception = = 
 Philosophy of perception is concerned with the nature of perceptual experience and the status of perceptual objects , in particular how perceptual experience relates to appearances and beliefs about the world . The main contemporary views within philosophy of perception include naive realism , enactivism and <unk> views . 
 = = Philosophy of mind and science = = 
 Humans are corporeal beings and , as such , they are subject to examination and description by the natural sciences . Since mental processes are intimately related to bodily processes , the descriptions that the natural sciences furnish of human beings play an important role in the philosophy of mind . There are many scientific disciplines that study processes related to the mental . The list of such sciences includes : biology , computer science , cognitive science , cybernetics , linguistics , medicine , pharmacology , and psychology . 
 = = = Neurobiology = = = 
 The theoretical background of biology , as is the case with modern natural sciences in general , is fundamentally materialistic . The objects of study are , in the first place , physical processes , which are considered to be the foundations of mental activity and behavior . The increasing success of biology in the explanation of mental phenomena can be seen by the absence of any empirical refutation of its fundamental presupposition : " there can be no change in the mental states of a person without a change in brain states . " 
 Within the field of neurobiology , there are many subdisciplines that are concerned with the relations between mental and physical states and processes : Sensory neurophysiology investigates the relation between the processes of perception and stimulation . Cognitive neuroscience studies the correlations between mental processes and neural processes . <unk> describes the dependence of mental faculties on specific anatomical regions of the brain . Lastly , evolutionary biology studies the origins and development of the human nervous system and , in as much as this is the basis of the mind , also describes the ontogenetic and phylogenetic development of mental phenomena beginning from their most primitive stages . Evolutionary biology furthermore places tight constraints on any philosophical theory of the mind , as the gene @-@ based mechanism of natural selection does not allow any giant leaps in the development of neural complexity or neural software but only incremental steps over long time periods . 
 The methodological breakthroughs of the neurosciences , in particular the introduction of high @-@ tech neuroimaging procedures , has propelled scientists toward the elaboration of increasingly ambitious research programs : one of the main goals is to describe and comprehend the neural processes which correspond to mental functions ( see : neural correlate ) . Several groups are inspired by these advances . 
 = = = Computer science = = = 
 Computer science concerns itself with the automatic processing of information ( or at least with physical systems of symbols to which information is assigned ) by means of such things as computers . From the beginning , computer programmers have been able to develop programs that permit computers to carry out tasks for which organic beings need a mind . A simple example is multiplication . It is not clear whether computers could be said to have a mind . Could they , someday , come to have what we call a mind ? This question has been propelled into the forefront of much philosophical debate because of investigations in the field of artificial intelligence ( AI ) . 
 Within AI , it is common to distinguish between a modest research program and a more ambitious one : this distinction was coined by John Searle in terms of a weak AI and strong AI . The exclusive objective of " weak AI " , according to Searle , is the successful simulation of mental states , with no attempt to make computers become conscious or aware , etc . The objective of strong AI , on the contrary , is a computer with consciousness similar to that of human beings . The program of strong AI goes back to one of the pioneers of computation Alan Turing . As an answer to the question " Can computers think ? " , he formulated the famous Turing test . Turing believed that a computer could be said to " think " when , if placed in a room by itself next to another room that contained a human being and with the same questions being asked of both the computer and the human being by a third party human being , the computer 's responses turned out to be indistinguishable from those of the human . Essentially , Turing 's view of machine intelligence followed the <unk> model of the mind — intelligence is as intelligence does . The Turing test has received many criticisms , among which the most famous is probably the Chinese room thought experiment formulated by Searle . 
 The question about the possible sensitivity ( qualia ) of computers or robots still remains open . Some computer scientists believe that the specialty of AI can still make new contributions to the resolution of the " mind body problem " . They suggest that based on the reciprocal influences between software and hardware that takes place in all computers , it is possible that someday theories can be discovered that help us to understand the reciprocal influences between the human mind and the brain ( <unk> ) . 
 = = = Psychology = = = 
 Psychology is the science that investigates mental states directly . It uses generally empirical methods to investigate concrete mental states like joy , fear or obsessions . Psychology investigates the laws that bind these mental states to each other or with inputs and outputs to the human organism . 
 An example of this is the psychology of perception . Scientists working in this field have discovered general principles of the perception of forms . A law of the psychology of forms says that objects that move in the same direction are perceived as related to each other . This law describes a relation between visual input and mental perceptual states . However , it does not suggest anything about the nature of perceptual states . The laws discovered by psychology are compatible with all the answers to the mind – body problem already described . 
 = = = Cognitive science = = = 
 Cognitive science is the interdisciplinary scientific study of the mind and its processes . It examines what cognition is , what it does , and how it works . It includes research on intelligence and behavior , especially focusing on how information is represented , processed , and transformed ( in faculties such as perception , language , memory , reasoning , and emotion ) within nervous systems ( human or other animal ) and machines ( e.g. computers ) . Cognitive science consists of multiple research disciplines , including psychology , artificial intelligence , philosophy , neuroscience , linguistics , anthropology , sociology , and education . It spans many levels of analysis , from low @-@ level learning and decision mechanisms to high @-@ level logic and planning ; from neural circuitry to modular brain organisation . Rowlands argues that cognition is <unk> , embodied , embedded , affective and ( potentially ) extended . The position is taken that the " classical sandwich " of cognition sandwiched between perception and action is artificial ; cognition has to be seen as a product of a strongly coupled interaction that cannot be divided this way . 
 = = Philosophy of mind in the continental tradition = = 
 Most of the discussion in this article has focused on one style or tradition of philosophy in modern Western culture , usually called analytic philosophy ( sometimes described as Anglo @-@ American philosophy ) . Many other schools of thought exist , however , which are sometimes subsumed under the broad ( and vague ) label of continental philosophy . In any case , though topics and methods here are numerous , in relation to the philosophy of mind the various schools that fall under this label ( phenomenology , existentialism , etc . ) can globally be seen to differ from the analytic school in that they focus less on language and logical analysis alone but also take in other forms of understanding human existence and experience . With reference specifically to the discussion of the mind , this tends to translate into attempts to grasp the concepts of thought and perceptual experience in some sense that does not merely involve the analysis of linguistic forms . 
 Immanuel Kant 's Critique of Pure Reason , first published in 1781 and presented again with major revisions in 1787 , represents a significant intervention into what will later become known as the philosophy of mind . Kant 's first critique is generally recognized as among the most significant works of modern philosophy in the West . Kant is a figure whose influence is marked in both continental and analytic / Anglo @-@ American philosophy . Kant 's work develops an in @-@ depth study of transcendental consciousness , or the life of the mind as conceived through universal categories of consciousness . 
 In Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel 's Philosophy of Mind ( frequently translated as Philosophy of Spirit or Geist ) , the third part of his Encyclopedia of the Philosophical Sciences , Hegel discusses three distinct types of mind : the " subjective mind / spirit " , the mind of an individual ; the " objective mind / spirit " , the mind of society and of the State ; and the " Absolute mind / spirit " , the position of religion , art , and philosophy . See also Hegel 's Phenomenology of Spirit . Nonetheless , Hegel 's work differs radically from the style of Anglo @-@ American philosophy of mind . 
 In 1896 , Henri Bergson made in Matter and Memory " Essay on the relation of body and spirit " a forceful case for the ontological difference of body and mind by reducing the problem to the more definite one of memory , thus allowing for a solution built on the empirical test case of aphasia . 
 In modern times , the two main schools that have developed in response or opposition to this Hegelian tradition are phenomenology and existentialism . Phenomenology , founded by Edmund Husserl , focuses on the contents of the human mind ( see <unk> ) and how processes shape our experiences . <unk> , a school of thought founded upon the work of Søren Kierkegaard , focuses on Human predicament and how people deal with the situation of being alive . Existential @-@ phenomenology represents a major branch of continental philosophy ( they are not contradictory ) , rooted in the work of Husserl but expressed in its fullest forms in the work of Martin Heidegger , Jean @-@ Paul Sartre , Simone de Beauvoir and Maurice Merleau @-@ Ponty . See Heidegger 's Being and Time , Merleau @-@ Ponty 's Phenomenology of Perception , Sartre 's Being and Nothingness , and Simone de Beauvoir 's The Second Sex . 
 = = Mind in Eastern philosophy = = 
 = = = Mind in Hindu philosophy = = = 
 = = = = Dualism = = = = 
 Substance Dualism is a common feature of several orthodox Hindu schools including the <unk> , <unk> , Yoga and Dvaita Vedanta . In these schools a clear difference is drawn between matter and a non @-@ material soul , which is eternal and undergoes samsara , a cycle of death and rebirth . The <unk> school argued that qualities such as cognition and desire are inherent qualities which are not possessed by anything solely material , and therefore by process of elimination must belong to a non @-@ material self , the atman . Many of these schools see their spiritual goal as moksha , liberation from the cycle of reincarnation . 
 = = = = Vedanta monistic idealism = = = = 
 In the Advaita Vedanta of the 8th century Indian philosopher <unk> , the mind , body and world are all held to be the same unchanging eternal conscious entity called Brahman . Advaita , which means non @-@ dualism , holds the view that all that exists is pure absolute consciousness . The fact that the world seems to be made up of changing entities is an illusion , or Maya . The only thing that exists is Brahman , which is described as <unk> ( Being , consciousness and bliss ) . Advaita Vedanta is best described by a verse which states " Brahman is alone True , and this world of plurality is an error ; the individual self is not different from Brahman " . 
 Another form of monistic Vedanta is Vishishtadvaita ( Qualified Non @-@ Dualism ) as posited by the eleventh century philosopher Ramanuja . Ramanuja criticized Advaita Vedanta by arguing that consciousness is always intentional and that it is also always a property of something . Ramanuja 's Brahman is defined by a multiplicity of qualities and properties in a single monistic entity . This doctrine is called " <unk> " ( several things in a common substrate ) . 
 = = = = Materialism = = = = 
 Arguably the first exposition of empirical materialism in the history of philosophy is in the Cārvāka school ( also called <unk> ) . The Cārvāka school rejected the existence of anything but matter ( which they defined as being made up of the four elements ) , including God and the soul . Therefore , they held that even consciousness was nothing but a construct made up of atoms . A section of the Cārvāka school believed in a material soul made up of air or breath , but since this also was a form of matter , it was not said to survive death . 
 = = = Buddhist philosophy of mind = = = 
 A salient feature of Buddhist philosophy which sets it apart from Indian orthodoxy is the centrality of the doctrine of not @-@ self ( <unk> anatta , <unk> <unk> ) . The Buddha 's not @-@ self doctrine sees humans as an impermanent composite of five psychological and physical aspects instead of a single fixed self . In this sense , what is called ego or the self is merely a convenient fiction , an illusion that does not apply to anything real but to an erroneous way of looking at the ever changing stream of five interconnected aggregate factors . The relationship between these aggregates is said to be one of dependent @-@ arising ( <unk> ) . This means that all things , including mental events , arise co @-@ dependently from a plurality of other causes and conditions . This seems to reject both causal determinist and <unk> conceptions of mind . 
 = = = = Abhidharma theories of mind = = = = 
 Three centuries after the death of the Buddha ( c . 150 BCE ) saw the growth of a large body of literature called the Abhidharma in several contending Buddhist schools . In the <unk> analysis of mind , the ordinary thought is defined as <unk> ( ' conceptual proliferation ' ) . According to this theory , perceptual experience is bound up in multiple conceptualizations ( expectations , judgments and desires ) . This proliferation of conceptualizations form our illusory superimposition of concepts like self and other upon an ever changing stream of aggregate phenomena . In this conception of mind no strict distinction is made between the conscious faculty and the actual sense perception of various phenomena . Consciousness is instead said to be divided into six sense modalities , five for the five senses and sixth for perception of mental phenomena . The arising of cognitive awareness is said to depend on sense perception , awareness of the mental faculty itself which is termed mental or ' introspective awareness ' ( <unk> ) and attention ( <unk> ) , the picking out of objects out of the constantly changing stream of sensory impressions . 
 Rejection of a permanent agent eventually led to the philosophical problems of the seeming continuity of mind and also of explaining how rebirth and karma continue to be relevant doctrines without an eternal mind . This challenge was met by the <unk> school by introducing the concept of mind as a factor of existence . This " life @-@ stream " ( <unk> @-@ <unk> ) is an undercurrent forming the condition of being . The continuity of a karmic " person " is therefore assured in the form of a mindstream ( citta @-@ <unk> ) , a series of flowing mental moments arising from the subliminal life @-@ continuum mind ( <unk> @-@ citta ) , mental content , and attention . 
 = = = = Indian Mahayana = = = = 
 The <unk> school held a form of phenomenalism that saw the world as imperceptible . It held that external objects exist only as a support for cognition , which can only apprehend mental representations . This influenced the later Yogacara school of Mahayana Buddhism . The Yogācāra school is often called the mind @-@ only school because of its <unk> stance that consciousness is the ultimate existing reality . The works of Vasubandhu have often been interpreted as arguing for some form of Idealism . Vasubandhu uses the dream argument and a mereological refutation of atomism to attack the reality of external objects as anything other than mental entities . Scholarly interpretations of Vasubandhu 's philosophy vary widely , and include phenomenalism , neutral monism and realist phenomenology . 
 The Indian Mahayana schools were divided on the issue of the possibility of reflexive awareness ( <unk> ) . <unk> accepted the idea of reflexive awareness as expounded by the Yogacara school , comparing it to lamp that illuminates itself while also illuminating other objects . This was strictly rejected by <unk> scholars like <unk> . Since in the philosophy of the <unk> all things and mental events are characterized by emptiness , they argued that consciousness could not be an inherently reflexive ultimate reality since that would mean it was self validating and therefore not characterized by emptiness . These views were ultimately reconciled by the 8th century thinker Śāntarakṣita . In Śāntarakṣita 's synthesis he adopts the idealist Yogācāra views of reflexive awareness as a conventional truth into the structure of the two truths doctrine . Thus he states : " By relying on the Mind @-@ Only system , know that external entities do not exist . And by relying on this Middle Way system , know that no self exists at all , even in that [ mind ] . " 
 The Yogācāra school also developed the theory of the repository consciousness ( <unk> ) to explain continuity of mind in rebirth and accumulation of karma . This repository consciousness acts as a storehouse for karmic seeds ( bija ) when all other senses are absent during the process of death and rebirth as well as being the causal potentiality of dharmic phenomena . Thus according to B. Alan Wallace : 
 No constituents of the body — in the brain or elsewhere — transform into mental states and processes . Such subjective experiences do not emerge from the body , but neither do they emerge from nothing . Rather , all objective mental appearances arise from the substrate , and all subjective mental states and processes arise from the substrate consciousness . 
 = = = = Tibetan Buddhism = = = = 
 Tibetan Buddhist theories of mind evolved directly from the Indian Mahayana views . Thus the founder of the Gelug school , Je Tsongkhapa discusses the Yogācāra system of the Eight <unk> in his Explanation of the Difficult Points . He would later come to repudiate Śāntarakṣita 's pragmatic idealism . According to the 14th Dalai Lama the mind can be defined " as an entity that has the nature of mere experience , that is , ' clarity and knowing ' . It is the knowing nature , or agency , that is called mind , and this is non @-@ material . " The simultaneously dual nature of mind is as follows : 
 1 . Clarity ( <unk> ) – The mental activity which produces cognitive phenomena ( <unk> @-@ ba ) . 
 2 . Knowing ( rig ) – The mental activity of perceiving cognitive phenomena . 
 The 14th Dalai Lama has also explicitly laid out his theory of mind as experiential dualism which is described above under the different types of dualism . 
 Because Tibetan philosophy of mind is ultimately <unk> , it focuses on meditative practices such as <unk> and <unk> that allow a practitioner to experience the true reflexive nature of their mind directly . This unobstructed knowledge of one 's primordial , empty and non @-@ dual Buddha nature is called <unk> . The mind 's innermost nature is described among various schools as pure luminosity or " clear light " ( ' od <unk> ) and is often compared to a crystal ball or a mirror . <unk> Rinpoche speaks of mind thus : " Imagine a sky , empty , spacious , and pure from the beginning ; its essence is like this . Imagine a sun , luminous , clear , unobstructed , and spontaneously present ; its nature is like this . " 
 = = = = Zen Buddhism = = = = 
 The central issue in Chinese Zen philosophy of mind is in the difference between the pure and awakened mind and the defiled mind . Chinese Chan master <unk> described the mind as without beginning and without form or limit while the defiled mind was that which was obscured by attachment to form and concepts . The pure Buddha @-@ mind is thus able to see things " as they truly are " , as absolute and non @-@ dual " <unk> " ( <unk> ) . This non @-@ conceptual seeing also includes the paradoxical fact that there is no difference between a defiled and a pure mind , as well as no difference between samsara and nirvana . 
 In the <unk> , the Japanese philosopher Dogen argued that body and mind are neither ontologically nor <unk> distinct but are characterized by a oneness called shin jin ( <unk> ) . According to Dogen , " casting off body and mind " ( <unk> <unk> ) in <unk> will allow one to experience things @-@ as @-@ they @-@ are ( <unk> ) which is the nature of original enlightenment ( <unk> ) . 
 = = Topics related to philosophy of mind = = 
 There are countless subjects that are affected by the ideas developed in the philosophy of mind . Clear examples of this are the nature of death and its definitive character , the nature of emotion , of perception and of memory . Questions about what a person is and what his or her identity consists of also have much to do with the philosophy of mind . There are two subjects that , in connection with the philosophy of the mind , have aroused special attention : free will and the self . 
 = = = Free will = = = 
 In the context of philosophy of mind , the problem of free will takes on renewed intensity . This is certainly the case , at least , for materialistic <unk> . According to this position , natural laws completely determine the course of the material world . Mental states , and therefore the will as well , would be material states , which means human behavior and decisions would be completely determined by natural laws . Some take this reasoning a step further : people cannot determine by themselves what they want and what they do . Consequently , they are not free . 
 This argumentation is rejected , on the one hand , by the <unk> . Those who adopt this position suggest that the question " Are we free ? " can only be answered once we have determined what the term " free " means . The opposite of " free " is not " caused " but " compelled " or " coerced " . It is not appropriate to identify freedom with <unk> . A free act is one where the agent could have done otherwise if it had chosen otherwise . In this sense a person can be free even though determinism is true . The most important compatibilist in the history of the philosophy was David Hume . More recently , this position is defended , for example , by Daniel Dennett . 
 On the other hand , there are also many <unk> who reject the argument because they believe that the will is free in a stronger sense called libertarianism . These philosophers affirm the course of the world is either a ) not completely determined by natural law where natural law is intercepted by physically independent agency , b ) determined by indeterministic natural law only , or c ) determined by indeterministic natural law in line with the subjective effort of physically non @-@ reducible agency . Under Libertarianism , the will does not have to be deterministic and , therefore , it is potentially free . Critics of the second proposition ( b ) accuse the <unk> of using an incoherent concept of freedom . They argue as follows : if our will is not determined by anything , then we desire what we desire by pure chance . And if what we desire is purely accidental , we are not free . So if our will is not determined by anything , we are not free . 
 = = = Self = = = 
 The philosophy of mind also has important consequences for the concept of self . If by " self " or " I " one refers to an essential , immutable nucleus of the person , some modern philosophers of mind , such as Daniel Dennett believe that no such thing exists . According to Dennett and other contemporaries , the self is considered an illusion . The idea of a self as an immutable essential nucleus derives from the idea of an immaterial soul . Such an idea is unacceptable to modern philosophers with physicalist orientations and their general skepticism of the concept of " self " as postulated by David Hume , who could never catch himself not doing , thinking or feeling anything . However , in the light of empirical results from developmental psychology , developmental biology and neuroscience , the idea of an essential inconstant , material nucleus — an integrated representational system distributed over changing patterns of synaptic connections — seems reasonable . 
 = Battle of the Rice Boats = 
 The Battle of the Rice Boats , also called the Battle of Yamacraw Bluff , was a land and naval battle of the American Revolutionary War that took place in and around the Savannah River on the border between the Province of Georgia and the Province of South Carolina on March 2 and 3 , 1776 . The battle pitted the Patriot militia from Georgia and South Carolina against a small fleet of the Royal Navy . 
 In December 1775 , the British Army was besieged in Boston . In need of provisions , a Royal Navy fleet was sent to Georgia to purchase rice and other supplies . The arrival of this fleet prompted the colonial rebels who controlled the Georgia government to arrest the British Royal Governor , James Wright , and to resist the British seizure and removal of supply ships anchored at Savannah . Some of the supply ships were burned to prevent their seizure , some were recaptured , but most were successfully taken by the British . 
 Governor Wright escaped from his confinement and safely reached one of the fleet 's ships . His departure marked the end of British control over Georgia , although it was briefly restored when Savannah was retaken by the British in 1778 . Wright again ruled from 1779 to 1782 , when British troops were finally withdrawn during the closing days of the war . 
 = = Background = = 
 In April 1775 , tensions over British colonial policies in the Thirteen Colonies boiled over into war with the Battles of Lexington and Concord . Following those events , Patriot colonists surrounded the city of Boston , placing it under siege , although the encirclement was incomplete : the city could be resupplied by sea . News of this action and the June Battle of Bunker Hill fanned the flames of independence throughout the colonies . Although the Province of Georgia had managed to remain relatively neutral before these events , radicals in the Georgia provincial congress came into power during the summer of 1775 and progressively stripped Georgia 's Royal Governor , James Wright , of his powers . While Wright had requested a naval presence near Savannah , Patriots in Charleston , South Carolina had intercepted his request and substituted for it a dispatch indicating he did not need such support . 
 The dispute in Georgia reached a crisis point when British men @-@ of @-@ war began arriving at Tybee Island in January 1776 . On January 12 , three ships were seen at anchor off Tybee Island ; by January 18 the fleet consisted of the HMS Cherokee , HMS Siren , HMS Raven , HMS Tamar , and a number of smaller vessels . Wright 's opinion , expressed to Joseph Clay and others , was that the fleet had been sent to punish the local rebels . In fact , these ships were the beginnings of a fleet assembled to acquire provisions in Savannah for the beleaguered British troops in Boston . In December 1775 General William Howe had ordered an expedition to purchase rice and other provisions in Georgia . By early February the entire fleet had assembled off Tybee Island . It was under the overall command of Captain Andrew Barclay ( or Barkley ) on the HMS Scarborough , and included HMS Hinchinbrook and two transports , HMS Whitby and HMS Symmetry , carrying about 200 British army regulars from the 40th Foot under the command of Major James Grant . 
 The arrival of the first ships in January prompted the Georgia Committee of Safety to order the arrest of Wright and other provincial representatives of the Crown on January 18 . Joseph Habersham , a major in the Georgia militia , placed Governor Wright under house arrest , and extracted a promise from the governor that he would not attempt to communicate with the British ships . Wright , who continued to be harassed in spite of his confinement , feared for his life , and escaped the mansion on the night of February 11 . He made his way to the plantation of a Loyalist supporter and was taken from there to the Scarborough . In the meantime , Georgia 's provincial assembly had met , elected representatives to the Second Continental Congress , and begun the process of raising regiments for the Continental Army . 
 After Governor Wright arrived aboard the Scarborough he wrote a letter to the remaining members of his council , in which he expressed frustration over getting assurances of safety and access to the desired supplies from the Patriot authorities . Georgia had , along with the other twelve colonies , in 1774 adopted the terms of the Continental Association created by the First Continental Congress banning trade with Great Britain . With negotiations effectively failed , Barclay ordered his fleet into action on February 29 . His objective was a number of merchant vessels docked at Savannah , whose owners were desirous of moving their goods , something that became possible on March 1 when the previous constraints expired . 
 = = Battle = = 
 On March 1 , Scarborough , Tamar , Cherokee , and Hinchinbrook sailed up the Savannah River to Five @-@ Fathom Hole , accompanying transports carrying two to three hundred men under Grant 's command . Hinchinbrook and one of the transports then sailed up the Back River . The transport anchored opposite the port area , while Hinchinbrook , in an attempt to take a position above the town , grounded on a sandbank in the river . Gunfire from Joseph Habersham 's militia cleared Hinchinbrook 's decks , but without suitable boats , Habersham was unable to attempt the taking of the vessel , which floated free on the next high tide . Late on the evening of March 2 , Grant 's men were landed on Hutchinson Island . They made their way across the island , and , at 4 : 00 am on March 3 , took over a number of the rice boats anchored near the island . Due to their success at remaining quiet , and possibly with the collusion of the ship captains , the alarm was not raised in Savannah until 9 : 00 am . The arrival of the ships on March 1 prompted the Committee of Safety to issue calls for the defense of the town and the ships , which were forward along with a request for assistance to South Carolina 's Committee of Safety the next day . 
 When the alarm was raised , Colonel McIntosh took 300 militiamen and set up three 4 @-@ pound cannons on Yamacraw Bluff . He then sent Lieutenant Daniel Roberts and Major Raymond <unk> II under a parley flag to one of the occupied ships ; they were promptly arrested . When a second , larger , parley arrived to discuss the release of the two captives and the ships , the situation turned nasty when Captain Rogers , leader of the party , was insulted . After he fired at someone on the occupied ship , the British responded in kind , wounding one and very nearly sinking the parley group 's boat . Following that boat 's retreat , McIntosh opened fire with the cannons on the bluff , beginning a <unk> that lasted for four hours . 
 The Committee of Safety , when it met to discuss the situation , decided that the supply ships should be burned , and a company of militia was assembled to accomplish this task . One supply ship , the Inverness , was torched and set adrift toward the occupied vessels , causing a scramble as the British troops hurried to abandon them in the face of the arriving fire ship . During the confusion , the Patriot militia and battery were active , raking the scurrying British crews with musket fire and grape shot . Two of the occupied vessels managed to get away downstream , and two more escaped the flames by going upstream , but were forced to dock , and their crews were taken prisoner . Three ships succumbed to the flames , which burned well into the night . The action was assisted by the timely arrival of 500 South Carolina militia sent in response to the earlier appeal . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Colonel McIntosh sent a parley to Captain Barclay the next day , offering a prisoner exchange . When Barclay refused the exchange , the Committee of Safety ordered the arrest of the remaining members of Wright 's council . This move proved successful ; the British @-@ held prisoners were released in exchange for promises of protection of those councillors . 
 In spite of the action , the British successfully sailed most of the merchant ships down the Back River , although some of the ships needed to dump a portion of their cargo in order to make it down the shallow channel . Once they reached Tybee Island , the desired provisions , amounting to 1 @,@ 600 barrels of rice , were loaded onto the two British transport ships . 
 The fleet remained anchored off Tybee Island while negotiations went on over the exchange of prisoners . During this time the fleet detained several arriving vessels , which were later disposed of as prizes . On March 25 , a band of militia from Savannah burned all the houses on the island to deny their use to Wright and the ships ' officers . Barclay weighed anchor on March 30 and sailed north , leading the convoy of merchant ships and transports . As the British had abandoned Boston earlier in March , he first put into Newport , Rhode Island , where the local Patriots denied him any assistance and fired at his ships using field artillery . He eventually rejoined the British forces at Halifax , Nova Scotia in May . 
 The battle and Wright 's departure marked the end of British control over Georgia until Savannah was recaptured by British forces in December 1778 . Governor Wright returned , and Savannah then remained in British hands until 1782 . 
 = Interstate 15 in Arizona = 
 Interstate 15 ( I @-@ 15 ) is an Interstate Highway , running from San Diego , California , United States , to the Canadian border , through Mohave County in northwest Arizona . Despite being isolated from the rest of Arizona , in the remote Arizona Strip , and short in length at 29 @.@ 43 miles ( 47 @.@ 36 km ) , it remains notable for its scenic passage through the Virgin River Gorge . The highway heads in a northeasterly direction from the Nevada border northeast of Mesquite , Nevada , to the Utah border southwest of St. George , Utah . 
 The south portion of I @-@ 15 's route was built close to the alignment of the old U.S. Route 91 ( US 91 ) , but the northern section , through the Virgin River Gorge , was built along roadless terrain . The southern section of the highway was complete and open in the early 1960s , but the gorge section was inaccessible until 1973 . When it opened , the Virgin River Gorge passage was the most expensive section of rural Interstate per mile . 
 = = Route description = = 
 The highway is signed and designated the Veterans Memorial Highway , a designation which continues into Utah . Traffic volume along the Arizona section of I @-@ 15 is approximately 23 @,@ 000 vehicles per day . The highway is also a part of the CANAMEX Corridor , a trade corridor in North America linking Edmonton , Alberta in Canada and Mexico City . 
 The highway enters the state in Mohave County northeast of Mesquite and Las Vegas , Nevada , paralleling the old US 91 heading northeast on an alignment north of the Virgin River . I @-@ 15 parallels the Virgin River for its entire length in Arizona , but the terrain abruptly becomes more rugged at mile 13 , where the Virgin River Gorge begins . The first interchange is exit 8 at Littlefield , where old US 91 turns north to avoid the gorge . I @-@ 15 crosses the river for the first time just beyond Littlefield , and soon passes another interchange serving local roads eastwards . This exit , exit 9 , is a right @-@ in / right @-@ out design with frontage roads , constructed after the initial opening . Access under I @-@ 15 is provided just south of the ramps . 
 Beyond exit 9 , I @-@ 15 enters the Virgin River Gorge , first passing through " The Narrows " . Here , the gorge features limestone cliffs that are as high as 500 feet ( 150 m ) above the highway . Several <unk> allow access to these cliffs . Within the canyon , through which it ascends northbound and descends southbound , five bridges cross the river . The highway generally follows the winding course of the river , but several rock cuts bypass bends . 
 The canyon opens up slightly at the Cedar Pocket interchange ( exit 18 ) , allowing for a rest area . This rest area was turned over to the federal Bureau of Land Management in 2002 which maintains the nearby Virgin River Gorge Recreation Area . The rest area was demolished in 2009 . I @-@ 15 continues to parallel the Virgin River , but begins to deviate more . Trees here include tamarix , ash , cottonwoods , willows and Joshua trees . Wildflowers such as globemallow , marigold , and sand <unk> dot the route in springtime . At mile 22 @.@ 5 , the highway crosses the Virgin River for the final time , continuing east along the smaller Black Rock Gulch before then turning slightly northeast into a flatter area . The final interchange ( exit 27 ) provides local access . 
 A weigh station / port of entry formerly served both sides of the road near mile 28 before the Utah state line . The weigh station / port of entry are now combined into a joint Arizona / Utah facility just north of the state line staffed by the Arizona Department of Transportation ( DOT ) Motor Vehicle Division and Utah DOT Motor Carrier Division . I @-@ 15 continues on into Utah providing access to St. George as well as Salt Lake City . 
 = = History = = 
 The Old Spanish Trail from Southern California had two routes through northwestern Arizona , splitting at Littlefield ; one went north towards central Utah , and the other went northeast through the Virgin River Gorge , straddling the state line to the Four Corners area . When the Arrowhead Trail was marked in the 1920s , and U.S. Route 91 in 1926 , automobile travelers between Nevada and Utah followed the northerly routing , turning east in Utah to reach St. George . 
 When the Interstates were planned , federal authorities decided to save 12 miles ( 19 km ) over US 91 and pass through the Virgin River Gorge to take advantage of its scenery and lower grades for trucks . Construction was completed first , in the early 1960s , on the portion between Nevada and the gorge . The bridges over Big Bend Wash were completed in 1962 . The bridge over the Virgin River near Littlefield was completed by 1964 . By 1965 , the overpass over Black Rock Road ( northwards ) was finally complete . 
 Construction through the gorge was slower and much more difficult , and the segment could not fully open until December 14 , 1973 . To help quicken construction , the state of Utah loaned a portion of their federal highway funds to Arizona . Even though the highway is of little importance to the transportation needs of Arizona , as it does not link any Arizona communities , it does serve as a vital link between Salt Lake City and Las Vegas and Los Angeles to the southwest . Despite extra funding , however , challenges remained . Flash flooding and quicksand in the gorge repeatedly caused problems , with equipment and materials apparently disappearing overnight . Worse , the project was to claim a life , when in October 1969 , a helicopter performing reconnaissance on the gorge crashed due to wind , killing the pilot . To help navigate the gorge 's rugged and unforgiving terrain , a special piece of equipment called a swamp buggy had to be brought from Texas . Even with this help , the route still demanded construction of four bridges over Virgin River . The westernmost bridge and the bridge carrying the northbound lanes at the third bridge location from the west were completed in 1972 . By 1973 , all five bridges were finally complete . 
 Even before its opening , it was promoted as the most scenic highway in the state ; a 1988 article in Arizona Highways said that the project " enhanced rather than distracted from Nature 's handiwork " . The Virgin River was <unk> 12 times in what was the most expensive rural freeway in the country , at the price of approximately $ 10 million per mile ( $ 6 @,@ 200 @,@ 000 / km ) or $ 49 million per mile ( $ 30 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 / km ) in 2007 dollars . 
 = = Exit list = = 
 The entire route is in Mohave County . 
 = Tornada ( Occitan literary term ) = 
 In Old Occitan literature , a tornada ( Occitan : [ <unk> , <unk> ] , Catalan : [ <unk> , <unk> ] ; " turned , twisted " ) refers to a final , shorter stanza ( or <unk> ) that appears in lyric poetry and serves a variety of purposes within several poetic forms . The word tornada derives from the Old Occitan in which it is the feminine form of <unk> , a past participle of the verb <unk> ( " to turn , return " ) . It is derived from the Latin verb <unk> ( " to turn in a lathe , round off " ) . 
 Originating in the Provence region of present @-@ day France , Occitan literature spread through the tradition of the troubadours in the High Middle Ages . The tornada became a hallmark of the language 's lyric poetry tradition which emerged c . 1000 , in a region called Occitania that now comprises parts of modern @-@ day France , Italy and Catalonia ( northeastern Spain ) . Under the influence of the troubadours , related movements sprang up throughout medieval Europe : the <unk> in Germany , <unk> in Galicia ( northeastern Spain ) and Portugal , and that of the <unk> in northern France . Because of this , the concept embodied in the tornada has been found in other Romance language literatures that can directly trace several of their techniques from the Occitan lyric tradition . The tornada appears in Old French literature as the envoi , in Galician @-@ Portuguese literature as the <unk> , and in Italian literature as the <unk> and <unk> . The tornada has been used and developed by poets in the Renaissance such as Petrarch ( 1304 – 1374 ) and Dante Alighieri ( <unk> – 1321 ) , and it continues to be invoked in the poetic forms that originated with the Occitan lyrical tradition that have survived into modernity . 
 By c . 1170 the Occitan lyric tradition had become a set of generic concepts developed by troubadours , poets who composed and performed their poetry ; the majority of their poems can be categorised as <unk> ( love songs ) , <unk> ( satires ) , and the <unk> ( individual stanzas ) . Since they are composed of a variable number of lines , an individual tornada can also be known as by more general poetic labels that apply to stanza length , according to where it is used ; for instance , the tornada of a sestina , comprising three lines , is also known as a tercet . For example , in a sestina ( a poetic form that is derived from the troubadour tradition ) , the tornada serves as a short , concluding stanza that should contain all of the six so @-@ called " rhyme @-@ words " that are repeated throughout the form . When employed , this form of the tornada ( as a sestina ) has traditionally taken a rhyming pattern of 2 – 5 , 4 – 3 , 6 – 1 . The first rhyme @-@ word of each pair can occur anywhere in the line , while the second iteration must end the line . However , as the form developed , the end @-@ word order of the tornada was no longer strictly enforced . 
 <unk> can serve a number of purposes within poems ; they often contain useful information about the poem 's composition — often able to identify the location and date of the poem 's composition , and the identity of members of the troubadour 's circle — and several <unk> serve as dedications to a friend or patron of the poet . An additional purpose of the tornada is to focus and reflect on the theme of the poem , commenting on the surrounding material within the poem , and to act as a concluding stanza for the poem . However , the device can sometimes be used to create new narrative material . For instance , in <unk> 's <unk> “ L ’ <unk> <unk> ’ una <unk> ” ( trans . " The other day along a hedgerow " ) , the narrator is attracted to a shepherdess for her feisty wit and professes that " country @-@ men want country @-@ women / in places where all wisdom 's lacking . " The shepherdess ' reply in the tornada : " and some will gawk before a painting / while others wait to see real manna . " serves to " [ create ] some tension with the enigma she seems to introduce suddenly at the end . " 
 In the original Occitan model , the tornada was a stanza that metrically replicated the second half ( <unk> ) of the preceding strophe ( a structural division of a poem containing stanzas of varying length ) . Since the poems of the troubadours were very often accompanied by music , the music of the tornada would have indicated the end of the poem to an audience . Comparatively , the Sicilian tornada was larger , forming the entire last strophe of the song or ballad being performed ( canzone ) , and varied little in terms of its theme — typically a personification of the poem , with a request for it to deliver instructions from the poet . The Dolce Stil Novo , a thirteenth @-@ century literary movement in Italian Renaissance poetry , deployed the stanza form in their <unk> and sonnets . The movement 's principal figures — Dante and Cavalcanti — extended the use of the tornada throughout an entire poem , as opposed to being used as a concluding stanza . In his poem " <unk> , se <unk> t ’ è <unk> " , Dante personifies the poem as a " little messenger boy " : 
 As the form developed , the purpose of the tornada evolved from a purely stylistic device to include emotional aspects ; Levin summarises that " [ the tornada ] developed in the Italian lyric from a simple concluding formula to a sophisticated projection of the poet 's message through the medium of a human character . " Whereas <unk> had primarily been an extension of the poet 's voice , the innovation of the Dolce Stil Novo movement was to provide them with an autonomous human voice , often in the form of a unique character . 
 = Samuel Johnson = 
 Samuel Johnson ( 18 September 1709 [ O.S. 7 September ] – 13 December 1784 ) , often referred to as Dr Johnson , was an English writer who made lasting contributions to English literature as a poet , essayist , moralist , literary critic , biographer , editor and lexicographer . Johnson was a devout Anglican and committed Tory , and has been described as " arguably the most distinguished man of letters in English history " . He is also the subject of " the most famous single biographical work in the whole of literature , " James Boswell 's Life of Samuel Johnson . 
 Born in Lichfield , Staffordshire , Johnson attended Pembroke College , Oxford for just over a year , before his lack of funds forced him to leave . After working as a teacher , he moved to London , where he began to write for The Gentleman 's Magazine . His early works include the biography Life of Mr Richard Savage , the poems London and The Vanity of Human Wishes , and the play Irene . 
 After nine years of work , Johnson 's A Dictionary of the English Language was published in 1755 . It had a far @-@ reaching effect on Modern English and has been described as " one of the greatest single achievements of scholarship " . This work brought Johnson popularity and success . Until the completion of the Oxford English Dictionary 150 years later , Johnson 's was viewed as the pre @-@ eminent British dictionary . His later works included essays , an influential annotated edition of The Plays of William Shakespeare , and the widely read tale The History of Rasselas , Prince of <unk> . In 1763 , he befriended James Boswell , with whom he later travelled to Scotland ; Johnson described their travels in A Journey to the Western Islands of Scotland . Towards the end of his life , he produced the massive and influential Lives of the Most Eminent English Poets , a collection of biographies and evaluations of 17th- and 18th @-@ century poets . 
 Johnson was a tall and robust man . His odd gestures and tics were disconcerting to some on first meeting him . Boswell 's Life , along with other biographies , documented Johnson 's behaviour and mannerisms in such detail that they have informed the posthumous diagnosis of Tourette syndrome , a condition not defined or diagnosed in the 18th century . After a series of illnesses , he died on the evening of 13 December 1784 , and was buried in Westminster Abbey . In the years following his death , Johnson began to be recognised as having had a lasting effect on literary criticism , and he was claimed by some to be the only truly great critic of English literature . 
 = = Life and career = = 
 = = = Early life and education = = = 
 Born on 18 September 1709 ( New Style ) , to Michael Johnson , a bookseller , and his wife , Sarah Ford , Samuel Johnson often claimed that he grew up in poverty . Since both his parents ' families had money , it is uncertain what occurred between the time of Michael and Sarah 's marriage and the birth of Samuel just three years later to provoke such a change in fortune . Johnson was born in the family home above his father 's bookshop in Lichfield , Staffordshire and , because his mother Sarah was 40 when she gave birth , a " man @-@ midwife " and surgeon of " great reputation " named George Hector was brought in to assist . He did not cry and , with doubts surrounding the newborn 's health , his aunt exclaimed " that she would not have picked such a poor creature up in the street . " Since it was feared that the baby might die , the vicar of St Mary 's was summoned to perform a baptism . Two godfathers were chosen : Samuel Swynfen , a physician and graduate of Pembroke College , Oxford , and Richard Wakefield , a lawyer , coroner , and Lichfield town clerk . 
 Johnson 's health improved and he was put to wet @-@ nurse with Joan <unk> . He soon contracted scrofula , known at that time as the " King 's Evil " because it was thought royalty could cure it . Sir John <unk> , former physician to King Charles II , recommended that the young Johnson should receive the " royal touch " , which he received from Queen Anne on 30 March 1712 . However , the ritual was ineffective , and an operation was performed that left him with permanent scars across his face and body . With the birth of Johnson 's brother , Nathaniel , a few months later , Michael became unable to pay the debts he had accrued over the years , and his family was no longer able to maintain its standard of living . 
 Johnson demonstrated signs of great intelligence as a child , and his parents , to his later disgust , would show off his " newly acquired accomplishments " . His education began at the age of three , and was provided by his mother , who had him memorise and recite passages from the Book of Common Prayer . When Samuel turned four , he was sent to a nearby school , and , at the age of six he was sent to a retired shoemaker to continue his education . A year later , Johnson went to Lichfield Grammar School , where he excelled in Latin . During this time , Johnson started to exhibit the tics that would influence how people viewed him in his later years , and which formed the basis for the posthumous diagnosis of Tourette syndrome . He excelled at his studies and was promoted to the upper school at the age of nine . During this time , he befriended Edmund Hector , nephew of his " man @-@ midwife " George Hector , and John Taylor , with whom he remained in contact for the rest of his life . 
 At the age of 16 , Johnson was given the opportunity to stay with his cousins , the Fords , at Pedmore , Worcestershire . There he became a close friend of Cornelius Ford , who employed his knowledge of the classics to tutor Johnson while he was not attending school . Ford was a successful , well @-@ connected academic , but he was also a notorious alcoholic whose excesses contributed to his death six years later . After spending six months with his cousins , Johnson returned to Lichfield , but Mr. Hunter , the headmaster , " angered by the impertinence of this long absence , " refused to allow Samuel to continue at the grammar school . Unable to return to Lichfield Grammar School , Johnson was enrolled into the King Edward VI grammar school at Stourbridge . Because the school was located near Pedmore , Johnson was able to spend more time with the Fords , and he began to write poems and verse translations . However , he spent only six months at Stourbridge before returning once again to his parents ' home in Lichfield . 
 During this time , Johnson 's future was uncertain because his father was deeply in debt . To earn money , Johnson began to stitch books for his father , and it is likely that Johnson spent much time in his father 's bookshop reading and building his literary knowledge . The family remained in poverty until Sarah Johnson 's cousin , Elizabeth <unk> , died in February 1728 and left enough money to send Johnson to university . On 31 October 1728 , a few weeks after he turned 19 , Johnson entered Pembroke College , Oxford . The inheritance did not cover all of his expenses at Pembroke , but Andrew Corbet , a friend and fellow student at Pembroke , offered to make up the deficit . 
 Johnson made friends at Pembroke and read much . In later life , he told stories of his idleness . He was later asked by his tutor to produce a Latin translation of Alexander Pope 's Messiah as a Christmas exercise . Johnson completed half of the translation in one afternoon and the rest the following morning . Although the poem brought him praise , it did not bring the material benefit he had hoped for . The poem later appeared in Miscellany of Poems ( 1731 ) , edited by John Husbands , a Pembroke tutor , and is the earliest surviving publication of any of Johnson 's writings . Johnson spent the rest of his time studying , even during the Christmas holiday . He drafted a " plan of study " called " Adversaria " , which was left unfinished , and used his time to learn French while working on his Greek . 
 After thirteen months , a shortage of funds forced Johnson to leave Oxford without a degree , and he returned to Lichfield . Towards the end of Johnson 's stay at Oxford , his tutor , Jorden , left Pembroke and was replaced by William Adams . He enjoyed Adams as a tutor , but by December , Johnson was already a quarter behind in his student fees , and he was forced to return home . He left behind many books that he had borrowed from his father because he could not afford to transport them , and also because he hoped to return to Oxford soon . 
 He eventually did receive a degree . Just before the publication of his Dictionary in 1755 , Oxford University awarded Johnson the degree of Master of Arts . He was awarded an honorary doctorate in 1765 by Trinity College Dublin and in 1775 by Oxford University . In 1776 , he returned to Pembroke with Boswell and toured the college with his former tutor Adams , who was now a Master . During that visit he recalled his time at the college , his early career , and expressed his later fondness for Jorden . 
 = = = Early career = = = 
 Little is known about Johnson 's life between the end of 1729 and 1731 . It is likely that he lived with his parents . He experienced bouts of mental anguish and physical pain during years of illness ; his tics and gesticulations associated with Tourette syndrome became more noticeable and were often commented upon . By 1731 Johnson 's father was deeply in debt and had lost much of his standing in Lichfield . Johnson hoped to get an usher 's position , which became available at Stourbridge Grammar School , but since he did not have a degree , his application was passed over on 6 September 1731 . At about this time , Johnson 's father became ill and developed an " inflammatory fever " which led to his death in December 1731 . Johnson eventually found employment as <unk> at a school in Market Bosworth , run by Sir <unk> Dixie , 4th Baronet who allowed Johnson to teach without a degree . Although Johnson was treated as a servant , he found pleasure in teaching even though he considered it boring . After an argument with Dixie he quit the school , and by June 1732 he had returned home . 
 Johnson continued to look for a position at a Lichfield school . After being turned down for a job at Ashbourne , he spent time with his friend Edmund Hector , who was living in the home of the publisher Thomas Warren . At the time , Warren was starting his Birmingham Journal , and he enlisted Johnson 's help . This connection with Warren grew , and Johnson proposed a translation of Jerónimo Lobo 's account of the Abyssinians . Johnson read Abbé Joachim Le Grand 's French translations , and thought that a shorter version might be " useful and profitable " . Instead of writing the work himself , he dictated to Hector , who then took the copy to the printer and made any corrections . Johnson 's A Voyage to Abyssinia was published a year later . He returned to Lichfield in February 1734 , and began an annotated edition of Poliziano 's Latin poems , along with a history of Latin poetry from Petrarch to Poliziano ; a Proposal was soon printed , but a lack of funds halted the project . 
 Johnson remained with his close friend Harry Porter during a terminal illness , which ended in Porter 's death on 3 September 1734 . Porter 's wife Elizabeth ( née Jervis ) ( otherwise known as " Tetty " ) was now a widow at the age of 45 , with three children . Some months later , Johnson began to court her . The Reverend William Shaw claims that " the first advances probably proceeded from her , as her attachment to Johnson was in opposition to the advice and desire of all her relations , " Johnson was inexperienced in such relationships , but the well @-@ to @-@ do widow encouraged him and promised to provide for him with her substantial savings . They married on 9 July 1735 , at St Werburgh 's Church in Derby . The Porter family did not approve of the match , partly because of the difference in their ages . ( Johnson was 25 and Elizabeth was 46 . ) Elizabeth 's marriage to Johnson so disgusted her son Jervis that he severed all relations with her . However , her daughter Lucy accepted Johnson from the start , and her other son , Joseph , later came to accept the marriage . 
 In June 1735 , while working as a tutor for the children of Thomas Whitby , a local Staffordshire gentleman , Johnson had applied for the position of headmaster at Solihull School . Although Johnson 's friend Gilbert Walmisley gave his support , Johnson was passed over because the school 's directors thought he was " a very haughty , ill @-@ natured gent , and that he has such a way of distorting his face ( which though he can 't help ) the <unk> think it may affect some lads " . With Walmisley 's encouragement , Johnson decided that he could be a successful teacher if he ran his own school . In the autumn of 1735 , Johnson opened Edial Hall School as a private academy at Edial , near Lichfield . He had only three pupils : Lawrence Offley , George Garrick , and the 18 @-@ year @-@ old David Garrick , who later became one of the most famous actors of his day . The venture was unsuccessful and cost Tetty a substantial portion of her fortune . Instead of trying to keep the failing school going , Johnson began to write his first major work , the historical tragedy Irene . Biographer Robert DeMaria believed that Tourette syndrome likely made public occupations like schoolmaster or tutor almost impossible for Johnson . This may have led Johnson to " the invisible occupation of authorship " . 
 Johnson left for London with his former pupil David Garrick on 2 March 1737 , the day Johnson 's brother died . He was penniless and pessimistic about their travel , but fortunately for them , Garrick had connections in London , and the two were able to stay with his distant relative , Richard Norris . Johnson soon moved to Greenwich near the Golden Hart Tavern to finish Irene . On 12 July 1737 he wrote to Edward Cave with a proposal for a translation of Paolo Sarpi 's The History of the Council of Trent ( 1619 ) , which Cave did not accept until months later . In October 1737 Johnson brought his wife to London , and he found employment with Cave as a writer for The Gentleman 's Magazine . His assignments for the magazine and other publishers during this time were " almost unparalleled in range and variety , " and " so numerous , so varied and scattered " that " Johnson himself could not make a complete list " . The name Columbia , a poetic name for America coined by Johnson , first appears in a 1738 weekly publication of the debates of the British Parliament in The Gentlemen 's Magazine . 
 In May 1738 his first major work , the poem London , was published anonymously . Based on Juvenal 's Satire III , it describes the character Thales leaving for Wales to escape the problems of London , which is portrayed as a place of crime , corruption , and poverty . Johnson could not bring himself to regard the poem as earning him any merit as a poet . Alexander Pope said that the author " will soon be <unk> " ( unearthed , dug up ) , but this would not happen until 15 years later . 
 In August , Johnson 's lack of an MA degree from Oxford or Cambridge led to his being denied a position as master of the Appleby Grammar School . In an effort to end such rejections , Pope asked Lord Gower to use his influence to have a degree awarded to Johnson . Gower petitioned Oxford for an honorary degree to be awarded to Johnson , but was told that it was " too much to be asked " . Gower then asked a friend of Jonathan Swift to plead with Swift to use his influence at the University of Dublin to have a master 's degree awarded to Johnson , in the hope that this could then be used to justify an MA from Oxford , but Swift refused to act on Johnson 's behalf . 
 Between 1737 and 1739 , Johnson befriended Richard Savage . Feeling guilty about living on Tetty 's money , Johnson stopped living with her and spent his time with Savage . They were poor and would stay in taverns or sleep in " night @-@ cellars " . Some nights they would roam the streets until dawn because they had no money at all . Savage 's friends tried to help him by attempting to persuade him to move to Wales , but Savage ended up in Bristol and again fell into debt . He was committed to debtors ' prison and died in 1743 . A year later , Johnson wrote Life of Mr Richard Savage ( 1744 ) , a " moving " work which , in the words of the biographer and critic Walter Jackson Bate , " remains one of the innovative works in the history of biography " . 
 = = = A Dictionary of the English Language = = = 
 In 1746 , a group of publishers approached Johnson with an idea about creating an authoritative dictionary of the English language . A contract with William Strahan and associates , worth 1 @,@ 500 guineas , was signed on the morning of 18 June 1746 . Johnson claimed that he could finish the project in three years . In comparison , the Académie Française had forty scholars spending forty years to complete their dictionary , which prompted Johnson to claim , " This is the proportion . Let me see ; forty times forty is sixteen hundred . As three to sixteen hundred , so is the proportion of an Englishman to a Frenchman . " Although he did not succeed in completing the work in three years , he did manage to finish it in eight . Some criticised the dictionary , including Thomas Babington Macaulay , who described Johnson as " a wretched <unk> , " but according to Bate , the Dictionary " easily ranks as one of the greatest single achievements of scholarship , and probably the greatest ever performed by one individual who laboured under anything like the disadvantages in a comparable length of time . " 
 Johnson 's dictionary was not the first , nor was it unique . It was , however , the most commonly used and imitated for the 150 years between its first publication and the completion of the Oxford English Dictionary in 1928 . Other dictionaries , such as Nathan Bailey 's <unk> Britannicum , included more words , and in the 150 years preceding Johnson 's dictionary about twenty other general @-@ purpose monolingual " English " dictionaries had been produced . However , there was open dissatisfaction with the dictionaries of the period . In 1741 , David Hume claimed : " The Elegance and <unk> of Stile have been very much neglected among us . We have no Dictionary of our Language , and scarce a tolerable Grammar . " Johnson 's Dictionary offers insights into the 18th century and " a faithful record of the language people used " . It is more than a reference book ; it is a work of literature . 
 For a decade , Johnson 's constant work on the Dictionary disrupted his and Tetty 's living conditions . He had to employ a number of assistants for the copying and mechanical work , which filled the house with incessant noise and clutter . He was always busy , and kept hundreds of books around . John Hawkins described the scene : " The books he used for this purpose were what he had in his own collection , a copious but a miserably ragged one , and all such as he could borrow ; which latter , if ever they came back to those that lent them , were so defaced as to be scarce worth owning . " Johnson was also distracted by Tetty 's poor health as she began to show signs of a terminal illness . To accommodate both his wife and his work , he moved to 17 Gough Square near his printer , William Strahan . 
 In preparation , Johnson wrote a Plan for the Dictionary . Philip Stanhope , 4th Earl of Chesterfield , was the patron of the Plan , to Johnson 's displeasure . Seven years after first meeting Johnson to go over the work , Chesterfield wrote two anonymous essays in The World recommending the Dictionary . He complained that the English language lacked structure and argued in support of the dictionary . Johnson did not like the tone of the essays , and he felt that Chesterfield had not fulfilled his obligations as the work 's patron . In a letter to Chesterfield , Johnson expressed this view and harshly criticised Chesterfield , saying " Is not a patron , my lord , one who looks with unconcern on a man struggling for life in the water , and when he has reached ground , <unk> him with help ? The notice which you have been pleased to take of my labours , had it been early , had been kind : but it has been delayed till I am indifferent and cannot enjoy it ; till I am solitary and cannot impart it ; till I am known and do not want it . " Chesterfield , impressed by the language , kept the letter displayed on a table for anyone to read . 
 The Dictionary was finally published in April 1755 , with the title page acknowledging that Oxford had awarded Johnson a Master of Arts degree in anticipation of the work . The dictionary as published was a huge book . Its pages were nearly 18 inches ( 46 cm ) tall , and the book was 20 inches ( 51 cm ) wide when opened ; it contained 42 @,@ 773 entries , to which only a few more were added in subsequent editions , and it sold for the extravagant price of £ 4 10s , perhaps the rough equivalent of £ 350 today . An important innovation in English <unk> was to illustrate the meanings of his words by literary quotation , of which there were approximately 114 @,@ 000 . The authors most frequently cited include William Shakespeare , John Milton and John Dryden . It was years before Johnson 's Dictionary , as it came to be known , turned a profit . Authors ' royalties were unknown at the time , and Johnson , once his contract to deliver the book was fulfilled , received no further money from its sale . Years later , many of its quotations would be repeated by various editions of the Webster 's Dictionary and the New English Dictionary . 
 Besides working on the Dictionary , Johnson also wrote numerous essays , sermons , and poems during these nine years . In 1750 , he decided to produce a series of essays under the title The Rambler that were to be published every Tuesday and Saturday and sell for twopence each . Explaining the title years later , he told his friend , the painter Joshua Reynolds : " I was at a loss how to name it . I sat down at night upon my bedside , and resolved that I would not go to sleep till I had fixed its title . The Rambler seemed the best that occurred , and I took it . " These essays , often on moral and religious topics , tended to be more grave than the title of the series would suggest ; his first comments in The Rambler were to ask " that in this undertaking thy Holy Spirit may not be withheld from me , but that I may promote thy glory , and the salvation of myself and others . " The popularity of The Rambler took off once the issues were collected in a volume ; they were reprinted nine times during Johnson 's life . Writer and printer Samuel Richardson , enjoying the essays greatly , questioned the publisher as to who wrote the works ; only he and a few of Johnson 's friends were told of Johnson 's authorship . One friend , the novelist Charlotte Lennox , includes a defence of The Rambler in her novel The Female Quixote ( 1752 ) . In particular , the character Mr. Glanville says , " you may sit in Judgment upon the Productions of a Young , a Richardson , or a Johnson . Rail with premeditated Malice at the Rambler ; and for the want of Faults , turn even its inimitable Beauties into Ridicule . " ( Book VI , Chapter XI ) Later , she claims Johnson as " the greatest Genius in the present Age . " 
 However , not all of his work was confined to The Rambler . His most highly regarded poem , The Vanity of Human Wishes , was written with such " extraordinary speed " that Boswell claimed Johnson " might have been perpetually a poet " . The poem is an imitation of Juvenal 's Satire X and claims that " the antidote to vain human wishes is non @-@ vain spiritual wishes " . In particular , Johnson emphasises " the helpless vulnerability of the individual before the social context " and the " inevitable self @-@ deception by which human beings are led astray " . The poem was critically celebrated but it failed to become popular , and sold fewer copies than London . In 1749 , Garrick made good on his promise that he would produce Irene , but its title was altered to Mahomet and Irene to make it " fit for the stage . " The show eventually ran for nine nights . 
 Tetty Johnson was ill during most of her time in London , and in 1752 she decided to return to the countryside while Johnson was busy working on his Dictionary . She died on 17 March 1752 , and , at word of her death , Johnson wrote a letter to his old friend Taylor , which according to Taylor " expressed grief in the strongest manner he had ever read " . He wrote a sermon in her honour , to be read at her funeral , but Taylor refused to read it , for reasons which are unknown . This only exacerbated Johnson 's feelings of loss and despair after the death of his wife . Consequently , John Hawkesworth had to organise the funeral . Johnson felt guilty about the poverty in which he believed he had forced Tetty to live , and blamed himself for neglecting her . He became outwardly discontent , and his diary was filled with prayers and laments over her death which continued until his own . She was his primary motivation , and her death hindered his ability to complete his work . 
 = = = Later career = = = 
 On 16 March 1756 , Johnson was arrested for an outstanding debt of £ 5 18s . Unable to contact anyone else , he wrote to the writer and publisher Samuel Richardson . Richardson , who had previously lent Johnson money , sent him six guineas to show his good will , and the two became friends . Soon after , Johnson met and befriended the painter Joshua Reynolds , who so impressed Johnson that he declared him " almost the only man whom I call a friend " . Reynolds ' younger sister Frances observed during their time together " that men , women and children gathered around him [ Johnson ] " , laughing at his gestures and gesticulations . In addition to Reynolds , Johnson was close to Bennet Langton and Arthur Murphy . Langton was a scholar and an admirer of Johnson who persuaded his way into a meeting with Johnson which led to a long friendship . Johnson met Murphy during the summer of 1754 after Murphy came to Johnson about the accidental republishing of the Rambler No. 190 , and the two became friends . Around this time , Anna Williams began boarding with Johnson . She was a minor poet who was poor and becoming blind , two conditions that Johnson attempted to change by providing room for her and paying for a failed cataract surgery . Williams , in turn , became Johnson 's housekeeper . 
 To occupy himself , Johnson began to work on The Literary Magazine , or Universal Review , the first issue of which was printed on 19 March 1756 . Philosophical disagreements erupted over the purpose of the publication when the Seven Years ' War began and Johnson started to write polemical essays attacking the war . After the war began , the Magazine included many reviews , at least 34 of which were written by Johnson . When not working on the Magazine , Johnson wrote a series of prefaces for other writers , such as Giuseppe <unk> , William Payne and Charlotte Lennox . Johnson 's relationship with Lennox and her works was particularly close during these years , and she in turn relied so heavily upon Johnson that he was " the most important single fact in Mrs Lennox 's literary life " . He later attempted to produce a new edition of her works , but even with his support they were unable to find enough interest to follow through with its publication . To help with domestic duties while Johnson was busy with his various projects , Richard Bathurst , a physician and a member of Johnson 's Club , pressured him to take on a freed slave , Francis Barber , as his servant . 
 Johnson 's work on The Plays of William Shakespeare took up most of his time . On 8 June 1756 , Johnson published his Proposals for Printing , by Subscription , the Dramatick Works of William Shakespeare , which argued that previous editions of Shakespeare were edited incorrectly and needed to be corrected . Johnson 's progress on the work slowed as the months passed , and he told music historian Charles Burney in December 1757 that it would take him until the following March to complete it . Before that could happen , he was arrested again , for a debt of £ 40 , in February 1758 . The debt was soon repaid by Jacob Tonson , who had contracted Johnson to publish Shakespeare , and this encouraged Johnson to finish his edition to repay the favour . Although it took him another seven years to finish , Johnson completed a few volumes of his Shakespeare to prove his commitment to the project . 
 In 1758 , Johnson began to write a weekly series , The Idler , which ran from 15 April 1758 to 5 April 1760 , as a way to avoid finishing his Shakespeare . This series was shorter and lacked many features of The Rambler . Unlike his independent publication of The Rambler , The Idler was published in a weekly news journal The Universal Chronicle , a publication supported by John Payne , John Newbery , Robert Stevens and William Faden . 
 Since The Idler did not occupy all Johnson 's time , he was able to publish his philosophical novella Rasselas on 19 April 1759 . The " little story book " , as Johnson described it , describes the life of Prince Rasselas and <unk> , his sister , who are kept in a place called the Happy Valley in the land of Abyssinia . The Valley is a place free of problems , where any desire is quickly satisfied . The constant pleasure does not , however , lead to satisfaction ; and , with the help of a philosopher named <unk> , Rasselas escapes and explores the world to witness how all aspects of society and life in the outside world are filled with suffering . They return to Abyssinia , but do not wish to return to the state of constantly fulfilled pleasures found in the Happy Valley . Rasselas was written in one week to pay for his mother 's funeral and settle her debts ; it became so popular that there was a new English edition of the work almost every year . References to it appear in many later works of fiction , including Jane Eyre , Cranford and The House of the Seven Gables . Its fame was not limited to English @-@ speaking nations : Rasselas was immediately translated into five languages ( French , Dutch , German , Russian and Italian ) , and later into nine others . 
 By 1762 , however , Johnson had gained notoriety for his <unk> in writing ; the contemporary poet Churchill teased Johnson for the delay in producing his long @-@ promised edition of Shakespeare : " He for subscribers baits his hook / and takes your cash , but where 's the book ? " The comments soon motivated Johnson to finish his Shakespeare , and , after receiving the first payment from a government pension on 20 July 1762 , he was able to dedicate most of his time towards this goal . Earlier that July , the 24 @-@ year @-@ old King George III granted Johnson an annual pension of £ 300 in appreciation for the Dictionary . While the pension did not make Johnson wealthy , it did allow him a modest yet comfortable independence for the remaining 22 years of his life . The award came largely through the efforts of Sheridan and the Earl of Bute . When Johnson questioned if the pension would force him to promote a political agenda or support various officials , he was told by Bute that the pension " is not given you for anything you are to do , but for what you have done " . 
 On 16 May 1763 , Johnson first met 22 @-@ year @-@ old James Boswell — who would later become Johnson 's first major biographer — in the bookshop of Johnson 's friend , Tom Davies . They quickly became friends , although Boswell would return to his home in Scotland or travel abroad for months at a time . Around the spring of 1763 , Johnson formed " The Club " , a social group that included his friends Reynolds , Burke , Garrick , Goldsmith and others ( the membership later expanded to include Adam Smith and Edward Gibbon ) . They decided to meet every Monday at 7 : 00 pm at the Turk 's Head in Gerrard Street , Soho , and these meetings continued until long after the deaths of the original members . 
 On 9 January 1765 , Murphy introduced Johnson to Henry Thrale , a wealthy brewer and MP , and his wife Hester . They struck up an instant friendship ; Johnson was treated as a member of the family , and was once more motivated to continue working on his Shakespeare . Afterwards , Johnson stayed with the <unk> for 17 years until Henry 's death in 1781 , sometimes staying in rooms at Thrale 's Anchor Brewery in Southwark . Hester Thrale 's documentation of Johnson 's life during this time , in her correspondence and her diary ( Thraliana ) , became an important source of biographical information on Johnson after his death . Oliver Goldsmith told her of one illness that Johnson had " he owed his recovery to her attention " . Johnson said of her , " If she was not the wisest woman in the world , she was undoubtedly one of the wittiest . " 
 Johnson 's edition of Shakespeare was finally published on 10 October 1765 as The Plays of William Shakespeare , in Eight Volumes ... To which are added Notes by Sam . Johnson in a printing of one thousand copies . The first edition quickly sold out , and a second was soon printed . The plays themselves were in a version that Johnson felt was closest to the original , based on his analysis of the manuscript editions . Johnson 's revolutionary innovation was to create a set of corresponding notes that allowed readers to clarify the meaning behind many of Shakespeare 's more complicated passages , and to examine those which had been transcribed incorrectly in previous editions . Included within the notes are occasional attacks upon rival editors of Shakespeare 's works . Years later , Edmond Malone , an important Shakespearean scholar and friend of Johnson 's , stated that Johnson 's " vigorous and comprehensive understanding threw more light on his authour than all his predecessors had done " . 
