 In February 1767 , Johnson was granted a special audience with King George III . This took place at the library of the Queen 's house , and it was organised by Barnard , the King 's librarian . The King , upon hearing that Johnson would visit the library , commanded that Barnard introduce him to Johnson . After a short meeting , Johnson was impressed both with the King himself and with their conversation . 
 = = = Final works = = = 
 On 6 August 1773 , eleven years after first meeting Boswell , Johnson set out to visit his friend in Scotland , and to begin " a journey to the western islands of Scotland " , as Johnson 's 1775 account of their travels would put it . The work was intended to discuss the social problems and struggles that affected the Scottish people , but it also praised many of the unique facets of Scottish society , such as a school in Edinburgh for the deaf and mute . Also , Johnson used the work to enter into the dispute over the authenticity of James Macpherson 's Ossian poems , claiming they could not have been translations of ancient Scottish literature on the grounds that " in those times nothing had been written in the <unk> [ i.e. Gaelic ] language " . There were heated exchanges between the two , and according to one of Johnson 's letters , MacPherson threatened physical violence . Boswell 's account of their journey , The Journal of a Tour to the Hebrides ( 1786 ) , was a preliminary step toward his later biography , Life of Johnson . Included were various quotations and descriptions of events , including anecdotes such as Johnson swinging a broadsword while wearing Scottish garb , or dancing a Highland jig . 
 In the 1770s , Johnson , who had tended to be an opponent of the government early in life , published a series of pamphlets in favour of various government policies . In 1770 he produced The False Alarm , a political pamphlet attacking John Wilkes . In 1771 , his Thoughts on the Late Transactions Respecting Falkland 's Islands cautioned against war with Spain . In 1774 he printed The Patriot , a critique of what he viewed as false patriotism . On the evening of 7 April 1775 , he made the famous statement , " Patriotism is the last refuge of a scoundrel . " This line was not , as widely believed , about patriotism in general , but the false use of the term " patriotism " by John Stuart , 3rd Earl of Bute ( the patriot @-@ minister ) and his supporters - and the enemies of Bute , who played upon his non @-@ English descent . Johnson opposed " self @-@ professed Patriots " in general , but valued what he considered " true " patriotism . 
 The last of these pamphlets , Taxation No Tyranny ( 1775 ) , was a defence of the Coercive Acts and a response to the Declaration of Rights of the First Continental Congress of America , which protested against taxation without representation . Johnson argued that in emigrating to America , colonists had " voluntarily resigned the power of voting " , but they still had " virtual representation " in Parliament . In a parody of the Declaration of Rights , Johnson suggested that the Americans had no more right to govern themselves than the Cornish people , and asked " How is it that we hear the loudest yelps for liberty among the drivers of negroes ? " If the Americans wanted to participate in Parliament , said Johnson , they could move to England and purchase an estate . Johnson denounced English supporters of American separatists as " traitors to this country " , and hoped that the matter would be settled without bloodshed , but he felt confident that it would end with " English superiority and American obedience " . Years before , Johnson had stated that the English and the French were just " two robbers " who were stealing land from the natives , and that neither deserved to live there . After the signing of the 1783 Peace of Paris treaty , marking the colonists ' defeat of the British , Johnson was " deeply disturbed " with the " state of this kingdom " . 
 On 3 May 1777 , while Johnson was trying to save Reverend William Dodd from execution , he wrote to Boswell that he was busy preparing a " little Lives " and " little Prefaces , to a little edition of the English Poets " . Tom Davies , William Strahan and Thomas Cadell had asked Johnson to create this final major work , the Lives of the English Poets , for which he asked 200 guineas , an amount significantly less than the price he could have demanded . The Lives , which were critical as well as biographical studies , appeared as prefaces to selections of each poet 's work , and they were longer and more detailed than originally expected . The work was finished in March 1781 and the whole collection was published in six volumes . As Johnson justified in the advertisement for the work , " my purpose was only to have allotted to every Poet an Advertisement , like those which we find in the French Miscellanies , containing a few dates and a general character . " 
 Johnson was unable to enjoy this success because Henry Thrale , the dear friend with whom he lived , died on 4 April 1781 . Life changed quickly for Johnson when Hester Thrale became romantically involved with the Italian singing teacher Gabriel Mario Piozzi , which forced Johnson to change his previous lifestyle . After returning home and then travelling for a short period , Johnson received word that his friend and tenant Robert Levet , had died on 17 January 1782 . Johnson was shocked by the death of Levet , who had resided at Johnson 's London home since 1762 . Shortly afterwards Johnson caught a cold that developed into bronchitis and lasted for several months . His health was further complicated by " feeling forlorn and lonely " over Levet 's death , and by the deaths of his friend Thomas Lawrence and his housekeeper Williams . 
 = = = Final years = = = 
 Although he had recovered his health by August , he experienced emotional trauma when he was given word that Hester Thrale would sell the residence that Johnson shared with the family . What hurt Johnson most was the possibility that he would be left without her constant company . Months later , on 6 October 1782 , Johnson attended church for the final time in his life , to say goodbye to his former residence and life . The walk to the church strained him , but he managed the journey unaccompanied . While there , he wrote a prayer for the Thrale family : 
 To thy fatherly protection , O Lord , I commend this family . Bless , guide , and defend them , that they may pass through this world , as finally to enjoy in thy presence everlasting happiness , for Jesus Christ 's sake . Amen . 
 Hester Thrale did not completely abandon Johnson , and asked him to accompany the family on a trip to Brighton . He agreed , and was with them from 7 October until 20 November 1782 . On his return , his health began to fail , and he was left alone after Boswell 's visit on 29 May 1783 . 
 On 17 June 1783 , Johnson 's poor circulation resulted in a stroke and he wrote to his neighbour , Edmund Allen , that he had lost the ability to speak . Two doctors were brought in to aid Johnson ; he regained his ability to speak two days later . Johnson feared that he was dying , and wrote : 
 The black dog I hope always to resist , and in time to drive , though I am deprived of almost all those that used to help me . The neighbourhood is impoverished . I had once Richardson and Lawrence in my reach . Mrs. Allen is dead . My house has lost Levet , a man who took interest in everything , and therefore ready at conversation . Mrs. Williams is so weak that she can be a companion no longer . When I rise my breakfast is solitary , the black dog waits to share it , from breakfast to dinner he continues barking , except that Dr. Brocklesby for a little keeps him at a distance . Dinner with a sick woman you may venture to suppose not much better than solitary . After dinner , what remains but to count the clock , and hope for that sleep which I can scarce expect . Night comes at last , and some hours of restlessness and confusion bring me again to a day of solitude . What shall exclude the black dog from an habitation like this ? 
 By this time he was sick and gout @-@ ridden . He had surgery for gout , and his remaining friends , including novelist Fanny Burney ( the daughter of Charles Burney ) , came to keep him company . He was confined to his room from 14 December 1783 to 21 April 1784 . 
 His health began to improve by May 1784 , and he travelled to Oxford with Boswell on 5 May 1784 . By July , many of Johnson 's friends were either dead or gone ; Boswell had left for Scotland and Hester Thrale had become engaged to Piozzi . With no one to visit , Johnson expressed a desire to die in London and arrived there on 16 November 1784 . On 25 November 1784 , he allowed Burney to visit him and expressed an interest to her that he should leave London ; he soon left for Islington , to George Strahan 's home . His final moments were filled with mental anguish and delusions ; when his physician , Thomas Warren , visited and asked him if he were feeling better , Johnson burst out with : " No , Sir ; you cannot conceive with what acceleration I advance towards death . " 
 Many visitors came to see Johnson as he lay sick in bed , but he preferred only Langton 's company . Burney waited for word of Johnson 's condition , along with Windham , Strahan , Hoole , Cruikshank , Des Moulins and Barber . On 13 December 1784 , Johnson met with two others : a young woman , Miss Morris , whom Johnson blessed , and Francesco <unk> , an Italian teacher , who was given some of Johnson 's final words : " Iam <unk> " ( " I who am about to die " ) . Shortly afterwards he fell into a coma , and died at 7 : 00 pm . 
 Langton waited until 11 : 00 pm to tell the others , which led to John Hawkins ' becoming pale and overcome with " an agony of mind " , along with Seward and Hoole describing Johnson 's death as " the most awful sight " . Boswell remarked , " My feeling was just one large expanse of <unk> ... I could not believe it . My imagination was not convinced . " William Gerard Hamilton joined in and stated , " He has made a chasm , which not only nothing can fill up , but which nothing has a tendency to fill up . <unk> is <unk> Let us go to the next best : There is nobody ; <unk> man can be said to put you in mind of Johnson . " 
 He was buried on 20 December 1784 at Westminster Abbey with an inscription that reads : 
 Samuel Johnson , LL.D. 
 <unk> XIII die <unk> , 
 Anno Domini 
 <unk> 
 <unk> <unk> <unk> . 
 = = Literary criticism = = 
 Johnson 's works , especially his Lives of the Poets series , describe various features of excellent writing . He believed that the best poetry relied on contemporary language , and he disliked the use of decorative or purposefully archaic language . He was suspicious of the poetic language used by Milton , whose blank verse he believed would inspire many bad imitations . Also , Johnson opposed the poetic language of his contemporary Thomas Gray . His greatest complaint was that obscure allusions found in works like Milton 's <unk> were overused ; he preferred poetry that could be easily read and understood . In addition to his views on language , Johnson believed that a good poem incorporated new and unique imagery . 
 In his smaller poetic works , Johnson relied on short lines and filled his work with a feeling of empathy , which possibly influenced Housman 's poetic style . In London , his first imitation of Juvenal , Johnson uses the poetic form to express his political opinion and , as befits a young writer , approaches the topic in a playful and almost joyous manner . However , his second imitation , The Vanity of Human Wishes , is completely different ; the language remains simple , but the poem is more complicated and difficult to read because Johnson is trying to describe complex Christian ethics . These Christian values are not unique to the poem , but contain views expressed in most of Johnson 's works . In particular , Johnson emphasises God 's infinite love and shows that happiness can be attained through virtuous action . 
 When it came to biography , Johnson disagreed with Plutarch 's use of biography to praise and to teach morality . Instead , Johnson believed in portraying the biographical subjects accurately and including any negative aspects of their lives . Because his insistence on accuracy in biography was little short of revolutionary , Johnson had to struggle against a society that was unwilling to accept biographical details that could be viewed as tarnishing a reputation ; this became the subject of Rambler 60 . Furthermore , Johnson believed that biography should not be limited to the most famous and that the lives of lesser individuals , too , were significant ; thus in his Lives of the Poets he chose both great and lesser poets . In all his biographies he insisted on including what others would have considered trivial details to fully describe the lives of his subjects . Johnson considered the genre of autobiography and diaries , including his own , as one having the most significance ; in Idler 84 he explains how a writer of an autobiography would be the least likely to distort his own life . 
 Johnson 's thoughts on biography and on poetry coalesced in his understanding of what would make a good critic . His works were dominated with his intent to use them for literary criticism . This was especially true of his Dictionary of which he wrote : " I lately published a Dictionary like those compiled by the academies of Italy and France , for the use of such as aspire to exactness of criticism , or elegance of style " . Although a smaller edition of his Dictionary became the standard household dictionary , Johnson 's original Dictionary was an academic tool that examined how words were used , especially in literary works . To achieve this purpose , Johnson included quotations from Bacon , Hooker , Milton , Shakespeare , Spenser , and many others from what he considered to be the most important literary fields : natural science , philosophy , poetry , and theology . These quotations and usages were all compared and carefully studied in the Dictionary so that a reader could understand what words in literary works meant in context . 
 Johnson did not attempt to create schools of theories to analyse the aesthetics of literature . Instead , he used his criticism for the practical purpose of helping others to better read and understand literature . When it came to Shakespeare 's plays , Johnson emphasised the role of the reader in understanding language : " If Shakespeare has difficulties above other writers , it is to be imputed to the nature of his work , which required the use of common colloquial language , and consequently admitted many phrases allusive , elliptical , and proverbial , such as we speak and hear every hour without observing them " . 
 His works on Shakespeare were devoted not merely to Shakespeare , but to understanding literature as a whole ; in his Preface to Shakespeare , Johnson rejects the previous dogma of the classical unities and argues that drama should be faithful to life . However , Johnson did not only defend Shakespeare ; he discussed Shakespeare 's faults , including his lack of morality , his vulgarity , his carelessness in crafting plots , and his occasional inattentiveness when choosing words or word order . As well as direct literary criticism , Johnson emphasised the need to establish a text that accurately reflects what an author wrote . Shakespeare 's plays , in particular , had multiple editions , each of which contained errors caused by the printing process . This problem was compounded by careless editors who deemed difficult words incorrect , and changed them in later editions . Johnson believed that an editor should not alter the text in such a way . 
 = = Character sketch = = 
 Johnson 's tall and robust figure combined with his odd gestures were confusing to some ; when William Hogarth first saw Johnson standing near a window in Samuel Richardson 's house , " shaking his head and rolling himself about in a strange ridiculous manner " , Hogarth thought Johnson an " <unk> , whom his relations had put under the care of Mr. Richardson " . Hogarth was quite surprised when " this figure stalked forwards to where he and Mr. Richardson were sitting and all at once took up the argument ... [ with ] such a power of eloquence , that Hogarth looked at him with astonishment , and actually imagined that this <unk> had been at the moment inspired " . Beyond appearance , Adam Smith claimed that " Johnson knew more books than any man alive " , while Edmund Burke thought that if Johnson were to join Parliament , he " certainly would have been the greatest speaker that ever was there " . Johnson relied on a unique form of rhetoric , and he is well known for his " refutation " of Bishop Berkeley 's <unk> , his claim that matter did not actually exist but only seemed to exist : during a conversation with Boswell , Johnson powerfully stomped a nearby stone and proclaimed of Berkeley 's theory , " I refute it thus ! " 
 Johnson was a devout , conservative Anglican and a compassionate man who supported a number of poor friends under his own roof , even when unable to fully provide for himself . Johnson 's Christian morality permeated his works , and he would write on moral topics with such authority and in such a trusting manner that , Walter Jackson Bate claims , " no other moralist in history excels or even begins to rival him " . However , Johnson 's moral writings do not contain , as Donald Greene points out , " a predetermined and authorized pattern of ' good behavior ' " , even though Johnson does emphasise certain kinds of conduct . He did not let his own faith prejudice him against others , and had respect for those of other denominations who demonstrated a commitment to Christ 's teachings . Although Johnson respected John Milton 's poetry , he could not tolerate Milton 's Puritan and Republican beliefs , feeling that they were contrary to England and Christianity . He was an opponent of slavery on moral grounds , and once proposed a toast to the " next rebellion of the negroes in the West Indies " . Beside his beliefs concerning humanity , Johnson is also known for his love of cats , especially his own two cats , Hodge and Lily . Boswell wrote , " I never shall forget the indulgence with which he treated Hodge , his cat . " 
 Johnson was also known as a staunch Tory ; he admitted to sympathies for the Jacobite cause during his younger years but , by the reign of George III , he came to accept the Hanoverian Succession . It was Boswell who gave people the impression that Johnson was an " arch @-@ conservative " , and it was Boswell , more than anyone else , who determined how Johnson would be seen by people years later . However , Boswell was not around for two of Johnson 's most politically active periods : during Walpole 's control over British Parliament and during the Seven Years ' War . Although Boswell was present with Johnson during the 1770s and describes four major pamphlets written by Johnson , he neglects to discuss them because he is more interested in their travels to Scotland . This is compounded by the fact that Boswell held an opinion contradictory to two of these pamphlets , The False Alarm and Taxation No Tyranny , and so attacks Johnson 's views in his biography . 
 In his Life of Samuel Johnson Boswell referred to Johnson as ‘ Dr. Johnson ’ so often that he would always be known as such , even though he hated being called such . Boswell 's emphasis on Johnson 's later years shows him too often as merely an old man <unk> in a tavern to a circle of admirers . Although Boswell , a Scotsman , was a close companion and friend to Johnson during many important times of his life , like many of his fellow Englishmen Johnson had a reputation for despising Scotland and its people . Even during their journey together through Scotland , Johnson " exhibited prejudice and a narrow nationalism " . Hester Thrale , in summarising Johnson 's nationalistic views and his anti @-@ Scottish prejudice , said : " We all know how well he loved to abuse the Scotch , & indeed to be abused by them in return . " 
 = = Health = = 
 Johnson had several health problems , including childhood tuberculous scrofula resulting in deep facial scarring , deafness in one ear and blindness in one eye , gout , testicular cancer , and a stroke in his final year that left him unable to speak ; his autopsy indicated that he had pulmonary fibrosis along with cardiac failure probably due to hypertension , a condition then unknown . Johnson displayed signs consistent with several diagnoses , including depression and Tourette syndrome ( TS ) . 
 There are many accounts of Johnson suffering from bouts of depression and what Johnson thought might be madness . As Walter Jackson Bate puts it , " one of the ironies of literary history is that its most compelling and authoritative symbol of common sense — of the strong , imaginative grasp of concrete reality — should have begun his adult life , at the age of twenty , in a state of such intense anxiety and bewildered despair that , at least from his own point of view , it seemed the onset of actual insanity " . To overcome these feelings , Johnson tried to constantly involve himself with various activities , but this did not seem to help . Taylor said that Johnson " at one time strongly entertained thoughts of Suicide " . Boswell claimed that Johnson " felt himself overwhelmed with an horrible melancholia , with perpetual irritation , <unk> , and impatience ; and with a dejection , gloom , and despair , which made existence misery " . 
 Early on , when Johnson was unable to pay off his debts , he began to work with professional writers and identified his own situation with theirs . During this time , Johnson witnessed Christopher Smart 's decline into " penury and the madhouse " , and feared that he might share the same fate . Hester Thrale Piozzi claimed , in a discussion on Smart 's mental state , that Johnson was her " friend who feared an apple should intoxicate him " . To her , what separated Johnson from others who were placed in asylums for madness — like Christopher Smart — was his ability to keep his concerns and emotions to himself . 
 Two hundred years after Johnson 's death , the posthumous diagnosis of Tourette syndrome became widely accepted . The condition was unknown during Johnson 's lifetime , but Boswell describes Johnson displaying signs of TS including tics and other involuntary movements . According to Boswell " he commonly held his head to one side ... moving his body backwards and forwards , and rubbing his left knee in the same direction , with the palm of his hand ... [ H ] e made various sounds " like " a half whistle " or " as if clucking like a hen " , and " ... all this accompanied sometimes with a thoughtful look , but more frequently with a smile . Generally when he had concluded a period , in the course of a dispute , by which time he was a good deal exhausted by violence and <unk> , he used to blow out his breath like a Whale . " There are many similar accounts ; in particular , Johnson was said to " perform his gesticulations " at the threshold of a house or in doorways . When asked by a little girl why he made such noises and acted in that way , Johnson responded : " From bad habit . " The diagnosis of the syndrome was first made in a 1967 report , and TS researcher Arthur K. Shapiro described Johnson as " the most notable example of a successful adaptation to life despite the liability of Tourette syndrome " . Details provided by the writings of Boswell , Hester Thrale , and others reinforce the diagnosis , with one paper concluding : 
 [ Johnson ] also displayed many of the obsessional @-@ compulsive traits and rituals which are associated with this syndrome ... It may be thought that without this illness Dr Johnson 's remarkable literary achievements , the great dictionary , his philosophical deliberations and his conversations may never have happened ; and Boswell , the author of the greatest of biographies would have been unknown . 
 From early childhood , Johnson suffered from poor eyesight , especially in his left eye , which interfered with his education . There were somewhat contradictory reports about his eyesight from his contemporaries . He appeared to have been near @-@ sighted , yet he did not use eyeglasses . His eyesight became worse with age ; still , his handwriting remained quite legible . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Johnson was , in the words of Steven Lynn , " more than a well @-@ known writer and scholar " ; for it is said of his poetry , ' small in amount , its quality excellent ' , and regrets were expressed that he had not written much more ' . He was a celebrity for the activities and the state of his health in his later years were constantly reported in various journals and newspapers , and when there was nothing to report , something was invented . According to Bate , " Johnson loved biography , " and he " changed the whole course of biography for the modern world . One by @-@ product was the most famous single work of biographical art in the whole of literature , Boswell 's Life of Johnson , and there were many other memoirs and biographies of a similar kind written on Johnson after his death . " These accounts of his life include Thomas Tyers 's A Biographical Sketch of Dr Samuel Johnson ( 1784 ) ; Boswell 's The Journal of a Tour to the Hebrides ( 1785 ) ; Hester Thrale 's Anecdotes of the Late Samuel Johnson , which drew on entries from her diary and other notes ; John Hawkins 's Life of Samuel Johnson ( 1787 ) , the first full @-@ length biography of Johnson ; and , in 1792 , Arthur Murphy 's An Essay on the Life and Genius of Samuel Johnson , which replaced Hawkins 's biography as the introduction to a collection of Johnson 's Works . Another important source was Fanny Burney , who described Johnson as " the acknowledged Head of Literature in this kingdom " and kept a diary containing details missing from other biographies . Above all , Boswell 's portrayal of Johnson is the work best known to general readers . Although critics like Donald Greene argue about its status as a true biography , the work became successful as Boswell and his friends promoted it at the expense of the many other works on Johnson 's life . 
 In criticism , Johnson had a lasting influence , although not everyone viewed him favourably . Some , like Macaulay , regarded Johnson as an idiot savant who produced some respectable works , and others , like the Romantic poets , were completely opposed to Johnson 's views on poetry and literature , especially with regard to Milton . However , some of their contemporaries disagreed : Stendhal 's Racine et Shakespeare is based in part on Johnson 's views of Shakespeare , and Johnson influenced Jane Austen 's writing style and philosophy . Later , Johnson 's works came into favour , and Matthew Arnold , in his Six Chief Lives from Johnson 's " Lives of the Poets " , considered the Lives of Milton , Dryden , Pope , Addison , Swift , and Gray as " points which stand as so many natural centres , and by returning to which we can always find our way again " . 
 More than a century after his death , literary critics such as G. Birkbeck Hill and T. S. Eliot came to regard Johnson as a serious critic . They began to study Johnson 's works with an increasing focus on the critical analysis found in his edition of Shakespeare and Lives of the Poets . Yvor Winters claimed that " A great critic is the rarest of all literary geniuses ; perhaps the only critic in English who deserves that epithet is Samuel Johnson " . F. R. Leavis agreed and , on Johnson 's criticism , said , " When we read him we know , beyond question , that we have here a powerful and distinguished mind operating at first hand upon literature . This , we can say with emphatic conviction , really is criticism " . Edmund Wilson claimed that " The Lives of the Poets and the prefaces and commentary on Shakespeare are among the most brilliant and the most acute documents in the whole range of English criticism " . The critic Harold Bloom placed Johnson 's work firmly within the Western canon , describing him as " unmatched by any critic in any nation before or after him ... Bate in the finest insight on Johnson I know , emphasised that no other writer is so obsessed by the realisation that the mind is an activity , one that will turn to destructiveness of the self or of others unless it is directed to labour . " It is no wonder that his philosophical insistence that the language within literature must be examined became a prevailing mode of literary theory during the mid @-@ 20th century . 
 There are many societies formed around and dedicated to the study and enjoyment of Samuel Johnson 's life and works . On the bicentennial of Johnson 's death in 1984 , Oxford University held a week @-@ long conference featuring 50 papers , and the Arts Council of Great Britain held an exhibit of " Johnsonian portraits and other memorabilia " . The London Times and Punch produced parodies of Johnson 's style for the occasion . In 1999 , the BBC Four television channel started the Samuel Johnson Prize , an award for non @-@ fiction . 
 Half of Johnson 's surviving correspondence , together with some of his manuscripts , editions of his books , paintings and other items associated with him are in the Donald and Mary Hyde Collection of Dr. Samuel Johnson , housed at Houghton Library at Harvard University since 2003 . Materials in the collection may be accessed through the Houghton Reading Room . The collection includes drafts of his Plan for a Dictionary , documents associated with Hester Thrale Piozzi and James Boswell ( including corrected proofs of his Life of Johnson ) and a teapot owned by Johnson . 
 A Royal Society of Arts blue plaque , unveiled in 1876 , commemorates his Gough Square house . 
 = = Major works = = 
 = Death in Bloom = 
 " Death in Bloom " is the seventeenth episode of the second season of the American animated television series Adventure Time . The episode was written and storyboarded by Jesse Moynihan and Cole Sanchez , from a story by Mark Banker , Kent Osborne , Patrick McHale , and series creator Pendleton Ward . It originally aired on Cartoon Network on February 28 , 2011 . The episode guest stars Miguel Ferrer as Death ; Ferrer would later reprise his role in the fourth season episode " Sons of Mars " . 
 The series follows the adventures of Finn ( voiced by Jeremy Shada ) , a human boy , and his best friend and adoptive brother Jake ( voiced by John DiMaggio ) , a dog with magical powers to change shape and grow and shrink at will . In this episode , Finn and Jake make a trip to the Land of the Dead after killing Princess Bubblegum 's ( voiced by Hynden Walch ) plant when they were instructed to take care of it . After Jake 's memory is wiped and Finn loses a musical duel against Death ( voiced by Ferrer ) , the two are nearly killed until a lucky coincidence causes Death to spare them . 
 Originally , the episode was supposed to revolve around the duo trying to get the plant back , lest Princess Bubblegum turn into a man . In addition , the episode originally was supposed to feature a mysterious rabbit that guided Finn and Jake through the Underworld ; this character was later cut . The episode was watched by 1 @.@ 981 million people and received largely positive critical attention . Many critics applauded Ferrer 's voice acting work , and Matt Fowler of IGN singled the episode out as an example of the comedic darkening of Adventure Time . 
 = = Plot = = 
 While spending time with Finn and Jake , Princess Bubblegum realizes that she needs to leave for a science convention in the Veggie Village . She entrusts the two with guarding her Princess Plant . However , when she departs , Finn and Jake party too hard with the plant , killing it . They then decide on a way to journey into the Land of the Dead and to reclaim the flower 's soul from Death himself . For an unspecified price , Peppermint Butler ( voiced by Steve Little ) teaches the two how to get into the Underworld , and he instructs Finn and Jake also to tell Death that he said hello . 
 Once in the Land of the Death , Finn and Jake are nearly eaten by conscious skeletons , who crave flesh . While evading these monsters , Jake jumps into the " River of <unk> " and loses his memory . Finn drags Jake all the way to Death 's castle . Once inside , Death reveals that he will return the flower 's soul if Finn can beat him in a musical showdown . Finn choose to play jingle bells , whereas Death plays drums and sings death metal . Jake , the now @-@ impartial judge due to his memory loss , rules that Death wins . 
 Because Finn and Jake lost the contest , Death decides to kill them . Before he dies , however , Finn tells Death that Peppermint Butler says hello ; Death — revealed to be an acquaintance of Peppermint Butler — suddenly relents and tells the two that they can have " anything [ they ] want . " Death then returns Princess Plant 's soul as well as Jake 's memory before zapping Finn and Jake to the Candy Kingdom . Bubblegum returns , only to eat part of the plant , causing her hair to change . Peppermint Butler then asks for his payment : he wants both Finn and Jake 's flesh , much to their horror . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Death in Bloom " was written and storyboarded by Jesse Moynihan and Cole Sanchez , from a story by Mark Banker , Kent Osborne , Patrick McHale , and series creator Pendleton Ward . The episode was directed by Larry Leichliter . Both Ward and fellow series storyboard artist Tom Herpich helped Moynihan and Sanchez clean up their story . One scene , in which Finn and Jake hide from the skeletons only to have Jake 's flatulence alert them to their presence , was supposed to be storyboarded by Ward . However , he was extremely tired and offered Herpich $ 100 — the amount Ward would have earned had he done it — to storyboard the scene instead . The episode features an extremely long pan showing much of the Land of the Dead . Moynihan noted that he " wanted to really go over the top and make it like 15 pages but 7 pages felt right " ; he later said that he wanted to " blow kids ' minds " with the shot . Moynihan 's original pan was redesigned by background designer Dan " Ghostshrimp " James , who also did some of the other backgrounds for the episode . Other background were done by Chris Tsirgiotis , who , according to Moynihan , was doing his " best Ghostshrimp impression " ; Tsirgiotis himself later noted that , " Matching Ghostshrimp ’ s drawing style is pretty tricky . It looks simple at first glance , but it ’ s actually very sophisticated and nuanced . " 
 The scene wherein Peppermint Butler teaches Finn and Jake to enter the land of the dead by crossing their eyes and staring at a corner was inspired by a story that Moynihan 's father told him when he was younger . According to the artist , his father told him that if you " concentrate really hard enough " , you would " walk into another dimension " . Moynihan recalled the story when he was penning the episode , and worked it into the episode . The climax featuring Death and Finn engaging in a musical competition was specifically written so as to not be " corny " . According to Ward , scenes featuring contests were often avoided because they were " the easiest traps to fall into when you 're writing an outline " . For " Death in Bloom " , the writing staff realized that a contest would work towards the story 's strengths . In original drafts of the episode , Finn and Jake were guided through the Land of the Dead by a mysterious rabbit . Sanchez continually felt that the rabbit was misplaced in the episode . When it came time to revise the story , the rabbit was inevitably cut because it was agreed by the writers and series staff that the character did not fit with the story . The rabbit 's role was later partially replaced by an ominous talking skull that tries to get Jake to drink from the " River of <unk> " . According to storyboard artist Rebecca Sugar , a rough draft for the original ending featured Princess Bubblegum becoming a man without the Princess Plant . Moynihan later noted that the writers were being a " little reckless " when it was pitched , and Ward joked that he had to step in and be " quality control " to prevent the idea from making it into the final episode . 
 Death was voiced by Miguel Ferrer . Ferrer would later reprise his role in the fourth season episode " Sons of Mars " . Death 's look was designed by Moynihan ; he admitted that he was " sort of intimidated " in redesigning the iconic character , and that he strove to stay away from " the cowl and the sickle " . Before settling on the final design , Moynihan tried both a " Japanese cosmic alien thing " and a " Jodorowsky / Holy Mountain inspired " design . He then later changed the head into a horse skull . The design for the character was then finalized by Phil Rynda , who was the series ' lead character designer at the time . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Death in Bloom " first aired on Cartoon Network on October 11 , 2010 . The episode was viewed by 1 @.@ 981 million viewers and scored a Nielsen rating of 1 @.@ 2 / 2 percent . This means it was seen by 1 @.@ 2 percent of all households and 2 percent of all households watching television at the time of the episode 's airing . The episode first saw physical release as part of the 2013 Fionna and Cake DVD , which included 16 episodes from the series ' first three seasons . It was later re @-@ released as part of the complete second season DVD in June 2013 . 
 Tyler Foster of DVD Talk wrote highly of the episode , and highlighted it as a stand @-@ out of the second season . He applauded the way in which the series reinvented the idea of the Underworld , noting that its presentation was " hilarious in and of itself " . In addition , he was complimentary towards Ferrer 's performance as Death ; in a review of the Fionna and Cake DVD , Foster referred to the actor 's work as " hilarious " in the episode , and in a review of the second season , he wrote that " if ' Miguel Ferrer as Death ' isn 't a perfect four @-@ word tease pitch for the show 's genius , I don 't know what is . " Matt Fowler of IGN cited the episode as a season highlight , writing that the episode 's best part is when " Finn has a ' death metal @-@ off ' with Death " . He also noted that the episode is important to the series as a whole , as it is one of the many second season entries that marks a " darkening effect " upon the series ; he specifically cited the scene wherein Peppermint Butler demands Finn and Jake 's flesh as payment . 
 = Joe Diffie = 
 Joe Logan Diffie ( born December 28 , 1958 ) is an American country music singer . After working as a demo singer in the 1980s , he signed with Epic Records ' Nashville division in 1990 . Between then and 2004 , Diffie charted 35 cuts on the Billboard Hot Country Songs chart , including five number one singles : his debut release " Home " , " If the Devil Danced ( In Empty Pockets ) " , " Third Rock from the Sun " , " Pickup Man " ( his longest @-@ lasting number one , at four weeks ) and " Bigger Than the Beatles " . In addition to these cuts , he has 12 other top ten singles and ten other top 40 hits on the same chart . He also co @-@ wrote singles for Holly Dunn , Tim McGraw , and Jo Dee Messina , and has recorded with Mary Chapin Carpenter , George Jones , and Marty Stuart . 
 Diffie released seven studio albums , a Christmas album and a greatest hits package under the Epic label . He also released one studio album each through Monument Records , Broken Bow Records , and Rounder Records . Among his albums , 1993 's Honky Tonk Attitude and 1994 's Third Rock from the Sun are certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ; 1992 's Regular Joe and 1996 's Life 's So Funny are both certified gold . His most recent album , Homecoming : The Bluegrass Album , was released in late 2010 through Rounder . His style is defined by a neotraditionalist country influence with a mix of novelty songs and ballads . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Joe Diffie was born into a musical family in Tulsa , Oklahoma , in 1958 . His first musical performance came at age four , when he performed in his aunt 's country music band . Diffie 's father , Joe R. , played guitar and banjo , and his mother sang . Following in his mother 's footsteps , Diffie began to sing at an early age , often listening to the albums in his father 's record collection . Diffie has said that his " Mom and Dad claimed that [ he ] could sing harmony when [ he ] was three years old . " His family moved to San Antonio , Texas while he was in the first grade , and subsequently to Washington state where he attended fourth and fifth grades . Later , he moved to Wisconsin for the years he was in sixth grade through his second year of high school , and back to Oklahoma where he attended high school in the town of Velma . In his last two years in high school , Diffie played football , baseball , and golf in addition to running track ; in his senior year he was recognized as Best All @-@ Around Male Athlete . 
 After graduating , he attended Cameron University in Lawton , Oklahoma . Although he initially earned credits toward medical school , he decided against a medical profession after marrying for the first time in 1977 , and ultimately dropped out before graduation . Diffie first worked in oil fields , then drove a truck that pumped cement out of oil wells in Alice , Texas , before he moved back to Duncan to work in a foundry . During this period , he worked as a musician on the side , first in a gospel group called Higher Purpose , and then in a bluegrass band called Special Edition . Diffie then built a recording studio , began touring with Special Edition in adjacent states , and sent demo recordings to publishers in Nashville . Hank Thompson recorded Diffie 's " Love on the Rocks " , and Randy Travis put one of Diffie 's songs on hold but ultimately did not record it . 
 After the foundry closed in 1986 , Diffie declared bankruptcy and sold the studio out of financial necessity . He also divorced his wife , who left with their two children . Diffie spent several months in a state of depression before deciding to move to Nashville , Tennessee . There , he took a job at Gibson Guitar Corporation . While at Gibson , he contacted a songwriter and recorded more demos , including songs that would later be recorded by Ricky Van Shelton , Billy Dean , Alabama , and The Forester Sisters . By mid @-@ 1989 , he quit working at the company in order to record demos full @-@ time . Diffie also met Debbie , who would later become his second wife . That same year , Diffie was contacted by Bob Montgomery , a songwriter and record producer known for working with Buddy Holly . Montgomery , who was then the vice president of A & R at Epic Records , said that he wanted to sign Diffie to a contract with the label , but had to put the singer on hold for a year . In the meantime , Holly Dunn released " There Goes My Heart Again " , which Diffie co @-@ wrote and sang the backing vocals . Following this song 's chart success , Diffie signed with Epic in early 1990 . 
 = = Professional music career = = 
 = = = 1990 – 1991 : A Thousand Winding Roads = = = 
 The label released Diffie 's debut album , A Thousand Winding Roads , at the end of 1990 , with Montgomery and Johnny Slate as producers . Its first single , " Home " , reached the top of the Billboard Hot Country Songs charts . The song was also rated number one on the country music charts published by Radio & Records and Gavin Report , making him the first country music artist to have a number one debut single on all three charts , as well as the first country music artist to have a debut single spend more than one week in the number one position at the latter two publications . Diffie co @-@ wrote the album 's second and fourth releases , " If You Want Me To " and " New Way ( To Light Up an Old Flame ) " ; both peaked at number two on Billboard , and the former reached number one on the RPM country music charts in Canada . Between these two songs , " If the Devil Danced ( In Empty Pockets ) " became Diffie 's second Billboard number one . The album itself peaked at number 23 on Top Country Albums . Diffie also performed his first concerts in late 1990 , touring with George Strait and Steve Wariner . In that same year , Cash Box magazine named him Male Vocalist of the year . In 1991 , Diffie co @-@ wrote the tracks " Livin ' on What 's Left of Your Love " and " Memory Lane " on labelmate Keith Palmer 's debut album . 
 = = = 1992 : Regular Joe = = = 
 Diffie 's second album , titled Regular Joe , was released in 1992 and was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America . The first two singles from the album both peaked at number five on Billboard : " Is It Cold in Here " and " Ships That Don 't Come In " , with the latter reaching number one on Radio & Records . The album 's third single , " Next Thing Smokin ' " , made its chart debut one month before " Not Too Much to Ask " , a duet that Diffie recorded with Mary Chapin Carpenter for her album Come On Come On . Both of these songs made the country Top 20 , respectively reaching sixteen and fifteen , and the duet was nominated for a Grammy Award for Best Country Collaboration with Vocals at the 35th Grammy Awards in 1993 . The final single from Regular Joe was " Startin ' Over Blues " ( originally the B @-@ side to " Ships That Don 't Come In " ) , which peaked at number 41 . 
 Brian Mansfield gave the album a positive review in Allmusic , saying that it " has all the clichés of country music , and all the good stuff too . " Richmond Times @-@ Dispatch reviewer Norman Rowe referred to Diffie as a " pleasant surprise " and called " Is It Cold in Here " " the sort of tear @-@ jerker George Jones has worked wonders with in the past " . Alanna Nash of Entertainment Weekly thought that Diffie " [ sang ] in his natural voice " , but thought that its material " punches all the predictable thematic buttons . " 
 = = = 1993 : Honky Tonk Attitude = = = 
 1993 's Honky Tonk Attitude shipped a million copies in the United States and was certified platinum . The first three singles from the album all reached the Top Ten on the country singles charts : the title track ( which Diffie co @-@ wrote ) and the Dennis Linde composition " John Deere Green " both peaked at number five , with the number three " Prop Me Up Beside the Jukebox ( If I Die ) " in between . " John Deere Green " also accounted for Diffie 's first appearance on the Billboard Hot 100 , where it peaked at number 69 . " In My Own Backyard " , the last release from Honky Tonk Attitude , reached number nineteen on the country charts . Diffie told the Fort Worth Star @-@ Telegram that the album was " a little rowdier than the first two . " Nash rated the album more favorably than the ones before it , saying that Diffie " is maturing into a first @-@ rate interpreter of working @-@ class woes . " 
 Also in 1993 , Diffie was inducted into the Grand Ole Opry . He and several other artists won that year 's Country Music Association award for Vocal Event of the Year , for their guest vocals on George Jones 's " I Don 't Need Your Rockin ' Chair " . Tim McGraw also included two of Diffie 's songs on his 1993 debut album : another version of " Memory Lane " , which he released as a single , and " Tears in the Rain " . 
 = = = 1994 – 1996 : Third Rock from the Sun , Mr. Christmas and Life 's So Funny = = = 
 Third Rock from the Sun was Diffie 's highest @-@ charting Top Country Album ( where it reached number six ) , as well as his second consecutive platinum album . It was also the first album that he co @-@ produced , doing so with Johnny Slate . The album included two consecutive number one singles in its title track and in " Pickup Man " . The latter of those two songs was Diffie 's longest @-@ lasting number one , at four weeks . Both songs also entered the Hot 100 , respectively peaking at 84 and 60 . In 2005 , " Pickup Man " was repurposed by the Applebee 's restaurant chain for use in its television commercials . The album 's next single , " So Help Me Girl " , peaked at number two on the country charts and 84 on the pop charts , in addition to topping the RPM country charts . The song was covered in 1997 by English singer Gary Barlow . Diffie followed the song with " I 'm in Love with a Capital ' U ' " and " That Road Not Taken " , which respectively reached country peaks of 21 and 40 . Third Rock from the Sun received critical praise for adding more rock and up @-@ tempo material . Thom Owens wrote that he began " adding more rock flourishes " on this album , and Nash said that Diffie " not only understands the blue @-@ collar ethic from the inside out – he 's also familiar with its humorous underbelly . " 
 In mid @-@ 1995 , he recorded the title track for Columbia Records 's Runnin ' Wide Open , an album comprising NASCAR @-@ themed songs by various artists . He issued two albums later in the year . The first was a Christmas project titled Mr. Christmas , which comprised covers of traditional Christmas songs as well as newly written songs . One of these original songs , " LeRoy the Redneck Reindeer " , was issued as a Christmas single late in the year , peaking at number 33 upon its initial release and re @-@ entering the country music charts for the next two years based on Christmas airplay . Of this album , Stephen Thomas Erlewine said , " it 's pleasant , but it 's not particularly distinguished . " 
 His other release that year was the studio album Life 's So Funny . It was led off by " Bigger Than the Beatles " , the last number one single of his career . The album 's other two singles were " C – O – U – N – T – R – Y " and " Whole Lotta Gone " ( previously the b @-@ side of " Bigger Than the Beatles " ) , both of which peaked at 23 on the country music charts in 1996 . Country Standard Time critic George <unk> praised the album for containing " songs that are slightly different from [ what ] those other artists sing . " Owens thought that it was a " varied collection of ballads and midtempo rockers " , but said that it was not " as consistently engaging " as Third Rock from the Sun . Nash gave " Bigger Than the Beatles " a C @-@ minus rating , calling it " just a lame device to evoke the names of beloved rock heroes . " 
 = = = 1996 – 1998 : Twice Upon a Time and Greatest Hits = = = 
 Twice Upon a Time followed in 1996 . Its singles all failed to make the Top Ten on the country charts , with lead @-@ off " This Is Your Brain " reaching number 25 , followed by " Somethin ' Like This " at number 40 and " The Promised Land " at number 61 , the lowest @-@ peaking single of his career . The album also failed to achieve a gold certification . Doug <unk> and Drew Womack , who then recorded on Epic in the band Sons of the Desert , sang backing vocals on it . Also included on the album was " I Got a Feelin ' " , which Tracy Lawrence previously recorded on his 1994 album I See It Now . Jeffrey B. Remz criticized the two novelty songs on Twice Upon a Time for lacking substance , and thought that most of the ballads were well @-@ sung , but that the production " lacks any soul . " Owens said that it " doesn 't offer anything new or especially remarkable from Joe Diffie . " 
 In mid @-@ 1998 , Epic Records released Diffie 's Greatest Hits package , which featured three new cuts . Among these were " Texas Size Heartache " , and its b @-@ side , " Poor Me " , which respectively reached numbers four and forty @-@ three on the country charts . At the end of the year , Diffie recorded a cover of Charlie Rich 's " Behind Closed Doors " for the multi @-@ artist album A Tribute to Tradition on Columbia Records . Diffie 's version of the song peaked at number 64 based on unsolicited airplay . He also contributed to another cut on that album , " Same Old Train " , which featured Marty Stuart and eleven other country music singers . This song peaked at 59 on the country charts and won the 1999 Grammy Award for Best Country Collaboration with Vocals for all artists involved . 
 = = = 1999 – 2000 : A Night to Remember = = = 
 His final album for Epic Records , titled A Night to Remember , was released in 1999 . As he did with the new cuts for his Greatest Hits package , Diffie worked with producer Don Cook and producer / session drummer Lonnie Wilson , a friend of Diffie 's who formerly fronted the band Bandana . Its title track spent twenty @-@ nine weeks on the country charts and peaked at number six ; it was his only Top 40 on the Hot 100 , where it reached number 38 . After this song came " The <unk> ' Kind " and " It 's Always Somethin ' " , which respectively reached twenty @-@ one and five on the country charts , and 90 and 57 on the Hot 100 . The latter spent thirty @-@ seven weeks on the country music charts , the longest chart run achieved by any of his singles . 
 Country Standard Time gave the album a positive review for having " nary a novelty tune in the bunch " , and Nash wrote that it had a " surprising depth of feeling . " Erlewine also noted that the album did not contain any novelty songs , and called it the " purest country album he 's ever made . " 
 = = = 2001 – 2004 : In Another World and Tougher Than Nails = = = 
 In 2001 , Sony Nashville transferred Diffie from its Epic division to the Monument Records division . This move was due to a corporate decision that Epic had too many artists and Monument had too few . Cook and Wilson also produced his only album for Monument , which was titled In Another World . Regarding this album , Diffie told Billboard that its material had a common theme of love , and that he wanted to create a more contemporary sound through the production . The album 's title track peaked at number ten on the country charts and number 66 on the Hot 100 . Only one other single was released from the album : " This Pretender " ( co @-@ written by Rascal Flatts lead singer Gary LeVox ) , which failed to make the country music Top 40 . 
 In Another World received mixed reviews . Country Weekly reviewer wrote that Diffie " deals with adult emotions " and described the title track as " a shimmering ballad perfect for his expressive tenor . " William Ruhlmann called the album " sturdy formula country " , and Jeffrey B. Remz of Country Standard Time said that he " easily interpret [ s ] " the songs but " doesn 't seem to be doing anything too dramatically different . " After Monument closed its Nashville branch , Diffie began touring with Mark Chesnutt and Tracy Lawrence on the Rockin ' Roadhouse Tour , which began in 2002 . That same year , Diffie was inducted into the Oklahoma Music Hall of Fame . 
 Diffie signed to the independent Broken Bow Records in 2003 . His only album for the label was Tougher Than Nails , which he and Wilson produced with Buddy Cannon . It included five songs that Diffie co @-@ wrote , as well as a duet with George Jones entitled " What Would Waylon Do " . Tougher Than Nails produced a Top 20 hit in its title track , followed by " If I Could Only Bring You Back " , which peaked at number 50 and spent only eight weeks on the charts . This latter song was also his last charting single . Erlewine said of the album 's content , " there 's nothing new , but there doesn 't need to be " , and Country Standard Time said that the album " shows that he 's still got the talent that took him to stardom in the first place . " 
 In 2005 , Jo Dee Messina released " My Give a Damn 's Busted " , which Diffie co @-@ wrote and originally recorded on In Another World . Her version of the song , included on her album Delicious Surprise , was a number one single that year . 
 = = = 2004 – 2013 : The Ultimate Collection and Homecoming = = = 
 After leaving Broken Bow , Diffie continued to tour , primarily playing smaller venues and county fairs . In 2007 , he joined with Lonestar , Charlie Daniels and Craig Morgan to perform a benefit concert for Sgt. Kevin Downs , a soldier who was severely wounded in Iraq . In 2008 , Diffie compiled and released a live album , and he signed to Rounder Records later in that year . Rounder released an album called The Ultimate Collection , which comprised re @-@ recordings of his hits for Epic . 
 His next project for Rounder , Homecoming : The Bluegrass Album , was released on October 26 , 2010 . It includes collaborations with The <unk> , Rhonda Vincent and other bluegrass artists . Diffie toured at various county fairs in August 2010 in support of it . He co @-@ produced the album with Luke Wooten , and included on it the song " Tennessee Tea " , which Diffie originally recorded while he was in Special Edition . Allmusic reviewer j. poet gave this album a positive review for showing Diffie 's bluegrass influences . 
 In late 2012 , Jason Aldean recorded the song " 1994 " , co @-@ written by Thomas Rhett , Luke Laird , and Barry Dean . The song , which was released in February 2013 as the third single from Aldean 's album Night Train , name @-@ drops Diffie and incorporates several of his song titles into the lyrics . Upon hearing about the song , Diffie said that " it 's really an honor " to be mentioned in the song , and that it was " flattering " . Later in the year , Diffie collaborated with Aaron Tippin and Sammy Kershaw on the album All in the Same Boat as well as cutting the single " Girl Riding Shotgun " with D Thrash of the <unk> Boyz . 
 = = Musical styles = = 
 Steve Huey of Allmusic wrote that Diffie " lent his traditional sensibilities to humorous , rock @-@ tinged novelties and plaintive ballads . " His early albums for Epic mostly consisted of ballads , but starting with Honky Tonk Attitude , he began to include more up @-@ tempo and novelty numbers . Starting with A Night to Remember , Diffie returned to a more ballad @-@ oriented sound ; Mike <unk> , then the senior vice president of sales for Sony Music Nashville , thought that the albums before it had over @-@ emphasized his novelty releases . 
 Alanna Nash regularly compared Diffie 's voice to that of George Jones . In her review of A Thousand Winding Roads , she contrasted the album with Mark Chesnutt 's debut Too Cold at Home by saying , " While Chesnutt merely takes his inspiration from Jones , Diffie mimics Jones ' delivery ... But now that he 's making records himself , [ his vocal imitation ] drops him to the rear of the pack , as a stylist with little style of his own . " She thought that Diffie began to move away from his George Jones influences on A Night to Remember . William Ruhlmann wrote that Diffie " has put together a decade @-@ plus career in country largely on his ability to succeed " in " scour [ ing ] Nashville publishers for ten good compositions in the established style " , and that he was an " adequate but undistinguished singer . " 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Diffie has been married three times . His first wife was <unk> Parker , whom he married while in college . The couple had two children , Parker and Kara , then divorced in 1986 . Parker later worked as Diffie 's on @-@ road manager in the mid @-@ 2000s , and in mid @-@ 2010 , he and Kara auditioned for American Idol . Two years after divorcing <unk> , Diffie married Debbie Jones , a nurse technician . They had two sons , Drew and Tyler , the latter of whom was born with Down syndrome and nearly died in 1991 following complications from a tonsillectomy . Diffie began an affair with Liz Allison , the widow of NASCAR driver Davey Allison , in 1993 . In 1994 , a judge ordered Diffie to pay Jones $ 3 @,@ 000 per month towards their pending divorce settlement , and not to allow Drew and Tyler to be in the presence of any girlfriend ; he divorced Jones in 1996 . In 2000 , Diffie married the former Theresa Crump , whom he met at a concert , at the Opryland Hotel in Nashville , Tennessee . They have one daughter , Kylie <unk> , born in 2004 . 
 From 1992 to the early 2000s , Diffie held a charity concert and golf tournament benefiting First Steps , a nonprofit organization for the education of mentally and physically impaired children . His contributions to this organization won him a Humanitarian Award from the Country Radio Broadcasters in 1997 . 
 = = Discography = = 
 = = = Studio albums = = = 
 A Thousand Winding Roads ( 1990 ) 
 Regular Joe ( 1992 ) 
 Honky Tonk Attitude ( 1993 ) 
 Third Rock from the Sun ( 1994 ) 
 Life 's So Funny ( 1996 ) 
 Twice Upon a Time ( 1997 ) 
 A Night to Remember ( 1999 ) 
 In Another World ( 2001 ) 
 Tougher Than Nails ( 2004 ) 
 Homecoming : The Bluegrass Album ( 2010 ) 
 All in the Same Boat ( 2013 ) 
 = = = Billboard number @-@ one singles = = = 
 " Home " ( 1990 ) 
 " If the Devil Danced ( In Empty Pockets ) " ( 1991 ) 
 " Third Rock from the Sun " ( 1994 ) 
 " Pickup Man " ( 1994 ) 
 " Bigger Than the Beatles " ( 1995 – 1996 ) 
 = = Awards and nominations = = 
 = 10th National Congress of the Communist Party of Vietnam = 
 The 10th National Congress of the Communist Party of Vietnam ( Vietnamese : Đại hội <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> X ) was held in Ba Đình Hall , Hanoi from 18 to 25 April 2006 . The congress occurs every five years . 1 @,@ 176 delegates represented the party 's 3 million members . At the 13th plenum of the Central Committee , held before the congress , it was decided that eight members of the Communist Party 's 9th Politburo had to retire . While certain segments within and outside the Politburo were skeptical , the decision was implemented . Because of party rules , the congress was not empowered to elect the general secretary , and it held a survey on whom the delegates wanted to be appointed General Secretary . The first plenum of the Central Committee , held in the immediate aftermath of the congress , re @-@ elected Nông Đức Mạnh as general secretary . 
 The congress is noteworthy because of the extent of democratization which took place within the party . The role of the Central Committee in decision @-@ making was strengthened , and the role of the Politburo as a supreme organ was weakened . Inner @-@ party accountability was strengthened . The Eighth Five @-@ Year Plan of the Socialist Republic of Vietnam was approved at the congress , renewed its Marxist – Leninist credentials and emphasized the need to continue to improve the socialist @-@ oriented market economy . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 Preparations for the 10th Congress were led by the Personnel Appointments subcommittee of the 9th Central Committee , probably chaired by General Secretary Nông Đức Mạnh . Mạnh worked closely with the Head of the Commission for Organization and Personnel to prepare a list of nominees for the election of the Central Committee at the upcoming congress . The 12th plenum of the 9th Central Committee , held in July 2005 , laid down the principles for the Personnel Appointments subcommittee to work within : 
 ( i ) quality of candidates in terms of qualifications and a " clean " CV 
 ( ii ) reasonable distribution of candidates among different sectors and representations from among the population to ensure total Party leadership in all areas . 
 After the 12th plenum , the Personnel Appointments subcommittee began discussions with important organizations and individuals within the Party , most notably with the Central Commission for Inspection ( which investigates complaints against Party members ) , party elders Đỗ Mười , Lê Đức Anh , Võ Văn Kiệt , Võ Nguyên Giáp and Nguyễn Đức Tâm , and with the 9th Politburo . The nomination list created in these discussions had to be voted on by the 9th Central Committee . At its 13th plenum , the 9th Central Committee , several changes to the nomination list recommended by Personnel Appointments subcommittee were made ; the Central Committee decided to retire 8 out of 14 Politburo members , the largest number of en masse retirements in the history of the Politburo . However , in official pronouncements , this decision was referred to as a " survey " , and not an election . Even so , the majority believed the eight people mentioned would retire rather than stay for another term . The retirements of Chairman of the National Assembly Nguyễn Văn An , who was considered a strong contender for the general secretaryship at the 11th Congress , and two leading proteges of Mạnh ; the unofficial deputy general secretary Phan Diễn , and the Head of the Commission for Organization and Personnel Trần Đình Hoan , were unexpected . 
 Some party elders were seeking the removal of Mạnh as general secretary . While Đỗ Mười and Lê Đức Anh supported Mạnh 's re @-@ election , Võ Văn Kiệt and Võ Nguyên Giáp opposed him . However , all four of them agreed on retaining Nguyễn Văn An in the 10th Politburo . One point in Mạnh 's favour was his lack of grave mistakes during his first tenure , and the lack of a credible opponent . Võ Văn Kiệt supported Nguyễn Minh Triết 's candidacy for the general secretaryship , while the retiring prime minister Phan Văn Khải supported a possible candidacy by Nguyễn Văn An , even if the Central Committee had voted for his Politburo retirement in the " survey " . Those who supported Mạnh 's removal based their campaign on the fact that his son @-@ in @-@ law had worked at PMU 18 Department of the Ministry of Transport during the PMU 18 scandal . A more damaging rumour was that Mạnh had included Nguyễn Việt Tiến , the Deputy Minister of Transport who was implicated in the scandal , on the Central Committee nominee <unk> , Dao <unk> Đình Bình , the Minister of Transport , was a close associate of Mạnh . Mạnh was accused of nepotism and of establishing a patronage system for himself within the party and state ; his son Nông Quốc <unk> was elected as Head of Youth Organizations in March 2005 , and was thus entitled to attend the 10th Congress . At a meeting with some veteran politicians , Mạnh was asked by Lê Khả Phiêu and Võ Nguyên Giáp to resign from his post and not to run for a seat in the 10th Central Committee – Mạnh , however , refused to resign . 
 In a proposal to the 11th plenum of the 9th Central Committee , Võ Văn Kiệt suggested democratizing the political system by giving the delegates to a party congress the power to elect the general secretary , the Central Committee and the Central Commission for Inspection , and giving congress delegates ultimate power on all matters put before them at the congress . He called for the reduction of the Central Committee from one @-@ fourth to one @-@ third , holding the elections of state leaders at the National Assembly in the immediate aftermath of a congress ( and not a year later ) , secret ballots for elections , empowering delegates to self @-@ nominate to the Central Committee and merging the offices of President and General Secretary into one . These suggestions , with the exception of holding the National Assembly elections earlier , were rejected at the 11th plenum of the 9th Central Committee in January 2005 . 
 At the 14th plenum of the 9th Central Committee , the Politburo proposed that Mạnh would be appointed president and resign from his post as general secretary to be succeeded by Nguyễn Văn An , while Phan Diễn would be retained for the sake of stability . The proposal was rejected in a formal vote by the 9th plenum , and the Central Committee upheld the results of the " survey " . At the unplanned 15th plenum held 14 – 16 April , which was held due to pressure by Nguyễn Minh Triết , Nguyễn Văn An and Phan Văn Khải , it was decided that delegates at the upcoming congress had the right of self @-@ nomination and that there would competing elections for the posts of general secretary , prime minister and chairman of the National Assembly . The loser of the contest for general secretary would be appointed president . Mạnh and Nguyễn Minh Triết were candidates for the general secretaryship , Nguyễn Tấn Dũng and Nguyễn Sinh Hùng for the prime ministership and Nguyễn Phú Trọng and Trương Tấn Sang for the National Assembly chairmanship . For the first time in the party 's history , competing elections were held for offices of power . 
 = = Delegates = = 
 1 @,@ 176 delegates participated at the 10th Congress . These candidates were accepted on the basis of the Working Regulations of the party . 146 ( 12 @.@ 37 percent ) of the delegates were members of the 9th Central Committee . 1 @,@ 025 ( 86 @.@ 87 percent ) of the delegates were elected by provincial and local subunits of the party . 9 ( 0 @.@ 76 percent ) of the delegates represented the party 's overseas branches . 136 ( 11 @.@ 56 percent ) delegates were women , and 154 ( 13 @.@ 10 percent ) came from ethnic minorities . There were 18 ( 1 @.@ 53 percent ) delegates who had been awarded the Hero of the People 's Armed Forces , 7 ( 0 @.@ 60 percent ) who had been awarded Hero of Labor , 4 ( 0 @.@ 34 percent ) who had been awarded the title People 's Teacher , 13 ( 1 @.@ 11 percent ) who had been given the title Meritorious Teacher , 4 ( 0 @.@ 34 percent ) with the title of Meritorious Doctor , 27 ( 2 @.@ 30 percent ) with the honorary title 40 years of Party membership , 2 ( 0 @.@ 17 percent ) with the honorary title of 50 years of Party membership . 81 @.@ 29 percent of the delegates had graduated from either college or university , and 16 @.@ 59 percent of these had received PhD or had worked as professors or assistant professors . 96 @.@ 52 percent of the delegates had received a bachelor 's degree in political training courses . The average age of the delegates was 52 @.@ 92 years – Dinh Huy ( 30 years of age ) was the youngest delegate , and Do Quang Hung ( 77 years of age ) was the oldest delegate . 
 = = The Congress and the 1st plenum = = 
 The elected 10th Central Committee comprised 81 ( 52 @.@ 5 percent ) members from the 9th Central Committee , and 79 ( 47 @.@ 5 percent ) new members were elected . The candidate with the highest vote received 97 @.@ 88 percent , while the candidate with the lowest vote received 63 @.@ 41 percent . All the provinces , with the exception of Đắk Nông Province , elected officials to the 10th Central Committee . A number of surprises occurred during the election process ; six ministers were not re @-@ elected . Another surprise was that no officials from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs were elected as full members . However , Phạm Bình Minh , the Director of the International Organizations Directorate of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs , was elected as an alternate member . None of the 34 self @-@ nominated candidates at the congress were elected to the 10th Central Committee . It is unknown whether any of the self @-@ nominees for alternate membership in the 10th Central Committee were elected . There was an increase in Central Committee officials working in the central government , the provinces , military and defence officials , public security officials and officials from mass organizations , but there was a decrease in officials from the sectors of information , social and cultural affairs , economics , business and financial affairs , and others . 
 As the meeting progressed , some delegates publicly demanded that the congress should be given the authority to elect the general secretary and the head of the Central Commission for Inspection . This was approved and a survey form which listed four possible candidates ; Mạnh , Nguyễn Minh Triết , Nguyễn Văn An and Nguyễn Phú Trọng was created . Nguyễn Văn An withdrew his candidacy , knowing he would not be elected to the 10th Politburo because he was not elected to the 10th Central Committee . However , because of party rules which stated that the Central Committee after the congress elected the general secretary , the vote at the congress was considered a survey . Another version of the proceedings , that given by Mạnh at the press conference after the congress , was that the 1 @,@ 176 congress delegates were given a list of the elected members of the 10th Central Committee , and were given a free choice of electing any of them to the general secretaryship . After the congress , on 25 April , the 1st plenum of the Central Committee convened to elect the general secretary . The two leading candidates at the congress survey , Mạnh and Nguyễn Minh Triết , stood for election at the plenum . Mạnh was elected and Nguyễn Minh Triết was appointed state president . However , rumours that Mạnh won narrowly over his rival , and that Nguyễn Minh Triết withdrew his candidature following the party tradition of appointing the general secretary , circulated after the congress . 
 The 10th Politburo comprised 14 members . As was decided at the first plenum , the ranking given to Politburo members was to be decided by the number of approval votes the official earned during the election . Lê Hồng Anh , the Minister of Public Security , was ranked second in the Politburo because he received the second @-@ most approval votes for his candidacy . Of the 14 members of the Politburo , five were concurrently members of the 10th Secretariat . The Secretariat comprised eight members , amongst whom the highest rank was general secretary . 
 = = Policy enactments = = 
 The official Congress communique set 2020 as a date on which Vietnam would reach the status of a modern , industrial society . To reach this goal , the targeted growth for gross domestic product ( GDP ) was set at 7 @.@ 5 – 8 percent for 2006 – 2011 . The congress promised to renew the socialist @-@ oriented market economy , and step up its fight against political corruption . The communique emphasized the party 's goal of a future society without exploitation , based on the ideology of Marxism – Leninism . The Political Report , the Eighth Five @-@ Year Plan ( 2006 – 2010 ) – officially titled the Five Year Socio @-@ economic Development Plan , the report on Party building and the amendment and revision to the Party 's charter , were approved . Mạnh said that the approval of these documents were " the results of the intellect and the will of our entire Party and people , the in @-@ depth practical and theoretical summation of 20 years of Renovation [ Đổi Mới ] and the improvement and development of the policy and philosophy of renovations in the current period of our country 's revolution . " 
 The Eighth Five @-@ Year Plan is subordinate to the Ten Year Socio @-@ economic Development Strategy ( 2001 – 2010 ) which aims to continue comprehensive reform and achieve fast , sustainable growth rates . The main goal of the Ten Year Plan is to lift Vietnam out of the category of underdeveloped countries and to reach the status of a modern @-@ industrial nation by 2012 . The Eighth Five @-@ Year Plan , while approved by the Congress , had to earn the approval of the National Assembly before being implemented . 
 The delegates approved the general secretary 's Political Report , Report on Orientations and Tasks for Socio @-@ Economic Development for the 2006 – 10 Period , and the Report on Party building and amendments made to the party statute . These reports ' main objectives were to accelerate the reform process and strengthen the socialist @-@ oriented market economy . The congress allowed existing party members to engage in private ownership . This was a controversial amendment and was a break with the theory of exploitation of man by man . While the amendment was approved , the third plenum of the 10th Central Committee restricted the change to party members who had worked in state @-@ owned enterprises which have been privatized . 
 = = Democratization = = 
 An important characteristic of the 10th Congress was the internal democratization of the party leadership , most notably seen in the Politburo 's willingness to follow the " survey " voted by the 13th plenum of the Central Committee . The top five members of the " survey " were rewarded with the five highest government positions in Vietnam . While the leadership selection process was not dramatically altered , the Central Committee as a collective unit was strengthened , and the Central Committee acquired control over personnel appointments and policy @-@ making . In effect , these changes have reduced the roles of powerful individuals , who may be seen as taking too much control . 
 = = Acknowledgement = = 
 35 foreign parties congratulated the CPV on holding its 10th Congress . Among these were ruling parties of the remaining socialist states , the Communist Party of Cuba , the Communist Party of China ( CPC ) and the Lao People 's Revolutionary Party . Hu Jintao , the former CPC General Secretary of the Central Committee , personally congratulated Nguyen Van Son , the Chairman of the CPV Commission for External Relations , on the CPV 's holding of the 10th National Congress . Not all the parties which congratulated the CPV were communists , for example the Cambodian People 's Party , the Workers ' Party of Korea , the Social Democratic Party of Germany , the Uri Party and the Bulgarian Socialist Party . 
 The French Communist Party congratulated the CPV on holding its 10th National Congress , and stated that it " was a milestone and an occasion for the Party to reiterate its orientations and its determination to implement objectives as well as open new visions for the 21st century . " In an official communique from the Central Committee of the Japanese Communist Party ( JCP ) to the CPV 10th Central Committee , the <unk> Central Committee stated " The Communist Party of Viet Nam is advancing on the chosen path of building socialism through the market economy . This is a new discovery in the history of mankind . " The Communist Party of India sent its " warmest fraternal greetings to the leadership and delegates to the 10th Congress of the Communist Party of Viet Nam . " The Communist Party USA sent a " warm revolutionary greetings to the delegates and members of the Communist Party of Viet Nam on the occasion of your 10th National Party Congress . We wish you much success in your deliberations at this important event . " The Communist Party of the Russian Federation stated , " Under the leadership of the Communist Party of Viet Nam , the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam has successfully carried out adopted policies . The industrious Vietnamese people have created favourable conditions for progress . The CPV has displayed a creative and principled approach to solving important and sophisticated problems , while remaining persistent in its socialist ideology . " 
 The Portuguese Communist Party said , " The Tenth Party Congress and the objectives your congress was striving towards , given the present international situation , constitute something significant . " The Communist Party of Brazil said , " We are very impressed by the efforts exerted by the Vietnamese people and Communists in building socialism in line with national development . The renewal process in Viet Nam has helped the country attain great achievements in modernization , industrialization and international integration . " Mahmoud Abbas , Chairman of the Executive Committee of the Palestine Liberation Organization extended his greetings , and said " We are proud of our friendship and relationship , and once again reaffirm our determination to strengthen ties and solidarity for the mutual benefit of both our nations " . 
 = Illinois 's 1st congressional district election , 2000 = 
 The 2000 United States House of Representatives election for the 1st district in Illinois took place on November 7 , 2000 to elect a representative from Illinois 's 1st congressional district for the 107th United States Congress . Incumbent Democratic Representative Bobby Rush faced a primary challenge from Barack Obama . Rush defeated Obama 61 percent to 30 percent , with other candidates combining for the remaining nine percent . Rush then defeated his Republican opponent , Raymond <unk> , 87 percent to 12 percent , ensuring his reelection . 
 Subsequent to this election Obama was elected to the United States Senate in 2004 . He was then elected President of the United States in 2008 and re @-@ elected in 2012 . 
 = = District = = 
 Illinois 's 1st congressional district is a minority @-@ majority district . At the time of the election , 65 percent of its constituents were African American . In redistricting after the 1990 United States Census , the district was extended into the suburbs for the first time in 90 years , but a majority of the districts ' residents ( 70 % ) lived in Chicago . A strongly Democratic district , only twice since 1966 has a Republican candidate for United States Congress received over 20 % of the vote . 
 = = Background = = 
 Rush was involved in the Civil Rights Movement of the 1960s . He was a member of the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee ( SNCC ) and a former member and founder of the Illinois chapter of the Black Panther Party . After coordinating a medical clinic that treated sickle cell anemia , Rush served as an alderman and was first elected to represent Illinois 's 1st district in 1992 . Rush ran for Mayor of Chicago against Richard M. Daley in 1999 and lost , receiving only 28 % of the vote , making him appear electorally vulnerable . 
 Obama , at age 38 , was a lecturer at the University of Chicago and a two @-@ term state Senator . Though friends , including Terry Link , his colleague in the Illinois Senate , warned Obama against challenging Rush , as there was no obvious reason to displace him to the voters , Obama ran anyway because of his frustration with what he claimed was Republican obstructionism in the Illinois Legislature and the feeling Rush was representing the district less well as he could . Also challenging Rush were Donne Trotter , a state senator , and George Roby , a police officer . Raymond <unk> , a perennial candidate who worked as a clown , ran unopposed for the Republican nomination . 
 = = Campaign = = 
 Obama entered the race in late September 1999 , six months before the primary , stating that Rush represented " a politics that is rooted in the past , a reactive politics that isn ’ t good at coming up with concrete solutions . " He promised to build consensus and lead coalitions involving people outside of the black community to reduce crime , improve health care coverage , promote economic development and expand educational opportunities . 
 Early polling showed Rush 's name recognition started off at 90 percent , with Obama 's at 11 percent . Rush had 70 percent approval , while Obama had 8 percent approval . In the head to head matchup , forty @-@ seven percent of the people polled favored Rush , 10 percent favored Obama , and 5 percent supported Trotter , who is also African American . Most of Obama 's support came from White Americans . 
 In mid @-@ October , Rush ’ s son , Huey , was murdered , leading Obama to put his campaign on hold . Governor George Ryan called the Illinois Legislature to a special session to re @-@ enact a package of gun @-@ safety bills , a pet issue of Rush , which had been overturned by the Illinois Supreme Court . Obama supported the package , but the session dragged on towards Christmas . Obama annually spent the Christmas vacation in Hawaii with his family visiting his grandmother , who raised him . Obama left Illinois , expecting the session would continue into January . However , a crucial vote took place earlier than expected , failing by five votes with Obama and others absent . Obama came under fire for missing the vote though he said he would have flown back sooner , but his 18 @-@ month @-@ old daughter was sick . Meanwhile , Rush received an outpouring of sympathy that aided his campaign . 
 As Obama lived in Hyde Park , a more affluent neighborhood with a higher percentage of White voters than the rest of the district , the narrative of the race became " the Black Panther against the professor " Obama frequently came off as uptight . Rush criticized Obama : " Barack Obama went to Harvard and became an educated fool . We ’ re not impressed with these folks with these Eastern elite degrees . Barack is a person who read about the civil @-@ rights protests and thinks he knows all about it . " Trotter said , " Barack is viewed in part to be the white man in blackface in our community . " Though the Chicago Tribune endorsed Obama , many , including local officials , President Bill Clinton , and Vice President Al Gore , the Democratic Party nominee for President , endorsed Rush . 
 Obama raised enough money to remain competitive with Rush . However , he neither connected with the working @-@ class African Americans of the district nor provided a convincing reason for them to vote against Rush . Obama later wrote : " Less than halfway into the campaign , I knew in my bones that I was going to lose . Each morning from that point forward I awoke with a vague sense of dread , realizing that I would have to spend the day smiling and shaking hands and pretending that everything was going according to plan . " 
 = = Results = = 
 = = = Primary election = = = 
 Rush defeated Obama in the primary election , held on March 21 , 2000 , by a 2 @-@ to @-@ 1 margin . <unk> won the Republican Party nomination . 
 = = = General election = = = 
 Rush defeated <unk> in the general election . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Obama later said he got " my rear end handed to me " in his loss to Rush and acknowledged his own hubris . However , many analysts believe that Obama 's loss helped him to learn from his mistakes , which enabled him to run more successful campaigns in 2004 and 2008 . Obama was seen as a stiff policy <unk> , and he used the experience to hone his ability to connect with voters . According to Chicago City Council member Toni Preckwinkle , an early Obama supporter , Obama " took a hard look at himself after that campaign and became a much better campaigner , more at ease on the campaign trail . " He put more effort into his campaign , hiring David Axelrod as his chief political strategist . Also , Obama increased his focus on the Illinois Senate , improving his legislative accomplishments . 
 In 2004 , Obama was the keynote speaker at the Democratic National Convention . After his speech , political pundits speculated about his future as a possible presidential candidate . After being elected to the United States Senate that year , and amid much speculation in the media regarding his future plans , Obama announced that he would seek the 2008 democratic presidential nomination in February 2007 and went on to defeat Hillary Clinton in one of the closest presidential nomination races in American history . He then defeated fellow senator John McCain in the general election to become President of the United States . 
 = German destroyer Z6 Theodor Riedel = 
 The German destroyer Z6 Theodor Riedel was a Type 1934A @-@ class destroyer built for the Kriegsmarine during the mid @-@ 1930s . At the beginning of World War II in September 1939 , the ship laid defensive minefields to the North Sea . She covered her sister ships over the next few months as they laid offensive minefields in English waters in late 1939 – early 1940 . She participated in the early stages of the Norwegian Campaign by transporting troops to the Trondheim area in early April 1940 and was transferred to France later that year where the ship covered another minelaying sortie before engine problems caused her to return to Germany in November for repairs . Theodor Riedel was badly damaged when she ran aground three days after her repairs were completed and was out of action until May 1942 . 
 The ship was transferred to Norway in 1942 and ran aground yet again as she prepared to attack one of the convoys to Russia in July . Repairs were completed in December and Theodor Riedel participated in the Battle of the Barents Sea at the end of the year and in the German attack on Spitzbergen in mid @-@ 1943 . After another lengthy refit , the ship began escorting ships between Denmark and Norway in mid @-@ 1944 and continued to do so until May 1945 when she made several trips to rescue refugees from East Prussia before the end of the war on 8 May . 
 Theodor Riedel spent the rest of the year under British control as the Allies decided how to dispose of the captured German ships and was ultimately allotted to France in early 1946 and renamed Kléber . She became operational later that year , but she was reconstructed and modernized in Cherbourg in 1948 – 51 . After its completion , the ship was assigned to the Mediterranean Squadron for several years . Kléber was placed in reserve in late 1953 , but was not condemned until 1957 and scrapped the next year . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 Z6 Theodor Riedel had an overall length of 119 meters ( 390 ft 5 in ) and was 114 meters ( 374 ft 0 in ) long at the waterline . At some point before September 1939 , her stem was lengthened , which increased her overall length to 120 meters ( 393 ft 8 in ) . The ship had a beam of 11 @.@ 30 meters ( 37 ft 1 in ) , and a maximum draft of 4 @.@ 23 meters ( 13 ft 11 in ) . She displaced 2 @,@ 171 long tons ( 2 @,@ 206 t ) at standard load and 3 @,@ 110 long tons ( 3 @,@ 160 t ) at deep load . 
 The two Wagner geared steam turbine sets , each driving one propeller shaft , were designed to produce 70 @,@ 000 PS ( 51 @,@ 000 kW ; 69 @,@ 000 shp ) using steam provided by six high @-@ pressure Wagner boilers . The ship had a designed speed of 36 knots ( 67 km / h ; 41 mph ) and she reached a maximum speed of 36 @.@ 4 knots from 72 @,@ 100 shaft horsepower ( 53 @,@ 765 kW ) during her sea trials . Theodor Riedel carried a maximum of 752 metric tons ( 740 long tons ) of fuel oil which was intended to give a range of 4 @,@ 400 nautical miles ( 8 @,@ 100 km ; 5 @,@ 100 mi ) at a speed of 19 knots ( 35 km / h ; 22 mph ) , but the ship proved top @-@ heavy in service and 30 % of the fuel had to be retained as ballast low in the ship . The effective range proved to be only 1 @,@ 530 nmi ( 2 @,@ 830 km ; 1 @,@ 760 mi ) at 19 knots . The crew numbered 10 officers and 315 enlisted men , plus an additional four officers and 19 enlisted men if serving as a flotilla flagship . 
 The ship carried five 12 @.@ 7 @-@ centimeter ( 5 in ) SK C / 34 guns in single mounts with gun shields , two each superimposed , fore and aft . The fifth gun was carried on top of the aft superstructure . Her anti @-@ aircraft armament consisted of four 3 @.@ 7 @-@ centimeter ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) SK C / 30 guns in two twin mounts abreast the rear funnel and six 2 @-@ centimeter ( 0 @.@ 8 in ) C / 30 guns in single mounts . Paul Jacobi carried eight above @-@ water 53 @.@ 3 @-@ centimeter ( 21 @.@ 0 in ) torpedo tubes in two power @-@ operated mounts . A pair of reload torpedoes were provided for each mount . Four depth charge throwers were mounted on the sides of the rear deckhouse and they were supplemented by six racks for individual depth charges on the sides of the stern . Enough depth charges were carried for either two or four patterns of 16 charges each . Mine rails could be fitted on the rear deck that had a maximum capacity of 60 mines . A system of passive hydrophones designated as ' GHG ' ( Gruppenhorchgerät ) was fitted to detect submarines and an active sonar system was installed by August 1940 . 
 During the war , the ship 's light anti @-@ aircraft armament was augmented several times . Improved 2 cm C / 38 guns replaced the original C / 30 guns and three additional guns were added sometime in 1941 . The two guns on the aft shelter deck were replaced by a single 2 cm quadruple Flakvierling mount , probably sometime during 1942 . It is not certain if the improved 3 @.@ 7 cm SK M / 42 gun replaced her original 3 @.@ 7 cm guns , but Theodor Riedel had one quadruple , two twin and six single mounts for 2 cm guns by the end of the war . 
 = = Career = = 
 Theodor Riedel , named after Lieutenant ( Korvettenkapitän ) Theodor Riedel , was ordered on 9 January 1935 and laid down at DeSchiMAG , Bremen on 18 July 1935 as yard number <unk> . She was launched on 22 April 1936 and completed on 2 July 1937 . The ship participated in the late 1937 naval maneuvers and while training with the 2nd Destroyer Division ( 2 . Zerstörer @-@ Division ) ran aground on 8 June 1938 near Heligoland island . The impact badly damaged her bottom , both propellers and knocked the port turbine out of alignment . Towed to Wilhelmshaven for repairs , the dockyard was unable to fully repair the turbine 's foundations and it had problems with its thrust bearings until a new turbine was fitted in 1943 . Theodor Riedel participated in the August 1938 Fleet Review as part of the 2nd Destroyer Division and the following fleet exercise . The division accompanied the heavy cruiser Admiral Graf Spee on her voyage to the Mediterranean in October where they visited Vigo , Tangiers , and Ceuta before returning home . The destroyer had a lengthy refit at Wilhelmshaven from February 1939 to August . 
 When World War II began , the ship began laying defensive minefields in the German Bight with her sister ships . She also patrolled the Skagerrak to inspect neutral shipping for contraband goods in October . The ship attempted to lay a minefield off the British coast on the night of 12 / 13 November , with two of her sisters , but had to turn back after she and Z7 Hermann Schoemann suffered machinery breakdowns . Theodor Riedel covered another such operation on the night of 10 / 11 February 1940 . On 22 February 1940 , Theodor Riedel and five other destroyers , Z3 Max Schultz , Z1 Leberecht Maass , Z4 Richard Beitzen , Z13 Erich Koellner and Z16 Friedrich Eckoldt , sailed for the Dogger Bank to intercept British fishing vessels in " Operation Wikinger " . En route , the flotilla was erroneously attacked by a Heinkel He 111 bomber from Bomber Wing 26 ( Kampfgeschwader 26 ) . Leberecht Maass was hit by at least one bomb , lost steering , and broke in half , sinking with the loss of 280 of her crew . During the rescue effort , Max Schultz hit a mine and sank with the loss of her entire crew of 308 . Hitler ordered a Court of Inquiry to be convened to investigate the cause of the losses and it concluded that both ships that been sunk by bombs from the He 111 . The Kriegsmarine had failed to notify its destroyers that the Luftwaffe was making anti @-@ shipping patrols at that time and had also failed to inform the Luftwaffe that its destroyers would be at sea . Postwar evidence revealed that one or both ships struck a British minefield laid by the destroyers Ivanhoe and Intrepid . 
 Theodor Riedel was allocated to Group 2 for the Norwegian portion of Operation Weserübung . The group 's task was to transport the 138th Mountain Infantry Regiment ( Gebirgsjäger @-@ Regiment 138 — 3rd Mountain Division ) to seize Trondheim together with the heavy cruiser Admiral Hipper . The ships began loading troops on 6 April and set sail the next day . Theodor Riedel and her sisters Z8 Bruno Heinemann and Z5 Paul Jacobi each carried a company of mountain troops tasked to seize the forts defending the entrance to the Trondheimsfjord . After passing the surprised forts the ships were able to land their troops and capture the forts with little difficulty . All of the destroyers had suffered storm damage en route and were low on fuel because none of the oil tankers had arrived yet . To defend the port after Admiral Hipper departed , Theodor Riedel was beached on a sandbar on 10 April as a stationary artillery and torpedo battery . The following day she was attacked by nine Fairey Swordfish torpedo bombers of 816 Squadron from the aircraft carrier HMS Furious . They were very surprised to see their torpedoes detonate short of the ship as they struck the sandy rocks . She was refloated 10 days later and towed to Trondheim for repairs . There she was the first German destroyer to receive a radar system and one set of torpedo tubes was removed and remounted on land near Agdenes to improve the local defenses . On 7 June the work was finished and Theodor Riedel went to Wilhelmshaven for an overhaul . 
 She was transferred to France , departing on 9 September . Now based at Brest , the ship covered the laying of a minefield in Falmouth Bay during the night of 28 / 29 September that ultimately sank five ships totaling only 2 @,@ 026 gross register tons ( GRT ) . Theodor Riedel was plagued by problems with her port engine and sailed for Wilhelmshaven on 5 November 1940 for repairs . Having been hit by a practice torpedo and further damaged by a boiler room fire , the repairs took until 9 August . She departed for Norway three days later , but struck an uncharted reef that ripped open her bottom in seven compartments and caused both propeller shafts to seize up . The ship was towed to Bergen for temporary repairs and then to Kiel where repairs lasted until 10 May 1942 . 
 Theodor Riedel departed for Norway on 11 June and she was one of four destroyers assigned to escort the battleship Tirpitz during Operation Rösselsprung ( Knight 's Move ) , an attack on the Russia @-@ bound Convoy PQ 17 . The ships sailed from Trondheim on 2 July for the first stage of the operation , although three of the destroyers , including Theodor Riedel , assigned to Tirpitz 's escort ran aground in the dark and heavy fog and were forced to return to port for repairs . Coupled with the damage suffered by the heavy cruiser Lützow when she ran aground the same day , the operation was canceled shortly afterwards . Theodor Riedel was temporarily repaired at Trondheim and was towed back to Germany for permanent repairs on 25 July . Three days later they were attacked without effect by three British Bristol Beaufort torpedo bombers . 
 = = = Battle of the Barents Sea = = = 
 The ship was operational again in December and she returned to Norway , together with Lützow , in time to participate in Operation Regenbogen , an attempt to intercept Convoy JW 51B sailing from the UK to the Soviet Union in late December . After the convoy was spotted on the morning of 31 December . Theodor Riedel , Lützow , and two other destroyers were tasked to engage the convoy while Admiral Hipper and three other destroyers attempted to occupy the attention of the convoy 's escort . The Germans failed to press home their attack and only sank one destroyer , a minesweeper and damage one merchantman while losing one of their own destroyers . 
 Theodor Riedel escorted the minelayer Brummer in early February 1943 as the latter laid a minefield near Kildin Island in the Barents Sea . The following month , the ship , her sister Paul Jacobi , and the destroyer Z20 Karl Galster sailed for Jan Mayen island on 31 March to rendezvous with the blockade runner , MV Regensburg . They searched for several days before increasingly heavy weather forced them to return to port with storm damage . Unbeknownst to the Germans , Regensburg had been intercepted and sunk by a British cruiser on 30 March . Theodor Riedel then sailed for Trondheim for repairs , but was nearly lost en route on 6 April when water contamination of her fuel caused her to lose all power . Only the timely arrival of a tug prevented her from drifting ashore . In September the ship participated in Operation Zitronella , ferrying troops of the 349th Grenadier Regiment ( Grenadier @-@ Regiment 349 ) of the 230th Infantry Division to destroy Norwegian facilities on the island of Spitzbergen , together with Tirpitz and the battleship Scharnhorst , escorted by eight other destroyers . While successful , the operation was primarily intended to boost the morale of the ships stationed in the Arctic when fuel shortages limited their activities and the Allies reestablished the bases five weeks later . Theodor Riedel escorted convoys in and around the Skagerrak until she returned to Germany in early December for another overhaul . 
 After her overhaul was completed in June 1944 , the ship resumed her former duties in the Skagerrak , although the repairs required after another boiler room fire in August necessitated lengthy repairs in Oslo . She was damaged after colliding with the mole in Frederikshavn , Denmark , on 18 November and became operational again on 7 January 1945 . Theodor Riedel remained in Southern Norway and Denmark until the ships there were ordered into the Baltic to assist with the evacuation of the Hel Peninsula on 5 May . After unloading the refugees in Copenhagen , she made another voyage to Hela and returned to Copenhagen on 7 May . The crew surrendered in Kiel three days later . 
 = = = Post @-@ war service = = = 
 The ship , now under British command with German crewmembers on board , was overhauled in Wilhelmshaven in June 1945 , while her fate was determined . She was initially allocated to Great Britain at the end of 1945 and sailed to Rosyth in mid @-@ January . In the meantime , France had protested and she was given Theodor Riedel and three other destroyers . The ships were formally handed over at Cherbourg on 4 February 1946 and renamed Kléber , after General Jean Baptiste Kléber . 
 Kléber was given a brief refit on 31 August – 10 September and then made a training cruise to Bordeaux between 28 October and 21 December . During this voyage , she rescued the crew of the collier SS France @-@ Hélène on 31 October . The ship was assigned to the 1st Division of Large Destroyers ( contre @-@ torpilleurs ) in 1947 and received the pennant number of <unk> . Late that year she escorted the submarine Doris to Londonderry to be returned to the British in November , returning to Cherbourg by 25 November . Kléber was reconstructed in 1948 – 51 during which her bridge was enlarged , her original light AA weapons were replaced by six single 40 @-@ millimeter ( 1 @.@ 6 in ) Bofors guns , her fifth 12 @.@ 7 cm gun was removed , and American radars were fitted . She sailed from Cherbourg to her new base at Toulon on 20 December . Now assigned to the 3rd Destroyer Division of the Mediterranean Fleet , the ship made numerous port visits in French North Africa over the next two years . Kléber was transferred back to Cherbourg in October 1953 and she was reduced to reserve on 20 December . Her condition was evaluated in 1957 and her hull was found to be in very poor condition so she was condemned on 10 April and hulked as <unk> the same day . She was broken up in Rouen the following year . 
 = Handkea utriformis = 
 Handkea utriformis , synonymous with Lycoperdon <unk> , Lycoperdon <unk> or Calvatia utriformis , is a species of the Lycoperdaceae family of puffballs . A rather large mushroom , it may reach dimensions of up to 25 cm ( 9 @.@ 8 in ) broad by 20 cm ( 7 @.@ 9 in ) tall . It is commonly known as the mosaic puffball , a reference to the polygonal @-@ shaped segments the outer surface of the fruiting body develops as it matures . Widespread in northern temperate zones , it is found frequently on pastures and sandy heaths , and is edible when young . H. utriformis has antibiotic activity against a number of bacteria , and can bioaccumulate the trace metals copper and zinc to relatively high concentrations . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 This puffball was originally described in 1790 by French botanist Jean Baptiste François Pierre Bulliard as Lycoperdon <unk> , and since then , has been variously placed in the genera Bovista , Lycoperdon , Calvatia , and <unk> . In 1989 , German mycologist Hanns Kreisel described the genus Handkea to include species of Calvatia that had distinct microscopic features : Handkea species have a unique type of capillitium ( coarse thick @-@ walled hyphae in the gleba ) , with curvy slits instead of the usual pores . Although accepted by some authors , the genus concept has been rejected by others . 
 In the past , the species ( when it was known as Calvatia utriformis ) has been separated into three varieties ( C. utriformis var. utriformis , C. utriformis var. <unk> and C. utriformis var. <unk> ) based on differences in the ornamentation of the exoperidium ( outer tissue layer of the wall , or peridium ) and spores . However , a 1997 study of these characters revealed that the three varieties are not clearly demarcated . This study and others suggest that variations in the environmental conditions in which the specimens are grown can affect the development of these characteristics . 
 Phylogenetic analyses published in 2008 shows that Handkea may be grouped in a clade along with species from several other genera , including Lycoperdon , <unk> , <unk> , Bovistella , and Calvatia . Published in the same year , another DNA analysis of the structure of <unk> rDNA transcript confirmed that H. utriformis is closely related to Lycoperdon echinatum . 
 = = Description = = 
 Like all puffballs , Handkea utriformis has a gasteroid basidiocarp , meaning the spores are produced internally , and are only released as the mature fruiting body ages and dries , or is broken . 
 Young puffballs are typically 6 to 12 centimetres ( 2 @.@ 4 to 4 @.@ 7 in ) across , white , or pale grey @-@ brown ; in maturity it may attain dimensions of 25 centimetres ( 9 @.@ 8 in ) broad by 20 centimetres ( 7 @.@ 9 in ) tall . The <unk> is tomentose — <unk> covered with a layer of fine matted hairs . The species derives its common name " <unk> puffball " from the mosaic pattern across the top and sides that develops as the fruiting body matures and the outer wall ( exoperidium ) breaks up into polygonal patches . The underside of the puffball is attached to the ground by a root @-@ like assemblage of hyphae called a rhizomorph . It is squat in appearance and roughly pear @-@ shaped , not usually taller than it is wide . The flesh ( gleba , or spore bearing mass ) is white when young , but becomes brown and powdery upon maturity . The upper skin eventually disintegrates weeks or even months after the puffball 's appearance , and the brown spores are released into the air ; this process is often hastened by rain , or by being trodden on by cattle . Eventually , all that remains is the sterile cup @-@ shaped base , which can sometimes hold water . This feature may have been the source of the specific epithet , as <unk> is Latin for ‘ water carrier ’ . 
 = = = Microscopic features = = = 
 The spores of H. utriformis are roughly spherical , smooth , and thick @-@ walled , with a single oil droplet . They have dimensions of 4 @.@ 5 – 5 @.@ 5 µm . 
 = = = Similar species = = = 
 A number of puffball species resemble H. utriformis , including Calvatia <unk> , C. booniana , and C. <unk> . Calvatia cyathiformis has a purple @-@ colored gleba with a smooth exoperidium ; C. booniana has an exoperidium that resembles felt or has tufts of soft " hairs " like H. utriformis but does not have any stem and has a capillitium with rounded rather than sinuous pits ; C. <unk> has an exoperidium that is thicker and smoother than H. utriformis . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 Handkea utriformis is widespread , and frequent in northern temperate zones . It is found in Europe , continental Asia , Japan , eastern atlantic North America , Mexico , and South Africa . It has also been collected in Chile , and New Zealand . Growing alone or in small groups , it favors sandy open pastures , or heaths , and is often found in coastal regions . It typically fruits in summer through late autumn ( July - November in the UK ) . 
 = = Edibility = = 
 This fairly large puffball is edible only when the spore bearing flesh is young , and white . It is said to lack texture , and the taste and odor of the young fruiting bodies are described as " not distinctive " . A 2007 study of the fatty acid composition of various edible Lycoperdaceae species determined the lipid content of H. utriformis to be quite low , approximately 1 @.@ 8 % ( wet weight ) . The fatty acid content was largely linoleic acid ( 42 @.@ 4 % ) , oleic acid ( 23 % ) , palmitic acid ( 12 @.@ 2 % ) , and stearic acid ( 3 @.@ 6 % ) ; 17 other fatty acids of various chain lengths and degrees of unsaturation contributed to the total fatty acid composition . 
 = = Antibiotic activity = = 
 A 2005 study of the antimicrobial activity of several Lycoperdaceae revealed that Handkea utriformis has " significantly active " against a number of bacteria , including Bacillus subtilis , Escherichia coli , Klebsiella pneumonia , Pseudomonas aeruginosa , Salmonella typhimurium , Staphylococcus aureus , Streptococcus pyogenes , and Mycobacterium smegmatis . On the other hand , H. utriformis has low antifungal activity against the species Candida albicans , <unk> rubra , and <unk> fragilis . 
 = = <unk> = = 
 A study of the copper and zinc concentrations in 28 different species of edible mushroom showed that H. utriformis selectively bioaccumulated both copper ( 251 @.@ 9 mg of copper per kilogram of mushroom ) and zinc ( 282 @.@ 1 mg Zn / kg mushroom ) to higher levels than all other mushrooms tested . The authors note that although these trace elements are important nutritional requirements for humans , and that H. utriformis may be considered a good source of these elements , it is known that absorption of the elements ( bioavailability ) from mushrooms is " low due to limited absorption from the small intestine " . 
 = Agaricus hondensis = 
 Agaricus hondensis , commonly known as the felt @-@ ringed agaricus , is a species of fungus in the family Agaricaceae . The species was officially described in 1912 by mycologist William Alphonso Murrill , along with three other Agaricus species that have since been placed in synonymy with A. hondensis . Found in the Pacific Northwest region of North America , A. hondensis fruits in the fall under conifers or in mixed forests . 
 The fungus produces fruit bodies ( mushrooms ) with white to gray @-@ brown caps up to 15 cm ( 6 in ) in diameter covered with pale pinkish @-@ brown scales that darken in age . The tightly @-@ packed gills on the cap underside are initially white before becoming pinkish , lilac @-@ gray , and finally brownish as the spores mature . The stout stipe is bulbous and has a thick , white , felt @-@ like ring . The mushroom is poisonous , and causes severe gastrointestinal upset if consumed . It has an unpleasant odor similar to phenol or creosote , and develops a soapy @-@ metallic taste when cooked . Agaricus hondensis can be distinguished from similar Agaricus species by differences in geographic range , habitat , staining reaction , and odor . 
 = = Systematics = = 
 The species was first described as new to science by American mycologist William Alphonso Murrill in 1912 , based on collections he made in November , 1911 under Californian redwoods . In the same publication , Murrill also described the species Agaricus <unk> , A. <unk> , and A. <unk> , all from the Pacific Northwest region of North America . The latter two were named to honor their original collectors , Albert Hill and James Ira Wilson <unk> , respectively , while the former was named for its resemblance to A. <unk> . In 1944 , Alexander H. Smith examined the type material of several of Murrill 's species , and concluded that were no characters to separate A. hondensis from A. <unk> , A. <unk> , or A. <unk> . He also determined that Sanford Myron Zeller 's A. glaber , published as new in 1938 , was also the same species as A. hondensis . The nomenclatural database MycoBank considers these names synonymous . The epithet hondensis refers to the type location , La Honda , California . The mushroom is commonly known as the " felt @-@ ringed agaricus " . 
 Agaricus hondensis has traditionally been classified in the section <unk> , a grouping of Agaricus species related to A. <unk> that are characterized by fruit bodies with phenolic odors , temporary yellowing discolorations in some parts of the fruit body , a negative Schaeffer ’ s reaction , and toxicity . A molecular analysis has shown that it , along with the related species A. freirei and A. <unk> , comprise a basal lineage in a clade of related sylvan species that have weak yellowing reactions and some tendencies toward reddish bruising reactions . This lineage is closely related to a group of Agaricus species that are typically placed in the section <unk> . Phylogenetic evidence suggests that these three species belong to a clade that diverged shortly after the presumed split of the sections <unk> and <unk> . 
 = = Description = = 
 The cap is initially convex before flattening out , and reaches a diameter of 6 – 15 cm ( 2 @.@ 4 – 5 @.@ 9 in ) . The dry and smooth cap surface is whitish or has pale pinkish @-@ brown to pinkish @-@ gray to fawn @-@ colored flattened fibrils or fine fibrillose scales ( at least in the center ) . In maturity , the fibrils usually darken to brown , reddish @-@ brown , or reddish @-@ gray , but in one northern form the fibrils are darker brown from the beginning . The flesh is thick and white . When bruised or injured , the flesh either does not change color , or may stain pale yellowish , then often slowly discolors pinkish . The odor of the crushed flesh is mild or faintly phenolic , but is usually distinctly phenolic in the base of the stipe . 
 The gills are initially pale pinkish to pinkish @-@ gray before becoming brown , then chocolate @-@ brown or darker when the spores mature . In maturity , the gills are free from attachment to the stipe , and are packed close together with little intervening spaced between them . The stipe is 7 – 20 cm ( 2 @.@ 8 – 7 @.@ 9 in ) long , and 1 – 2 @.@ 5 cm ( 0 @.@ 4 – 1 @.@ 0 in ) thick but with a thicker or bulbous base . Firm , smooth , and lacking the scales found on the cap , the stipe is white but discolors dingy pinkish or brownish in age or after handling . The flesh in the extreme base usually stains pale yellowish when bruised . The partial veil is membranous , white , and forms a thick , felt @-@ like ring on the upper portion of the stipe . The ring is <unk> but often flares outward instead of collapsing against the stipe . A drop of dilute potassium hydroxide placed on the cap turns yellow . 
 Spore prints are purplish brown to chocolate brown . The smooth , thick @-@ walled spores are broadly ellipsoidal , and typically measure 5 @.@ 8 – 7 @.@ 3 by 3 @.@ 7 – 4 @.@ 4 μm . The basidia ( spore @-@ bearing cells ) are four @-@ spored , club @-@ shaped , hyaline ( translucent , and measure 20 – 21 @.@ 3 by 5 @.@ 8 – 7 @.@ 0 μm . Cystidia on the gill edge ( cheilocystidia ) are sac @-@ shaped to club @-@ shaped , hyaline to pale yellowish brown in color , and have dimensions of 18 @.@ 3 – 25 @.@ 6 by 7 @.@ 3 – 11 @.@ 0 μm ; there are no cystidia on the gill face ( pleurocystidia ) . 
 = = = Similar species = = = 
 Distinctive field characteristics of Agaricus hondensis include its woodland habitat , the yellow staining reaction with KOH , and its odor . Agaricus freirei closely resembles A. hondensis , and , based on similarities in DNA sequences , is a close relative . A. freirei is found in coastal regions of Spain . A. hondensis has also been confused with A. <unk> and A. <unk> . A. sylvaticus does not have foul @-@ smelling flesh , and has a negative KOH reaction . A. <unk> is found from the midwestern United States eastward . Another lookalike , the edible A. <unk> , has similar overall coloration , but is distinguished from A. hondensis by a mild odor , a shaggy stipe , and a less substantial ring . 
 = = Habitat and distribution = = 
 A saprobic species , the fruit bodies of Agaricus hondensis grow scattered or in groups under conifers or in mixed forests . They have also been reported to grow in fairy rings . The fungus is found in the Pacific Coast of North America , from British Columbia in Canada south to California , but is most common in California . The mushroom fruits in the fall from September to October throughout much of its range , but in California the fruiting season tends to be from November to February . 
 = = Toxicity = = 
 Agaricus hondensis mushrooms are toxic , and consuming the fruit bodies causes gastroenteritis . Some fruit bodies smell of creosote , an odor that becomes even more prevalent if the mushrooms are cooked . Cooking also introduces an unpleasant soapy @-@ metallic flavor . The fruit bodies are used as food by the vagrant shrew ( Sorex <unk> ) and the American shrew mole ( <unk> <unk> ) . Relatively high levels of the chemical hydroquinone are present in fruit bodies . 
 = Eucteniza = 
 Eucteniza ( pronunciation : / <unk> / yewk @-@ tə @-@ NY @-@ <unk> ) is a genus of trapdoor spiders in the family Euctenizidae containing at least 14 species occurring in Mexico and the southern United States . Species are distinguished by a softened rear portion of the carapace , and males possess large spines on the first two pairs of walking legs that are used to hold females during mating . Like other trapdoor spiders they create burrows with a hinged lid , from which they await passing insects and other arthropods to prey upon . Many species are known from only one or two localities , or from only male specimens . More species are expected to be discovered . Eucteniza is closely related to spiders of the genera <unk> and <unk> . 
 = = Description = = 
 Members of Eucteniza reach up to 27 @.@ 5 mm ( 1 @.@ 08 in ) in body length ( not including the legs ) , which is relatively large to very large among spiders . The cephalothorax ( the anterior body segment bearing the eyes , mouthparts , and legs ) is oval , slightly longer than wide , and slopes considerably towards the rear when viewed from the side . The rear third of the carapace ( the upper surface of the cephalothorax ) is relatively soft , and is distinctly lighter in coloration . The carapace is often devoid of hairs , and in some species fringed with black bristles . The eight eyes are not elevated and are arranged in two rows in a rectangular area : the hind row is recurved , or slightly curved upwards ( as in a bowl or shallow U ) , while the anterior row is slightly <unk> ( slightly curved downwards , as in an inverted bowl ) . Eucteniza spiders are colored in various shades of brown , with males generally appearing a dark reddish @-@ brown . The jaws ( chelicerae ) are dark brown . The abdomen sometimes has a dark brown blotch on the upper surface . Measurements of most species only refer to the cephalothorax , which is less variable than the abdomen : recorded cephalothorax lengths range from 3 @.@ 5 mm ( 0 @.@ 14 in ) in E. <unk> to 11 @.@ 5 mm ( 0 @.@ 45 in ) in E. relata . 
 In males , the tibiae ( 5th leg segments ) of the first and second walking legs are swollen or enlarged in many species . Additionally , males possess one or two prominent spines , known as " mating claspers " on the first and second tibiae ; related genera possess claspers on the first pair of legs only . The size , number , and arrangement of these spines varies between species . Females have a double @-@ toothed groove that the fangs recede into , unlike that of any other <unk> genus . Both sexes also possess " preening combs " , rows of stiff bristles on the rear legs . 
 = = Behavior = = 
 Like other trapdoor spiders , Eucteniza species construct burrows in the ground with a hinged lid , from which they wait to ambush passing prey . Burrows and prey have been studied in E. relata , and other species are believed to have similar behavior . The burrow consists of an un @-@ branched tube , lined with silk and soil , ranging from 7 to 25 cm ( 2 @.@ 8 to 9 @.@ 8 in ) in depth . The burrow is covered with a cork @-@ like lid composed of silk and soil and hinged with silk . The bottom of the burrow accumulates molted exoskeletons and remains of prey , which include beetles , ants , and millipedes . Burrows of adults and juveniles have been found in close proximity , suggesting individuals do not disperse very far after hatching . Individuals in Texas disperse from their burrows between August and January , and hence are most often collected during this time . In Mexico , the dispersal period extends from June to January . 
 = = Habitat = = 
 The predominant habitat of Eucteniza is desert and tropical dry forest of Mexico and Texas . Specimens have been collected from elevations as low as 8 to 12 m ( 26 to 39 ft ) above sea level ( e.g. the Baja California species E. <unk> , E. diablo , and E. <unk> ) , to around 3 @,@ 300 m ( 10 @,@ 800 ft ) ( E. relata in northeastern Mexico ) . Burrows are located on flat ground or slight inclines . In southern Texas , E. relata may burrow in residential lawns , and may be particularly likely to be encountered after rains . Eucteniza spiders are generally difficult to find in the wild , and are rare in museum collections . 
 = = Predators = = 
 E. relata in Texas is thought to be preyed upon by tarantula hawk wasps in the genus <unk> , which are known to paralyze tarantulas and other spiders to provide food for their young . Observations suggest female <unk> seek out Eucteniza hosts and sting them in their burrows , leaving them paralyzed within . 
 = = Taxonomic history = = 
 The taxonomic history of Eucteniza spiders includes nearly 20 named species and four genera ; the three additional generic names are now considered taxonomic synonyms of Eucteniza , and several named species have similarly been determined to be synonyms of previously described species . 
 The genus Eucteniza was established by Austrian naturalist Anton <unk> in 1875 with the description of Eucteniza mexicana . In 1895 , the English zoologist and reverend Octavius Pickard @-@ Cambridge described the new genera <unk> and Enrico for the new species <unk> and mexicanus , respectively . Shortly thereafter , the reverend 's nephew Frederick O. Pickard @-@ Cambridge transferred F. <unk> to Eucteniza , rendering <unk> a junior synonym of Eucteniza . Similarly , the elder Pickard @-@ Cambridge 's Enrico mexicanus was synonymized with Eucteniza in 2002 , which required a name change to avoid confusion with <unk> 's Eucteniza mexicana . Thus Enrico mexicanus was given the replacement name Eucteniza <unk> . 
 In 1940 , the American biologist Ralph V. Chamberlin described <unk> rex , a new genus and species from Texas , while Willis J. Gertsch and Stanley <unk> described A. <unk> , also from Texas . Both species of <unk> were transferred to Eucteniza in 2002 . 
 Many taxonomic changes occurred in a 2013 revision by American biologists Jason Bond and Rebecca Godwin . Twelve new species were described , many named after nearby localities , indigenous peoples , or Mexican historic figures . Namesakes of other species include the nightclub Cabo <unk> of Cabo San Lucas , and a character from Battlestar Galactica . Both E. rex and E. <unk> were synonymized with E. relata , and the previously described E. <unk> ( Pickard @-@ Cambridge 's Enrico mexicanus ) was declared a dubious name : since it was originally described based on a juvenile specimen , it is unclear whether it represents a distinct species . Thus , as of 2013 a total of 14 valid species are recognized . 
 = = = Species and distribution = = = 
 The different species of Eucteniza are distinguished by differences in body size , limb proportions , number of tibial spines , and shape of female sperm receptacles , as well as geographic location . Most species are known from male specimens only , but E. <unk> and E. <unk> are known only from female specimens . Eucteniza species are distributed throughout central and northern Mexico , much of Texas , and the lower part of the Baja Peninsula . Many species are only known from the type locality , the site where the type specimen or specimens were originally collected . The species with the largest range is E. relata , although Bond and Godwin assert the species is actually composed of multiple as @-@ yet @-@ unnamed cryptic species ( distinct species erroneously grouped into one ) that will require additional morphological or genetic research to distinguish . 
 = = Classification = = 
 Eucteniza is the type genus of the family Euctenizidae ( the " wafer trapdoor spiders " ) , a <unk> family formerly considered a subfamily of the <unk> . Within Euctenizidae , Eucteniza is classified in the subfamily <unk> . Earlier comparisons of morphological and behavioral traits suggested the closest relative of Eucteniza is <unk> <unk> , a forest dwelling spider found in Arizona and New Mexico , while more recent studies , including analyses of DNA similarities , suggest a closer relationship to <unk> , a genus with several species ranging from Arizona to Texas into Mexico . 
 = Lactarius alnicola = 
 Lactarius alnicola , commonly known as the golden milkcap , is a species of fungus in the Russulaceae family . The fruit bodies produced by the fungus are characterized by a sticky , vanilla @-@ colored cap up to 20 cm ( 7 @.@ 9 in ) wide with a mixture of yellow tones arranged in faint concentric bands . The stem is up to 5 cm ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) long and has yellow @-@ brown spots . When it is cut or injured , the mushroom oozes a white latex , which has an intensely peppery taste . The acrid taste of the fruit bodies renders them unpalatable . The fungus is found in the western United States and Mexico , where it grows in mycorrhizal associations with various coniferous trees species , such as spruce , pine and fir , and deciduous species such as oak and alder . It has also been collected in India . Two varieties have been named : var. <unk> , known from Colorado , and var. pungens , from Michigan . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The species was originally described by American mycologist Alexander H. Smith in 1960 , from a collection made near Warm Lake , Idaho , two years prior . The species was originally collected under alders with conifers nearby , and its specific epithet reflects the presumed association between the species — alnicola means " living with alder " . Researchers subsequently discovered that the species has a relationship with conifers , not with alders , as the name implies . The mushroom is commonly known as the " golden milkcap " . 
 Lactarius alnicola is classified in subsection <unk> of section Piperites in the genus Lactarius . Species in this subsection are characterized by having a milk @-@ white to creamy or whey @-@ like latex that soon turns yellow upon exposure to air , and which may stain freshly cut surfaces of the fruit body yellow . Further , the cap margin is bearded , strigose ( covered with sharp , straight , and stiff hairs ) , and coarsely tomentose or woolly when young . Other species in the subsection include L. <unk> , L. <unk> , L. torminosus , L. payettensis , L. gossypinus , L. pubescens , L. <unk> and L. scrobiculatus ( the type species of the subsection ) . 
 = = Description = = 
 The cap is 8 – 20 cm ( 3 @.@ 1 – 7 @.@ 9 in ) wide , initially convex but becoming depressed to funnel @-@ shaped in maturity . The cap margin is initially rolled inward , then becomes uplifted as the cap expands . The cap surface is sticky to slimy , and near the margin there are matted " hairs " beneath the slimy or sticky layer . The color of the cap surface is yellow @-@ ochre , sometimes with concentric bands of lighter and darker shades ; the color becomes paler near the margin . The gills are adnate ( squarely attached to the stem ) to decurrent ( attached to and running down the length of the stem ) , narrow , and crowded closely together . Forked near the stem , the gills are initially whitish before becoming pale ochraceous @-@ buff . There are many lamellulae — small gills that do not extend completely to the stem . 
 The stem is 3 – 6 cm ( 1 @.@ 2 – 2 @.@ 4 in ) long and 2 – 3 cm ( 0 @.@ 8 – 1 @.@ 2 in ) thick , nearly equal in width throughout or tapered downward , dry , hard , coarsely pitted , and whitish to cream yellowish . It is initially solid , then becomes hollow with age . The flesh is thick , hard , whitish , and slowly stains pale yellow after the mushroom has been cut open . It has no distinctive odor , while the taste is immediately acrid . The latex is sparse , white on exposure to air , and unchanging or very slowly changing color to yellow . It stains cut flesh yellow , and tastes acrid . According to mycologist David Arora , the oak @-@ loving central and southern Californian population of this species has a more latent acrid taste . The spore print may range slightly in color : thin deposits are white , thick deposits are more yellow . The mushroom is considered inedible because of the intensely peppery taste . 
 = = = Microscopic characters = = = 
 The spores are 7 @.@ 5 – 10 by 6 – 8 @.@ 5 µm , ellipsoid , and ornamented with warts and narrow bands that form a partial reticulum . The surface prominences are up to 1 µm high , but mostly in the range 0 @.@ 3 – 0 @.@ 6 µm . The spores are hyaline ( translucent ) and amyloid , meaning that they will adsorb iodine when stained with Melzer 's reagent . The basidia , the spore @-@ bearing cells , are four @-@ spored , and measure 37 – 48 by 8 – 11 µm . The cap cuticle is an ixocutis ( a tissue layer on the surface of a mushroom made of a layer of gelatinous hyphae ) made of encrusted hyphae that are 3 – 5 µm wide . 
 = = = Varieties = = = 
 In their 1979 monograph of North American Lactarius species , Hesler and Smith named two varieties of L. alnicola . Lactarius alnicola var. <unk> , reported under mixed aspen and conifers from Ashcroft , Colorado , is very similar to the nominate variety , but it has a white to cream @-@ colored cap and white , unchanging latex . It has slightly smaller fruit bodies , with caps up to 10 cm ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) wide , and stems up to 4 cm ( 1 @.@ 6 in ) long ; its spores are slightly larger , measuring 9 – 10 @.@ 5 by 7 @.@ 5 – 9 µm . Lactarius alnicola var. pungens , reported only from mixed forests in Michigan , is similar but has a tacky surface that soon dries , a dull ochraceous to ochraceous @-@ tan cap with an ochraceous @-@ tawny center . It has whitish flesh , with a pungent odor described as " distinct and peculiar " . 
 = = = Similar species = = = 
 Novice mushroom hunters may mistake L. alnicola for the edible species Cantharellus cibarius , a choice edible species that has a vase @-@ shaped fruit body with strongly decurrent gills . Other similar Lactarius species include L. zonarius , L. payettensis , L. <unk> , L. <unk> , and L. psammicola f. glaber . L. <unk> also associates with conifers , and has a pale yellow @-@ ochre , frequently zonate cap , but may be distinguished by its stem , which is usually covered with spots . L. payettensis has a roughened , not smooth , cap margin . L. <unk> has a zonate cap and extremely acrid flesh . Its gills change color from pale vinaceous to light pinkish @-@ brown in maturity . L. psammicola f. glaber has a pinkish @-@ buff spore print . Mature fruit bodies of L. scrobiculatus var. montanus have been confused with L. alnicola . Its fruit bodies feature a smooth cap margin , acrid taste , white latex which slowly ( over several minutes ) turns yellow on exposure or stains the flesh yellow , and do not turn " clay color " when bruised . 
 = = Ecology , habitat , and distribution = = 
 Lactarius alnicola is an ectomycorrhizal species , and engages in a mutualistic association with certain plant species . In this association , the hyphae of the fungus permeate large volumes of soil and obtain scarce elements , especially phosphorus — which is often limiting for plant growth — which they pass on to the plant in exchange for metabolic products of the plant 's photosynthesis . The ectomycorrhizae that the fungus forms in association with Picea engelmannii have been shown to contain lactifers ( latex @-@ producing cells ) and pigments similar to the fruit body . Fruit bodies of the fungus grow in groups on the ground under alders and conifers , usually appearing between July and October . It is a fairly common species in the western United States and Baja California . Additional collection locations in Mexico include Veracruz , Villarreal , and Tapia . A population in central and southern California is known to associate with oak trees . In the Rocky Mountains it is associated with the subalpine tree species Englemann Spruce ( Picea engelmannii ) , while at lower elevations it is commonly found with white spruce ( Picea glauca ) . It is also known to associate with Ponderosa Pine ( Pinus ponderosa ) and Douglas @-@ fir ( genus Pseudotsuga ) . The mushroom has also been collected from <unk> , in the state of Uttarakhand , India . 
 = = = Cited books = = = 
 Bessette AR , Bessette A , Harris DM ( 2009 ) . Milk Mushrooms of North America : A Field Guide to the Genus Lactarius . Syracuse : Syracuse University Press . ISBN 0 @-@ 8156 @-@ <unk> @-@ 0 . 
 Hesler LR , Smith AH ( 1979 ) . North American Species of Lactarius . Michigan : The University of Michigan Press . ISBN 0 @-@ 472 @-@ <unk> @-@ 2 . 
 = William Lowndes Yancey = 
 William Lowndes Yancey ( August 10 , 1814 – July 27 , 1863 ) was a journalist , politician , orator , diplomat and an American leader of the Southern secession movement . A member of the group known as the Fire @-@ Eaters , Yancey was one of the most effective agitators for secession and rhetorical defenders of slavery . An early critic of John C. Calhoun and nullification , by the late 1830s Yancey began to identify with Calhoun and the struggle against the forces of the anti @-@ slavery movement . In 1849 , Yancey was a firm supporter of Calhoun 's " Southern Address " and an adamant opponent of the Compromise of 1850 . 
 Throughout the 1850s , Yancey , sometimes referred to as the " Orator of Secession " , demonstrated the ability to hold large audiences under his spell for hours at a time . At the 1860 Democratic National Convention , Yancey , a leading opponent of Stephen A. Douglas and the concept of popular sovereignty , was instrumental in splitting the party into Northern and Southern factions . At the 1860 convention , he used the phrase “ squatter sovereignty ” in a speech he gave to describe popular sovereignty . 
 During the American Civil War , Yancey was appointed by Confederate President Jefferson Davis to head a diplomatic delegation to Europe in the attempt to secure formal recognition of Southern independence . In these efforts , Yancey was unsuccessful and frustrated . Upon his return to America in 1862 , Yancey was elected to the Confederate States Senate where he was a frequent critic of the Davis Administration . Suffering from ill health for much of his life , Yancey died during the war at the age of 48 . 
 = = Youth = = 
 Yancey ’ s mother , Caroline Bird , lived on the family home ( nicknamed " the Aviary " ) located near the falls of the Ogeechee River in Warren County , Georgia . On December 8 , 1808 , she married Benjamin Cudworth Yancey , a lawyer in South Carolina who had served on the USS Constellation during the Quasi @-@ War with France . Yancey was born at " the Aviary " ; three years later , on October 26 , 1817 , his father died of yellow fever . He was probably named for William Lowndes ( 1782 @-@ 1822 ) , who represented South Carolina in Congress at the time that Yancey was born . 
 Yancey ’ s widowed mother married the Reverend Nathan Sydney Smith Beman on April 23 , 1821 . Beman had temporarily relocated to South Carolina to operate Mt . Zion Academy , where William was a student . In the spring of 1823 , the entire family moved when Reverend Beman took a position at the First Presbyterian Church in Troy , New York . Beman worked with Reverend Charles G. Finney in the New School movement and in the 1830s became involved with abolitionism through contacts with Theodore Dwight Ward and Lyman Beecher . 
 Beman ’ s marriage was marred by domestic unrest and spousal abuse that led to serious considerations of divorce and finally a permanent separation in 1835 . This atmosphere affected the children and caused William to reject many of his step @-@ father ’ s teachings . Yancey ’ s biographer , historian Eric H. Walther , speculates the character of Yancey ’ s later career was a result of low self @-@ esteem and a search for public adulation and approval that went back to his childhood experiences with Reverend Beman . 
 In the fall of 1830 , Yancey was enrolled at Williams College in northwestern Massachusetts . The 16 @-@ year @-@ old Yancey was admitted as a sophomore based on the required entrance examinations . At Williams , he participated in the debating society and for a short time was the editor of a student newspaper . In the autumn of 1832 , Yancey took his first steps as a politician by working on the campaign for Whig Ebenezer Emmons . Overall , Yancey had a successful stay at Williams academically that was marred only by frequent disciplinary problems . Despite being selected as the Senior Orator by his class , Yancey left the school in the spring of 1833 , six weeks before graduation . 
 = = Early career = = 
 Yancey returned to the South , relocating to Greenville , South Carolina . He originally lived on his uncle ’ s plantation , where he served as a bookkeeper . The uncle , Robert Cunningham , was a strong unionist , as were most of Yancey ’ s family , including his birth father . On July 4 , 1834 , at a Fourth of July celebration , Yancey made a stirring nationalistic address in which he openly attacked the radicals of the state who were still talking secession from the repercussions of the Nullification Crisis : 
 Listen , not then , my countrymen , to the voice which whispers ( for as yet , it does not raise itself above a whisper ) that Americans , who have been knit together by so many cords of affection , can no longer be mutual worshippers at the Shrine of Freedom — no longer can exist together , citizens of the same Republic … 
 As a result of Yancey ’ s political activities , he was appointed editor of the Greenville ( South Carolina ) Mountaineer in November 1834 . As editor , he attacked both nullification and the chief architect of nullification , John C. Calhoun . Yancey compared Calhoun to Aaron Burr and referred to them as " two fallen arch angels — who have made efforts to tear down the battlements and safeguards of our country , that they might rule , the Demons of the Storm . " 
 Yancey resigned from the newspaper on May 14 , 1835 . On August 13 , married Sarah Caroline Earl . As his dowry , Yancey received 35 slaves and a quick entry into the planter class . In the winter of 1836 – 1837 , Yancey removed to her plantation in Alabama , near <unk> ( Dallas County ) . It was an inopportune time to relocate . As a result of the Panic of 1837 , Yancey 's financial position was seriously damaged by cotton prices that fell from fifteen cents a pound in 1835 to as low as five cents a pound in 1837 . 
 In early 1838 , Yancey took over the <unk> Southern Democrat , and his first editorial was a strong defense of slavery . From his current economic perspective , Yancey began to identify the anti @-@ slavery movement negatively with issues such as the establishment of a national bank , internal improvements , and expanding federal power . As the former nationalist moved to a states ’ rights position , Yancey also changed his attitude toward Calhoun — applauding Calhoun ’ s role in the Gag rule Debates . Yancey also began to attack Henry Clay for his support of the American Colonization Society , which Yancey equated with attacks on Southern slavery . 
 Yancey , like most members of the planter class , was a strong believer in a personal code of honor . In September 1838 , Yancey returned for a brief return visit to Greenville . A political slur by Yancey in a private conversation was overheard by a teenage relative of the aggrieved party . Yancey was confronted by another relative ( and his wife ’ s uncle ) , Dr. Robinson Earle . Conversation turned to violence , and the always @-@ armed Yancey ended up killing the doctor in a street brawl . Yancey was tried and sentenced to a year in jail for manslaughter . An unrepentant Yancey was pardoned after only a few months , but while incarcerated he wrote for his newspaper , " Reared with the spirit of a man in my bosom — and taught to preserve inviolate my honor — my character , and my person , I have acted as such a spirit dictated . " 
 Yancey returned to his paper in March 1839 , but sold it a couple of months later when he moved to <unk> in Elmore County , Alabama . While his intent was to resume his life as a planter , Yancey suffered a huge financial reversal when his slaves were poisoned as a result of a feud between Yancey ’ s overseer and a neighboring overseer . Two slaves were killed , and most of the others were incapacitated for months . Unable to afford replacements and burdened with other debts from his newspaper , Yancey was forced to sell most of the slaves as they recovered . Yancey did open in <unk> the Argus and Commercial Advertiser . 
 = = Public office = = 
 Yancey was increasingly interested in politics as his personal politics moved towards the most radical wing of the Southern Democratic Party . Influenced most by Dixon Hall Lewis , Yancey fell into a social and political circle that included political leaders of the state such as Thomas Mays , J. L. M. Curry , John A. Campbell , and John Gill Shorter . In April 1840 , Yancey started a weekly campaign newsletter that supported Democrat Martin Van Buren over Whig William Henry Harrison in the <unk> election while emphasizing that slavery should now be the most important political and economic concern of the South . While still not a secessionist , Yancey was also no longer an unconditional unionist . 
 He was elected in 1841 to the Alabama House of Representatives , in which he served for one year . In March 1842 , Yancey sold his newspaper because of increasing debt ( throughout his career as an editor he faced the problem of many fellow editors — obtaining and collecting on subscriptions ) , and he opened a law practice instead . In 1843 , he ran for the Alabama Senate and was elected by a vote of 1 @,@ 115 to 1 @,@ 025 . His special concern in this election was the effort being made by Whigs to determine apportionment in the state legislature based on the " federal ratio " of each slave counting as three @-@ fifths of a person . Currently only whites were counted and the change would benefit the Whigs who generally were the largest slaveholders . This division between large slaveholders and yeomen <unk> would continue through the Alabama secession convention in 1861 . 
 In 1844 , Yancey was elected to the United States House of Representatives to fill a vacancy ( winning with a 2 @,@ 197 to 2 @,@ 137 vote ) and re @-@ elected in 1845 ( receiving over 4 @,@ 000 votes as the Whigs did not even field a candidate ) . In Congress , his political ability and unusual oratorical gifts at once gained recognition . Yancey delivered his first speech on January 6 , 1845 , when he was selected by the Democrats to respond to a speech by Thomas Clingman , a Whig from North Carolina , who had opposed Texas annexation . Clingman was offended by the tone of Yancey ’ s speech and afterwards Yancey refused to clarify that he had not intended to impugn Clingman ’ s honor . Clingman challenged Yancey to a duel , and he accepted . The exchange of pistol fire occurred in nearby Beltsville , Maryland ; neither combatant was injured . 
 In Congress , Yancey was an effective spokesman in opposing internal improvements and tariffs and supporting states ’ rights and the start of the Mexican @-@ American War . More and more , he subscribed to conspiracy theories regarding Northern intentions while helping to provide ammunition for those Northerners who were starting to believe in a slaveholders ’ conspiracy . In 1846 , however , he resigned his seat , partly for financial reasons , and partly because of his disgust with the Northern Democrats , whom he accused of sacrificing their principles for economic interests . 
 = = Alabama platform and address to the people of Alabama = = 
 Within a few months of his resignation , Yancey moved to Montgomery , where he purchased a 20 @-@ acre ( 81 @,@ 000 m2 ) dairy farm while establishing a law partnership with John A. Elmore . No longer a planter , Yancey still remained a slaveholder , owning 11 slaves in 1850 , 14 by 1852 , and 24 between 1858 and 1860 . While he had suggested with his resignation that his active role in politics might be over , " perhaps forever " , Yancey found this to be impossible . 
 Yancey recognized the significance of the Wilmot Proviso to the South and in 1847 , as the first talk of slaveholder Zachary Taylor as a presidential candidate surfaced , Yancey saw him as a possibility for bringing together a Southern political movement that would cross party lines . Yancey made it clear that his support for Taylor was conditional upon Taylor denouncing the Wilmot Proviso . However , Taylor announced that he would seek the Whig nomination , and in December 1847 Lewis Cass of Michigan , the leading Democratic candidate , endorsed the policy of Popular sovereignty . 
 With no available candidate sufficiently opposed to the Proviso , in 1848 Yancey secured the adoption by the state Democratic convention of the " Alabama Platform , " which was endorsed by the legislatures of Alabama and Georgia and by Democratic state conventions in Florida and Virginia . The platform declared : 
 1 . The Federal government could not restrict slavery in the territories . 
 2 . Territories could not prohibit slavery until the point where they were meeting in convention to draft a state constitution in order to petition Congress for statehood . 
 3 . Alabama delegates to the Democratic convention were to oppose any candidate supporting either the Proviso or Popular Sovereignty ( which allowed territories to exclude slavery at any point ) 
 4 . The federal government must specifically overrule Mexican anti @-@ slavery laws in the Mexican Cession and actively protect slavery . 
 When the national convention was held in Baltimore , Cass was nominated on the fourth ballot . Yancey ’ s proposal that the convention adopt the main points of the Alabama Platform was rejected by a 216 – 36 vote . Yancey and one other Alabama delegate left the convention in protest , and Yancey ’ s efforts to stir up a third party movement in the state failed . 
 The opening salvo in a new level of sectional conflict occurred on December 13 , 1848 , when Whig John G. Palfrey of Massachusetts introduced a bill to abolish slavery in the District of Columbia . Throughout 1849 in the South " the rhetoric of resistance to the North escalated and spread " . Calhoun delivered his famous " Southern Address " , but only 48 out of 121 Congressmen signed off on it . Yancey persuaded a June 1849 state Democratic Party meeting to endorse Calhoun ’ s address and was instrumental in calling for the Nashville Convention scheduled for June 1850 . 
 Yancey was opposed to both the Compromise of 1850 and the disappointing results of the Nashville Convention . The latter , rather than making a strong stand for secession as Yancey had hoped , simply advocated extending the Missouri Compromise Line to the Pacific Coast . Yancey helped create Southern Rights Associations ( a concept that originated in South Carolina ) in Alabama to pursue a secessionist agenda . A convention held in February 1851 of these Alabama associations produced Yancey ’ s radical " Address to the People of Alabama " . The address began : 
 The legacy of the old party organization had been to lead their members to avoid any decisive action on the great slavery question , and to wink and acquiesce in aggressions on the South rather than endanger party success by opposition to them . 
 The address hit all of the main points that would ultimately resurface in the secession during the winter of 1860 – 1861 , especially the treatment of Southerners : 
 … as inferiors in the Union — as degraded by your contact with slaves , and as unworthy of an association with the Northern man in the great work of extending the institution of slavery over the vast plains of the West . 
 Despite the efforts of Yancey , the popularity of the Compromise of 1850 , the failure of the Nashville Convention , and the acceptance of the more moderate Georgia Platform by much of the South , led to unionist victories in Alabama and most of the South . Yancey ’ s third party support for George Troup of Georgia on a Southern rights platform drew only 2 @,@ 000 votes . 
 = = Road to secession = = 
 Yancey continued to support the most radical Southern positions and is generally included as one of a group of southerners referred to as " fire @-@ eaters . " Historian Emory Thomas notes that Yancey , along with Edmund Ruffin and Robert Barnwell Rhett , " remained in the secessionist forefront longest and loudest . " Thomas characterized the whole fire @-@ eater cause as reactionary in purpose ( the preservation of the South as it then existed ) , but revolutionary in means ( the rejection of the existing political order ) . 
 When the conflicts in Kansas Territory known as Bleeding Kansas erupted in 1855 – 1856 , Yancey spoke publicly in support of Jefferson Buford ’ s efforts to raise 300 men to go to Kansas and fight for Southern interests . In 1856 , Yancey was head of the platform committee for the state Democratic and Anti – Know Nothing Convention , and he succeeded in having the convention <unk> the Alabama Platform . In June 1856 , he participated in a rally condemning Charles Sumner while praising his assailant Preston Brooks , who nearly bludgeoned Sumner to death in the United States Senate Chamber . In June 1857 , Yancey spoke at a rally opposing Robert J. Walker 's actions as territorial governor of Kansas . In July 1856 he spoke at the University of Alabama 's graduation on " the distinctive characteristics of the Northern and Southern people of the Union . " In January 1858 , he participated in a rally supporting William Walker , the famous Nicaragua filibuster , calling the " Central American enterprise as the cause of the South . " 
 Throughout the mid @-@ 1850s , he also lectured on behalf of the Mount Vernon Ladies Association of the Union , an organization that eventually purchased and restored Mount Vernon from John A. Washington in 1858 . Yancey helped to raise $ 75 @,@ 000 for this project . 
 Editor and fellow fire @-@ eater James DeBow was a leader in establishing the Southern Commercial Conventions in the 1850s . At the 1857 meeting in Knoxville , DeBow had called for a reopening of the international slave trade . At the May 1858 convention in Montgomery , responding to a speech by Virginian Roger A. Pryor opposing the slave trade , Yancey , in an address that spanned several days , made the following points : 
 If slavery is right per se , if it is right to raise slaves for sale , does it not appear that it is right to import them ? 
 Let us then wipe from our statute book this mark of Cain which our enemies have placed there . 
 We want negroes [ sic ] cheap , and we want a sufficiency of them , so as to supply the cotton demand of the whole world . 
 Yancey supported a plan originated by Edmund Ruffin for the creation of a League of United Southerners as an alternative to the national political parties . In a June 16 , 1858 letter to his friend James S. Slaughter that was publicly circulated ( Horace Greeley referred to it as " The Scarlet Letter " ) , Yancey wrote : 
 No National Party can save us ; no Sectional Party can do it . But if we could do as our fathers did , organize Committees of Safety all over the cotton states ( and it is only in them that we can hope of any effective movement ) we shall fire the Southern heart — instruct the Southern mind — give courage to each other , and at the proper moment , by one organized , concerted action , we can precipitate the cotton states into a revolution . 
 Yancey was ill for much of the remainder of 1858 and early 1859 . For the 1859 Southern Commercial Convention in Vicksburg , which passed the resolution to repeal all state and federal regulations banning the slave trade , Yancey could only contribute editorials , although by July 1859 he was able to speak publicly in Columbia , South Carolina , in favor of repealing the restrictions . When the Alabama Democratic Party organized in the winter of 1859 @-@ 1860 for the upcoming national convention , they chose Yancey to lead them on the basis of the Alabama Platform . Both Stephen A. Douglas and popular sovereignty were the immediate targets , but by then Yancey also recognized that secession would be necessary if a " Black Republican " were to gain the White House . 
 = = Spreading the pro @-@ slavery message = = 
 After twelve years ' absence from the national conventions of the Democratic Party , Yancey attended the Charleston convention in April 1860 . The Douglas faction refused to accept a platform , modeled after Yancey ’ s Alabama Platform of 1848 , committed to protecting slavery in the territories . When the platform committee presented such a proposal to the convention , it was voted down on the floor by a 165 – 138 vote . Yancey and the Alabama delegation left the hall and were followed by the delegates of Mississippi , Louisiana , South Carolina , Florida , Texas , and two of the three delegates from Delaware . On the next day , the Georgia delegation and a majority of the Arkansas delegation withdrew . As Eric Walther states , " Through his years of preparation and despite some brief wavering , William L. Yancey had finally destroyed the Democratic Party . " 
 Failing to nominate a candidate , the convention adjourned and reconvened in Baltimore on June 18 , 1860 . In a last gasp effort to obtain party unity , Douglas supporter George N. Sanders made an unauthorized offer to Yancey to run as vice @-@ president . Yancey turned this down , and the entire Yancey delegation from Alabama was refused credentials in favor of a pro – Douglas slate headed by John Forsyth . With the South Carolina delegation also being denied credentials , the Louisiana , Virginia , North Carolina , and Tennessee delegations left the convention . The Southern representatives reconvened in Baltimore on June 23 and adopted the Yancey platform from the Charleston convention and nominated John C. Breckinridge for president . In a speech before the convention , Yancey characterized the Douglas supporters as " ostrich like — their head was in the sand of squatter sovereignty , and they did not know their great , ugly , ragged abolition body was exposed " . Yancey , who had already made thirty public addresses in 1860 , delivered twenty more during the campaign . If he had not been before , he was certainly now a national figure — a figure making it clear that secession would follow anything other than a Breckinridge election . 
 Yancey ’ s speaking tour in favor of Breckinridge was not confined to the South . In Wilmington , Delaware , Yancey stated , " We stand upon the dark platform of southern slavery , and all we ask is to be allowed to keep it to ourselves . Let us do that , and we will not let the negro [ sic ] insult you by coming here and marrying your daughters . " 
 On October 10 , 1860 , at Cooper Institute Hall in New York Yancey advised Northerners interested in preserving the Union to " <unk> your jails and penitentiaries , re @-@ enforce and strengthen your police force , and keep the irrepressible conflict fellows from stealing our negroes … " Yancey cited southern fears that with abolitionists in power , " Emissaries will percolate between master [ and ] slave as water between the crevices of rocks underground . They will be found everywhere , with strychnine to put in our wells . " He further warned the crowd that Republican agitation would make Southern whites " the enemies of that race until we drench our fields with the blood of the unfortunate people . " 
 At Faneuil Hall in Boston , Yancey defended the practices of slavery : 
 You are allowed to whip your children ; we are allowed to whip our negroes [ sic ] . There is no cruelty in the practice . … Our negroes [ sic ] are but children . … The negro [ sic ] that will not work is made to work . Society tolerates no drones . 
 From Boston , Yancey ’ s tour included stops in Albany , Syracuse , Florence ( Kentucky ) , Louisville , Nashville , and New Orleans , finally returning to Montgomery on November 5 . When news of Lincoln ’ s election reached the city , Yancey rhetorically asked a public assemblage protesting the results , " Shall we remain [ in the Union ] and all be slaves ? Shall we wait to bear our share of the common dishonor ? God forbid ! " 
 = = Secession = = 
 On February 24 , 1860 , the Alabama legislature passed a joint resolution requiring the governor to call for the election of delegates to a state convention if a Republican was elected president . After first waiting for the official electoral votes to be counted , Governor Andrew Moore called for the election of delegates to take place on December 24 with the convention to meet on January 7 , 1861 . When the convention convened , Yancey was the guiding spirit . The delegates were split between those insisting on immediate secession versus those who would secede only in cooperation with other Southern states . A frustrated Yancey lashed out at those <unk> : 
 The misguided , deluded , wicked men in our midst , if any such there be , who shall oppose it [ secession ] , will be in alignment with the abolition power of the Federal government , and as our safety demands , must be looked upon and dealt with as public enemies . 
 Eventually , the ordinance of secession was passed over <unk> objections by a vote of 61 – 39 . 
 When the newly established Confederate States of America met later that month in Montgomery to establish their formal union , Yancey was not a delegate , but he delivered the address of welcome to Jefferson Davis , selected as provisional President , on his arrival at Montgomery . While many of the fire @-@ eaters were opposed to the selection of a relative moderate like Davis , Yancey accepted him as a good choice . In his speech , Yancey indicated that in the selection of Davis , " The man and the hour have met . We now hope that prosperity , honor , and victory await his administration . " Many historians agree with Emory Thomas who wrote , " When Yancey and Davis met in Montgomery the helm of the revolution changed hands . Yancey and the radicals had stirred the waters ; Davis and the moderates would sail the ship . " 
 = = At war = = 
 = = = Diplomat = = = 
 Confederate President Jefferson Davis and Yancey met on February 18 , 1861 , as Davis was starting to put together the executive branch of the government . Yancey turned down a cabinet position , but indicated he would be interested in a diplomatic post . Don Doyle argues that Davis displayed " tone deafness " in appointing Yancey , who was " ignorant of the world " and himself realized that he was " wholly unsuited by experience and personality for diplomacy . " However , Davis feared that Yancey would be a political opponent , and wanted him out of the country . 
 On March 16 , Yancey was formally appointed as the head of the diplomatic mission to England and France . Ambrose Dudley Mann and Pierre Adolphe Rost were also part of the mission ; only Mann had any diplomatic experience . The delegation assembled in London at the end of April . Confederate Secretary of State Toombs ’ official instructions to Yancey were to convince Europe of the righteousness and legality of southern secession , the viability of the militarily strong Confederacy , the value of cotton and virtually duty @-@ free trade , and the South ’ s willingness to observe all treaty agreements in effect between Britain and the United States except for the portion of the Webster @-@ Ashburton Treaty requiring aid in combating the African slave trade . Above all , Yancey was to strive for diplomatic recognition . 
 Hubbard argues that President Davis could not have selected " three less qualified Southern leaders " . In contrast to Walther ’ s favorable characterizations of Yancey ’ s conduct , Hubbard stated that Yancey ’ s conduct in England was " consistently impulsive , arrogant , [ and ] unreasonably demanding " . Arriving in Britain just a few days ahead of the news about the attack on Fort Sumter , Yancey and his delegation met informally with British foreign secretary Lord John Russell on May 3 and May 9 . Yancey emphasized the points from his instructions and denied , upon being questioned by Russell , that there was any intent to reopen the slave trade . Russell was non @-@ committal , and on May 12 , Queen Victoria announced British neutrality combined with recognition that a state of belligerency existed . 
 After news arrived of the Confederate victory at Bull Run , Yancey attempted to arrange another meeting with Russell , but he was forced to present his arguments in writing . Doyle argues that Yancey blundered badly by extolling the benefits of slavery to the world in general and Britain in particular . In an August 24 response directed to the representatives " of the so @-@ styled Confederate States of America " , Russell merely reiterated the previous determination to remain neutral . Critics maintain that the Yancey mission failed to adequately exploit openings presented by Union Secretary of State William Seward ’ s antagonist attitude towards Great Britain or to address British concerns concerning the effect of the war on Great Britain . In late August , with little else to do , Yancey submitted his resignation but , due to the events of the Trent Affair , Yancey did not leave until his replacements , James M. Mason and John Slidell ( selected by President Davis in July before he was aware of Yancey ’ s intent ) , arrived in January 1862 . Yancey did make one further attempt to meet with Russell in the wake of the Trent affair , but Russell replied to the delegation that " we must decline to enter into any official communication with them . " 
 While Yancey was originally optimistic about his mission , his observations in conversations and in the British papers forced him to conclude that the slavery issue was the primary obstacle to formal diplomatic recognition . He told his brother : 
 Anti @-@ slavery sentiment is universal . Uncle Tom 's Cabin has been read and believed .... I ought never to have come here . This kind of thing does not suit me . I do not understand these people or their ways well enough . " 
 = = = Confederate Senate = = = 
 While still in England , Yancey was elected to the Confederate Senate . His return home , because of the Union blockade , found him landing at the Sabine Pass near the Texas and Louisiana border . On his way to Richmond , he stopped in New Orleans where he made a public speech lamenting the fact that Europe looked down on the Confederacy over the issue of slavery , stating , " We cannot look for any sympathy or help from abroad . We must rely on ourselves alone . " 
 From March 28 , 1862 until May 1 , 1863 , Yancey served in three sessions of the Confederate Congress . While there , he reluctantly supported the Confederate Conscription Act of April 16 , 1862 , but was instrumental in allowing many state exemptions to the draft as well as the unpopular exemption for one overseer for every twenty slaves , an exemption that applied to about 30 @,@ 000 men . He unsuccessfully argued against the excessive use of secret , unrecorded sessions of Congress and generally pursued a states ’ rights position in regard to the exercise of national war powers in general and impressment of supplies and slaves by the federal Confederate government in particular . On military matters , Yancey wanted details provided to Congress on reports of execution without trials of Confederate soldiers by General Braxton Bragg , questioned the reasons Virginia had twenty nine brigadier generals while Alabama only had four , authored a resolution condemning drunkenness within the army , and joined in demands that Davis account for complaints on the military administration of the Trans @-@ Mississippi District . 
 Yancey gradually ran afoul of President Davis on matters of policy , although he was not one of Davis ’ s most extreme critics . Their differences accelerated in a series of letters exchanged after May 1863 , and no final resolution was reached . In Congress , Yancey and Benjamin Hill of Georgia , who had previously clashed in 1856 , had their differences over a bill intended to create the Confederate Supreme Court erupt into physical violence . Hill hit Yancey in the head with a glass inkstand on the floor of the Senate , but in the ensuing investigation it was Yancey , not Hill , who was censured . 
 Yancey returned to Alabama in May 1863 , before Congress had adjourned . By the end of June , Yancey was extremely ill , but he still continued his correspondence with President Davis and others . Finally on July 27 , 1863 , two weeks before his forty ninth birthday , Yancey died of kidney disease . Yancey ’ s funeral on July 29 , 1863 , brought the city of Montgomery to a standstill , and he was buried at Oakwood cemetery on Goat Hill near the original Confederate Capitol . 
 = = <unk> = = 
 The William Lowndes Yancey Law Office in Montgomery , Alabama , was designated a National Historic Landmark of the United States in 1973 . Due to unauthorized interior renovations , it was later de @-@ designated , but it remains listed on the National Register of Historic Places . 
 = Cyclone Trina = 
 Tropical Cyclone Trina ( Fiji Meteorological Service designation : 01F , Joint Typhoon Warning Center designation : 06P ) was a weak but destructive tropical cyclone in late 2001 which caused some of the worst flooding in the South Pacific island of Mangaia , Cook Islands , in nearly 50 years . Forming out of an upper @-@ level low pressure system on November 29 near the island of Rarotonga , or roughly 1 @,@ 470 mi ( 2 @,@ 365 km ) southeast of Fiji , Trina remained practically stationary as it meandered in the same general area for over a week . Due to unfavorable conditions for tropical cyclogenesis , the storm struggled to develop significant convection , preventing it from intensifying beyond 65 km / h ( 40 mph ) . After finally succumbing to wind shear on December 2 , the system weakened to a tropical depression near Mangaia and dissipated several days later . 
 As a result of the cyclone 's slow movement , heavy rains impacted the same area for more than a week , resulting in severe flooding . Throughout Mangaia , nearly 90 % of the islands ' staple crop was lost and about 60 % of the livestock perished . Following an assessment of the damage , it was determined that US $ 52 @,@ 000 was needed to repair losses . Due to the severity of damage caused by Trina , its name was retired in May 2002 and replaced with Tino . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 Tropical Cyclone Trina was identified by the Regional Specialized Meteorological Center in Nadi , Fiji , the Fiji Meteorological Service ( FMS ) , on November 18 , 2001 as an upper @-@ level low west of Rarotonga , an island situated roughly 2 @,@ 355 km ( 1 @,@ 465 mi ) east @-@ southeast of Fiji . Little development took place over the following ten days as the low gradually made its way to the surface . Situated in a region of relatively low wind shear , the system acquired subtropical characteristics before deep convection formed around its center . Late on November 29 , the FMS upgraded the low to a tropical depression and assigned it the identifier 01F . However , the system later entered an area unfavorable to tropical cyclogenesis , consisting of increasing shear and marginally warm sea surface temperatures , estimated between 26 and 27 ° C ( 79 and 81 ° F ) . Drifting westward , convection managed to increase despite unfavorable conditions , as the low passed roughly 45 km ( 30 mi ) southwest of Rarotonga on November 30 . Later that day , the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) issued a Tropical Cyclone Formation Alert , stating a " good " chance of the system becoming a tropical cyclone within 48 hours . Although the center remained partially devoid of convective activity , the system was declared Tropical Depression 06P by the agency within hours of the alert . 
 Later on November 30 , the depression further intensified into a tropical cyclone and was given the name Trina by the FMS . At this time , gale @-@ force winds were only present in one quadrant of the storm . In previous years , gale @-@ force winds had to be present all around the center for the system to receive a name . Upon receiving its name , Trina attained its peak intensity with winds of 65 km / h ( 40 mph ) along with a barometric pressure of 995 mbar ( hPa ; 29 @.@ 38 inHg ) . Remaining nearly stationary , Trina succumbed to strong wind shear during the evening of November 30 . The JTWC only classified Trina as a tropical storm for 12 hours before downgrading the system and issuing their final advisory early on December 1 . However , according to the FMS , the system retained gale @-@ force winds through December 2 , by which time it was situated about 70 km ( 45 mi ) northwest of Mangaia . Now significantly displaced from any convective activity , the remnants of Trina persisted in the same general area for several more days before completely dissipating . 
 = = Impact and aftermath = = 
 Following Tropical Depression 01F 's upgrade to Tropical Cyclone Trina on November 30 , the Cook Islands were placed under a cyclone alert . Gale warnings were also put in place for the islands of Rarotonga and Mangaia for several days . Air New Zealand flights and many social events were canceled to ensure public safety . Due to the low intensity of the storm , the main threat was not wind damage , although gusts up to 100 km / h ( 65 mph ) were reported in Rarotonga . Owing to the slow movement of the storm , heavy rains associated with Trina fell on Mangaia for nearly eight days , resulting in widespread flooding . Parts of the island were inundated with up to 2 m ( 6 @.@ 6 ft ) of water , destroying nearly 95 % of the taro crop and drowning numerous livestock . Several of the islands ' main roads were washed out and a few reports of landslides were made . 
 The flooding on Mangaia was regarded as the worst in almost 50 years , as nearly the entire island was affected . According to locals , the ocean surrounding the island became red at one point due to the amount of soil being washed out to sea . Despite initial reports that the local water supply was contaminated , the International Federation of Red Cross And Red Crescent Societies ( IFRC ) stated that it was safe to drink and there was a sufficient amount for all of the islands ' 744 residents . Offshore , a sailboat was severely damaged by large swells produced by the storm and was on the verge of sinking . The sailor managed to secure the vessel and make it safely to shore . 
 The flooding on Mangaia persisted for nearly a week before finally subsiding . Once the waters receded , the full extent of damage was revealed . Although only minor structural damage was sustained , the agricultural sector received extensive losses . Nearly 90 % of the islands ' staple crop was lost and about 60 % of all the livestock perished . Following an assessment made by the Cook Islands National Disaster Management Council , it was determined that US $ 52 @,@ 000 was needed to repair losses from Trina . International assistance from the United Nations was eventually requested on December 12 , allowing for relief funds from several agencies to be delivered to the area . Fears of food shortages also prompted the local government to begin stockpiling food should it become a necessary relief supply . A total of US $ 24 @,@ 140 was committed in relief funds by New Zealand , Norway and the United Nations to assist the Cook Islands in recovering from the storm . By late @-@ December , an additional F $ 20 @,@ 000 ( US $ 11 @,@ 000 ) was distributed by the Pacific Islands Forum Secretariat to the affected islands . In the months following Cyclone Trina , debris removal and cleanup was relatively slow , delaying efforts to replant crops lost in the floods . Food shortage issues became apparent in February 2002 , prompting the IFRC to distribute food to all of Mangaia 's residents . 
 Due to the severity of damage caused by Trina , its name was retired in May 2002 and replaced with Tino . 
 = Kate Millett = 
 Katherine Murray " Kate " Millett ( born September 14 , 1934 ) is an American radical feminist writer , educator , artist , and activist . She attended Oxford University and was the first American woman to be awarded a postgraduate degree with first @-@ class honors by St. Hilda 's . She has been described as " a seminal influence on second @-@ wave feminism " , and is best known for her 1970 book Sexual Politics , which was her doctoral dissertation at Columbia University . Journalist Liza Featherstone attributes previously unimaginable " legal abortion , greater professional equality between the sexes , and a sexual freedom " being made possible partially due to Millett 's efforts . 
 The feminist , human rights , peace , civil rights , and anti @-@ psychiatry movements have been some of Millett 's key causes . Her books were motivated by her activism , such as woman 's rights and mental health reform , and several were autobiographical memoirs that explored her sexuality , mental health , and relationships . Mother Millett and The Loony Bin Trip , for instance , dealt with family issues and the times when she was involuntarily committed to a nursing home . Besides appearing in a number of documentaries , she produced Three Lives . In the 1960s and 1970s , Millett taught at Waseda University , Bryn Mawr College , Barnard College , and University of California , Berkeley . 
 Millett was raised in Minnesota and has spent most of her adult life in Manhattan and the Woman 's Art Colony , which became the Millett Center for the Arts in 2012 that she established in Poughkeepsie , New York . Self @-@ identified as bisexual , Millett was married to sculptor Fumio Yoshimura from 1965 to 1985 and had relationships with women , one of whom was the inspiration for her book Sita . She has continued to work as an activist , writer , and artist . Some of her later written works are The Politics of Cruelty ( 1994 ) , about state @-@ sanctioned torture in many countries , and a book about the relationship with her mother in Mother Millett ( 2001 ) . Between 2011 and 2013 , she has won the Lambda Pioneer Award for Literature , received Yoko Ono 's Courage Award for the Arts , and was inducted into the National Women 's Hall of Fame . 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 Katherine Murray Millett was born on September 14 , 1934 to James Albert and Helen Feely Millett in Saint Paul , Minnesota . According to Millett , she was afraid of her father , an engineer , who beat her . He was an alcoholic who abandoned the family when she was 14 , " consigning them to a life of genteel poverty . " Her mother was a teacher and insurance saleswoman . She has two sisters , Sally and Mallory ; the latter was one of the subjects of Three Lives . Of Irish Catholic heritage , Kate Millett attended parochial schools in Saint Paul throughout her childhood . 
 Millett graduated in 1956 magna cum laude from University of Minnesota with a BA degree in English literature ; she was a member of the Kappa Alpha Theta sorority . A wealthy aunt paid for her education at St Hilda 's College , Oxford , where she majored in English literature and obtained a first @-@ class degree , with honors , in 1958 . She was the first American woman to be awarded a postgraduate degree with first @-@ class honors by St. Hilda 's . After spending about 10 years as an educator and artist , Millett entered the graduate school program for English and comparative literature at Columbia University in 1968 , during which she taught English at Barnard . While there , she championed student rights , women 's liberation , and abortion reform . She completed her dissertation in September 1969 and was awarded her doctorate , with distinction , in March 1970 . 
 = = Career and activism = = 
 = = = Early career as an artist and educator = = = 
 Millett taught English at the University of North Carolina after graduating from St. Hilda 's , but she left mid @-@ semester to study art . In New York City she worked as a kindergarten teacher and learned to sculpt and paint from 1959 to 1961 . She then moved to Japan and studied sculpture . Millett met fellow sculptor Fumio Yoshimura , had her first one @-@ woman show at Tokyo 's Minami Gallery , and taught English at Waseda University . She left Japan in 1963 and moved to New York 's Lower East Side . 
 Millett taught English and exhibited her works of art at Barnard College beginning in 1964 . She was among a group of young , radical and untenured educators who wanted to modernize women 's education ; Millett wanted to provide them with " the critical tools necessary to understand their position in a patriarchal society . " Her viewpoints on radical politics , her " stinging attack " against Barnard in Token Learning , and a budget cut at the college led to her being dismissed on December 23 , 1968 . Her artwork was featured in an exhibit at Greenwich Village 's Judson Gallery . During these years Millett became interested in the peace and Civil Rights Movements , joined the Congress of Racial Equality ( CORE ) , and participated in their protests . 
 In 1971 Millett taught sociology at Bryn Mawr College . She started buying and restoring property that year , near Poughkeepsie , New York ; this became the Women 's Art Colony and Tree Farm , a community of women artists and writers and Christmas tree farm . Two years later she was an educator at the University of California , Berkeley . 
 = = = Feminism and sexuality = = = 
 Millett is acknowledged as a leader of the modern women 's movement , or second @-@ wave feminism , of the 1960s and 1970s . She is known for her book Sexual Politics , considered the movement 's manifesto . 
 = = = = Feminism = = = = 
 In 1966 , Millett became a committee member of National Organization for Women and subsequently joined the New York Radical Women , <unk> , and Downtown Radical Women organizations . 
 She contributed the piece " Sexual politics ( in literature ) " to the 1970 anthology Sisterhood is Powerful : An Anthology of Writings From The Women 's Liberation Movement , edited by Robin Morgan . 
 She became a spokesperson for the feminism movement following the success of the book Sexual Politics , but struggled with conflicting perceptions of her as arrogant and elitist , and the expectations of others to speak for them , which she covered in her 1974 book , Flying . 
 Biographer Gayle Graham Yates said that " Millett articulated a theory of patriarchy and conceptualized the gender and sexual oppression of women in terms that demanded a sex role revolution with radical changes of personal and family lifestyles " . Betty Friedan 's focus , by comparison , was to improve leadership opportunities socially and politically and economic independence for women . 
 Millett wrote several books of women 's lives from a feminist perspective . For instance , in the book The Basement : Meditations on a Human Sacrifice ( 1980 ) , completed over four years , she chronicled the torture and murder of Indianapolis teenager Sylvia <unk> by Gertrude <unk> in 1965 that had preoccupied her for 14 years . With a feminist perspective , she explored the story of the defenseless girl and the dynamics of the individuals involved in her sexual , physical and emotional abuse . Biographer Roberta M. Hooks wrote , " Quite apart from any feminist polemics , The Basement can stand alone as an intensely felt and movingly written study of the problems of cruelty and submission . " Millett said of the motivation of the perpetrator : " It is the story of the suppression of women . Gertrude seems to have wanted to administer some terrible truthful justice to this girl : that this was what it was to be a woman " . 
 Millett and Sophie Keir , a Canadian journalist , traveled to Tehran , Iran in 1979 for the Committee for Artistic and Intellectual Freedom to work for Iranian women 's rights . Their trip followed actions taken by Ayatollah <unk> 's government to prevent girls from attending schools with boys , to require working women to wear veils , and not to allow women to divorce their husbands . Thousands of women attended a protest rally held at Tehran University on International Women 's Day , March 8 . About 20 @,@ 000 women attended a march through the city 's Freedom Square ; many of whom were stabbed , beaten , or threatened with acid . Millett and Keir , who had attended the rallies and demonstrations , were removed from their hotel room and taken to a locked room in immigration headquarters two weeks after they arrived in Iran . They were threatened that they might be put in jail and , knowing that homosexuals were executed in Iran , Millett also feared she might be killed when she overheard officials discuss her lesbianism . After an overnight stay , the women were put on a plane that landed in Paris . Although Millett was relieved to have arrived safely in France , she was worried about the fate of Iranian women left behind , " They can 't get on a plane . That 's why international sisterhood is so important . " She wrote about the experience in Going to Iran . 
 = = = = Sexual Politics = = = = 
 Sexual Politics originated as Millett 's PhD dissertation and was published in 1970 , the same year that she was awarded her doctorate from Columbia University . The bestselling book , a critique of patriarchy in Western society and literature , addressed the sexism and <unk> of the modern novelists D. H. Lawrence , Henry Miller , and Norman Mailer and contrasted their perspectives with the dissenting viewpoint of the homosexual author Jean Genet . Millett questioned the origins of patriarchy , argued that sex @-@ based oppression was both political and cultural , and posited that undoing the traditional family was the key to true sexual revolution . In its first year on the market , the book sold 80 @,@ 000 copies and went through seven printings . 
 Considered a symbol of the women 's liberation movement , Millett was featured in a Time cover story , " The Politics of Sex " , which called Sexual Politics a " remarkable book " that provided a coherent theory about the feminist movement . Alice Neel created the depiction of Millett for the August 31 , 1970 cover . 
 According to biographer Peter Manso , The Prisoner of Sex was written by Norman Mailer in response to Millett 's Sexual Politics . " The Prisoner of Sex is structured as a contest . His rhetoric against her prose , his charm against her earnestness , his polemic rage against her vitriolic charges . The aim is to convert the larger audience , the stronger presence as the sustaining truth . The Prisoner of Sex combines self parody and satire ... " , said Andrew Wilson , author of Norman Mailer : An American Aesthetic . 
 = = = = Sexism and sexuality = = = = 
 While speaking about sexual liberation at Columbia University , a woman in the audience asked Millett , " Why don 't you say you 're a lesbian , here , openly . You 've said you were a lesbian in the past . " Millett hesitantly responded , " Yes , I am a lesbian " . A couple of weeks later , Time 's December 8 , 1970 article " Women 's Lib : A Second Look " reported that Millett admitted she was bisexual , which it said would likely discredit her as a spokesperson for the feminist movement because it " reinforce [ d ] the views of those skeptics who routinely dismiss all <unk> as lesbians . " In response , two days later a press conference was organized by feminists Ivy <unk> and Barbara Love in Greenwich Village in which they spoke of their " solidarity with the struggle of homosexuals to attain their liberation in a sexist society " to Kate Millett and other attendees . 
 Millett 's 1971 film Three Lives is a 16mm documentary made by an all @-@ woman crew , including co @-@ director Susan <unk> , <unk> Lenore Bode , and editor Robin Mide , under the name Women 's Liberation Cinema . The 70 @-@ minute film focuses on three women — Mallory Millett @-@ Jones , the director 's sister ; Lillian Shreve , a chemist ; and Robin Mide , an artist — reminiscing about their lives . Vincent Canby , The New York Times ' art critic , wrote : " Three Lives is a good , simple movie in that it can 't be bothered to call attention to itself , only to its three subjects , and to how they grew in the same male @-@ dominated society that Miss Millett , in her Sexual Politics , so systematically tore apart , shook up , ridiculed and undermined — while , apparently , tickling it pink . " It received " generally excellent reviews " following its premiere at a New York City theater . 
 In 1974 and 1977 , respectively , Millett published two autobiographical books . Flying ( 1974 ) , a " stream @-@ of @-@ consciousness memoir about her bisexuality " , explored her life after the success of Sexual Politics in what was described in The New York Times Book Review as an example of " dazzling exhibitionism " . Millett captured life as she thought , experienced and lived it , in a style like a documentary film . Sita ( 1977 ) explores her sexuality , particularly her lesbian lover who committed suicide and the effect on Millett 's personal and private life . 
 In an interview with Mark Blasius , Millett was sympathetic to the concept of intergenerational sex and expressed pro @-@ pedophile comments , describing age of consent laws as " very oppressive " to gay male youth in particular . Millett added that " one of children 's essential rights is to express themselves sexually , probably primarily with each other but with adults as well " and that " the sexual freedom of children is an important part of a sexual revolution ... if you don 't change the social condition of children you still have an inescapable inequality " . However , Millet criticised those who wished to abolish age of consent laws , saying the issue was not focused on children 's rights but " being approached as the right of men to have sex with kids below the age of consent and no mention is made of relationships between women and girls " . 
 = = = The 1980s through 2000s = = = 
 In 1980 , Millett was one of the ten invited artists whose work was exhibited in the Great American Lesbian Art Show at the Woman 's Building in Los Angeles . Millett was a contributor to On the Issues magazine , and continued writing into the early 2000s . She discussed state @-@ sanctioned torture in The Politics of Cruelty ( 1994 ) , bringing attention to the use of torture in many countries . 
 Millett has also been involved in prison reform and campaigns against torture . Journalist Maureen Freely wrote of Millett 's viewpoint regarding activism in her later years : " The best thing about being a <unk> is that she can say what she pleases because ' nobody 's giving me a chair in anything . I 'm too old , mean and ornery . Everything depends on how well you argue . ' " 
 = = = Mother Millett = = = 
 Kate wrote Mother Millett ( 2001 ) about her mother who in her later years developed several serious health problems , including a brain tumor and <unk> . Made aware of her mother 's declining health , Millett visited her mother in Minnesota ; their visits included conversations about their relationship and outings to baseball games , museums , and restaurants . When her mother was no longer able to care for herself in her apartment , she was placed in a nursing home in St. Paul , Minnesota , which was one of Helen Millett 's greatest fears . Kate visited her mother and was disturbed by the care she received and her mother 's demoralized attitude . Nursing home residents who were labeled as " behavioral problems " , as Helen was , were subject to forcible restraint . Helen said to Kate , " Now that you 're here , we can leave . " 
 Aware of the efforts her mother made to give her life , support her and raise her , Millett became a care @-@ giver and coordinator of many daily therapies , and pushed her mother to be active . She wanted to give her " independence and dignity " . In the article " Her Mother , Herself " , Pat Swift wrote : " Helen Millett might have been content to go " gently into that good night " — she was after all more afraid of the nursing home than dying — but daughter Kate was having none of that . Feminist warrior , human rights activists , gay <unk> , writer and artist , Kate Millett has not gone gently through life and never hesitates to rage at anyone — friend or foe , family or the system — to right a perceived wrong . When the dignity and quality of her ailing mother 's life was at stake , this book 's unfolding tale became inevitable . " Even though Helen played a role in having her daughter committed to the University of Minnesota 's Mayo wing , Kate had her mother removed from the nursing home and returned to her apartment , where attendants managed her care . During this period , Millett could also " bully " her mother for her lack of cultural sophistication and the amount of television she watched and could be harsh with caregivers . 
 = = = Millett Center for the Arts = = = 
 In 2012 , The Women 's Art Colony became a <unk> non @-@ profit organization and changed its name to the Millett Center for the Arts . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 = = = Interpersonal relationships = = = 
 Millett was not the " polite , middle @-@ class girl " that many parents of her generation and social circle desired : she could be difficult , brutally honest , and tenacious . Liza Featherstone , author of " <unk> Is Powerful " , says that these qualities helped to make her " one of the most influential radical feminists of the 1970s " . They could also make for difficult interpersonal relationships . Millett wrote several autobiographical memoirs , with what Featherstone calls " brutal honesty " , about herself , her husband , lovers , and family . Her relationship with her mother was strained by her radical politics , domineering personality , and unconventional lifestyle . Helen was particularly upset about examination of her lesbianism in her books . Family relationships were further strained after she was involuntarily committed to psychiatric wards and again when she wrote The Loony Bin Trip . 
 Millett focused on her mother in Mother Millett , a book about how she was made aware by her sister Sally of the seriousness of Helen Millett 's declining health and poor nursing home care . Kate removed her mother from the home and returned her to an apartment , where caregivers managed her health and comfort . In the book , " Millett writes about the situation — her mother 's distance and imperiousness , her family 's failure to recognize the humanity of the old and the insane — with brutal honesty . Yet she also describes moments of forgiveness , humility and admiration . " During this time , she developed a close relationship , previously inconceivable , with her mother , which she considered " a miracle and a grace , a gift . " Her relationships with her sisters were troubled during this time , but they all came to support their mother 's apartment @-@ living . The suggestion of her role as the heroine in Mother Millett , however , may have been " at the expense of her two siblings " . 
 = = = Marriage = = = 
 In 1961 , Millett moved to Japan and met fellow sculptor Fumio Yoshimura , the widower of a woman named Yoshiko . A Japanese native , Yoshimura studied painting at Tokyo University of the Arts . In 1963 Yoshimura and Millett left Japan and moved to New York 's Lower East Side in the Bowery district . In 1965 the two married and during their marriage Millett said that they were " friends and lovers " . She dedicated her book Sexual Politics to him . During their marriage , author Estelle C. Jelinek says that he " loves her , leads his own creative life , and accepts her woman lovers " . In 1985 , the couple divorced . 
 = = = Mental health = = = 
 Mental illness has affected Millett 's personal and professional life since 1973 , when she lived with her husband in California and was an activist and teacher at the University of California , Berkeley . Yoshimura and Sally , Kate 's eldest sister , became concerned about Kate 's mental stability . Her family claimed that she went for as many as five consecutive nights without sleep and could talk nonsensically for hours . During a screening of one of her films at University of California , Berkeley , Millett " began talking incoherently " . According to her sister , Mallory Millett @-@ <unk> , " There were pained looks of confusion in the audience , then people whispered and slowly got up to leave . " Sally , who was a law student in Nebraska , signed papers to have her younger sister involuntarily committed . Millett was forcefully taken and held in mental hospitals for ten days . She signed herself out using a release form intended for voluntary admissions . During a visit to St. Paul , Minnesota , a couple of weeks later , her mother asked Kate to visit a psychiatrist and , based upon the psychiatrist 's suggestion , signed commitment papers for Kate . She was released within three days , having won a sanity trial , due to the efforts of her friends and pro bono attorney . 
 Following the two involuntary confinements , Millett became depressed , particularly disturbed about having been confined without due process . While in the mental hospitals , she was given " mind @-@ altering " drugs or restrained , depending upon whether she cooperated or not . She was stigmatized for having been committed and diagnosed with manic depression ( now commonly called bipolar disorder ) . The diagnosis affected how she was perceived by others and her ability to attain employment . In California doctors had recommended that she take lithium to manage wide manic and depression swings . Her depression became more severe when her housing in the Bowery was condemned and Yoshimura threatened divorce . To manage the depression , Millett again began taking lithium . 
 In 1980 , with support of two friends and photojournalist Sophie Keir , Millett stopped taking lithium to improve her mental clarity , relieve diarrhea and hand tremors , and better uphold her philosophies about mental health and treatment . She began to feel alienated and was " <unk> " as Keir watched for behavioral changes . Her behavior was that of a bipolar high , including " mile @-@ a @-@ minute " speech , which turned her peaceful art colony to " a quarrelsome dystopia . " Mallory Millett , having talked to Keir , tried to get her committed but was unsuccessful due to New York 's laws concerning involuntary commitments . 
 Millett visited Ireland in the fall of 1980 as an activist . Upon her intended return to the United States , there was a delay at the airport and she extended her stay in Ireland . She was involuntarily committed in Ireland after airport security determined from someone in New York that she had a mental illness and had stopped taking lithium . While confined , she was heavily drugged . To combat the aggressive pharmaceutical program of " the worst bin of all " , she counteracted the effects of Thorazine and lithium by eating a lot of oranges or hid the pills in her mouth for later disposal . She said of the times when she was committed , " To remain sane in a bin is to defy its definition , " she said . 
 [ Millett ] describes with loathing the days of television @-@ induced boredom , nights of drug @-@ induced terror , people deprived of a sense of time , of personal dignity , even of hope . What crime justifies being locked up like this , Millett asks . How can one not be crazy in such a place ? 
 After several days , she was found by her friend Margaretta D 'Arcy . With the assistance of an Irish parliament member and a therapist @-@ psychiatrist from Dublin , Millett was declared competent and released within several weeks . She returned to the United States , became severely depressed , and began taking lithium again . In 1986 , Millett stopped taking lithium without adverse reactions . After one lithium @-@ free year , Millett announced the news to stunned family and friends . 
 Millett 's depression caused her to attempt suicide several times . She has said that she thought that the depression was due to grief and feeling broken . She said , " When you have been told that your mind is unsound , there is a kind of despair that takes over ... " In The Loony Bin Trip , Millett wrote that she dreaded her depressed periods : 
 At one point , listening to others talk about her " freaking out , " Millett muses , " How little weight my own perceptions seem to have , " and goes on : " Depression is the victim 's dread , not mania . For we could enjoy mania if we were permitted by the others around us ... A manic person permitted to think ten thousand miles a minute is happy and harmless and could , if encouraged and given time , perhaps be productive as well . Ah , but depression – that is what we all hate . We the afflicted . Whereas the relatives and shrinks ... they rather welcome it : You are quiet and you suffer . 
 = = = = Views on mental illness = = = = 
 Millett disputes diagnoses and labels like manic depression ( bipolar disorder ) and schizophrenia , which she claims are placed upon people who exhibit socially unacceptable behavior . " Many healthy people , she said , are ' driven to mental illness ' by society 's disapproval and by the ' authoritarian institution of psychiatry . ' She attributed her own depression to her diagnosis , and not the other way around , writing , " When you have been told that your mind is unsound , there is a kind of despair that takes over " . Millett documented her experiences in the book The Loony Bin Trip ( 1990 ) . 
 Feminist author and historian Marilyn <unk> wrote that " Millett refuses the labels that would declare her insane " , continuing " she conveys the paranoid terror of being judged cruelly by others for what seems to the afflicted person to be a reasonable act . " 
 = = = = Activism = = = = 
 Angered by institutional psychiatric practices and lenient involuntary commitment processes , Millett became an activist . With her lawyer , she changed the State of Minnesota 's commitment law so that a trial is required before a person is involuntarily committed . 
 Millett has been active in the anti @-@ psychiatry movement . As a representative of <unk> International , she spoke out against psychiatric torture at the United Nations during the negotiations of the text of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities ( 2005 ) . 
 = = = Bowery redevelopment = = = 
 In the late 1990s and early 2000s , Millett was involved in a dispute with the New York City authorities , who wanted to evict her from her home at 295 Bowery as part of a massive redevelopment plan . Millett and other tenants held out , but ultimately lost their battle . Their building was demolished , and the residents were relocated . 
 = = Scholarship = = 
 Kristan Poirot , author of Mediating a Movement , Authorizing Discourse , says that the release of Millett 's Sexual Politics ( 1970 ) was a pivotal event in the second wave of the feminist movement . Although there were other important moments in the movement , like the founding of the National Organization for Women and release of The Feminine Mystique by Betty Friedan , it was in 1970 that the media gave greater attention to the feminist movement , first with a front page article in The New York Times and coverage on the three network 's news programs about the Women 's Strike for Equality event that summer . Millett used psychology , anthropology , the sexual revolution , and literary criticism to explain her theory of sexual politics , which is that western societies have been driven by a belief that men are superior to women . According to Poirot , the book , which received widespread media coverage , " was considered to be the first book @-@ length exposition of second wave radical feminist theory . " Published accounts of Millett 's lesbianism played a part in the fracture in the feminist movement over lesbians ' role within the movement and reduced her effectiveness as a women 's rights activist . 
 Millett wrote her autobiographical books Flying ( 1974 ) and Sita ( 1977 ) about coming out as gay , partly an important consciousness @-@ raising activity . She realized beginning an open dialogue is important to break down the isolation and alienation that hiding in privacy can cause . She wrote in Flying what Alice Henry calls in her off our backs review of Sita an " excruciating public and political ' coming out ' " and its effect on her personal , political , and artistic lives . While she discussed some of her love affairs in Flying , in Sita she provides insight into a lesbian love affair and her fears of being alone or inadequate . Henry writes , " Kate 's transparent vulnerability and attempts to get to the root of herself and grasp her lover are typical of many women who love women . " 
 Millett recorded her visit to Iran and the demonstrations by Iranian feminists against the fundamentalist shift in Iran politics under Khomeini 's government . Her book Going to Iran ( 1979 ) is " a rare and therefore valuable eyewitness account of a series of important developments in the history of Iranian women " , albeit told from the perspective of a feminist from the western world . 
 Scholar Camille Paglia has described Millett 's scholarship as deeply flawed , declaring that " American feminism 's nose dive began " when Millett achieved prominence . According to Paglia , Millett 's Sexual Politics " reduced complex artworks to their political content and attacked famous male artists and authors for their alleged sexism , " thereby sending serious academic literary appreciation and criticism into eclipse . 
 = = Awards and honors = = 
 Millett won the Best Books Award for Mother Millett from Library Journal in 2001 . In 2012 , she was awarded one of that year 's Courage Award for the Arts by Yoko Ono , which Ono created to " recognize artists , musicians , collectors , curators , writers — those who sought the truth in their work and had the courage to stick to it , no matter what " and " honor their work as an expression of my vision of courage " . Between 2011 and 2012 , she was also awarded the Lambda Pioneer Award for Literature and a $ 25 @,@ 000 visual arts grant from the Foundation for Contemporary Arts . She was honored in the summer of 2011 at a Veteran Feminists of America gala ; attendees included feminists such as Susan Brownmiller and Gloria Steinem . 
 In March 2013 , the U.S. National Women 's Hall of Fame announced that Millett was to be among the institution 's 2013 inductees . Beverly P. Ryder , board of directors co @-@ president , said that Millett was a " real pillar of the women 's movement " . The induction ceremony took place on October 24 , 2013 , at the National Women 's Hall of Fame headquarters in Seneca Falls , New York . 
 = = Works = = 
 = = = Exhibitions = = = 
 Some of her exhibitions and installations are : 
 1963 – Minami Gallery , Tokyo 
 1967 – Group exhibition , 12 Evenings of Manipulation , Judson Gallery , New York City 
 1968 – Situations , Brooklyn Community College , New York 
 1970 – The American Dream Goes to Pot , The People 's Flag Show , Phoenix Art Museum ; Judson Memorial Church , New York 
 1972 – Terminal Piece , Women 's <unk> Center , New York 
 1973 – Small Mysteries , <unk> Theatre Festival , New York 
 1977 – Naked Ladies , Los Angeles Women 's Building , California 
 1977 – Solo exhibition , Andre Wauters Gallery , New York 
 1977 – The Lesbian Body , Chuck Levitan Gallery , New York 
 1978 – The Trial of Sylvia <unk> , <unk> Gallery , New York 
 1979 – Elegy for Sita , <unk> Gallery , New York 
 1979 – Women 's Caucus for Art 
 1980 – Group exhibition , Great American Lesbian Art Show , Los Angeles 
 1980 – Solo exhibition , Lesbian Erotica , Galerie de Ville , New Orleans ; Second Floor Salon 
 1981 – Solo exhibition , Lesbian Erotica , Galerie des Femmes , Paris 
 1986 – Group exhibition , Feminists and <unk> , Center on Contemporary Art , Seattle 
 1988 – Fluxus , Museum of Modern Art , New York 
 1991 – 1994 – Courtland Jessup Gallery , Provincetown , Massachusetts 
 1992 – Group exhibition , Body Politic , La MaMa La Galleria 
 1991 – Solo exhibition , Freedom from Captivity , Courtland Jessup Gallery , Provincetown , Massachusetts 
 1997 – Kate Millett , Sculptor : The First 38 Years , Fine Arts Gallery , University of Maryland , Catonsville 
 2009 – Black Madonna , multimedia show of 41 artists , HP Garcia Gallery , New York 
 = = = Books = = = 
 Author 
 Millett , Kate ( 1970 ) . Sexual Politics . Garden City , New York : Doubleday . OCLC <unk> . 
 Millett , Kate ( 1971 ) . The Prostitution papers : A Candid Dialogue . Falmouth : Paladin . OCLC <unk> . 
 Millett , Kate ( 1974 ) . Flying . New York : Alfred A. Knopf , . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 394 @-@ <unk> @-@ 8 . 
 Millett , Kate ( 1976 ) . Sita . London : Virago . 
 Millett , Kate ( 1979 ) . The Basement : Meditations on a Human Sacrifice . New York : Simon & Schuster . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 671 @-@ <unk> @-@ 8 . 
 Millett , Kate ( 1981 ) . Going to Iran . New York : Coward , McCann & Geoghegan . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 698 @-@ <unk> @-@ 3 . 
 Millett , Kate ( 1990 ) . The Loony @-@ Bin Trip . New York : Simon & Schuster . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 671 @-@ <unk> @-@ 3 . 
 Millett , Kate ( 1993 ) . The Politics of Cruelty : An Essay on the Literature of Political Imprisonment . New York , London : Norton . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 393 @-@ <unk> @-@ 9 . 
 Millett , Kate ( 1995 ) . AD , a Memoir . W.W. Norton . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 393 @-@ <unk> @-@ 7 . 
 Millett , Kate ( 2001 ) . Mother Millett . London : Verso . ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ 85984 @-@ 607 @-@ 0 . 
 Co @-@ author 
 Millett , Kate ; O 'Dell , Kathy ; Berger , Maurice ( 1997 ) . Kate Millett , Sculptor : The First 38 Years . Catonsville , Maryland : Fine Arts Gallery . ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 9 @-@ 4 . 
 = = = Articles or book chapters = = = 
 Millett , Kate ( Summer 1998 ) . " Out of the Loop " . On The Issues Magazine . 
 Millett , Kate ( 2005 ) , " Theory of Sexual Politics " , in Cudd , Ann E. ; Andreasen , Robin O. , Feminist theory : a philosophical anthology , Oxford , UK ; Malden , Massachusetts : Blackwell Publishing , pp. 37 – 59 , ISBN 1 @-@ 4051 @-@ 1661 @-@ 7 
 Millett , Kate ( 2007 ) , " The Illusion of Mental Illness " , in Stastny , Peter ; Lehmann , Peter , Alternatives beyond psychiatry , Berlin Eugene , Oregon : Peter Lehmann Publishing , pp. 29 – 38 , ISBN <unk> . 
 = = = Film = = = 
 Three Lives ( documentary ) . Women 's Liberation Cinema Company . 1971 . Producer 
 Not a Love Story : A Film About Pornography ( documentary ) . National Film Board of Canada ( NFB ) . 1981 . Herself , writer , artist 
 <unk> : Daughters of de Beauvoir ( 1 episode ) ( biography ) . British Broadcasting Corporation ( BBC ) , Union Pictures Productions . 1989 . Herself 
 Playboy : The Story of X ' ( documentary ) . Calliope Films , Playboy Entertainment Group . 1998 . Herself 
 The Real Yoko Ono ( television ) . 2001 . Herself 
 Des fleurs pour Simone de Beauvoir ( documentary short ) ( in French ) . France . 2007 . Herself 
 = Uru : Ages Beyond Myst = 
 Uru : Ages Beyond Myst is an adventure video game developed by Cyan Worlds and published by Ubisoft . Released in 2003 , the title is the fourth game in the Myst canon . Departing from previous games of the franchise , Uru takes place in the modern era and allows players to customize their onscreen avatars . Players use their avatars to explore the abandoned city of an ancient race known as the D 'ni , uncover story clues and solve puzzles . 
 Cyan began developing Uru shortly after completing Riven in 1997 , leaving future Myst sequels to be produced by third @-@ party developers . Uru required five years and $ 12 million to complete . Uru was initially conceived as a multiplayer game ; the single @-@ player portion was released , but the multiplayer component , Uru Live , was delayed and eventually canceled . The online video game service GameTap released the multiplayer portion of Uru as Myst Online : Uru Live in February 2007 , but the service was canceled again the following year due to a lack of subscribers . GameTap passed the rights to Uru Live back to Cyan , who re @-@ launched the game for free in 2010 . 
 Uru was not as well received as previous Myst titles . Critics admired the visuals and new features of the game but criticized the lack of multiplayer in the retail version and clunky controls . Compared to previous games in the series , which had sold millions of units , Uru 's sales were considered disappointing . The game was a critical and commercial disappointment for Cyan , causing the company financial troubles ; nevertheless , it has attracted a cult following . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Uru : Ages Beyond Myst is a puzzle @-@ adventure game that takes place on worlds known as Ages . Gameplay can be viewed from first- and third @-@ person perspectives , a departure from other Myst titles . Players navigate Ages from the third @-@ person perspective , but can switch to the first @-@ person view for closer inspection of clues and objects . Players in Uru can neither pick up objects nor carry an inventory of items ; puzzle items must be pushed or kicked into place . The onscreen interface is minimal , having no health meters , maps , or compasses to distract from exploration . 
 Players create their own avatars when beginning the game . Different skin tones , facial features , clothing , and hairstyles are available for customizing these player representations . Players also receive a special linking book , a volume that serves as a portal to a personal world or Age , known as Relto . The main objective of the game is to explore and restore power to other Ages ; players must also find seven " journey cloths " . These cloths serve as save points in lieu of a game @-@ saving option ; characters are transported to the last cloth they touched when they restart . As in previous Myst games , player characters cannot die . For example , falling off a cliff sends characters back to Relto . The personal Age serves as a hub in Uru , containing a bookshelf with linking books to Ages players have explored , as well as avatar customization options and game information . 
 During the course of the game , players uncover clues about the D 'ni , an ancient civilization , and the archeological group dedicated to learning more about them , the D 'ni Restoration Council . Aspects of the D 'ni civilization such as social structure , marriage , and how Ages came about are also imparted as players progress through the Ages . Players may collect Relto pages , which offer cosmetic customization to the player 's personal Age — for example , making it rain or adding a waterfall . 
 Uru was originally to ship with a massively multiplayer online component , which was delayed and never integrated into the retail release . Initially branded Uru Live , the multiplayer portion was designed to allow two or more players to work together to overcome obstacles or complete puzzles . Players would be able to chat in real time and cooperate in specially @-@ designed puzzles . In previews of the multiplayer component , there were three distinct types of Ages . The personal Age provided links to other Ages , which were unlocked by solving puzzles in prerequisite worlds . Neighborhood Ages were analogous to an invite @-@ only party , and City Ages provided places for players to congregate ; IGN called the Age " a giant lounge " . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Uru takes place many years after the events of Myst IV : Revelation . Unlike previous games in the series , Uru 's story mixes fictional plot elements with real @-@ world events . According to the game 's fictional history , archeologists found an entrance to a vast underground cavern in the 1980s near a volcano in New Mexico . The caves led to an ancient abandoned city built by the enigmatic D 'ni civilization . The D 'ni practiced an ancient ability known as the Art . By writing a description of another world , the D 'ni created " linking books " which served as portals to the worlds described , known as Ages . Soon after making contact with a single human , the entire civilization suddenly disappeared two hundred years ago . In Uru 's story , the video game Myst was created when the archeological leaders approached a development studio , Cyan , and asked them to create a game to educate the public about the D 'ni . Myst sold millions of copies , and Cyan continued to produce games based on D 'ni findings . In the present day , a group known as the D 'ni Restoration Council or DRC reopens the passages to the D 'ni caverns and begins to rebuild the abandoned cities . 
 Players begin Uru 's story in New Mexico near the Cleft , a deep fissure in the ground near the entrance to the D 'ni caverns . A man who introduces himself as <unk> sits in front of his trailer by the Cleft , encouraging the player to discover the environment and join the exploration . The player stumbles across a hologram of a woman , Yeesha , who tells the story of the D 'ni and requests help to rebuild the civilization . 
 = = Development = = 
 Cyan Worlds began development on its next project after the company finished 1997 's Riven , the sequel to the bestselling Myst . The game that became Uru would take more than five years and $ 12 million to complete . While under development , Uru was codenamed DIRT ( " D 'ni in real time " ) , then <unk> ( for " Multi @-@ User DIRT , Persistent / Personal Interactive Entertainment / Experience / Exploration / Environment " ) . Uru was officially announced as Myst Online , before being renamed Uru in early 2003 . Myst co @-@ creator Rand Miller released a statement along with an outline of the game : 
 Uru is a revolutionary adventure game that takes the best qualities of the Myst franchise and makes them even better . The single @-@ player experience will eclipse the beauty , grandeur , and mind @-@ challenging elements of previous titles . Plus , with the option to join a constantly updated online universe , the adventure never has to end . From new machines and puzzles to special events and entirely new Ages , players will find more to do , more to see , and more to explore each time they return — and this time , they can discover everything with old and new friends . 
 Miller considered Uru a major departure from Myst and Riven in that Cyan wanted to create a persistent world , where actions occurred while the player was not online . Miller did not consider the game a true massively multiplayer online game , saying " there is not leveling and skills and monsters and experience in any artificial sense . The ' leveling ' is finding and exploring and owning new Ages that are released regularly ; the experience is what you really learn while exploring that will help you later — not points on a scale . " Miller considered there to be two benefits to such a system : firstly that players would care more about being part of the story , and secondly that even new players could make discoveries and be part of the community . The game was designed as more of a spin @-@ off than a sequel to previous Myst games , due to the merging of items from the contemporary ( traffic cones and T @-@ shirts ) to the fantastic ( books that transport the user to new worlds ) . 
 The game was originally conceived as a multiplayer @-@ only game , where players could meet and solve new puzzles that would be added monthly . At the request of publisher Ubisoft , Cyan eventually developed a single @-@ player portion as well . Cyan announced players would be invited to participate in a multiplayer beta test , which drew 10 @,@ 000 to 40 @,@ 000 participants . Uru was released in November 2003 , while the multiplayer portion was delayed . Small groups of players were allowed to come online to test the multiplayer part of the game , and journalists were told they would be invited to play soon after , but Uru Live was canceled before being released . Cyan stated that there were not enough projected subscribers to support the service . 
 = = = Expansion packs and Uru : The Complete Chronicles = = = 
 After Uru 's release and Uru Live 's demise , Cyan announced that new content would be added via expansion packs . The first , Uru : To D 'ni , added the never @-@ released Uru Live online content , thus focusing on the past of the D 'ni . Uru : The Path of the Shell , extended the story of Uru in the present and added multiple never @-@ before @-@ seen Ages . Unlike the first expansion pack , Uru : The Path of the Shell was not free , but was boxed and sold in stores . Uru , To D 'ni , and The Path of the Shell were also packaged together and sold as Uru : The Complete Chronicles . 
 = = = Audio = = = 
 Uru 's music was composed by Tim Larkin , who had started his career at game publisher Brøderbund , and lobbied hard to be included on Riven 's development team . Larkin worked on creating different sound effects for Riven and was chosen to score Uru after composer and Myst co @-@ creator Robyn Miller left Cyan in early 1998 . The music for the game was collected as a soundtrack , Uru Music , that was released in 2003 . 
 Larkin chose the instrumentation for each track based on the various digital environments in the game . When the player is in the game 's representation of New Mexico , for example , Larkin used a resonator guitar and flutes , creating what he called something " indigenous to a southwest type of feel that 's very contemporary " . In other areas Larkin described the game 's music as being " less typical than you would find in most games " because of the exotic landscape the developers had created . To create contemporary and exotic types of music in the game , Larkin employed a combination of real and synthesized instruments . Sometimes Larkin replaced synthesized performances with those of real musicians , as in the track " Gallery Theme " , where a synthesized vocal part was eventually discarded in favor of soprano Tasha Koontz . To create an exotic feel , Larkin used a group of Maasai tribesmen 's chanting , who were recorded during their visit to Spokane , Washington , where Cyan Worlds was located at that time . 
 The Uru soundtrack received two Game Audio Network Guild ( G.A.N.G. ) nominations in 2004 — one for " Best Original Vocal Song ( Choral ) " for the " Gallery Theme " ( which won ) , and another for " Best Original Soundtrack . " Beyond its use in Uru , " Gallery Theme " was later used in the theatrical trailer for Steven Spielberg 's film , Munich . The Uru soundtrack comes on an enhanced CD , containing a ( nearly ) four @-@ minute music video called " Uru : The Makers " and an audio @-@ only interview with Rand Miller and Tim Larkin . 
 = = = Uru Live = = = 
 To compensate for the cancellation of Uru Live , Cyan published all the developed online content as single @-@ player expansion packs . Meanwhile , a small group of dedicated fans , many of them the Uru Live beta testers , were allowed to maintain their unofficial servers , called " shards " . Cyan released binaries of the original Uru Live servers under the banner Until Uru and coordinated with the fan shards so that players could verify their authentication keys , necessary to play the game . The shards were often unstable and no new content was released ; rather , they provided a place for fans to socialize . In February 2006 , Cyan opened their own official shard , called D <unk> , open at no charge to Uru owners , though an invitation from the community was required . Miller revealed in a letter to fans that Cyan had received " limited funding from a third party that allows us to breathe some refreshing new life and optimism into all things Uru . " As with the fan @-@ operated servers , D <unk> would feature no new content , instead allowing Cyan staff called " surveyors " to interact with fans and gather information . 
 In April 2006 , GameTap announced it was relaunching Uru Live as Myst Online : Uru Live . A major reason for the resurrection of the game was the fan support . According to GameTap 's vice president of content Ricardo Sanchez , " One of the reasons [ GameTap was ] so attracted to Uru Live is that it had this persistent group that kept it alive during the dark days of its absence . " While Cyan devoted its time to Myst Online , it promised not to shut down Until Uru in the meantime , although it would offer no new authentication keys . GameTap released Myst Online in February 2007 . A Macintosh version , using the Cider translation layer engine so that Intel @-@ processor Macs did not need a Windows installation to run the game , was released in March . At the time , Myst Online was the only Mac @-@ compatible game on GameTap . New content for the game was released in the form of online " episodes " , adding new Ages , puzzles , and plot continuation with each episode . For business reasons GameTap announced in February 2008 that the game would go offline in April ; Cyan reacquired the rights to the game and announced that it would give the Myst Online source code and tools to the fans , making the game an open source project . In 2010 , Cyan Worlds released the game free of charge , under the name MO : <unk> . It is currently hosted on Cyan @-@ maintained servers . 
 In 2011 , Cyan Worlds and OpenUru.org announced the release of Myst Online 's client and 3ds Max plugin under the GNU GPL v3 license . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Initial reception to Uru was generally positive , but less so than previous games in the series . The game has average critic scores of 79 / 100 and 76 @.@ 19 % from aggregate web sites Metacritic and Game Rankings , respectively . Though Uru was a departure from previous Myst titles , the differences were usually praised . Game Informer 's Lisa Mason said Uru " successfully updated " the adventure game genre . The visuals and music were highly praised , and GameZone called the world of the D ’ ni beautifully rendered and brilliantly designed . Newspapers appreciated the contrast Uru offered from violence @-@ filled contemporary games . 
 Reception to the game 's third @-@ person controls and the addition of instant failures by falling were not well received . Denise Cook of Computer Gaming World called the third person option " choked " and " quirky " . While Cook appreciated the added depth and immersion provided by the real @-@ time rendering , she found incidents such as slipping off rocks , falling into lava , and plummeting into canyons irksome additions to the previously stress @-@ free Myst formula . GameSpy 's Carla Harker found several puzzles highly difficult solely due to the poorly implemented control scheme which " never becomes intuitive " . Computer Gaming World 's Robert Coffey and Cook considered the plot of the single @-@ player release minimal and forgettable . 
 A major critic complaint about Uru was that the game did not ship with the multiplayer component . GameSpot 's Andrew Park questioned why the game shipped with the multiplayer element open only for select players when the component had previously been beta @-@ tested . GameSpy was disappointed that the feature advertised on the box and in the game manual was not available in the product . Reviewer Bob Mandel found that the most disappointing part of the dropped multiplayer game was that " as you progress through the game , a number of tantalizing clues emerge of places you can go and activities you can undertake only through the promised online mode . " 
 Uru 's sales were considered disappointing , whereas the first three Myst games had sold more than 12 million units collectively before Uru 's release . Time magazine pointed to the game 's relative failure as evidence the franchise had lost its touch , a notion the developers of Myst IV : Revelation sought to dispel . Uru 's poor sales were also considered a factor in financially burdening Cyan , contributing to the company 's near @-@ closure in 2005 . The title 's original graphics and story nevertheless attracted a cult following . 
 = Mycena galopus = 
 Mycena galopus , commonly known as the milking bonnet or the milk @-@ drop Mycena , is an inedible species of fungus in the Mycenaceae family of the Agaricales order . It produces small mushrooms that have grayish @-@ brown , bell @-@ shaped , radially @-@ grooved caps up to 2 @.@ 5 cm ( 1 in ) wide . The gills are whitish to gray , widely spaced , and squarely attached to the stem . The slender stems are up to 8 cm ( 3 in ) long , and pale gray at the top , becoming almost black at the hairy base . The stem will ooze a whitish latex if it is injured or broken . The variety nigra has a dark gray cap , while the variety candida is white . All varieties of the mushroom occur during summer and autumn on leaf litter in coniferous and deciduous woodland . 
 Mycena galopus is found in North America and Europe . The saprobic fungus is an important leaf litter decomposer , and able to utilize all the major constituents of plant litter . It is especially adept at attacking cellulose and lignin , the latter of which is the second most abundant renewable organic compound in the biosphere . The mushroom latex contains chemicals called benzoxepines , which are thought to play a role in a wound @-@ activated chemical defense mechanism against yeasts and parasitic fungi . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The mushroom was first described as Agaricus galopus by Christian Hendrik Persoon in 1800 , and later transferred to the genus Mycena by Paul Kummer in 1871 . An Australian taxon formerly considered a variety , Mycena galopus var. mellea , was raised to species level and renamed M. <unk> in 1998 . The variety candida was described by Jakob Emanuel Lange in 1914 based on specimens he found in Denmark ; variety nigra was named by Carleton Rea in 1922 . Mycena <unk> is an orthographical variant spelling . 
 The specific epithet galopus is derived from the Greek <unk> " milk " , and <unk> " foot " . The mushroom is commonly known as the " milking bonnet " , or the " milk @-@ drop Mycena " . The varieties candida and nigra are the white and black milking bonnets , respectively . 
 = = Description = = 
 The cap of M. galopus is egg @-@ shaped when young , later becoming conic to somewhat bell @-@ shaped , and eventually reaching a diameter of 0 @.@ 5 to 2 @.@ 5 cm ( 0 @.@ 2 to 1 @.@ 0 in ) . In age it often has a margin curved inward , and a prominent umbo . The cap surface has a hoary sheen ( remnants of the universal veil that once covered the immature fruit body ) that soon sloughs off , leaving it naked and smooth . The cap margin , which is initially pressed against the stem , is translucent when moist , so that the outline of the gills underneath the cap may be seen , and has deep narrow grooves when dry . The color is largely fuscous @-@ black except for the whitish margin that fades to pale gray ; the umbo remains blackish or becomes dark gray , sometimes with a very pale ashy gray over all when moist , and opaque and ashy gray after drying . The flesh is thin , soft , and fragile , without any distinctive odor and taste . 
 The gills are <unk> spaced , narrow , ascending @-@ adnate , whitish to gray , usually darker in age , with edges that are pallid or grayish . The stem is 4 to 8 cm ( 1 @.@ 6 to 3 @.@ 1 in ) ( rarely up to 12 cm ) long , 1 – 2 mm thick , equal in length throughout , smooth , and fragile . The lower portion of the stem is dark blackish @-@ brown to a dark ashy color . The apex of the stem is pallid , and the whitish base covered with coarse , stiff hairs . When broken it exudes a white milk @-@ like liquid . The variety candida is similar in appearance to the main variety , except its fruit body is completely white . Variety nigra has a dark or blackish @-@ gray cap , and gills that are initially whitish before turning gray . 
 Although not poisonous , M. galopus and the varieties candida and nigra are inedible . 
 = = = Microscopic characteristics = = = 
 The spores are 9 – 13 by 5 – 6 @.@ 5 μm , smooth , ellipsoid , occasionally somewhat pear @-@ shaped , and very weakly amyloid . The basidia are four @-@ spored . The pleurocystidia and cheilocystidia are similar and very abundant , and measure 70 – 90 by 9 – 15 μm . They are narrowly fusoid @-@ ventricose and usually have abruptly pointed tips , sometimes forked or branched near the apex , hyaline , and smooth . The flesh of the gill is homogenous , and stains dark vinaceous @-@ brown in iodine . The flesh of the cap has a thin but clearly differentiated pellicle , a well @-@ developed hypoderm ( the tissue layer immediately underneath the pellicle ) , and the remainder is filamentous . All but the pellicle stain vinaceous @-@ brown in iodine . 
 = = = Similar species = = = 
 The " red edge bonnet " , Mycena rubromarginata , is also grayish @-@ brown , but it has gill edges that are red , and it does not ooze latex when broken . It has amyloid , pip @-@ shaped to roughly spherical spores that measure 9 @.@ 2 – 13 @.@ 4 by 6 @.@ 5 – 9 @.@ 4 µm . 
 = = Ecology , habitat , and distribution = = 
 Mycena galopus is a saprobic fungus , and plays an important role in forest ecosystems as a decomposer of leaf litter . It has been estimated in the UK to account for a large portion of the decomposition of the autumn leaf litter in British woodlands . It is able to break down the lignin and cellulose components of leaf litter . Grown in axenic culture in the laboratory , the fungus mycelium has been shown to degrade ( in addition to lignin and cellulose ) <unk> , protein , soluble carbohydrates , and purified xylan and pectin using enzymes such as polyphenol oxidases , <unk> , and catalase . It is particularly adept at breaking down lignin , which is the second most abundant renewable organic compound in the biosphere , after cellulose . Research also suggests that the fungus weathers soil minerals , making them more available to mycorrhizal plants . Phosphorus , an important macronutrient influencing plant growth , typically occurs in primary minerals like apatite , or other organic complexes , and its low solubility often results in low phosphorus availability in soil . The biological activity of M. galopus mycelium can increase the availability of phosphorus and other nutrients , both as a result of soil acidification due to cation uptake and via the release of weathering agents such low molecular mass organic acids . Studies have shown that the fungus is sensitive to low concentrations of sulphite ( <unk> − ) , a byproduct of sulphur dioxide pollution , suggesting that this pollution can be toxic to the growth of the fungus ( and the subsequent decomposition of leaf litter ) at environmentally relevant concentrations . 
 The fruit bodies of Mycena galopus grow in groups to scattered on humus under hardwoods or conifers . In the United States , it is very abundant along the Pacific Coast from Washington to California , and also in Tennessee and North Carolina ; its northern distribution extends to Canada ( Nova Scotia ) . In Europe , it has been collected from Britain , Germany , and Norway . 
 = = Chemistry = = 
 In 1999 , <unk> and colleagues reported the presence of several structurally related antifungal compounds called benzoxepines in the latex of Mycena galopus . One of these compounds , 6 @-@ <unk> , is a derivative of <unk> , a potent antifungal metabolite first isolated from submerged cultures of <unk> species in 1997 . The antifungal activity of <unk> is based on selective inhibition of the NADH dehydrogenase enzyme of the electron transport chain . A 2008 publication reported that fatty acid esters of <unk> serve as precursors to wound @-@ activated chemical defense . When the fruit body is injured and the latex is exposed , an esterase enzyme ( an enzyme that splits esters into an acid and an alcohol in a chemical reaction with water called hydrolysis ) presumably cleaves the inactive esterified benzoxepines into their active forms , where they can help defend the mushroom against yeasts and parasitic fungi . In nature , the mushroom is rarely attacked by parasitic fungi , however , it is prone to infection by the " bonnet mold " Spinellus fusiger , which is insensitive to the benzoxepines of M. galopus . In an English field study , where the two fungi M. galopus and Marasmius androsaceus made up over 99 % of the fruit bodies in a site under Sitka spruce , the <unk> <unk> arthropod <unk> latus preferred to graze on the mycelium of M. androsaceus . This selective grazing influences the vertical distribution of the two fungi in the field . 
 = Minneapolis wireless internet network = 
 The city of Minneapolis , Minnesota , is covered by a citywide broadband wireless internet network , sometimes called Wireless Minneapolis . The network was first proposed in 2003 , at which point only a few other cities nationwide had such systems in place . Local firm US Internet beat out EarthLink to build and operate the network , with a guaranteed ten @-@ year , multimillion @-@ dollar contract from the city itself as the network 's anchor tenant . Construction began on the project in 2006 , but encountered several delays . Most of the city was covered by the network by 2010 , and USI Wireless , the subsidiary of US Internet responsible for the system , set up numerous free internet access points at public locations around Minneapolis . 
 The network , which offers speeds of one to six megabits per second at a rate of about $ 20 per month , had about 20 @,@ 000 residential subscribers by the end of 2010 . <unk> , the network is used by city inspectors and employees , with plans in place for the police and fire departments to use it in the future . In 2007 , when the I @-@ 35W Mississippi River bridge collapsed , the wireless system helped coordinate rescuers and emergency services . The city and USI Wireless have won praise for the network , which has been singled out for being one of the few successful municipal wireless ventures nationwide among a number of stalled or failed projects . 
 = = Background = = 
 At the time when the wireless network was under consideration , various other American cities already had such networks or were in the process of constructing them . <unk> and Moorhead , both in Minnesota , had city @-@ owned and -operated wireless networks , while Philadelphia was considering building its own and Corpus Christi , Texas , was experimenting with a specialized government @-@ use @-@ only network . 
 Before the network was built , Minneapolis 's city services were run on a combination of fiber optics and other services , with city inspectors , who worked throughout the city , using Sprint Cellular while working in the field . Around the same time , in 2005 , Popular Science ranked Minneapolis as the " Top Tech City " in America , citing factors such as the city 's 110 wireless hotspots , compared to the national average of 61 at the time . 
 = = History = = 
 The initiative to construct a citywide wireless internet network , initiated in 2003 by city councilmember Gary Schiff , aimed to both offer city residents with wireless access for around $ 20 per month , and also to improve city services such as fire and police by giving them greater access to information while en route or on @-@ site anywhere in the city . Bridging the digital divide in the city was also a stated goal for the network . 
 Several ownership schemes were considered in the process of building and running the system . One plan , which named city officials as the owners and operators of the network , was scrapped because the city lacked the core competency to do it on its own , as well as the $ 25 – 30 million capital investment required for the initial construction . The plan which was ultimately adopted entailed a private company building and running the network . This plan met opposition from the Institute for Local Self Reliance , an organization that stated that it believed that the city should build the network itself , and then contract a private company to maintain it . 
 The city opened up bidding for the construction of the network in 2005 , eventually receiving bids from eight different internet service providers . Of these eight , Atlanta @-@ based EarthLink and Minnetonka @-@ based US Internet were selected as semifinalists , and each company set up a trial program in Minneapolis before the final decision was made . During this process , outcry arose from both members of the Institute for Local Self Reliance about the lack of public hearings on the subject of the network , and from Qwest , another internet service provider who had placed a bid to build and run the network , about the city 's plan to be involved in the wireless internet business at all . The deputy chief information officer of Minneapolis , Bill Beck , stated that the city was worried about legal restrictions and lawsuits , which were key reasons for the lack of transparency in the process . 
 US Internet was selected by the Minneapolis City Council to build the city 's network late in the summer of 2006 . The firm was guaranteed a 10 @-@ year , $ 12 @.@ 5 million contract with the city as its anchor tenant . USI Wireless , a wholly owned subsidiary of US Internet , was tasked with installing 1 @,@ 800 radio transmitters for the wireless network upon light poles , telephone poles , buildings , and other structures . Construction was slated to begin three to four weeks after the city selected US Internet , around the beginning of October 2006 , and was expected to be completed by the following autumn . The network is sometimes referred to as Wireless Minneapolis . 
 US Internet also provides wired fiber optic connections that were available , as of April 2014 , to around 12 @,@ 600 residents of Minneapolis . Connections ran as quickly as one <unk> for $ 99 per month , about half the price of a 25 <unk> connection from Comcast . Later that year , the company announced plans to bring its internet services farther afield to the broader Minneapolis – Saint Paul metropolitan area and nationally . US Internet announced in December of the same year that it would bring 10 Gbit / s service to Minneapolis making it the first municipality in the world to have access at that speed . 
 = = Availability and usage = = 
 Minneapolis was intended to be covered in its entirety by the wireless network , with certain exceptions ( such as the Eloise Butler Wildflower Garden , which lacked the infrastructure to support such a system ) . The city 's numerous lakes were also ruled out for network coverage , since sending and receiving signals on them would require transmission poles in the water . The first area of the city to receive the service was Downtown Minneapolis , though it was delayed two weeks there due to technical challenges posed by the skyscrapers in the area , as well as the uneven terrain of the Mississippi River on the east side of the area . The goal was to blanket the entire city with the network by November 2007 and in spite of delays , USI Wireless expected that the next area for installation , a residential neighborhood , would be easier thanks to its flat terrain . In late 2008 , however , the completion of the network was stuck at 82 % because of a misunderstanding between the Minneapolis Park Board , who stated that USI Wireless could not install their radio transmitters on park land without the proper permits , and USI Wireless , who had been unaware of this . A further delay in 2008 came in the form of light poles that were breaking under the stress of the wireless transmitters being placed upon them in neighborhoods in the Calhoun @-@ Isles area of the city . In response , the city paid $ 1 million to install new light poles in the area that would be capable of supporting the transmitters . By 2009 , almost the entirety of the city 's 59 square miles ( 152 @.@ 8 km2 ) was covered by the network , with certain " Challenge Areas " being fitted with special equipment . 
 In 2006 , when US Internet was selected to construct the network , plans existed for the wireless service to be available to residents for a subscription of $ 19 @.@ 95 per month , for speeds of one to three megabits per second , which were comparable to the speeds being offered by other internet service providers in the area at the time but at half the cost . USI Wireless has been marketing the service since then , including with billboards featuring local personality Fancy Ray . 
 By December 2010 , USI Wireless had approximately 20 @,@ 000 subscribers , according to the company 's CEO , Joe Caldwell . The company 's original target was 30 @,@ 000 subscribers by 2012 ; Caldwell expected the company would reach this milestone by 2013 , due to delays in setting the network up . Nonetheless , the firm made a $ 1 @.@ 2 million profit in 2010 and counted 27 @,@ 000 subscribers by 2014 . Meanwhile , in 2010 , the city of Minneapolis was paying $ 1 @.@ 25 million annually for the wireless service but using only six percent of the capacity which it had purchased . Some complaints were raised by various municipal departments from whose budgets the cost of the network subscription was being deducted , regardless of whether they were utilizing it . More departments , however , were beginning to use the network , including city inspectors and 90 other city employees , a trend which was expected to lead to a usage of fourteen percent of the city 's purchased capacity by the end of 2011 . 
 The city of Minneapolis had connected 30 security cameras and 35 electronic street signs to the network by the end of 2010 , with the intention to connect 50 network @-@ enabled parking meters and 10 garbage trucks to the system in the near future . Fire and police conversion to the citywide network was also underway , though the city was taking necessary precautions to ensure that the two services , who will ultimately have their own dedicated frequency , continue to offer uninterrupted public safety service . 
 About 200 free wireless access points were set up around the city to aid with the city 's goal of increasing access to the internet . US Internet paid $ 500 @,@ 000 up front and agreed to pay five percent of its yearly revenues for seven years to maintain them , totaling about $ 10 million . By 2010 , 44 such points had been set up at community centers around Minneapolis , out of a total of 117 which had also gone up in parks and on street corners around the city . Per the request of law enforcement officials who were concerned about the potential ability to surf the internet anonymously , the free login points require the user to enter a username , password , and credit card number . 
 = = = Emergency preparedness = = = 
 Minneapolis 's wireless network was built with emergency preparedness in mind , a consideration which Caldwell noted was always a part of the proposals for such networks . It was not until the collapse of the I @-@ 35W Mississippi River bridge on August 1 , 2007 , however , that this application of the network was truly tested . By that point , USI Wireless had managed to cover about 18 square miles ( 46 @.@ 6 km2 ) of the city with its network . Conveniently , much of this area was in Downtown or along the Mississippi River , near where the bridge collapse site was . Shortly after the collapse , USI Wireless opened up the network to anyone ( not just subscribers ) and hastily added more wireless transmitters to the area to give additional speed to the network . With cell phone service overwhelmed in just 30 minutes , it was Caldwell 's goal that people would use smartphones to communicate via the network instead . Whether or not voice communications traffic jumped in that period was unclear , but the network 's usage did expand from 1 @,@ 000 users before the collapse to 6 @,@ 000 afterwards . 
 The network was also used heavily by government officials and rescue personnel , who used PDAs or laptops to log on to the network . It was used by rescue workers who were floating in the middle of the river and who could receive the signal to communicate with the headquarters in charge of the rescue operations . The wireless service was integral in sending large GIS files to the scene for rescuers to use in locating survivors . It was also utilized by the Minnesota Department of Transportation , the American Red Cross , and media outlets , both local and national . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In a report on municipal wireless networks by The Wall Street Journal , Minneapolis 's was singled out as being " a success story " , with the publication explaining that the concept of having the city as the anchor tenant was a good one . The article cited the wireless network in Philadelphia that was being set up around the same time that Minneapolis 's was , but was being run and built by EarthLink , the other finalist in the bidding process to select a network for Minneapolis . EarthLink had relinquished control of its partially complete network in 2008 , in part due to a low subscription rate of only 5 @,@ 000 customers in May of that year . Minneapolis , meanwhile , had 10 @,@ 000 subscribers , and the network was nearing completion . In reference to the variety of stalled or failed wireless projects across the country , PC World cited USI Wireless as " the only firm that got the numbers and engineering to add up for them so far . " A 2009 article in Computerworld noted that " Minneapolis is one of the few large cities that has deployed Wi @-@ Fi successfully . " The wireless network was tested in December 2007 by wireless testing firm <unk> , and was found to be the fastest metro wireless internet network in America . 
 The network received the <unk> Digital Cities Wireless Communities Best Practices Award in 2007 . 
 = Mike Capuano = 
 Michael Everett " Mike " Capuano ( / <unk> / ; born January 9 , 1952 ) is an American politician who serves as the U.S. Representative for Massachusetts 's 7th congressional district . A member of the Democratic Party , his district includes the majority of Boston , as well as parts of Cambridge and other communities immediately north and south of Boston . Prior to being elected to Congress he served as an Alderman and later Mayor of Somerville . 
 He was born and raised in Somerville , and after graduating from Dartmouth College and Boston College Law School , he worked as an attorney and Somerville alderman . After losing two elections for Mayor in 1979 and 1981 , he went to work as legal counsel for the Massachusetts General Court . He ran for a Mayor a third time in 1989 and won , serving from 1990 to 1999 . 
 In 1998 he navigated a crowded Democratic primary to replace Joseph Kennedy II in Congress and has since been re @-@ elected six times . He represented the state 's 8th district until it was redrawn in 2013 into the 7th district . In Congress he is a staunch liberal and member of the Congressional Progressive Caucus . He ran in the 2010 special election to fill the seat in the United States Senate made vacant by the death of Ted Kennedy , his predecessor 's uncle , but lost the primary to Martha Coakley , who in turn lost the general election to Republican Scott Brown . 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 Capuano was born January 9 , 1952 in the Spring Hill neighborhood of Somerville , Massachusetts , to Rita Marie ( née Garvey ) and Andrew Capuano . His father left to serve in World War II shortly after getting married , and after returning ran for the Somerville Board of Aldermen , and became the first Italian American elected to the board . His mother was of Irish descent . 
 Capuano graduated from Somerville High School in 1969 , and later attended Dartmouth College , where he graduated with a Bachelor of Arts in 1973 . Capuano later went on to earn his Juris Doctor in 1977 from Boston College Law School , specializing in tax law . 
 = = Early political career = = 
 In 1976 , Capuano was elected to the Somerville Board of Aldermen representing Ward 5 , once served in by his father . Capuano served one term , stepping down in 1979 to run for Mayor of Somerville . In the 1979 mayoral election he faced Eugene Brune , Paul Haley , and incumbent , Thomas August . He lost the nomination to Brune , who went on to defeat August . Capuano ran again in 1981 to challenge Brune , placing second in a three @-@ person runoff election . Capuano promoted his opposition to the state ballot question Proposition 2 ½ and criticized Brune for expanding the mayoral staff in the face of tight city budgets , while Brune touted his prevention of service cuts after the proposition passed . Capuano lost in the general election with 40 % of the vote . 
 From 1978 to 1984 Capuano served as chief legal counsel for the Massachusetts General Court 's Joint Committee on Taxation . Capuano left the committee in 1984 to join the Beacon Hill law firm and lobbying group Joyce & Joyce . In 1985 he returned to the Somerville Board of Aldermen as an at @-@ large member . 
 = = = Mayor of Somerville = = = 
 In 1989 Capuano ran for Mayor a third time in and won . Capuano served as Mayor from 1990 to 1999 , where he earned a reputation as a hands @-@ on administrator . One of his priorities was to lower the city 's population density , which at time was the highest of any New England municipality , by using state grants to demolish several buildings and replace them with playgrounds and parking spaces . As Mayor he oversaw the reduction of school class sizes to a maximum of 19 students . 
 = = U.S. House of Representatives = = 
 = = = Elections = = = 
 In 1998 , Joseph Kennedy II announced his retirement after six terms in what was then the 8th District . Capuano entered a crowded 10 @-@ way Democratic <unk> real contest in this heavily Democratic district , which was once represented by John F. Kennedy and Tip O 'Neill . The early front @-@ runner was former Boston Mayor and US Vatican Ambassador Raymond Flynn . However , Capuano won the primary with 23 % , largely due to large turnout in Somerville , all but assuring him of election in November . He easily won the general election in November , taking 81 percent of the vote . He has been reelected seven times , never dropping below 80 % of the vote . Since his initial run for the seat , Capuano has been unopposed in all but two reelection bids ; he faced a minor @-@ party candidate in 2006 and an independent in 2012 . To date , he has only faced a Republican once , during his initial run in 1998 . 
 = = = Tenure = = = 
 During his tenure , Capuano has helped found five congressional caucuses , on : Community Health Centers ; Empowerment Zones and Enterprise Communities ; Sudan ; and Korea ; as well as one for former Mayors . 
 Capuano voted against the War in Iraq and supported immediate withdrawal of troops . In 2005 Capuano visited Iraq and met with military leaders to assess the future of the region . Capuano is considered to be one of the biggest supporters in Congress for increasing international aid funding , and has advocated bringing attention to the crisis in Sudan and helped secure funding aimed at assisting developing African nations . 
 Capuano is pro @-@ choice and supports open access to abortions . In 2012 a fundraiser hosted by Pope John XXIII High School where Capuano and fellow Massachusetts Congressman Ed Markey were to receive awards was cancelled due to their " positions [ being ] inconsistent with church doctrine ; " both were humble in response to the news . During the 2010 Senate Democratic primary Capuano criticized his opponent Martha Coakley , claiming she wouldn 't have voted for the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act with Stupak – Pitts Amendment which would have barred federal funding of abortions ; which Capuano said he only did to " keep the health care debate alive . " Capuano 's comments were characterized by WBUR political analyst as " an empty charge against her since he has the same position as she does . " 
 After the 2006 election that created a Democratic majority in the House , he was appointed Chairman of the Speaker 's Task Force on Ethics Enforcement by Nancy Pelosi , with whom he has a close relationship . After serving as the Chairman of the Task Force on Ethics Enforcement , in 2008 Capuano introduced H.R. 895 which established the Office of Congressional Ethics . Capuano has had a long @-@ running relationship with former Congressman Anthony Weiner , whom he shared a Washington , D.C. apartment with for 12 years . Following Weiner 's sexting scandal Capuano did not call on him to resign , saying : " I am not the guy who likes to judge other people . I figure that is between them and the people who are appropriately named to do that – and that is the Ethics Committee . " 
 Capuano is a strong supporter of labor rights and unions ; in February 2011 during a rally at Beacon Hill in Boston , in support of the 2011 Wisconsin budget protests , Capuano told the crowd , " I ’ m proud to be here with people who understand that it ’ s more than just sending an email to get you going . Every once and awhile you need to get out on the streets and get a little bloody when necessary " . Following criticism , Capuano expressed regret for his " choice of words . " 
 Following the 2008 financial crisis and subsequent bank bailouts , at a House Financial Services Committee hearing Capuano berated the bank CEOs for their practices , saying at one point : " You come to us today on your bicycles after buying Girl Scout cookies and helping out Mother Teresa and telling us , ' We 're sorry , we didn 't mean it , we won 't do it again , trust us . ' Well , I have some people in my constituency that actually robbed some of your banks and they say the same thing . " Capuano 's speech was included in the 2010 documentary film Inside Job , described by director Charles H. Ferguson as being about " the systemic corruption of the United States by the financial services industry and the consequences of that systemic corruption . " 
 A self @-@ described " fiscal conservative , " in 2013 Capuano joined Senator Elizabeth Warren and Boston Mayor Thomas Menino in a rally against the then @-@ upcoming sequester , with Capuano calling it " stupid . " In 2012 Capuano along with fellow Massachusetts Congressman Barney Frank introduced legislation to combine the Securities and Exchange Commission and Commodity Futures Trading Commission into the " Securities and Derivatives Commission . " 
 = = Campaigns for higher office = = 
 = = = 1994 Secretary nomination = = = 
 Capuano ran for Massachusetts Secretary of the Commonwealth in the 1994 election , running against former State Representatives Augusto Grace and William F. Galvin for the Democratic nomination . During the race he framed himself as an advocate for the poor and urban communities , and criticized aid formulas which he argued left less @-@ wealthy municipalities with less per @-@ capita revenue . To appear on the Democratic primary required the support of at least 15 % of delegates in the state party convention . In what the Boston Globe deemed " an embarrassing defeat , " he was disqualified from the race with only 13 % of delegate votes . When asked why he staged the difficult race to begin with , he responded , " Because I wasn 't ready to run for Governor . " 
 = = = 2010 Senate campaign = = = 
 After the death of incumbent Senator Ted Kennedy , a special election to succeed him was scheduled . On September 8 , 2009 , Capuano collected nomination papers to run for the seat and on September 18 , he announced his candidacy . Capuano ran as a " Washington insider , " comparing himself to Kennedy saying : " was [ Kennedy ] not the ultimate insider ... I think that ’ s probably one of the best things that we share . ” In his campaign Capuano received several high @-@ profile endorsements , including House Speaker Pelosi and former Massachusetts Governor and 1988 Democratic presidential nominee , Michael Dukakis . 
 Consistently polling below incumbent Massachusetts Attorney General , Martha Coakley , on December 8 , 2009 Capuano lost the Democratic primary to Coakley , winning only 28 % of the vote to Coakley 's 47 % , amongst a field of four candidates . 
 = = = 2014 gubernatorial election = = = 
 Capuano considered running for Governor of Massachusetts in 2014 . On January 21 , 2013 , former Mayor of Springfield , Massachusetts and member of the Massachusetts Governor 's Council Michael Albano endorsed Capuano to run , posting on his Facebook page : " while the Congressman has not made a decision to compete for the [ Democratic ] nomination [ for Governor ] at this time , it is not too early to make the case and encourage his candidacy . " When asked in February 2013 whether he might run for Governor , Capuano responded : " Part of me thinks that some of the more interesting , more important fights over the next several years might be conducted at <unk> around the country and not necessarily on Capitol Hill . " In a statement in September 2013 , Capuano announced he would not run for Governor , and would instead focus on running for re @-@ election to Congress . His decision was attributed to his loss against Martha Coakley in the Democratic primary for Senate , virtually closing any possibility for running for higher office . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Capuano was named after his two grandfathers , and has seven siblings , one of whom died in childbirth and another died of polio at the age of 5 . Capuano married Barbara <unk> in 1974 , and together they have two boys , Michael and Joseph . He is the uncle of actors Chris Evans of the Fantastic Four and Captain America film series , and Scott Evans of the soap opera One Life to Live . In 2003 the City of Somerville dedicated a new school in Capuano 's honor ; the Michael E. Capuano Early Childhood Center officially opened in September that year . 
 = Ozzie Smith = 
 Osborne Earl " Ozzie " Smith ( born December 26 , 1954 ) is a retired American baseball shortstop who played in Major League Baseball ( MLB ) for the San Diego Padres and St. Louis Cardinals from 1978 to 1996 . Nicknamed " The Wizard " for his defensive brilliance , Smith set major league records for career assists ( 8 @,@ 375 ) and double plays ( 1 @,@ 590 ) by a shortstop ( the latter since broken by Omar Vizquel ) , as well as the National League ( NL ) record with 2 @,@ 511 career games at the position ; Smith won the NL Gold Glove Award for play at shortstop for 13 consecutive seasons ( 1980 – 92 ) . A 15 @-@ time All @-@ Star , he accumulated 2 @,@ 460 hits and 580 stolen bases during his career , and won the NL Silver Slugger Award as the best @-@ hitting shortstop in 1987 . He was elected to the Baseball Hall of Fame in his first year of eligibility in 2002 . He was also elected to the St. Louis Cardinals Hall of Fame in the inaugural class of 2014 . 
 Smith was born in Mobile , Alabama , but his family moved to Watts , Los Angeles , when he was six years old . While participating in childhood athletic activities , Smith developed quick reflexes ; he went on to play baseball in high school and college , at Los Angeles ' Locke High School and Cal Poly @-@ San Luis Obispo respectively . Drafted as an amateur player by the Padres , Smith made his major league debut in 1978 . He quickly established himself as an outstanding fielder , and later became known for performing backflips on special occasions while taking his position at the beginning of a game . Smith won his first Gold Glove Award in 1980 , and made his first All @-@ Star Game appearance in 1981 . When conflict with Padres ' ownership developed , he was traded to the Cardinals for shortstop Garry Templeton in 1982 . 
 Upon joining the Cardinals , Smith helped the team win the 1982 World Series . Three years later , his game @-@ winning home run during Game 5 of the 1985 National League Championship Series prompted broadcaster Jack Buck 's " Go crazy , folks ! " play @-@ by @-@ play call . Despite a rotator cuff injury during the 1985 season , Smith posted career highs in multiple offensive categories in 1987 . Smith continued to earn Gold Gloves and All @-@ Star appearances on an annual basis until 1993 . During 1995 season , Smith had shoulder surgery and was out nearly three months . After tension with his new manager Tony La Russa developed in 1996 , Smith retired at season 's end , and his uniform number ( No. 1 ) was subsequently retired by the Cardinals . Smith also served as host of the television show This Week in Baseball from 1997 to 1998 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Smith was born in Mobile , Alabama , the second of <unk> and <unk> Smith 's six children ( five boys and one girl ) . While the family lived in Mobile , his father worked as a sandblaster at Brookley Air Force Base . When Smith was six his family moved to the Watts section of Los Angeles . His father became a delivery truck driver for Safeway stores , while his mother became an aide at a nursing home . His mother was an influential part of his life who stressed the importance of education and encouraged him to pursue his dreams . 
 Smith played a variety of sports in his youth , but considered baseball to be his favorite . He developed quick reflexes through various athletic and leisure activity , such as bouncing a ball off the concrete steps in front of his house , moving in closer to reduce reaction time with each throw . When not at the local YMCA or playing sports , Smith sometimes went with friends to the neighborhood lumberyard , springboarding off inner tubes and doing flips into sawdust piles ( a precursor to his famous backflips ) . In 1965 , at age ten , he endured the Watts Riots with his family , recalling that , " We had to sleep on the floor because of all the sniping and looting going on . " 
 While Smith was attending junior high school , his parents divorced . Continuing to pursue his interest in baseball , he would ride the bus for nearly an hour to reach Dodger Stadium , cheering for the Los Angeles Dodgers at about 25 games a year . Upon becoming a student at Locke High School , Smith played on the basketball and baseball teams . Smith was a teammate of future National Basketball Association player Marques Johnson on the basketball team , and a teammate of future fellow Hall @-@ of @-@ Fame player Eddie Murray on the baseball side . After high school Smith attended Cal Poly San Luis Obispo in 1974 on a partial academic scholarship , and managed to walk @-@ on to the baseball team . In addition to his academic education , he learned to switch @-@ hit from Cal Poly coach <unk> Harr . When Cal Poly 's starting shortstop broke his leg midway through the 1974 season , Smith subsequently took over the starting role . Later named an All @-@ American athlete , he established school records in career at bats ( 754 ) and career stolen bases ( 110 ) before graduating in 1977 . 
 = = Professional baseball career = = 
 = = = San Diego Padres = = = 
 Smith was playing semi @-@ professional baseball in <unk> , Iowa , in June 1976 when he was selected in the seventh round of the amateur entry draft by the Detroit Tigers . The parties could not agree on a contract ; Smith wanted a $ 10 @,@ 000 ( $ 41 @,@ 585 today ) signing bonus , while the Tigers offered $ 8 @,@ 500 ( $ 35 @,@ 347 today ) . Smith returned to Cal Poly for his senior year , then in the 1977 draft was selected in the fourth round by the San Diego Padres , ultimately agreeing to a contract that included a $ 5 @,@ 000 signing bonus ( $ 19 @,@ 525 today ) . Smith spent his first year of professional baseball , 1977 , with the Class A Walla Walla Padres of the Northwest League . 
 Smith began 1978 as a non @-@ roster invitee to the San Diego Padres ' spring training camp in Yuma , Arizona . Smith credited Padres manager Alvin Dark for giving him confidence by telling reporters the shortstop job was Smith 's until he proved he can 't handle it . Even though Dark was fired in the middle of training camp , Smith made his Major League Baseball ( MLB ) debut on April 7 , 1978 . 
 It did not take long for Smith to earn recognition in the major leagues , making what some consider his greatest fielding play only ten games into his rookie season . The Padres played host to the Atlanta Braves on April 20 , 1978 , and with two out in the top of the fourth inning , Atlanta 's Jeff Burroughs hit a ground ball up the middle . Smith described the play by saying , " He hit a ball back up the middle that everybody thought was going into center field . I instinctively broke to my left and dove behind second . As I was in the air , the ball took a bad hop and caromed behind me , but I was able to catch it with my bare hand . I hit the ground , bounced back up , and threw Burroughs out at first . " 
 During a <unk> to Houston , later in the season , Smith met a part @-@ time usherette at the Astrodome named Denise while making his way to the team bus outside the stadium . The couple developed a relationship that was sometimes long @-@ distance in nature , and eventually decided to marry . It was also during the 1978 season that Smith introduced a signature move . Padres promotion director Andy Strasberg knew Smith could perform backflips , but that he only did them during practice before fans entered the stadium . Strasberg asked Smith to do a backflip for fans during Fan Appreciation Day on October 1 , the Padres ' last home game of the season . After conferring with veteran teammate Gene <unk> , Smith went ahead with the backflip , and it proved to be wildly popular . Smith finished the 1978 season with a .258 batting average and <unk> fielding percentage , placing second in National League Rookie of the Year voting to Bob Horner . 
 After working with a hitting instructor during the offseason , Smith failed to record a base hit in his first 32 at @-@ bats of the 1979 season . Among players with enough at @-@ bats to qualify for the 1979 National League Triple Crown , Smith finished the season last in batting average ( .211 ) , home runs ( 0 ) , and RBI ( 27 ) . Off the field , conflict developed between Padres ' ownership and the combination of Smith and his agent , Ed Gottlieb . The parties entered into a contract dispute before the 1980 season , and when negotiations lasted into spring training , the Padres renewed Smith 's contract at his 1979 salary of $ 72 @,@ 500 Smith 's agent told the Padres the shortstop would forgo the season to race in the Tour de France , despite the fact Smith admitted to The Break Room on 96 @.@ 5 <unk> in Rochester , New York he had never heard of the Tour . Angered by the Padres ' attitude during those contract talks , Gottlieb took out a help @-@ wanted ad in the San Diego Union , part of which read , " Padre baseball player wants part @-@ time employment to supplement income . " When Joan Kroc , wife of Padres owner Ray Kroc , publicly offered Smith a job as an assistant gardener on her estate , Smith and Gottlieb 's relationship with the organization deteriorated further . 
 Meanwhile , Smith was winning recognition for his accomplishments on the field . In 1980 , he set the single @-@ season record for most assists by a shortstop ( 621 ) , and began his string of 13 consecutive Gold Glove awards . Smith 's fielding play prompted the Yuma Daily Sun to use the nickname " The Wizard of Oz " in a March 1981 feature article about Smith . While " The Wizard of Oz " nickname was an allusion to the 1939 motion picture of the same name , Smith also came to be known as simply " The Wizard " during his playing career , as Smith 's Baseball Hall of Fame plaque would later attest . In 1981 , Smith made his first All @-@ Star Game appearance as a reserve player . 
 = = = = Trade = = = = 
 While Smith was having problems with the Padres ' owners , the St. Louis Cardinals also found themselves unhappy with their shortstop , Garry Templeton . Templeton 's relationship with Cardinal Nation had become increasingly strained and finally came to a head during a game at Busch Stadium on August 26 , 1981 , when ( after being heckled for not running out a ground ball ) he made obscene gestures at fans , and had to be physically pulled off the field by manager Whitey Herzog . 
 Given the task of overhauling the Cardinals by owner Gussie Busch ( and specifically to unload Templeton ) , Herzog was looking to trade Templeton when he was approached by Padres General Manager Jack McKeon at the 1981 baseball winter meetings . While McKeon had previously told Herzog that Smith was untouchable in any trade , the Padres were now so angry at Smith 's agent Gottlieb that McKeon was willing to deal . McKeon and Herzog agreed in principle to a six @-@ player trade , with Templeton for Smith as the centerpiece . It was then that Padres manager Dick Williams informed Herzog that a no @-@ trade clause had been included in Smith 's 1981 contract . Upon learning of the trade , Smith 's initial reaction was to invoke the clause and stay in San Diego , but he was still interested to hear what the Cardinals had to say . While the deal for the players beside Templeton and Smith went through , Herzog flew to San Diego to meet with Smith and Gottlieb over the Christmas holiday . Smith later recalled that , " Whitey told me that with me playing shortstop for the St. Louis Cardinals , we could win the pennant . He made me feel wanted , which was a feeling I was quickly losing from the Padres . The mere fact that Whitey would come all the way out there to talk to us was more than enough to convince me that St. Louis was the place I wanted to be . " 
 = = = St. Louis Cardinals = = = 
 = = = = 1982 – 84 = = = = 
 After more behind @-@ the @-@ scenes contract wrangling , Smith became a St. Louis Cardinal on February 11 , 1982 . Herzog believed Smith could improve his offensive production by hitting more ground balls , and subsequently created a motivational tool designed to help Smith concentrate on that task . Approaching Smith one day during spring training , Herzog said , " Every time you hit a fly ball , you owe me a buck . Every time you hit a ground ball , I owe you a buck . We 'll keep that going all year . " Smith agreed to the wager , and by the end of the season had won close to $ 300 from Herzog . As the 1982 season got underway , Herzog 's newly assembled team won 12 games in a row during the month of April , and finished the season atop the National League East division . Herzog would later say of Smith 's contributions that , " If he saved two runs a game on defense , which he did many a night , it seemed to me that was just as valuable to the team as a player who drove in two runs a game on offense . " 
 Smith became a father for the first time during the 1982 season with the birth of his son O.J. , today known as Nikko , on April 28 . Smith also developed a lasting friendship with teammate Willie McGee during the season , and Smith said he likes to think he " helped Willie get over some of the rough spots of adjusting to the major leagues " . Smith later participated in the postseason for the first time when the Cardinals faced the Atlanta Braves in the best @-@ of @-@ five 1982 National League Championship Series ( NLCS ) . Smith drove in the series ' first run by hitting a sacrifice fly that scored McGee in Game 1 , ultimately going five for nine in St. Louis ' three @-@ game series sweep . 
 Just as Herzog had predicted when he told Smith the Cardinals would win the pennant with him on the team , Smith found himself as the team 's starting shortstop in the best @-@ of @-@ seven 1982 World Series against the Milwaukee Brewers . During the contest Smith scored three runs , had five hits , and did not commit an error in the field . When St. Louis was trailing 3 – 1 with one out in the sixth inning of Game 7 , Smith started a rally with a base hit to left field , eventually scoring the first of the team 's three runs that inning . The Cardinals scored two more runs in the 8th inning for a 6 @-@ 3 win and the championship . 
 After the World Series championship , Smith and the Cardinals agreed on a new contract in January 1983 that paid Smith $ 1 million per year . Smith was voted in as the National League 's starting shortstop in the All @-@ Star Game for the first time in 1983 , and at season 's end won a fourth consecutive Gold Glove Award . During July of the 1984 season , Smith went on the disabled list with a broken wrist after being hit by a pitch during a game against the Padres . Smith 's return to the lineup a month later was not enough to propel the Cardinals to a postseason berth . 
 = = = = 1985 – 86 = = = = 
 In 1985 , Smith amassed a .276 batting average , 31 stolen bases , and 591 assists in the field . The Cardinals as a team won 101 games during the season and earned another postseason berth . Facing the Los Angeles Dodgers in the now best @-@ of @-@ seven NLCS , a split of the first four games set the stage for Game 5 at Busch Stadium . With the score tied at two runs apiece in the bottom of the ninth inning , Dodgers manager Tommy Lasorda called upon closer Tom Niedenfuer to pitch . Smith batted left @-@ handed against Niedenfuer with one out . Smith , who had never hit a home run in his previous 3 @,@ 009 left @-@ handed major league at @-@ bats , pulled an inside fastball down the right @-@ field line for a home run , ending Game 5 in a 3 – 2 Cardinals victory . Smith said , " I was trying to get an extra @-@ base hit and get into scoring position . Fortunately , I was able to get the ball up . " The home run not only prompted broadcaster Jack Buck 's " Go crazy folks " play @-@ by @-@ play call , but was also later voted the greatest moment in Busch Stadium history by Cardinals fans . 
 After Smith 's teammate Jack Clark hit a late @-@ inning home run of his own in Game 6 to defeat the Dodgers , the Cardinals moved on to face the Kansas City Royals in the 1985 World Series . Once again sportswriters were quick to draw attention to Smith 's outstanding defensive play instead of his 2 for 23 effort at the plate . After the Cardinals took a three @-@ games @-@ to @-@ two advantage , a controversial Game 6 call by umpire Don <unk> overshadowed the remainder of the Series ( which the Royals won in seven games ) . 
 What was not publicly known during the regular season and playoffs was that Smith had torn his rotator cuff after suffering an impingement in his right shoulder during the July 11 – 14 homestand against the Padres . After suffering the impingement diving back into first base on a pickoff throw , Smith altered his throwing motion to such a degree that the rotator cuff tear subsequently developed . The 5 ' 10 " ( 1 @.@ 78 m ) , 180 @-@ pound ( 82 kg ) Smith opted to forgo surgery and instead built up his arm strength via weightlifting , playing through whatever pain he encountered . Said Smith , " I didn 't tell anybody about the injury , because I wanted to keep playing and didn 't want anybody thinking they could run on me or take advantage of the injury . I tried to do almost everything , except throw a baseball , left @-@ handed : opening a door , turning on the radio — everything . It didn 't get any better , but it was good enough that I didn 't have to have surgery . " 
 Because of his injury , Smith let his then four @-@ year @-@ old son Nikko perform his traditional Opening Day backflip before the Cardinals ' first home game of the 1986 season . Smith made an " eye @-@ popping " play later that season on August 5 , during a game against the Philadelphia Phillies at Busch Stadium . In the top of the ninth inning , Phillies first baseman Von Hayes hit a short fly ball to left field , which was pursued by both Smith and left fielder Curt Ford . Running with his back to home plate , Smith dove forward , simultaneously catching the ball while parallel to the ground and flying over the diving Ford , avoiding a collision by inches . 
 = = = = 1987 – 90 = = = = 
 After hitting in either the second or eighth spot in the batting order for most of his time in St. Louis , Herzog made Smith the number @-@ two hitter full @-@ time during the 1987 season . Over the course of the year , Smith accrued a .303 batting average , 43 stolen bases , 75 RBIs , 104 runs scored , and 40 doubles , good enough to earn him the Silver Slugger Award at shortstop . In addition to winning the Gold Glove Award at shortstop for the eighth consecutive time , Smith posted a career @-@ high on @-@ base percentage of .392 . Smith was also the leading vote @-@ getter in the 1987 All @-@ Star Game . The Cardinals earned a postseason berth with 95 wins , and subsequently faced the San Francisco Giants in the 1987 National League Championship Series . Smith contributed a triple during the series , and the Cardinals won the contest in seven games . 
 The 1987 World Series matched the Cardinals against the American League champion Minnesota Twins . The home team won every game of the contest , as Minnesota won the series . In 28 at @-@ bats during the Series , Smith scored three runs and had two RBIs . Smith finished second in MVP balloting to Andre Dawson , who had played on the last @-@ place Chicago Cubs , largely because Smith and teammate Jack Clark split the first @-@ place vote . Following the 1987 season , Smith was awarded the largest contract in the National League at $ 2 @,@ 340 @,@ 000 . 
 While the team did not see the postseason for the remainder of the decade , Smith continued to rack up All @-@ Star appearances and Gold Gloves . Combined with the attention he received from his contract , Smith continued to be a national figure . Known as a savvy dresser , he made the April 1988 cover of GQ magazine . Smith was witness to change within the Cardinal organization when owner Gussie Busch died in 1989 and Herzog quit as manager during the 1990 season . 
 = = = = 1990 – 95 = = = = 
 Joe Torre became Smith 's new manager in 1990 , but the team did not reach the postseason during Torre 's nearly five @-@ year tenure . While the Cardinals celebrated their 100th anniversary in 1992 , Smith marked milestones of his own , stealing his 500th career base on April 26 , then notching a triple on May 26 in front of the home crowd for his 2,000th hit . St. Louis had a one @-@ game lead in the National League East division on June 1 , 1992 , but injuries took their toll on the team , including Smith 's two @-@ week illness in late July after contracting chicken pox for the first time . As a testament to his national visibility during this time , Smith appeared in a 1992 episode of The Simpsons titled " Homer at the Bat " . Smith became a free agent for the first time in his career on November 2 , 1992 , only to sign a new contract with the Cardinals on December 6 . 
 Smith won his final Gold Glove in 1992 , and his 13 consecutive Gold Gloves at shortstop in the National League has yet to be matched . The 1993 season marked the only time between 1981 and 1996 that Smith failed to make the All @-@ Star team , and Smith finished the 1993 season with a .288 batting average and .974 fielding percentage . He appeared in 98 games during the strike @-@ shortened 1994 season , and later missed nearly three months of the 1995 season after shoulder surgery on May 31 . Smith was recognized for his community service efforts with the 1994 Branch Rickey Award and the 1995 Roberto Clemente Award . In February 1994 , Smith took on the role of honorary chairman and official spokesman for the Missouri Governor 's Council on Physical Fitness and Health . 
 = = = = 1996 = = = = 
 As Smith entered the 1996 season , he finalized a divorce from his wife Denise during the first half of the year . Meanwhile , manager Tony La Russa began his first season with the Cardinals in tandem with a new ownership group . After General Manager Walt <unk> acquired shortstop Royce Clayton during the offseason , La Russa emphasized an open competition for the spot that would give the Cardinals the best chance to win . When spring training concluded , Smith had amassed a .288 batting average and zero errors in the field , and Clayton batted .190 with eight errors . Smith believed he had earned the position with his spring training performance , but La Russa disagreed , and awarded Clayton the majority of playing time in the platoon situation that developed , where Smith typically saw action every third game . La Russa said , " I think it 's fair to say he misunderstood how he compared to Royce in spring training ... When I and the coaches evaluated the play in spring training — the whole game — Royce started very slowly offensively and you could see him start to get better . By what he was able to do defensively and on the bases , Royce deserved to play the majority of the games . " 
 Smith missed the first month of the season with a hamstring injury , and continued to harbor ill feelings toward La Russa that had developed after spring training ended . In a closed @-@ door meeting in mid @-@ May , La Russa asked Smith if he would like to be traded . Instead , Smith and his agent negotiated a compromise with Cardinals management , agreeing to a buyout of special provisions in his contract in conjunction with Smith announcing his retirement . The agreement prompted a press conference at Busch Stadium on June 19 , 1996 , during which Smith announced he would retire from baseball at season 's end . 
 As Smith made his final tour of the National League , he was honored by many teams , and received a standing ovation at the 1996 All @-@ Star Game in Philadelphia . Between June 19 and September 1 , Smith 's batting average increased from .239 to .286 . On September 2 Smith tied a career high by scoring four runs , one of which was a home run , and another on a close play at home plate in the bottom of the 10th inning against division leader Houston . The victory moved the Cardinals to within a half game of Houston in the National League Central Division , and the Cardinals went on to win the division by six games . The Cardinals held a special ceremony at Busch Stadium on September 28 , 1996 , before a game against the Cincinnati Reds , honoring Smith by retiring his uniform number . Noted for his ritual backflip before Opening Days , All @-@ Star Games , and postseason games , Smith chose this occasion to perform it for one of the last times . 
 In the postseason , the Cardinals first faced the San Diego Padres in the 1996 National League Division Series . After sitting out Game 1 , Smith got the start in Game 2 at Busch Stadium , helping his team go up two games in the series by notching a run , a hit and two walks at the plate , along with an assist and a putout in the field . The Cardinals then swept the series by winning Game 3 in San Diego . 
 The Cardinals faced the Atlanta Braves in the 1996 National League Championship Series . Smith started Game 1 and subsequently registered three putouts and one assist in the field , but went hitless in four at @-@ bats in the Cardinals ' 4 – 2 loss . The Cardinals then won Games 2 , 3 , and 4 , contests in which Smith did not appear . Upon receiving the start in Game 5 , Smith nearly duplicated his Game 1 performance with four putouts , one assist , and zero hits in four at @-@ bats as part of another Cardinals defeat . The Cardinals also failed to win Game 6 or Game 7 in Atlanta , ending their season . When the Cardinals were trailing by ten runs during Game 7 on October 17 , Smith flied out to right field while pinch @-@ hitting in the sixth inning , marking the end of his playing career . Smith finished his career with distinctions ranging from the accumulation of more than 27 @.@ 5 million votes in All @-@ Star balloting , to holding the record for the most MLB at @-@ bats without hitting a grand slam . 
 = = Post @-@ playing career = = 
 Upon retirement , Smith took over for Mel Allen as the host of the television series This Week in Baseball ( <unk> ) in 1997 . Smith also became color commentator for the local broadcast of Cardinals games on KPLR @-@ TV from 1997 to 1999 . When his stint on This Week in Baseball concluded , Smith then moved on to do work for CNN @-@ SI beginning in 1999 . After La Russa retired as manager of the Cardinals in 2011 , Smith became active in the organization again , starting with his stint as a special instructor for the team 's 2012 spring training camp . 
 On January 8 , 2002 Smith learned via a phone call he had been elected to the Baseball Hall of Fame on his first ballot by receiving 91 @.@ 7 % of the votes cast . As it happened , the Olympic torch was passing through St. Louis on its way to Salt Lake City for the 2002 Winter Olympics , and Smith served as a torchbearer in a ceremony with St. Louis Rams ' quarterback Kurt Warner that evening . Smith was inducted into the Hall of Fame during ceremonies on July 28 , 2002 . During his speech , he compared his baseball experiences with the characters from the novel The Wonderful Wizard of Oz , after which his son Dustin presented his Hall of Fame plaque . Days later on August 11 , Smith was back at Busch Memorial Stadium for the unveiling of a statue in his likeness made by sculptor Harry Weber . Weber chose to emphasize Smith 's defensive skills by showing Smith stretched horizontal to the ground while fielding a baseball . At the ceremony Weber told Smith , " You spent half of your career up in the air . That makes it difficult for a sculptor to do something with it . " 
 Smith has also been an entrepreneur in a variety of business ventures . Smith opened " Ozzie 's " restaurant and sports bar in 1988 , started a youth sports academy in 1990 , became an investor in a grocery store chain in 1999 , and partnered with David Slay to open a restaurant in the early 2000s . Of those businesses the youth academy remains in operation , with the restaurant having closed in 2010 after changing ownership and locations once . Aside from appearing in numerous radio and television commercials in the St. Louis area since retiring from baseball , Smith authored a children 's book in 2006 and launched his own brand of salad dressing in 2008 . 
 Besides the National Baseball Hall of Fame , Smith has been also inducted or honored in other halls of fame and recognitions . In 1999 , he ranked number 87 on The Sporting News ' list of the 100 Greatest Baseball Players , and finished third in voting at shortstop for the Major League Baseball All @-@ Century Team . He was honored with induction into the Missouri Sports Hall of Fame , Alabama Sports Hall of Fame and the St. Louis Walk of Fame , and received an honorary Doctor of Humane Letters degree from Cal Poly . In January 2014 , the Cardinals announced Smith among 22 former players and personnel to be inducted into the St. Louis Cardinals Hall of Fame Museum for the inaugural class of 2014 . 
 = = Career MLB statistics = = 
 = = = Hitting = = = 
 = = = Fielding = = = 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Smith is the father to three children from his marriage to former wife Denise ; sons Nikko and Dustin , and daughter Taryn . Smith remains a visible figure around the St. Louis area , making varied appearances like playing the role of the Wizard in the St. Louis Municipal Opera 's summer 2001 production of The Wizard of Oz . Smith cheered on his son Nikko as he cracked the top ten finalists of the 2005 edition of American Idol . In 2012 , Smith made news headlines again , when he sold all of his Gold Gloves at auction together for more than $ 500 @,@ 000 . 
 = MTV Unplugged ( Mariah Carey EP ) = 
 MTV Unplugged is a live EP by American singer and songwriter Mariah Carey , released in the United States on June 2 , 1992 by Columbia Records . Following the success of Carey 's previous two albums and the growing critical commentary on her lack of concert tours and unsubstantial televised performances , Sony BMG organised a performance show at the Kaufman Astoria Studios , New York on March 16 , 1992 . The show , titled MTV Unplugged , originally aired on MTV to help promote Carey 's album Emotions , as well as help shun critics who deemed Carey a possible studio artist . However , after its success , the show was released to the public as an EP , with an accompanying VHS titled MTV Unplugged + 3 . 
 Upon release , the EP garnered generally positive reviews from music critics , many of whom complimented Carey 's vocals . Commercially , the album was a success , peaking at number three on the Billboard 200 , and was certified three times platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) , denoting shipments of three million copies within the United States . Additionally , the EP experienced strong success in several international markets , such as the Netherlands and New Zealand , where it reached number one and was certified double platinum . MTV Unplugged peaked within the top five in the United Kingdom , and in the top ten in Australia and Canada . 
 " I 'll Be There " was chosen as the lead single from the album . Due to its critical success until that point , it was released one month before its parent EP , eventually becoming Carey 's sixth chart topper in the United States , and one of the few songs to do so by two different acts . Globally , the song was successful , topping the charts in Canada , the Netherlands and New Zealand , as well as attaining the top five position in Ireland and the United Kingdom . After its success , " If It 's Over " , a song from Carey 's second studio effort Emotions was released , due to its exposure on the show and EP . 
