 = = Background = = 
 After the release of Carey 's second studio album , Emotions ( 1991 ) , critics began wondering whether Carey would finally embark on a worldwide tour , having not toured to promote her self @-@ titled debut album . Although Carey had done several sporadic award show appearances , as well as television program performances , critics began accusing Carey of being a studio artist , not capable of delivering or replicating the same quality vocals live , especially her whistle register . During several televised interviews , Carey addressed the accusations , claiming that she did not tour out of fear of the long travel times and distances , as well as the strain on her voice performing her songs back @-@ to @-@ back . However , in hopes of putting any claims of her being a manufactured artist to rest , Carey and Walter Afanasieff decided to book an appearance on MTV Unplugged , a television program aired by MTV . The show 's purpose was to present name artists , and feature them " unplugged " or stripped of studio equipment . While live , the show allowed several musicians and back up vocalists , while recorded in an acoustic setting . The issues Carey faced once the show was booked was the content ; she didn 't know what material to present at the intimate concert . While Carey felt strongly of her more soulful and powerful songs , it was decided that her most popular content to that point would be included . Days prior to the show 's taping , Carey and Afanasieff thought of adding a cover version of an older song , in order to provide something different and unexpected . They chose " I 'll Be There " , a song made popular by The Jackson 5 in 1970 , rehearsing it few times before the night of the show . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 Carey 's performance was recorded on March 16 , 1992 at Kaufman Astoria Studios in Queens , New York . The show featured a number of musicians , back @-@ up vocalists and just a crew of ten , for filming and recording . Directed by Larry Jordan , who previously worked with Carey on the music video for " Someday " . Dana Jon Chapelle was chosen as the sound mixer , having worked with Carey on her previous two studio albums . The show began with the song " Emotions " Carey entered the studio dressed in a black jacket and matching pants and boots . Prior to the song 's studio introduction , Carey opened the song with an impromptu gospel and a cappella number , eventually leading to the song 's chorus led by David Cole . After the song , Carey introduced the band and staff ; to her left was a four @-@ piece string section with Belinda Whitney Barnett , Cecilia Hobbs @-@ Gardner , <unk> Garvey and Laura <unk> , while San Shea played the harpsichord and harmonium . The show 's rhythm section was led by Gigi Conway on the drums , Randy Jackson on bass , Vernon Black on guitar , and Sammy Figueroa and Ren Klyce , both percussionists . Additionally , Carey had ten background singers on stage , led by Trey Lorenz and Patrique McMillan . The next song on the set @-@ list was " If It 's Over " , a collaboration with Carole King . Walter Afanasieff replaced Cole on the piano , during which time a set of five male musicians were brought on stage . They were Lew Delgado , baritone saxophone ; Lenny Pickett , tenor saxophone ; George Young , alto saxophone ; Earl Gardner , trumpet ; and Steve <unk> , trombone . They had been present during Carey 's live performance of the song on Saturday Night Live a few months prior . As Carey introduced the song , she said " this next song I wrote with one of my idols , Carole King " , beginning the performance shortly after . For " Someday " , Cole returned to the stage , replacing Afanasieff on the keyboard . During the song , Carey would often place her index finger over her left ear , especially while using the whistle register . She later explained to the audience that it would help her in hearing herself more precisely , something needed to properly execute a higher ranged note . Once again , as Carey began " Vision of Love " , her " first single ever " , Afansieff swapped positions with Cole . The performance varied heavily from the studio version , as it was more low key and only used voices in a cappella form , without any heavy instrumentation . Prior to beginning the fifth song on the set @-@ list , " Make It Happen " , Afanasieff shared the organ with Cole , playing the bass while the latter handled the treble . After the song began , the back @-@ up began " piling their vocals " over Carey 's , according to author Chris Nickson , and allowed the song to attain a more " churchy feel " . He felt the song was superior to the studio version , due to its stripped performance and vocals : 
 " The roughness of this version succeeded in a way the recorded version on ' Emotions ' could never manage . In the sterile atmosphere of a studio , where perfection , technology , and overdubbing were the rules , spontaneity had no place . On the stage , it was valued , and this performance had it . Everyone pushed everyone just a little further , to create something wonderful , and judging by the response , the audience realized it , as did Mariah when the song was finished . " 
 Soon after completing " Make It Happen " , Carey eagerly presented the final song on the set list , " I 'll Be There " . The way the song was arranged , Carey took Michael Jackson 's lead , while Trey Lorenz sang the second lead , originally sung by Jermaine Jackson . After performing the sung alongside a very simple arrangement and minimal instrumentals , the back @-@ up singers began humming to the tune of " Can 't Let Go " , leading Carey to present " another final " song for the show . Several days after the concert , Carey sat down with Melinda Newman from Billboard , telling her of the experience recording the show , as well as her view on it from a creative perspective . She said " Unplugged taught me a lot about myself because I tend to nitpick everything I do and make it a bit too perfect because I 'm a perfectionist . I 'll always go over the raw stuff , and now I 've gotten to the point where I understand the raw stuff is usually better . " 
 = = Release = = 
 Originally , MTV planned to air the show several times during April 1992 , it was normal for MTV Unplugged sessions to air around six times during the month of release , before being archived . Carey 's version was met with critical acclaim and extended popularity , leading to it being shown more often than usual . Fans from around the United States made multiple requests for the show to be aired on television , and by the end of April 1992 , Carey 's episode of MTV Unplugged had aired over three @-@ times as much as an average episode would . The concert 's success tempted Sony officials to use it as some form of an album . However , Carey and Afansieff were already making headway on a new album set tentatively for release in 1993 . This being so , Sony decided to release it as an EP , selling for a reduced price due to its shorter length . 
 = = = Video = = = 
 After the success of the EP 's lead single " I 'll Be There " , Sony chose to release not only the EP , but a VHS accompaniment package ; a video of the actual concert titled MTV Unplugged + 3 . Aside from featuring the seven song 's performed at Kaufman Astoria Studios , it held three music videos ; " Can 't Let Go " , " Make It Happen " , and a rare remix version and video of " Emotions " . The video peaked atop the Billboard video chart , and was certified platinum by the RIAA , denoting shipments of 100 @,@ 000 units throughout the United States . 
 MTV Unplugged + 3 garnered generally positive reviews from music critics . Allmusic editor Shawn M. Haney gave the video three out of five stars , praising Carey 's vocals as well as her cover of " I 'll Be There " . Haney wrote " Gradually , the power and esteem of these tales lift to new heights and remain at a peak with the breathtaking , moment @-@ making performance of " I 'll Be There , " a charming song first cut by The Jackson 5 . " Writing for the St. Petersburg Times , Sabrina Miller called Carey an " artiste " and wrote " Programs like MTV Unplugged showcase talent like hers with an exclamation point . " Journalist and writer from The New York Times Jon Pareles branded the performance " shrewd " , and claimed Carey 's cover of " I 'll Be There " " set off fireworks " . A writer for Entertainment Weekly called the show a " vocal Tour de force " , and wrote " in addition to her breathtaking pipes , she has developed a commanding stage presence . " Additionally , they felt Carey 's performance of " I 'll Be There " was " killer " and concluded their review with " In the process , this rare public appearance reminded us there was a big @-@ league performer inside that party dress . " 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 MTV Unplugged garnered generally positive reviews from music critics . Allmusic editor Shawn M. Haney gave the album three out of five stars , praising Carey 's vocals as well as her cover of " I 'll Be There " . Haney wrote " Gradually , the power and esteem of these tales lift to new heights and remain at a peak with the breathtaking , moment @-@ making performance of " I 'll Be There , " a charming song first cut by the Jackson 5 . " Writing for the St. Petersburg Times , Sabrina Miller called Carey an " artiste " and wrote " Programs like MTV Unplugged showcase talent like hers with an exclamation point . " Journalist and writer from The New York Times Jon Pareles branded the performance " shrewd , " and claimed Carey 's cover of I 'll be There " " set off fireworks . " A writer for Entertainment Weekly called the show a " vocal Tour de force , " and wrote " in addition to her breathtaking pipes , she has developed a commanding stage presence . " Additionally , they felt Carey 's performance of " I 'll Be There " was " killer " and concluded their review with " In the process , this rare public appearance reminded us there was a big @-@ league performer inside that party dress . " Carey was nominated for a Grammy Award for Best Female Pop Vocal Performance for the album . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 MTV Unplugged debuted at number eight on the Billboard 200 , during the week of June 20 , 1992 . In its third week , the album peaked at number three . In total , the album remained in the top @-@ twenty for fourteen weeks , and on the chart for fifty @-@ seven ( making one re @-@ entry ) . MTV Unplugged was certified triple @-@ platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) , denoting shipment of three million copies throughout the country . As of April 2013 , Nielsen SoundScan estimates actual sales of the album at 2 @,@ 774 @,@ 000 in the United States . On June 20 , 1992 , MTV Unplugged entered the Canadian RPM Singles Chart at number thirty @-@ seven , eventually peaking at number six five weeks later . During the week of November 22 , 1992 , the album spent its last week on the chart , exiting at number eighty @-@ seven after spending twenty @-@ four weeks on the album 's chart . To date , the album has been certified platinum by the Canadian Recording Industry Association ( CRIA ) , denoting shipments of 70 @,@ 000 units throughout the country . In Australia , the album debuted at number thirty @-@ four on the ARIA Charts , during the week ending July 12 , 1992 . Weeks later , it peaked at number seven , where it remained for four consecutive weeks , and a total of twenty @-@ five weeks in the top 50 , and <unk> @-@ three weeks in the top 100 . The album was certified platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) , denoting shipments of 70 @,@ 000 copies . 
 Outside the United States , the album experienced success in several European markets . In Austria , MTV Unplugged entered the albums chart at number thirty @-@ nine , eventually peaking number twenty @-@ one and spending a total of ten weeks on the chart . In France , the album peaked at number twenty @-@ two , and was certified double @-@ gold by the Syndicat National de l 'Édition Phonographique ( SNEP ) , with estimated sales of 144 @,@ 000 copies . In the Netherlands , the EP entered the MegaCharts at number sixty @-@ six during the week of June 20 , 1992 . It eventually peaked at number one , staying there for three consecutive weeks , and a total of 116 weeks on the chart . The Nederlandse Vereniging van Producenten en Importeurs van beeld- en geluidsdragers ( NVPI ) certified the album double @-@ platinum , denoting shipments of 200 @,@ 000 units throughout the country . MTV Unplugged entered the New Zealand Albums Chart at number four during the week of August 2 , 1992 . After spending three weeks at number one , and a total of nineteen in the chart , the album was certified double @-@ platinum by the Recording Industry Association of New Zealand ( RIANZ ) . On the Swiss Albums Chart dated September 13 , 1992 , the album reached its peak position of number nineteen . After only five weeks charting within the country , it was certified gold by the International Federation of the Phonographic Industry ( IFPI ) . In the United Kingdom , the album debuted and peaked at number three on the UK Albums Chart , during the week dated July 18 , 1992 . After spending ten weeks on the chart , the album was certified gold by the British Phonographic Industry ( BPI ) , denoting shipments of 100 @,@ 000 units . 
 = = Singles = = 
 After the decision to release the EP was made , Sony decided to release Carey 's live version of " I 'll Be There " as the only single , due to its critical success . The song debuted at number thirteen on the Billboard Hot 100 , becoming Carey 's highest debut on the chart at the time . After four weeks , the song topped the chart , becoming Carey 's sixth number one in the United States , and spending two weeks there . Its success across the globe was strong , peaking at number one on the singles charts in Canada , the Netherlands , and New Zealand , and reached number two and three in the United Kingdom and Ireland , respectively . " I 'll Be There " was certified gold by both the Australian Recording Industry Association and Recording Industry Association of New Zealand , denoting shipments of 35 @,@ 000 and 7 @,@ 500 units of the song in their respective countries . After its success , " If It 's Over " , a song from Carey 's second studio effort Emotions was released , due to its exposure on the show and EP . It was given a very limited release , and only charted in the Netherlands , peaking at number 80 . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits for MTV Unplugged adapted from AllMusic . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = Mounseer Nongtongpaw = 
 Mounseer Nongtongpaw is an 1808 poem once thought to have been written by the Romantic writer Mary Shelley as a child . It is now believed that the author was theatrical writer John Taylor . The poem is an expansion of the entertainer Charles Dibdin 's song of the same name and was published as part of eighteenth @-@ century philosopher William Godwin 's Juvenile Library . A series of comic stanzas on French and English stereotypes , Mounseer Nongtongpaw <unk> John Bull for his inability to understand French . It was illustrated by Godwin 's friend William Mulready . 
 = = Publication details = = 
 Mounseer Nongtongpaw was originally published by William Godwin 's publishing firm , M. J. Godwin , in 1808 as part of its Juvenile Library series . English editions have been located for 1811 , 1812 , 1823 , and 1830 and Philadelphia editions have been located for 1814 and c . 1824 . The original edition was illustrated by a protégé of Godwin , William Mulready . Shelley biographer Emily Sunstein speculates that some of the verses may have been written to match illustrations that were already designed . The copper plate engravings are reproduced in Peter and Iona Opie 's Nursery Companion . 
 = = Structure and plot = = 
 Mounseer Nongtongpaw is based on a popular 1796 song of the same name by the entertainer Charles Dibdin . Dibdin 's original song mocks English and French stereotypes in five eight @-@ line stanzas , particularly " John Bull 's " refusal to learn French . John Bull makes numerous inquiries to which he always receives the same response : " Monsieur , je vous n <unk> pas " ( " Monsieur , I don 't understand you " ) , which he mistakenly interprets as " Mounseer Nongtongpaw " . He comes to believe that the Palais Royal , Versailles , and a beautiful woman — the sights he sees while touring France — belong to this mysterious personage . When he comes upon a funeral and receives the same response , he concludes that all of Nongtongpaw 's wealth could not save him from death . Mounseer Nongtongpaw expands Dibdin 's comic verses , adding more events to the narrative in shorter four @-@ line stanzas , such as inquiries about a tavern feast , a shepherd 's flock , a coach and four , and a hot @-@ air balloon : 
 = = Attribution = = 
 Mounseer Nongtongpaw was first attributed to the ten @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half @-@ year @-@ old Mary Godwin ( later Mary Shelley ) in A Nursery Companion ( 1980 ) by Peter and Iona Opie . Don Locke supported this view in his biography of William Godwin , Mary 's father , that same year . The attribution rested on a 1960 advertisement by a book dealer , which printed part of a 2 January 1808 letter from William Godwin to an unknown correspondent : 
 I therefore enclose two scribbles with which I would not otherwise have troubled you .... That in small writing is the production of my daughter in her eleventh year , and is strictly modelled , as far as her infant talent would allow , on Dibdin 's song .... The whole object is to keep up the joke of Nong Tong Paw being constantly taken for the greatest man in France . 
 " Dibdin 's song " refers to the popular song by Charles Dibdin on which the poem is based . The Opies wrote that " the presumption must be that the verses Godwin printed were those by his daughter " . In the 1831 introduction to Frankenstein , Shelley described her early childhood writing as that of " a close imitator — rather doing what others had done , than putting down the suggestions of my own mind " . 
 However , after the rediscovery of the entire letter , doubts emerged regarding this attribution : 
 Dear Sir , 
 In the midst of our short conversation of yesterday , & still more pleasant than short , you expressed a wish to receive a sketch in prose of the thing we desired . I am sure your kindness renders it a duty incumbent on me in return , to afford you every facility in my power . I therefore <unk> two scribbles with which I would not otherwise have troubled you . That in small writing is the production of my daughter in her eleventh year , & is strictly modelled , as ar as [ sic ] her infant talents would allow , on Dibdin 's song . This may answer the purpose of a prose sketch . The other is written by a young man of twenty . It is rather unintelligible : but the two first two stanzas may afford you a hint respecting the first two designs . 
 The more what you shall favour us with shall purely be your own , the more exquisite I am well satisfied it will be found . The whole object is to keep up the joke of Nong Tong Paw being constantly taken for the greatest man in France . 
 Believe me , with a thousand thanks , 
 My dear sir , 
 Very sincerely yours 
 W Godwin 
 Jan. 2 , 1808 . 
 May we send to you at ten or eleven to @-@ morrow morning ? 
 If you should have any thing to communicate , & should address it to Mr. Hooley , 41 , Skinner Street , Snow Hill , it will reach me in safety . 
 The complete letter suggests that the " small writing " was a prose piece , although Sunstein , the former owner of the letter ( which is now held by The Carl H. Pforzheimer Collection of Shelley and His Circle ) , argues that the wording is open to interpretation . She claims that " read in its entirely , [ the letter ] indicates that Mary Godwin wrote the initial revised text for Nongtongpaw , but not the final version " . She argues " that Mary Godwin 's revision was usable for a ' prose sketch ' does not necessarily mean that she wrote it in prose " . 
 According to Jeanne Moskal , one of the editors of the most recent definitive edition of Mary Shelley 's works , " It can be deduced from the letter , and corroborated by other circumstantial evidence uncovered by Sunstein , that the correspondent had been invited to write a new version of Dibdin 's song and that the correspondent and the composer of the 1808 text were therefore one and the same . " This man was probably John Taylor , whom Sunstein describes as " a veteran theatrical and miscellaneous writer ... best known for his narrative recital poem ' Monsieur Tonson ' ( 1796 ) " , which is a comic poem similar to Mounseer Nongtongpaw . Thus , in this authoritative collection of Mary Shelley 's works , the poem is not attributed to her . 
 = = Significance = = 
 Mounseer Nongtongpaw represents the beginning of Mary Shelley 's collaborative writing career , although it is no longer possible to reconstruct her actual contributions . Her sketch was given to the author of the published work as a way to inspire him . What precisely he drew from that text is , however , unknown . 
 = Basketball ( The Office ) = 
 " Basketball " is the fifth episode of the first season of the American comedy television series The Office , and the show 's fifth episode overall . The episode aired on NBC in the United States on April 19 , 2005 . The episode was written and directed by producer Greg Daniels , marking both his first solo writing credit and first directing credit for the series . This episode also marks the first appearance of comedian Patrice O 'Neal . 
 In this episode , Michael Scott ( Steve Carell ) and the office staff take on the workers in the warehouse in a basketball game . Owing to racist and sexist stereotypes , Michael chooses many less @-@ skilled office workers for the team over their more athletically talented peers . Michael claims a " flagrant personal intentional foul , " stops the game , and declares his team as the winners . The warehouse finds the call unfair and Michael caves under pressure , and concedes the victory to the warehouse staff . 
 The episode was inspired by a deleted scene from the first episode where Michael talks about a pick @-@ up basketball game . For two days , the cast of The Office played actual basketball games , which were then spliced together to give the effect of one continuous game . In addition , several lines from the episode became fan and cast favorites . " Basketball " was viewed by an estimated 5 @.@ 0 million viewers and received a 2 @.@ 4 / 6 % rating share among adults between the ages of 18 and 49 . The episode received positive reviews from critics . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 Michael ( Steve Carell ) comes in to work prepared to pit the office staff against the warehouse in a game of basketball , with the losers having to work on Saturday . Michael picks Jim ( John Krasinski ) , Ryan ( B.J. Novak ) , and Stanley ( Leslie David Baker ) , the last of whom he believes possesses significant basketball skills based on a racial stereotype . In addition , he also reluctantly picks Dwight ( Rainn Wilson ) and Phyllis ( Phyllis Smith ) , but refuses to pick Oscar ( Oscar Nunez ) or Kevin ( Brian Baumgartner ) . 
 The game begins and Stanley proves to be a horrible player . Furthermore , Michael cannot make a shot , nor is he a fan of passing or defending . Upon gaining possession of the ball , Michael fools around and intentionally acts stupid to tease the opponents , which results in Roy ( David Denman ) snatching the ball and scoring against Michael 's team . Despite the fact that Michael is the one who foolishly lost the ball , he blames the scoring on his teammates ' ineptitude . Jim switches with Michael on defense and defends Roy . As Jim begins to show his prowess at the game , Roy and Jim gradually become aggressive toward each other , with Pam ( Jenna Fischer ) looking on . At a crucial point in the game , Michael is accidentally hit in the face and claims it is a " flagrant personal intentional foul " . He <unk> stops the game and declares the office winners since they were winning when the foul occurred . The warehouse finds the call unfair and Michael caves under pressure , conceding the victory to the warehouse staff . As everybody returns to work , Kevin demonstrates his excellent shooting skills . 
 Afterwards , Michael , in a rare moment of heart , tells the office that they do not have to come in on Saturday either . However , his justification does little to calm them : " Like coming in an extra day is going to prevent us from being downsized . " 
 = = Production = = 
 " Basketball " was written and directed by producer Greg Daniels . Although he wrote the episode , Daniels was not originally scheduled to direct " Basketball . " Rainn Wilson remarked that he really pushed for Daniels to direct the episode . John Krasinski applauded Daniels for being the first writer to " take [ the characters ] out of the office . " Daniels later said that his favorite shot from the episode was when Michael takes Ryan on a tour of the warehouse because " you got to see the whole basketball [ set ] . " The editors ' cut for the episode was 40 minutes long . During the commentary for the episode , Steve Carell argued that the American version of The Office was more difficult to shoot because the British version was 29 minutes long , whereas the American version could only be 22 minutes . 
 The inspiration for the episode was a deleted scene from the pilot episode where Michael talks about a pick @-@ up basketball game . During filming , the cast and crew were filmed playing real basketball games for two days . The takes were then spliced together to make it appear as if only one game had taken place . NBC was worried about the episode because several of their other pilots had done basketball episodes . The network put a lot of pressure on the cast and crew to make the episode appear " as realistic as it could be . " Donald Lee Harris designed the warehouse set , which Krasinski described as " amazing " and " detailed . " 
 Several of the actors had basketball experience , such as Krasinski , who played for his high school team . Brian Baumgartner , who portrays Kevin , actually succeeded in making 14 free @-@ throw shots , of which several were included in the final footage . Steve Carell later said of his basketball skills , " The thing about looking like you 're bad at basketball is , it 's like anything else , you have to be incredibly good in order to look bad [ … ] but that 's not the case with me and basketball . I just was bad . " However , Carell joked that he would " kick ass " at a hockey episode , a reference to his real @-@ life hockey skills . 
 " Basketball " contained several lines that became fan and cast favorites . Two of Michael 's lines , " The hand strikes and gives a flower " and " Blessed be those who sit and wait " were described by Wilson as Confucian and biblical , respectively . Carell joked that Michael Scott himself should self @-@ publish a book of inspirational sayings . Jenna Fischer revealed that her line , " Please don 't throw garbage at me " was her favorite line of the first season . Michael 's line , " Try not to be too gay on the court " was improvised by Carell and Krasinski 's reaction was real , as he had no idea Carell was going to say it . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 In its original American broadcast on April 19 , 2005 , " Basketball " was viewed by an estimated 5 @.@ 0 million viewers and received a 2 @.@ 4 / 6 % rating share among adults between the ages of 18 and 49 . This means that it was seen by 2 @.@ 4 % of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds , and 6 % of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds watching television at the time of the broadcast . The episode , airing after Scrubs , retained 92 percent of its lead @-@ in audience . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 The episode received moderately positive reviews from critics . Travis Fickett from IGN retroactively gave the episode a 7 @.@ 5 out of 10 , signifying a " good " episode . Fickett commented that " Basketball " was stylistically different from most of the other episodes in the fledgling series , pointing to its lack of a sub @-@ plot and its characterization of Michael Scott . Fickett , when discussing the latter , singled out the moment wherein Michael hurts Phyllis ' feelings by telling her she can 't play basketball , writing , " The moment is played mostly straight – and it does feel more realistic and uncomfortable and in that way , the show leans more towards the feel of the UK series . It 's a great moment , but feels like a different show . " Overall , he wrote that , " There is still quite a bit of funny stuff [ in ' Basketball ' ] , but in many ways , this episode suggests what the show would have been like had it taken a slightly different direction in terms of tone and style . " Miss Alli from Television Without Pity gave the episode an " A – " . Jenna Mullins from E ! News referred to " Basketball " as her " all @-@ time favorite episode of The Office " in an article about Steve Carell 's last episode of the series . 
 Not all reviews were as positive , however . Erik Adams of The A.V. Club awarded the episode a " C + " and highly criticized the characterization of Michael . Largely , he felt that Michael 's antics made him out to be a jerk because the series has not worked at showing that he truly " isn ’ t a complete asshole " . Adams noted that Michael " could truly force Darryl and his staff to work on Saturdays , and he truly could fire them for winning the basketball game . But that would be an outrageous abuse of legitimate power , which isn ’ t funny . " Ultimately he argued that the basketball scenes went on for too long ; he said the " episode ’ s original cut ran too long to air , and it ’ s obvious where the basketball scenes boxed out other threads of the episode " . 
 = Ship camouflage = 
 Ship camouflage is a form of military deception in which a ship is painted in one or more colors in order to obscure or confuse an enemy 's visual observation . Several types of marine camouflage have been used or prototyped : blending or crypsis , in which a paint scheme attempts to hide a ship from view ; deception , in which a ship is made to look smaller or , as with the Q @-@ ships , to mimic merchantmen ; and dazzle , a chaotic paint scheme which tries to confuse any estimate of distance , direction , or heading . Counterillumination , to hide a darkened ship against the slightly brighter night sky , was trialled by the Royal Canadian Navy in diffused lighting camouflage . 
 Ships were sometimes camouflaged in classical times . Mediterranean pirate ships were sometimes painted blue @-@ gray for concealment . Vegetius records that Julius Caesar 's scout ships were painted bluish @-@ green when gathering intelligence along the coast of Britain during the Gallic Wars . Ships were sometimes painted deceptively during the Age of Sail , while both sides in the American Civil War camouflaged their ships , whether to run blockades or for night reconnaissance . 
 Ship camouflage was used in earnest by the British Admiralty in the First World War . The marine artist Norman Wilkinson led research into dazzle camouflage , resulting in the painting of thousands of British and later American ships in dazzle patterns . He intended it not to make ships invisible , nor even to cause the enemy to miss his shot , but to deceive him into taking up a poor firing position . In the Second World War , dazzle was revisited by the Royal Navy and the United States Navy , and applied to a limited extent by other navies . 
 After the Second World War , radar made painted camouflage less effective , though inshore craft continue to use camouflage schemes alongside anti @-@ radar stealth . 
 = = Early use = = 
 Ship camouflage was occasionally used in ancient times . The 3rd century book Imagines notes that Mediterranean pirate ships were sometimes painted blue @-@ gray for concealment . Vegetius writing in the 4th century says that " Venetian blue " ( bluish @-@ green , the same color as the sea ) was used in the years 56 – 54 BC during the Gallic Wars , when Julius Caesar sent his <unk> <unk> ( scout ships ) to gather intelligence along the coast of Britain . The ships were painted entirely in bluish @-@ green wax , with sails and ropes the same color . The sailors and marines were also dressed in " Venetian blue " . 
 In the Age of Sail , deception was often used by ships , and paint was applied ad hoc by ships ' captains for temporary tactical advantage . A ship might be painted to look like another , it might have its cannon ports hidden by painted canvas to look harmless , or it might have additional cannon ports painted on to appear more powerful . For example , in one of his battles during 1778 – 1782 , American privateer Jonathan <unk> hid the guns of his ship the General Pickering , to appear as if it were a slow merchant ship . <unk> allowed his ship to be approached at close range by a much faster British privateer , then he quickly pulled the painted canvas away and delivered a full broadside , capturing the enemy . 
 In the American Civil War , camouflage paint was applied by both sides during the Union blockade of 1861 – 1865 . Blockade runners aiding the Confederates sometimes painted their ships all in mist @-@ gray , to hide themselves in coastal fog . One Union blockade crew may have painted their rowboat white , and its oars , and wore white clothing for a night reconnaissance patrol up an enemy @-@ held river . 
 In the 1890s , German and French fighting ships were being painted gray . American interest in ship camouflage was given official funding in 1898 during the Spanish – American War when white , light gray , and medium gray paint schemes were evaluated for their ability to hide a ship as seen against the distant sky on the horizon . Artist Abbott Handerson Thayer investigated countershading color schemes to " paint out " natural shadows . The United States Navy switched from gray to white in the 1900s , and in 1907 its Great White Fleet set out to circumnavigate the globe with all @-@ white hulls . The white paint proved to be unsuccessful , and after the return of the Great White Fleet , its ships were painted gray . British ships began being painted gray in 1903 ; lighter shades were preferred to minimize solar heating in warmer climates . 
 = = First World War = = 
 In the First World War , the increasing range of naval guns , and the great fear of high @-@ speed , long @-@ range torpedoes used against warships and merchant ships caused a significant increase in the use of ship camouflage . 
 = = = Royal Navy = = = 
 Patterned ship camouflage was pioneered in Britain . Early in the First World War , the zoologist John Graham Kerr advised Winston Churchill to use disruptive camouflage to break up ships ' outlines , and countershading to make them appear less solid , following the American artist Abbott Handerson Thayer 's beliefs . Kerr was not an effective political campaigner , and his ideas were abandoned on Churchill 's departure from the Admiralty , while his postwar legal action to claim credit for ship camouflage failed . His successor , the marine artist Norman Wilkinson , successfully promoted the idea that Kerr 's camouflage sought invisibility rather than image disruption . Under Wilkinson , the Admiralty researched and issued a large number of " razzle @-@ dazzle " designs , which became known simply as " dazzle " , to counter the threat from submarines . Models were made and painted , often by women artists , and tested in a laboratory by viewing through a periscope . After trials , in October 1917 the Admiralty ordered all its merchant ships to be painted in dazzle patterns . The purpose of dazzle camouflage was not however motion dazzle but visual deception , as Wilkinson later explained : 
 The primary object of this scheme was not so much to cause the enemy to miss his shot when actually in firing position , but to mislead him , when the ship was first sighted , as to the correct position to take up . ... making it a matter of difficulty for a submarine to decide on the exact course of the vessel to be attacked . 
 Over 4000 British merchant ships and some 400 naval vessels were painted in dazzle camouflage during 1917 – 1918 . 
 Deceptive measures other than dazzle included the fitting of anti @-@ rangefinder baffles to the masts and yards of battleships such as HMS Emperor of India in 1917 . Deceptive mimicry was also practised , with heavily armed Q @-@ ships disguised as merchant ships . 
 = = = German Imperial Navy = = = 
 The German navy put little emphasis on camouflage . After the Battle of Jutland , German naval effort in any case went into submarine warfare . However , Germany made use of disguise , such as by painting ships in the colour schemes of British or neutral shipping . For example , the Kronprinzessin Cecilie was painted to resemble the British liner Olympic , and managed to reach America , evading the British blockade in 1915 . In 1915 and 1916 , the Germans further made use of commerce raiders , converted freighters with hidden weapons and long range , able to slip through the British blockade and then attack shipping as far away as the south Atlantic . German First World War merchant ships were rarely camouflaged , nor did they use Q @-@ ships , as the Allied navies did not attack merchant shipping . 
 = = = Other navies = = = 
 The Allied navies of France and Italy essentially followed Admiralty camouflage practice . In 1913 , American camouflage experiments included a submarine painted in a three @-@ color pattern of broad vertical stripes designed by William Mackay , using white stripes to separate green and blue stripes . Wilkinson visited the United States to advise the U.S. Navy on ship camouflage . Dazzle schemes were used on merchant ships , naval transports , and smaller warships . Battleships were camouflaged in a variety of patterns . 
 = = Second World War = = 
 Some two @-@ color paint schemes attempted to harmonize with both sea and sky near the horizon . The US Navy painted some ships dark gray with white structures above bridge level . Both the US Navy and the Royal Navy painted ships dark gray on the hull and light gray on the superstructure and turrets . USN measure 12 was a graded system with sea blue low on the hull below the first continuous deck , with ocean gray above that . The top of the masts were painted haze gray . This measure was modified with ocean gray above navy blue low on the hull below the first continuous deck ( painted parallel to the waterline rather than the main deck ) . This bold contrast on a horizontal line near the horizon reduced visibility to surface observers and created the illusion of greater range . This camouflage was considered most effective for gunnery engagements with surface units or shore batteries in areas where aerial observation was unlikely . It was used in the Atlantic and European coastal waters from the end of 1942 through the end of World War II . It was worn by shore bombardment ships in the Pacific from late 1944 after the destruction of Japanese naval aviation capability at the Battle of the Philippine Sea . Similar Admiralty standard schemes were applied beginning in 1944 when it was assumed enemy forces would have radar . Ships were painted light gray overall , except for a sea blue patch low on the hull , either between the main gun turrets or the entire length of the hull . 
 = = = United States Navy = = = 
 In 1935 , the United States Navy Naval Research Laboratory began studies and tests on low visibility camouflage for ships . Some measures were deceptive , like a false painted bow wave to give the impression of high speed at all times . Measures making cruisers resemble destroyers were discontinued after causing station @-@ keeping confusion among ships operating in formation . 
 Color schemes included light gray , haze gray , ocean gray , and black . Haze gray was found to provide reasonable protection in the widest range of conditions , and became a standard US Navy paint scheme after World War II . Ocean gray also became a standard paint scheme after the war . Although black is still used for submarines , it was discontinued on destroyers after it had been determined that black ships remained more noticeable than gray ships on even the darkest nights . 
 The US Navy painted some ships sea blue overall for concealment from aircraft . During the Battle of the Coral Sea and the Battle of Midway , ships painted completely blue came under attack less often than ships wearing two @-@ color schemes . On the advice of United States aviators the blue color was darkened and used extensively in the western and southern Pacific from mid @-@ 1942 through 1945 to minimize detection and identification by enemy aircraft . Dark blue also proved effective under artificial illumination during night actions . Upper surfaces of aircraft operating from carrier decks were painted a similar shade of blue . Sailors were ordered to wear dungarees rather than white uniforms when topside . 
 The Thayer system was white with large polygonal patches of light sea blue ( called Thayer Blue ) . This measure was most useful in Arctic latitudes with extended twilight and frequent fog and cloud cover . Purity of color was important for full realization of the Purkinje effect where some colors appear lighter and some appear darker at low levels of illumination . Darkening the pattern increased course deception , but increased visibility at night and in haze . 
 Measure 32 was a medium pattern of obtrusive polygons in navy blue or black , against background polygons of lighter grays and greens . This measure emphasized mistaken identity and course deception to complicate submarine attack . Patterns were carried across the bow , and light gray was used aft to blend with the wake . This measure was based on the World War I dazzle system modified by observations in the western Pacific ; and was applied to most surface ships in the Pacific during 1944 and 1945 . Different patterns were devised for classes with large numbers of ships so the pattern would not identify the class of ship . 
 = = = Royal Navy = = = 
 Between the world wars , Royal Navy ships were painted dark gray in the Home Fleet , light gray in the Mediterranean and Caribbean Seas , and white in the Indian Ocean and western Pacific . Many Home Fleet ships were painted medium gray during 1939 and 1940 to decrease visibility from the peacetime dark gray . 
 In the first year of the war British captains largely painted their ships as they saw fit . HMS Grenville is believed to have been the first ship to adopt a disruptive camouflage paint scheme in December 1939 , and several G @-@ class destroyers of her flotilla used a similar scheme of contrasting stone colored polygons . When concern arose about German aerial reconnaissance of Scapa Flow , some Home Fleet ships were painted with disruptive Flotta schemes of dark brown , light gray , and light green polygons from April to August 1940 for concealment and identity confusion in port . Most Home Fleet ships had been repainted medium gray by December 1940 . 
 The Royal Navy painted Mediterranean submarines dark blue in 1940 to reduce submerged visibility to aircraft . 
 Captain Louis Mountbatten 's 5th Flotilla of K class destroyers were painted Mountbatten pink in 1940 . Mountbatten observed a Union @-@ Castle Liner disappear from convoy during an autumn sunset because of the company 's unusual lavender @-@ mauve @-@ gray hull color . Mountbatten reasoned the color would be effective camouflage during dawn and dusk periods , and devised a similar shade by mixing medium gray with a small amount of venetian red . Its effectiveness was much disputed ; but it was applied to other destroyers , a few cruisers , and numerous small warships which maintained the scheme through 1944 for use in coastal waters . 
 No Admiralty camouflage section was established until October 1940 . Admiralty camouflage schemes promulgated in 1941 were not universally adopted because of difficulties with operating schedules and shortages of some paint pigments . Nearly all destroyers and larger ships wore an Admiralty disruptive camouflage scheme by late 1942 ; but Commonwealth captains executed official camouflage schemes with greater variation than was customary with American measures . 
 Initial Admiralty disruptive camouflage schemes employed polygons of varying shades of gray , blue and green so at least two of the colors would blend with background sea or sky under different light conditions . Schemes devised for capital ships emphasized identity confusion rather than concealment . HMS Queen Elizabeth became the first ship to receive an official camouflage scheme in January 1941 . As more ships received similar schemes through 1941 it became evident the polygons were too small to be differentiated at effective camouflage ranges . Simplified Admiralty light and dark disruptive schemes were promulgated in 1942 to use larger and simpler polygons with no more than four colors . Light disruptive schemes were intended for use in the higher latitudes where skies were often overcast . Dark disruptive schemes used darker colors providing more effective disruption where bright sunlight could be expected . 
 The Admiralty Western Approaches scheme evolved from a camouflage scheme applied to HMS Broke in June 1940 at the suggestion of the naturalist Peter Scott , who was serving aboard that ship . Broke was painted white with large polygonal patches of light gray , light sea blue and light sea green . Broke achieved some notoriety in a collision where the captain of the other ship claimed to have been unable to see Broke . Escort captains observing Broke experimented with similar schemes including polygons of dark gray or dark blue for increased disruptive contrast , while others tried painting their ships entirely white to emphasize concealment . The Admiralty omitted light gray from Peter Scott 's scheme . White with large polygonal patches of light sea blue and light sea green was adopted in mid @-@ 1941 for use exclusively on destroyers and smaller ships engaged in anti @-@ submarine operations . This was an effective scheme under typical North Atlantic weather conditions of fog and overcast . Captain @-@ class frigates were delivered painted white with a pattern of sea blue and light grey in an American Western Approaches variant . These were colors used in American camouflage measures ; but the pattern was unique to ships produced for the Royal Navy and was replaced by Admiralty schemes and colors during refit . The Home Fleet destroyer scheme was similar to the Western Approaches scheme but used darker shades of blue and gray on the rear third of the ship , to assist in station @-@ keeping . British decks were usually dark gray . 
 The Admiralty 's informal approach changed when a branch of the Naval Research Laboratory was established at Leamington Spa under Commander James <unk> @-@ Bateman to test ship camouflage schemes experimentally . Painted models were floated in a large tank and examined against different backgrounds , using theater lamps to simulate varying lighting conditions . 
 An experimental coating able to change color was tested on Royal Navy submarines . On suggestion by Professor Leslie <unk> , lead oxide was applied to the hull , enabling it to become black on application of a solution of sulphite and sea water for night operation . For day sailing , a solution of hydrogen peroxide and sea water would be applied , producing sulphate and returning the hull to a white colour desirable for daytime conditions . 
 = = = German Kriegsmarine = = = 
 German Kriegsmarine ships before the Second World War were either light gray overall or had dark gray hulls , and many retained this scheme during the war . The cruiser Deutschland , for instance , had a gray hull and light gray superstructure in 1934 . Others had dazzle camouflage , usually in combinations of pale gray , dark gray and sea blue . For example , the hull of the battleship Scharnhorst had a dazzle pattern of stripes on a gray background in 1940 , but some of these were later painted out , and the bows forward of the main guns painted black . Scharnhorst was not camouflaged against air observation , her decks fore and aft bearing large black on white swastikas on a red field ; her main gun turrets had red ( in the Baltic ) or yellow tops for air recognition . The battleship Bismarck set out to Norway in dazzle camouflage ; this was painted out with gray for her final trip to the Atlantic . The cruiser Admiral Scheer wore a low contrast pattern of irregular dark gray marks on light grey for her superstructure , with a dark gray hull , black waterline and , away from air support while out raiding in 1941 , dark gray turret tops . 
 Larger ships often had false bows and sterns painted in a different shade from the rest of the hull to create the impression of the ship being at greater range from the observer . German decks were a very dark gray . Smaller ships operating in the North Sea or Baltic Sea were painted white or a very pale gray to blend in with daytime mist and nighttime phosphorescent organisms . As in the First World War , the Germans again employed disguised commerce raiders , <unk> such as Atlantis , Thor and Kormoran . These ships were able to modify their appearance to throw off the searching Allied cruisers . 
 = = = Royal Canadian Navy = = = 
 In the diffused lighting camouflage project , the Royal Canadian Navy experimented with variable counter @-@ illumination camouflage to match horizon light levels and minimize ships ' silhouettes during prolonged arctic twilight . During the experiments , one side of the test ship was faintly illuminated by projectors mounted outboard . Results were improved with the use of blue @-@ green filters , and then with a <unk> to measure the brightness of the night sky . The ship 's visibility was reduced , but the technology was inconvenient and never adopted in practice . 
 = = = Other navies = = = 
 Italian ships of Mussolini 's navy retained its pre @-@ war scheme of light gray overall for its smaller ships , but the larger units mostly had dazzle camouflage of dark gray , light sea blue , light sea green and light gray . Italian <unk> had a high @-@ visibility pattern of red and white diagonal stripes so that their own aircraft would not attack them . 
 Japanese ships were generally not camouflaged . In special tactical situations , camouflage could be improvised , as when the battleships Yamato and Musashi had their decks blackened with a mixture of soot to help them hide while passing through the San Bernardino Strait at night in the October 1944 Battle of Leyte Gulf . Japanese ships largely retained their pre @-@ war dark gray paint scheme , although some major units like aircraft carriers changed to a dark sea green . Some aircraft carriers had their flight decks painted in a dazzle camouflage , but this seems to have been ineffective . By 1945 , with the remnants of the Japanese Navy seeking to hide from American air power , its battleships were painted in a variety of camouflage measures . Haruna for example wore olive green overall , its turrets painted light green with gray stripes , whereas Ise 's olive dress was broken up with patches of gray , red @-@ brown , yellow , and dark green . 
 Soviet ships were dark gray overall , sometimes with medium gray upperworks . 
 The French Navy used light gray before the war and under the Vichy regime . Free French ships that operated with the British adopted one of the British schemes . Those that were refitted in American shipyards were usually repainted in the American Measure 22 . 
 = = After the Second World War : coastal and river boats = = 
 After the Second World War , the universal adoption of radar made traditional camouflage generally less effective , and led to development of stealth ships , a form of radar camouflage . However , camouflage may have helped United States warships avoid hits from Vietnamese shore batteries which used optical rangefinders . Some U. S. Navy PTF boats were camouflaged experimentally in 1975 with green overall , broken up by patterns of gray and black . USS Freedom , a littoral combat ship , is however said to be the first U.S. Navy ship to have camouflage reminiscent of that used in the World Wars . 
 = Lovers in Japan = 
 " Lovers in Japan " is a song by British alternative rock band Coldplay . It was written by all members of the band for their fourth studio album , Viva la Vida or Death and All His Friends . The song is built around an introductory tack piano sound , then followed by chiming guitars and soaring choruses , supported by the pianos and rhythms that accompany the song 's lyrics . The album version of " Lovers in Japan " also includes the track " Reign of Love " . 
 It was released as a promotional radio single on 3 November 2008 and peaked at number 10 on the Billboard Bubbling Under Hot 100 Singles chart . The song also charted at number 19 on Billboard 's Adult Top 40 chart . " Lovers in Japan " was well received by music critics , who praised the track 's general sound . Although the promotional single is seen as the fourth single from the album , the version on the single is the Osaka Sun Mix , which is featured on the Prospekt 's March EP . 
 = = Writing and composition = = 
 When asked about the development of the song , during a track @-@ by @-@ track reveal , drummer Will Champion said : 
 We were in a studio in New York , this place called the Magic Shop , and it had this thing called a tack piano there , which sounds like an old honky @-@ tonk piano , where you put little tacks in the hammers , so it sounds like more of a harpsichord almost . And so we wanted to use that kind of sound , but we didn 't have a tack piano , so rather than sample it , we went and bought an old piano from the shop up the road from our studio , and we bought a load of tacks , and me and Guy and Jon spent a couple of hours pushing tacks into the piano hammers . 
 On Viva la Vida or Death and All His Friends , " Lovers in Japan " transitions seamlessly into a second track entitled " Reign of Love " . In an interview with Q magazine , bassist Guy Berryman explained that the band could not make up their minds about the track listing , as they had discussed that they wanted to keep the album concise with a total of ten tracks and an intended length of under 42 minutes . Champion further stated , " We just preferred to have less titles and more stuff . The album as a whole has got the most on it , but it ’ s the shortest . We wanted to make it almost impossible for you to not listen to it all in one go . " In addition , vocalist Chris Martin revealed that the band had wanted to have a " two @-@ in @-@ one " song title , as American recording artist Justin Timberlake had done the same on his album FutureSex / LoveSounds ( 2006 ) . 
 The song 's instrumentation features an introductory detuned tack piano sound , progressing to feature upbeat guitar riffs and soaring choruses . Towards the end , it builds into a rhythmically soaring , sound , compared by critics to that of Irish rock band U2 . Martin sings about the shortness of time , as well as " runners who must run until the race is won " and " soldiers who must soldier on " in the second and third verses of the song . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 Coldplay released " Lovers in Japan " in the United States on 3 November 2008 as the fourth single from Viva la Vida or Death and All His Friends . A new mix of the song is also featured in the band 's 2008 EP Prospekt 's March , entitled " Lovers in Japan ( Osaka Sun Mix ) " . Chris Martin said of the Prospekt 's March version of the song : " We 've been playing it live better than it is on the record . So the live version has informed this Osaka Sun version , which is just a bit more lively . " " Lovers in Japan " was released as a radio @-@ only single in the United States and later entered Billboard 's Hot Adult Top 40 Tracks chart , where it peaked at number 32 on the issue dated 29 November 2008 . The track also peaked at number 10 on the Billboard Bubbling Under Hot 100 Singles chart and at number 65 on the Pop 100 chart . Outside of the United States , " Lovers in Japan " peaked at number 41 on the Japan Hot 100 . 
 " Lovers in Japan " received high commendations from critics . Alexis Petridis of The Guardian review of the album , wrote : " Chris Martin 's melodies ... shine : even his loudest detractor could hardly deny his way with a tune as evidenced here by ' 42 ' and ' Lovers in Japan ' . " Evan Sawdey of PopMatters remarked that the song is " stunning , jaw @-@ dropping highlight " . He added that " Martin pounds away at a bouncy toy @-@ piano melody ... leading into a chorus where guitarist Jonny Buckland gets to unleash what might be the catchiest guitar riff he 's written ... ( and yes , he absolutely bathes in the moment ) . " Joey Guerra of the Houston Chronicle described " Lovers in Japan " as a " joyous , romantic anthem that combines wistful rock riffs and gorgeous piano " . He also wrote that the song is one of " the disc 's best moments " . 
 Jed Gottlieb of the Boston Herald remarked that the piano sound in " Lovers in Japan / Reign of Love " hints at the 1968 song " Lady Madonna " by The Beatles , " before taking a neo @-@ classical , Chopin @-@ does @-@ Britpop route " . Jeff Crawford of the City Messenger wrote , " ' Lovers in Japan / Reign of Love ' and ' Strawberry Swing ' rank among the band 's best work " . Josh Hathaway from The Plain Dealer wrote that " Lovers in Japan / Reign of Love " works " in just the opposite direction with ' Lovers ' playing like an update of vintage Simple Minds , an almost anthem that never fully takes flight , before giving way to the gentle ' Reign of Love ' " . 
 = = Music video = = 
 A music video for the single , directed by Mat Whitecross in London , was released on 31 October 2008 through the iTunes Store . The video was made available for free for a week on the American and Canadian iTunes Stores . The video utilises the " Osaka Sun Mix " version of the song . 
 The first half of the video shows the band playing in a courtyard while each member writes certain words from the lyrics in glowing neon on the screen . During the chorus , the camera spins around in circles to go along with the lines " They are turning my head out " . The video ends with butterfly @-@ shaped confetti raining on the band , as happens when each chorus is played at live concerts , along with the words " The End " on the screen behind the band as they take a bow . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Rings Around the World = 
 Rings Around the World is the fifth studio album and the major label debut by Super Furry Animals . Released on 23 July 2001 by Epic Records in the United Kingdom , it was the first album by any artist to be simultaneously released on both audio CD and DVD . The record reached number 3 in the UK Albums Chart and includes the singles " Juxtapozed with U " , " ( Drawing ) Rings Around the World " and " It 's Not the End of the World ? " . 
 The album , which singer Gruff Rhys describes as " a very ambitious project " , was recorded between April and September 2000 at Monnow Valley Studios in Rockfield , Monmouthshire , Wales and Bearsville Studios , New York with the band acting as co @-@ producers alongside Chris Shaw . The majority of the songs on Rings Around the World were written by Rhys on guitar and piano with keyboardist Cian Ciaran contributing " [ A ] Touch Sensitive " and " Miniature " as well as collaborating with other members of the band on " Run ! Christian , Run ! " , " Alternate Route to Vulcan Street " and " No Sympathy " . Ex @-@ Beatle Paul McCartney and former Velvet Underground member John Cale make cameo appearances on the album . 
 Musically Rings Around the World is an eclectic record incorporating pop , prog , punk , jungle , electronica , techno and death metal . Rhys has offered several explanations of the album 's lyrical content , claiming the record is " about Earth , and the pollution of space " and also that it addresses the human condition . Critics meanwhile have referred to the record as " thematically eccentric " and lacking an " overarching theme " . Critical reception was generally positive , with the album being nominated for 2001 's Mercury Music Prize and placing at number one in Mojo 's " best albums of 2001 " feature . Some reviews claimed it to be the best record of the band 's career although the NME described it as the band 's worst album . 
 = = Origins and recording = = 
 Rings Around the World was the Super Furry Animals ' first album for Epic Records following the demise , in 1999 , of their previous label Creation and the success of 2000 's Mwng , which was issued on the band 's own label , Placid Casual . Singer Gruff Rhys has stated that the band aimed to make a " laid back and sort of wiped clean " record with Rings .... In a 2008 interview with Uncut Rhys described the album as " a very ambitious project " stating that " We were trying to make a blockbuster album that was going to be like The Eagles ... We were trying to make utopian pop music that had pretensions of being progressive and exciting . " Rings ... was originally going to be called Text Messaging is Destroying the Pub Quiz as We Know It and released as a double album containing 75 – 90 minutes of material with Rhys stating that he was " into the excess of it , that was the whole point " . The group eventually decided against the idea but , drawn by the technical capabilities of the format and the desire to do something that had never been done before , produced a DVD version of Rings ... , making it the first album to be simultaneously released on CD and DVD . The DVD features a surround sound mix alongside music videos and remixes and was made possible only by the financial backing of Epic . 
 Recording sessions began in April 2000 at Monnow Valley Studios in Rockfield , Monmouthshire , Wales with co @-@ producer Chris Shaw and engineer Eric Tew . The band moved to Bearsville Studios , New York before returning to Monnow Valley some months later where recording was completed in September 2000 . Bearsville was chosen because of its drum and live rooms , which the band felt were desirable as they were using more microphones to capture audio for the surround sound mix included on the DVD version of the album than they would normally when simply recording in stereo . The group were mindful of the capabilities of surround sound and recorded sub @-@ bass on tracks such as " [ A ] Touch Sensitive " and " Juxtapozed with U " , which could only be heard through a low @-@ frequency subwoofer channel in the surround mix . The band recorded onto two @-@ inch analogue tape until they had a take they were happy with , then transferred the results to Pro Tools where individual songs were edited and overdubs were added . According to Keyboardist Cian Ciaran this meant the band could " edit some beats very precisely ... like the gated kicks at the end of the track " Sidewalk Serfer Girl " " . Once they were happy with a song the group then transferred it back to tape before mixing took place as they liked the " tape sound " . 
 Rhys wrote many of the tracks on the album on acoustic guitar and piano and brought them to the band either as fully formed songs or as ideas which the group would then jam out . Ciaran wrote the songs " [ A ] Touch Sensitive " and " Miniature " and the intro and outro of " Run ! Christian , Run ! " . A jam between Cian and guitarist Huw Bunford resulted in Rings Around the World 's opening track " Alternate Route to Vulcan Street " . The pair looped a sample of drummer Dafydd Ieuan playing the bass drum and snare and recorded themselves playing along on piano and guitar into a sampler . They then " chopped the playing up a bit " and filtered the drums and guitar to " give them more movement " . Finally Rhys wrote lyrics and a string arrangement was added by Sean O 'Hagan . Cian also contributed the second part of the song " No Sympathy " , sampling the " mellow acoustic guitars " from the first half to create a techno " climactic ending " . 
 Sessions for Rings Around the World saw the band concentrating on arrangements , particularly their vocal harmonies . On previous albums individual members of the group would " keep singing until [ they ] came up with harmonies that worked " but , encouraged by co @-@ producer Chris Shaw , for Rings ... the band took the time to work out harmonies in advance . The group used piano , keyboards or " whatever was available " to give themselves a starting note before the five band members and staff at the recording studio began trying ideas out . Occasionally Auto @-@ Tune was used to " re @-@ pitch existing lines to see if different versions of them would counterpoint correctly " , with the band then learning the new vocal lines and recording them as they did not want to use Auto @-@ Tune on the finished album . 
 Paul McCartney is credited as providing " celery and carrot " on the track " Receptacle for the Respectable " . McCartney performed a similar role over thirty years earlier , chewing celery to form the percussion track of The Beach Boys song " Vegetables " from the album Smiley Smile . The Super Furry Animals had met the ex @-@ Beatle at the NME Awards when a drunk Ciaran persuaded him to let them remix some Beatles material , resulting in 2000 's Liverpool Sound Collage album . The band asked him to " return the favour " and appear on Rings Around the World , recording his part over the phone . Huw Bunford has said of McCartney 's contribution : " He took it with good nature . You kind of see how far you can go sometimes ... we figured we already had a bass and singers so we really didn 't need any more musicians . So we figured he could crunch vegetables " . Former Velvet Underground member John Cale , a " sort of childhood hero " of Rhys 's , also makes an appearance on the album , playing piano on the song " Presidential Suite " . The Super Furry Animals had met Cale in Cardiff when they acted as his backing band for a song which appeared on the film Beautiful Mistake . They originally asked him to arrange strings for " Presidential Suite " but Cale turned them down reasoning that he would simply do what the band do : hum a melody to someone who could write the music down for him . 
 = = Musical style = = 
 Rings Around the World is " very cinematic " and falls somewhere between the Super Furry Animals ' 1999 album , the " instantaneous , easy to grasp , and almost disposable " Guerrilla , and its " exact opposite " , 2000 's Mwng . The band combined the technology they used for the former with the simplicity of the latter , which featured " just the band playing in the studio " . Singer Gruff Rhys has described the album as the band 's " cosmic rock record " . 
 The album is a " kaleidoscopic blend of pop , prog , punk , psych , and electronica " . Drowned in Sound describes it as similar to Guerrilla with " Beach Boys @-@ esque psychedelic pop ... put to techno undertones " while the NME has called Rings Around the World an " expensive , glossy production ... lush and widescreen " and suggested that it " reaches for an effect so modern that at times it sounds like it could 've been made in the ' 80s " . The first single , " Juxtapozed with U " , is reminiscent of both the Philadelphia soul music of the 1970s , and the " plastic " approximation of that music on David Bowie 's 1975 album Young Americans , while " No Sympathy " has been described as the " missing link between Crosby , Stills , Nash & Young @-@ <unk> harmonies , jungle hi @-@ hats and berserk sampler techno " . The Dallas Observer compared " It 's Not the End of the World ? " to tunes such as The Kinks ' " Waterloo Sunset " , Dennis Wilson 's " Forever " and Jack Bruce 's " Theme for an Imaginary Western " while The Big Issue called " Sidewalk Serfer Girl " " surf @-@ punk electro pop " . Elsewhere on the album the eclectic range of sounds continues from the trip hop of " [ A ] Touch Sensitive " to the Status Quo @-@ esque " ( Drawing ) Rings Around the World " and the " electro country rock " of " Run ! Christian , Run ! " . 
 The track " Receptacle For the Respectable " reflects the eclecticism of the album as it " undergoes a complete personality change " over the course of its four @-@ minute thirty @-@ two @-@ second duration , veering from prog rock to death metal . The song begins as an acoustic guitar @-@ driven pop song and then shifts into a slower bridge section which leads to an even slower coda which has been compared to the music of Burt Bacharach and The Beach Boys ' Smiley Smile album and features Paul McCartney chewing carrots and celery to the beat . The track ends with a " pantomime death metal " section with Rhys 's " distorted , bellowed vocals " screaming the title phrase . According to Cian Ciaran , the song initially comprised just the first two parts when recorded at Monnow Valley Studios but , by the time the group relocated to Bearsville Studios , Rhys had written and added the third section . While there the band added the fourth section by " pissing about with Pro Tools " , looping the bass from the end of the third section " by accident " to create the musical backing . A fifth , hip hop , section was discussed but the band decided against it , reasoning that " if you 're going to do a fifth bit , you 'd probably do a sixth , and before you know where you are , you 're doing a concept album made up of nothing but bits ! " . According to the band , the track is the only time on the album where they tried to achieve comedy and " completely went with [ their ] silly streak " . 
 = = Lyrical themes = = 
 Singer and chief lyric writer Gruff Rhys has given several explanations of the lyrical themes present on the album . He has claimed that the record is " about Earth , and the pollution of space : it 's about debris " and that it was originally going to be a " state of the planet concept album " before the band decided against it . Rhys has also stated that the album is about the human condition , citing tracks such as " Fragile Happiness " and " Receptacle For The Respectable " as examples . Critics have referred to the album as " thematically eccentric " and lacking an " overarching theme " with The Independent claiming it leaps " from religious fundamentalists to modern telecommunications and the old Hollywood star system with disorienting glee " . 
 In contrast with 1999 's Guerrilla , which featured songs with " self @-@ consciously disposable , happy " lyrics , the tracks on Rings Around the World are , according to Rhys , " <unk> and more revealing " . The track " No Sympathy " was originally written for a film entitled <unk> , which followed three unsympathetic characters who lived for a week as though it were their last . Rhys has described the song as quite a departure for him as a lyric writer and claimed that out of context it could appear bleak and scary . " Presidential Suite " , about former United States and Russian presidents Bill Clinton and Boris Yeltsin , is " a reflective look back at the decadent nineties " during the Lewinsky scandal and asks if " we need to know if he really came inside her mouth ? " . " Juxtapozed with U " addresses social injustice and is about " house prices going up , and people being left behind by the super rich " and has been described by Rhys as " grotesque in its <unk> and lift " . " Sidewalk Serfer Girl " was initially written about Patti White Bull , a girl who fell into a coma for 15 years , awaking in 1999 , but became an amalgamation of the lyrics of several different songs , including one section in which Rhys describes his disdain for extreme sports . " Receptacle for the Respectable " is about simultaneously being in awe of , and being hurt by , a " girl around town " while " It 's Not the End of the World ? " is " a romantic song about growing old " . " Run ! Christian , Run ! " was influenced by guitarist Huw Bunford 's interest in " doomsday cult websites " . Bunford printed out several essays from these websites and gave them to Rhys who used them as inspiration for his lyrics along with his own recollections of watching Christian television shows during the band 's American tours . The album 's title track , " ( Drawing ) Rings Around the World " , is based on an idea put forward by <unk> 's girlfriend 's father and is about " all the rings of communication around the world . All the rings of pollution , and all the radioactivity that goes around " . " Shoot Doris Day " refers to shooting American singer and actress Doris Day with film — " a very cinematic reference " for a song which Rhys claims is " over @-@ the @-@ top lyrically " . The track is about " how people change " and also references Labour Party ' spin doctor ' Peter Mandelson , in the guise of ' Victor Panache ' . 
 = = DVD = = 
 The DVD of Rings Around the World contains the 13 songs featured on the CD version of the album along with 7 bonus tracks . These 20 songs are presented in surround sound and are accompanied by " low budget " music videos . The release also includes 16 remixes and interactive menus featuring ambient music created by the band . According to Keyboard player Cian Ciaran the group were worried that " doing a DVD might seem elitist , because only certain people have DVD players and systems , even now " but reasoned that " most people will have DVD playback systems at home within five years . Even if it doesn 't take off , the stereo version of the album will always be there " . The DVD release received a ' 15 ' certificate from the British Board of Film Classification , meaning that no @-@ one under the age of 15 could buy or rent it in the United Kingdom . 
 Ciaran has stated that the Super Furry Animals were " very hands @-@ on " during the making of the DVD . Initially the band were mainly concerned with the sound quality , describing the presentation of the album 's tracks in surround sound as " radical , like the change from mono to stereo " . The group directed the surround sound mix themselves , instructing audio engineers to move instruments and vocal parts between speakers : " We want that one bit of sound to travel from the centre , over our heads and finish on my right shoulder ... Let 's have the main vocal in the middle , then each harmony in its own speaker . " They soon became equally as interested in the remixes , visuals and interactive elements however . Ciaran has described this process as " not always a nice position to be in " when , for example , they had to reject music videos they weren 't happy with . The band asked different directors to make music videos for each song having tried unsuccessfully to make a film to accompany their 1999 album Guerrilla themselves . According to singer Gruff Rhys the band " tended to go for illustrators who could [ make videos ] cheaply using Flash ... and artists who like to work " . The directors were asked to make the visuals as " extreme as possible " in an effort to avoid making videos that looked like just " another pop promo ... like MTV " and , according to Ciaran , had to " work even harder at creating something interesting " due to the limited budget available . Many of those who made videos for the DVD release had no previous experience of making films resulting in a " really fresh ... kind of scruffy " end product . According to Rhys the band made separate music videos for Rings Around the World 's three singles as they saw the videos included on the DVD release of the album as " pure art " whereas they needed promotional videos that were more like adverts for the songs . Rhys has stated that the Super Furry Animals felt that fans placed too much emphasis on the videos on Rings Around the World rather than concentrating on the music , as a result of which the band used " really bland images " on the DVD release of their next album Phantom Power . 
 Although he enjoyed having so much control over the project Ciaran has claimed that it " sometimes felt like it would never end " and he was glad to get back to " the music side of things " upon the DVD 's completion . Singer Gruff Rhys has stated that he found being involved with all aspects of the DVD release " really exciting " and particularly enjoyed working with " so many people " . 
 = = Release = = 
 Rings Around the World was released on CD , vinyl , MiniDisc and DVD on 23 July 2001 in the United Kingdom on Sony 's Epic imprint and was the world 's first simultaneous album / DVD release . The record reached number 3 in the UK Albums Chart . In America Rings Around the World was released on 19 March 2002 by XL Recordings with a bonus CD featuring seven tracks which appear on the DVD version of the album . Rings Around the World was released on 25 September 2001 in Japan with two additional tracks , " Tradewinds " and " Happiness Is a Worn Pun " , added after " Fragile Happiness " at the end of the album . " Juxtapozed with U " was released as the first single from the album , reaching number 14 in the UK Singles Chart , followed by " ( Drawing ) Rings Around the World " in October 2001 which peaked at number 28 . The third and final single to be taken from the album , " It 's Not the End of the World ? " , was released in January 2002 and reached number 30 in the UK Singles Chart . The album has been certified gold in the United Kingdom , denoting sales of more than 100 @,@ 000 copies . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Rings Around the World received praise from critics with a score of 86 on Metacritic , denoting " universal acclaim " . Brent DiCrescenzo of Pitchfork Media stated that the album 's combination of " paisley , sun @-@ heated , and layered " music with Gruff Rhys 's " satirical and heartfelt lyrics " makes it " timeless " and the band 's best record . Adrian Begrand of PopMatters called the record " near @-@ perfect " and wrote that " we should be thankful there are bands out there willing to throw everything they 've got into a record just to see what happens " . Uncut praised its " accessible and adventurous " nature , while The Independent opined that Rings Around the World " represents a quantum jump beyond the Furries ' previous work " and described it as " one of the year 's most engrossing – and , crucially , most entertaining – albums " . Mojo stated that Rings Around the World was the band 's " first truly flawless album " and later named it the best album of 2001 . Tiny Mix Tapes called Rings Around the World " one of the , if not the , best releases of 2002 " , describing it as a " mixture of sugar pop of yesteryear and modern Britpop " resulting in a " near perfect " album . Rings Around the World was later nominated for 2001 's Mercury Music Prize . 
 In a review for Stylus Magazine , Scott Plagenhoef wrote that on Rings Around the World , the band are " gleefully working outside of a scene or prototype " and " dabbling in a world of musical influences and Western hegemony , playing the merry prankster to Radiohead 's gloom – and all with a smile , and in three @-@ part harmony " . Writing for AllMusic , Stephen Thomas Erlewine praised the record , claiming that it " shines brightly " compared to the " dead world of mainstream and indie rock in 2001 " but expressed disappointment that it is " the first SFA album not to progress from its predecessor " . Rob Brunner of Entertainment Weekly claimed that at its best , the album " recalls a lost Brian Wilson @-@ style psychedelic marvel " , but went on to state that it is " at times marred by forced eccentricity " , citing the " heavy metal gorgon voice booming through ' Receptacle for the Respectable ' " and the " awful lite @-@ rock homage " " Juxtapozed with U " as examples . Q stated that , although songs such as " ( Drawing ) Rings Around the World " , " Shoot Doris Day " and " Presidential Suite " are " excellent " , the album features " nothing to change anyone 's world " , while the NME claimed that , despite containing some great songs , it is the band 's worst album . Robert Christgau of The Village Voice singled out " Tradewinds " as a " choice cut " , indicating a " good song on an album that isn 't worth your time or money . " 
 Accolades 
 * denotes an unordered list 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = Werner Kaegi ( composer ) = 
 Werner Kaegi ( born June 17 , 1926 ) is a Swiss electronic music composer , musicologist and educator . During the 1960s , he promoted electronic music in his home country . In the 1970s , as a composer and researcher at Utrecht 's Institute of <unk> , The Netherlands , he developed pioneering programs in the field of computer @-@ generated music . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Kaegi was born in <unk> , in the St. Gallen canton . He studied mathematical logic and music in Zürich , Heidelberg and Basel , and music composition in Zürich , Basel , Salzburg and Paris . His music teachers have included composers Paul Hindemith , Arthur Honegger and Louis Aubert . In 1951 , blending his interests for mathematics and music , he received his doctorate with a study of the structure of Johann Sebastian Bach 's Inventions and Fugues . 
 Kaegi discovered Pierre Schaeffer , musique concrète and the GRM radio broadcasts in Paris in 1951 , yet his 1950s compositions are for traditional instruments ; Ariadne in Zürich is for clarinet and piano 4 hands , <unk> , for oboe , bassoon and cimbalom , while the 1956 Sonate is for clarinet and piano . During the next decade , however , Werner Kaegi embraced electronic music and became a pioneer of Swiss electroacoustic music , predating other composers in the field , such as Bruno Spoerri and Rainer Boesch . 
 = = At Centre de Recherches Sonores ( 1963 – 1970 ) = = 
 From 1963 to 1970 , Kaegi worked at the Centre de Recherches Sonores , the electroacoustic music studio of Radio Suisse Romande in Geneva . There he started composing electronic and tape music , including pieces such as <unk> ( 1964 ) , L 'Art de la Table ( 1964 ) , and Entretiens ( 1965 ) . At the <unk> , Kaegi created several radiophonic works ; such as La Porte Noire in 1964 and <unk> in 1965 . In the late 1960s , Kaegi wrote several essays on electronic music , including the influential book Was ist <unk> Musik ? , ( " What Is Electronic Music ? " ) , which was published in 1967 in Zurich , Switzerland , and also became a film for Swiss television . 
 This period of electronic music championing culminated in 1971 with the publication of Kaegi 's unique record release , a 7 @-@ inch record titled Von <unk> zur <unk> Musik ( " From Sine Wave to Electronic Music " ) . In the 12 pages accompanying booklet , Kaegi analyses the basic constituents of electronic music like sine wave , sound synthesis , ring modulation or electronic oscillator , with sound examples provided on the disc as well as excerpts from his most recent works of the time , Kyoto , 1970 , Thai Clarinet , 1970 , Hydrophonie I , 1969 and Illumination Expo ' 70 Osaka , 1969 . The latter piece was commissioned by the Swiss government to be used as background music for the Swiss pavilion at the World Expo ' 70 in Osaka , Japan , a project he undertook with composer and contemporary music promoter André <unk> ( born 1931 ) , then head of music at Radio Suisse Romande . 
 = = At Instituut voor <unk> ( 1971 – 1987 ) = = 
 In 1969 , Kaegi was invited to compose at Utrecht 's Institute of <unk> , formerly known as STEM , in The Netherlands , where he created the tape music of Hydrophonie I. Owing to a grant from the Swiss government , he permanently relocated to The Netherlands in 1971 to work at the Institute and soon became a member of the board of directors . At the Institute , Kaegi worked as a composer , researcher and teacher in the field of electronically generated music and composition – his students have among others included Benno Ammann , Lasse Thoresen , Jos Janssen , Cort Lippe , Kathleen St John , Trevor Batten , Maarten In ' t Veld , Martin Supper , Peter Pabon , Kees van <unk> . After Floris van Maanen the Canadian composer Paul Goodman , born 1955 , became his assistant in the 1980s . 
 Between 1973 and 1978 , together with Dutch researcher Stan <unk> ( 1938 – 2010 ) , Kaegi developed the VOSIM program . VOSIM , which stands for <unk> <unk> , is a system based on the digital sound synthesis of simple , sinusoidal square waves , allowing the modeling of vowel sounds , vocal fricatives and quasi @-@ instrumental tones . It complemented , and was used in conjunction with , Gottfried Michael Koenig 's own computer @-@ generated music programs Project 1 ( 1964 ) , Project 2 ( 1966 ) and SSP ( 1971 ) . Werner Kaegi summed up the VOSIM system in 1986 in a presentation for the scientific journal Interface . 
 In 1987 , Kaegi was awarded a prize at the 15th Bourges international electroacoustic competition , in Bourges , France , for his piece Ritournelles , for soprano and VOSIM software . He apparently ceased teaching and composing after 1987 . 
 = = Notable compositions = = 
 9 Lieder with lyrics by Joseph Von Eichendorff and Hermann Hesse ( 1943 ) 
 Vom Leben und Sterben des <unk> <unk> , oratorio 
 <unk> , for oboe , bassoon and cimbalom 
 Magna Voce Ad Dominum <unk> , for singer and orchestra 
 Lieder für <unk> , songs for choir ( 1948 – 54 ) 
 Sonate , for clarinet and piano ( 1956 ) 
 Ariadne in Zürich , for clarinet and piano 4 hands ( 1957 ) 
 Concerto , for jazz quartet and string ensemble ( 1961 ) 
 = = = At Centre de Recherches Sonores , Geneva = = = 
 Suisse Vigilante ( music for Expo ' 64 , Lausanne ) , for tape ( 1963 ) 
 <unk> , for tape ( 1964 ) 
 L 'Art de la Table , for tape ( 1964 ) 
 <unk> , background or exhibition music ( 1964 ) 
 La Porte Noire , radiophonic work ( 1964 ) 
 <unk> , radiophonic work ( 1965 ) 
 Entretiens , for tape ( 1965 ) 
 Mystic Puzzle II , for tape and jazz orchestra ( 1965 ) 
 Mystic Puzzle III , for tape and saxophone ( 1967 ) 
 Les <unk> de la <unk> , for tape ( 1967 ) 
 Entretiens <unk> , for speaker , 9 instruments and tape ( 1968 ) 
 Anima ou Les Rêves de Damien , for tape ( 1968 ) 
 Illumination ( music for Expo ' 70 , Osaka , Japan 1970 ) , with André <unk> ( 1969 ) 
 Kyoto , for tape and instruments ( 1970 ) 
 Thai Clarinet , for clarinet and electronic ( 1970 ) 
 = = = At Instituut voor <unk> , Utrecht = = = 
 Hydrophonie I , for tape ( 1969 ) 
 <unk> , for tape ( 1984 ) 
 Dialogue II , for tape and gamelan orchestra ( 1984 ) 
 Dialogue III , for tape ( 1984 ) 
 Dialogue , for tape with gamelan orchestra ( 1985 ) 
 Champs <unk> Ritournelles , for tape ( 1985 ) 
 Ritournelles , for soprano and computer ( VOSIM software ) ( 1987 ) 
 = One ( Ami Suzuki song ) = 
 " One " ( capitalized as " ONE " ) is a song recorded by Japanese recording artist Ami Suzuki for her seventh studio album , Supreme Show ( 2008 ) . It was written and produced by Japanese producer and Capsule member Yasutaka Nakata . The track is Suzuki 's third single with Nakata after her August 2007 single 's " Free Free " and " Super Music Maker " . " One " premiered on June 18 , 2008 as the lead single from the album . 
 Musically , " One " was described as a dance and club song . The lyrics describes Suzuki 's celebration of her career and music ; it also emphasizes minor themes of love , happiness , partying , and relationships . Upon its release , the track garnered positive reviews from music critics and was praised for its composition and commercial appeal . It also achieved lukewarm success in Japan , peaking at number 17 on the Japanese Oricon Singles Chart and 47 on the Billboard Japan Hot 100 chart . As of March 2016 , " One " has sold over eight thousand units in Japan alone . 
 The accompanying music video for " One " was shot in Tokyo ; it features Suzuki inside of a club , surrounded by LED lamps and several club poles . The music video became notable for displaying another change in Suzuki 's persona and is cited as an example of her numerous " reinventions " . For additional promotion , the song was featured on Suzuki 's One Promotional Tour , and at her 29th birthday event . 
 = = Background and release = = 
 " One " was written , produced , composed and arranged by Japanese musician and Capsule member Yasutaka Nakata . Nakata was not credited as the single 's featuring artist where it was first introduced on Suzuki 's double a @-@ side single " Free Free " and " Super Music Maker " ( 2007 ) . It is Suzuki 's third single to be handled by Nataka , following " Free Free " and " Super Music Maker " . It was selected as the lead single from Supreme Show , and was released on June 18 , 2008 by Avex Trax . " One " is to commemorate her 10th anniversary of her music career , and was released physically on July 2 that same year . 
 The maxi CD of the single contains the original composition and remix of " One " , plus the album version and remix of " A Token of Love " . The DVD format of the single includes the radio edit music video of " One " . The CD cover sleeve has Suzuki laying down on a mirror , with several strips of neon light behind her . The DVD cover sleeve features Suzuki kneeling down in front of a wall of neon lights . The standalone CD cover was used as the digital EP cover for the iTunes Store and Amazon.com. The cover sleeve is placed at the back of the jewel case , with the front cover featuring a booklet with a different photo . Suzuki 's name or the song 's title are not placed on either the front or back of the case . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " One " was recorded in early 2008 by Nakata at Avex Studio in Tokyo , Japan , and was co @-@ distributed by Nakata 's label Contemode , owned by Avex and Yamaha in Japan . The song was described as a dance @-@ pop song with numerous musical elements , including club music and electropop . Throughout the entire track , Suzuki 's vocals are processed with autotune and vocoder post @-@ production work ; the delivery is from the intro chorus and end of the song . Tetsuo Hiraga from Billboard 's magazine Hot Express compared the " club " sounds and production to Japanese trio Perfume , a project that Nakata has contributed and produced since 2008 ; Hiraga felt Suzuki 's song and Perfume 's work emphasized a similar " club " and " energy " sound and feeling . Wendy Roeltgen from Orient Extreme compared Suzuki 's processed vocals to the work of Daft Punk , and compared the composition to the work of Kylie Minogue 's eighth studio album Fever ( 2002 ) . The lyrics describes Suzuki 's celebration of her career and music ; it also emphasizes minor themes of love , happiness , partying , and relationships . 
 = = Critical response = = 
 " One " received favorable reviews from most music critics . David Hickey , who had written her extended biography at AllMusic , highlighted the song as an album and career stand out track . Wendy Roeltgen from Orient Extreme was positive in her review , labeling it a " fun " and " dance summer tune " ; Roeltgen concluded that " One " presented " superior quality " to the likes of other Japanese musicians . Tetsuo Hiraga from Billboard 's magazine Hot Express went on to discuss the quality of the song , and noted that her mini hiatus in 2007 " changed a lot " of her future music releases . Despite Hiraga feeling that Suzuki didn 't provide enough " spirit " for the track and compared it to Perfume 's work as well , he commended the club composition and production . An editorial review on the Japanese Amazon.com site complimented the composition of the track , labelling it " sparkling up @-@ tempo tune " . A staff reviewer from CD Journal was positive towards the song 's composition and Nakata 's production , labelling it a " sparkly " and " glistening " dance tune . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 In Japan , " One " debuted at number 17 on the Japanese Oricon Singles Chart , selling over 5 @,@ 100 units in its first week of sales . This became Suzuki 's highest charting single , alongside her 2006 single " Alright ! " since " Fantastic " ( 2006 ) . The song lasted four weeks in the singles chart , her longest spanning single since " Alright ! " with five . The song was her first single to reach the top 20 since " Alright ! " and sold over 8 @,@ 000 units in Japan , her highest selling single since " Free Free " with 10 @,@ 000 units . " One " debuted and peaked at 57 on Billboards Japan Hot 100 , 67 on Billboards Japanese Radio Songs Chart , and 27 on the Billboard Japan Hot Singles Chart . The song spent a sole week on all three Billboard component charts , making this Suzuki 's first single to fall out in all Japanese Billboard chart simultaneously . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The accompanying music video for " One " was shot in Tokyo . The video opens with Suzuki singing while surrounded by several white lights . The first verse has several different angle shots of Suzuki singing in front of LED lights , dancing to the beat of the song . The pre @-@ chorus shows a change of LED light colors , and includes several inter cut scenes of Suzuki pole dancing with facial jewelery on . The chorus features changing neon colors of blue , red , green , and yellow in the background , and has several close @-@ up , body , and atmospheric shots of the room and Suzuki . 
 The second verse has five different shots of Suzuki in a pink dress , singing the song in a colorized 3D effect . Several club lights are overlapped with another shot of Suzuki dancing . The second chorus features several clones of Suzuki in the pink dress , standing in the shape of the song 's title " One " ; this scene uses the 3D effect . The final scenes finish with Suzuki in the room , as the lights turn off . 
 An editor from Channel @-@ Ai blog was positive towards the video 's visual effects and Suzuki 's fashion , stating " for this reason all her 2008 releases were produced by the electronic producer and capsule leader Yasutaka Nakata , where Suzuki reinvented herself as a disco queen " ; the editor concluded that " the media would portray Ami as the new fashion leader portraying the popular ero @-@ <unk> style . " The music video appeared on the DVD version of " One " , and the bonus DVD format of Supreme Show . 
 = = Promotion and live performances = = 
 For additional promotion , the song was featured on two of Suzuki 's concert tours , and one television commercial . " One " was used as the ending theme song for the Nippon TV 's series All Japan High School Quiz Championships . " One " made its first live premiere at Suzuki 's One Party , which consisted of live performances in celebration of Suzuki 's 10th Anniversary of her career beginning . The song was performed live on two club party events hosted by Suzuki : the 2008 Cruising Party , and a live performance at Club Asia ; the performances appeared on the limited edition DVD format for Supreme Show . " One " was then performed again at Club Asia for a second hosting party by Suzuki ; this live version was released on the bonus DVD format for Supreme Show . " One " was also included on the track list on one of Suzuki 's concert tours ; this being a concert for her 29th birthday , at the Liquidroom event . The Liquidroom live performance appeared on the bonus DVD format of Suzuki 's extended play , Snow Ring ( 2013 ) . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of Supreme Show . 
 Ami Suzuki – vocals , background vocals 
 Yasutaka Nakata – songwriting , composition , production , arrangement , management 
 Avex Trax – Suzuki 's management 
 Contemode – Nataka 's management 
 Recorded by Nakata at Avex Studio , Tokyo , Japan 
 = = Charts and sales = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Solar urticaria = 
 Solar urticaria ( SU ) is a rare condition in which exposure to ultraviolet or UV radiation , or sometimes even visible light , induces a case of urticaria or hives that can appear in both covered and uncovered areas of the skin . It is classified as a type of physical urticaria . The classification of disease types is somewhat controversial . One classification system distinguished various types of SU based on the wavelength of the radiation that causes the breakout ; another classification system is based on the type of allergen that initiates a breakout . 
 The agent in the human body responsible for the reaction to radiation , known as the photoallergen , has not yet been identified . The disease itself can be difficult to diagnose properly because it is so similar to other dermatological disorders , such as polymorphic light eruption or PMLE . The most helpful test is a diagnostic <unk> , a specialized test which confirms the presence of an abnormal sunburn reaction . Once recognized , treatment of the disease commonly involves the administration of antihistamines , and desensitization treatments such as phototherapy . In more extreme cases , the use of immunosuppressive drugs and even plasmapheresis may be considered . 
 The initial discovery of the disease is credited to P. <unk> in 1904 , but it did not have a name until the suggestion of " solar urticaria " was given by Duke in 1923 . However , their research contributed to the study of this uncommon disease . More than one hundred cases have been reported in the past century . 
 = = Signs and symptoms = = 
 Generally , the areas affected are exposed skin not usually protected by clothing ; however it can also occur in areas covered by clothing . Areas constantly subjected to the sun 's rays may only be slightly affected if at all . People with extreme cases will also have reactions to light bulbs that emit a UV wavelength ( any bulb that is not an LED ) . Parts of the body only thinly covered can also potentially be subjected to an outbreak . 
 Life with SU can be difficult . Patients are subject to constant itching and pain , as within minutes of the initial exposure to UV radiation a rash will appear . The urticarial reaction begins in the form of pruritus , later progressing to erythema and edema in the exposed areas of the skin . If vast areas of the body are affected , the loss of fluid into the skin could lead to light @-@ headedness , headache , nausea , and vomiting . Extremely rarely , patients have been reported to experience an increase in heart rate that can cause a stroke or heart attack due to the body cavity swelling . Other rare side effects can be bronchospasm and glucose instability issues . Also , if a large area of the body is suddenly exposed the person may be subject to an anaphylactic reaction . Once free of exposure , the rash will usually fade away within several hours ; rare and extreme cases can take a day or two to normalize depending on severity of the reaction . 
 = = Causes = = 
 Solar urticaria is an immunoglobulin E @-@ mediated hypersensitivity that can be introduced through primary or secondary factors , or induced by exogenous <unk> . Primary SU is believed to be a type I hypersensitivity ( a mild to severe reaction to an antigen including anaphylaxis ) in which an antigen , or substance provoking an immune response , is " induced by UV or visible radiation . " Secondary SU can occur when a person comes into contact with chemicals such as tar , pitch , and dyes . People who use drugs such as <unk> or patients with erythropoietic <unk> may also contract this secondary form . These items that cause this <unk> are exogenous <unk> because they are outside of the body and cause it to have a greater sensitivity to light . 
 Also , there have been a few unorthodox ( unusual ) causes of solar urticaria . For those susceptible to visible light , white T @-@ shirts may increase the chances of experiencing an outbreak . In one case , doctors found that the white T @-@ shirt absorbed UVA radiation from the sun and transformed it into visible light which caused the reaction . Another patient was being treated with the antibiotic tetracycline for a separate dermatological disorder and broke out in hives when exposed to the sun , the first case to implicate tetracycline as a solar urticaria inducing agent . 
 It is not yet known what specific agent in the body brings about the allergic reaction to the radiation . When patients with SU were injected with an irradiated autologous serum , many developed urticaria within the area of injection . When people who did not have SU were injected , they did not demonstrate similar symptoms . This indicates that the reaction is only a characteristic of the patients with solar urticaria and that it is not <unk> . It is possible that this photoallergen is located on the binding sites of IgE that are found on the surface of mast cells . The photoallergen is believed to begin its configuration through the absorption of radiation by a <unk> . The molecule , because of the radiation , is transformed resulting in the formation of a new photoallergen . 
 = = Diagnosis = = 
 Solar urticaria can be difficult to diagnose , but its presence can be confirmed by the process of phototesting . There are several forms of these tests including <unk> tests , <unk> , <unk> tests , and laboratory tests . All of these are necessary to determine the exact infliction that the patient is suffering from . <unk> tests are patch tests conducted when it is believed that a patient is experiencing certain symptoms due to an allergy that will only occur when in contact with sunlight . After the procedure , the patient is given a low dosage of UVA radiation . 
 Another test known as a <unk> is the most useful in identifying solar urticaria . In this test , one centimeter segments of skin are subject to varying amounts of UVA and UVB radiation in order to determine the specific dosage of the certain form of radiation that causes the urticaria to form . When testing for its less intense form ( fixed solar urticaria ) , phototesting should be conducted only in the areas where the hives have appeared to avoid the possibility of getting false @-@ negative results . 
 A third form of testing is the <unk> test which is used to identify disorders instigated by sun burns . The process of this test involves exposing one area of a patient 's arm to certain dosage of UVB radiation and one area on the other arm to a certain dosage of UVA radiation . The amount of radiation that the patient is exposed to is equal to that " received in an hour of midday summer sun . " If the procedure produces a rash , then the patient will undergo a biopsy . Finally , there are laboratory tests which generally involve procedures such as blood , urine , and fecal biochemical tests . In some situations , a skin biopsy may be performed . 
 = = = Classification = = = 
 Solar urticaria , due to its particular features , is considered to be a type of physical urticaria or light sensitivity . Physical urticaria arises from physical factors in the environment , which in the case of solar urticaria is UV radiation or light . SU may be classified based on the wavelength of the radiative energy that causes the allergic reaction ; known as Harber 's classification , six types have been identified in this system . Type I solar urticaria is caused by UVB ( ultraviolet B ) radiation , with wavelengths ranging from 290 – 320 nm . Type II is induced by UVA ( ultraviolet A ) radiation with wavelengths that can range from 320 – 400 nm . The wavelength range of type III and IV spans from 400 to 500 nm , while type V can be caused by UVB radiation to visible light ( 280 – 600 nm ) . Type VI has only been known to occur at 400 nm . 
 Another classification distinguishes two types . The first is a hypersensitivity caused by a reaction to <unk> located only in people with SU ; while the second is caused by <unk> that can be found in both people with SU and people without it . 
 A subgroup of solar urticaria , fixed solar urticaria , has also been identified . It is a rare , less intense form of the disease with <unk> ( swollen areas of the skin ) that affect certain , fixed areas of the body . Fixed solar urticaria is induced by a broad spectrum of radiative energy with wavelengths ranging from 300 – 700 nm . 
 = = = Differential diagnosis = = = 
 <unk> light eruption ( PMLE ) is the easiest disease to mistake for solar urticaria because the locations of the lesions are similar ( the V of the neck and the arms ) . However , patients with SU are more likely to develop lesions on the face . Also , a reaction with PMLE will take a greater amount of time to appear than with solar urticaria . Lupus erythematosus has been mistaken for SU ; however , lesions from lupus erythematosus will take a longer amount of time to go away . Furthermore , when being tested for the two diseases , patients with SU have a reaction immediately while patients with lupus erythematosus will have a delayed reaction . Patients who have experienced solar urticarial symptoms from a young age could mistakenly be thought to have erythropoietic <unk> . However , the main symptom for this disease is pain and patients with have been found to have abnormal levels of protoporphyrin in their blood while these levels are normal in SU patients . Finally , cholinergic urticaria , or urticaria induced by heat , can occasionally appear to be solar urticaria because the heat from the sun will cause a person with the disease to have a reaction . 
 = = Management = = 
 = = = Antihistamines = = = 
 <unk> are proteins associated with many allergic reactions . When the UV radiation or light comes in contact with a person with solar urticaria , histamine is released from mast cells . When this occurs , the permeability of vessels near the area of histamine release is increased . This allows blood fluid to enter the vessels and cause inflammation . Antihistamines suppress the activity of the histamine . 
 <unk> , a first @-@ generation H1 receptor antagonist or medicine that combats the H1 receptor that is associated with many allergic reactions , has been found to be the most potent antihistamine for this particular disease . Patients prescribed 50 milligrams four times per day have been able to sustain normal exposure to the sun without suffering a reaction . 
 Patients with less potent forms of solar urticaria such as fixed solar urticaria can be treated with the medication <unk> , which may also be used <unk> to prevent recurrence . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 This form of treatment is meant to reduce the intensity or altogether eliminate the allergic reactions people have by gradually increasing exposure to the form of radiation that brings about the reaction . In the case of solar urticaria , phototherapy and <unk> are the two major desensitization treatments . 
 Phototherapy can be used for prevention . Exposure to a certain form of light or UV radiation enables the patient to build up a tolerance and outbreaks can be reduced . This type of treatment is generally conducted in the spring . However , the benefits of this therapy only last for two to three days . 
 <unk> , or PUVA , is considered superior to phototherapy because it produces a longer @-@ lasting tolerance of the radiation that initiates the outbreak . When treatment first begins , the main goal is to build up the patient 's tolerance to UVA radiation enough so that they can be outdoors without suffering an episode of solar urticaria . Therefore , treatments are regulated at three per week while constantly increasing the exposure to UVA radiation . Once the patient has reached an adequate level of desensitization , treatments are reduced to once or twice per week . 
 = = = Immunoglobulin E ( IgE ) Therapy = = = 
 Some patients and researchers have successfully treated solar urticaria with <unk> ( trade name <unk> ) which is commonly used to treat Idiopathic <unk> . <unk> is a recombinant humanized monoclonal antibody against IgE . It acts by binding free IgE at the same site that IgE would bind to its high @-@ affinity receptor ( <unk> ) on mast cells , thereby reducing free IgE in the serum 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Doctors will sometimes prescribe immunosuppressive drugs such as <unk> and ciclosporin if the patient is suffering from an intense form of solar urticaria . However , the side effects of these medicines can be severe which is why they are reserved for the most extreme of cases . 
 = = = Plasmapheresis = = = 
 In more extreme cases , plasmapheresis can be considered . This technique is used to remove the blood plasma or fluid in the red blood cells and then return the cells to the body . It " removes a circulating factor from the blood that may be involved in causing the urticaria , " but is still being tested and is not always effective . When the treatment is a success , the patient 's <unk> is decreased to the degree that they can undergo PUVA which can result in the relief of the urticarial outbreaks for an extended period of time . The major setback to this treatment is that the side effects can be severe and may include anaphylactoid reactions . 
 = = Epidemiology = = 
 In the United States , only about 4 % of patients with photosensitive disorders are reported to have been diagnosed with solar urticaria . Internationally , the number is slightly larger at 5 @.@ 3 % . Solar urticaria may occur in all races but studies monitoring 135 African Americans and 110 Caucasians with <unk> found that 2 @.@ 2 % of the African Americans had SU and 8 % of the Caucasians had the disease showing that Caucasians have a better chance of getting the disease . <unk> 3 @.@ 1 per 100 @,@ 000 people are affected and females are more likely to be affected than males . The age ranges anywhere from 5 – 70 years old , but the average age is 35 and cases have been reported with children that are still in infancy . Solar urticaria accounts for less than one percent of the many documented urticaria cases . To put that into a better perspective , since its first documented case in Japan in 1916 , over one hundred other instances of the disease have been reported . 
 = = History = = 
 Solar urticaria was first identified by P. <unk> in 1904 . Just a year later , in 1905 , Ward became the first to induce urticaria through exposure to the sun in a controlled environment . The first documented case came in Japan in 1916 . The name " solar urticaria " was proposed in 1923 . In 1928 urticaria was induced for the first time . This was carried out by phototesting with increasing amounts of radiation of varying wavelengths . In 1942 the disease was passively transferred to normal volunteers using serum from patients with solar urticaria . 
 = Moaning Lisa = 
 " Moaning Lisa " is the sixth episode of The Simpsons ' first season . It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on February 11 , 1990 . The episode was written by Al Jean and Mike Reiss , and was directed by Wes Archer . Ron Taylor guest stars in the episode as Bleeding Gums Murphy . The episode deals with Lisa 's depression and her attempts to sublimate it by playing her saxophone . It received positive reviews from television critics . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Lisa wakes up one morning saddened . At school , she gets in trouble with her music teacher for improvising , and her gym teacher sends home a note to her parents saying she was reluctant to play dodgeball . At home , Homer and Bart pummel each other at video boxing , but despite Homer 's attempts , he is unable to defeat Bart. Homer and Marge try to cheer Lisa up , but she is consumed with worry over all the suffering in the world . In her room , Lisa hears music coming from outside her window . She follows the music through town and meets Bleeding Gums Murphy , a soulful saxophonist playing the blues . Lisa learns about expressing herself through her music from him , only to be discovered and whisked away by Marge . 
 Homer goes to the arcade and enlists the help of a local video game wizard , while Marge takes Lisa to band practice . She tells Lisa to smile no matter how she feels inside , to suppress her emotions in order to be popular , and that happiness will follow . But when she sees Lisa hiding her true feelings and being taken advantage of by her classmates , Marge changes her tune and tells Lisa to be herself and her support helps Lisa to feel genuinely happy . When Homer returns home , he is about to defeat Bart in a rematch but Marge unplugs the game console to announce Lisa 's recovery , while Bart declares his retirement as undefeated video boxing champ . Later , the Simpsons visit a jazz club to hear Bleeding Gums Murphy sing a blues number written by Lisa . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Moaning Lisa " was the first episode of the series to focus on Lisa . The idea for it was suggested by The Simpsons producer James L. Brooks , who wanted to do an episode where Lisa was sad but she did not know why . The writers also felt that they had done several " jokey " episodes on the show and wanted to try something new that was " really emotional and sweet " . The song Lisa sings in this episode later reappeared in expanded form on The Simpsons Sing the Blues CD . 
 Mr. Largo , Lisa 's music teacher , was partly inspired by a music teacher Matt Groening had as a kid . The designs of the boxers in the video game Homer and Bart play were loosely based on Homer and Bart , and the referee in the game was based on a character from Matt Groening 's Life in Hell comic strip . Bleeding Gums Murphy was loosely based on the famous blues musician Blind Lemon Jefferson . Ralph Wiggum , Bleeding Gums Murphy , and Jacqueline Bouvier ( during Marge 's childhood flashback ) all make their first ( going by production order rather than airdate ) appearances on The Simpsons in this episode . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original American broadcast , " Moaning Lisa " finished 34th place in the weekly ratings for the week of February 5 – February 11 , 1990 with a Nielsen rating of 13 @.@ 8 . It was the highest rated show on the Fox Network that week . The authors of the book I Can 't Believe It 's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide , Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood , said : " Certain scenes of this , the most syrupy of Simpsons episodes , sent viewers raised on the later seasons scurrying to the bathroom . 
 Yes , the final moments may give you <unk> , and are a world away from the anti @-@ schmaltz normally associated with the series , but there is still much to recommend here . In fact , the Homer – Bart subplot is more successful than the main storyline ; Homer 's nightmare about their relationship is genuinely disturbing . " In a DVD review of the first season , David B. Grelck gave the episode a rating of 2 @.@ 5 / 5 and added : " Lisa develops much of her future personality in this episode . 
 The family dynamic is starting to fall into place , as is the relationship between Homer and Lisa . " Colin Jacobson at DVD Movie Guide said in a review that " overall , this was a pretty drab episode " and added that " it had some moments , such as the videogame boxing matches between Homer and Bart , but Lisa lacked the strength at this point to carry an entire show . " 
 = = Home release = = 
 The episode was released first on home video in the United Kingdom , as part of a VHS release titled The Simpsons Collection ; the episode was paired with season one episode " Homer 's Odyssey " . It was released in the US on the VHS release The Best of The Simpsons , Vol . 2 ( 1997 ) , paired with " Bart the General " . In the United States , it was later re released in an collector 's edition boxed set of the first three volumes of The Best of The Simpsons collections . 
 In the United Kingdom , it was re released as part of VHS boxed set of the complete first season , released in November 1999 . The episode 's début on the DVD format was as a part of The Simpsons season one DVD set , which was released on September 25 , 2001 . Groening , Reiss , Archer , and Jean participated in the DVD 's audio commentary . A digital edition of the series ' first season was published December 20 , 2010 in the United States containing the episode , through Amazon Video and iTunes . 
 = 1991 Yugoslav campaign in Croatia = 
 The 1991 Yugoslav campaign in Croatia was a series of engagements between the Yugoslav People 's Army ( JNA ) , the Yugoslav Navy and the Yugoslav Air Force , and the Croatian National Guard ( ZNG ) then the Croatian Army ( HV ) during the Croatian War of Independence . The JNA was originally deployed in order to preserve Yugoslavia , and the initial plan of the campaign entailed the military occupation of Croatia and the removal of the Croatian leadership elected in 1990 . The JNA intervention was the culmination of its involvement in the confiscation of weapons from Croatia 's Territorial Defence , and in the Croatian Serb revolt that had begun in August 1990 . From that time , the JNA had been frequently deployed to form a buffer zone between the insurgents and the ZNG or the Croatian police . In effect , these JNA buffer zones often secured the territorial gains of the insurgents and led to an increasingly hostile relationship between the JNA and Croatia . The JNA campaign plan was amended shortly before the campaign to include the relief of JNA barracks besieged by the ZNG . The besieging and subsequent capture of several JNA facilities allowed Croatia to arm its previously poorly equipped military and to equip new recruits . 
 The campaign effectively started on 20 September 1991 , even though relatively minor offensive actions had already been undertaken . By the end of the month , it suffered from serious delays and manpower shortages caused by low call @-@ up turnout in Serbia . In early October , the original campaign objectives were reduced as Serbian president Slobodan Milošević and his allies gained greater control of the JNA . Subsequently , the campaign objectives were redefined to deny the Croatian Government access to parts of Croatia that contained substantial Serb populations and to protect Croatian Serbs . The campaign culminated in late November and early December with the Battle of Vukovar and the Siege of Dubrovnik . A limited Croatian counterattack and the development of the HV led to a stalemate on the battlefield . 
 The strategic situation permitted the development of the Vance plan — a ceasefire supervised by United Nations peacekeepers designed to create conditions for the political settlement of the conflict in Croatia . The Sarajevo Agreement , regarding the implementation of the ceasefire , was signed on 2 January 1992 , bringing the campaign to an end . Nonetheless , the JNA took several more months to withdraw from Croatia as it was replaced by the UN peacekeepers . In 1991 alone , the conflict caused more than 7 @,@ 000 deaths and the internal displacement of 400 @,@ 000 – 600 @,@ 000 people . More than 1 @,@ 700 persons remain missing as a result of the campaign . 
 = = Background = = 
 In 1990 , following the electoral defeat of the government of the Socialist Republic of Croatia , ethnic tensions increased . The Yugoslav People 's Army ( Jugoslovenska Narodna Armija – JNA ) confiscated the weapons of Croatia 's Territorial Defence ( Teritorijalna obrana - TO ) to minimize potential resistance . On 17 August , the tensions escalated into an open revolt by Croatian Serbs , centred on the predominantly Serb @-@ populated areas of the Dalmatian hinterland around Knin , parts of the Lika , Kordun , Banovina regions and eastern Croatia . In January 1991 , Serbia , supported by Montenegro and Serbia 's provinces of Vojvodina and Kosovo , made two unsuccessful attempts to obtain approval from the Yugoslav Presidency to deploy the JNA to disarm Croatian security forces . After a bloodless skirmish between Serb insurgents and Croatian special police in March , the JNA , supported by Serbia and its allies , asked the federal Presidency to grant it wartime powers and declare a state of emergency . The request was denied on 15 March , and by the summer of 1991 , the JNA came under the control of the Serbian President Slobodan Milošević as the Yugoslav federation started to fall apart . 
 Milošević became de facto commander of the JNA once he secured control over the rump federal presidency and through his influence over the federal defence minister General Veljko Kadijević and JNA chief of staff Blagoje Adžić . Milošević , preferring a campaign aimed at expanding Serbia rather than preserving Yugoslavia , publicly threatened to replace the JNA with a Serbian army and declared that he no longer recognized the authority of the federal presidency . This threat caused the JNA to gradually abandon plans to preserve Yugoslavia in favour of the expansion of Serbia . By the end of the month , the conflict had escalated and the first fatalities occurred . The JNA then stepped in to support the insurgents and prevent Croatian police from intervening . In early April , leaders of the Serb revolt in Croatia declared their intention to integrate the area under their control with Serbia . The Government of Croatia considered this an act of secession . 
 At the beginning of 1991 , Croatia had no regular army . In an effort to bolster its defence , it doubled police numbers to about 20 @,@ 000 . The most effective part of the force was the 3 @,@ 000 @-@ strong special police deployed in 12 battalions which adopted principles of military organization . In addition , there were 9 @,@ 000 – 10 @,@ 000 regionally @-@ organized reserve police ; these were set up in 16 battalions and 10 independent companies , but the units lacked weapons . In May , in response to the deteriorating situation , the Croatian government established the Croatian National Guard ( Zbor narodne garde - ZNG ) by amalgamating the special police battalions into four guards brigades . The guards brigades initially comprised about 8 @,@ 000 troops , and were subordinated to the Ministry of Defence headed by retired JNA General Martin Špegelj . The regional police , by then expanded to 40 @,@ 000 , was also attached to the ZNG and re @-@ organized into 19 brigades and 14 independent battalions . The guards brigades were the only ZNG units that were fully equipped with small arms , while heavier weapons and an effective command and control structure were lacking throughout the ZNG . At the time , Croatian weapon stocks consisted of 30 @,@ 000 small arms purchased abroad in addition to 15 @,@ 000 previously owned by the police . A new 10 @,@ 000 @-@ strong special police was established to replace the personnel transferred to the ZNG guards brigades . 
 The Croatian view of the JNA role in the Serb revolt gradually evolved between January and September 1991 . The initial plan of Croatian President Franjo Tuđman was to win support for Croatia from the European Community ( EC ) and the United States , and he dismissed advice to seize JNA barracks and storage facilities in the country . Tuđman 's stance was motivated by his belief that Croatia could not win a war against the JNA . The ZNG was limited to a defensive role even though the actions of the JNA appeared to be coordinated with Croatian Serb forces . This impression was reinforced by buffer zones the JNA established after armed conflicts between the Croatian Serb militia and the ZNG — the JNA intervened after the ZNG lost ground , leaving the Croatian Serbs in control of the territory . Furthermore , the JNA provided some weapons to the Croatian Serbs , although the bulk of the weaponry was provided from Serbia 's TO and Ministry of Internal Affairs stocks . After the start of the JNA intervention in Slovenia in late June , conscripts began deserting from the JNA and very few were drafted to replace them , except in Serbia . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 The JNA intervened directly against Croatia for the first time on 3 July , driving Croatian forces out of Baranja , north of the city of Osijek , and out of Erdut , Aljmaš and Dalj east of that city . During the summer of 1991 , the Croatian Serb military consolidated in the territory under its control . In Banovina , Glina was captured from the ZNG on 26 July . That same day , two Croatian police stations near Hrvatska Kostajnica were captured , isolating the town . The attacks , codenamed Operation Stinger , were carried out by the 7th Banija Division , spearheaded by the Knin special police led by Dragan Vasiljković . In the aftermath of capture of the Kozibrod police station , Serb forces committed the first mass killing , involving the deaths of ten captured policemen and seventeen civilians . 
 The ZNG successfully defended Hrvatska Kostajnica until mid @-@ September . In August , Croatian Serbs acting under the operational control of the JNA clashed with the ZNG around Osijek , Vukovar and Vinkovci in eastern Slavonia . Fighting in eastern Slavonia led to ZNG blockades of JNA barracks in those cities and limited fighting against the garrisons there . In western Slavonia , the Croatian Serb militia attempted to advance into Daruvar but were held back by the ZNG in the area around Okučani and south of Pakrac before the JNA formed a buffer zone there . Following this fighting , Croatia was denied use of major transport routes between Zagreb and Slavonia . In northern Dalmatia , the JNA initiated several clashes with the ZNG and coordinated its advances with Croatian Serb forces . These attacks culminated in the capture of Kijevo on 26 August and the Maslenica Bridge on 11 September . The capture of the bridge severed the last remaining road link between Dalmatia and the rest of Croatia . In the summer of 1991 , the performance of the ZNG was poor because it lacked manpower and weapons , and exerted inadequate command and control . The professional ZNG troops were better trained than their opponents , with the exception of the Knin special police set up by the Serbian State Security Service . 
 On 1 September 1991 , Tuđman accepted an EC @-@ proposed ceasefire and peace conference , despite his ultimatum demanding that the JNA return to its barracks by 31 August . After the Yugoslav Presidency also accepted it , the conference began on 7 September . Four days later , the Croatian member and chair of the federal presidency , Stjepan Mesić , ordered the JNA to return to its barracks within 48 hours . The move was motivated by Tuđman 's impression that the conference would have continued endlessly while the ZNG lost ground . The order was disputed by other members of the presidency , but it gave Croatia justification to openly confront the JNA . On 14 September , the ZNG and the Croatian police blockaded and cut utilities to all JNA facilities it had access to , beginning the Battle of the Barracks . The ZNG blockaded 33 large JNA garrisons in Croatia , and numerous smaller facilities including border posts and weapons and ammunition storage depots . The ZNG quickly captured isolated facilities and depots , as well as several major JNA posts , and seized large quantities of weapons — including the capture of entire stocks of the JNA 32nd ( Varaždin ) Corps and nearly all the weapons confiscated from Croatia 's TO . The JNA lost control of eight brigades — including one armoured and two mechanized brigades , and three artillery regiments — while additional forces in the JNA Fifth Military District and its Military @-@ Maritime District remained besieged . The significance of the Battle of the Barracks was reinforced by the introduction of a United Nations ( UN ) arms embargo on 25 September . In September , Anton Tus was appointed the Chief of the General Staff of the Armed Forces of the Republic of Croatia . 
 = = Order of battle = = 
 In early September 1991 , the ZNG had 8 @,@ 000 full @-@ time and 40 @,@ 000 reserve troops . The four guards brigades of full @-@ time troops were the only units of the ZNG that were fully equipped with small arms , but even they lacked heavy weapons . A 10 @,@ 000 @-@ strong special police force was established to replace the personnel transferred from the original special police units to the guards brigades . In September , the Croatian small arms stockpile consisted of 30 @,@ 000 purchased abroad in addition to 15 @,@ 000 previously owned by the police . The Battle of the Barracks resulted in a large increase to ZNG weapon holdings — allowing full arming of its existing units , raising of an additional 40 – 42 brigades and fielding a total of 200 @,@ 000 troops and 40 @,@ 000 police by the end of the year . The ZNG captured 250 tanks , 400 – 500 heavy artillery pieces , 180 @,@ 000 small arms and 2 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 long tons ( 2 @,@ 200 @,@ 000 short tons ) of ammunition . In addition , 3 @,@ 000 officers left the JNA and joined the ZNG . In 1991 , the ZNG was supported by the Croatian Defence Forces ( Croatian : Hrvatske obrambene snage , HOS ) — a militia raised by the Croatian Party of Rights . The party stated it had as many as 3 @,@ 000 troops , but the police estimated it at 250 armed militiamen . 
 The JNA planned a two @-@ stage mobilisation of troops . The first wave of call @-@ ups was performed in July , and was meant to intimidate Croatia without an actual offensive being launched and allow timely deployment of crucial units . After the first stage of the mobilisation failed to deter Croatian forces , the second stage commenced on 15 September ; it was met with a large @-@ scale refusal of mobilised personnel to report to their designated units , desertions and an overall lack of enthusiasm for the campaign . This resulted in low troop availability , forcing the JNA to deploy fewer infantry units and to abandon some operations . Response to the mobilisation was particularly poor in Central Serbia , where only 26 % of those called @-@ up reported for service . Nonetheless , in September 1991 , the JNA discharged conscripts that had completed their terms of service , and reached 73 % of planned troop levels . The mobilisation problems demoralised JNA troops and commanders . A request made by JNA general command to Milošević for general mobilisation to strengthen troop levels was denied because he did not believe the campaign was needed nor feasible . Despite the mobilisation problems , the JNA and the TO forces deployed in support of the campaign consisted of approximately 145 @,@ 000 troops , 1 @,@ 100 tanks , 700 other armoured vehicles and 1 @,@ 980 artillery pieces , supported by the Yugoslav Air Force and the Navy . 
 = = Timeline = = 
 The JNA developed a plan to defeat Croatia militarily , overthrow its government and create conditions necessary for the continued existence of Yugoslavia . The plan was amended in September 1991 to accommodate the besieging of JNA garrisons by the ZNG , incorporating the lifting of the blockade into the campaign objectives . The plan entailed five corps @-@ level campaigns designed to impose an air and naval blockade of Croatia , capture territory populated by Serbs and relieve barracks under ZNG siege . The axes of attack were specified as Gradiška – Virovitica , Bihać – Karlovac – Zagreb , Knin – Zadar and Mostar – Split . Armoured and mechanized forces were tasked with the capture of eastern Slavonia and advances west towards Zagreb and Varaždin . This was identified as the main effort of the campaign . Finally , a land blockade of Dubrovnik was planned , coupled with an advance west towards the Neretva River to support the drive to Split . The plan may have proposed withdrawal of the JNA to Serb @-@ populated areas of Croatia or from the whole of Croatia after the objectives were completed , but sources conflict on that issue . 
 = = = September offensive = = = 
 In eastern Slavonia , the JNA responded to the ZNG siege of its garrison in Vukovar , and on 14 September 1991 it deployed troops to relieve the barracks . Independent of that effort , the main thrust of the campaign against Croatia was initially planned to start on 21 September . The southern operational group of the thrust , spearheaded by the 1st Guards Mechanised Division , was expected to lift the ZNG siege of the JNA barracks in Vinkovci , and reach Našice and Slavonski Brod in two to three days . Over the next four to five days , the group was expected to reach the line Okučani – <unk> by advancing via the Đakovo – Požega road and the Zagreb – Belgrade motorway , avoiding major population centres . The northern operational group , subordinated to the 12th ( Novi Sad ) Corps , was to advance from Osijek to Našice and then further west towards Bjelovar . The two operational groups were assigned approximately 57 @,@ 000 troops and 5 @,@ 000 supporting personnel . The 17th ( Tuzla ) Corps was probably tasked with crossing the Sava River — marking the border of Croatia — at Slavonski Brod and Slavonski Šamac to join the westward drive along the motorway , but the crossing never occurred . 
 The campaign was brought forward by one day to 20 September . The change of schedule caused the JNA 1st Guards Mechanised Division to commit to battle as it arrived in eastern Slavonia with no reconnaissance or preparation . The resulting traffic jam on the Šid – Tovarnik – Stari Jankovci road prevented bridging units from reaching the Bosut River . That in turn prevented the 1st Guards Division from crossing the river and confined it to the area between the Bosut and the Danube , east of Vinkovci . Besides the bridging units , the division did not receive the 80th Motorised Brigade — which appears to have disintegrated before reaching the Croatian frontier — and the 2nd Guards Mechanised Brigade — a victim of friendly fire bombardment in the area between Tovarnik and <unk> adjacent to the border . Several units of the Novi Sad Corps also disintegrated when morale declined after a number of friendly fire incidents . 
 The Banja Luka Corps was tasked with the main axis of advance from Okučani to Daruvar and Virovitica in western Slavonia , and a secondary drive from Okučani towards Kutina . This task was consistent with the line expected to be reached by the main thrust of the JNA advancing from the east in about a week . The Corps had already deployed a battlegroup of the 265th Mechanised Brigade near Okučani to support the advance that started on 21 September , and reached the Papuk Mountains . The Corps received two motorised brigades and one artillery brigade as reinforcements during the advance , but the problems with morale and desertions experienced in eastern Slavonia were also present in the Banja Luka Corps . In one such instance , the 130th Mechanised Brigade , sent as a reinforcement , had been reduced to a 280 @-@ strong battalion by 29 September . The JNA was stopped by the ZNG between Novska , Nova Gradiška and Pakrac , even though some Croatian Serb militia units took positions on the Bilogora and Papuk north of Pakrac near Virovitica , and Slatina , with no JNA support . 
 The JNA Knin Corps , which had already fully mobilised and deployed , started the campaign in northern Dalmatia and southern Lika on 16 September 1991 . It captured Drniš on 18 September , but sustained defeats at <unk> Selo two days later and near Šibenik on 22 September as it attempted to capture the city . After this defeat , the Corps ceased its attacks , except for those around Gospić in Lika , for the rest of the month . Five days after the JNA and the Serbian Guard paramilitaries lost their positions in the city on 22 September , the Knin Corps captured Lovinac . JNA troops assembling near the southern tip of Croatia in the Dubrovnik hinterland consisted of elements of the Užice and Titograd Corps . They had not advanced onto Croatian soil by the end of September because of mobilisation problems in Bosnia and Herzegovina . In Banovina , the JNA captured Petrinja on 21 September , but failed to make further progress . Because of the failure of JNA mobilisation , the planned campaign in Kordun was limited to the consolidation of positions held around Karlovac . On 15 September , the Yugoslav Navy blockaded the Croatian Adriatic ports of Pula , Rijeka , Zadar , Split and Dubrovnik for a week . 
 = = = Reduced objectives = = = 
 On 30 September , the general staff of the JNA reduced the objectives of the campaign because it had not followed the initial plan and had become bogged down . The reduced objectives called for offensive and defensive actions , the inflicting of decisive defeats on Croatian forces in Dalmatia and eastern Slavonia , and strikes against vital infrastructure in Croatia , to obtain an agreement on the evacuation of besieged JNA facilities . While some units on the ground started to implement the new orders the same day , they did not take effect completely before 4 October . On 3 October , Serbian and Montenegrin representatives in the Yugoslav Presidency declared that they alone had become the acting federal presidency and assumed control of the JNA . Two days later , the JNA requested that the presidency authorize a general mobilization of forces needed for the campaign , but this was refused by Milošević . By 9 October , the JNA effort was considered a failure . Its commanders formally accepted the role forced on the JNA by Milošević and limited its strategic objectives in Croatia to the protection of Serb @-@ populated areas . 
 The JNA effort to relieve its Vukovar barracks turned into a protracted siege , delaying 36 @,@ 000 troops and a significant proportion of armoured units slated for the thrust towards Zagreb and Varaždin . Vukovar was captured in mid @-@ November but the victory proved pyrrhic because it completely disrupted the overall campaign . During the Battle of Vukovar , the JNA formally approved the use of paramilitary volunteers to fill its ranks . These included the White Eagles and the Serb Volunteer Guard ( SVG ) , which were trained by the Serbian Ministry of Interior . On 12 October , the federal presidency authorized the JNA to enlist the volunteers as an estimated 150 @,@ 000 people had emigrated from Yugoslavia , while others had taken refuge with friends or relatives to avoid the JNA draft . After capturing Vukovar , the JNA 12th Corps and the SVG advanced south @-@ west across the Bosut on 15 – 16 November , and west between Vinkovci and Osijek , on 20 November , but the Croatian forces — renamed the Croatian Army ( Hrvatska vojska - HV ) that month — contained their advances . According to General Života Panić , commander of the JNA 1st Military District at the time , the immediate objectives of the advances were Osijek and Županja . 
 In Banovina , the JNA reached the Kupa River and captured its entire southern bank , except for ZNG bridgeheads in the areas of <unk> , Sunja and Sisak , on 30 September . No further advances were achieved there . The JNA attempted an additional push towards the <unk> bridgehead via Novi Farkašić on 17 – 18 October , and another towards Sunja on 2 November , but both attempts failed . On 4 October , the JNA initiated an attack in Kordun , in the area of Karlovac , pushing the ZNG back in the area of Slunj two days later . On 8 October , it reached the banks of the Kupa and Korana Rivers and the intensity of fighting died down . The greatest flare @-@ up of hostilities in the area occurred on 4 – 5 November when a JNA garrison based in a suburb of Karlovac broke through the ZNG siege in the Battle of Logorište and reached JNA @-@ held territory to the east of the city . Further south , the JNA captured Slunj on 17 November and Cetingrad on 29 November , eliminating a ZNG pocket in Kordun . JNA activity in Lika was limited to shelling and air raids on Gospić and Otočac , peaking on 4 October . 
 On 1 October , the JNA Banja Luka Corps initiated probing attacks in western Slavonia , presaging a major effort employing the bulk of the corps three days later . The advance established defensive positions just outside Novska and Nova Gradiška , and captured Jasenovac on 8 October . Lipik and a part of Pakrac were captured four days later . By that time , the JNA campaign in western Slavonia had lost its momentum . 
 In northern Dalmatia , the JNA Knin Corps attacked Zadar on 4 October , reaching its outskirts and lifting the ZNG siege of the Šepurine Barracks the next day . The advance was blocked by the ZNG and a truce was agreed on 7 October . Two days later , it was followed by an agreement to evacuate JNA facilities in Zadar , including equipment stored there . Further south , the JNA Titograd Corps and its Military @-@ Maritime District forces advanced from eastern Herzegovina and the Bay of Kotor , and pushed east and west of Dubrovnik on 1 October , placing besieging the city by the end of the month . The JNA was supported by Montenegro 's TO in the area . Even though the Croatian troops defending the city were few , the city held out , sustaining increasingly intensive artillery , naval and air bombardment until a ceasefire was agreed in the area on 7 December . As the siege shaped international opinion on the Croatian War of Independence , it became a major contributor to a shift towards the international diplomatic and economic isolation of Serbia and rump Yugoslavia , and resulted in the creation of a perception of Serbia and rump Yugoslavia as an aggressor state . 
 The JNA attacks on <unk> and Zadar were supported by the Yugoslav Navy , which blockaded the coast on two more occasions . On 3 October , all shipping off Croatia , except for ferry lines to Pag and islands in the Kvarner Gulf , was halted . The blockade , except for that of Dubrovnik , was lifted on 11 October . The final blockade , restricting access to Rijeka , Zadar , Šibenik and Split in addition to Dubrovnik , started on 8 November . On 15 November , the Yugoslav Navy sustained losses when it unsuccessfully attacked Split and the island of Brač . The Yugoslav blockade in the northern Adriatic ended on 22 November , but in the southern Adriatic — except off Dubrovnik — it was lifted on 3 December . 
 = = = Croatian counter @-@ offensive = = = 
 On 8 October , Croatia declared independence from Yugoslavia . Even though the declaration had been preceded the day before by a Yugoslav Air Force attack on the presidential office in Zagreb , the Croatian authorities considered that the war situation was no longer critical . This assessment was followed by an order to prepare plans for a counter @-@ offensive on 12 October , and three more orders to commence offensive operations , which were issued by 20 November . The plans involved containing the JNA south of Osijek , advancing to the Bosut River south of Vinkovci , recapturing Jasenovac and the Okučani – Lipik road to secure the Papuk and Psunj mountains , advancing towards Petrinja , Glina , Slunj , Korenica and Gračac , recapturing the Maslenica Bridge and the Obrovac – Gračac road , and stopping the JNA advance north @-@ west of Dubrovnik . 
 The most significant results were produced in western Slavonia , where Croatian forces began pushing the JNA away from Grubišno Polje towards Lipik on 31 October , and away from Nova Gradiška towards Okučani on 12 November . In mid @-@ November , another push along the Novska – Okučani axis recaptured several villages by 9 December , while Lipik was recaptured by the Croatian forces — now renamed the HV — on 7 December . The mountains of Papuk and Bilogora , north of Pakrac where the Croatian Serb militia was not supported by the JNA , were brought under Croatian control in the same period . A HV offensive to recapture the Okučani area , codenamed Operation Orkan 91 , commenced in the final days of December . The area was attacked from the directions of Pakrac , Novska and Nova Gradiška . The effort made no progress except west of Nova Gradiška — but even there it was very limited . Under international pressure , Tuđman called off the offensive on 26 December . 
 The second significant HV offensive was Operation Whirlwind , launched across the Kupa River on 11 December . The HV was tasked with advancing towards Glina but the operation failed after a shallow bridgehead was established within two days . In Lika , battles were fought for individual villages but little progress was made by either side . The JNA captured four villages south of Osijek between 21 November and 16 December but the front lines generally became static . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The JNA campaign in Croatia ended in a stalemate , leading both sides to accept an internationally supervised ceasefire . By late November , the JNA was no longer in a position to make substantial advances , while Milošević refused to pursue objectives that he no longer considered achievable . Between September and December 1991 , the HV captured many weapons and significantly increased its capabilities . In mid @-@ January 1992 , it commanded 155 @,@ 772 troops and had 216 tanks , 127 other armoured vehicles and 1 @,@ 108 artillery pieces at its disposal . Even though JNA positions in western Slavonia were on the brink of military collapse , the HV struggled elsewhere and its munitions stockpiles were depleted , while the UN arms embargo prevented its quick resupply . By the end of 1991 , the conflict had killed 6 @,@ 000 Croatians . Another 23 @,@ 000 were wounded and 400 @,@ 000 became internally displaced persons ( IDPs ) . Some sources report that there were as many as 600 @,@ 000 IDPs . The 6 @,@ 000 killed include 3 @,@ 761 soldiers . JNA losses were officially reported at 1 @,@ 279 killed in action , but the figure may have been considerably higher because casualties were consistently under @-@ reported during the war . The HV counter @-@ offensive in western Slavonia created 20 @,@ 000 Serb refugees . They fled from the area when the JNA ordered the Croatian Serb forces to withdraw , and were subsequently settled in JNA @-@ held Baranja . 
 In 1991 and early 1992 , approximately 18 @,@ 000 Croatian citizens were missing or held by the JNA or its allies . Approximately 8 @,@ 000 of these were imprisoned in internment camps in Serbia , Montenegro , Bosnia and Herzegovina , or in Croatian territory controlled by the JNA . The camps were set up in Begejci , Stajićevo , Sremska Mitrovica , Niš , Aleksinac , Manjača , Banja Luka , Knin , Bučje , Beli Manastir , <unk> , Vukovar and Morinj . Approximately 300 prisoners died while detained in the camps . Most of the prisoners had been released by August 1992 . As of May 2013 1 @,@ 703 were people still missing as a result of the 1991 campaign . Both sides committed numerous atrocities during the conflict . The most significant one committed by Croatian forces was the Gospić massacre . The atrocities committed by the Serb forces were far greater in scale . The most significant ones were those committed in Kijevo , the killing of more than 200 prisoners of war in the aftermath of the Battle of Vukovar , and the bombardment of Dubrovnik . Those war crimes were subsequently prosecuted by the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia , which was set up in 1993 under the terms of UN Security Council Resolution 827 . 
 The atrocities prompted Germany to grant Croatia diplomatic recognition in mid @-@ November . It overcame opposition to the move from the United Kingdom , France and the United States by late December , and formally recognized Croatia on 23 December 1991 . The German decision was followed by recognition from other EC member states on 15 January 1992 . The Croatian Serbs in turn declared the establishment of the Republic of Serbian Krajina ( RSK ) on 21 December 1991 in JNA @-@ held areas comprising approximately 30 % of Croatian territory . The RSK was entirely dependent on Serbia economically and financially . 
 The battlefield stalemate allowed the implementation of the Vance plan — an outcome of the diplomatic mission to Yugoslavia by the Special Envoy of the Secretary @-@ General of the United Nations Cyrus Vance , aided by United States diplomat Herbert Okun , and Under @-@ Secretary @-@ General of the United Nations for Special Political Affairs Marrack Goulding . It was aimed at producing a negotiated end to hostilities in Croatia . The plan proposed a ceasefire , the protection of civilians in specific areas designated as UN Protected Areas and deployment of UN peacekeepers in Croatia . The plan was endorsed by Milošević , Kadijević , and Tuđman , and the three signed the Geneva Accord to that effect in Geneva , Switzerland , on 23 November 1991 . The accord provided for the end of the Croatian blockade of JNA barracks , the withdrawal of JNA personnel and equipment from Croatia , the implementation of a ceasefire and the facilitation of delivery of humanitarian aid . The parties to the accord also agreed to the deployment of a UN peacekeeping mission in Croatia . The mission was subsequently authorised through United Nations Security Council Resolution 721 of 27 November , following a formal request for the deployment of UN peacekeepers submitted by the Yugoslav government the previous day . The Implementation Agreement , ensuring the ceasefire required for the deployment of peacekeepers , was signed by Croatian Defence Minister Gojko Šušak and deputy commander of JNA 5th Military District General Andrija Rašeta in Sarajevo , Bosnia and Herzegovina , on 2 January . The ceasefire generally held after it took effect on 3 January at 6 pm , except in the Dubrovnik area , where the JNA remained in positions around the town and in Konavle until July 1992 . The naval blockade of Dubrovnik was lifted on 26 May 1992 . As a consequence of organizational problems and breaches of the ceasefire agreement , the deployment of UN peacekeepers did not start until 8 March . The Vance plan is considered to have saved the Croatian Serbs from defeat . 
 = New York State Route 28B = 
 New York State Route 28B ( NY 28B ) was a state highway in Oneida County , New York , in the United States . The route served as a connector between NY 287 ( now NY 365 ) in the village of Prospect and NY 12 and NY 28 in the village of Remsen . It was assigned in the mid @-@ 1930s and removed in the mid @-@ 1960s , at which time most of the route became New York State Route 920V , an unsigned reference route . The alignment of NY 28B was originally part of legislative Route 26 and later Route 25 in the early 20th century . 
 = = Route description = = 
 NY 28B began at an intersection with NY 287 ( now mostly part of NY 365 ) at Church Street in the village of Prospect . The route headed to the northwest , following State Street through the northern portion of the village . At the northern village line , the amount of development along the route decreased substantially as it proceeded through the town of Trenton as Prospect Road . NY 28B continued northwest for 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) on a linear northwesterly routing through a rural section of Trenton to the northern town line , where it crossed into the town of Remsen . The route continued on this path for another 0 @.@ 25 miles ( 0 @.@ 40 km ) before turning towards the west and paralleling the town line into the village of Remsen . 
 Within Remsen , NY 28B became known as Prospect Street as it headed westward for three blocks through the residential southeastern part of the village . In the last of the three , the route crossed over Cincinnati Creek just before intersecting Main Street . While Prospect Street ended here , NY 28B turned south onto Main Street , following it for two blocks to a junction with Steuben Street . Here , NY 28B turned west , passing through a slightly more rural area as it approached the divided highway carrying NY 12 and NY 28 around the western edge of the village . NY 28B ended upon meeting the arterial at the western village line . 
 = = History = = 
 In 1908 , the New York State Legislature created Route 26 , an unsigned legislative route extending from Little Falls to Remsen via Dolgeville , Salisbury , and Prospect . In Remsen , Route 26 ended at Route 25 , which followed the modern NY 12 corridor between Barneveld and Remsen . By 1920 , Route 26 was reconfigured to run directly from Barneveld to Little Falls while the portion of former Route 26 between Prospect and Remsen became part of a realigned Route 25 . When the first set of posted routes in New York were assigned in 1924 , the Barneveld – Remsen portion of legislative Route 25 was bypassed by NY 12 , which was assigned to Route 25 's original , direct alignment between the two villages instead . The portion of legislative Route 25 between Barneveld and Prospect was designated as part of NY 287 in the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York . 
 The section of legislative Route 25 from Prospect to Remsen was finally assigned a posted designation c . 1936 when it became part of NY 28B , an alternate route of NY 28 that extended west along NY 287 to Barneveld . At the time , NY 12 and NY 28 followed Mappa Avenue , Old State Road , and Main Street between Barneveld and Remsen while NY 287 and NY 28B were routed on Boon Street , Parker Hollow Road , and Church Street from Barneveld to Prospect . The overlap with NY 287 was eliminated in the early 1950s after NY 28B was truncated to begin in Prospect . 
 By 1954 , NY 12 and NY 28 were shifted westward onto a new bypass around the village of Remsen . NY 28B was extended southward along NY 12 and NY 28 's former alignment on Main Street and westward on Steuben Street to meet the new highway . The NY 28B designation was eliminated in the mid @-@ 1960s and replaced with NY 920V , an unsigned reference route . Around the same time , NY 287 was realigned onto the bypass that now carries NY 365 around the northern fringe of the village of Prospect , truncating NY 920V to its current length . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route was in Oneida County . 
 = Tin Man ( Star Trek : The Next Generation ) = 
 " Tin Man " is the 20th episode of the third season of the American science fiction television series Star Trek : The Next Generation , and the 68th episode overall . It was originally released on April 23 , 1990 , in broadcast syndication . It was written by Dennis Putman Bailey and David Bischoff with uncredited work by Lisa Putman White . It was based on Bailey and <unk> 's 1975 short story , and subsequent 1979 novel , Tin Woodman . Both the short story / novel and the episode are named for the Tin Woodman from L. Frank Baum 's Oz books . 
 Set in the 24th century , the series follows the adventures of the crew of the Federation starship Enterprise . In this episode , telepath Tam Elbrun ( Harry Groener ) joins the crew to investigate a bio ship detected near a star about to go supernova . As the crew investigates , the Romulans threaten the Enterprise and the creature , Gomtuu , and Elbrun boards it with Lt. Commander Data ( Brent Spiner ) . As the star is about to explode , Gomtuu sends Data back to the Enterprise and the two ships out of the system . Gomtuu and Elbrun leave together as the star goes supernova . 
 The spec script was chosen as the crew believed it could go into production quickly . After purchasing it , the production of this episode began a week later . Groener guest starred as Elbrun , the first male Betazoid seen on the show . Michael Cavanaugh appeared as Captain Robert DeSoto , a character that was mentioned in " Encounter at Farpoint " and later in the franchise . The design of Gomtuu was based on an element from The Adventures of Buckaroo Banzai Across the 8th Dimension , while the chair creation special effect was made using reverse motion . " Tin Man " received Nielsen ratings of 10 @.@ 2 percent . Critical reception has been mixed ; while it has been listed in the top 70 of the best episodes of the franchise , other reviewers have called the plot <unk> and trite . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The Enterprise brings aboard the Betazoid Federation emissary Tam Elbrun ( Harry Groener ) , and takes him to a distant star system . Elbrun , whom Deanna Troi ( Marina Sirtis ) previously knew when he was a mental patient , has a history of mental instability due to his overpoweringly strong telepathic capabilities , but his unique skills are used for first contact situations with alien life . On this particular mission , Elbrun 's abilities are needed to try to coax a giant sentient spaceship , nicknamed " Tin Man , " away from a star that is about to go supernova . En route , Elbrun finds it impossible to filter out the thoughts of the Enterprise crew . When meeting Lt. Commander Data ( Brent Spiner ) , Elbrun is puzzled by finding what he calls ' absence of mind ' ; he finds relief in developing a friendship with Data , who , being an artificial lifeform , has no emotions to be read . 
 When they arrive , the Enterprise is attacked by a Romulan Warbird waiting for them . The warbird turns to attack " Tin Man , " but Elbrun sends it a telepathic warning . Tin Man emits an energy wave that destroys the Warbird and seriously damages the Enterprise . Elbrun , now in communication with Tin Man , reveals that it calls itself Gomtuu . The creature is millennia @-@ old and formerly had a crew , but they were lost in a radiation accident . Due to a combination of remorse , loneliness , and a lack of purpose , Gomtuu wishes to die in the supernova . Elbrun requests to be beamed aboard the creature but Captain Jean @-@ Luc Picard ( Patrick Stewart ) is cautious of this action . When a second warbird arrives , Picard lets Elbrun transport to Gomtuu along with Data to help protect the ship . Elbrun is initially overwhelmed <unk> by Gomtuu but eventually comes to identify himself with the ship . 
 With the supernova imminent , the elated Elbrun informs Data he will stay with Gomtuu , believing it is where he truly belongs . Gomtuu leaves the star 's orbit moments before the start of the supernova , and sends the Enterprise and the Warbird spinning out of the star system in separate directions before they are caught in the solar blast . As the Enterprise regains control , they find Data aboard the bridge , who reports what happened aboard Gomtuu . When Data discusses the events with Troi , Data comes to realize that like Elbrun with Gomtuu , the Enterprise is where he belongs . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Tin Man " was based on a 1975 short story Tin Woodman by Dennis Russell Bailey and David Bischoff , which had been originally published in Amazing Science Fiction Stories and later expanded into a novel in 1979 . The short story had been nominated for a Nebula Award in 1977 . The name of the story and of the episode were both references to the Tin Woodman from L. Frank Baum 's Oz books . Bailey and Bischoff had been inspired to pitch for The Next Generation due to their combined dislike of the first five minutes of the second season episode " Samaritan Snare " . When uncredited co @-@ writer Lisa Putman White spoke to the crew of the series during the second season , she was told by Eric A. Stillwell that the show only wanted bottle episodes . So together with Bischoff and Bailey , the short story was redeveloped into a spec script following Bischoff 's suggestion . 
 The script was received by script editor Melinda M. Snodgrass at a fortunate time . The crew were looking for a script which could go immediately into production in order to free up time to work on other scripts which needed more work . She handed it to executive producer Michael Piller , who thought it didn 't need much work . He passed it onto fellow executive producer Rick Berman , who held onto it for a week while the writers chased the production crew for updates . The script was then purchased , and Bailey , Bischoff and White were informed that it was due to go into production a week later . 
 Harry Groener made his first appearance in Star Trek as the Betazoid Tam Elbrun , the first male of the species seen on screen . Michael Cavanaugh also appeared as Captain Robert DeSoto of the USS Hood . DeSoto had first been mentioned in the pilot of The Next Generation , " Encounter at Farpoint " , as Commander William Riker 's former commanding officer . In a deleted scene , it would have been mentioned that DeSoto and Picard had served together as lieutenants previously . The character would go on to be mentioned later in the series in " The Pegasus " , and in the Star Trek : Deep Space Nine episode " Treachery , Faith , and the Great River " as well as in several non @-@ canon books . " Tin Man " was directed by Robert <unk> , who was disappointed with the result as he felt he could have created a better episode . 
 The creation of Gomtuu required work across several different departments on the series . Rick Sternbach and Greg Jein 's design for the external appearance of Gomtuu was inspired by the thermal pods in the 1984 science fiction film The Adventures of Buckaroo Banzai Across the 8th Dimension . The special effect in which a chair was formed on the creature 's bridge was created by visual effects supervisor Robert Legato , who created a wax chair and melted it , then played it backwards in reverse motion for the effects shot . The interior sound of Gomtuu was a recording of sound editor James <unk> 's stomach through a stethoscope . Furthermore , the musical score for the episode was a Star Trek debut for Jay Chattaway , who from towards the end of the fourth season onwards would begin to alternate work on episodes with Dennis McCarthy . 
 = = Reception and home media release = = 
 = = = Broadcast = = = 
 " Tin Man " aired in broadcast syndication during the week commencing April 23 , 1990 . It received Nielsen ratings of 10 @.@ 2 , reflecting the percentage of all households watching the episode during its timeslot . This placed it as the third highest viewed syndicated show of the week , but saw a decrease from the 11 @.@ 7 percent who watched the previous first run episode , " Captain 's Holiday " . But , it was seen by more viewers than the following episode , " Hollow Pursuits " , which received a Nielsen rating of 9 @.@ 8 percent . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 In Beyond the Final Frontier : An Unauthorised Review of Star Trek , Mark Jones and Lance Parkin described " Tin Man " as " a good episode " and described Elbrun as becoming " annoying very quickly " , while Gomtuu wasn 't as unusual as the script suggested . James Van Hise and Hal Schumer in The Complete Trek : The Next Generation also described " Tin Man " as a " good episode " , but said that both the Romulan threat and the animosity towards Elbrun felt " contrived " . They praised the characterization seen in several scenes , and the idea for Elbrun . 
 Keith DeCandido reviewed the episode for Tor.com and gave it a seven out of ten . He criticised the " one @-@ dimensional " Peter Vogt and lamented the lack of Andreas Katsulas in " Tin Man " , but praised Groener , calling him " simply stellar " . DeCandido credited the performance of Groener and the strong science fiction elements of " Tin Man " as creating a " strong episode " , but he criticized the actions of the Romulans as simply being there to advance the plot . Zack Handlen reviewed " Tin Man " in 2010 for the A.V. Club , giving it a rating of " B + " . He suggested that it could have been better than it ultimately was . Handlen praised Groener generally , but he found his performance as Elbrun " off @-@ putting " , although suggested it was perhaps deliberately so . Handlen suggested that that Gomtuu could have had more of a personality , and the ending should not have been quite so predictable or convenient . 
 James Hunt wrote about the episode for Den of Geek in 2014 , calling it a " trite , predictable episode that you 're best off skipping " . He said the main issue was the highly predictable ending , but also criticized the scenes with Data which he said were " massively trite and worse still , tacked on " . In 2014 , the episode was ranked as the 68th best out of the 700 plus episodes in the Star Trek franchise by Charlie Jane Anders for io9 . 
 = = = Home media release = = = 
 " Tin Man " was first released on VHS cassette on August 8 , 1991 in the United States and Canada . The episode was later included on the Star Trek : The Next Generation season three DVD box set , released in the United States on September 3 , 2002 . The first Blu Ray release was in the United States on April 30 , 2013 . 
 = The College Dropout = 
 The College Dropout is the debut studio album by American hip hop artist Kanye West , released February 10 , 2004 , by Roc @-@ A @-@ Fella Records . It was recorded over a period of four years , beginning in 1999 . Prior to the album 's release , West had received praise for his production work for artists such as Jay @-@ Z and Talib Kweli , but faced difficulty being accepted as a rapper in his own right by figures in the music industry . Nonetheless intent on pursuing a solo career , it was several years before West finally received a record deal from Roc @-@ A @-@ Fella Records . 
 The album 's production was handled by West and developed his " chipmunk soul " production style , which made use of sped @-@ up , pitch shifted vocal samples from soul and R & B records , in addition to West 's own drum programming , string accompaniment , and gospel choirs . It features vocal contributions from Jay @-@ Z , Mos Def , Jamie Foxx , Syleena Johnson , and Ludacris among many other artists . Diverging from the then @-@ dominant gangster persona in hip hop , West 's lyrics concern themes of family , self @-@ consciousness , materialism , religion , racism , and higher education . The album was promoted by singles including " Through the Wire " and " Jesus Walks " , both of which received critical acclaim . " All Falls Down " and " Slow Jamz " both charted within the top 10 on the Billboard Hot 100 , with the latter charting at number one . 
 Upon its release , The College Dropout debuted at number two on the US Billboard 200 chart , selling 441 @,@ 000 copies during its first week . It was a massive commercial success , producing five singles that achieved chart success , and it received universal acclaim from music critics , earning West several accolades that included a Grammy Award for Best Rap Album at the 47th Grammy Awards . It is West 's best @-@ selling album in the United States , with domestic sales of 3 @.@ 4 million copies and worldwide sales of over 4 million copies . It is often listed among the greatest debut albums of all time and has been named by Time and Rolling Stone as one of the greatest albums of all time . 
 = = Background = = 
 Although he had attained success as a producer , Kanye West aspired to be a rapper , but had struggled to attain a record deal . Record companies ignored him because he did not portray the gangsta image prominent in mainstream hip hop at the time . After a series of meetings with Capitol Records , West was ultimately denied an artist deal . According to Capitol Record 's A & R , Joe Weinberger , he was approached by West and almost signed a deal with him , but another person in the company convinced Capitol 's president not to . Desperate to keep West from defecting to another label , then @-@ label head Damon Dash reluctantly signed West to Roc @-@ A @-@ Fella Records . Jay @-@ Z , West 's colleague , later admitted that Roc @-@ A @-@ Fella was initially reluctant to support West as a rapper , claiming that many saw him as a producer first and foremost , and that his background contrasted with that of his labelmates . 
 West 's breakthrough came a year later on October 23 , 2002 , when , while driving home from a California recording studio after working late , he fell asleep at the wheel and was involved in a near @-@ fatal car crash . The crash left him with a shattered jaw , which had to be wired shut in reconstructive surgery . The accident inspired West ; two weeks after being admitted to a hospital , he recorded a song at the Record Plant Studios with his jaw still wired shut . The composition , " Through The Wire " , expressed West 's experience after the accident , and helped lay the foundation for his debut album , as according to West " all the better artists have expressed what they were going through " . West added that " the album was my medicine " , as working on the record distracted him from the pain . " Through The Wire " was first available on West 's Get Well Soon ... mixtape , released December 2002 . At the same time , West announced that he was working on an album called The College Dropout , whose overall theme was to " make your own decisions . Don 't let society tell you , ' This is what you have to do . ' " 
 = = Recording = = 
 The College Dropout was recorded at The Record Plant in Los Angeles , California , but the production featured on the record were formed elsewhere over the course of several years . According to John Monopoly , West 's friend , manager and business partner , the album " ... [ didn 't have ] a particular start date . He 's been gathering beats for years . He was always producing with the intention of being a rapper . There 's beats on the album he 's been literally saving for himself for years . " At one point , West hovered between making a portion of the production in the studio and the majority within his own apartment in Newark , New Jersey . Because it was a two @-@ bedroom apartment , West was able to set up a home studio in one of the rooms and his bedroom in the other . 
 Carrying a Louis Vuitton backpack filled with old disks and demos to the studio and back , West crafted his production in less than fifteen minutes at a time . He recorded the remainder of the album in Los Angeles while recovering from the car accident . Once he had completed the album , it was leaked months before its release date . However , West decided to use the opportunity to review the album , and The College Dropout was significantly remixed , remastered , and revised before being released . As a result , certain tracks originally destined for the album were subsequently retracted , among them " Keep the Receipt " with Ol ' Dirty Bastard and " The Good , the Bad , and the Ugly " with Consequence . West meticulously refined the production , adding string arrangements , gospel choirs , improved drum programming and new verses . West 's perfectionism led The College Dropout to have its release postponed three times from its initial date in August 2003 . First it got delayed to October , then to January 2004 , finally hitting stores February 10 . 
 = = Composition = = 
 The College Dropout diverged from the then @-@ dominant gangster persona in hip hop in favor of more diverse , topical subjects for the lyrics . Throughout the album , West touches on a number of different issues drawn from his own experiences and observations , including organized religion , family , sexuality , excessive materialism , self @-@ consciousness , minimum @-@ wage labor , institutional prejudice , and personal struggles . Music journalist Kelefa Sanneh wrote , " Throughout the album Mr. West taunts everyone who didn 't believe in him : teachers , record executives , police officers , even his former boss at the Gap " . West explained , " My persona is that I 'm the regular person . Just think about whatever you 've been through in the past week , and I have a song about that on my album . " The album was musically notable for West 's unique development of his " chipmunk soul " production style , in which R & B and soul music samples were sped up and pitch shifted . 
 The album begins with a skit featuring a high school teacher asking West to deliver a graduation speech . The skit is followed by " We Don 't Care " featuring West comically celebrating drug life with lines like " We wasn 't supposed to make it past 25 , joke 's on you , we still alive " and then criticizing its influence amongst children . His lyrics contain various popular culture references such as allusions to rappers Really Doe and Tupac Shakur and song " 21 Questions " by 50 Cent and Nate Dogg . The next track , " Graduation Day " , features Miri Ben @-@ Ari on violin , and vocals by John Legend . 
 On " All Falls Down " , West wages an attack on consumerism . The song features singer Syleena Johnson and contains an interpolation of Lauryn Hill 's " Mystery of Iniquity " . West called upon Johnson to re @-@ sing a vocal portion of " Mystery of Iniquity " , which ended up in the final mix . Gospel hymn with doo @-@ wop elements " I 'll Fly Away " precedes " Spaceship " , a track with a relaxed beat containing a soulful Marvin Gaye sample . The lyrics are mostly critical of the working world , where West muses about flying away in a spaceship to leave his boring job , and guest rappers GLC and Consequence add comparisons to modern day retail environment with slavery . 
 On " Jesus Walks " West professes his belief in Jesus , while also discussing how religion is used by various people and how the media seems to avoid songs that address matters of faith while embracing compositions on violence , sex , and drugs . " Jesus Walks " is built around a sample of " Walk With Me " as performed by the ARC Choir . Garry Mulholland of The Observer described it as a " towering inferno of martial beats , fathoms @-@ deep chain gang backing chants , a defiant children 's choir , gospel wails , and sizzling orchestral breaks . " The first verse of the song is told through the eyes of a drug dealer seeking help from God , and it reportedly took over six months for West to draw inspiration for the second verse . 
 " Never Let Me Down " is influenced by West 's near @-@ death car crash . The song features Jay @-@ Z who rhymes about maintaining status and power given his chart success , with West commenting about racism and poverty . The song features verses by spoken word performer J. Ivy who offers comments of upliftment . " Never Let Me Down " reuses a Jay @-@ Z verse first heard in the remix of his song " <unk> Baby " . " Get Em High " is a collaboration by West with two socially conscious rappers , Talib Kweli and Common . " The New Workout Plan " is a mostly comical song and is centered around the premise of an aerobics routine . " Slow Jamz " features Twista and Jamie Foxx and serves as a tribute to classic smooth soul artists and slow jam songs . The song also appeared on Twista 's album Kamikaze . On the song " School Spirit " , West relates the experience of dropping out of school and contains references to well @-@ known fraternities , sororities , singer Norah Jones , and record label Roc @-@ A @-@ Fella Records . " Two Words " features commentary on social issues and features Mos Def , Freeway , and the Harlem Boys Choir . 
 " Through the Wire " features a high @-@ pitched vocal sample of Chaka Khan and relates West 's real life experience with being in a car accident . The song provides a mostly comedic account of his difficult recovery , and features West rapping with his jaw still wired shut from the accident . The chorus and instrumentals sample a pitched up version of Chaka Khan 's 1985 single " Through the Fire " . " Family Business " is a soulful tribute to the <unk> of <unk> <unk> , one of the many collaborators in the album . The song " Last Call " is about Kanye 's story from being a producer to a rapper , The album ends with a nearly nine @-@ minute autobiographical monologue that follows the song " Last Call " , but it 's not a separate track . 
 = = Packaging = = 
 Eric Duvauchelle , who was then part of Roc @-@ A @-@ Fella 's in @-@ house brand design team , then Design Director at Nike , Inc. and now independent Creative Director ( <unk> ) , was assigned for the artwork of The College Dropout . West had already taken pictures dressed as the Dropout Bear - which would reappear in his later work - and Duvauchelle picked the image of him sitting on a set of bleachers , as he got attracted to the loneliness of what was supposed to be " the most popular representation of a school " . The image is framed inside gold ornaments , which Duvauchelle found in a book of illustrations from the 16th @-@ century and West wanted to use to " bring a sense of elegance and style to what was typically a gangster @-@ led image of rap artists " . The inside cover follows a college yearbook , with photos of the featured artists of the albums from their youth . 
 = = Singles = = 
 West 's debut single , " Through the Wire " , entered the Billboard Hot 100 chart at number ninety @-@ four and peaked at number fifteen on February 3 , 2004 , for five weeks . It remained on the chart for twenty @-@ one weeks . It performed better on the urban contemporary charts , reaching number eight on the Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Singles & Tracks and number four on the Hot Rap Tracks . In the United Kingdom , it debuted at number nine on the UK Singles Chart , where it peaked for two weeks , and exited the chart after nine weeks . The track charted lower in other European countries , reaching the top thirty in Ireland , Sweden , and the Netherlands ; the top fifty in Belgium and Switzerland ; and number sixty @-@ one in Germany . Its maximum peak time in those countries lasted one week . The single entered the New Zealand Singles Chart at number twenty @-@ four and peaked at number sixteen . 
 The second single , " Slow Jamz " , peaked at number one in the United States , becoming Twista 's , West 's , and Foxx 's first number one hit . " All Falls Down " was released as the third single , and it entered the UK Singles Chart at number ten and peaked at number seven on the U.S. Hot 100 . Fourth single , " Jesus Walks " earned widespread commercial success , peaking at number eleven in the United States and becoming West 's fourth top twenty hit , while peaking at number sixteen in the UK . 
 The fifth and final single , " The New Workout Plan " , peaked at number fifty @-@ nine on the U.S. Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Singles & Tracks chart . The song 's official remix was produced by Lil Jon and features guest appearances from Twista , Luke , and Fonzworth Bentley . The remix was later included on The College Dropout Video Anthology . 
 The planned sixth single was " Spaceship " , featuring rappers GLC and Consequence . This was confirmed in 2009 when GLC reported that a music video had been made for the song , but never released ; the label decided to move on from the album to begin promoting West 's second album , Late Registration . On June 3 , 2009 , West uploaded the video on his official blog . At one time , " Two Words " ( featuring Mos Def and Freeway ) was also intended to be released as a single , and a video for the song was filmed , and later uploaded by West online in May 2009 . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 The album debuted at number two on the U.S. Billboard 200 chart , behind Norah Jones ' Feels Like Home , selling 441 @,@ 000 copies in its first week . It remained on the second spot under Feels Like Home for two more weeks , with 196 @,@ 000 units sold in the second week and 132 @,@ 000 in the third . By April 2004 , it was certified by the Recording Industry Association of America for having shipped in excess of 1 million copies in the United States . On June 30 , 2004 , the album was certified double platinum in sales by the RIAA , following sales of 2 million copies . As of June 2014 , The College Dropout is West 's best @-@ selling album in the United States , with domestic sales of 3 @,@ 358 @,@ 000 copies . It has also sold over 4 million copies worldwide . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 The College Dropout received widespread acclaim from critics . At Metacritic , which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream publications , the album received an average score of 87 , based on 25 reviews . Kelefa Sanneh from The New York Times dubbed it " 2004 's first great hip @-@ hop album " . The A.V. Club 's Nathan Rabin praised its " substance , social commentary , righteous anger , ornery humanism , dark humor , and even Christianity " , calling it " one of those wonderful crossover albums that appeal to a huge audience without sacrificing a shred of integrity " . Dave Heaton of PopMatters called the album " musically engaging " , writing that " every single one of these songs comes off like a genuine extension of Kanye 's personality and experiences " . URB wrote that the album " manages to be both visceral and emotive , sprinkling the dancefloors with tears and sweat . " Mojo dubbed the album " manna for hip hop fans starved of basic but ballistic beats @-@ and @-@ breaks fare in an increasingly litigious age . " 
 Josh Love of Stylus Magazine wrote that West " subverts cliches from both sides of the hip @-@ hop divide " and praised him for " trying to reflect the entire spectrum of hip @-@ hop and black experience , looking for solace and salvation in the traditional <unk> of church and family " . Ethan Brown of New York commended West 's " emotional brand of hip @-@ hop " and stated " he makes autobiography universal in a way that hasn 't really been heard in hip @-@ hop since the mid @-@ nineties " . Hua Hsu of The Village Voice felt that his sped @-@ up samples " carry a humble , human air . You can still hear tiny traces of actual people inside " . The newspaper 's Robert Christgau wrote that " not only does [ West ] create a unique role model , that role model is dangerous — his arguments against education are as market @-@ targeted as other rappers ' arguments for thug life " . Entertainment Weekly 's Michael Endelman elaborated on West 's avoidance of the then @-@ dominant " gangsta " persona of hip hop : 
 West delivers the goods with a disarming mix of confessional honesty and sarcastic humor , earnest idealism and big @-@ pimping materialism . In a scene still dominated by authenticity battles and gangsta posturing , he 's a middle @-@ class , politically conscious , post @-@ thug , bourgeois rapper — and that 's nothing to be ashamed of . 
 Although he commended West 's vulnerability and signature sound , Rolling Stone 's Jon Caramanica felt that " West isn 't quite MC enough to hold down the entire disc " . Slant Magazine 's Sal Cinquemani observed " too many guest artists , too many interludes , and just too many songs period " , but stated , " As chest @-@ <unk> self @-@ congratulatory as it may be , The College Dropout is at once laugh @-@ out @-@ loud funny ( ' The New Workout Plan ' ) , genuinely touching ( ' Family Business ' ) , and brutally honest ( ' All Falls Down ' ) " . Pitchfork Media 's Rob Mitchum called it a " flawed , overlong , hypocritical , egotistical , and altogether terrific album " . AllMusic editor Andy Kellman felt that it shows West as a " remarkably versatile lyricist and a valuable MC " . Renee Graham of The Boston Globe asserted that " West has certainly raised the bar on what mainstream hip @-@ hop can and should be " . In a retrospective review , Rolling Stone called it " a demonstration that hip @-@ hop — real , banging , commercial hip @-@ hop — could be a vehicle for nuanced self @-@ examination and musical subtlety . " 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 West received 10 Grammy nominations at the 2005 Grammy Awards . The College Dropout was nominated for Album of the Year , and won Best Rap Album . " Jesus Walks " won Best Rap Song , and was nominated for both Song of the Year and Grammy Award for Best Rap / Sung Collaboration . 
 The College Dropout was voted as the best album of the year by Rolling Stone and in The Village Voice 's Pazz & Jop , an annual poll of American critics . Spin ranked it number one on its list of 40 Best Albums of the Year . Comedian Chris Rock has attested to listening to The College Dropout while writing his material . In 2005 , Pitchfork Media named it # 50 in their best albums of 2000 – 2004 . In 2006 , the album was named by Time as one of the 100 best albums of all time . In its retrospective 2007 issue , XXL awarded it a perfect " XXL " rating , which had previously been given to only sixteen other albums . In its July 4 , 2008 issue , Entertainment Weekly listed College Dropout as the fourth best album of the past 25 years . The magazine later listed it as the best album of the decade . Newsweek placed The College Dropout among its Best Albums of the Decade list at number 3 . Rhapsody named it the seventh best album of the decade and the fourth best hip hop album of the decade . Rolling Stone ranked it number 10 on its list of the 100 Best Albums of the Decade and stated , " Kanye expanded the musical and emotional language of hip @-@ hop ... he challenged all the rules , dancing across boundaries others were too afraid to even acknowledge " . In 2012 Complex named the album one of the classic albums of the last decade , and the 20th best hip hop debut album ever . The same year Rolling Stone ranked The College Dropout number 298 on its list of the 500 Greatest Albums of All Time , and 19th on their list of debut records . The album was also included in the book 1001 Albums You Must Hear Before You Die . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = = 2005 Japanese Special Edition = = = 
 Notes 
 " Intro " , " School Spirit Skit 1 " , " School Spirit Skit 2 " , " Graduation Day " , " I 'll Fly Away " , & " The Li 'l Jimmy Skit " feature vocals by DeRay Davis . 
 " We Don 't Care " features vocals by John Legend and <unk> Watkins . 
 " Graduation Day " , " Jesus Walks " and " Never Let Me Down " feature vocals by John Legend . 
 " I 'll Fly Away " , " School Spirit " and " Lil Jimmy Skit " feature vocals by DeRay Davis and Tony Williams . 
 " Spaceship " and " Last Call " feature vocals by John Legend and Famous Tony Williams . 
 " Get Em High " features vocals by <unk> Rainey . 
 " Workout Plan " features vocals by Brandi <unk> , <unk> Brown and <unk> Singleton . 
 " The New Workout Plan " features vocals by John Legend and <unk> Rainey . 
 " Slow Jamz " features vocals by Aisha Tyler . 
 Sample credits 
 " We Don 't Care " contains samples of " I Just Wanna Stop " , written by Ross <unk> and performed by The Jimmy Castor Bunch . 
 " All Falls Down " contains interpolations of " Mystery of Iniquity " , written and performed by Lauryn Hill . 
 " Spaceship " contains samples of " Distant Lover " , written by Marvin Gaye , Gwen Gordy Fuqua and Sandra Greene , and performed by Marvin Gaye . 
 " Jesus Walks " contains samples of " Walk with Me " , performed by The ARC Choir ; and samples of " ( Don 't Worry ) If There 's a Hell Below , We 're All Going to Go " , written and performed by Curtis Mayfield . 
 " Never Let Me Down " contains samples of " Maybe It 's the Power of Love " , written by Michael Bolton and Bruce <unk> , and performed by Blackjack ; and interpolations of " <unk> Baby " ( remix ) , written by Shawn Carter , Justin Smith and Kenneth Edmonds , and performed by Jay @-@ Z. 
 " Slow Jamz " contains samples of " A House Is Not a Home " , written by Burt Bacharach and Hal David , and performed by Luther Vandross . 
 " Breathe In Breathe Out " contains samples of " Precious Precious " , written and performed by Jackie Moore . 
 " School Spirit " contains samples of " Spirit in the Dark " , written and performed by Aretha Franklin . 
 " Two Words " contains samples of " Peace & Love ( Amani Na <unk> ) – Movement IV ( Encounter ) " , written by Lou Wilson , Ric Wilson and Carlos Wilson , and performed by Mandrill ; and samples of " The Rainmaker " , written by Harry Nilsson and Bill Martin , and performed by The 5th Dimension . 
 " Through the Wire " contains samples of " Through the Fire " , written by * David Foster , Tom Keane and Cynthia Weil , and performed by Chaka Khan . 
 " Family Business " contains samples of " <unk> Thang " , written by Terry <unk> and Charles Stepney , and performed by The Dells ; and interpolations of " <unk> az a <unk> " , written by Tupac Shakur and Delmar Arnaud , and performed by 2Pac . 
 " Last Call " contains samples of " Mr. Rockefeller " , written by Jerry Blatt and Bette Midler , and performed by Bette Midler ; and samples of " She 's Gone to Another " , written by Kenneth Ruffin and performed by The <unk> . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Information taken from The College Dropout liner notes . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = = Weekly charts = = = 
 = = = Year @-@ end charts = = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = Ambrose Rookwood = 
 Ambrose Rookwood ( c . 1578 – 31 January 1606 ) was a member of the failed 1605 Gunpowder Plot , a conspiracy to replace the Protestant King James I with a Catholic monarch . Rookwood was born into a wealthy family of Catholic recusants , and educated by Jesuits at Flanders . His older brother became a Franciscan , and his two younger brothers were ordained as Catholic priests . Rookwood , however , became a horse @-@ breeder . He married the Catholic Elizabeth Tyrwhitt , and had at least two sons . 
 He was enlisted into the plot in September 1605 by Robert Catesby , a religious zealot whose impatience with James 's treatment of English Catholics had grown so severe that he conspired to blow up the House of Lords with gunpowder , killing the king and much of the Protestant hierarchy . With the other conspirators he had recruited , Catesby also planned to incite a rebellion in the Midlands , during which James 's nine @-@ year @-@ old daughter Princess Elizabeth would be captured , and installed as titular queen . Rookwood 's stable of fine horses was essential for the uprising to succeed . 
 The explosion was planned to coincide with the State Opening of Parliament on 5 November 1605 , but the man left in charge of the gunpowder stored beneath the House of Lords , Guy Fawkes , was discovered there and arrested . Rookwood fled the city , and informed Catesby and the others of the plan 's failure . Together the remaining conspirators rode to Holbeche House in Staffordshire , where on 8 November they were attacked by the pursuing Sheriff of Worcester and his men . Catesby was killed , but Rookwood survived , and was imprisoned in the Tower of London . 
 Rookwood and the survivors were arraigned on 27 January 1606 in Westminster Hall . Pleading not guilty , he claimed to have loved Catesby " above any worldly man " . His subsequent request for mercy was ignored , however , and he was hanged , drawn and quartered on 31 January , in the Old Palace Yard at Westminster . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Born sometime about 1578 , Ambrose Rookwood was the second of four sons born to Robert Rookwood and his second wife , Dorothy Drury , the daughter of Sir William Drury and Elizabeth <unk> . During his first marriage to Bridget Kemp , Robert had sired four sons , but all predeceased their father . 
 The Rookwood family had lived at <unk> in Suffolk for 300 years . Wealthy , and staunch Catholics , the authorities viewed them as trouble @-@ makers . Ambrose 's Papist cousin Edward had spent ten years in prison for his faith , but in 1578 he entertained Queen Elizabeth I at his home , Euston Hall . It was an expensive visit that made a serious dent in the family 's finances , and which neutered their influence for years thereafter . Ambrose 's parents had been imprisoned for their recusancy , and he was indicted on the same charge in February 1605 . However , he was apparently happy to advertise his faith ; in the summer of 1605 he commissioned a London cutler , John Craddock , to place a Spanish blade into a sword hilt engraved with the story of the Passion of Christ . As such weapons were generally worn in public , it was " a potentially dangerous statement of faith " . 
 Ambrose and two of his brothers , Robert and Christopher , were educated by Jesuits at Saint @-@ Omer , then in Flanders . Both brothers became priests ( Ambrose 's elder brother , Henry , became a Franciscan ) , and his half @-@ sisters Dorothea and Susanna became nuns . Ambrose married into the <unk> , a prominent family of Catholics from <unk> in Lincolnshire , and with his wife Elizabeth ( cousin to Robert Keyes ) had at least two sons , Robert and Henry . According to the Jesuit Oswald Tesimond , Rookwood was " well @-@ built and handsome , if somewhat short " , which he compensated for by his taste in extravagant clothing . In author Antonia Fraser 's opinion , this affectation was somewhat inappropriate at a time when " clothes were supposed to denote rank rather than money " . On his father 's death in 1600 , Rookwood inherited Coldham Hall , which subsequently became a refuge for priests . The following year he joined the Earl of Essex 's abortive rebellion against the government , for which he was captured and held at Newgate Prison . 
 = = Enlisted = = 
 In August 1605 Rookwood joined the Jesuits Henry Garnet and John Gerard on a pilgrimage to the shrine of St Winefride 's Well in Holywell . Late in September , he was approached by Robert Catesby , Thomas Wintour and John Wright , and invited to join what became known as the Gunpowder Plot . English Catholics had hoped that the persecution of their faith would end when James I came to the throne , as his attitude appeared to be moderate , even tolerant towards Catholics . In Catesby 's view however , James had reneged on his promises . He therefore planned to kill the king by blowing up the House of Lords with gunpowder , and then inciting a popular revolt to install James 's daughter , Princess Elizabeth , as titular Queen . To this end he had already helped enlist nine Catholics into the conspiracy , but was running out of money and needed to recruit more men . Rookwood was a horse @-@ breeder , and his stable of fine mounts at Coldham Hall was needed for the Midlands uprising . He had been asked to supply them with gunpowder about a year earlier , under the pretence that it was for William Stanley 's regiment in Flanders — no longer an illegal operation due to the recent Treaty of London — but otherwise provided no funds for the conspiracy . 
 Although unverifiable , his wife 's relationship to Robert Keyes may mean that Rookwood already suspected that something was being planned . He was at first concerned for the welfare of the Catholic lords who would be present at the explosion , but his compunction was alleviated when Catesby promised him that they would be tricked out of attending Parliament that day . Any lingering doubts Rookwood had were removed by Catesby 's lie that the Jesuits had given the scheme their approval . Rookwood had stayed with the <unk> at Huddington Court , and that month with the Catholic <unk> at <unk> Hall , but at <unk> 's behest he rented Clopton House near Stratford , and moved there after Michaelmas . He took with him several Catholic religious symbols , such as chalices , crucifixes , vestments , Latin books and praying beads . These were concealed in a cellar built by the Jesuit Nicholas Owen . 
 Toward the end of October he joined Keyes at his lodgings in London . A few days before the planned explosion he changed his mind about the sword he had ordered John Craddock to make , and had the cutler replace the grip with a gold one . The modified sword , which in total probably cost Rookwood more than £ 20 , was delivered on 4 November . 
 = = Discovery = = 
 The existence of the plot had been revealed in an anonymous letter delivered ten days earlier to William Parker , 4th Baron Monteagle , warning him to keep away from Parliament . On the evening of 4 November the authorities made a search of the House of Lords , where they discovered one of the plotters , Guy Fawkes , guarding a hoard of explosives . He was immediately arrested . 
 Fawkes had posed as a servant of fellow plotter Thomas Percy , and it was therefore Percy 's name that appeared on the first arrest warrant issued by the government . News of Fawkes 's capture soon spread through London , prompting Christopher Wright ( brother of John ) to rush to Thomas Wintour , and tell what had happened . Wintour guessed that the government was looking for Percy , and told Wright to travel to Percy 's lodgings and " bid him <unk> " . While Wintour lingered , Christopher Wright and Percy left the city , followed by Keyes , and then Rookwood . A renowned horseman , Rookwood covered 30 miles in two hours on a single horse . Using various steeds he had left along the route , he passed Keyes at Highgate , and then Wright and Percy at Little Brickhill near Dunstable . He caught up with Catesby , who had left the previous day to prepare the uprising , and told him what had happened in London . The group , which now included Catesby , his servant Thomas Bates , both Wright brothers , Percy and Rookwood , rode on to Dunchurch . 
 While Fawkes was being tortured , on 6 November the government began to round up anyone they thought might be involved . Rookwood 's servants , still in the house their master had so hastily departed , were questioned on the same day . His belongings at Clopton — including several incriminating Catholic symbols — were also taken , and by the time the plotters had reached Catesby 's family home at Ashby St Ledgers , Rookwood 's name was among the list of suspects drawn up by the Lord Chief Justice . The fugitives continued on to Dunchurch , where they met the recently recruited conspirator Everard Digby , with his hunting party . The next day the group stole horses from Warwick Castle , although with his fine cortège , Rookwood avoided the town . They then collected stored weapons from Norbrook , and continued on to Huddington . The party tried in vain to expand their number , but were shunned ; no one was prepared to risk being labelled a traitor . Father Garnet , contacted at Coughton Court by Bates , wrote Catesby a letter in which he implored the group to stop their " wicked actions " , before himself fleeing . 
 = = Fugitive = = 
 I doe acknowledge that uppon <unk> <unk> beeing the 7th of November 1605 my selfe and all the other gentlemen ( as I doe remember ) did <unk> o ' <unk> to one Mr. <unk> <unk> , at Mr. Robert Wintour his house , and <unk> other my <unk> I did acknowledge my error in concealing theire intended enterprise of <unk> <unk> his Ma and the State , having a scruple in conscience , the <unk> <unk> to mee to bee too <unk> , hee for all in generall gave me absolution without any other <unk> beeing <unk> by the multitude that were to come to him . 
 Rookwood was proclaimed a wanted man on 7 November . He went to confession and with the rest of the group took the sacrament — in Fraser 's opinion , a sign that none of them thought they had long to live . Through pouring rain they rode to Hewell Grange , helping themselves to further arms , ammunition and money , and finally reached Holbeche House , on the border of Staffordshire , at about 10 : 00 pm that night . Tired from three days of riding , they spread in front of the fire some of the now @-@ soaked gunpowder taken from Hewell Grange , to dry out . A stray spark landed on the powder , and Rookwood , Catesby , John Grant and another man were caught up in the resultant conflagration . Rookwood and Catesby were described as " reasonably well " , but Grant was blinded . 
 Several of the conspirators disappeared into the night , but Rookwood , Catesby , the Wright brothers , Percy and Grant stayed on . They didn 't have long to wait ; by 11 : 00 am the next day the house was surrounded by 200 of the Sheriff of Worcester 's men . In the ensuing battle , Wintour was shot in the shoulder . John and Christopher Wright were each killed . Catesby and Percy were reportedly both killed by a single musket ball . Rookwood was also shot , but survived and was quickly captured . His belongings should by right have been seized by the government , but his elaborate sword apparently proved to be too great a temptation for the Sheriff 's men , and disappeared without trace . Rookwood and the others were taken first to Worcester , and then to the Tower of London . Those conspirators still at large were rounded up shortly after . 
 = = Trial and execution = = 
 Watched in secret by the king and his family , the surviving conspirators were arraigned in Westminster Hall on 27 January 1606 . Some of the prisoners hung their heads " as if their hearts were full of doggedness " , while others were nonchalant . All except Digby pleaded " Not Guilty " . Defending himself , Rookwood claimed that he had been enlisted into the plot through his friendship with Catesby , " whom he loved above any worldly man " . He admitted that he could not expect mercy , but asked for it anyway , so as not to leave a " blemish and blot unto all ages " . 
 His pleas were in vain . Three days later , Digby , Robert Wintour , John Grant and Thomas Bates were hanged , drawn and quartered at the western end of St Paul 's churchyard . The following day , Rookwood , Thomas Wintour , Robert Keyes and Guy Fawkes were tied to wattled hurdles and dragged by horse from the Tower , to the Old Palace Yard at Westminster — a longer route than had been suffered by their fellow conspirators . Rookwood had asked to be informed when he passed by his lodgings in the Strand , so that he could open his eyes and see his wife , waiting at the window . He shouted " Pray for me , pray for me ! " According to Father Gerard ( who was not then present ) , Elizabeth answered , " I will , and be of good courage . Offer <unk> wholly to God . I , for my part , do as freely restore thee to God as He gave thee unto me . " For the rest of the journey he kept his eyes closed , in prayer . Thomas Wintour was the first that day to be hanged and then killed . Rookwood was next , and made a short speech to the assembled audience . He was repentant , asking God to bless the king , queen , and their " royal progeny " , but " spoil [ ed ] all the pottage with one filthy weed " by beseeching God to make the king a Catholic . Nevertheless , he seems to have been left to hang for longer than the others , before suffering the remainder of his grim sentence . 
 = Ach Gott , wie manches Herzeleid , BWV 58 = 
 Ach Gott , wie manches Herzeleid ( Ah God , how much heartbreak ) , BWV 58 , is a church cantata by Johann Sebastian Bach . He composed the dialogue cantata in Leipzig for the Sunday after New Year 's Day . 
 The text has been attributed to Christoph Birkmann by Christine Blanken of the Bach @-@ Archiv Leipzig . He combined the topics of the readings , the gospel of the Flight into Egypt and teaching about the suffering of Christians from the First Epistle of Peter , in a structure of unusual symmetry with a duet as the first and last of the five movements . Both duets are dialogues of the Soul , represented by a soprano , and Jesus , sung by a bass as the vox Christi ( voice of Christ ) . Both duets are set as a chorale fantasia , combining a stanza from a hymn , sung by the soprano as the cantus firmus , with original poetry set in counterpoint . Both stanzas are sung to the same melody , but come from different hymns , Martin Moller 's " Ach Gott , wie manches Herzeleid " , and Martin Behm 's " Herr Jesu Christ , meins Lebens Licht " . While the poet wrote the duets to fit the same music , Bach composed them in contrast , even changing the meter of the tune , to fit the different mood : lamenting heartbreak in the beginning , comfort in the end . 
 Bach scored the work for a small Baroque instrumental ensemble of originally just strings and continuo , probably intended to ease the workload of musicians for the Christmas season . In a later version , he added a trio of oboes to the outer movements . Bach counted the work as part of his cycle of chorale cantatas , which he had begun in 1724 . It was presumably first performed on 5 January 1727 . 
 = = History and text = = 
 Bach composed the dialogue cantata the Sunday after New Year 's Day , probably of 1727 . This occasion happens only in years with a Sunday between New Year 's Day and Epiphany on 6 January . The prescribed readings for the day are from the First Epistle of Peter , the suffering of Christians ( 1 Peter 4 : 12 – 19 ) , and from the Gospel of Matthew , the Flight into Egypt ( Matthew 2 : 12 – 23 ) . In his first year as Thomaskantor ( director of church music ) in Leipzig , Bach had composed Schau , lieber Gott , wie meine Feind , BWV 153 , for this occasion . 
 The text has been recently attributed to Christoph Birkmann ( 1703 – 1771 ) , a theologian and student of Bach , by Christine Blanken of the Bach @-@ Archiv Leipzig . He retells the topic of the gospel in the first recitative , and expands it to the journey , suffering and perils of the contemporary Christian , with a focus on the contrast between suffering on Earth and joy in Heaven . The two outer movements are unusually similar , both duets of the Soul and Jesus , using a hymn stanza and free text . The first movements includes the first stanza of " Ach Gott , wie manches Herzeleid " , published by Martin Moller in 1587 ; the last movement includes the second stanza of Martin Behm 's " Herr Jesu Christ , meins Lebens Licht " , published in 1610 in the second volume of the collection <unk> <unk> <unk> . The melody is the same for both hymns and first appeared in Wolflein Lochamer 's Lochamer @-@ Liederbuch ( around 1455 ) . The poet 's own verse for the two movements is also similar , as if the author expected the composer to repeat the music , but Bach set them differently , even contrasting . 
 Bach performed the cantata presumably first on 5 January 1727 . He performed it again on 4 January 1733 or 3 January 1734 . Only this later version survived , for which Bach had added oboes to the orchestra and wrote a new third movement . The surviving continuo part of the original aria suggests a significantly different character . As only the continuo part of the first version of the central aria movement survived , it is unknown if the text was also changed . 
 Bach counted the work as part of his cycle of chorale cantatas , which he had begun in 1724 / 25 . In that year 's Christmas season , the Sunday fell between Christmas and New Year , a different occasion with different prescribed readings . Ach Gott , wie manches Herzeleid is not similar to the early works of that cycle which focus on one Lutheran hymn , such as a cantata on Moller 's hymn , Ach Gott , wie manches Herzeleid , BWV 3 , composed for the second Sunday after Epiphany of 1725 . According to the Bach scholar Alfred Dürr , the cantata is " to be numbered among the successors of the seventeenth @-@ century dialogue compositions as a ' Dialogue of the Faithful Soul with God ' " . 
 = = Scoring and structure = = 
 Bach structured the cantata in five movements in a symmetrical arrangement of two framing duets surrounding recitatives and a central aria . Bach scored the work for two vocal soloists ( soprano ( S ) and bass ( B ) ) , and a Baroque instrumental ensemble of originally two violins ( Vl ) , viola ( Va ) , and basso continuo . John Eliot Gardiner , who conducted the Bach Cantata Pilgrimage in 2000 , notes that the scoring for just two voices and strings was probably intended to ease the workload of musicians who had a busy time during the Christmas season . In the later version , Bach added a trio of two oboes ( Ob ) and taille ( Ot ) . The duration is given as 17 minutes . 
 In the following table of the movements , the scoring follows the Neue Bach @-@ Ausgabe of the later version . The keys and time signatures are taken from the book on all cantatas by the Bach scholar Alfred Dürr , using the symbols for common time ( 4 / 4 ) . The continuo , playing throughout , is not shown . 
 = = Music = = 
 The structure of the piece is unusually symmetric . It opens and closes with a duet including a chorale text . Harmonically , the piece begins and ends in C major , and the central movement is in D minor . The second movement modulates from A minor to F major , while the fourth movement mirrors this motion . 
 = = = 1 = = = 
 The first movement , " Ach Gott , wie manches Herzeleid " ( Ah , God , how much heartache ) , is a chorale fantasia , with the soprano , representing the Soul , singing the cantus firmus , reinforced by the taille , while the bass as the vox Christi ( voice of Christ ) delivers original verse in counterpoint to the melody . The melody is tonal but with a " very chromatic subtext " . The movement , marked Adagio , begins with a ritornello of strings doubled by oboes . A dotted @-@ rhythm figure , characteristic of a French overture , dominates the music . A figure of lament appears first in the continuo , then also in the upper voices . The ritornello recurs midway through the movement . 
 = = = 2 = = = 
 The secco bass recitative , " <unk> dich gleich die <unk> Welt , " ( Though the angry world might persecute you ) , is chromatic and in two sections : the first describes a history of persecution related to the Flight into Egypt with " striding angular phrases " , while the second section emphasizes the presence of God using a gentler and smoother melodic line . 
 = = = 3 = = = 
 The third movement , " Ich bin vergnügt in meinem Leiden " ( I am cheerful in my sorrow ) , is a soprano aria with an obbligato solo violin . The da capo movement describes the spirit 's confidence in God . The first section includes a " motto theme " transitioning into a " hectic " violin melody . The middle section is characterized by a " muscular " soprano line and " oddly bizarre " solo violin . The first section returns modified and unheralded . 
 = = = 4 = = = 
 The soprano recitative , " Kann es die Welt nicht lassen " ( If the world cannot cease ) , begins by recounting persecution , but quickly becomes an arioso with a walking continuo . 
 = = = 5 = = = 
 The final movement , " Ich hab für mir ein schwere Reis " ( I have a difficult journey before me ) , opens with a triad fanfare , which the bass voice sings on the words " Nur <unk> " ( Be comforted ) . It is similar to a motif in Bach 's Violin Concerto in E minor , BWV 1042 . The soprano reprises the chorale melody in duple rather than the original triple time , with a responding line in the bass voice . After two phrases , the ritornello plays alone for eight measures before both voices re @-@ enter in counterpoint to complete the chorale . 
 = = Selected recordings = = 
 Frank <unk> , Bach Aria Group , Bach Aria Group , Decca , 1960 . 
 Karl Richter , Münchener Bach @-@ Chor , Münchener Bach @-@ Orchester , Bach Cantatas Vol . 1 – Advent and Christmas . Archiv Produktion , 1970 . 
 Helmuth Rilling , Gächinger Kantorei , Bach @-@ Collegium Stuttgart , Die Bach Kantate Vol . 20 , Hänssler , 1971 . 
 Nikolaus Harnoncourt , Tölzer Knabenchor , Concentus Musicus Wien , J.S. Bach : Das Kantatenwerk – Sacred Cantatas Vol . 3 . Teldec , 1976 . 
 Michel <unk> , Ensemble vocal de Lausanne , Orchestre de Chambre de Lausanne . Bach Cantatas . Erato , 1976 . 
 Pieter Jan Leusink , Holland Boys Choir , Netherlands Bach Collegium . Bach Edition Vol . 18 – Cantatas Vol . 9 . Brilliant Classics , 2000 . 
 John Eliot Gardiner , Monteverdi Choir , English Baroque Soloists . Bach Cantatas Vol . 17 : Berlin . Soli Deo Gloria , 2000 . 
 Ton Koopman , Amsterdam Baroque Orchestra & Choir . J.S. Bach : Complete Cantatas Vol . 17 . Antoine Marchand , 2003 . 
 Masaaki <unk> Collegium Japan . J.S. Bach : Cantatas Vol . 38 ( Solo Cantatas ) . BIS , 2006 . 
 = Thyroid ima artery = 
 The thyroid ima artery ( <unk> ima artery , <unk> <unk> ima , thyroid artery of Neubauer or the lowest thyroid artery ) is an artery of the head and neck . It is an anatomical variant that , when present , supplies blood to the thyroid gland , which is primarily supplied by the inferior and superior thyroid arteries . The artery also supplies the trachea , the parathyroid gland and the thymus gland ( as <unk> <unk> ) in rare cases . It has also been reported to be a compensatory artery when one or both of the inferior thyroid arteries are absent and in a few cases the only source of blood to the thyroid gland . Though it mostly arises from the brachiocephalic trunk , it may also originate from other sources . It also varies in size , blood supply , and termination . The artery occurs in only 3 – 10 % of the population and because of the variations , it may cause surgical complications such as severe bleeding . 
 = = Structure = = 
 Thyroid ima artery is an embryonic artery and it occurs because of the failure of the vessel to close , remaining patent ( open ) . 
 The artery has a variable origin . It mostly arises from the brachiocephalic trunk , but may also originate from the arch of aorta , the right common carotid , the subclavian , the <unk> artery , the <unk> trunk , the transverse scapular or the internal thoracic artery . It ascends in front of the trachea in the superior mediastinum to the lower part of the thyroid gland . 
 It differs in size and ranges from as small as accessory thyroid arteries to the size of primary thyroid vessels . The diameter of the lumen of the artery ranges from 3 – 5 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 12 – 0 @.@ 20 in ) . The artery may be present as an accessory thyroid artery but sometimes appears to compensate for incompetence or absence of one or more main thyroid vessels . Since it begins from below the thyroid gland and ascends upwards , it is mostly associated with absence or reduced size of the inferior thyroid arteries . In such cases , it is known as the accessory inferior thyroid artery . In rare cases , the artery has been seen to be compensating for absence of one or both superior thyroid arteries . 
 In cases where the length of the thyroid ima artery is shorter , the artery ends by supplying the thymus gland and is known as <unk> <unk> . 
 = = Function = = 
 When present , the thyroid ima 's chief supply is the thyroid gland , though it also supplies the trachea . The artery may extend and supply the parathyroid glands . An infrequently observed artery , it is more frequently reported in the context of enlarged parathyroid glands ( parathyroid adenomas ) . The artery ends by supplying the thyroid gland , or the parathyroid glands , as a single unit or as multiple branches . The artery is also found to be the only supply of the parathyroid gland in rare cases . 
 = = Clinical significance = = 
 The artery is only present in approximately 3 – 10 % of the population . Thyroid ima artery is of surgical importance ; due to its relatively small size and infrequent presence it can cause complications such as severe bleeding in surgery of the thorax , trachea , thyroid or parathyroid glands . Knowledge of occurrence of the artery is especially important during tracheostomy and <unk> . Because the artery is smaller than the other thyroid vessels , and having an origin from one of the bigger vessels , a brisk cut while performing the surgery may cause complications such as severe hemorrhage and significant blood loss . The artery , if dissected , may draw back into the mediastinum and further complicate the condition by causing hemorrhage and clots in the thoracic cavity . 
 = = History = = 
 The thyroid ima artery was first defined by German anatomist Johann E. Neubauer in the year 1772 . Hence , it was named the thyroid artery of Neubauer . The artery originates lower than the inferior thyroid arteries , so it is also known as the lowest thyroid artery . 
 <unk> <unk> ima is the Latin name of the artery . 
 = = Other animals = = 
 The presence of thyroid ima artery is also observed in other higher primates . The artery has been reported in gorillas , gibbons , macaques and gray langurs . Variations in the origin were also seen ; it was found to originate from the aorta in the thorax , or the carotid in the neck . 
 = Typhoon Maysak ( 2015 ) = 
 Typhoon Maysak , known in the Philippines as Typhoon Chedeng , was the most powerful pre @-@ April tropical cyclone on record in the Northwestern Pacific Ocean . The fourth named storm of the 2015 Pacific typhoon season , Maysak originated as a tropical depression on March 26 . The next day , the Japan Meteorological Agency ( JMA ) upgraded the depression to a tropical storm and assigned it the name Maysak . According to the JMA , Maysak became the second typhoon of the year on March 28 . The typhoon explosively intensified into a Category 5 super typhoon on March 31 , passing near the islands of Chuuk and Yap in the Federated States of Micronesia . After maintaining that intensity for 18 hours , Maysak weakened , made landfall over the Philippine island of Luzon as a minimal tropical storm , and dissipated shortly afterwards . 
 Maysak affected Yap and Chuuk in the Federated States of Micronesia , as well as the Philippines . The storm was responsible for four deaths in the Federated States of Micronesia alongside 10 injuries . Damage was estimated at $ 8 @.@ 5 million ( 2015 USD ) . Estimates from the Red Cross suggested that there were 5 @,@ 000 people in desperate need of food , water and shelter , and needed emergency assistance . Pacific Maritime Association administrator Melinda Espinosa said " Most concrete structures withstood the fury but everything else was damaged . " Later , the storm struck the Philippines , causing minimal damage . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 An area of convection persisted on March 24 to the east @-@ southeast of the Marshall Islands . Initially it consisted of a broad but consolidating circulation , with outflow to the north offsetting moderate wind shear to aid in development . It gradually became better organized , with a curved area of convection wrapping into the center . On March 26 , the Japan Meteorological Agency ( JMA ) classified the system as a tropical depression just east of Pohnpei . On March 27 , the JTWC started tracking the system as a Tropical Depression 04W . Moving west @-@ northwestward , the system 's center became more consolidated with convective banding becoming wrapped into it . The JTWC upgraded 04W to a tropical storm the same day , and the JMA upgraded the depression to Tropical Storm Maysak . 
 On March 28 , microwave satellite imagery revealed an eye with central dense overcast obscuring most of the feature ; accordingly , the JMA upgraded Maysak to a severe tropical storm . The storm continued to strengthen while moving westward along the periphery of a subtropical ridge , The eye became more defined and the convection became more consolidated . Early on March 29 , the JMA upgraded Maysak further to typhoon status , estimating 10 minute winds of 120 km / h ( 75 mph ) . That day , the typhoon moved over Chuuk Lagoon , the first time an eye crossed the lagoon since Typhoon Amy in 1971 . The storm developed good outflow , enhanced by a strong northerly flow , although moderate wind shear kept Maysak from intensifying more quickly . However , the eye became clearly visible on March 30 , and the typhoon rapidly intensified after the shear diminished . The JTWC reported a 30 km ( 19 mi ) wide eye displaying the stadium effect , and surrounded by very deep convection . On March 31 , the agency assessed that Maysak intensified into a Category 5 @-@ equivalent super typhoon on the SSHWS , with 1 minute winds of 260 km / h ( 160 mph ) ; this was increased to 280 km / h ( 175 mph ) in post @-@ season reanalysis , the highest on record for a pre @-@ April typhoon . Around that time , the storm was moving through the Federated States of Micronesia ( FSM ) , passing just north of Fais Island , and also very near Ulithi . Late on March 31 , the JMA estimated peak winds of 195 km / h ( 120 mph ) and a minimum pressure of 910 mbar ( 27 inHg ) , although operationally the agency estimated Maysak was slightly more intense . This made Maysak the most powerful typhoon ever recorded before April , surpassing Typhoon Mitag of 2002 , Typhoon Alice of 1979 , and Typhoon Harriet of 1959 . 
 At peak intensity , Maysak had a nearly symmetric eye with an almost perfect ring of convection around it , with characteristics of an annular tropical cyclone . On April 1 , the eye widened to about 40 km ( 25 mi ) after undergoing an eyewall replacement cycle , and the storm began to weaken , with diminished intensity of the convection . The convection weakened significant in the storm 's southern quadrant due to drier air and worsening upper level conditions . On April 1 , the Philippine Atmospheric , Geophysical and Astronomical Services Administration ( PAGASA ) started tracking Maysak , giving it the local name Chedeng . The eye widened further as dry air wrapped into the center , and stronger wind shear diminished the convection . On April 4 , the JMA downgraded Maysak to a severe tropical storm , and later that day further to a tropical storm . The storm continued to weaken as it approached the Philippines , and late on April 4 the convection began dislocating from the circulation . On April 5 , Maysak made landfall along east @-@ central Luzon as a minimal tropical storm , making it one of only eight storms to strike the island between January and April since 1945 . Soon after it degraded into a tropical depression , and the weakening storm crossed Luzon with scattered thunderstorms . After emerging into the South China Sea , the system continued to the west @-@ northwest , and Maysak dissipated on April 7 . 
 = = Impact = = 
 = = = Federated States of Micronesia = = = 
 Typhoon Maysak is responsible for extensive damage across the Federated States of Micronesia ( FSM ) , with Chuuk and Yap States suffering the brunt of its impact . Agricultural impact was extensive , with 90 percent of the banana , breadfruit , and taro crops destroyed in Chuuk and Yap states . Overall , 281 homes were destroyed , and another 300 were damaged . According to the United States Agency for International Development ( USAID ) , a total of 29 @,@ 000 people were directly affected by the storm and damage throughout the FSM amounted to $ 8 @.@ 5 million . There were four deaths and ten injuries related to the typhoon in the FSM . 
 Early in its development , Maysak brushed Kosrae within the FSM . Persistent westerly winds knocked down a few trees and damaged a few houses while also causing beach erosion . The storm later struck Chuuk State on March 29 , passing directly over the main island as a Category 1 @-@ equivalent typhoon , with gusts as high as 175 km / h ( 110 mph ) . Rainfall on Weno Island reached 150 to 180 mm ( 6 to 7 in ) . High sustained winds , measured up to 114 km / h ( 71 mph ) at the local National Weather Service office , downed numerous trees , power lines , and tore off roofs . An estimated 80 – 90 percent of homes in Chuuk sustained damage . The storm destroyed at least 830 homes and 37 businesses , displacing 6 @,@ 760 people . Power to most of the state , including the entirety of Weno , was knocked out and communication was difficult . On Weno alone , the storm left about 7 @,@ 000 people homeless . Water sources were rendered undrinkable . Outlying islands sustained heavy damage to crops and houses . Across Chuuk State , rough waves from the typhoon damaged seawalls and sank or damaged 11 boats or ships . There were at least four deaths in the state . A fallen tree killed a man and a child died after being struck by airborne debris . One person died due to a mudslide , and a newborn child died after being unable to arrive at the hospital due to fallen trees . 
 Two days after striking Chuuk , Maysak passed directly over Ulithi atoll and skirted Fais Island at peak intensity , resulting in extensive damage . According to Guam Governor Eddie Calvo , sustained winds reached 210 km / h ( 130 mph ) in Ulithi and 160 km / h ( 100 mph ) on Fais , with gusts reaching 240 km / h ( 150 mph ) on Ulithi . All structures on Ulithi not made of concrete were severely damaged or destroyed by Maysak 's powerful winds . Power and water supplies to Ulithi were completely lost during the storm . The entirety of the island 's crop were ruined by the typhoon 's storm surge , with early estimates indicating that it would be a full year before crops could be planted again . Though spared a direct hit , Yap proper was also hit hard with reports of airborne debris during the storm . Outlying islands were also affected ; on Faraulep , water wells were contaminated and fruit trees were knocked down . During the storm , 18 fishermen were stranded <unk> Island and West <unk> Island , but they returned home afterward . 
 = = = Philippines = = = 
 Ahead of the storm , over 24 @,@ 000 people evacuated Philippines 's northeastern province of Aurora . Many radio stations , typically which close during Easter , remained operational to broadcast the storm . Officials issued storm warnings , and the military was on alert . Beaches were closed , boats were ordered to remain at port , and 10 flights were canceled . The Department of Social Welfare and Development reported that ₱ 300 @.@ 9 million ( US $ 6 @.@ 8 million ) worth of funds and supplies were available for possible relief efforts . Approximately 28 @,@ 000 family food packs were prepositioned in warehouses across Luzon . 
 Striking the Philippines as a rapidly weakening system , Maysak had only minimal effects in the country , producing strong waves and light rainfall . Across Aurora and Isabela provinces , a total of 2 @,@ 761 people were directly affected by the storm , most of whom were evacuated prior to Maysak 's landfall . No damage or loss of life was reported ; however , four people were injured after waves generated by Maysak hit them while they were taking selfies along the shoreline of <unk> town in Aurora province on April 4 . An overloaded , unregistered ferry capsized off Sulu Province in Mindanao on April 3 , resulting in five deaths . The Philippine Coast Guard stated that seas at the time were calm and the sinking likely resulted from overcrowding of the vessel rather than Typhoon Maysak . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Chuuk Governor Johnson <unk> issued a state of emergency on April 1 and stated that international assistance was necessary . Immediate concerns included the possibility of residents starving with most of the state 's crops ruined . Yap Governor Tony <unk> also issued a state of emergency on April 1 . On April 9 , the Congress of the Federated States of Micronesia held a special two @-@ day session at the request of President Manny Mori , which included determination of typhoon relief funds . They allocated $ 1 @.@ 5 million toward relief for Chuuk and Yap States on April 11 . The president also issued a price freeze to pre @-@ storm levels to prevent price gouging . 
 The FSM government estimated that residents on Fais and Ulithi would need food rations for 3 – 6 months following the typhoon . Debris removal at Chuuk International Airport allowed for flights to the state to resume on April 1 . Emergency assistance across the nation was hampered by the remote and small nature of the islands it comprises . In many instances , communities can only be reached by boat . Further complicating issues was the large number of trees uprooted or downed by the storm which blocked numerous roads . Generators had been supplied to Ulithi and Fais by April 6 , allowing for water pumps to be activated and supply clean water . Power and water supply was gradually restored , although many remained without power by two weeks after the storm . On April 6 , a United States Coast Guard helicopter provided an aerial assessment of the islands affected . Damage assessment was difficult due to the many sparse islands affected across open ocean . Relief supplies stockpiled by the Micronesian Red Cross were distributed in the immediate aftermath of Maysak ; however , these supplies were exhausted by April 8 . On April 14 , the FSM government sent a patrol boat to Chuuk , delivering rice , ramen noodles , and water . 
 Due to their Compact of Free Association , United States President Barack Obama declared a state of disaster for the FSM on April 28 , which allocated federal assistance for rebuilding . This followed a request by FSM President Mori on the previous day . USAID transported relief goods and $ 2 @.@ 1 million worth of aid , including reverse osmosis kits and water distribution tanks . On Ulithi , the USAID delivered 20 @,@ 000 kg ( 44 @,@ 000 lb ) worth of food to residents . Throughout the FSM , the agency assisted in repairing buildings , providing housing assistance to residents whose homes were destroyed , as well as plastic sheeting . By May 8 , the United States government had provided nearly $ 2 @.@ 96 million in assistance , including $ 620 @,@ 000 sent to the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations for regrowing damaged crops . 
 Several countries , agencies , and non @-@ governmental organizations came to the aid of the FSM in the wake of Maysak . On April 13 , the Government of Australia provided A $ 100 @,@ 000 ( US $ 77 @,@ 000 ) and two patrol boats for recovery and relief operations . As an offer of " comfort and support " , the Chinese government gave the FSM $ 500 @,@ 000 in cash on April 21 . The Government of Japan sent water treatment and transportation supplies to the FSM government , while the International Organization for Migration distributed 20 water treatment units to Ulithi . The European Union also sent 47 rainwater storage units , which would aid in helping future water supply . 
 = Battle of Britain ( video game ) = 
 Battle of Britain is a turn @-@ based strategy video game developed and published by Personal Software Services for the Commodore 64 in 1987 . It was also ported to the Amstrad CPC and ZX Spectrum later that year . It is the seventh instalment to the Strategic Wargames series . The game is set during the Battle of Britain campaign of the Second World War and revolves around Britain 's defence and prevention against a Nazi invasion . In the game , the player commands the Royal Air Force as they must defend key cities against the Luftwaffe . 
 The game contains elements of first @-@ person shooting ; during some sequences the game requires a certain number of aircraft to be shot down . Battle of Britain received mixed to positive reviews from critics upon release . Critics praised the fast pace of the gameplay and features , however , one reviewer was divided over the historical accuracy of the battle . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 The game is a turn @-@ based strategy and focuses on air battles during the Battle of Britain campaign of the Second World War . The player commands squadrons of the Royal Air Force and the main objective of the game is to defend key cities and radar installations from the Luftwaffe . Unlike previous games in the series , Battle of Britain is the first to include cursor movement , a scrolling interface and elements of first @-@ person shooter gameplay . At the start of the game , the player is given the option of how many RAF squadrons they wish to allocate for offensive and defensive purposes ; a proportionate amount must be sent to attack Luftwaffe squadrons whilst the others will be left to defend key cities from air raids . 
 The game has three individual scenarios ; training mode , Blitzkrieg mode , and campaign mode . Training mode is set on the lowest difficulty and allows the player to finish the game by using any strategy over an indefinite period of time . Blitzkrieg mode only lasts one in @-@ game day and features the Luftwaffe going out for an " all @-@ out " attack simultaneously on every target and city . The campaign mode takes place over a period of 30 days and is set on the highest difficulty . In addition , the campaign mode features historically accurate movements and strategies used by both the RAF and Luftwaffe . 
 At the start of the game , a wave of Luftwaffe aircraft ( in the appearance of <unk> sprites on the map ) will cross the English Channel and proceed to bomb various cities , air bases and radar installations . In response , RAF squadrons are automatically scrambled and will await orders to either engage invading Luftwaffe fighters or to defend key cities from bombers . When a RAF squadron has successfully engaged a Luftwaffe unit on the map , the game will shift to a first @-@ person shooter perspective , in which the point of view is portrayed from a cockpit of either a Spitfire or Messerschmitt Bf 109 , depending on the side chosen . During the dogfight sequence , the number of Luftwaffe casualties will depend on how many aircraft the player was able to shoot down . 
 The game features a changing weather system , which will vary from every hour and will provide obstructions for various forces and installations . For example , fog will close runways whereas storms will temporarily disrupt bombing runs and dogfights . Over time , RAF squadrons will run out of ammunition or fuel , and thus must replenish at the nearest RAF station , which will render them vulnerable to a Luftwaffe bombing run . In between turns , the player has the opportunity to request reinforcements from RAF reserves , however the longer the campaign progresses , the quality of the reserves will diminish . 
 = = Background = = 
 Personal Software Services was founded in Coventry , England , by Gary Mays and Richard Cockayne in 1981 . The company were known for creating games that revolved around historic war battles and conflicts , such as Theatre Europe , Bismark and Falklands ' 82 . The company had a partnership with French video game developer ERE Informatique , and published localised versions of their products to the United Kingdom . In 1986 , Cockayne took a decision to alter their products for release on 16 @-@ bit consoles , as he found that smaller 8 @-@ bit consoles such as the ZX Spectrum lacked the processing power for larger strategy games . The decision was falsely interpreted as " pull @-@ out " from the Spectrum market by a video game journalist . Following years of successful sales throughout the mid 1980s , Personal Software Services experienced financial difficulties , in what Cockayne admitted in a retrospective interview that " he took his eye off the ball " . The company was acquired by Mirrorsoft in February 1987 , and was later dispossessed by the company due to strains of debt . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The game received mixed to positive reviews from critics upon release . Gwyn Hughes of Your Sinclair praised the game 's fast pace and tempo of gameplay , stating it to be " fast and furious " . However , he criticised the arcade @-@ style flying sequences , referring them as " dodgy " due to the system 's lack of processing power . Philippa Irvine of Crash praised the " all @-@ action " theme of the game , and heralded the campaign as " impressive " in both terms of content and length . Gary Rook of Sinclair User similarly praised the gameplay , suggesting that it had a " workmanship " quality to it , however he noted that it lacked a " certain sparkle " . Gordon <unk> of ZX Computing found some aspects of the gameplay confusing , comparing it to juggling . 
 A reviewer of Computer and Video Games stated that the game " isn 't very good " , nor the best Battle of Britain recreation on the market , and criticised on how interceptions were " far too easy " to make . Reviewing the ZX Spectrum version of the game , a critic from Advanced Computer Entertainment cited the game as historically inaccurate due to it lasting only 30 days , whereas the actual Battle of Britain was considerably longer . However , they praised the gameplay as an " enjoyable challenge " and a good value for money . 
 = Sandugo = 
 The Sandugo was a blood compact , performed in the island of Bohol in the Philippines , between the Spanish explorer Miguel López de Legazpi and Datu Sikatuna the chieftain of Bohol on March 16 , 1565 , to seal their friendship as part of the tribal tradition . This is considered as the first treaty of friendship between the Spaniards and Filipinos . " Sandugo " is a Visayan word which means " one blood " . 
 The Sandugo is depicted in both the provincial flag and the official seal of the government in Bohol . It also features the image of the blood compact . The top of the seal explains the history behind the Sandugo event that occurred in Bohol , the fleet and the location where the Spaniards anchored and the place where the treaty was conducted which was dated on March 16 , 1565 . 
 = = History = = 
 In 1521 , Portuguese explorer Ferdinand Magellan became the first person from Europe to reach Asia by sailing west , a voyage of which he would meet an untimely death in the island of the Philippines . Spain sent expeditions to colonize the East Indies in their competition with Portugal to seize control over the spice trade . However , all of these expeditions failed . It was not until Miguel López de Legazpi , sailing from Mexico with five ships and five hundred men , reached the Philippines in 1565 and a Spanish settlement was established . López de Legazpi was greeted by hostile Muslim tribes opposing a foreign invasion . His attempt to land on the island of Cebu resulted in the death of one of his soldiers prompting him to explore another island and seek trade with various tribes . 
 Sailing south toward the island of Mindanao , López de Legazpi 's fleet encountered <unk> forcing them to sail northward to the island of Bohol . There , he captured a vessel from Borneo whose Malay sailors informed the Spaniards that the natives inhabiting the region traded with people from Borneo and Indonesia . Arriving in Bohol , López de Legazpi noticed the hostility of the people . The Malayan servant explained that such hostility was due to the expeditions conducted by the Portuguese from the Moluccas islands . In 1563 , Portuguese fleets arrived in Visayan waters and enslaved about 1 @,@ 000 inhabitants . López de Legazpi , with the help of the Malayan sailor , explained to the tribes in Bohol that they were not Portuguese and that they had come to the islands to trade . Upon learning this , the chieftains and their tribes became friendlier and welcoming to the Spaniards . 
 = = Ceremony = = 
 The Sandugo began with the arrival of Miguel López de Legazpi in Bohol in 1565 and the establishment of allegiance by Datu Sikatuna to the king of Spain . They made a cut on their left arm with a dagger and poured their blood into a cup filled with wine , which they both drank in honour of their friendship . The inscription at a monument in Tagbilaran City describes the event : 
 It added that the compact was performed as part of the tribal tradition . 
 In his report to Philip II , López de Legazpi wrote : 
 = = Tradition = = 
 By performing a blood compact , it preserves the bond of friendship between two tribes . This ceremony was the first treaty of friendship between the natives , and the Spaniards . In honor of this ceremony , the former President of the Philippines Elpidio Quirino established the Order of Sikatuna , a presidential decoration conferred upon politicians . Juan Luna , a Filipino painter , depicted this event in his painting entitled The Blood Compact ( Spanish : El Pacto de Sangre ) in 1883 . El Pacto de Sangre obtained the first prize in Paris in 1885 and at the Louisiana Purchase Exposition of St. Louis in 1904 . At that period , it was an important part for tribes to perform the <unk> as part of the peace process . A monument was constructed in Tagbilaran City by the Philippine Historical Committee and the National Historical Institute . 
 = = Publications = = 
 Agoncillo , Teodoro A. History of the Filipino People . <unk> Publishing , 1990 ( 8th Edition ) . 
 <unk> , José S. Rizal and the Emergence of the Philippine Nation . 2001 revised edition . 
 Constantino , Renato . The Philippines : A Past Revisited . Tala Publishing Series , 1975 . 
 <unk> , Onofre D. The Roots of the Filipino Nation . 1989 . 
 Scott , William Henry . Barangay : Sixteenth @-@ Century Philippine Culture and Society . <unk> : 1994 . 
 <unk> , Gregorio F. Great Filipinos in History : An Epic of Filipino Greatness in War and Peace . Verde Bookstore , 1970 . 
 <unk> , Gregorio . Dagohoy : Champion of Philippine Freedom . Manila : Enriquez , <unk> and Co . , 1941 . 
 = The 39 Steps ( 2008 film ) = 
 The 39 Steps is a 2008 British television adventure thriller feature @-@ length adaptation of the John Buchan novel The Thirty @-@ Nine Steps produced by the BBC . It was written by Lizzie Mickery , directed by James Hawes , and filmed on location in Scotland , starring Rupert Penry @-@ Jones , Lydia Leonard , David Haig , Eddie Marsan , and Patrick Malahide . Following three screen versions of the novel and a 1977 television adaptation of The Three Hostages , Penry @-@ Jones became the fifth actor to portray Hannay on screen . This adaptation is set on the eve of the First World War and sees mining engineer Richard Hannay caught up in an espionage conspiracy following the death of a British spy in his flat . 
 The single drama was first shown on BBC One and BBC HD on 28 December 2008 as part of BBC One 's Christmas 2008 line @-@ up , and it was the most watched programme of the day . Compared to Alfred Hitchcock 's 1935 film , it received mostly negative reviews from the press . The production was criticised for its historical inaccuracies , particularly its use of anachronistic props . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The story starts on 28 June 1914 ; Richard Hannay ( Rupert Penry @-@ Jones ) , a mining engineer and an intelligence officer during the Second Boer War , is in London following his recent return from Africa , finding England " <unk> " , " class @-@ bound " and " deathly , deathly dull " . Evading German spies ( Werner <unk> and Peter Stark ) , Scudder ( Eddie Marsan ) pushes himself into Hannay 's flat and reveals himself to be a betrayed freelance British Secret Service Bureau agent , who has been on the trail of a German espionage ring with headquarters in Scotland . He has heard rumours of a plot to assassinate a high @-@ ranking European royal , which could lead to war . Believing he will soon be killed , he hands Hannay a notebook to pass to Captain Kell of the Secret Service Bureau . While Hannay answers the door , Scudder is shot by one of the German spies seeking his notebook who has entered the flat via a back door . The police arrive , and Hannay is arrested for murder before escaping . 
 Unable to contact Kell , Hannay flicks through the notebook , finding it contains pages of code using Roman numerals . He finds a map in the back and takes a train to Scotland to prove Scudder right , attempting to decipher the code en route . Finding out Archduke Ferdinand has been assassinated , Hannay reaches Scotland and leaves the train to escape the police . He stays in a barn overnight , where he deciphers the code in the notebook ( except a section in double code ) , which reveals the Germans want to destroy the Royal Navy so that they could invade the country , starting a war . Chased by the police , the Germans and machine @-@ gun @-@ fire from a biplane , he encounters brother and sister Harry and Victoria Sinclair , a prospective Member of Parliament and a suffragette respectively ( Patrick Kennedy and Lydia Leonard ) , who believe him to be a Liberal spokesman . At a political rally in a nearby town ( Culross ) where Hannay meets Sir George Sinclair , Harry and Victoria 's uncle ( David Haig ) , Victoria aids Hannay 's attempt to escape , before they are captured by the Germans . With the notebook missing from Hannay 's pocket , they are taken to <unk> Castle ( Dumbarton Castle ) , the headquarters of the German espionage ring , where they are imprisoned by Professor Fisher ( Patrick Malahide ) . Sir George arrives as they are captured and inquires about them while they are held in another room . After he leaves they are bound and gagged and placed in the cellar . They escape and return to where they were captured to look for the notebook , which Victoria reveals she had picked from Hannay 's pocket and hidden . They stay overnight in an inn , where Hannay details the contents of the notebook to Victoria . 
 In the morning , they escape to Harry 's house , where Victoria unsuccessfully attempts to contact Captain Kell . Hannay , alone , meets with Sir George , who sits on the defence committee . Hannay reveals the contents of the notebook , leading to Sir George disclosing that a meeting of the National Committee of Defence is being held the next day at Stirling Castle to unveil new naval plans , matching part of the double code . Later , Hannay and Victoria kiss , and the next morning he sees her leaving with a man , whom he recalls seeing previously on the train and at the rally . With the notebook missing and finding out that Victoria disconnected the call she made to the Secret Service Bureau before it was connected , Hannay goes to Stirling Castle , believing Victoria to be a traitor . There , Victoria reveals she works for the Secret Service Bureau and he meets Kell ( Alex Jennings ) and Wakeham , the man Victoria left with earlier ( Steven Elder ) , who reveal they used Hannay to distract the Germans and sent Victoria to keep an eye on him . Hannay deduces that Sir George is the traitor , as he should have heard them when he was at Fisher 's House , and , with his photographic memory , has escaped with the naval plans memorised . To identify his rendezvous point with the Germans , they crack the remaining code , referring to the room they were previously imprisoned in at <unk> Castle , and discover " 39 steps " written in the notebook by Scudder using invisible ink . At the Castle , Hannay and Victoria find 39 steps leading to a loch . A shoot @-@ out ensues , and a German U @-@ boat surfaces in the loch . Fisher , the Germans and Sir George fail to get to the U @-@ boat before it submerges , and surrender . 
 Together by the loch , Hannay and Victoria kiss before she is hit by a bullet fired by a surviving gunman , falls into the loch and disappears . The story concludes four months later , after the declaration of the First World War , when Hannay , in a British Army officer 's uniform , is waiting to meet someone at St Pancras Station . Harry appears , saying that Victoria wanted to say goodbye , and Hannay sees her in the distance . In reply to Hannay 's bewilderment , Harry tells him , " top secret , old man . " Victoria disappears behind a luggage trolley and Harry tells Hannay she 'll see him after the war . 
 = = Production = = 
 Announced by the BBC in August 2008 , filming began in September 2008 for a first broadcast at Christmas . Penry @-@ Jones , who had previously worked on the spy drama Spooks , took the lead role , with the screenplay written by Lizzie Mickery ( co @-@ writer of the dramas The State Within and Messiah ) , produced by Lynn Horsford ( Boy A , The Mark of Cain ) and directed by James Hawes ( Fanny Hill , Merlin , Doctor Who ) . Penry @-@ Jones became the fifth actor to play Hannay on screen , preceded by Robert Donat , Kenneth More , Barry Foster , and Robert Powell . 
 At the time of the announcement , Horsford said : " With this adaptation we wanted to stay faithful to the spirit and period of the book , but asked the writer Lizzie to feel free to re @-@ imagine it for a modern audience more familiar with James Bond and Jason Bourne . " The production was set around the eve of the First World War and retained other elements from the book , including having the 39 steps refer to steps to a departure point , but according to The Times ' thriller critic it has " a style that gives more than a nod to the grittier James Bond of Daniel Craig " . A piece in The Observer stated that Mickery was " braced for complaints this Christmas from fans of previous screen portrayals " , after basing her plot on the original book rather than the films . Differences from the book include the introduction of romance for Hannay , through suffragette and spy Victoria Sinclair , played by Lydia Leonard , and , according to Serena Davies of The Daily Telegraph , " a plot with so many twists and turns you almost need a degree in espionage to follow it " . 
 Penry @-@ Jones read the book and saw the other versions of the film , but said that Hitchcock 's 1959 film North by Northwest was " more of a template for me than any version of The 39 Steps " . Explaining why he took on the part , he said to Tim Oglethorpe of the Daily Record : 
 Part of the appeal was the cars , I 'm a bit of a buff ... And I said – jokingly , of course – that I wouldn 't be in The 39 Steps unless the action included the famous chase scene in which Hannay is pursued by a biplane . I 've always wanted to be chased by a plane like Cary Grant in the movie North by Northwest and I was just delighted when it happened in our version of Steps . 
 He also said prior to broadcast that , depending on the reception , " They 'd like to do more if they can . I definitely would . " 
 Filming took place on location in Scotland . Locations used included the area around West Register Street in Edinburgh for the London scenes at the start of the film , Bo 'ness railway station , Kelvingrove Art Gallery and Museum for the interior scenes of St Pancras railway station , Glasgow City Chambers , Culross , Stirling Castle , Dumbarton Castle , the highlands of Argyll and Loch Katrine , used for the finale . 
 The production was shot using 35 mm film rather than high @-@ definition cameras . Hawes told Matthew Bell of Broadcast that : 
 Film is absolutely right for this project . It has scale , big exterior locations and that 's something that still challenges HD .... The HD cameras available to us on our budget are still vulnerable in difficult weather conditions [ encountered during filming ] . There 's no doubt that what we 've got on 35mm is just so much more detailed . It has so much more depth of field and richness than we could have got on HD . 
 The adaptation was originally planned to be broadcast on BBC One on Boxing Day , but was later moved to a Sunday night slot on 28 December . It was simulcast in high @-@ definition on BBC HD . 
 = = = Artistic licence and historical inaccuracies = = = 
 Some artistic licence was used to find the appropriate props . Cars used included a 1924 Morris Oxford , a 1926 Darracq , and a 1927 Wolseley , previously used in the 1960s series Dr Finlay 's Casebook . Willie Bennie , who sourced the vehicles , told the Daily Record : 
 I knew they were wanting to include car chases to make the drama much more exciting to watch . The only trouble was that the cars around this era weren 't very fast . 
 The biplane that chased Hannay was a 1916 Royal Aircraft Factory S.E.5a , his apartment was in an Art Deco building and 1950s rail carriages were being pulled by a steam engine built in 1927 . 
 Ben Stephenson , Head of Drama Commissioning at the BBC , told The Daily Telegraph in reply to complaints about the inaccuracies : 
 The question is : for the seven million people who watched it , did it feel authentic , did it create a sense of period ? ... We were creating a realistic world within a world – a world of damsels and heroes and a huge amount of excitement . That , for me , is the priority . Did it create that world ? It absolutely did . That 's not to say that we don 't work increasingly hard to get everything right . But it 's hard to get all the details right when it 's a 21st century drama , never mind anything earlier . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Overnight viewing figures estimated that the programme was seen by 7 @.@ 3 million viewers ( 28 % audience share ) on 28 December 2008 , against a Top Gear : Vietnam Special on BBC Two . It was the most watched programme of the day . 
 The adaptation received mostly negative reviews from the press , believing it did not match up to Hitchcock 's 1935 film version ( as predicted by Mickery ) . Sam Wollaston of The Guardian felt that the romance scene between Hannay and Victoria ( when they stay overnight in an inn ) was " one of the silliest ever " and felt that after the final scene at the loch and the concluding scene : " It 's all very silly .... It doesn 't have the pace , the moodiness or the wit . " Damien Love of Sunday Herald felt the " tepid pace " was set by the casting of Penry @-@ Jones , and that he " has a style reminiscent of the young Roger Moore , but without the vital , animating spark of self @-@ deprecation . As Hannay , Penry @-@ Jones is not at his best , and more reminiscent of a well @-@ stuffed armchair on wheels . " Mick Hume of The Times said " The overall effect was to turn Buchan 's blood and thunder tale into a pallid politically correct Enid Blyton story " , and The Independent 's Robert Hanks concluded his review by saying that " By the end , my impression was that several pages of the plot must have been eaten by a dog , or a bored actor , and the director had decided , sod it , nobody 's going to keep watching this long . Which I wouldn 't have if I wasn 't being paid . " 
 The adaptation did receive some positive comments however . In The Sunday Times , A. A. Gill praised Penry @-@ Jones and said that it was " <unk> paced " and was " the closest to the original [ the book ] and by far and away the most convincing " . Roz Laws of the Sunday Mercury also commented on Penry @-@ Jones , saying that he " proved to be just as good a spy in 1914 as he was in Spooks , only more dashing " and Alison Graham of the Radio Times , in her ' pick of the day ' piece , said that Penry @-@ Jones is " just perfect as John Buchan 's hero " and commented that Victoria ( Leonard ) was " a splendid suffragette " . Alasdair McKay of The Herald said " it was all rather <unk> and well @-@ mannered " . 
 Articles in the Daily Mail and The Daily Telegraph reported on the inaccuracies in the drama , including the 1916 biplane and the submarine rising in a freshwater loch , and 24 viewers complained to the corporation . 
 = = Home media = = 
 The adaptation was released on Region 2 DVD on 2 February 2009 and Region 1 DVD on 2 March 2010 . 
 = Janusz Zajdel = 
 Janusz Andrzej Zajdel ( 15 August 1938 – 19 July 1985 ) was a prominent Polish science @-@ fiction author , second in popularity in Poland to Stanisław Lem . His major genres were social @-@ science fiction and dystopia . His main recurring theme involved the gloomy prospects for a space environment into which mankind carried totalitarian ideas and habits : Red Space Republics , or Space Labor Camps , or both . His heroes desperately try to find meaning in the world around them . His novels are recognized as classics of science fiction in Poland . 
 His most famous works are five social @-@ science fiction novels : Cylinder van Troffa ( Van Troff 's Cylinder , 1980 ) ; Limes inferior ( The Lower Limit , 1982 ) ; Cała prawda o planecie Ksi ( The Whole Truth about Planet Xi , 1983 ) ; Wyjście z cienia ( Coming out of the Shadow , 1983 ) ; and Paradyzja ( Paradise : World in Orbit , 1984 ) . 
 The Polish science fiction fandom award was named after him : the Janusz A. Zajdel Award . He was a trustee of World SF . 
 = = Life = = 
 Janusz Zajdel was born 15 August 1938 in Warsaw , Poland . He studied physics at the University of Warsaw . After graduating , he worked many years as a radiological engineer and an expert on nuclear physics at the Central Laboratory of Radiological Protection in Poland . He published a number of academic works , handbooks of safety regulations , and educational texts . 
 In his spare time , he popularized science by writing science fiction . With his brother , he started a column in a Polish magazine for young people interested in science and engineering , Młody Technik ( Young Technician ) , in which they proposed various futuristic gadgets . In 1961 Młody Technik published Zajdel 's science @-@ fiction debut , the short story " Tau Ceti " ( Polish : Tau <unk> ) . Other stories by him soon appeared in several other Polish magazines . 
 His science @-@ fiction book @-@ writing career began in 1965 with the publication of a short @-@ story anthology , Jad <unk> ( The Venom of <unk> ) , which included stories from Młody Technik and some others that had already appeared a year earlier in another anthology . By 1982 he had published four more collections : <unk> przez <unk> ( Through the Mirror , 1975 ) ; <unk> ( 1976 ) ; Feniks ( The Phoenix , 1981 ) ; and <unk> <unk> ( The Devil 's Tail , 1982 ) . 
 His first novel , Lalande 21185 , appeared in 1966 , a year after his first short @-@ story anthology , and was geared toward young adults . His first serious science @-@ fiction novel was a " first contact " -type SF mystery , Prawo do <unk> ( Right of Return , 1975 ) ; but it was his novels of the late 1970s and early 1980s — Cylinder van Troffa ( Van Troff 's Cylinder , 1980 ) ; Limes inferior ( The Lower Limit , 1982 ) ; Cała prawda o planecie Ksi ( The Whole Truth about Planet Xi , 1983 ) ; Wyjście z cienia ( Out of the Shadows , 1983 ) ; and Paradyzja ( Paradise : World in Orbit , 1984 ) — that earned him a reputation as one of the most important Polish science @-@ fiction writers . 
 He was an active member of Polish and international science fiction fandom , and a Trustee of World SF . In the 1980s he was an active supporter of the Polish Solidarity movement . 
 On 19 July 1985 he died of lung cancer , after three years ' struggle against the disease . 
 = = Themes = = 
 Zajdel 's early works , from 60s and early 70s , can be located in the <unk> , classic science fiction genre , focusing on scientific inventions and their role in space exploration , alien contact or artificial intelligence . As his writing career continued , however , his stories evolved to focus on the social aspects and often negative consequences of those inventions . Over time , an increasingly visible theme became visible in his works - a concern over dangers inherent in attempts to control the human society . He is also condemning human ignorance , warning against xenophobia , and asking philosophical questions about the nature of the universe , happiness and human destiny . Zajdel 's most important works are from his second period - late 70s and 80s - and represent the genres of social and dystopian fiction . In his works , he envisions totalitarian states and societies leaving under extreme forms of mass surveillance . 
 His works are also recognized as being a critique of the totalitarian , communist state , a reality of his life in People 's Republic of Poland . Science @-@ fiction genre , with its outer @-@ worldly , clearly fictional , and often allegorical setting and invented jargon was able to debate fundamentals of such systems with frankness that more mainstream literature would not be allowed to . 
 = = Importance = = 
 Zajdel has been described as the second science fiction writer in popularity in Poland after Stanisław Lem . He has also been described as the writer who replaced Lem as the " top Polish SF writer " , after " Lem vacated [ this position ] earlier of his own volition " . 
 He is recognized as an originator of the social science fiction genre in Polish science fiction , known in Poland as the sociological speculative fiction ( <unk> <unk> ) . He has been an inspiration to a number of younger Polish science fiction authors such as Maciej <unk> and Marek <unk> . 
 His works have been translated into Belorussian , Bulgarian , Czech , Esperanto , Finnish , German , Hungarian , Russian and Slovenian . Almost none of his works have been translated into English ; the only exception is the short story <unk> <unk> <unk> ( " Particularly Difficult Territory " ) that Zajdel wrote for the English language Tales from the Planet Earth anthology edited by Frederik Pohl and Elizabeth Anne Hull . 
 = = Recognition = = 
 In 1973 Zajdel received an honorary award Magnum <unk> from the Młody Technik ( Young Technician ) magazine for long @-@ term cooperation . In 1980 Zajdel was recipient of the Polish Ministry of Culture and Arts Award for Van Troff 's Cylinder . Zajdel also received the Golden <unk> Award two times : for Limes Inferior ( 1982 novel ; 1983 award ) and Wyjście z cienia ( " Out of the Shadow " ) ( 1983 novel ; 1984 award ) . 
 In 1984 Polish fantasy and science fiction fandom ( associated with the Polish SF convention <unk> ) decided to establish an annual award , initially named <unk> ( " Sphynx " ) . Janusz A. Zajdel became the first winner of this award , for his 1984 novel Paradyzja . He won the award posthumously in 1985 , shortly after his death , at which time it was decided to rename the award after him , and it became known as the Janusz A. Zajdel Award . 
 Frederik Pohl dedicated the anthology Tales From The Planet Earth to Zajdel and A. Bertram Chandler . This book also contains the English translation of one of Zajdel 's short stories , Particularly Difficult Territory . It is his only work to have been translated into English to date ( as of August 2015 ) . 
 = = = Novels = = = 
 Lalande 21185 , 1966 
 Prawo do <unk> ( Right of Return ) , Nasza Księgarnia , 1975 
 Cylinder van Troffa ( Van Troff 's Cylinder ) , 1980 
 Limes inferior ( The Lower Limit ) , 1982 
 Cała prawda o planecie Ksi ( The Whole Truth about Planet Xi ) , 1983 
 Wyjście z cienia ( Coming out of the Shadow ) , 1983 
 Paradyzja ( Paradise : World in Orbit ) , 1984 
 <unk> <unk> na <unk> Ksi ( A Second Look at Planet Xi ) , posthumously completed by Marcin Kowalczyk , 2014 
 = = = Short @-@ story collections = = = 
 Jad <unk> ( The Venom of <unk> ) , Nasza Księgarnia , 1965 
 <unk> przez <unk> ( Through the Mirror ) , <unk> , 1975 ) 
 <unk> , Nasza Księgarnia , 1976 
 Feniks ( The Phoenix ) , Nasza Księgarnia , 1981 
 <unk> <unk> ( The Devil 's Tail ) , <unk> , 1982 
 <unk> <unk> ten <unk> ? ( Where Is This Streetcar Going ? ) , 1988 
 <unk> <unk> ( Higher Considerations ) , Wydawnictwo <unk> , 1988 
 List <unk> ( Farewell Letter [ including outlines of unfinished novels ] ) , Alfa , 1989 
 <unk> z <unk> <unk> ( First @-@ hand Account ) , <unk> , 2010 
 = Byzantine navy = 
