 The Byzantine navy was the naval force of the East Roman or Byzantine Empire . Like the empire it served , it was a direct continuation from its Imperial Roman predecessor , but played a far greater role in the defence and survival of the state than its earlier iteration . While the fleets of the unified Roman Empire faced few great naval threats , operating as a policing force vastly inferior in power and prestige to the legions , the sea became vital to the very existence of the Byzantine state , which several historians have called a " maritime empire " . 
 The first threat to Roman hegemony in the Mediterranean was posed by the Vandals in the 5th century , but their threat was ended by the wars of Justinian I in the 6th century . The re @-@ establishment of a permanently maintained fleet and the introduction of the dromon galley in the same period also marks the point when the Byzantine navy began departing from its late Roman roots and developing its own characteristic identity . This process would be furthered with the onset of the Muslim conquests in the 7th century . Following the loss of the Levant and later Africa , the Mediterranean Sea was transformed from a " Roman lake " into a battleground between Byzantines and Arabs . In this struggle , the Byzantine fleets were critical , not only for the defence of the Empire 's far @-@ flung possessions around the Mediterranean basin , but also for repelling seaborne attacks against the imperial capital of Constantinople itself . Through the use of the newly invented " Greek fire " , the Byzantine navy 's best @-@ known and feared secret weapon , Constantinople was saved from several sieges and numerous naval engagements were won for the Byzantines . 
 Initially , the defence of the Byzantine coasts and the approaches to Constantinople was borne by the great fleet of the Karabisianoi . Progressively however it was split up into several regional ( thematic ) fleets , while a central Imperial Fleet was maintained at Constantinople , guarding the city and forming the core of naval expeditions . By the late 8th century , the Byzantine navy , a well @-@ organized and maintained force , was again the dominant maritime power in the Mediterranean . The antagonism with the Muslim navies continued with alternating success , but in the 10th century , the Byzantines were able to recover a position of supremacy in the Eastern Mediterranean . 
 During the 11th century , the navy , like the Empire itself , began to decline . Faced with new naval challenges from the West , the Byzantines were increasingly forced to rely on the navies of Italian city @-@ states like Venice and Genoa , with disastrous effects on Byzantium 's economy and sovereignty . A period of recovery under the <unk> was followed by another period of decline , which culminated in the disastrous dissolution of the Empire by the Fourth Crusade in 1204 . After the Empire was restored in 1261 , several emperors of the Palaiologan dynasty tried to revive the navy , but their efforts had only a temporary effect . By the mid @-@ 14th century , the Byzantine fleet , which once could put hundreds of warships to sea , was limited to a few dozen at best , and control of the Aegean passed definitively to the Italian and Ottoman navies . The diminished navy , however , continued to be active until the fall of the Byzantine Empire to the Ottomans in 1453 . 
 = = Operational history = = 
 = = = Early period = = = 
 = = = = Civil wars and barbarian invasions : the 4th and 5th centuries = = = = 
 The Byzantine navy , like the Eastern Roman or Byzantine Empire itself , was a continuation of the Roman Empire and its institutions . After the Battle of Actium in 31 BC , in the absence of any external threat in the Mediterranean , the Roman navy performed mostly policing and escort duties . Massive sea battles , like those fought in the Punic Wars , no longer occurred , and the Roman fleets were composed of relatively small vessels , best suited to their new tasks . By the early 4th century , the permanent Roman fleets had dwindled , so that when the fleets of the rival emperors Constantine the Great and Licinius clashed in 324 AD , they were composed to a great extent of newly built or commandeered ships from the port cities of the Eastern Mediterranean . The civil wars of the 4th and early 5th centuries , however , did spur a revival of naval activity , with fleets mostly employed to transport armies . Considerable naval forces continued to be employed in the Western Mediterranean throughout the first quarter of the fifth century , especially from North Africa , but Rome 's mastery of the Mediterranean was challenged when Africa was overrun by the Vandals over a period of fifteen years . 
 The new Vandalic Kingdom of Carthage , under the capable king Geiseric , immediately launched raids against the coasts of Italy and Greece , even sacking and plundering Rome in 455 . The Vandal raids continued unabated over the next two decades , despite repeated Roman attempts to defeat them . The Western Empire was impotent , its navy having dwindled to almost nothing , but the eastern emperors could still call upon the resources and naval expertise of the eastern Mediterranean . A first Eastern expedition in 448 , however , went no further than Sicily , and in 460 , the Vandals attacked and destroyed a Western Roman invasion fleet at Cartagena in Spain . Finally , in 468 , a huge Eastern expedition was assembled under Basiliscus , reputedly numbering 1 @,@ 113 ships and 100 @,@ 000 men , but it failed disastrously . About 600 ships were lost to fire ships , and the financial cost of 130 @,@ 000 pounds of gold and 700 000 pounds of silver nearly bankrupted the Empire . This forced the Romans to come to terms with Geiseric and sign a peace treaty . After Geiseric 's death in 477 , however , the Vandal threat receded . 
 = = = = Sixth century – Justinian restores Roman control over the Mediterranean = = = = 
 The 6th century marked the rebirth of Roman naval power . In 508 , as antagonism with the Ostrogothic Kingdom of Theodoric flared up , the Emperor Anastasius I ( 491 – 518 ) is reported to have sent a fleet of 100 warships to raid the coasts of Italy . In 513 , the general Vitalian revolted against Anastasius . The rebels assembled a fleet of 200 ships which , despite some initial successes , were destroyed by admiral Marinus , who employed a sulphur @-@ based incendiary substance to defeat them . 
 In 533 , taking advantage of the absence of the Vandal fleet , sent to suppress a revolt in Sardinia , an army of 15 @,@ 000 under Belisarius was transported to Africa by an invasion fleet of 92 dromons and 500 transports , beginning the Vandalic War , the first of the wars of reconquest of Emperor Justinian I ( 527 – 565 ) . These were largely amphibious operations , made possible by the control of the Mediterranean waterways , and the fleet played a vital role in carrying supplies and reinforcements to the widely dispersed Byzantine expeditionary forces and garrisons . This fact was not lost on the Byzantines ' enemies . Already in the <unk> , Theodoric had planned to build a massive fleet directed against the Byzantines and the Vandals , but his death in 526 limited the extent to which these plans were realized . In 535 , the Gothic War began with a double @-@ pronged Byzantine offensive , with a fleet again carrying Belisarius ' army to Sicily and then Italy , and another army invading Dalmatia . Byzantine control of the sea was of great strategic importance , allowing the smaller Byzantine army to successfully occupy the peninsula by 540 . 
 In 541 however , the new Ostrogoth king , Totila , created a fleet of 400 warships with which to deny the seas around Italy to the Empire . Two Byzantine fleets were destroyed near Naples in 542 , and in 546 , Belisarius personally commanded 200 ships against the Gothic fleet that blockaded the mouths of the Tiber , in an unsuccessful effort to relieve Rome . In 550 , Totila invaded Sicily , and over the next year , his 300 @-@ ship fleet captured Sardinia and Corsica , and raided Corfu and the coast of Epirus . However , a defeat in a sea battle off Sena Gallica marked the beginning of the final Imperial ascendancy . With the final conquest of Italy and southern Spain under Justinian , the Mediterranean once again became a " Roman lake " . 
 Despite the subsequent loss of much of Italy to the Lombards , the Byzantines maintained control of the seas around the peninsula . As the Lombards rarely ventured to sea , the Byzantines were able to retain several coastal strips of Italian territory for centuries . The only major naval action of the next 80 years occurred during the Siege of Constantinople by the Sassanid Persians , Avars and Slavs in 626 . During that siege , the Slavs ' fleet of <unk> was intercepted by the Byzantine fleet and destroyed , denying the Persian army passage across the Bosporus and eventually forcing the Avars to retreat . 
 = = = Struggle against the Arabs = = = 
 = = = = Emergence of the Arab naval threat = = = = 
 During the 640s , the Muslim conquest of Syria and Egypt created a new threat to Byzantium . Not only did the Arabs conquer significant recruiting and revenue @-@ producing areas , but , after the utility of a strong navy was demonstrated by the short @-@ lived Byzantine recapture of Alexandria in 644 , they took to creating a navy of their own . In this effort the new Muslim elite , which came from the inland @-@ oriented northern part of the Arabian peninsula , largely relied on the resources and manpower of the conquered Levant ( especially the Copts of Egypt ) , which until a few years previously had provided ships and crews for the Byzantines . There is , however , evidence that in the new naval bases in Palestine shipwrights from Persia and Iraq were also employed . The lack of illustrations earlier than the 14th century means that nothing is known about the specifics of the early Muslim warships , although it is usually assumed that their naval efforts drew upon the existing Mediterranean maritime tradition . Given a largely shared nautical nomenclature , and the centuries @-@ long interaction between the two cultures , Byzantine and Arab ships shared many similarities . This similarity also extended to tactics and general fleet organization ; translations of Byzantine military manuals were available to the Arab admirals . 
 After seizing Cyprus in 649 and raiding Rhodes , Crete and Sicily , the young Arab navy decisively defeated the Byzantines under the personal command of Emperor Constans II ( 641 – 668 ) in the Battle of the Masts of 655 . This catastrophic Byzantine defeat opened up the Mediterranean to the Arabs , and began a centuries @-@ long series of naval conflicts over the control of the Mediterranean waterways . From the reign of Muawiyah I ( 661 – 680 ) , raids intensified , as preparations were made for a great assault on Constantinople itself . In the long first Arab siege of Constantinople , the Byzantine fleet proved instrumental to the survival of the Empire : the Arab fleets were defeated through the use of its newly developed secret weapon , " Greek fire " . The Muslim advance in Asia Minor and the Aegean was halted , and an agreement to a thirty @-@ year truce concluded soon after . 
 In the 680s , Justinian II ( 685 – 695 and 705 – 711 ) paid attention to the needs of the navy , strengthening it by the resettlement of over 18 @,@ 500 Mardaites along the southern coasts of the Empire , where they were employed as marines and rowers . Nevertheless , the Arab naval threat intensified as they gradually took control of North Africa in the 680s and 690s . The last Byzantine stronghold , Carthage , fell in 698 , although a Byzantine naval expedition managed to briefly retake it . The Arab governor Musa bin Nusair built a new city and naval base at Tunis , and 1 @,@ 000 Coptic shipwrights were brought to construct a new fleet , which would challenge Byzantine control of the western Mediterranean . Thus , from the early 8th century on , Muslim raids unfolded unceasingly against Byzantine holdings in the Western Mediterranean , especially Sicily . In addition , the new fleet would allow the Muslims to complete their conquest of the Maghreb and to successfully invade and capture most of Visigoth Spain . 
 = = = = Byzantine counter @-@ offensive = = = = 
 The Byzantines were unable to respond effectively to the Muslim advance in Africa , because the two decades between 695 and 715 were a period of great domestic turmoil . They did react with raids of their own in the East , such as the one in 709 against Egypt which captured the local admiral , but they also were aware of a coming onslaught : as Caliph al @-@ Walid I ( 705 – 715 ) readied his forces for a renewed assault against Constantinople , Emperor Anastasios II ( 713 – 715 ) prepared the capital , and mounted an unsuccessful pre @-@ emptive strike against the Muslim naval preparations . Anastasios was soon overthrown by Theodosius III ( 715 – 717 ) , who in turn was replaced , just as the Muslim army was advancing through Anatolia , by Leo III the Isaurian ( 717 – 741 ) . It was Leo III who faced the second and final Arab siege of Constantinople . The use of Greek fire , which devastated the Arab fleet , was again instrumental in the Byzantine victory , while a harsh winter and Bulgar attacks further sapped the besiegers ' strength . 
 In the aftermath of the siege , the retreating remains of the Arab fleet were decimated in a storm , and Byzantine forces launched a counter @-@ offensive , with a fleet sacking Laodicea and an army driving the Arabs from Asia Minor . For the next three decades , naval warfare featured constant raids from both sides , with the Byzantines launching repeated attacks against the Muslim naval bases in Syria ( Laodicea ) , and Egypt ( Damietta and Tinnis ) . In 727 , a revolt of the thematic fleets , largely motivated by resentment against the Emperor 's iconoclasm , was put down by the imperial fleet through use of Greek fire . Despite the losses this entailed , some 390 warships were reportedly sent to attack Damietta in 739 , and in 747 , aided for the first time by ships from the Italian city @-@ states , the Byzantines decisively defeated the combined Syrian and Alexandrian fleets off Cyprus , breaking the naval power of the Umayyad Caliphate . 
 The Byzantines followed this up with the destruction of the North African flotillas , and coupled their successes at sea with severe trading limitations imposed on Muslim traders . Given the Empire 's new ability to control the waterways , this strangled Muslim maritime trade . With the collapse of the Umayyad state shortly thereafter and the increasing fragmentation of the Muslim world , the Byzantine navy was left as the sole organized naval force in the Mediterranean . Thus , during the latter half of the 8th century , the Byzantines enjoyed a second period of complete naval superiority . During this time , to stand watch on the coasts of Syria , guarding against a raid by the Byzantine fleet , was deemed by the Muslims more pious an act than a night of prayer in the Kaaba . These successes enabled Emperor Constantine V ( 741 – 775 ) to shift the fleet from the Mediterranean to the Black Sea during his campaigns against the Bulgars in the 760s . In 763 , a fleet of 800 ships carrying 9 @,@ 600 cavalry and some infantry sailed to Anchialus , where he scored a significant victory , but in 766 , a second fleet , allegedly of 2 @,@ 600 ships , again bound for Anchialus , sank en route . At the same time however , the Isaurian emperors undermined Byzantium 's naval strength : with the Arab threat gone for the moment , and with the largely iconodule naval themes staunchly opposed to their iconoclastic policies , the emperors reduced the navy 's size and downgraded the naval themes . 
 = = = = Renewed Muslim ascendancy = = = = 
 The Byzantine naval predominance lasted until the early 9th century , when a succession of disasters at the hands of the resurgent Muslim fleets spelled its end and inaugurated an era that would represent the zenith of Muslim ascendancy . Already in 790 , the Byzantines suffered a major defeat in the Gulf of Antalya , and raids against Cyprus and Crete recommenced during the reign of Harun al @-@ Rashid ( 786 – 809 ) . Around the Mediterranean , new powers were rising , foremost amongst them the Carolingian Empire , while in 803 , the Pax Nicephori recognized the de facto independence of Byzantine Venice , which was further entrenched by the repulsion of a Byzantine attack in 809 . At the same time , in Ifriqiya , the new Aghlabid dynasty was established , which immediately engaged in raids throughout the central Mediterranean . 
 The Byzantines , on the other hand , were weakened by a series of catastrophic defeats against the Bulgars , followed in 820 by the Revolt of Thomas the Slav , which attracted the support of a large part of the Byzantine armed forces , including the thematic fleets . Despite its suppression , the revolt had severely depleted the Empire 's defences . As a result , Crete fell between 824 and 827 to a band of Andalusian exiles . Three successive Byzantine recovery attempts failed over the next few years , and the island became a base for Muslim piratical activity in the Aegean , radically upsetting the balance of power in the region . Despite some Byzantine successes over the Cretan corsairs , and the razing of Damietta by a Byzantine fleet of 85 ships in 853 , Arab naval power in the Levant was steadily reviving under Abbasid rule . Further Byzantine attempts to recover Crete , in 843 and 866 , were complete failures . 
 The situation was even worse in the West . A critical blow was inflicted on the Empire in 827 , as the Aghlabids began the slow conquest of Sicily , aided by the defection of the Byzantine commander <unk> and the island 's thematic fleet . In 838 , the Muslims crossed over into Italy , taking Taranto and Brindisi , followed soon by Bari . Venetian operations against them were unsuccessful , and throughout the 840s , the Arabs were freely raiding Italy and the Adriatic , even attacking Rome in 846 . Attacks by the Lombards and Lothair I failed to dislodge the Muslims from Italy , while two large @-@ scale Byzantine attempts to recover Sicily were heavily defeated in 840 and 859 . By 850 , the Muslim fleets , together with large numbers of independent <unk> raiders , had emerged as the major power of the Mediterranean , putting the Byzantines and the Christians in general on the defensive . 
 The same period , when a battered Byzantium defended itself against enemies on all fronts , also saw the emergence of a new , unexpected threat : the Rus ' made their first appearance in Byzantine history with a raid against Paphlagonia in the 830s , followed by a major expedition in 860 . 
 = = = Byzantine Reconquest : the era of the Macedonian dynasty = = = 
 During the course of the later 9th and the 10th century , as the Caliphate fractured into smaller states and Arab power became weakened , the Byzantines launched a series of successful campaigns against them . This " Byzantine Reconquest " was overseen by the able sovereigns of the Macedonian dynasty ( 867 – 1056 ) , and marked the <unk> of the Byzantine state . 
 = = = = Reign of Basil I = = = = 
 The ascension of Emperor Basil I ( 867 – 886 ) heralded this revival , as he embarked on an aggressive foreign policy . Continuing the policies of his predecessor , Michael III ( 842 – 867 ) , he showed great care to the fleet , and as a result , successive victories followed . In 868 , a fleet under the droungarios tou <unk> Niketas Ooryphas relieved Ragusa from an Arab siege and re @-@ established Byzantine presence in the area . A few years later , he twice heavily defeated the Cretan pirates at Kardia and in the Corinthian Gulf , temporarily securing the Aegean . Cyprus also was temporarily recovered and Bari occupied . At the same time , however , the Muslim presence in Cilicia was strengthened , and <unk> became a major base for land and seaborne attacks against Byzantine territory , especially under the famed emir Yazaman al @-@ Khadim ( 882 – 891 ) , despite the heavy defeat of one of his raids before <unk> . 
 In the West , the Muslims continued to make steady advances , as the local Byzantine forces proved inadequate : the Empire was forced to rely on the aid of their nominal Italian subjects , and had to resort to the transfer of the eastern fleets to Italy to achieve any progress . Following the fall of Enna in 855 , the Byzantines were confined to the eastern shore of Sicily , and under increasing pressure . A relief expedition in 868 achieved little . Syracuse was attacked again in 869 , and in 870 , Malta fell to the Aghlabids . Muslim corsairs raided the Adriatic , and although they were driven out of Apulia , in the early 880s they established bases along the western Italian coast , from where they would not be completely dislodged until 915 . In 878 , Syracuse , the main Byzantine stronghold in Sicily , was attacked again and fell , largely because the Imperial Fleet was occupied with transporting marble for the construction of the Nea Ekklesia , Basil 's new church . In 880 , Ooryphas ' successor , the droungarios Nasar , scored a significant victory in a night battle over the Aghlabids who were raiding the Ionian Islands . He then proceeded to raid Sicily , carrying off much booty , before defeating another Muslim fleet off Punta Stilo . At the same time , another Byzantine squadron scored a significant victory at Naples . These successes allowed a short @-@ lived Byzantine counter @-@ offensive to develop in the West in the 870s and 880s under Nikephoros Phokas the Elder , expanding the Byzantine foothold in Apulia and Calabria and forming the thema of Longobardia , which would later evolve into the <unk> of Italy . A heavy defeat off Milazzo in 888 , however , signalled the virtual disappearance of major Byzantine naval activity in the seas around Italy for the next century . 
 = = = = Arab raids during the reign of Leo VI = = = = 
 Despite the successes under Basil , during the reign of his successor Leo VI the Wise ( 886 – 912 ) , the Empire again faced serious threats . In the north , a war broke out against the Bulgarian Tsar Simeon , and a part of the Imperial Fleet was used in 895 to ferry an army of Magyars across the Danube to raid Bulgaria . The Bulgarian war produced several costly defeats , while at the same time the Arab naval threat reached new heights , with successive raids devastating the shores of Byzantium 's naval heartland , the Aegean Sea . In 891 or 893 , the Arab fleet sacked the island of Samos and took its stratēgos prisoner , and in 898 , the eunuch admiral Raghib carried off 3 @,@ 000 Byzantine sailors of the <unk> as prisoners . These losses denuded Byzantine defences , opening the Aegean up to raids by the Syrian fleets . The first heavy blow came in 901 , when the renegade Damian of Tarsus plundered Demetrias , while in the next year , Taormina , the Empire 's last outpost in Sicily , fell to the Muslims . The greatest disaster , however , came in 904 , when another renegade , Leo of Tripoli , raided the Aegean . His fleet penetrated even into the Dardanelles , before proceeding to sack the Empire 's second city , Thessalonica , all while the Empire 's fleet remained passive in the face of the Arabs ' superior numbers . Furthermore , the Cretan corsairs ' raids reached such intensity , that by the end of Leo 's reign , most of the southern Aegean islands were either abandoned or forced to accept Muslim control and pay tribute to the pirates . It is no surprise that a defensive and cautious mindset is prevalent in the Leo 's contemporary instructions on naval warfare ( <unk> ) . 
 The most distinguished Byzantine admiral of the period was Himerios , the logothetēs tou dromou . Appointed admiral in 904 , he was unable to prevent the sack of Thessalonica , but he scored a first victory in 905 or 906 , and in 910 , he led a successful attack on Laodicea in Syria . The city was sacked and its hinterland plundered and ravaged without the loss of any ships . A year later , however , a huge expedition of 112 dromons and 75 <unk> with 43 @,@ 000 men , that had sailed under Himerios against the Emirate of Crete , not only failed to recover the island , but on its return voyage , it was ambushed and comprehensively defeated by Leo of Tripoli off Chios ( October 912 ) . 
 The tide began to turn again after 920 . Coincidentally , the same year witnessed the ascension of an admiral , Romanos Lekapenos ( 920 – 944 ) , to the imperial throne , for the second ( after <unk> <unk> ) and last time in the Empire 's history . Finally , in 923 , the decisive defeat of Leo of Tripoli off Lemnos , coupled with the death of Damian during a siege of a Byzantine fortress in the next year , marked the beginning of the Byzantine resurgence . 
 = = = = Recovery of Crete and the northern Levant = = = = 
 The Empire 's growing might was displayed in 942 , when Emperor Romanos I dispatched a squadron to the Tyrrhenian Sea . Using Greek fire , the squadron destroyed a fleet of Muslim corsairs from <unk> . In 949 , however , another expedition of about 100 ships , launched by Constantine VII ( 945 – 959 ) against the Emirate of Crete , ended in disaster , due to the incompetence of its commander , Constantine Gongyles . A renewed offensive in Italy in 951 – 952 was defeated by the Fatimids , but another expedition in 956 and the loss of an Ifriqiyan fleet in a storm in 958 temporarily stabilized the situation in the peninsula . In 962 , the Fatimids launched an assault on the remaining Byzantine strongholds on Sicily ; Taormina fell on Christmas Day 962 and Rometta was besieged . In response , a major Byzantine expedition was launched in 964 but ended in disaster . The Fatimids defeated the Byzantine army before <unk> and then annihilated the fleet at the Battle of the Straits , notably through the use of divers bearing incendiary devices . Both powers focusing their attention elsewhere , a truce was concluded between Byzantium and the Fatimids in 967 , which curbed Byzantine naval activity in the West : the seas of Italy were left to the local Byzantine forces and the various Italian states until after 1025 , when Byzantium again actively intervened in southern Italy and Sicily . 
 In the East , in 956 the stratēgos Basil <unk> inflicted a crushing defeat on the <unk> fleet , opening the way for another grand expedition to recover Crete . It was entrusted to Nikephoros Phokas , who in 960 set out with a fleet of 100 dromons , 200 <unk> , and 308 transports , carrying an overall force of 77 @,@ 000 men , to subdue the island . The conquest of Crete removed the direct threat to the Aegean , Byzantium 's naval heartland , while Phokas ' subsequent operations led to the recovery of Cilicia ( in 963 ) , Cyprus ( in 968 ) , and the northern Syrian coast ( in 969 ) . These conquests removed the threat of the once mighty Muslim Syrian fleets , effectively re @-@ establishing Byzantine dominance in the Eastern Mediterranean , so that Nikephoros Phokas could boast to Liutprand of Cremona with the words " I alone command the sea " . A few raids and naval clashes occurred as antagonism with the Fatimids mounted in the late 990s , but peaceful relations were restored soon after , and the Eastern Mediterranean remained relatively calm for several decades to come . 
 During the same period , the Byzantine fleet was active in the Black Sea as well : a Rus ' fleet that was threatening Constantinople in 941 was destroyed by 15 hastily assembled old ships equipped with Greek fire , and the navy played an important role in the Rus ' – Byzantine War of 970 – 971 , when John I Tzimiskes ( 969 – 976 ) sent 300 ships to blockade the Kievan Rus ' from retreating over the <unk> 
 = = = Komnenian period = = = 
 = = = = Decline during the 11th century = = = = 
 Throughout most of the 11th century , the Byzantine navy faced few challenges . The Muslim threat had receded , as their navies declined and relations between the Fatimids , especially , and the Empire were largely peaceful . The last Arab raid against imperial territory was recorded in 1035 in the Cyclades , and was defeated in the next year . Another Rus ' attack in 1043 was beaten back with ease , and with the exception of a short @-@ lived attempt to recover Sicily under George Maniakes , no major naval expeditions were undertaken either . Inevitably , this long period of peace and prosperity led to complacency and neglect of the military . Already in the reign of Basil II ( 976 – 1025 ) , the defence of the Adriatic was entrusted to the Venetians . Under Constantine IX ( 1042 – 1055 ) , both the army and navy were reduced as military service was increasingly commuted in favour of cash payments , resulting in an increased dependency upon foreign mercenaries . The large thematic fleets declined and were replaced by small squadrons subject to the local military commanders , geared more towards the suppression of piracy than towards confronting a major maritime foe . 
 By the last quarter of the 11th century , the Byzantine navy was a shadow of its former self , having declined through neglect , the incompetence of its officers , and lack of funds . Kekaumenos , writing in ca . 1078 , laments that " on the pretext of reasonable patrols , [ the Byzantine ships ] are doing nothing else but ferrying wheat , barley , pulse , cheese , wine , meat , olive oil , a great deal of money , and anything else " from the islands and coasts of the Aegean , while they " flee [ the enemy ] before they have even caught sight of them , and thus become an embarrassment to the Romans " . By the time Kekaumenos wrote , new and powerful adversaries had risen . In the West , the Norman Kingdom of Sicily , which had expelled the Byzantines from Southern Italy and had conquered Sicily , was now casting its eye on the Byzantine Adriatic coasts and beyond . In the East , the disastrous Battle of Manzikert in 1071 had resulted in the loss of Asia Minor , the Empire 's military and economic heartland , to the Seljuk Turks , who by 1081 had established their capital at Nicaea , barely a hundred miles south of Constantinople . Soon after , Turkish as well as Christian pirates appeared in the Aegean . The Byzantine thematic fleets , which once policed the seas , were by then so depleted by neglect and the successive civil wars that they were incapable of responding effectively . 
 = = = = Attempts at recovery under Alexios I and John II = = = = 
 At this point , the sorry state of the Byzantine fleet had dire consequences . The Norman invasion could not be forestalled , and their army seized Corfu , landed unopposed in Epirus and laid siege to Dyrrhachium , starting a decade of war which consumed the scant resources of the embattled Empire . The new emperor , Alexios I Komnenos ( 1081 – 1118 ) , was forced to call upon the assistance of the Venetians , who in the 1070s had already asserted their control of the Adriatic and Dalmatia against the Normans . In 1082 , in exchange for their help , he granted them major trading concessions . This treaty , and subsequent extensions of these privileges , practically rendered the Byzantines hostage to the Venetians ( and later also the Genoese and the Pisans ) . Historian John Birkenmeier notes that : 
 Byzantium 's lack of a navy [ ... ] meant that Venice could regularly extort economic privileges , determine whether invaders , such as the Normans or Crusaders entered the Empire , and parry any Byzantine attempts to restrict Venetian commercial or naval activity . 
 In the clashes with the Normans through the 1080s , the only effective Byzantine naval force was a squadron commanded , and possibly maintained , by Michael <unk> , a veteran naval commander of previous decades . Together with the Venetians , he initially prevailed over the Norman fleet , but the joint fleet was caught off guard and defeated by the Normans off Corfu in 1084 . 
 Alexios inevitably realized the importance of having his own fleet , and despite his preoccupation with land operations , he took steps to re @-@ establish the navy 's strength . His efforts bore some success , especially in countering the attempts by Turkish emirs like Tzachas of Smyrna to launch fleets in the Aegean . The fleet under John Doukas was subsequently used to suppress revolts in Crete and Cyprus . With the aid of the Crusaders , Alexios was able to regain the coasts of Western Anatolia and expand his influence eastwards : in 1104 , a Byzantine squadron of 10 ships captured Laodicea and other coastal towns as far as Tripoli . By 1118 , Alexios was able to pass on a small navy to his successor , John II Komnenos ( 1118 – 1143 ) . Like his father , John II concentrated on the army and regular land @-@ based campaigns , but he took care to maintain the navy 's strength and provisioning system . In 1122 , however , John refused to renew the trading privileges that Alexios had granted to the Venetians . In retaliation , the Venetians plundered several Byzantine islands , and , with the Byzantine fleet unable to confront them , John was forced to renew the treaty in 1125 . Evidently the Byzantine navy at this point was not sufficiently powerful for John to successfully confront Venice , especially since there were other pressing demands on the Empire 's resources . Not long after this incident , John II , acting on the advice of his finance minister John of <unk> , is reported to have cut funding to the fleet and transferred it to the army , equipping ships on an ad hoc basis only . 
 = = = = Naval expeditions of Manuel I = = = = 
 The navy enjoyed a major comeback under the ambitious emperor Manuel I Komnenos ( 1143 – 1180 ) , who used it extensively as a powerful tool of foreign policy in his relations with the Latin and Muslim states of the Eastern Mediterranean . During the early years of his reign , the Byzantine naval forces were still weak : in 1147 , the fleet of Roger II of Sicily under George of Antioch was able to raid Corfu , the Ionian islands and into the Aegean almost unopposed . In the next year , with Venetian aid , an army accompanied by a very large fleet ( allegedly 500 warships and 1 @,@ 000 transports ) was sent to recapture Corfu and the Ionian Islands from the Normans . In retaliation , a Norman fleet of 40 ships reached Constantinople itself , demonstrating in the Bosporus off the Great Palace and raiding its suburbs . On its return voyage however it was attacked and destroyed by a Byzantine or Venetian fleet . 
 In 1155 , a Byzantine squadron of 10 ships in support of Norman rebel Robert III of Loritello arrived at Ancona , launching the last Byzantine bid to regain Southern Italy . Despite initial successes and reinforcements under megas doux Alexios Komnenos Bryennios , the expedition was ultimately defeated in 1156 , and 4 Byzantine ships were captured . By 1169 , the efforts of Manuel had evidently borne fruit , as a large and purely Byzantine fleet of about 150 galleys , 20 large transports and 60 horse transports under megas doux Andronikos Kontostephanos was sent to invade Egypt in cooperation with the ruler of the Crusader Kingdom of Jerusalem . The invasion failed however , and the Byzantines lost half the fleet in a storm on the way back . 
 Following the Empire @-@ wide seizure and imprisonment of all Venetians in March 1171 , the Byzantine fleet was strong enough to deter an outright attack by the Venetians , who sailed to Chios and settled for negotiations . Manuel sent a fleet of 150 ships under Kontostephanos to confront them there and employed delaying tactics , until , weakened by disease , the Venetians began to withdraw and were pursued by Kontostephanos ' fleet . It was a remarkable reversal of fortunes , compared with the humiliation of 1125 . In 1177 , another fleet of 70 galleys and 80 auxiliary ships under Kontostephanos , destined for Egypt , returned home after appearing off Acre , as Count Philip of Flanders and many important nobles of the Kingdom of Jerusalem refused to participate in the campaign . However , by the end of Manuel 's reign , the strains of constant warfare on all fronts and the Emperor 's various grandiose projects had become evident : the historian Niketas Choniates attributes the rise of piracy in the latter years of Manuel 's reign to the diversion of the funds intended for the maintenance of the fleet for other needs of the imperial treasury . 
 = = = Decline = = = 
 = = = = Angelos dynasty and the Fourth Crusade = = = = 
 After the death of Manuel I and the subsequent demise of the Komnenian dynasty in 1185 , the navy declined swiftly . The maintenance of galleys and the upkeep of proficient crews were very expensive , and neglect led to a rapid deterioration of the fleet . Already by 1182 the Byzantines had to pay Venetian mercenaries to crew some of their galleys , but in the 1180s , as the bulk of the Komnenian naval establishment persisted , expeditions of 70 – 100 ships are still recorded in contemporary sources . Thus Emperor Andronikos I Komnenos ( 1183 – 1185 ) could still gather 100 warships in 1185 to resist and later defeat a Norman fleet in the Sea of Marmara . However , the subsequent peace treaty included a clause which required the Normans to furnish a fleet for the Empire . This , together with a similar agreement made by Isaac II Angelos ( 1185 – 1195 and 1203 – 1204 ) with Venice the next year , in which the Republic would provide 40 – 100 galleys at six months ' notice in exchange for favourable trading concessions , is a telling indication that the Byzantine government was aware of the inadequacy of its own naval establishment . 
 The period also saw the rise of piracy across the Eastern Mediterranean . Pirate activity was high in the Aegean , while pirate captains frequently offering themselves as mercenaries to one or the other of the region 's powers , providing for the latter a quick and cheap way of raising a fleet for particular expeditions , without the costs of a standing navy . Thus a Byzantine fleet of 66 vessels sent by Isaac II to recapture Cyprus from Isaac Komnenos was destroyed by the pirate <unk> of Brindisi , who was in the employ of the Normans of Sicily . The depredations of the pirates , especially the Genoese captain Kaphoures , described by Niketas Choniates and his brother , the Metropolitan of Athens Michael Choniates , finally forced the Angeloi to action . The fleet tax was once again levied from the coastal regions and a navy of 30 ships was equipped , which was entrusted to the Calabrian pirate Steiriones . Despite scoring a few early successes , Steiriones ' fleet was destroyed in a surprise attack by Kaphoures off Sestos . A second fleet , augmented by Pisan vessels and again commanded by Steiriones , was finally able to defeat Kaphoures and end his raids . 
 At the same time , however , the then megas doux , Michael <unk> , was accused by Niketas Choniates of enriching himself by selling off the equipment of the imperial fleet , while by the early 13th century the authority of the central government had weakened to such an extent that various local potentates began seizing power in the provinces . The general atmosphere was one of lawlessness , which enabled men like Leo Sgouros in southern Greece and the imperial governor of Samos , Pegonites , to use their ships for their own purposes , launching raids of their own . Even Emperor Alexios III Angelos ( 1195 – 1203 ) is said to have licensed one of his commanders , Constantine <unk> , to launch pirate raids against commerce in the Black Sea . 
 The Byzantine state and its fleet were thus in no state to resist the naval might of Venice , which supported the Fourth Crusade . When Alexios III and <unk> were alerted to the fact that the Crusade was sailing for Constantinople , only 20 " wretched and decayed " vessels could be found , according to Niketas Choniates . During the first Crusader siege of the city in 1203 , the attempts of the Byzantine ships to oppose the Crusader fleet from entering the Golden Horn were repulsed , and the Byzantine attempt to employ fireships failed due to the Venetians ' skill at handling their ships . 
 = = = = Nicaea and the Palaiologan period = = = = 
 After the capture of Constantinople by the Fourth Crusade in 1204 , the Byzantine Empire was partitioned between the Crusaders , while three Greek successor states were set up , the Despotate of Epirus , the Empire of Trebizond , and the Empire of Nicaea , each claiming the Byzantine imperial title . The former did not maintain a fleet , the <unk> navy was minuscule and mostly used for patrols and transporting troops , while the Nicaeans initially followed a policy of consolidation and used their fleet for coastal defence . Under John III Vatatzes ( 1222 – 1254 ) , a more energetic foreign policy was pursued , and in 1225 , the Nicaean fleet was able to occupy the islands of Lesbos , Chios , Samos , and <unk> . It was , however , no match for the Venetians : attempting to blockade Constantinople in 1235 , the Nicaean navy was defeated by a far smaller Venetian force , and in another similar attempt in 1241 , the Nicaeans were again routed . Nicaean efforts during the 1230s to support a local rebellion in Crete against Venice were also only partially successful , with the last Nicaean troops being forced to leave the island in 1236 . Aware of the weakness of his navy , in March 1261 the Emperor Michael VIII Palaiologos ( 1259 – 1282 ) concluded the Treaty of Nymphaeum with the Genoese , securing their aid against Venice at sea , in return for commercial privileges . 
 Following the recapture of Constantinople a few months later however , Michael VIII was able to focus his attention on building up his own fleet . In the early 1260s , the Byzantine navy was still weak , and depended still greatly on Genoese aid . Even so , the allies were not able to stand up to Venice in a direct confrontation , as evidenced by the defeat of a combined Byzantine – Genoese fleet of 48 ships by a much smaller Venetian fleet in 1263 . Taking advantage of the Italians ' preoccupation with the ongoing Venetian – Genoese war , by 1270 Michael 's efforts had produced a strong navy of 80 ships , with several Latin privateers sailing under imperial colours . In the same year , a fleet of 24 galleys besieged the town of Oreos in Negroponte ( Euboea ) , and defeated a Latin fleet of 20 galleys . This marked the first successful independent Byzantine naval operation and the beginning of an organized naval campaign in the Aegean that would continue throughout the 1270s and would result in the recapture , albeit briefly , of many islands from the Latins . 
 This revival did not last long . Following the death of Charles of Anjou in 1285 and the end of the threat of an invasion from Italy , Michael 's successor Andronikos II Palaiologos ( 1282 – 1328 ) assumed that , by relying on the naval strength of his Genoese allies , he could do without the maintenance of a fleet , whose particularly heavy expenditure the increasingly cash @-@ strapped treasury no longer could afford . At the same time , Andronikos was less concerned with the West and more with affairs in Asia Minor and his — eventually futile — attempt to stop the Turkish advance there , a policy where the fleet lacked a role . Consequently , the entire fleet was disbanded , its crews dismissed and the ships broken up or left to rot . The results were quick to follow : during Andronikos ' long reign , the Turks gradually took permanent possession of the Aegean coasts of Anatolia , with the Empire unable to reverse the situation , while the Venetian fleet was able to attack Constantinople and raid its suburbs at will during the 1296 – 1302 war . 
 Andronikos ' decision aroused considerable opposition and criticism from contemporary scholars and officials almost from the outset , and historians like Pachymeres and Nikephoros Gregoras dwell long on the disastrous long @-@ term effects of this short @-@ sighted decision : piracy flourished , often augmented by the crews of the disbanded fleet who took service under Turkish and Latin masters , Constantinople was rendered defenceless towards the Italian maritime powers , and more and more Aegean islands fell under foreign rule — including Chios to the Genoese Benedetto Zaccaria , Rhodes and the Dodecanese to the Hospitallers , Lesbos and other islands to the <unk> . As Gregoras commented , " if [ the Byzantines ] had remained masters of the seas , as they had been , then the Latins would not have grown so arrogant [ ... ] , nor would the Turks ever have gazed upon the sands of the [ Aegean ] sea , [ ... ] nor would we have to pay to everyone tribute every year . " After 1305 , bowing to popular pressure and the need to contain the Catalan Company , the Emperor belatedly tried to rebuild the navy of 20 vessels , but although a few ships were built and a small fleet appears to have been active over the next couple of years , it eventually was disbanded again . 
 In the 14th century , recurrent civil wars , attacks from Bulgaria and Serbia in the Balkans and the devastation caused by ever @-@ increasing Turkish raids hastened the collapse of the Byzantine state , which would culminate in its final fall to the Ottoman Turks in 1453 . Several emperors after Andronikos II also tried to re @-@ build a fleet , especially in order to secure the security and hence the independence of Constantinople itself from the interference of the Italian maritime powers , but their efforts produced only short @-@ term results . 
 Thus Andronikos II 's successor Andronikos III Palaiologos ( 1328 – 1341 ) , immediately after his accession , with the help of contributions from various magnates , assembled a large fleet of reportedly 105 vessels . This he personally led in the last major foray of a Byzantine navy in the Aegean , recovering Chios and Phocaea from the Genoese and forcing various smaller Latin and Turkish principalities to come to terms with him . His campaigns against the Ottomans in Bithynia were failures , however , and soon the Ottomans had established their first naval base at <unk> on the Sea of Marmara , from where they the coasts of Thrace . To defend against this new threat , towards the end of Andronikos III 's reign a fleet of some 70 ships was built at Constantinople to oppose the Turkish raids , and headed by the megas doux Alexios Apokaukos . This fleet was very active during the civil war of 1341 – 1347 , in which its commander played a prominent role . Following the civil war , Emperor John VI Kantakouzenos ( 1347 – 1354 ) tried to restore the navy and merchant fleet , as a means of both reducing the Empire 's economic dependency on the Genoese colony of Galata , which controlled the trade passing through Constantinople , and of securing the control of the Dardanelles against passage by the Turks . To that end , he enlisted the aid of the Venetians , but in March 1349 , his newly built fleet of nine warships and about 100 smaller vessels was caught in a storm off the southern shore of Constantinople . The inexperienced crews panicked , and the ships were either sunk or captured by the Genoese . Undeterred , Kantakouzenos launched another effort at building a fleet , which allowed him to re @-@ establish Byzantine authority over Thessalonica and some coastal cities and islands . A core of this fleet was maintained at Constantinople , and although Byzantine ships remained active in the Aegean , and scored some successes over Turkish pirates , they were never able to stop their activities , let alone challenge the Italian navies for supremacy at sea . Lack of funds condemned the fleet to a mere handful of vessels maintained at Constantinople . It is characteristic that in his 1418 pamphlet to the despotēs Theodore II Palaiologos , the scholar <unk> <unk> advises against the maintenance of a navy , on the grounds that resources were insufficient to adequately maintain both it and an effective army . 
 Henceforth , the impoverished Byzantine state became a pawn of the great powers of the day , trying to survive by exploiting their rivalries . Thus , for instance , in 1351 , Kantakouzenos was induced to side with Venice in its war with Genoa , but , abandoned by the Venetian admirals , his fleet was easily defeated by the Genoese and he was forced to sign an unfavourable peace . During the brief usurpation of John VII in 1390 , Manuel II ( 1391 – 1425 ) was able to gather only five galleys and four smaller vessels ( including some from the Hospitallers of Rhodes ) to recapture Constantinople and rescue his father John V. Six years later , Manuel promised to arm ten ships to assist the Crusade of Nicopolis ; twenty years later , he personally commanded 4 galleys and 2 other vessels carrying some infantry and cavalry , and saved the island of Thasos from an invasion . Likewise , in 1421 , 10 Byzantine warships were engaged in support of the Ottoman pretender Mustafa against Sultan Murad II . 
 The last recorded Byzantine naval victory occurred in 1427 in a battle off the <unk> Islands , when the Emperor John VIII Palaiologos ( 1425 – 1448 ) defeated the superior fleet of Carlo I Tocco , Count of Cephalonia and Despot of Epirus , forcing him to relinquish all his holdings in the Morea to the Byzantines . The last appearance of the Byzantine navy was in the final Ottoman siege of 1453 , when a mixed fleet of Byzantine , Genoese and Venetian ships ( varying numbers are provided by the sources , ranging from 10 to 39 vessels ) defended Constantinople against the Ottoman fleet . During the siege , on 20 April 1453 , the last naval engagement in Byzantine history took place , when three Genoese galleys escorting a Byzantine transport fought their way through the huge Ottoman blockade fleet and into the Golden Horn . 
 = = Organization = = 
 = = = Early period ( 4th – mid @-@ 7th centuries ) = = = 
 Very little is known about the organization of the Roman fleets of late Antiquity , from the gradual break @-@ up of the large provincial fleets into smaller squadrons in the 3rd century to the formation of a new navy at the onset of the Muslim conquests . Despite the evidence of considerable naval activity in this period , earlier scholars believed that the Roman navy had all but vanished by the 4th century , but more recent work has altered this picture towards a transformation into a mainly fluvial and coastal force , designed for close co @-@ operation with the army . 
 Under Emperor Diocletian ( 284 – 305 ) , the navy 's strength reportedly increased from 46 @,@ 000 men to 64 @,@ 000 men , a figure that represents the numerical peak of the late Roman navy . The Danube Fleet ( <unk> <unk> ) with its attendant legionary flotillas is still well attested in the Notitia Dignitatum , and its increased activity is commented upon by Vegetius ( De Re Militari , <unk> ) . In the West , several fluvial fleets are mentioned , but the old standing praetorian fleets had all but vanished ( De Re Militari , <unk> ) and even the remaining western provincial fleets appear to have been seriously understrength and incapable of countering any significant barbarian attack . In the East , the Syrian and Alexandrian fleets are known from legal sources to have still existed in ca . 400 ( Codex Justinianus , <unk> & <unk> ) , while a fleet is known to have been stationed at Constantinople itself , perhaps created out of the remnants of the praetorian fleets . In 400 it was sufficient to slaughter a large number of Goths who had built rafts and tried to cross the strip of sea that separates Asia from Europe . Its size , however , is unknown , and it does not appear in the Notitia . 
 For operations in the Mediterranean during the 5th century , fleets appear to have been assembled on an ad hoc basis and then disbanded . The first permanent Byzantine fleet can be traced to the early 6th century and the revolt of Vitalian in 513 – 515 , when Anastasius I created a fleet to counter the rebels ' own . This fleet was retained , and under Justinian I and his successors it was developed into a professional and well @-@ maintained force . Because of the absence of any naval threat , however , the navy of the late 6th century was relatively small , with several small flotillas in the Danube and two main fleets maintained at Ravenna and Constantinople . Additional flotillas must have been stationed at the other great maritime and commercial centres of the Empire : at Alexandria , providing the escort to the annual grain fleet to Constantinople , and at Carthage , controlling the western Mediterranean . Justinian also stationed troops and ships at the more remote outposts of the Empire , at Septem ( Ceuta ) , Cherson in the Crimea , and <unk> ( Eilat ) in the Gulf of Aqaba . The long @-@ established naval tradition and infrastructure of those areas made the maintenance of the fleet easier , and , in the event of a naval expedition , a large fleet could be quickly and inexpensively assembled by impressing the numerous merchant vessels . 
 = = = Middle period ( late 7th century – 1070s ) = = = 
 = = = = Fleet organization = = = = 
 In response to the Arab conquests during the 7th century , the whole administrative and military system of the Empire was reformed , and the thematic system established . According to this , the Empire was divided into several themata , which were regional civil and military administrations . Under the command of a stratēgos , each thema maintained its own , locally levied forces . Following a series of revolts by thematic forces , under Constantine V the larger early themes were progressively broken up , while a central imperial army , the tagmata , was created , stationed at or near Constantinople , serving as a central reserve that henceforth formed the core of campaigning armies . 
 A similar process was followed in the fleet , which was organized along similar lines . In the second half of the 7th century , the fleet of the Karabisianoi ( Greek : <unk> , " the Ships ' Men " ) was created . The exact date is unknown , with suggestions ranging from the 650s / 660s , in response to the Battle of the Masts , or following the first Arab siege of Constantinople in 672 – 678 . Its origin is also unknown : it was recruited possibly from the remainders of the old <unk> exercitus , or the army of the Illyricum . It was headed by a stratēgos ( stratēgos tōn <unk> / <unk> , " general of the ships / seafarers " ) , and included the southern coast of Asia Minor from Miletus to the frontier with the Caliphate near Seleucia in Cilicia , the Aegean islands and the imperial holdings in southern Greece . Its headquarters was initially perhaps at Samos , with a subordinate command under a droungarios at <unk> in Pamphylia . As its name suggests , it comprised most of the Empire 's standing navy , and faced the principal maritime threat , the Arab fleets of Egypt and Syria . 
 The Karabisianoi however proved inadequate and were replaced in the early 8th century by a more complex system composed of three elements , which with minor alterations survived until the 11th century : a central imperial fleet based at Constantinople , a small number of large regional naval commands , either maritime themata or independent commands termed " <unk> " , and a greater number of local squadrons charged with purely defensive and police tasks and subordinate to the local provincial governors . Unlike the earlier Roman navy , where the provincial fleets were decidedly inferior in numbers and included only lighter vessels than the central fleets , the Byzantine regional fleets were probably formidable formations in their own right . 
 The capital 's navy played a central role in the repulsion of the Arab sieges of Constantinople , but it is unclear whether the Imperial Fleet ( <unk> <unk> , <unk> <unk> ) of later times existed as a separate command in the 7th or 8th centuries . As its chief , the droungarios tou <unk> , is first attested in the Taktikon Uspensky of 842 / 843 , and as there is little evidence for major fleets operating from Constantinople during the 8th century , Hélène Ahrweiler dates its creation to the early 9th century . Thereafter , the Imperial Fleet formed the main central reserve and the core of various expeditionary fleets . 
 The first and for a long time only maritime theme ( θέμα <unk> , thema <unk> ) was the Theme of the Cibyrrhaeots ( θέμα <unk> , thema <unk> ) . It was created from the Karabisianoi fleet , and assigned to the administration and defence of the southern coasts of Asia Minor . The exact date of its creation is unclear , with one view proposing ca . 719 and another ca . 727 . Its stratēgos , first mentioned in 734 , was based at Attaleia . His principal lieutenants were the <unk> of the Mardaites , an ek <unk> ( representative ) at <unk> and droungarioi of Attaleia and Kos . Being located closest to the Muslim Levant , it remained the Empire 's principal naval fleet for centuries , until it was reduced with the decline of the Arab naval threat . The fleet is last mentioned in 1043 , and thereafter the theme became a purely civilian province . 
 The Cibyrrhaeots were complemented by two independent naval commands in the Aegean , each headed by a droungarios : the <unk> <unk> ( " Aegean Sea " ) , covering the northern half of the Aegean and the Dardanelles and Marmara Sea , and the command variously known as the <unk> ( " Twelve Islands " ) and <unk> ( " Gulf " ) , which was based at Samos and comprised the southern Aegean including the Cyclades . Unlike the other droungarioi who headed subordinate commands , these two <unk> were completely independent , and their droungarioi exercised both civil and military authority over them . Eventually they were raised to full maritime themes , the Theme of the Aegean Sea ( θέμα τοῦ <unk> <unk> , thema tou <unk> <unk> ) ca . 843 , while the eastern parts of the <unk> / <unk> <unk> formed the Theme of Samos ( θέμα <unk> , thema <unk> ) in the late 9th century . It comprised it the Ionian coast , and its capital was at Smyrna . 
 Some " land " themata also maintained sizeable squadrons , usually placed under a <unk> ( mentioned collectively as tourmarchai tōn <unk> in the Taktikon Uspensky ) . They played an intermediate role between the large thematic fleets and the central Imperial Fleet : they were permanent squadrons with professional crews ( <unk> ) , maintained by resources from the imperial treasury and not the province they were stationed in , but subordinate to the local thematic stratēgos and charged mainly with local defence and police duties . These were : 
 The Theme of Hellas ( θέμα <unk> , thema <unk> ) , founded in ca . 686 – 689 by Justinian II , encompassed the imperial possessions of southern Greece with capital at Corinth . Justinian settled 6 @,@ 500 Mardaites there , who provided oarsmen and garrisons . While not exclusively a naval theme , it maintained its own fleet . It was split in 809 into the Theme of the Peloponnese and the new Theme of Hellas , covering Central Greece and Thessaly , which also retained smaller fleets . 
 The Theme of Sicily ( θέμα <unk> , thema <unk> ) was responsible for Sicily and the imperial possessions in south @-@ western Italy ( Calabria ) . Once the bastion of Byzantine naval strength in the West , by the late 9th century it had greatly diminished in strength , and disappeared after the final loss of Taormina in 902 . Distinct tourmarchai are attested for Sicily proper and Calabria . 
 The Theme of Cephallenia ( θέμα <unk> , thema <unk> ) , controlling the Ionian Islands , was established in the mid- to late 8th century , to protect imperial communications with Italy and defend the Ionian Sea from Arab raids . The new imperial possessions in Apulia were added to it in the 870s , before they were made into a separate thema ( that of Longobardia ) in about 910 . 
 The Theme of Paphlagonia ( θέμα <unk> , thema <unk> ) and the Theme of Chaldia ( θέμα <unk> , thema <unk> ) were split off from the Armeniac Theme in ca . 819 by emperor Leo V and provided with their own naval squadrons , possibly as a defence against Rus ' raids . 
 Isolated regions of particular importance for the control of the major sea @-@ lanes were covered by separate officials with the title of archon , who in some cases may have commanded detachments of the Imperial Fleet . Such <unk> are known for Chios , Malta , the <unk> Gulf , and possibly <unk> and " Bulgaria " ( whose area of control is identified by Ahrweiler with the mouths of the Danube ) . These vanished by the end of the 9th century , either succumbing to Arab attacks or being reformed or incorporated into themes . 
 = = = = Manpower and size = = = = 
 Just as with its land counterpart , the exact size of the Byzantine navy and its units is a matter of considerable debate , owing to the <unk> and ambiguous nature of the primary sources . One exception are the numbers for the late 9th and early 10th century , for which we possess a more detailed breakdown , dated to the Cretan expedition of 911 . These lists reveal that during the reign of Leo VI the Wise , the navy reached 34 @,@ 200 oarsmen and perhaps as many as 8 @,@ 000 marines . The central Imperial Fleet totalled some 19 @,@ 600 oarsmen and 4 @,@ 000 marines under the command of the droungarios of the <unk> <unk> . These four thousand marines were professional soldiers , first recruited as a corps by Basil I in the 870s . They were a great asset to the Imperial Fleet , for whereas previously it had depended on thematic and <unk> soldiers for its marines , the new force provided a more reliable , better trained and immediately available force at the Emperor 's disposal . The high status of these marines is illustrated by the fact that they were considered to belong to the imperial tagmata , and were organized along similar lines . The Aegean thematic fleet numbered 2 @,@ 610 oarsmen and 400 marines , the Cibyrrhaeot fleet stood at 5 @,@ 710 oarsmen and 1 @,@ 000 marines , the Samian fleet at 3 @,@ 980 oarsmen and 600 marines , and finally , the Theme of Hellas furnished 2 @,@ 300 oarsmen with a portion of its 2 @,@ 000 thematic soldiers doubling as marines . 
 The following table contains estimates , by Warren T. Treadgold , of the number of oarsmen over the entire history of the Byzantine navy : 
 Contrary to popular perception , galley slaves were not used as oarsmen , either by the Byzantines or the Arabs , or by their Roman and Greek predecessors . Throughout the existence of the Empire , Byzantine crews consisted of mostly lower @-@ class freeborn men , who were professional soldiers , legally obliged to perform military service ( <unk> ) in return for pay or land estates . In the first half of the 10th century , the latter were calculated to be of the value of 2 – 3 pounds ( 0 @.@ 91 – 1 @.@ 36 kg ) of gold for sailors and marines . Use was however made of prisoners of war and foreigners as well . Alongside the Mardaites , who formed a significant part of the fleet 's crews , an enigmatic group known as the <unk> ( possibly Dalmatians ) appears in the Cretan expeditions , as well as many Rus ' , who were given the right to serve in the Byzantine armed forces in a series of 10th @-@ century treaties . 
 In his De Ceremoniis , Constantine Porphyrogennetos gives the fleet lists for the expeditions against Crete of 911 and 949 . These references have sparked a considerable debate as to their interpretation : thus the numbers given for the entire Imperial Fleet in 949 can be interpreted as either 100 , 150 or 250 ships , depending on the reading of the Greek text . The precise meaning of the term ousia ( <unk> ) is also a subject of confusion : traditionally , it is held to have been a standard complement of 108 men , and that more than one could be present aboard a single ship . In the context of the De Ceremoniis however , it can also be read simply as " unit " or " ship " . The number of 150 seems more compatible with the numbers recorded elsewhere , and is accepted by most scholars , although they differ as to the composition of the fleet . Makrypoulias interprets the number as 8 <unk> , 100 <unk> and 42 <unk> proper , the latter including the two imperial vessels and the ten ships of the <unk> squadron . As for the total size of the Byzantine navy in this period , Warren Treadgold extrapolates a total , including the naval themes , of ca . 240 warships , a number which was increased to 307 for the Cretan expedition of 960 – 961 . According to Treadgold , the latter number probably represents the approximate standing strength of the entire Byzantine navy ( including the smaller flotillas ) in the 9th and 10th centuries . It is however noteworthy that a significant drop in the numbers of ships and men attached to the thematic fleets is evident between 911 and 949 . This drop , which reduced the size of thematic fleets from a third to a quarter of the total navy , was partly due to the increased use of the lighter <unk> type instead of the heavier dromōn , and partly due to financial and manpower difficulties . It is also indicative of a general trend that would lead to the complete disappearance of the provincial fleets by the late 11th century . 
 = = = = Rank structure = = = = 
 Although naval themes were organized much the same way as their land counterparts , there is some confusion in the Byzantine sources as to the exact rank structure . The usual term for admiral was stratēgos , the same term used for the generals that governed the land themata . Under the stratēgos were two or three tourmarchai ( sing. tourmarches , effectively " Vice Admiral " ) , in turn overseeing a number of droungarioi ( sing. droungarios , corresponding to " Rear Admiral " ) . Until the mid @-@ 9th century , the governors of the themes of the Aegean and Samos are also recorded as droungarioi , since their commands were split off from the original Karabisianoi fleet , but they were then raised to the rank of stratēgos . As the thematic admirals also doubled as governors of their themes , they were assisted by a <unk> ( " chief secretary / notary " ) who headed the civilian administration of the theme . Further staff officers were the chartoularios in charge of the fleet administration , the <unk> ( " chief messenger " ) , who acted as chief of staff , and a number of staff <unk> ( " counts " , sing. komēs ) , including a komēs tēs <unk> , who commanded the bodyguard ( hetaireia ) of the admiral . 
 The Imperial Fleet was a different case , as it was not tied to the thematic administration , but was considered as one of the tagmata , the professional central reserve forces . Consequently , the commander of the Imperial Fleet remained known as the droungarios tou <unk> <unk> ( later with the prefix megas , " grand " ) . His title is still found in the Komnenian era , albeit as commander of the imperial escort squadron , and survived until the Palaiologan era , being listed in the 14th @-@ century Book of Offices of Pseudo @-@ Kodinos . The office of a deputy called <unk> is also mentioned for the Imperial Fleet , but his role is unclear from the sources . He may have held a post similar to that of a Port Admiral . Although some of these senior officers were professional seamen , having risen from the ranks , most fleet commanders were high court officials , who would have relied on their more experienced professional subordinates for nautical expertise . 
 In the lower levels of organization , there was more uniformity : squadrons of three or five ships were commanded by a komēs or <unk> , and each ship 's captain was called <unk> ( " centurion " ) , although literary sources also used more archaic terms like <unk> or even <unk> . Each ship 's crew , depending on its size , was composed of one to three <unk> . Under the captain , there was the <unk> ( " banner bearer " ) , who acted as executive officer , two prōtokaraboi ( sing. prōtokarabos , " head of the ship " ) , sometimes also referred to archaically as <unk> , and a bow officer , the <unk> . The prōtokaraboi were helmsmen , in charge of the steering oars in the stern , as well as of the rowers on either side of the ship . The senior of the two was the " first prōtokarabos ( <unk> prōtokarabos ) . In actual terms , there probably were several of each kind upon each ship , working in shifts . Most of these officers rose from the ranks , and there are references in the De Administrando Imperio to first oarsmen ( <unk> ) who rose to become prōtokaraboi in the imperial barges , and later assumed still higher offices ; Emperor Romanos Lekapenos being the most successful example . There were also a number of specialists on board , such as the two bow oarsmen and the <unk> , who worked the siphons used for discharging the Greek fire . A <unk> ( " trumpeter " ) is also recorded in the sources , who conveyed orders to the rowers ( <unk> or <unk> ) . Since the marine infantry were organized as regular army units , their ranks followed those of the army . 
 = = = Late period ( 1080s – 1453 ) = = = 
 = = = = Reforms of the Komnenoi = = = = 
 After the decline of the navy in the 11th century , Alexios I rebuilt it on different lines . Since the thematic fleets had all but vanished , their remnants were amalgamated into a unified imperial fleet , under the new office of the megas doux . The first known occupant of the office was Alexios ' brother @-@ in @-@ law John Doukas , in ca . 1092 . The megas droungarios of the fleet , once the overall naval commander , was subordinated to him , acting now as his principal aide . The megas doux was also appointed as overall governor of southern Greece , the old themata of Hellas and the Peloponnese , which were divided into districts ( <unk> ) that supplied the fleet . Under John II , the Aegean islands also became responsible for the maintenance , crewing and provision of warships , and contemporary sources took pride in the fact that the great fleets of Manuel 's reign were crewed by " native Romans " , although use continued to be made of mercenaries and allied squadrons . However , the fact that the fleet was now exclusively built and based around Constantinople , and that provincial fleets were not reconstituted , did have its drawbacks , as outlying areas , in particular Greece , were left vulnerable to attack . 
 = = = = Nicaean navy = = = = 
 With the decline of the Byzantine fleet in the latter 12th century , the Empire increasingly relied on the fleets of Venice and Genoa . Following the sack of 1204 however , sources suggest the presence of a relatively strong fleet already under the first Nicaean emperor , Theodore I Laskaris , although we lack specific details about it . Under John III and Theodore II ( 1254 – 1258 ) , the navy had two main strategic areas of operations : the Aegean , entailing operations against the Greek islands ( chiefly Rhodes ) as well as the transport and supply of armies fighting in the Balkans , and the Sea of Marmara , where the Nicaeans aimed to interdict Latin shipping and threaten Constantinople . Smyrna provided the main shipyard and base for the Aegean , with a secondary one at <unk> , while the main base for operations in the Marmara Sea was <unk> , near <unk> across the Gallipoli peninsula . 
 = = = = Palaiologan navy = = = = 
 Despite their efforts , the Nicaean emperors failed to successfully challenge the Venetian domination of the seas , and were forced to turn to the Genoese for aid . After regaining Constantinople in 1261 however , Michael VIII initiated a great effort to lessen this dependence by building a " national " navy , forming a number of new corps to this purpose : the Gasmouloi ( <unk> ) , who were men of mixed Greek @-@ Latin descent living around the capital ; and men from Laconia , called <unk> ( <unk> , " Laconians " ) or <unk> ( <unk> ) , were used as marines , forming the bulk of Byzantine naval manpower in the 1260s and 1270s . Michael also set the rowers , called <unk> or <unk> , apart as a separate corps . All these groups received small grants of land to cultivate in exchange for their service , and were settled together in small colonies . The <unk> were settled near the sea throughout the northern Aegean , while the Gasmouloi and <unk> were settled mostly around Constantinople and in Thrace . These corps remained extant , albeit in a diminished form , throughout the last centuries of the Empire ; indeed the Gasmouloi of Gallipoli formed the bulk of the crews of the first great Ottoman fleets . Throughout the Palaiologan period , the fleet 's main base was the harbour of <unk> on the Marmara shore of Constantinople , dredged and refortified by Michael VIII . Among the provincial naval centres , probably the most important was Monemvasia in the Peloponnese . 
 At the same time , Michael and his successors continued the well @-@ established practice of using foreigners in the fleet . Alongside the mistrusted Italian city @-@ states , with whom alliances shifted regularly , mercenaries were increasingly employed in the last centuries of the Empire , often rewarded for their services with fiefs . Most of these mercenaries , like Giovanni de lo Cavo ( lord of Anafi and Rhodes ) , Andrea Morisco ( successor of de lo Cavo in Rhodes ) and Benedetto Zaccaria ( lord of Chios and Phocaea ) , were Genoese , the Byzantines ' major ally in the period . Under Michael VIII , for the first time a foreigner , the Italian privateer Licario , became megas doux and was given Euboea as a fief . In 1303 , another high rank , that of <unk> ( <unk> or <unk> ) was introduced . The term had already entered Byzantine usage through contact with the Kingdom of Naples and other Western nations , but was rarely used ; it was adopted as part of the imperial hierarchy , coming after the megas doux and the megas droungarios , with the arrival of the mercenaries of the Catalan Company . Only two holders are known , Ferran d <unk> and Andrea Morisco , both from 1303 – 1305 , although the rank continued to be mentioned in various lists of offices . 
 = = Ships = = 
 = = = <unk> and their derivatives = = = 
 The primary warship of the Byzantine navy until the 12th century was the dromon ( <unk> ) and other similar ship types . Apparently an evolution of the light <unk> galleys of the imperial Roman fleets , the term first appears in the late 5th century , and was commonly used for a specific kind of war @-@ galley by the 6th . The term dromōn itself comes from the Greek root <unk> ( <unk> ) , " to run " , thus meaning " runner " , and 6th @-@ century authors like Procopius are explicit in their references to the speed of these vessels . During the next few centuries , as the naval struggle with the Arabs intensified , heavier versions with two or possibly even three banks of oars evolved . Eventually , the term was used in the general sense of " warship " , and was often used interchangeably with another Byzantine term for a large warship , chelandion ( χελάνδιον , from the Greek word <unk> , " courser " ) , which first appeared during the 8th century . 
 = = = = Evolution and features = = = = 
 The appearance and evolution of medieval warships is a matter of debate and conjecture : until recently , no remains of an oared warship from either ancient or early medieval times had been found , and information had to be gathered by analyzing literary evidence , crude artistic depictions and the remains of a few merchant vessels . Only in 2005 – 2006 did archaeological digs for the Marmaray project in the location of the Harbour of Theodosius ( modern <unk> ) uncover the remains of over 36 Byzantine ships from the 6th to 10th centuries , including four light galleys of the galea type . 
 The accepted view is that the main developments which differentiated the early dromons from the <unk> , and that henceforth characterized Mediterranean galleys , were the adoption of a full deck ( <unk> ) , the abandonment of the rams on the bow in favour of an above @-@ water spur , and the gradual introduction of lateen sails . The exact reasons for the abandonment of the ram ( Latin : rostrum ; <unk> , <unk> ) are unclear . Depictions of upward @-@ pointing beaks in the 4th @-@ century Vatican Vergil manuscript may well illustrate that the ram had already been replaced by a spur in late Roman galleys . One possibility is that the change occurred because of the gradual evolution of the ancient shell @-@ first mortise and tenon hull construction method , against which rams had been designed , into the skeleton @-@ first method , which produced a stronger and more flexible hull , less susceptible to ram attacks . Certainly by the early 7th century , the ram 's original function had been forgotten , if we judge by Isidore of Seville 's comments that they were used to protect against collision with underwater rocks . As for the lateen sail , various authors have in the past suggested that it was introduced into the Mediterranean by the Arabs , possibly with an ultimate origin in India . However , the discovery of new depictions and literary references in recent decades has led scholars to <unk> the appearance of the lateen sail in the Levant to the late Hellenistic or early Roman period . Not only the triangular , but also the quadrilateral version were known , used for centuries ( mostly on smaller craft ) in parallel with square sails . Belisarius ' invasion fleet of 533 was apparently at least partly fitted with lateen sails , making it probable that by the time the lateen had become the standard rig for the dromon , with the traditional square sail gradually falling from use in medieval navigation . 
 The dromons that Procopius describes were single @-@ banked ships of probably 50 oars , arranged with 25 oars on each side . Again unlike Hellenistic vessels , which used an outrigger , these extended directly from the hull . In the later bireme dromons of the 9th and 10th centuries , the two oar banks ( <unk> ) were divided by the deck , with the first oar bank was situated below , whilst the second oar bank was situated above deck ; these rowers were expected to fight alongside the marines in boarding operations . Makrypoulias suggests 25 oarsmen beneath and 35 on the deck on either side for a dromon of 120 rowers . The overall length of these ships was probably about 32 meters . Although most contemporary vessels had a single mast ( <unk> or <unk> ) , the larger bireme dromons probably needed at least two masts in order to manoeuvre effectively , assuming that a single lateen sail for a ship this size would have reached unmanageable dimensions . The ship was steered by means of two quarter rudders at the stern ( <unk> ) , which also housed a tent ( <unk> ) that covered the captain 's berth ( <unk> ( b ) at ( t ) os ) . The prow ( <unk> ) featured an elevated forecastle ( <unk> ) , below which the siphon for the discharge of Greek fire projected , although secondary siphons could also be carried amidships on either side . A <unk> ( <unk> ) , on which marines could hang their shields , ran around the sides of the ship , providing protection to the deck crew . Larger ships also had wooden castles ( <unk> ) on either side between the masts , similar to those attested for the Roman <unk> , providing archers with elevated firing platforms . The bow spur ( <unk> ) was intended to ride over an enemy ship 's oars , breaking them and rendering it helpless against missile fire and boarding actions . 
 The four <unk> ships uncovered in the <unk> excavations , dating to the 10th – 11th centuries , are of uniform design and construction , suggesting a centralized manufacturing process . They have a length of ca . 30 m , and are built of European Black Pine and Oriental plane . 
 = = = = Ship types = = = = 
 By the 10th century , there were three main classes of bireme ( two oar @-@ banks ) warships of the general dromon type , as detailed in the inventories for the Cretan expeditions of 911 and 949 : the [ chelandion ] <unk> ( [ χελάνδιον ] <unk> ) , so named because it was manned by an ousia of 108 ; the [ chelandion ] <unk> ( [ χελάνδιον ] <unk> ) , crewed with up to 120 – 160 men , its name either implying an origin in the region of Pamphylia as a transport ship or its crewing with " picked crews " ( from <unk> + <unk> , " all tribes " ) ; and the dromōn proper , crewed by two <unk> . In the De Ceremoniis , the heavy dromōn is said to have an even larger crew of 230 rowers and 70 marines ; naval historian John H. Pryor considers them as supernumerary crews being carried aboard , while the Greek scholar Christos Makrypoulias suggests that the extra men correspond to a second rower on each of the upper @-@ bank oars . A smaller , single @-@ bank ship , the <unk> ( <unk> , " single @-@ banked " ) or galea ( <unk> , from which the term " galley " derives ) , with ca . 60 men as crew , was used for scouting missions but also in the wings of the battle line . The galea in particular seems to have been strongly associated with the Mardaites , and Christos Makrypoulias even suggests that the ship was exclusively used by them . Three @-@ banked ( " trireme " ) dromons are described in a 9th @-@ century work dedicated to the <unk> Basil Lekapenos . However , this treatise , which survives only in fragments , draws heavily upon references on the appearance and construction of a Classical trireme , and must therefore be used with care when trying to apply it to the warships of the middle Byzantine period . The existence of trireme vessels is , however , attested in the Fatimid navy in the 11th and 12th centuries , and references made by Leo VI to large Arab ships in the 10th century may also indicate trireme galleys . 
 For cargo transport , the Byzantines usually commandeered ordinary merchantmen as transport ships ( <unk> ) or supply ships ( <unk> ) . These appear to have been mostly sailing vessels , rather than oared . The Byzantines and Arabs also employed horse @-@ transports ( <unk> ) , which were either sailing ships or galleys , the latter certainly modified to accommodate the horses . Given that the <unk> appear originally to have been oared horse @-@ transports , this would imply differences in construction between the chelandion and the dromōn proper , terms which otherwise are often used indiscriminately in literary sources . While the dromōn was developed exclusively as a war galley , the chelandion would have had to have a special compartment amidships to accommodate a row of horses , increasing its beam and hold depth . In addition , Byzantine sources refer to the <unk> or <unk> ( <unk> , <unk> ) , which was a boat carried along by the bigger ships . The kind described in the De Ceremoniis had a single mast , four oars and a rudder . 
 = = = Western designs of the last centuries = = = 
 The exact period when the dromon was superseded by galea @-@ derived ships of Italian origin is uncertain . The term continued in use until the late 12th century , although Byzantine writers were indiscriminate in their use of it . Contemporary Western writers used the term to denote large ships , usually transports , and there is evidence to support the idea that this usage had also spread to the Byzantines . William of Tyre 's description of the Byzantine fleet in 1169 , where " dromons " are classed as very large transports , and the warships with two oar banks are set apart from them , may thus indeed indicate the adoption of the new bireme galley types by the Byzantines . From the 13th century on , the term " dromon " fell into gradual disuse and was replaced by <unk> ( <unk> , meaning " detailed to / owing a service " ) , a late @-@ 11th century term which originally applied to the crews , who were drawn from populations detailed to military service . During the latter period of the Byzantine Empire , Byzantine ships were based on Western models : the term <unk> is used indiscriminately for both Byzantine and Latin ships , and the horse @-@ carrying chelandion was replaced by the Western <unk> ( itself deriving from Arabic <unk> , adopted as <unk> , <unk> , in Greek ) . A similar process is seen in surviving sources from Angevin Sicily , where the term <unk> was replaced by the <unk> , although for a time both continued to be used . No construction differences are mentioned between the two , with both terms referring to horse @-@ carrying vessels ( <unk> ) capable of carrying from 20 to 40 horses . 
 The bireme Italian @-@ style galleys remained the mainstay of Mediterranean fleets until the late 13th century , although again , contemporary descriptions provide little detail on their construction . From that point on , the galleys universally became trireme ships , i.e. with three men on a single bank located above deck , each rowing a different oar ; the so @-@ called alla <unk> system . The Venetians also developed the so @-@ called " great galley " , which was an enlarged galley capable of carrying more cargo for trade . 
 Little is known on particular Byzantine ships during the period . The accounts of the 1437 journey by sea of the Byzantine delegation to the Council of Florence , by the Byzantine cleric Sylvester <unk> and the Greek @-@ Venetian captain Michael of Rhodes , mention that most of the ships were Venetian or Papal , but also record that Emperor John VIII travelled on an " imperial ship " . It is unclear whether that ship was Byzantine or had been hired , and its type is not mentioned . It is , however , recorded as having been faster than the Venetian great merchant galleys accompanying it , possibly indicating that it was a light war galley . Michael of Rhodes also wrote a treatise on shipbuilding , which provided construction instructions and illustrations of the main vessels , both galleys and sailing ships , used by Venice and the other maritime states of the region in the first half of the 15th century . 
 = = Tactics and weapons = = 
 The Byzantines took care to codify , preserve and pass on the lessons of warfare at land and sea from past experience , through the use of military manuals . Despite their sometimes antiquarian terminology , these texts form the basis of our knowledge on Byzantine naval affairs . The main surviving texts are the chapters on sea combat ( peri <unk> ) in the Tactica of Leo the Wise and Nikephoros Ouranos ( both drawing extensively from the <unk> of <unk> <unk> and other earlier works ) , complemented by relevant passages in the De Administrando Imperio of Constantine Porphyrogennetos and other works by Byzantine and Arab writers . 
 = = = Naval strategy , logistics and tactics = = = 
 When examining ancient and medieval naval operations , it is necessary to first understand the technological limitations of galley fleets . Galleys did not handle well in rough waters and could be swamped by waves , which would be catastrophic in the open sea ; history is replete with instances where galley fleets were sunk by bad weather ( e.g. the Roman losses during the First Punic War ) . The sailing season was therefore usually restricted from mid @-@ spring to September . The maintainable cruising speed of a galley , even when using sails , was limited , as were the amount of supplies it could carry . Water in particular , being essentially a galley 's " fuel " supply , was of critical importance . With consumption levels estimated at 8 litres a day for every oarsman , its availability was a decisive operational factor in the often water @-@ scarce and sun @-@ baked coasts of the Eastern Mediterranean . Smaller dromons are estimated to have been able to carry about 4 days ' worth of water . Effectively , this meant that fleets composed of galleys were confined to coastal routes , and had to make frequent landfall to replenish their supplies and rest their crews . This is well attested in Byzantine overseas endeavours , from Belisarius ' campaign against the Vandals to the Cretan expeditions of the 9th and 10th centuries . It is for these reasons that Nikephoros Ouranos emphasizes the need to have available " men with accurate knowledge and experience of the sea [ ... ] , which winds cause it to swell and which blow from the land . They should know both the hidden rocks in the sea , and the places which have no depth , and the land along which one sails and the islands adjacent to it , the harbours and the distance such harbours are the one from the other . They should know both the countries and the water supplies . " 
 Medieval Mediterranean naval warfare was therefore essentially coastal and amphibious in nature , carried out to seize coastal territory or islands , and not to exercise " sea control " as it is understood today . Furthermore , following the abandonment of the ram , the only truly " ship @-@ killing " weapon available prior to the advent of gunpowder and explosive shells , sea combat became , in the words of John Pryor , " more unpredictable . No longer could any power hope to have such an advantage in weaponry or the skill of crews that success could be expected . " It is no surprise therefore that the Byzantine and Arab manuals emphasize cautious tactics , with the priority given to the preservation of one 's own fleet , and the acquisition of accurate intelligence , often through the use of spies posing as merchants . Emphasis was placed on achieving tactical surprise and , conversely , on avoiding being caught unprepared by the enemy . Ideally , battle was to be given only when assured of superiority by virtue of numbers or tactical disposition . Importance is also laid on matching one 's forces and tactics to the prospective enemy : Leo VI , for instance , contrasted ( Tactica , <unk> – 77 ) the Arabs with their heavy and slow ships ( <unk> ) , to the small and fast craft ( <unk> , chiefly <unk> ) , of the Slavs and Rus ' . 
 On campaign , following the assembly of the various squadrons at fortified bases ( <unk> ) along the coast , the fleet consisted of the main body , composed of the oared warships , and the baggage train ( <unk> ) of sailing vessels and oared transports , which would be sent away in the event of battle . The battle fleet was divided into squadrons , and orders were transmitted from ship to ship through signal flags ( <unk> ) and lanterns . 
 On the approach to and during an actual battle , a well @-@ ordered formation was critical : if a fleet fell into disorder , its ships would be unable to lend support to each other and probably would be defeated . Fleets that failed to keep an ordered formation or that could not order themselves into an appropriate counter @-@ formation ( <unk> ) to match that of the enemy , often avoided , or broke off from battle . Tactical manoeuvres were therefore intended to disrupt the enemy formation , including the use of various stratagems , such as dividing one 's force and carrying out flanking manoeuvres , feigning retreat or hiding a reserve in ambush ( Tactica , <unk> – 56 ) . Indeed , Leo VI openly advised ( Tactica , <unk> ) against direct confrontation and advocates the use of stratagems instead . According to Leo VI ( Tactica , <unk> ) , a crescent formation seems to have been the norm , with the flagship in the centre and the heavier ships at the horns of the formation , in order to turn the enemy 's flanks . A range of variants and other tactics and counter @-@ tactics was available , depending on the circumstances . 
 Once the fleets were close enough , exchanges of missiles began , ranging from combustible projectiles to arrows and javelins . The aim was not to sink ships , but to deplete the ranks of the enemy crews before the boarding actions , which decided the outcome . Once the enemy strength was judged to have been reduced sufficiently , the fleets closed in , the ships grappled each other , and the marines and upper bank oarsmen boarded the enemy vessel and engaged in hand @-@ to @-@ hand combat . 
 = = = Armament = = = 
 Unlike the warships of Antiquity , Byzantine and Arab ships did not feature rams , and the primary means of ship @-@ to @-@ ship combat were boarding actions and missile fire , as well as the use of inflammable materials such as Greek fire . Despite the fearsome reputation of the latter , it was only effective under certain circumstances , and not the decisive anti @-@ ship weapon that the ram had been in the hands of experienced crews . 
 Like their Roman predecessors , Byzantine and Muslim ships were equipped with small catapults ( <unk> ) and ballistae ( <unk> ) that launched stones , arrows , javelins , pots of Greek fire or other incendiary liquids , caltrops ( <unk> ) and even containers full of lime to choke the enemy or , as Emperor Leo VI somewhat implausibly suggests , scorpions and snakes ( Tactica , <unk> – 65 ) . Marines and the upper @-@ bank oarsmen were heavily armoured in preparation for battle ( Leo referred to them as " cataphracts " ) and armed with close @-@ combat arms such as lances and swords , while the other sailors wore padded felt jackets ( <unk> ) for protection and fought with bows and crossbows . The importance and volume of missile fire during sea combat can be gauged from the fleet manifests for the Cretan expeditions of the 10th century , which mention 10 @,@ 000 caltrops , 50 bows and 10 @,@ 000 arrows , 20 hand @-@ carried <unk> with 200 bolts called <unk> ( " flies " ) and 100 javelins per dromon . 
 From the 12th century on , the crossbow ( called <unk> , <unk> in Greek ) became increasingly important in Mediterranean warfare , remaining the most deadly weapon available until the advent of fully rigged ships with gunpowder artillery . The Byzantines made infrequent use of the weapon , chiefly in sieges , although its use is recorded in some sea battles . Cannons were introduced in the latter half of the 14th century , but they were rarely used by the Byzantines , who only had a few artillery pieces for the defence of the land walls of Constantinople . Unlike the Venetians and Genoese , there is no indication that the Byzantines ever mounted any on ships . 
 = = = Greek fire = = = 
 " Greek fire " was the name given by Western Europeans to the flammable concoction used by the Byzantines , so called because the Europeans viewed the Byzantines as Greeks . The Byzantines themselves used various descriptive names for it , but the most common was " liquid fire " ( <unk> <unk> ) . Although the use of incendiary chemicals by the Byzantines has been attested to since the early 6th century , the actual substance known as Greek fire is believed to have been created in 673 and is attributed to an engineer from Syria , named <unk> . The most common method of deployment was to emit the formula through a large bronze tube ( <unk> ) onto enemy ships . Alternatively , it could be launched in jars fired from catapults ; pivoting cranes ( <unk> ) are also mentioned as a method of pouring combustibles onto enemy ships . Usually the mixture would be stored in heated , pressurized barrels and projected through the tube by some sort of pump while the operators were sheltered behind large iron shields . A portable version ( <unk> ) also existed , reputedly invented by Leo VI , making it the direct analogue to a modern flamethrower . The means of its production was kept a state secret , and its components are only roughly guessed or described through secondary sources like Anna Komnene , so that its exact composition remains to this day unknown . In its effect , the Greek fire must have been rather similar to napalm . Contemporary sources make clear that it could not be extinguished by water , but rather floated and burned on top of it ; sand could extinguish it by depriving it of oxygen , and several authors also mention strong vinegar and old urine as being able to extinguish it , presumably by some sort of chemical reaction . Consequently , felt or hides soaked in vinegar were used to provide protection against it . 
 Despite the somewhat exaggerated accounts of Byzantine writers , it was by no means a " wonder weapon " , and did not avert some serious defeats . Given its limited range , and the need for a calm sea and favourable wind conditions , its usability was limited . Nevertheless , in favourable circumstances and against an unprepared enemy , its great destructive ability and psychological impact could prove decisive , as displayed repeatedly against the Rus ' . Greek fire continued to be mentioned during the 12th century , but the Byzantines failed to use it against the Fourth Crusade , possibly because they had lost access to the areas ( the Caucasus and the eastern coast of the Black Sea ) where the primary ingredients were to be found . The Arabs fielded their own " liquid fire " after 835 , but it is unknown if they used the Byzantine formula , possibly obtained through espionage or through the defection of stratēgos <unk> in 827 , or whether they independently created a version of their own . A 12th @-@ century treatise prepared by Mardi bin Ali al @-@ <unk> for Saladin records a version of Greek fire , called " naft " ( from naphtha ) , which had a petroleum base , with sulphur and various resins added . 
 = = Role of the navy in Byzantine history = = 
 It is not easy to assess the importance of the Byzantine navy to the Empire 's history . On one hand , the Empire , throughout its life , had to defend a long coastline , often with little hinterland . In addition , shipping was always the quickest and cheapest way of transport , and the Empire 's major urban and commercial centres , as well as most of its fertile areas , lay close to the sea . Coupled with the threat posed by the Arabs in the 7th to 10th centuries , this necessitated the maintenance of a strong fleet . The navy was perhaps at its most significant in the successful defence of Constantinople from the two Arab sieges , which ultimately saved the Empire . Throughout the period however , naval operations were an essential part of the Byzantine effort against the Arabs in a game of raids and counter @-@ raids that continued up to the late 10th century . 
 On the other hand , the nature and limitations of the maritime technology of the age meant that the neither the Byzantines nor any of their opponents could develop a true thalassocracy . Galley fleets were confined to coastal operations , and were not able to play a truly independent role . Furthermore , as the alternation of Byzantine victories and defeats against the Arabs illustrates , no side was able to permanently gain the upper hand . Although the Byzantines pulled off a number of spectacular successes , such as Nasar 's remarkable night @-@ time victory in 880 ( one of a handful of similar engagements in the Middle Ages ) , these victories were balanced off by similarly disastrous losses . Reports of mutinies by oarsmen in Byzantine fleets also reveal that conditions were often far from the ideal prescribed in the manuals . Combined with the traditional predominance of the great Anatolian land @-@ holders in the higher military and civil offices , all this meant that , as in the Roman Empire , the navy , even at its height , was still regarded largely as an adjunct to the land forces . This fact is clearly illustrated by the relatively lowly positions its admirals held in the imperial hierarchy . 
 It is clear nevertheless that the gradual decline of the indigenous Byzantine naval power in the 10th and 11th centuries , when it was eclipsed by the Italian city @-@ states , chiefly Venice and later Genoa , was of great long @-@ term significance for the fate of the Empire . The sack of the Fourth Crusade , which shattered the foundations of the Byzantine state , was due in large part to the absolute <unk> of the Empire at sea . This process was initiated by Byzantium itself in the 9th century , when the Italians were increasingly employed by the Empire to compensate for its own naval weakness in the West . The Italian republics also profited from their role as intermediaries in the trade between the Empire and Western Europe , marginalizing the Byzantine merchant marine , which in turn had adverse effects on the availability of Byzantine naval forces . Inevitably however , as the Italian republics slowly moved away from the Byzantine orbit , they began pursuing their own policies , and from the late 11th century on , they turned from protection of the Empire to exploitation and sometimes outright plunder , heralding the eventual financial and political subjugation of Byzantium to their interests . The absence of a strong navy was certainly keenly felt by the Byzantines at the time , as the comments of Kekaumenos illustrate . Strong and energetic emperors like Manuel Komnenos , and later Michael VIII Palaiologos , could revive Byzantine naval power , but even after landing heavy strokes against the Venetians , they merely replaced them with the Genoese and the Pisans . Trade thus remained in Latin hands , its profits continued to be siphoned off from the Empire , and after their deaths , their achievements quickly evaporated . After 1204 , and with the brief exception of Michael VIII 's reign , the fortunes of the now small Byzantine navy were more or less tied to the shifting alliances with the Italian maritime republics . 
 When viewing the entire course of Byzantine history , the waxing and waning of the navy 's strength closely mirrors the fluctuation of the Empire 's fortunes . It is this apparent interrelation that led the French Byzantinist Louis <unk> to remark : " The epochs of [ Byzantium 's ] dominion are those in which it held control of the sea , and it was when it lost it , that its reverses began . " 
 = History of Sunderland A.F.C. = 
 Sunderland Association Football Club are an English association football club based in Sunderland , Tyne and Wear . They were formed in 1879 , and played several years in the FA Cup and local cup competitions before joining the Football League in the 1890 – 91 season in place of Stoke . They played in the top league in England until the 1957 – 58 , season when they were relegated into the Second Division . Sunderland are England 's sixth most successful club of all time , having won the English League championship six times : in 1892 , 1893 , 1895 , 1902 , 1913 and , most recently , in 1936 . They have also been runners @-@ up on a further five occasions : in 1894 , 1898 , 1901 , 1923 and 1935 ( see Sunderland A.F.C. seasons ) . 
 Sunderland have also won the FA Cup twice , in 1937 against Preston North End and in 1973 against Leeds United . They were finalists in 1913 and 1992 , where they were beaten respectively by Aston Villa and Liverpool . They were finalists in the 1985 Football League Cup Final , but were beaten by Norwich City . Their other honours include two Charity Shields , in 1902 and 1935 . 
 = = Early years and title success : 1879 – 1913 = = 
 Sunderland AFC began life as " Sunderland & District Teachers Association Football Club " , founded in 1879 by James Allan , a teacher at Hendon Board School . His object was to provide " recreational amusement " for the area 's schoolteachers . Their first recorded competitive game was against Ferryhill Athletic on 13 November 1880 , which they lost 1 – 0 . Their first kit was an all blue strip , a contrast to the red and white stripes they play in currently . Their first ground was the Blue House Field in Hendon , close to James Allan 's school , and they would change their home four times in seven years before settling at Newcastle Road in 1886 . 
 In 1881 the club 's name was changed to Sunderland Association Football Club , and non @-@ teachers were allowed to join . They turned professional in 1885 , the same year that the club recruited a number of Scotsmen , their first internationally capped players . Founder James Allan left Sunderland in 1888 because of his dislike for the " professionalism " that had been creeping into the club , and subsequently formed Sunderland Albion . Tom Watson became Sunderland 's first manager when he was appointed in 1888 . On 5 April 1890 , the Football League 's founder , William McGregor , labelled Sunderland as " the team of all talents " stating that they had " a talented man in every position " . 
 Sunderland 's games consisted of local competitions and the FA Cup . Additionally , they participated in friendlies with Football League clubs ; they beat the League champions Preston North End on 28 April 1889 . As their popularity grew , they applied for admission into the Football League . At the League 's annual meeting that considered this application , Sunderland offered to pay towards other clubs ' travelling costs , to compensate for the extra distance these club would need to travel . This offer secured their place in the Football League . They replaced Stoke , one of the original League founding members , who failed to be re @-@ elected . In their second season in the Football League , Sunderland won the title , by five points over Preston North End . This success was repeated in the following season , when Sunderland won their second League title , this time 11 points ahead of their nearest contenders . That season also included an 8 – 1 win over West Bromwich Albion . 
 They came close to winning three successive League championships in the 1893 – 94 season , when they finished as runners @-@ up to Aston Villa . The club shared this period of success with Aston Villa ; the battles between these clubs were the subject of a Thomas Hemy painting of the two clubs during the 1894 – 95 season This is one of the earliest recorded paintings of a competitive Football League match ; entitled A Corner Kick , the painting now stands in the doorway of Sunderland 's current stadium , the Stadium of Light . Sunderland achieved their third League title in four seasons in the 1894 – 95 season , and after their League championship success took part in a game with Heart of Midlothian , the champions of Scotland . The game was played on 27 April 1895 , and was described as the " Championship of the World title match " . Sunderland won the game 5 – 3 and were crowned " Champions of the World " . 
 After taking Sunderland to three English League championship titles manager Watson resigned at the end of the 1895 – 96 season , in order to join Liverpool . Robert Campbell replaced him . From 1886 until 1898 , Sunderland 's home ground was in Newcastle Road . In 1898 , the club moved to what would become their home for almost a century , Roker Park . Initially the ground had a capacity of 30 @,@ 000 . However , over the following decades it was continually expanded , and at its peak would hold an official crowd of over 75 @,@ 000 in a sixth round FA Cup replay against Derby County on 8 March 1933 . Campbell did not achieve the same playing success as former manager Watson , as Sunderland failed to win any titles in his three seasons at the club , which he left in the 1898 – 99 season to join Bristol City . Scotsman Alex Mackie replaced Campbell as manager , and gained success in the 1901 – 02 season when Sunderland won their fourth League title . He followed this up with victory in the Sheriff of London Charity Shield , a competition featuring the best amateur and professional sides in England . Sunderland beat leading amateurs Corinthians 3 – 0 . 
 In 1904 Sunderland were involved in a financial irregularity , when the club 's board of directors gave their right back Andy McCombie £ 100 ( £ 9 @,@ 700 today ) to start a business , with the view that his benefit game would enable him repay the money . McCombie however , saw the money as a gift and refused to pay back the club . The Football Association launched an inquiry and agreed with McCombie , stating that it was a " resigning / win / draw bonus " . The club 's records showed further breaches of the League 's financial rules . As a result , Sunderland were fined £ 250 ( £ 24 @,@ 300 today ) and six directors were suspended for two and a half years . McCombie later signed for Newcastle United , and helped towards their spell of League success . 
 After 214 matches in charge of Sunderland , Mackie left the club as a result of the " McCombie affair " . He was replaced by Irishman Bob Kyle ; another 70 candidates had also applied for the managerial . In 1905 Sunderland were involved in the first £ 1 @,@ 000 ( £ 96 @,@ 800 today ) transfer fee for a player , when Alf Common signed for Middlesbrough . The 1907 – 08 season included Sunderland 's record League win , a 9 – 1 victory against Newcastle United at St James ' Park . 
 Kyle achieved his only League championship in charge of Sunderland in the 1912 – 13 season , when they won the League with 54 points . On 19 April 1913 Sunderland narrowly missed out on becoming one of the few clubs to win the League and cup double , when they were beaten 1 – 0 by Aston Villa in the FA Cup Final at Crystal Palace . This period in their history also saw the goalscoring of Charlie Buchan , who went on to score 221 goals for Sunderland , making him ( as of 2009 ) the second highest goal @-@ scorer in the club 's history , behind Bob Gurney . 
 = = First World War and inter @-@ war period , 1913 – 1939 = = 
 Sunderland finished in eighth place in 1914 – 15 Division One season , before World War I forced the break @-@ up of the team as men went off to fight on the continent . Charlie Buchan and Bob Young each went on to win the Military Medal . After the resumption of the Football League following the war , Sunderland finished fifth in the 1919 – 20 season . 
 To consolidate themselves in the First Division , Sunderland made several large money signings , including a world record fee of £ 5 @,@ 500 ( £ 271 @,@ 000 today ) for the signing of <unk> Cresswell from South Shields . In the 1922 – 23 season they came close to another League championship title , finishing runners @-@ up to Liverpool by six points with Buchan breaking the 30 goal mark . In the 1923 – 24 season Sunderland were involved in a dispute with the English and Scottish national teams . Buchan and William <unk> had been called up by England and Scotland respectively . Sunderland were two points clear at the top of the table , but without Buchan and <unk> they travelled to Arsenal and were beaten 2 – 0 , a defeat which helped cost them the title race for that season . 
 In April 1925 , Sunderland completed the signing of centre forward Dave Halliday , after Buchan left for Arsenal . In his second season Halliday scored 38 goals , helping Sunderland secure a third @-@ place finish in the League . In the 1928 – 29 season Halliday scored 43 goals , a club record for the most individual goals in a season . Kyle , who had been Sunderland 's manager since 1905 , resigned at the end of the 1928 – 29 season , after 25 seasons in charge of the club , managing 817 matches and taking Sunderland to the verge of a League and cup double . He was replaced by Johnny Cochrane , who arrived from St Mirren . With Cochrane in charge , Sunderland reached the 1930 – 31 FA Cup semi @-@ final , where they lost to Birmingham City . Sunderland 's next success came in the 1934 – 35 season when they finished as runners @-@ up to Arsenal . The following season Sunderland managed to win their sixth League title , by a margin of eight points . They scored 109 goals during the season , with Raich Carter and Bobby Gurney each scoring 31 . 
 The League championship led to Sunderland playing in the Charity Shield against FA Cup @-@ winners Arsenal . Sunderland won the shield after goals from Eddie <unk> and Raich Carter . Their success continued in the 1936 – 37 season , when they achieved their first FA Cup win . They beat Preston North End 3 – 1 in the final as Bobby Gurney , Raich Carter , and Eddie <unk> all scored goals at Wembley Stadium . Sunderland competed in the Charity Shield for a second successive season , this time against Manchester City who had won the League title in 1936 – 37 ; Sunderland were beaten 2 – 0 . Their FA Cup success looked set to continue in the 1937 – 38 season , when they reached the semi @-@ finals , but they were beaten 3 – 1 by Huddersfield Town , to end their chances . Cochrane announced his retirement from management in 1939 , after he had been in charge of Sunderland for 11 seasons , taking them to a League title , and an FA Cup win . 
 = = Second World War and postwar period , 1939 – 1959 = = 
 Bill Murray was appointed Sunderland 's manager in 1939 . On the outbreak of war the League competition was suspended shortly after the start of the 1939 – 40 season , halting the new manager 's progress . The FA Cup was also suspended , but a replacement tournament , the Football League War Cup , was introduced . Sunderland took part in the two @-@ legged War Cup final in the 1941 – 42 season , against Wolverhampton Wanderers . The first leg was drawn 2 – 2 at Roker Park , but Wolves won the return leg at Molineux 4 – 1 to win the trophy . During the war Roker Park suffered damage from bombs which destroyed the Roker End clubhouse ; a police constable was killed while patrolling the stadium 's perimeter . In the 1945 – 46 season , after the end of the war while the League was still suspended , the FA Cup resumed . Sunderland reached the fifth round where they were beaten by Birmingham City . The League resumed the following season , Sunderland finishing in ninth place . In the 1947 – 48 season the club finished in twentieth place , on the brink of being <unk> from the League 's Division one for the first time . 
 In January 1949 , Sunderland were involved in what is often regarded as the first case of a player transferring himself when they paid £ 18 @,@ 000 ( £ 574 @,@ 000 today ) for Carlisle United player @-@ manager Ivor Broadis , who handled transfer negotiations himself . In the 1948 – 49 season , Sunderland visited Yeovil Town in the fourth round of the FA Cup . Yeovil were a non @-@ League club at the time , but beat Division One side Sunderland 2 – 1 to knock them out of the Cup . However , Sunderland 's next season was more successful ; they finished third in the League , and were its top scorers with 83 goals . They also had the League 's top goalscorer , Dickie Davis with 25 goals . In the 1950 – 51 season , Sunderland paid a world record transfer fee when signing Welsh striker Trevor Ford from Aston Villa , for £ 30 @,@ 000 ( £ 930 @,@ 000 today ) , during a time when Sunderland were known as the " Bank of England club " because of their large money signings . 
 Sunderland made significant progress in the FA Cup for the first time since the resumption of football after the war when the reached the competition 's semi @-@ final in the 1954 – 55 season . They played Manchester City at Wembley Stadium , but were beaten 1 – 0 , ending their chances of playing against Newcastle United in the final . 
 In January 1957 , a letter was delivered to The Football Association ( FA ) from " Mr Smith " , in which the author made allegations that Sunderland were making illegal payments to players . The FA sent an investigation team , which found evidence of illegal payments in the Sunderland accounts , including a £ 3 @,@ 000 ( £ 65 @,@ 000 today ) bill , supposedly for straw to cover the pitch . The investigators uncovered a string of similar accounting glitches ; contract companies were purposely charging Sunderland excessive fees for services , and later sending credit @-@ notes to redress the balance . These credit notes were passed on to players . In total , just over £ 5 @,@ 000 ( £ 109 @,@ 000 today ) was handled in this way . The club 's chairman and chief financial officer , along with three other club directors , were permanently suspended . Sunderland were fined £ 5 @,@ 000 ( £ 109 @,@ 000 today ) , manager Murray was fined £ 200 ( £ 4 @,@ 300 today ) , and a number of players , including record @-@ signing Trevor Ford were temporarily suspended € from the game . In the aftermath of the event , manager Bill Murray was replaced by Alan Brown . 
 In 1958 , with Brown in charge , Sunderland were relegated from Division One for the first time in their history , bringing their 68 @-@ year stay in England 's top division to an end . Going into the final game of the season , they still had a chance of avoiding relegation , if they could win their game against Portsmouth and if Leicester City could be held by Birmingham City . Sunderland won their game 2 – 0 , but Birmingham could not prevent Leicester from winning , thus Sunderland were relegated . 
 = = FA Cup glory and Europe : 1959 – 1979 = = 
 After Sunderland 's first relegation from Division One in the 1957 – 58 season , the club at first languished in the lower half of Division Two , finishing the 1959 – 60 season in sixteenth place . Two finishes in third place followed in the 1961 – 62 and 1962 – 63 seasons , Sunderland in each case missing out on promotion by just one position . The 1961 – 62 season also saw the retirement of Brian Clough due to injury , after he had scored 63 goals in 74 games for the club . After six years in Division Two , Sunderland were promoted back to the First Division at the end of the 1963 – 64 season . 
 In 1964 Brown left his managerial post at Sunderland on appointment as manager of Sheffield Wednesday . After Sunderland had played through three months of the 1964 – 65 season without a manager , George Hardwick took over on a caretaker basis , until Ian McColl was appointed on a permanent basis at the end of the season . Brown returned for a second spell at Sunderland in 1968 . After their promotion Sunderland failed to make an impact in Division One , never finishing higher than fifteenth in six years , after which they were relegated for the second time . Billy Elliott , a former Sunderland player , took over after Brown 's second departure , but managed the team for only four matches before former Newcastle United player Bob Stokoe was appointed as permanent manager . 
 An intriguing interlude came about in 1967 , when Sunderland spent a summer in North America playing in the United Soccer Association , a league which imported various international clubs . Sunderland worked in North America under the name Vancouver Royal Canadians , finishing fifth in the league 's Western Division . 
 In 1973 , as a Second Division side , Sunderland reached the FA Cup Final , where they beat the cup @-@ holders Leeds United . A first half goal by Scotsman Ian Porterfield was the only goal of the game . Jimmy Montgomery produced a double save , first from a Trevor Cherry header , and then from a shot by Peter Lorimer , to prevent Leeds from scoring . At the end of the game Sunderland manager Stokoe ran onto the pitch to embrace his goalkeeper , a gesture perpetuated by the statue currently standing outside the Stadium of Light . Only two other clubs , Southampton in 1976 , and West Ham United in 1980 , have since equalled Sunderland 's achievement of lifting the FA Cup while playing outside the top tier of English football . 
 The FA Cup win in 1973 meant that Sunderland , for the first time in their history , had qualified for a European competition , in this case the UEFA Cup Winners ' Cup . They were first drawn against Hungarian side Vasas Budapest , who they beat 3 – 0 on aggregate . In the next round Sunderland were drawn against Sporting Lisbon . They won the first leg 2 – 1 at Roker Park , but in the return leg in Lisbon they were beaten 2 – 0 , and were thus knocked out of the competition in the second round . 
 In 1976 Sunderland were again promoted to the First Division , as Division Two champions . Stokoe became ill during the 1976 – 77 season ; he stepped down from the job , and was replaced temporarily by caretaker manager Ian MacFarlane . McFarlane 's stay was short , and he was replaced by Jimmy Adamson in 1976 . After promotion in the previous season , Sunderland were relegated back to the Second Division . Adamson managed them for just two seasons before resigning to move to Leeds United . In a flurry of many managers in a short time period , David <unk> took over as caretaker manager . Billy Elliot then joined Sunderland as manager for a second time , replacing <unk> until the end of the season . 
 = = Two cup finals : 1979 – 1997 = = 
 Sunderland celebrated their centenary in the 1979 – 80 season with a testimonial match . They played an " England XI " , featuring players from Newcastle United and from Middlesbrough ; they lost the game 2 – 0 . In 1979 , after Elliot ended his spell , Ken Knighton took the vacant manager 's position . Knighton managed Sunderland for 94 games , leading them in his first season to second place in Division Two , and promotion to the First Division , However , he was sacked the following season , when Sunderland were struggling near the bottom of Division One . Mick Docherty was brought in as caretaker manager until the end of the 1980 – 81 season , and helped them avoid relegation . 
 The activity in the Sunderland manager 's seat continued , with Alan Durban 's appointment in 1981 . He lasted two years , before being sacked in the 1983 – 84 season after a defeat by Manchester United . Former player Pop Robson was brought in for a single game , before Len Ashurst 's appointment as regular manager . In the 1984 – 85 season Ashurst led Sunderland to their first League Cup final , where they lost 1 – 0 to Norwich through an own goal from Gordon Chisholm , after Clive Walker had missed a penalty for Sunderland . At the end of the season Sunderland were relegated back to the Second Division , and Ashurst was sacked . 
 Lawrie McMenemy was brought in as manager in 1985 , but Sunderland reached the lowest point in their history in 1987 , when they suffered relegation to the Third Division after losing a two @-@ leg play @-@ off to Gillingham . The return of 1973 FA Cup winning manager Bob Stokoe , appointed caretaker manager following the sacking of McMenemy , could not help Sunderland avoid relegation . It was the first time in their history that they had fallen into the Third Division . However , under new manager Denis Smith , promotion was gained at the first attempt ; Sunderland returned to the Second Division as Third Division champions in 1988 . 
 Two years later , Sunderland reached the Second Division play @-@ off final , after beating Newcastle United in the semi @-@ final . During the second leg of the semi @-@ final at St. James ' Park , some Newcastle fans , seeing their team down 2 – 0 with only five minutes remaining , invaded the pitch in the hope of forcing an abandonment . However , the game was resumed and Sunderland completed the win . In the play @-@ off final , Sunderland lost 1 – 0 against Swindon Town at Wembley . However Sunderland were promoted a few weeks later in place of Swindon , who were kept in the Second Division after admitting financial irregularities . 
 After just one season in the First Division , Sunderland were relegated again . They subsequently struggled in Division Two , in 1991 – 92 . However , in that season Sunderland embarked on a run leading to the FA Cup final , where they lost 2 – 0 to Liverpool , They had previously beaten Chelsea in a quarter @-@ final replay . Smith had quit as manager during the season , and was replaced by his assistant Malcolm Crosby . He in turn resigned after less than a year , and was replaced by the ex @-@ England player Terry Butcher . 
 Before the end of 1993 , Butcher 's reign as manager came to an end after 45 games in charge , and he was replaced by Mick Buxton . In a period which included six managers in ten years , Buxton was sacked in 1995 . Sunderland 's board turned to Peter Reid as temporary manager , in the hopes of keeping Sunderland clear of relegation . That objective was achieved within weeks , and Reid was rewarded with a permanent contract . Reid 's first full season as Sunderland manager , 1995 – 96 , was successful ; the club won the Division One title and gained promotion to the Premier League for the first time since the League restructuring which had taken effect in 1992 – 93 . In the 1996 – 97 season , despite beating Manchester United , Arsenal and Chelsea they were relegated . 
 = = Recent times : 1997 – present = = 
 In the 1996 – 97 season Sunderland relocated to the 42 @,@ 000 @-@ seat Stadium of Light at Monkwearmouth , after 99 years at Roker Park . The stadium 's capacity was later expanded to 49 @,@ 000 seats , making it the fourth largest club stadium in England . In recognition of the historical importance of the mining industry in the club 's main area of support , a Davy Lamp currently stands outside the stadium . 
 In their first full season at the new ground , 1997 – 98 , Sunderland finished third in Division One . After beating Sheffield United in the Football League play @-@ offs semi @-@ final , they reached the final at Wembley with a place in the Premier League at stake . Over 40 @,@ 000 fans travelled from the North @-@ East to see the game against Charlton Athletic . The match was drawn 4 – 4 after extra time had been played ; Charlton , however , won the game on a penalty shootout , after Michael Gray had his penalty saved by Charlton goalkeeper Saša Ilić . 
 In the 1998 – 99 season Sunderland secured their Premier League place by winning the Division One title with a then record 105 League points . They clinched promotion at Bury by winning 5 – 2 . Kevin Phillips won the European Golden Shoe in his first top @-@ flight season with Sunderland , scoring 30 goals . 
 Sunderland 's 1999 – 2000 season started at Stamford Bridge , where Chelsea beat them 4 – 0 . However , in the return match later in the season Sunderland turned the tables on Chelsea , avenging their 4 – 0 defeat with a 4 – 1 win at the Stadium of Light . Sunderland also achieved a 2 – 1 victory over rivals Newcastle United at St. James ' Park , a result which helped bring about the resignation of Newcastle 's manager , Ruud Gullit . At the end of the season Sunderland finished seventh , a position they also achieved in 2000 – 01 . In each of these seasons they narrowly missed a place in European competition . 
 In 2001 – 02 Sunderland narrowly avoided relegation . They were the lowest scoring team in the Premier League , with 29 goals , ending the season in seventeenth place and being knocked out of both English Cup competitions in their first rounds . In 2002 – 03 they finished at bottom of the Premier League , with 4 wins , 21 goals , and 19 points , an English Premiership record low at that time . Reid had been sacked as manager in October and been replaced by Howard Wilkinson , with Steve Cotterill as his assistant . Wilkinson 's reign was unsuccessful , and he left the club after only six months in charge . Former Republic of Ireland manager Mick McCarthy came to the club in March 2003 , but could not prevent relegation . 
 In the 2003 – 04 season Sunderland finished third in Division One , and only a penalty shoot @-@ out defeat at the hands of Crystal Palace prevented them from reaching the play @-@ off final for a promotion place . In the 2004 – 05 season , Sunderland finished at the top of the table in Division One , now rechristened the Football League Championship , and thus returned to the Premier League . The 2005 – 06 season was poor for Sunderland , as they failed to win a home game before Christmas and were eventually relegated with a new record lowest points tally of 15 , breaking their own previous record of 19 . McCarthy was sacked in March and replaced by caretaker manager Kevin Ball . He took Sunderland to their first home win of the season , a 2 – 1 victory over Fulham . 
 On 6 August 2007 , Sunderland celebrated 10 years at the Stadium of Light with a draw against Juventus , and prepared for the oncoming season by spending nearly £ 40 million on new players for the squad , whilst also breaking the British transfer record for a goalkeeper with the £ 9 million transfer of Craig Gordon . Sunderland 's season took off with a victory at home against Tottenham , as Michael Chopra scored in the last minute . After a derby victory over Middlesbrough , and with teams below failing to win , Sunderland secured their Premier League status for the 2008 – 09 season . On 25 October 2008 , Sunderland defeated rivals Newcastle United 2 – 1 at the Stadium of Light , their first home win over them since 1980 , and the first time they had ever defeated them at that ground. on 4 December 2008 , Keane left Sunderland after a run of defeats in the Premier League . First @-@ team coach Ricky Sbragia took over as caretaker manager , and on 27 December 2008 Sbragia took the job on a permanent basis , signing an 18 @-@ month contract . Despite promising early results , the team continued to struggle and narrowly avoided relegation from the Premiership on the last day of the season , after which Sbragia resigned from his post . 
 Irish @-@ American tycoon Ellis Short completed a full takeover of the club from the Irish Drumaville Consortium , and Steve Bruce was announced as the new manager on 3 June . One of his first signings , Darren Bent , cost a club record fee of £ 10 million . Sunderland started their first season under Bruce strongly , including victories against Arsenal and Liverpool , but then went 14 matches without a win over the winter , eventually finishing the 2009 – 10 season 13th . Sunderland completed the signing of Ghana international Asamoah Gyan in August 2010 for a fee around £ 13 million , becoming their new record transfer fee . Sunderland started the next season strongly , this time with a seven match unbeaten run against teams including Manchester City , Liverpool , Arsenal and Manchester United . However , the run was ended with a 5 – 1 defeat to local rivals Newcastle United on 31 October 2010 . Sunderland bounced back with another good run , the highlight being a 3 – 0 victory against Chelsea at Stamford Bridge . This run left Sunderland challenging for a European qualification place by the end of 2010 . However , striker Darren Bent left Sunderland for Aston Villa in January 2011 in a deal potentially worth £ 24 million ( a record transfer fee received for the club ) . Following Bent 's departure Sunderland suffered a mid @-@ season slump and finished 10th — their highest top @-@ flight finish for 10 years . 
 On 24 August 2012 , Sunderland announced the signing of Steven Fletcher from Wolverhampton Wanderers for a fee of £ 14 million and England international winger Adam Johnson from Manchester City . Despite this , Sunderland endured a difficult start to the season , with their first victory not coming until late September against Wigan . Despite the £ 5 million signing of Danny Graham in January , Sunderland suffered a further slump , taking just 3 points from eight games , and with the threat of relegation looming , O 'Neill was sacked on March 30 , following a 1 @-@ 0 home defeat by Manchester United . Paolo Di Canio was announced has his replacement the following day , bringing his own backroom staff . The appointment prompted the immediate resignation of club Vice Chairman David Miliband due to Di Canio 's " past political statements " . The appointment of Di Canio also sparked opposition from the Durham Miners ' Association , which threatened to remove one of its mining banners from Sunderland 's Stadium of Light , which is built on the former site of the Wearmouth Colliery , as a symbol of its anger over the appointment . The background to the opposition was past statements made by Di Canio supporting Fascism . 
 = Gulfton , Houston = 
 Gulfton is a community in Southwest Houston , Texas , United States that includes a 3 @.@ 2 sq mi ( 8 @.@ 3 km2 ) group of apartment complexes that primarily house Hispanic and immigrant populations . It is located between the 610 Loop and Beltway 8 , west of the City of Bellaire , southeast of Interstate 69 / U.S. Highway 59 , and north of Bellaire Boulevard . 
 In the 1960s and 1970s Gulfton experienced rapid development , with new apartment complexes built for young individuals from the Northeast and Midwest United States . They came to work in the oil industry during the 1970s oil boom . 
 In the 1980s , as the economy declined , existing tenants left , resulting in significant drop in occupancy rates in the apartment complexes and forcing many complexes into bankruptcy and foreclosure . Owners marketed the empty units to newly arrived immigrants and Gulfton became a predominantly immigrant community . Beginning in the 1980s Gulfton 's crime rate increased and schools were increasingly overwhelmed with excess students . " Houstonians " ( Houston citizens ) nicknamed the community the " Gulfton Ghetto . " The city of Houston responded to the sudden demographic shifts by increasing police presence , and the school district responded by opening more schools to handle the influx of students . After the 1980s demographic and socioeconomic transitions , Gulfton gained a community college campus , two additional elementary schools , added public bus routes , a park , a community center , a public library , and a juvenile detention facility . 
 By 2000 Gulfton was the most densely populated community in Houston , with 71 percent Hispanic residents , including many recent immigrants from Mexico and Central America . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = 1950s to 1979 = = = 
 Before 1950 , Gulfton consisted of farm land and much of the area belonged to Westmoreland Farms . In the mid @-@ 1950s , the Shenandoah subdivision was established ; consisting of sixteen city blocks of ranch @-@ style homes . Shenandoah was located adjacent to the land which would later become the site of the Gulfton apartment complexes . Decades later these communities would clash as the apartments surrounding Shenandoah deteriorated and property values became threatened . 
 Due to the large parcels of land available and the grid road pattern , Gulfton was well @-@ suited for the construction of large apartment complexes . In the 1960s , a number of large apartment buildings were built . More complexes were added during the 1970s as Houston prospered from the oil boom . These apartments catered to young , predominantly Caucasian workers from the Rust Belt regions of the Northeastern and Midwestern United States employed in the burgeoning oil industry . Americans came from the South , the Midwest , New York , and California to live in the area of complexes . The complexes also housed some individuals from western and eastern Europe , Iran , Japan , Jordan , Lebanon , Saudi Arabia , Mexico , South America , and Vietnam . Few native Houstonians lived in the housing complexes . The apartments were given names meant to be fancy , such as " Napoleon Square " and " Chateau Carmel . " Some complexes gave free videocassette recorders to renters who signed leases for one year . 
 According to Jim Gaines , director of the Jesse H. Jones Center for Economic and Demographic Forecasting at Rice Center , a Rice University @-@ affiliated urban research center , the development of these apartment complexes was not well planned or coordinated . There was often little interest in building a quality product as developers were primarily concerned with generating quick revenue and capitalizing on the deregulation of financial institutions , tax laws favoring apartment construction , inflation , and a housing shortage in the Houston metropolitan area . 
 = = = 1980 @-@ 1992 = = = 
 In the mid @-@ 1980s the Houston @-@ area oil industry economy declined and more than 200 @,@ 000 jobs were lost from the local economy . Thousands of renters left causing a rise in apartment vacancies . Many apartment complexes throughout the Houston area experienced bankruptcy , foreclosure , and frequent turnover in ownership . Colonial House Apartments , which became known throughout the Houston area from advertisements featuring California promoter Michael Pollack , is an example as they faced foreclosure . DRG Funding , a mortgage lender headquartered in Washington , DC , took over the complex . On September 16 , 1988 the Government National Mortgage Association took over Colonial House Apartments and other properties of DRG , after DRG fell behind on its mortgage . On Wednesday May 11 , 1989 the Colonial House Apartments were auctioned off to an out @-@ of @-@ state investment group for USD $ 8 @.@ 9 million ( $ 17 million in today 's money ) and the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development realized a $ 42 million ( $ 80 @.@ 2 million in today 's money ) loss . The following year Colonial House was renamed " Lantern Village . " 
 Marketing to an influx of immigrant workers , owners abandoned " adult only " policies ( prohibiting children ) , listed vacancies in Spanish , and reduced rents . Despite the rent reduction , a July 17 , 1988 Houston Chronicle article stated that rates for poorly maintained apartments in Gulfton and other Houston areas were comparable to well @-@ maintained apartments in other parts of the city . According to Gaines , complexes in Gulfton began to cater to illegal immigrants and landlords allowed renters to " double @-@ up " housing ( several individuals and / or families living in a unit ) . John Goodner , a Houston city council member who represented a district that included Gulfton at that time , said that more demographic changes occurred within his district in the years leading up to 1988 than in any other part of the city . He was referring to the shift in the demographics of various apartment complexes . Goodner said that the complex owners were unconcerned about this development as long as the rent payments were made . Landlords had difficulty filling apartment complexes even if they did not require background checks . Many banks and lending institutions owned foreclosed apartments and failed to properly maintain them , considering it " pouring money down a perceived rat hole . " Gaines added that many complexes deferred maintenance . 
 Many of the new Gulfton residents found limited access to government services such as food stamps and municipal and county health care . By July 1989 , the Gulfton area was designated by Houston 's city council as a " Community Development Target . " These provided low income communities with increased city services supplemented with federal funding . This drew a response from the Houston Resident Citizens Participation Council ( <unk> ) , a citizen commission that monitored funding for low income residents . Board members formally protested city council against diverting support funds from the " old poor " in existing low income areas to the " new poor " in newly created communities . The <unk> members argued that the original " Community Development Targets " were not fully served prior to the service areas expanding and budgets shrinking . The council had no authority to force any changes in public policy . Rose Mary Garza , then the principal of Cunningham Elementary School , stated that some government officials were reluctant to expand services to Gulfton as they believed the low income apartments would be bulldozed . During his time city council member Goodner lobbied for a satellite health department clinic for apartment renters . 
 Robert Fisher , professor and chair of Political Social Work at the Graduate School of Social Work at the University of Houston , and Lisa Taaffe , a project manager for Houston 's " Communities in Schools , " stated in " Public Life in Gulfton : Multiple Publics and Models of Organization , " a 1997 article , that the development and decline of Gulfton originated from a , " purely short term , relatively spontaneous speculative process . " They state that the process focused on building apartment complexes , clubs , and warehouses for short @-@ term profit without providing supporting infrastructure such as parks , libraries , recreation centers , small blocks , and sidewalks . 
 In 1985 , recent Salvadoran immigrants opened the Central American Refugee Center ( CARECEN ) to provide legal services for central American immigrants . Between 1988 and 1992 CARECEN cooperated with the Central American Refugee Committee ( <unk> ) to publicize and advocate issues related to the Salvadoran Civil War and the immigration of Salvadorans to the United States . In 1988 , various religious representatives created the Gulfton Area Religious Council ( GARC ) open for any Christian church to join . GARC advocated assistance for Gulfton residents and established focused programs . Taafe and Fisher suggest that GARC focused on relieving the symptoms of poverty instead of removing its causes . Representative Goodner , described as " conservative " by Fisher and Taafe , organized a March 3 , 1989 , town hall meeting which sparked the creation of an organization called the Gulfton Area Action Council ( GAAC ) . The GAAC was made up of business owners who advocated the reduction of recreational drug use , local crime , and the improvement of the neighborhood , in an effort to restore property values . 
 In the late 1980s , the Southwest Houston Task Force was established as a coalition of representatives from the City of Houston government , health and human services organizations , businesses , schools , religious organizations , and Gulfton @-@ area residents . The Task Force held two meetings related to the proposal for the establishment of a municipal health clinic in Gulfton . The organization 's meetings led to the opening in 1991 of the Sisters of Charity Southwest Health Clinic , the Gulfton area 's first major health clinic . Jointly operated by the GAAC and the City of Houston , the clinic provided pre @-@ natal and child care services . Fisher and Taafe state that the organization " lost its focal issue " after the clinic opened . After performing a " community needs assessment " and identifying " local leaders " , the organization disbanded in early 1992 . During the same year the Salvadoran Civil War ended but CARECEN continued to provide legal services , publications , and advocacy for Central American immigrants . They also began campaigning the federal government to provide permanent legal residency to the Salvadoran refugees . 
 = = = 1992 @-@ 2009 = = = 
 In August 1992 , Mike McMahon of the GAAC and Francisco Lopez of CARECEN founded the Gulfton Area Neighborhood Organization ( GANO ) . In 1995 , CARECEN merged with GANO as both organizations had board members and goals in common . Fisher and Taafe said in the 1997 article Public Life in Gulfton : Multiple Publics and Models of Organization that the merger into GANO made cooperation between the members of the combined " progressive " GANO and Shenandoah Civic Association with the more " conservative " GAAC unlikely . By 1993 , Gulfton received 500 new street lights , paved streets , and new sidewalks as part of the City of Houston 's " Neighborhoods to Standard " program . 
 In 1997 , Gulfton received a federal designation as a National Weed & Seed site from <unk> and <unk> designation which provided the community with close to $ 7 million dollars in grant funding that would target criminal activity while providing social services for at @-@ risk youth and families in the <unk> zip code . <unk> <unk> , Gulfton Weed & Seed Coordinator , established the Gulfton Community Learning Center , Campo del Sol Summer Day Camp Program , the Campo del Sol After School Program and the Gulfton Education Center , in strategically located areas of Gulfton in an attempt to provide ESL classes , Citizenship classes , gang intervention , apartment outreach / community policing efforts and Computer classes @-@ all free of charge , to any resident interested in attending . From 1999 @-@ 2004 , the Gulfton Community Learning Center and the Gulfton Education Center provided free computer classes to over 800 community residents . From 1998 @-@ 2004 , more than 3 @,@ 000 children between the ages of 6 @-@ 18 attended the free summer day camp offered at Burnett Bayland Park . The Campo del Sol After School program provided teens from Jane Long Middle School after school enrichment programming and <unk> tutorials from 3 : 00 p.m. to 6 : 00 p.m. Many of the collaborative efforts were noted by the Houston Chronicle , Telemundo , PBS , La Voz and smaller newspapers from the area . 
 On July 11 , 1998 , Houston Police Department officers acting on a tip regarding drug related activities entered a Gulfton apartment complex and shot and killed Pedro Oregon Navarro . The circumstances of the event were disputed . By October 19 of that year a Harris County grand jury cleared the officers of charges related to the incident . Nestor Rodriguez , a professor of sociology at the University of Houston , described Gulfton as " a place where people are just struggling to get by . " Consequently , there were fewer " displays of outrage " than would have been expected if the incident had occurred in one of the " older , well @-@ established Latino communities . " Oregon 's killing was controversial because illicit drugs were not found on the property . Oregon 's family sued the City of Houston arguing that the raid was inappropriate . The city countered that its officers acted in an appropriate manner . A federal judge dismissed the lawsuit in 2000 . 
 Beatrice Marquez , a Houston Independent School District ( HISD ) parent involvement specialist for the Gulfton area , stated in a 2004 Education Week article that members of the Central American communities specifically identify themselves with Gulfton rather than Houston . 
 = = Geography = = 
 Gulfton is located in Southwest Houston outside the 610 Loop . Gulfton is about 10 mi ( 16 @.@ 1 km ) southwest of Downtown Houston and approximately 2 mi ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) west of Bellaire . Susan Rogers of the Rice Design Alliance describes Gulfton is an example of an " inner ring " area of Greater Houston which is located between downtown and the suburbs . Rogers states that the " outwardly conventional landscapes " of " inner ring " areas are " neither urban nor suburban , but a conglomeration of both , a hybrid condition mixed from one part global city , one part garden suburb , and one part disinvestment . " 
 Gulfton includes about 90 apartment complexes with more than 15 @,@ 000 units . Lori Rodriguez of the Houston Chronicle said that Gulfton , " with its rows of down @-@ at @-@ the @-@ heels apartments that still bear jaunty names from their swinging @-@ singles days , makes an incongruous gateway for the newest waves of immigrants and their many children . " Roberto <unk> of The Washington Post described Gulfton as a " tightly packed warren . " Some of the apartment complexes are over one block long . In the 1970s one of the apartment complexes contained seventeen swimming pools , seventeen hot tubs , seventeen laundry rooms , and two club houses . Gulfton also contains strip malls and office blocks . The complexes generally contain features catering to single adults and lack features appreciated by families , due to the initial market targeted in the 1970s . As of 2005 , Gulfton has more than one hundred semi @-@ private swimming pools but many of them have been filled in and are no longer usable . Some apartments in Gulfton have businesses located in ground floor units . Several area tract houses are occupied by beauty salons , small stores , and tire repair shops . Rogers contends that the mixed @-@ use adaptation , " has occurred spontaneously from the bottom up , indicative of the entrepreneurial spirit of residents and their need to adapt existing space for new uses . " A 2000s City of Houston report on Study Area 8 , which includes Gulfton and surrounding areas , states that Gulfton 's " large apartment complexes dominate the area 's landscape . " John Nova Lomax of the Houston Press described Gulfton as " uglier " than a group of apartment complexes along Broadway Street in eastern Houston . 
 The size of the city blocks in Gulfton differs significantly from that of Downtown Houston in that sixteen downtown city blocks will fit into one Gulfton block . Few sidewalks exist in Gulfton . In 1999 Houston City Council District F representative Ray <unk> said " [ Gulfton residents ] don 't have sidewalks , let alone sidewalks that are only two and a half feet wide . There are pregnant women walking down the sides of the roads . " In 2005 the Houston @-@ Galveston Area Council identified Gulfton as one of the most hazardous communities for pedestrians . 
 One complex , Napoleon Square , was built in 1971 for $ 22 million ; the 1 @,@ 884 unit complex , owned by real estate figure Harold Farb , included a $ 400 @,@ 000 disco and many swimming pools . In 1977 it had a main swimming pool , twelve other swimming pools , and a club called " Bonaparte 's Retreat . " Within a 1 @-@ mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) radius of the main entrance to Napoleon Square , 5 @,@ 000 apartment units in at least twelve apartment facilities , about forty swimming pools , about or more than twenty @-@ four bars and nightclubs , and about twelve tennis courts . A subsidiary of Western Capital purchased the complex in March 1985 . As of 1999 , about 1 @,@ 500 families reside in the complex , and most of them originated from Mexico , Central America , and South America . As of 2003 many families at Napoleon Square came from Mexico , Honduras , other Central American countries , and South America . The Napoleon Square and Lantern Village complexes have a combined total of over 1 @,@ 000 units and , as of 2000 , several thousand inhabitants . 
 = = Demographics = = 
 Between 1980 and 2000 the population of Gulfton increased by almost 100 % without significant additional residences built . Between the 1990 U.S. Census and the 2000 Census , the counted Hispanic population in Gulfton increased from 18 @,@ 422 to 33 @,@ 424 , an 81 % increase , and the non @-@ Hispanic White population decreased from 6 @,@ 371 to 4 @,@ 908 , a 23 % loss . Occupancy rates at many apartment complexes increased ; for instance , Napoleon Square 's rate increased from 60 % around 1996 to over 95 % in 2001 . Mike McMahon , the co @-@ founder of the Gulfton Area Neighborhood Organization ( GANO ) , said that increased census worker efforts to ensure a more accurate population count may have also contributed to the increase . 
 By 2005 , 60 % of Gulfton residents were not native born and represented citizenship from forty two countries . Many residents were illegal immigrants . More than 20 % of the households did not own cars . Starting in the mid @-@ 1980s , the Gulfton population experienced increases in female and children populations . Peg Purser , an urban planner who directed a 1991 University of Houston Center for Public Policy study commissioned by the Houston Chronicle , identified that the Hispanic population growth in the Gulfton area was almost entirely from Central American countries . According to the study , between the 1980 and 1990 U.S. Censuses , Hispanic population density increased by 3 @,@ 500 persons per square mile . Between 1990 and 2000 , the population of the area within the Gulfton Super Neighborhood increased by 13 @,@ 347 , from 33 @,@ 022 residents to 46 @,@ 369 residents or 40 % . 
 The 2000 census identifies Gulfton as a " hard to enumerate " tract with the densest neighborhood in the City of Houston , estimated at 45 @,@ 000 people in approximately 3 square miles ( 7 @.@ 8 km2 ) . Some community leaders believed that the actual population was closer to 70 @,@ 000 . In a 2006 National Center for School Engagement report , Susana Herrera , the program coordinator for Houston 's Truancy Reduction Demonstration Project , indicated that social service agencies and government officials estimated Gulfton 's population to be 60 @,@ 000 , with 20 @,@ 000 juveniles . Under @-@ representation in the census was likely as many of the area 's immigrants , especially those residing in the country illegally , may have been distrustful of the government 's attempt to obtain personal information . Jaime de la Isla , the assistant superintendent of the Houston Independent School District , said in 2000 that it was possible that the district lost significant amounts of money because residents of Gulfton were not counted in the 1990 United States Census , and that the district receives federal funds for bilingual programs , free and reduced lunch , and special education based on numbers in the U.S. census . Steve Murdock , a demographer for the state of Texas , said that " [ t ] he major problem in an undercount is not an immigration issue . It 's always difficult to count any population that is highly mobile , poor and living in a diversity of households . " 
 As of 2003 , 31 % of residents in Gulfton had an annual income of less than $ 15 @,@ 000 ( $ <unk> @.@ 41 in today 's money ) . By January 30 , 2007 , some 45 % of the families included small children . By that same date , many Gulfton families earned less than $ 25 @,@ 000 U.S. dollars ( $ <unk> @.@ 73 in today 's money ) per year and were dependent on public assistance . By 2006 , the median family income in Gulfton was $ 18 @,@ 733 ( $ <unk> @.@ 17 in today 's money ) or 30 % less than the city of Houston 's median income level . 
 By 2000 , many Gulfton residents had recently immigrated from Mexico or other Latin American countries . In 2000 , Houston 's Gulfton Super Neighborhood # 27 , which includes Gulfton and various surrounding subdivisions , reported a population of 46 @,@ 369 people , of whom 34 @,@ 410 ( 74 % ) were Hispanic , 5 @,@ 029 were white , 4 @,@ 047 were black , 2 @,@ 081 were Asian , 61 were Native American , 13 were Native Hawaiian , and 97 were of other races and were not Hispanic . 631 were of two or more races . As of 2010 , Gulfton has citizens of 82 countries , and 16 languages are spoken in the community . Gulfton had a density of 16 @,@ 000 people per square mile , while as a whole the area within the 610 Loop has a density of 3 @,@ 800 people per square mile . 
 Of the 32 @,@ 298 reported residents older than 18 , 22 @,@ 941 ( 71 % ) were Hispanic , 4 @,@ 064 were non @-@ Hispanic white , 2 @,@ 980 were black , 1 @,@ 715 were Asian , 38 were Native American , 10 were Native Hawaiian , and 65 were of other races and were not Hispanic . 485 were of two or more races . 
 The super neighborhood contained 17 @,@ 467 housing units , with 15 @,@ 659 occupied units , 14 @,@ 865 rental units , and 794 owner units . Super Neighborhood # 27 had 9 @,@ 930 families with 36 @,@ 019 individuals counted in the census . The super neighborhood 's average family size was 3 @.@ 63 , compared with a city average of 3 @.@ 39 . 
 The St. Luke 's Episcopal Health Charities 2007 Community Health Report on Gulfton , which includes some areas north of Gulfton , notes the U.S. Census reported the area to have 60 @,@ 637 people in 2000 . Since 1990 , that area 's population has increased by 16 @,@ 000 people ( over 26 % ) and the area 's Hispanic population increased by nearly 16 % . In a twenty @-@ year span ending in 2000 , the non @-@ Hispanic white population decreased by 50 % . In 1980 only about 15 % of the area population consisted of children , by 2000 that had risen to nearly 30 % of the population . 
 = = Government = = 
 = = = Local government = = = 
 Gulfton is served by the Houston Police Department 's South Gessner Division ( previously Fondren Patrol Division ) . Previously the Gulfton area was served by the Southwest Patrol division , headquartered on Beechnut Street . A June 1999 report entitled the Gulfton Community Five Year Plan , produced by the Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention , stated that the sudden changes in Gulfton 's population exceeded the police department 's ability to adapt . The establishment of the Gulfton Storefront Station augmented the police department 's presence in Gulfton . This station , located near the Napoleon Square Apartments , opened in the summer of 1990 with the City of Houston paying one dollar a month to the real estate company managing the complex . The Gulfton Area Action Council paid the utility bills , estimated at $ 5 @,@ 000 per month in 1990 ( $ <unk> @.@ 29 in today 's money ) . The Civic Association of Shenandoah also provides support for the establishment of the sub @-@ station . By 1998 the Fondren Patrol division was established with responsibility for the area . 
 The Houston Fire Department provides fire protection services . Its Fire District 68 Primary Run Area covers Gulfton and is located near Fire Station 51 Sharpstown , a part of Fire District 68 . The community is within Super Neighborhood # 27 Gulfton and its recognized council was established on June 22 , 2000 . Each super neighborhood represents a community advocacy block of civic clubs , places of worship , businesses , and other community interests . 
 Houston City Council District J now covers Gulfton . District J was created in 2011 to allow Hispanic voters to more easily select candidates who cater to them . Robert Jara , a political consultant of the group Campaign Strategies , drew the boundaries of District J in order to ensure that Gulfton and Sharpstown were together in one area . That way , the Hispanic residents could lobby for influence with their city council representative , whether he or she is of Hispanic origin or not . 
 In the 2000s Gulfton was divided between two city council districts , District C and District F , while in the 1990s all of Gulfton was in district F. By December 3 , 1991 , increased crime and demographic shifts in southwestern Houston neighborhoods led to many political rivals competing for the city council seat of District F. Anti @-@ Graffiti efforts were undertaken by Gulfton Weed & Seed and the Mayor 's Anti @-@ Gang Office to reduce the amount of gang graffiti in the area . A community mural was completed by at @-@ risk youth on the side of Kroger 's in 1999 as part of a collaborative effort between the Orange Show , Gulfton Weed & Seed and the United States Attorney 's Office . The mural was featured in the Houston Chronicle and on several major news outlets . In 2005 M. J. Khan , then the city council member of District F , promoted an anti @-@ graffiti campaign within his district . 
 The City of Houston operates the Southwest Multi @-@ Service Center within the Greater Sharpstown district , adjacent to Gulfton . The city 's multi @-@ service centers provide child care , elderly residents programs , and rental space . The complex includes the Houston Public Library ( HPL ) Express Southwest library extension . The center also houses the Mayor 's Office for Immigrant and Refugee Affairs and the Mayor 's Citizens ' Assistance Office ( CAO ) Southwest Satellite Office . Construction of the center was scheduled to begin in February 2005 . The Mayor of Houston , Bill White and Council Member Khan dedicated the center on Monday February 19 , 2007 , which cost an estimated USD $ 4 @.@ 1 million ( 2007 rates ) . 
 The Houston Parks and Recreation Department operates the Burnett Bayland Park and Burnett Bayland Community Center in Gulfton . The complex has an outdoor basketball court , a hike and bicycle trail , a playground , a lighted athletics field , and a water park . No recreation centers existed in Gulfton prior to the opening of Burnett Bayland . In 1995 Mike McMahon , executive director of Gulfton Area Neighborhood Association ( GANO ) , criticized the city for not establishing any libraries , multi @-@ service centers , parks , or recreation centers in Gulfton . However , through the collaborative effort of Gulfton Weed & Seed and Gulfton Youth Development , members of the Gulfton Youth Leadership Council attended <unk> meetings to lobby for an enclosed area at Burnett Bayland Park , where many of the youth attended Campo del Sol or soccer games ; they also lobbied for a multi @-@ purpose center to be established to assist all members of the Gulfton area . Through their efforts , money was allocated for Burnett Bayland to be rebuilt with an enclosed community center as well as money being allocated for a multipurpose center to be build . Many of these youngsters were previously gang involved youth who were headed to a juvenile delinquency center prior to their involvement with Weed & Seed and Gulfton Youth Development . Many of the participants graduated from high school and many began taking classes at HCC , something many never thought possible at the time . 
 = = = County representation = = = 
 Harris County Precinct Three serves Gulfton , while Harris County Constable Precinct Five and Constable Precinct One also provide services . 
 The County has offices in Gulfton and provides the Bellaire Tax Office Branch and the Harris County Youth Services Center services . The Harris County Child Protective Services ( CPS ) operates the <unk> program from this center aimed at preventing juvenile crime . One of their programs focused on decreasing juvenile crime is the Gulfton Youth Development Program which operates out of the Gulfton Community Learning Center at <unk> Renwick Drive . The Southwest Courthouse Annex 19 is located at the county complex . The Harris Health System operates the <unk> Health Center ( formerly People 's Health Center ) near Gulfton . The Harris County Juvenile Probation Department runs the Burnett @-@ Bayland Reception Center and the Burnett @-@ Bayland Home , residential post @-@ adjudication facilities for youth . The Reception Center opened in 1998 with revenue from the Texas Juvenile Probation Commission state grants and county funds . The Burnett Bayland Home is a 40 @-@ acre ( 16 ha ) campus for juvenile offenders who do not require secure confinement . 
 = = = State and federal representation = = = 
 Gulfton is located in District 137 of the Texas House of Representatives and represented by Gene Wu since 2013 . Gulfton is within District 17 of the Texas Senate and represented by Joan Huffman since 2009 . In May 1991 , Marc Campos of the Southwest Voter Registration Education Project , expressed concerns that proposed state senate redistricting plans would deliberately re @-@ draw Texas Senate , District 15 to ensure the re @-@ election of John Whitmire . He felt this would hamper the possible election of Hispanic representatives . Campos cited the inclusion of Gulfton in Whitmire 's district would dilute Hispanic voting strength , since many Gulfton residents are not eligible to vote due to a lack of citizenship . A May 15 , 1991 Houston Chronicle article reported that some people did not want to see Gulfton included in a mostly Hispanic Texas Senate district citing fears that the residents might not vote . During the afternoon of May 1 , 2010 , 7 @,@ 000 people protested Arizona 's SB 1070 bill along Bellaire Boulevard and Chimney Rock in Gulfton . 
 Gulfton is in Texas 's 9th congressional district and represented by Al Green since 2009 . The United States Postal Service operates four offices near Gulfton : the De Moss Post Office , the Rich Hill Post Office , the Bellaire Post Office ( in the City of Bellaire ) , and the Sage Post Office . 
 = = = Foreign delegations = = = 
 The Consulate @-@ General of Nicaragua in Houston was located in Suite 470 at 6300 Hillcroft Avenue , adjacent to Gulfton . In 2009 the office moved and no longer resides in the Gulfton area . 
 = = Transportation = = 
 Metropolitan Transit Authority of Harris County , Texas ( METRO ) operates passenger bus services in Gulfton . Bus lines serving the area include 2 Bellaire , 9 North Main / Gulfton , 33 Post Oak Crosstown , 47 Hillcroft Crosstown , and 163 Fondren Express . The Gulfton Area Neighborhood Organization successfully lobbied for increased METRO bus routes in Gulfton . 
 As part of the METRORail light rail network , METRO proposed the University Line , an approximately ten mile segment connecting Hillcroft Transit Center to the Eastwood Transit Center . In a 2007 Houston Chronicle questions and answers page regarding the proposed line , Daphne Scarbrough and Christof Spieler asked why METRO did not include a station to serve Gulfton . METRO responded that the agency originally envisioned " more of an express " line , but would examine the possibility of serving Gulfton on the University Line . In July 2008 , METRO indicated a " Gulfton Station " as a " potential " station on the University Line in its modified Locally Preferred Alternative ( <unk> ) plan . As of 2010 METRO has proposed the construction of a Gulfton Station as part of the University Line . 
 = = Economy = = 
 Gulfton includes several scattered areas of commercial and light industrial properties . Gulfton gained a large number of immigrants in the mid @-@ 1980s and the regional economy could not support the increasing pressure of the new workers . This led to higher unemployment rates and families tended to " double @-@ up " housing , where multiple families shared the same unit to reduce family expenditures . Scott Van Beck , head of the Houston Independent School District 's West Region in the Gulfton area , stated in a 2006 keynote address to the Rotary Club of Bellaire , " When I look out my window on Chimney Rock , I don 't see big corporations ; I see Gulfton ; I see mom and pop businesses . " The Houston Metropolitan Chamber , previously the Greater Southwest Houston Chamber of Commerce , provides economic assistance in Gulfton . 
 As of 2005 many Central American businesses have outlets in Gulfton . ADOC footwear has its only United States store located in Gulfton . Pollo <unk> has the Bellaire location in Gulfton . Salvadoran banks have three branches and an importing business in the area . As of 2004 the Salvadoran banks include <unk> ( a U.S. division of Banco Agricola ) , <unk> ( a subsidiary of HSBC El Salvador ) and <unk> . At that time many businesses in Gulfton , including small grocery stores and restaurants , were owned and operated by Salvadoran refugees from the Salvadoran Civil War . Grupo TACA operates the Houston @-@ area TACA Center on Bellaire Boulevard in the Gulfton area . Additionally , <unk> , a Mexican appliance and furniture chain , operates the # 38 Bellaire location in Greater Sharpstown adjacent to Gulfton . Throughout the neighborhood food vendors , called <unk> , travel on bicycles and sell foods and snacks such as spiced cucumbers and popsicles ( <unk> ) . 
 The emergence of the Latino community led to changes in area businesses as they catered to the predominant population . In 2003 Kroger remodeled its Gulfton supermarket to cater to the new demographic . In December Kroger announced that the 59 @,@ 000 @-@ square @-@ foot ( 5 @,@ 500 m2 ) Kroger in Gulfton would close by the end of January , as it has been an under @-@ performing store . Kroger owns the store location , and the chain is considering selling it to another grocery chain . 
 The Fox Network Center was formerly located on Gulfton Drive , in the Gulfton area , before it moved to The Woodlands in unincorporated Montgomery County around 2005 . A 2008 Houston Chronicle article described the former Fox Network Center location as " flood @-@ prone . " It employed around 300 staff . In 2001 a partnership formed between Ed Farris , of Farris & Associates , and U.S. Builders for the construction of Plaza de Americas , a 30 @,@ 000 @-@ square @-@ foot ( 2 @,@ 800 m2 ) shopping center adjacent to the Kroger in Gulfton . The project was completed for $ 4 million ( $ <unk> @.@ 73 in today 's money ) and hoped to attract retailers catering to Hispanic clients . Lane Design Group designed the center with a " Hispanic flavor . " The developers believed that the Hispanic buying power in the Gulfton area would generate profits . 
 = = Culture = = 
 Oriana Garcia , a Gulfton @-@ area community developer of Neighborhood Centers Inc . , described Gulfton as , " sort of like the Ellis Island of the current time . " Residents represent seventy distinct cultures , speak thirty different languages , and live in an area approximately 16 @,@ 000 square feet ( 1 @,@ 500 m2 ) . Garcia refers to the population as , " probably the most dense area in Houston . " Adrian Garcia , the anti @-@ gang office director for the Mayor of Houston in 2002 , also referred to Gulfton as , " somewhat of an Ellis Island . " Susan Rogers of the Rice Design Alliance said that Gulfton 's " affordable housing , shops , language , food , and culture all help to provide a familiar environment that eases the residents ' transition to life in America . " Rogers also said , " In many ways the residents of Gulfton are more connected globally than locally . " 
 In 1995 GANO activist Francisco Lopez , an El Salvador refugee , said , " Gulfton is what Denver Harbor is to Mexicans . Any recent Latin American immigrant has a relationship to Gulfton . " Lopez added that the immigrants mainly remain in the area because of the Fiesta Mart and other businesses that cater to the immigrant population . Lopez explained that many people originally expected Gulfton would provide a transient location for immigrants , who would then leave for other neighborhoods . By 1995 many had stayed in Gulfton and become long term residents even switching apartments but not leaving the area . In 2010 Katharine Shilcutt of the Houston Press said " Gulfton now possesses such a wide range of ethnic cuisines , restaurants and grocery stores , it can almost be seen as a microcosm of Houston . " 
 The popularity of soccer ( football ) in the neighborhood flourished after the Southwest Houston Soccer Association was established in the 1990s . Prior to its establishment , a few adult teams existed , but no youth league . In 1995 , Silvia Ramirez , a soccer coach , said in a newspaper article that a lack of confidence in English language abilities and long work hours prevented many area residents from creating soccer leagues . The same article quotes citizens who believe that playing soccer prevented them from joining gangs . In 2007 , Diana De La Rose , principal of Jane Long Middle School , said that soccer was popular among Gulfton @-@ area students . In 2010 the Houston Dynamo soccer team proposed the construction of a stadium near Gulfton . Instead the BBVA Compass Stadium began construction in East Downtown . 
 Neighborhood Centers Inc. began work in the Gulfton and Sharpstown areas around 30 years before 2011 . In 1998 Neighborhood Centers opened El Puente ( The Bridge ) , a privately operated community center on the grounds of the Napoleon Square Apartments , a complex which had a predominantly Spanish @-@ speaking population . El Puente is located in three apartment units that had been converted into office space and play areas . Two of the apartment units are connected to each other . The center 's goal is to provide community support to replace the community support that the immigrants had previously received in Latin America . As of 1999 , ten different agencies provided services at El Puente and 135 families signed up to receive the services . As of 1999 , at the center , the Houston Public Library provided literacy classes , Houston Community College provided English classes , the Houston Independent School District provided preschool services for three- and four @-@ year @-@ olds , the University of Houston Graduate College of Social Work arranged assessments for graduate students studying social work , and the Sisters of Charity 's Southwest Clinic provided prenatal and preventative medical services . In 2003 the Chrysalis Dance Company provided dance sessions at El Puente , used to teach English to mothers and children . <unk> <unk> , the coordinator of the complex , said in 1999 that the center was needed because children had few activities available . She said that " The children have very little to do . They 're just confined to their apartments . " 
 In 2007 , the group announced that it would build the Gulfton Neighborhood Campus at the intersection of <unk> Street and High Star Drive , once it raises the $ 20 million ( $ <unk> @.@ 74 in today 's money ) needed . The Baker @-@ Ripley Neighborhood Center , in Greater Sharpstown , was scheduled to open in December 2009 . The center consists of a 4 acres ( 1 @.@ 6 ha ) campus with five buildings . Designed by New Orleans @-@ based Concordia architects and landscaped by Asakura Robinson Company , the site contains a farmers market , health clinic , outdoor film venue , publicly accessible library , school , and some outdoor recreation areas . The center design incorporates architectural influences from Mexican and South American art . Rosa Gomez , an employee of Neighborhood Centers , said that the organization did not want Baker @-@ Ripley to appear " too fancy or official looking " so as not to intimidate recent immigrants . The non @-@ profit organization Project for Public Spaces assisted in the development of Baker @-@ Ripley . The organizers consulted residents of Gulfton and Sharpstown on the design of the center . Susan Baker , the wife of James Baker , a former U.S. Secretary of State , organized a fundraising campaign for the center . The center offers English and computer classes . Neighborhood Centers received a United States Department of Education Promise Neighborhood planning grant , used to fund its Gulfton Promise Project , a program to guide residents from birth until they obtain careers . 
 Texas Children 's Pediatric Associates Gulfton is a child health care center affiliated with Texas Children 's Hospital . As the third such pediatric primary health care center opened by Texas Children 's , the Gulfton campus exists as part of Project Medical Home to assist families with financial hardships avoid using emergency departments for primary care visits . 
 In 2004 , many promotoras ( promoters ) operated in Gulfton . These individuals are recruited from " hard @-@ to @-@ reach " communities and study health care from doctors and non @-@ profit organizations and then return to their communities to educate people in health care practices . U.S. public health care programs adopted promotoras from the Latin American model , although its use in Gulfton varies some from the Latin American system . For example , promotoras in the U.S. cannot legally dispense medication . 
 Prior to the change in demographics , at one apartment complex , Napoleon Square , residents socialized at the swimming pools on afternoons . The area nightclubs were active during evenings . During that era the members of the ethnic groups in the Napoleon Square apartment complex mainly kept to themselves . Harry Hurt III of the Texas Monthly said " while being one of the most integrated neighborhoods in Houston with its rainbow of human kinds and colors , Napoleon Square seemed to be one of the most factionalized , hardly a melting pot . " 
 = = Crime = = 
 In 1977 Gulfton was a part of the Police District 18 . During that year , out of the twenty police districts , it had the second highest rate of reported crimes after the North Side of Houston . Out of the districts it had the highest rates of fraud and suicide , the second highest rates in automobile theft , burglary , theft , and vandalism , the fourth highest rape rate , the fifth highest robbery rate , the eighth highest drug @-@ related arrest and narcotic crime rate , and the 13th highest rate of murder , all of this was prior to the Hispanic immigration influx of the 1980s . Harry Hurt III of the Texas Monthly said that the density of the apartments and the conformity of the design made it easy for criminals to operate in the complexes ; if a criminal figured out how to break into one unit , he could break into all of them as they all shared the same design . In 1977 Hurt said that cocaine and <unk> " appear to be common " in the apartments and that heroin " is also found in the area occasionally , though not as frequently as in some other parts of town . " Hurt also stated that several area residents and ex @-@ residents complained of theft . Around 1977 , according to two accused rapists known in the area were the " Blade " rapist , the " Beer Belly " rapist , and the " Jumper Cable " rapist . Much of the crime in the 1970s was because Gulfton was predominantly inhabited with white single young men in their 20 's . 
 After the 1980s economic decline and changes in the local demographics , crime increased in Gulfton . By 1988 , many Houstonians referred to the neighborhood as the Gulfton Ghetto . The area derived its name from Gulfton Drive which was described by Kim Cobb of the Houston Chronicle as , " one of the area 's more notorious streets . " In a 1988 , a Houston Chronicle article cited police officers patrolling the Gulfton area who could identify complexes where they often arrest criminals . In April 1992 , Houston Mayor Bob Lanier named Gulfton as one of ten Houston neighborhoods targeted by a city revitalization program . One aspect of Lanier 's project consisted of building barricades around the Shenandoah subdivision to reduce traffic and crime . The Shenandoah Civic Association and some members or the GAAC supported the measures and pursued the street closures . The Gulfton Area Neighborhood Organization ( GANO ) and other advocacy groups opposed the barricades . Members of these community groups considered the measures to be racially motivated . They voiced the opinion that the closures would not provide effective crime control , was a waste of city funds , and the closures would potentially harm local businesses . 
 After the demographics changed , youth street gangs appeared in Gulfton . As of 2006 the Gulfton area has gangs such as " Southwest Cholos , " " La Primera , " " La Tercera Crips , " " Somos <unk> Pero Locos , " and " Mara Salvatrucha " ( MS @-@ 13 ) . Charles <unk> , the director of a nonprofit group called " Youth Advocates , " said that Gulfton 's dense conditions , lack of features intended for children , and lack of recreational and athletic programs helped form the gang cultures . He added that other factors included fathers being absent , including many who were imprisoned , and mothers who had issues like drug and alcohol addictions or mothers who worked for jobs with very lengthy working hours . In 1993 , the " Southwest Cholos " began to appear in Gulfton . The gang did not have a traditional leadership structure like those in New York City and Los Angeles . Several police officers said that the gang engaged in criminal activities . Controversy erupted in 1995 after six teenagers and two adults sustained injuries in a drive @-@ by shooting near Jane Long Middle School . Police believed that the shooting was related to street gangs and arrested a 13 @-@ year @-@ old Sharpstown Middle School student in connection with the shooting . The Gulfton Area Neighborhood Organization had demanded for years that the City of Houston expand its anti @-@ crime activities . Sarah Turner , a spokesperson for the mayor , insisted that the city had taken corrective action . 
 During the same year , the State of Texas announced it would provide $ 500 @,@ 000 worth of grant funds to Gulfton @-@ area agencies for crime prevention programs . The state targeted Gulfton because the zip code had 419 juvenile probation referrals , the highest for any zip code in Harris County . After the grant was established , GANO , the Shenandoah Civic Association , and GARC worked together to reduce juvenile crime . In 1995 , Nelson Reyes , a counselor for immigrants from Mexico and El Salvador at the Gulfton Area Neighborhood Organization , said that local parents had positive attitudes about living in Gulfton as they made more money than they did in their home countries , but Gulfton @-@ area children felt impacted by the area crime . 
 Rose Mary Garza , the principal of Benavidez Elementary School in 1995 , stated that she hated hearing the term " Gulfton Ghetto , " which was still in common use at the time , as the community was trying to move away from that stereotype . Crime rates in Gulfton decreased that year and Captain Charles Bullock , commander of the Southwest Patrol on Beechnut Street said that an increased police presence caused the crime rates to decrease . 
 In the 1990s City of Houston officials started the " Weed and Seed " program , where funds would be used to replace criminal activity with positive community activities . The City of Houston spent $ 800 @,@ 000 in five years on Gulfton . Items funded through " Weed and Seed " included " United Minds , " a leadership program for teenagers , the Las Américas Education Center built on the Las Américas Apartments property , the Gulfton Community Learning Center , and a computer lab at an area park . Adrian Garcia , the anti @-@ gang office director of the Mayor of Houston , said in 2002 that the " Weed and Seed " program restored a sense of community and safety to Gulfton , which " was never engineered for family life , " without " heavy @-@ handed police tactics . " 
 A University of Houston professor , Peter Nguyen , remarked in 2005 , " You almost get a different sense of feeling once you cross over to Bellaire . " Bellaire is an incorporated city consisting of single @-@ family houses and a reputation for safety . Nguyen said that he believed the city should increase efforts to reduce crime in Gulfton . He added that it would be difficult to engage Gulfton 's population of " working people " , living " day to day " , to participate in anti @-@ crime activities like crime watches . Bruce Williams , a Houston Police Department Captain , states that it is difficult to fight crime with the reductions in man power . Williams said that U.S. federal government agents began working with the Houston Police Department to arrest serious gang criminals in Gulfton , including Mara Salvatrucha ( MS @-@ 13 ) members who were operating in the neighborhood . In 2007 , Tammy Rodriguez , head of the Gulfton Super Neighborhood department for the City of Houston , and the Fondren Patrol Division announced that the division would expand its Police Apartments Clergy Team ( PACT ) into three Gulfton complexes . PACT places married couples who are active in churches into the apartment complexes so they can work with tenants . The PACT program initially focused on the Napoleon Square and <unk> Carmel complexes . In August 2009 a gang war erupted between the Southwest Cholos and other area gangs causing violence to increase in Gulfton and surrounding areas . 
 = = Education = = 
 = = = Primary and secondary schools = = = 
 Gulfton is zoned for public schools in the Houston Independent School District ( HISD ) and divided between Trustee District V and Trustee District VII . 
 As of 2010 the Student Assessment department of HISD and the Technology Department Technical Support Services and Training offices ( Teledyne Training Facility ) are located in a building in the Gulfton area . Previously the district 's West Region offices , Charter and Safe Schools Initiatives office , Health and Medical Services office , and Virtual School Department were located in the facility . Prior to HISD 's 2005 reorganization , the Southwest District was headquartered where the West Region offices and Alternative Education offices now reside . Around 2004 the West Central District offices occupied the Chimney Rock facility . 
 = = = = Elementary and middle schools = = = = 
 The attendance boundaries of Benavidez Elementary School , Braeburn Elementary School , Cunningham Elementary School , and Rodriguez Elementary School cover sections of Gulfton . The Gulfton area is zoned to Jane Long Middle School with Pin Oak Middle School , located in the City of Bellaire , as an option . Pin Oak was named a National Blue Ribbon School in 2008 . 
 Gabriela Mistral Early Childhood Center in Gulfton is the early childhood center nearest Gulfton . Poor students , homeless students , students not proficient in English , and children of active @-@ duty members of the U.S. military or whose parents have been killed , injured , or missing in action while on active duty may attend Mistral . Las Américas Middle School and Kaleidoscope Middle School , two optional middle schools , are located in the Long Middle School campus . 
 Several state charter schools are located in Gulfton . SER @-@ Niños Charter School is a pre @-@ kindergarten through 8th grade state charter school in Gulfton . SER @-@ Niños as of 2009 receives state funds per student and relies on philanthropy for other expenses . Prospective students receive admittance based on a lottery . The students are mostly of Mexican and Salvadoran descent . Amigos Por Vida Friends For Life Charter School , opened in 1999 , is a state charter school for pre @-@ kindergarten 3 through Grade 8 . The Academy of Accelerated Learning , Inc. operates a charter school in Gulfton . YES Prep Gulfton ( originally YES Prep Lee ) , a state charter middle school that was originally located on the Lee High School campus , plans to expand to the six through twelve grades with thirty classrooms . As of 2007 many students at YES Prep Lee were from the Gulfton area . YES Prep Gulfton is now located in Greater Sharpstown . The Baker @-@ Ripley Charter School is located on the grounds of the Baker @-@ Ripley Neighborhood Center in Greater Sharpstown . The Juvenile Justice Charter School serves residents of the Burnett @-@ Bayland Reception Center and the Burnett @-@ Bayland Home . 
 There are several private schools in the Gulfton area . <unk> Private School serves preschool through Grade 3 . In addition to acting as a private elementary school , it also houses a 24 @-@ hour daycare program . The Holy Ghost School , a PreK @-@ 8 Roman Catholic school operated by the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Galveston @-@ Houston , is near Gulfton . 
 Most children live within 2 mi ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) ( as measured by travel along the closest public roads ) of their assigned elementary schools , so they are usually not eligible for free school bus transportation . This means that many children have to walk or ride bicycles to school . 
 = = = = = History of elementary and middle schools = = = = = 
 In 1953 , Cunningham Elementary School , the first elementary school to serve Gulfton , was built with a capacity for 300 students . Braeburn Elementary School opened in 1956 . Long Middle School , which as of 2008 serves Gulfton , opened in 1957 . 
 In 1979 , Cunningham Elementary School had 436 students , well over its original capacity of 300 . 75 @.@ 5 % of them were White , 14 % qualified for free lunch , and 15 % qualified for reduced cost lunch . Due to the increasing population and the sudden conversion of adults @-@ only complexes to family oriented , Cunningham Elementary School became overcrowded by 1986 with its enrollment increasing from around 500 in 1985 to more than 900 the next year . By 1988 , Gordon Elementary School , a campus in Bellaire , Texas , re @-@ opened to serve as a reliever school to Cunningham and to a non @-@ Gulfton school . By September 3 of that year , 1 @,@ 268 students were enrolled at Cunningham ; 72 % were classified as Hispanic and 99 % were on free or reduced @-@ cost lunch programs . Many of the children arrived from Central American countries experiencing civil strife , and therefore many had received an inadequate education prior to coming to the United States . In 1989 , Cunningham 's overcrowding was described as being " unanticipated . " In 1988 the U.S. federal government passed the Fair Housing Act , which , under most circumstances , prohibits any policy that excludes families with children from living in an apartment complex . Abbe Boring , the principal of Cunningham in 1992 , said that the student population increased when formerly singles @-@ only apartments were required to allow families to rent complexes . In September 1991 Braeburn and Cunningham were two of 32 HISD schools that had capped enrollments ; in other words the schools were filled to capacity and excess students had to attend other schools . By 1992 , Cunningham had around 1 @,@ 200 students and 51 temporary classroom units . Immediately prior to the opening of Benavidez , Cunningham had 1 @,@ 400 students . 
 Benavidez Elementary School , which opened on Tuesday January 21 , 1992 , relieved Cunningham of around 675 students and 29 teachers . Benavidez , along with two other schools , was a part of a $ 370 million Houston ISD school construction project , which originated from a school bond approved in March 1989 . Rose Garza , the principal of Benavidez , said that the committee determining the name of the school named it after Roy P. Benavidez , a soldier in the Vietnam War who was given the Medal of Honor , because the school wanted to name the school after a Hispanic who could serve as a positive role model to the mostly Hispanic student body that occupied the school when it opened . HISD officials said that the district had little difficulty opening the three schools in the middle of the year , since the same teachers had been teaching the same students while they occupied the previously overcrowded schools in the preceding fall . On its opening day Benavidez referred 400 students to other schools due to overcrowding . After Benavidez opened , Benavidez and Cunningham each had about 700 students . In 1994 , Benavidez had 1 @,@ 065 pupils and it had to send 200 children to different schools . As of that year , 88 % of Benavidez 's children were Hispanic . By 1996 , both Cunningham and Benavidez became overcrowded . Gordon also became a reliever school for Benavidez and another non @-@ Gulfton school . SER @-@ Niños opened in 1996 . In 2000 Benavidez had 1 @,@ 300 students and Cunningham had 1 @,@ 190 students . At the schools , the average classroom size was 30 students , exceeding the state 's recommendation of 22 students per classroom . 
 The Las Américas Education Center , which included a preschool named Las Américas Early Childhood Development Center and two middle schools , Las Américas Middle School and Kaleidoscope Middle School , started in 1995 as a reliever campus for Cunningham and Benavidez . The reliever school was established with funds from the " Weed and Seed " program established by City of Houston officials . In 2000 , the center moved into the Las Américas Apartments in Gulfton . 
 Rodriguez Elementary , built on almost 10 acres ( 4 @.@ 0 ha ) with Rebuild 2002 funds , opened during the first week 2002 to relieve Benavidez , Braeburn , and Cunningham . As a result , Rodriguez 's attendance zone took territory from Benavidez and Cunningham 's zones , while Cunningham 's zone took territory from Braeburn 's zone . Pin Oak Middle School in Bellaire opened in 2002 to relieve several overcrowded schools in southwestern Houston . 
 HISD paid around $ 200 @,@ 000 USD to lease the Las Américas units . In October 2006 , Michael Marquez , president of the Hispanic Housing and Education Corporation , which operated Las Américas , announced to HISD in a letter that the organization would terminate the lease agreement because of issues related to maintenance and management . The district decided to vacate the property instead of appealing the decision . In summer 2007 , the former Las Américas Education Center closed . The early childhood center merged with Mistral and the middle schools moved to the Long Middle School campus . 
 Gordon Elementary School , located in the City of Bellaire , served as a reliever campus for Benavidez , Cunningham , and two non @-@ Gulfton campuses , until it was converted into a Mandarin Chinese immersion school in 2012 . 
 = = = = High schools = = = = 
 Gulfton residents are zoned to Margaret Long Wisdom High School ( formerly Robert E. Lee High School ) , which opened in 1962 to relieve Lamar High School , with Lamar and Westside high schools as options . Most Gulfton high school @-@ aged residents attend Lee High School . When it opened , Lee High School had mainly affluent white students ; its demographics shifted to a mostly Hispanic and immigrant student body . In September 1991 Lee was one of 32 HISD schools that had capped enrollments , and excess students had to attend other schools . When Westside opened in 2000 , residents of the Lee attendance boundary gained the option to attend Westside instead of Lee , with no free transportation provided . By 2004 three out of every four Lee students were born to non @-@ English @-@ speaking households . 
 HISD also operates Liberty High School , a charter high school for recent immigrants . In January 2005 , Houston ISD opened Newcomer Charter School on the Lee High School campus . School officials placed fliers in Gulfton @-@ area apartment complexes , churches , flea markets , and <unk> . The school relocated to a shopping center along U.S. Highway 59 ( Southwest Freeway ) and adopted its current name in June 2007 . 
 In 2014 HISD opened Middle College High School @-@ Gulfton at HCC 's Gulfton facility ; it is a non @-@ traditional high school program for 150 students . 
 = = = = Students in Gulfton public schools = = = = 
 By the 1997 – 1998 school year , 75 % of Gulfton students qualified for free or reduced @-@ price lunches . Almost 95 % of Gulfton students were classified as economically disadvantaged , almost double the Texas rate . More than 70 % of Gulfton students exhibited a lack of English language proficiency , while 27 @.@ 6 % of Houston ISD students and 13 @.@ 4 % of Texas residents exhibited this level of deficiency . Susana Herrera , the program coordinator for Houston 's Truancy Reduction Demonstration Project , said that truancy was a major issue in Gulfton education and language barriers , a lack of supervision by parents and guardians , " high mobility , " lack of familiarity with United States laws , and familial norms act as " barriers to attending school . " A publication by the Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention stated that parental characteristics complicated their support of education , including low socioeconomic status , " language and cultural barriers , " and " limited opportunities for acculturation . " The City of Houston started the Gulfton Truancy Reduction Demonstration Project , which is operated by the Anti @-@ Gang Office under the Mayor of Houston and includes support from Houston ISD , the Houston Police Department , and the municipal courts . Scott Van Beck , the head of HISD 's West Region , in a keynote address to the Rotary Club of Bellaire that urban education needs " social capital " or frequent adult contact with children . 
 = = = Community colleges = = = 
 Gulfton is within the jurisdiction of the Houston Community College System ( HCCS ) . The community college district operates the HCCS Gulfton Center , inside a 35 @,@ 100 @-@ square @-@ foot ( 3 @,@ 260 m2 ) campus building owned by HCCS . The building opened in 1990 after Mutual Benefit Life Insurance Co. sold the building to HCCS for $ 700 @,@ 000 ( $ <unk> @.@ 79 when adjusted for inflation ) . The Gulfton campus is a part of the district 's Southwest College . 
 = = = Libraries = = = 
 Houston Public Library ( HPL ) operates the HPL Express Southwest at the Southwest Multi @-@ Service Center in the Greater Sharpstown district and adjacent to Gulfton . HPL Express facilities are library facilities located in existing buildings . Prior to the opening of HPL Express Southwest on January 24 , 2008 , no libraries existed near Gulfton . 
 = New York State Route 343 = 
 New York State Route 343 ( NY 343 ) is a state highway located entirely within central Dutchess County , in the Hudson Valley region of the U.S. state of New York . It runs east – west from the intersection of NY 82 in the village of Millbrook to the Connecticut state line in the town of Amenia , where it continues eastward briefly as Connecticut Route 343 . Along the way , it has a 7 @.@ 3 @-@ mile ( 11 @.@ 7 km ) concurrency with NY 22 from vicinity of the hamlet of Dover Plains to the hamlet of Amenia . 
 The entirety of modern Route 343 was originally the Dover branch of the Dutchess Turnpike . The turnpike , which was in operation from the early to the mid @-@ 19th century , was a major transportation route at the time , connecting several local communities to Litchfield County , Connecticut , and the city of Poughkeepsie . NY 343 was designated in 1930 , connecting the hamlet of Amenia to the state line , but was relocated a few years later onto the portion of New York State Route 200 from South Millbrook to the hamlet of Dover Plains . The NY 200 designation was transferred to NY 343 's original alignment . NY 343 absorbed NY 200 in the early 1940s , creating an overlap with NY 22 between Dover Plains and Amenia . The Connecticut portion of the highway was originally designated as part of Route 4 ; however , it was renumbered to Route 343 in 1932 . 
 Several landmarks along the way include the Silo Ridge Country Club in the hamlet of Wassaic , Beekman Park in the hamlet of Amenia , and the Troutbeck Conference Center in the hamlet of <unk> . When NY 343 crosses the state line , it becomes Connecticut 's Route 343 and passes through more rural and residential areas . Route 343 stretches for 1 @.@ 50 miles ( 2 @.@ 41 km ) into the town of Sharon , Connecticut , where it terminates at a junction with Route 4 and Route 41 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 = = = NY 343 = = = 
 NY 343 begins at an intersection with NY 82 ( cosigned as U.S. Route 44 or US 44 until 2008 ) in the hamlet of South Millbrook , located within the village of Millbrook . The road heads eastward into the town of Washington , intersecting an old alignment of NY 82 and passing to the south of Millbrook Golf and Tennis Club . NY 343 continues past fields , residential homes , and farms . The highway passes south of the creek , Mill Brook , entering the hamlet of <unk> , where it turns to the southeast at an intersection with County Route 99 ( CR 99 ) . At the intersection with CR 23 , NY 343 again changes direction , this time to the northeast , and soon crosses Stone Church Brook in the hamlet of Mutton Hollow . Here , NY 343 changes directions a third time , traveling to the southeast once again towards the hamlet of Dover Plains . 
 Northwest of Dover Plains , NY 343 turns to the northeast and passes into the town of Amenia . Just east of the town line , NY 343 intersects NY 22 . NY 343 turns north onto NY 22 , and the joined routes pass to the west of a series of moderately @-@ sized mountains as they head through regions of rural farms , fields and homes . The roads parallel the <unk> River and soon intersect with CR 81 ( a former routing of NY 22 ) south of the hamlet of Wassaic . After passing through Wassaic , the roads cross Wassaic Creek and enter a small valley , soon passing the Wassaic Train Station and continuing northward towards the hamlet of Amenia . 
 CR 81 merges with NY 22 and NY 343 as the main roads pass by Beekman Park and Silo Ridge Country Club in the hamlet of Amenia . The roads pass a pond and split at the intersection with US 44 . US 44 and NY 22 continue to the north , and NY 343 continues eastward towards the state line . The road passes south of the Amenia Cemetery , changing directions several times . NY 343 soon intersects with CR 2 and turns to the northeast , passing over the Webatuck Creek . About 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) later , NY 343 crosses the state line and enters Connecticut . 
 NY 343 is classified as a rural major collector road between Millbrook and Dover Plains and carries an average of about 3 @,@ 100 vehicles per day ( as of 2006 ) , 5 % of which is classified as truck traffic . The portion concurrent with NY 22 is a rural principal arterial road with average traffic of 5 @,@ 600 per day ( with 7 % classified as truck traffic ) . East of NY 22 , NY 343 is a rural minor arterial road carrying about 4 @,@ 100 vehicles per day ( with 6 % classified as truck traffic ) . 
 = = = CT 343 = = = 
 When NY 343 crosses the state line into the town of Sharon , it enters a moderately rural area where a large factory is located . Route 343 , known as Amenia Road , heads northeast towards the town center , passing through patches of forests and intersecting with Sharon Valley Road , a connector to Route 361 . After passing north of Sharon Country Club , the highway turns east as it enters the town center , where the surroundings of the highway begin to become populated . Route 343 ends 1 @.@ 5 miles ( 2 @.@ 4 km ) from the state line at an intersection with Route 4 and Route 41 south of the town green . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Old roads = = = 
 The alignment used by modern NY 343 was a major transportation route that passed through the colonial settlements of Wassaic and Amenia . The highway helped General George Washington 's troops during the American Revolutionary War and was also the main supply route to the hamlets of Payne 's Corners ( now Amenia ) , <unk> ( now Wassaic ) and Dover Plains . Stone statues that marked the way to different places including New York City , Fishkill and Boston were put up along the road during the Revolution , helping suppliers of salt from Boston . This highway grew significantly over the years , with settlements growing along the highway during the early 19th century . There were also a few factories along the route , including a Borden Food Corporation factory that produced condensed milk in the 1860s . 
 NY 343 from the NY 22 / US 44 intersection in Amenia to the Connecticut state line was part of the main line of the Dutchess Turnpike , which ran from Poughkeepsie to the state line at Amenia , mostly along modern US 44 . Prior to the building of the turnpike , the section of modern NY 343 east of Amenia to the state line was a swamp and did not connect Amenia to the state line . The turnpike corporation was established by law in April 1802 and finished grading the highway in 1805 . In May 1803 , the continuation of the Dutchess Turnpike into Connecticut , the Goshen and Sharon Turnpike , was also chartered . When the road was completed a few years later , it established a continuous , improved road between Poughkeepsie and Hartford . In 1806 , a branch route , splitting off from the mainline at South Millbrook , was established to connect the hamlet of Dover Plains to Poughkeepsie . The southern branch used modern NY 343 from its western end at US 44 in South Millbrook to NY 22 in Dover Plains . The state took over maintenance of the turnpikes at the beginning of the 20th century . 
 = = = Designation = = = 
 In 1924 , the main line of the Dutchess Turnpike was designated as NY 21 , connecting the city of Poughkeepsie to the Connecticut state line as the original turnpike did . The road continued into Connecticut as Route 4 , a highway that was part of the New England road marking system . In the 1930 state highway renumbering , old NY 21 was broken up into several state routes . The portion between NY 82A west of the hamlet of Amenia and the Connecticut state line in the town of Sharon was renumbered as NY 343 . In 1932 , the continuation of NY 343 in Connecticut was renumbered from Route 4 to Route 343 to match the New York route number . 
 As part of the 1930 renumbering , the Dover branch of the Dutchess Turnpike between modern NY 82 in the village of Millbrook and NY 22 north of the hamlet of Dover Plains was designated as part of NY 200 , which began in the city of Poughkeepsie and went via Millbrook to the vicinity of Dover Plains . US 44 was assigned c . 1935 , resulting in the reconfiguration of several state routes in Dutchess County . Two of the routes affected were NY 200 and NY 343 . The alignments of the two routes were swapped , with the former NY 343 between NY 22 in the hamlet of Amenia and the Connecticut state line becoming NY 200 and the portion of former NY 200 between the village of Millbrook and the hamlet of Dover Plains becoming NY 343 . The remaining portions of both routes ' old alignments became part of the new US 44 . 
 The NY 200 designation was removed from the Amenia – Sharon road in the early 1940s and NY 343 was redesignated along that section . The two segments of NY 343 were connected via an overlap with NY 22 , which remains to this day . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = Climate of Minnesota = 
 The climate of Minnesota is typical of a continental climate , with hot summers and cold winters . Minnesota 's location in the Upper Midwest allows it to experience some of the widest variety of weather in the United States , with each of the four seasons having its own distinct characteristics . The areas near Lake Superior in the Minnesota Arrowhead region experience weather unique from the rest of the state . The moderating effect of Lake Superior keeps the surrounding area relatively cooler in the summer and relatively warmer in the winter , giving that region a smaller yearly temperature range . On the Köppen climate classification , the southern third of Minnesota — roughly from the Twin Cities region southward — falls in the hot summer humid continental climate zone ( Dfa ) , and the northern two @-@ thirds of Minnesota falls in the warm summer great continental climate zone ( Dfb ) . 
 Winter in Minnesota is characterized by cold ( below freezing ) temperatures . Snow is the main form of winter precipitation , but freezing rain , sleet , and occasionally rain are all possible during the winter months . Common storm systems include Alberta clippers or Panhandle hooks ; some of which develop into blizzards . Annual snowfall extremes have ranged from over 170 inches ( 432 cm ) in the rugged Superior Highlands of the North Shore to as little as 10 inches ( 25 cm ) in southern Minnesota . Temperatures as low as − 60 ° F ( − 51 ° C ) have occurred during Minnesota winters . Spring is a time of major transition in Minnesota . <unk> are common early in the spring , but by late @-@ spring as temperatures begin to moderate the state can experience tornado outbreaks , a risk which diminishes but does not cease through the summer and into the autumn . 
 In summer , heat and humidity predominate in the south , while warm and less humid conditions are generally present in the north . These humid conditions initiate thunderstorm activity 30 – 40 days per year . Summer high temperatures in Minnesota average in the mid @-@ 80s F ( 30 ° C ) in the south to the upper @-@ 70s F ( 25 ° C ) in the north , with temperatures as hot as 114 ° F ( 46 ° C ) possible . The growing season in Minnesota varies from 90 days per year in the Iron Range to 160 days in southeast Minnesota . Tornadoes are possible in Minnesota from March through November , but the peak tornado month is June , followed by July , May , and August . The state averages 27 tornadoes per year . Minnesota is the driest state in the Midwest . Average annual precipitation across the state ranges from around 35 inches ( 890 mm ) in the southeast to 20 inches ( 510 mm ) in the northwest . Autumn weather in Minnesota is largely the reverse of spring weather . The jet stream — which tends to weaken in summer — begins to re @-@ strengthen , leading to a quicker changing of weather patterns and an increased variability of temperatures . By late October and November these storm systems become strong enough to form major winter storms . Autumn and spring are the windiest times of the year in Minnesota . 
 = = General climatology = = 
 Because of its location in North America , Minnesota experiences temperature extremes characteristic of a continental climate , with cold winters and mild to hot summers in the south and frigid winters and generally cool summers in the north . Each season has distinctive upper air patterns which bring different weather conditions with them . The state is 1 @,@ 000 miles ( 1 @,@ 609 km ) from any large body of water ( with the exception of Lake Superior ) , and temperatures and precipitation vary widely . It is far enough north to experience − 60 ° F ( − 51 ° C ) temperatures and blizzards during the winter months , but far enough south to have 114 ° F ( 46 ° C ) temperatures and tornado outbreaks in the summer . The 174 degree Fahrenheit ( 97 ° C ) variation between Minnesota 's highest and lowest temperature is the 11th largest variation of any U.S. state , and 3rd largest of any non @-@ mountainous state ( behind North Dakota and South Dakota ) . 
 Minnesota is far from major sources of moisture and is in the transition zone between the moist East and the arid Great Plains . Annual average precipitation across the state ranges from around 35 inches ( 890 mm ) in the southeast to 20 inches ( 510 mm ) in the northwest . Snow is the main form of precipitation from November through March , while rain is the most common the rest of the year . Annual snowfall extremes have ranged from over 170 inches ( 432 cm ) in the rugged Superior Highlands of the North Shore to as little as 2 @.@ 3 inches ( 5 @.@ 8 cm ) in southern Minnesota . It has snowed in Minnesota during every month with the exception of July , and the state averages 110 days per year with snow cover of an inch ( 2 @.@ 5 cm ) or greater . 
 = = = Lake Superior = = = 
 Lake Superior moderates the climate of those parts of Minnesota 's Arrowhead Region near the shore . The lake acts as a heat sink , keeping the state 's North Shore area relatively cooler in the summer and warmer in the winter . While this effect is marked near the lake , it does not reach very far inland . For example , Grand Marais on the lakeshore has an average July high temperature of 70 ° F ( 21 ° C ) , while Virginia , at about the same latitude but inland about 100 miles ( 161 km ) to the west , has an average July high of 77 ° F ( 25 ° C ) . Virginia 's average high temperature in January is 15 ° F ( − 9 ° C ) , while Grand Marais ' is 23 ° F ( − 5 ° C ) . Just a few miles inland from Lake Superior are the Sawtooth Mountains , which almost completely confine the marine air masses and associated precipitation to lower elevations near the lake . 
 The prevailing northwest winter winds also limit the lake 's influence . Places near the shoreline can receive lake @-@ effect snow , but because the state lies north and west of the lake , snowfall amounts are not nearly as large as they are in locations like Wisconsin and Michigan that lie downwind to the south . Even so , the single largest snowstorm in Minnesota history was a lake effect event . On January 6 , 1994 , Finland , Minnesota , received 36 inches ( 91 cm ) of lake effect snow in 24 hours , and 47 inches ( 119 cm ) over a three @-@ day period . Both are Minnesota records . At 85 inches ( 216 cm ) per year , the port city of Duluth has the highest average snowfall total of any city in Minnesota . At 58 @.@ 9 ° F ( 14 @.@ 9 ° C ) , Grand Marais has the lowest average summer temperature of any city in the state . 
 The climatological effects of Lake Superior tend to stifle convection , thus limiting the potential for tornadoes . Although Cook and Lake counties are two of the largest counties in the state , they have experienced only seven tornadoes in the past 56 years . One of those tornadoes was a large F3 that occurred in the 1969 Minnesota tornado outbreak . 
 = = = Climate = = = 
 = = = = Temperature = = = = 
 = = = = Precipitation = = = = 
 = = Winter = = 
 Even though winter does not officially start until late December , Minnesota usually begins experiencing winter @-@ like conditions in November , sometimes as early as October . As with many other Midwestern states , winter in Minnesota is characterized by cold ( below freezing ) temperatures and snowfall . Weather systems can move in from the north , west , or south , with the majority of the weather being driven in from the north . A vigorous jet stream brings high and low @-@ pressure systems through in quick succession , which can cause large temperature variations over a short period of time . 
 = = = Temperature = = = 
 As the last remnants of summertime air in the southern U.S. start to lose their grip , cold polar air building up in northern Canada starts to push farther south , eventually spreading into Minnesota . By the time December and January arrive , Minnesota is fully engulfed in the polar air and is then subjected to outbreaks of arctic air masses . Because there are no natural barriers north or northwest of Minnesota to block arctic air from pouring south , Minnesota gets regular shots of the arctic air through the winter . High pressure systems which descend south from the Canadian plains behind the fronts bring light winds , clear skies , and bitterly cold temperatures . The northern part of Minnesota gets the brunt of the cold air . International Falls , sometimes called the " <unk> of the nation " , has the coldest average annual temperature of any National Weather Service first @-@ order station in the contiguous United States at 37 @.@ 4 ° F ( 3 @.@ 0 ° C ) . Tower , Minnesota , sinks below zero ( − 17 ° C ) an average of 71 times per year , and the ten coldest counties in the country , based on January minimums , are all located in Minnesota . The air mass then slowly moderates as it moves south into the rest of the state . Alberta clippers alternate with these high @-@ pressure systems , bringing high winds and some snowfall with them . 
 Minnesota occasionally gets breaks from the polar and arctic air when a zonal flow takes hold . This means that the jet stream will move in a west to east motion — rather than north to south — and warmer air from the western United States is pushed into the region . In Minnesota this pattern commonly leads to a prolonged period of above freezing high temperatures that gives Minnesotans a break from the winter freeze . Storms that move into Minnesota from a more westerly direction generally do not bring significant amounts of precipitation with them . 
 = = = Precipitation = = = 
 Winter precipitation comes in a few different forms . Snow is the main form of precipitation , but freezing rain , ice , sleet and sometimes even rain are all possible during the winter months . Larger storm systems , often Panhandle hooks or other storms that occur with a meridional flow , can bring large amounts of snow and even blizzard conditions . 
 = = = = Alberta clippers = = = = 
 Alberta clippers are fast @-@ moving areas of low pressure that move through Minnesota during the winter months . Clippers get their name from Alberta , Canada , the province from which they begin their southward track . ( Other variations of the same type of storm systems are " Saskatchewan Screamers " or " Manitoba Maulers " . ) Although clippers often originate over the northern Pacific Ocean , they lose most of their moisture through orographic lift when they collide with the Canadian Rockies . Because of the limited moisture content and quick movement of the systems , clippers rarely produce more than 6 in ( 15 cm ) of snow as they pass through Minnesota . The biggest effects of an Alberta Clipper are what follows them , and that is arctic air , high wind speed , and dangerous wind chills . This often results in severe blowing and drifting snow , and sometimes even blizzard conditions . Alberta Clippers often proceed to become copious lake @-@ effect snow producers on the southern and eastern shores of the Great Lakes . 
 = = = = Panhandle hooks = = = = 
 In terms of their characteristics , Panhandle hooks are nearly the opposite of Alberta clippers . Instead of forming in the north and dropping south , these low pressure systems form in the southwestern United States and then move northeast . They get their name from the location where they usually make their turn to the north ; near the panhandles of Oklahoma and Texas . Unlike clippers , these storms usually have a great deal of moisture to work with . As the storms make their turn to the north , they pull in moist air from the nearby Gulf of Mexico and pull it northward toward Minnesota and other parts of the Midwest . As these systems move to the northeast , there will usually be a heavy band of snow to the northwest of the low pressure center if there is enough cold air present . A wintery mix of precipitation , rain , or sometimes even thunderstorms will then often occur to the south of it . Snowfall over a foot ( 30 cm ) is not uncommon with a panhandle hook , and because of the high moisture content in these systems the snow is usually wet and heavy . Large panhandle hooks can become powerful enough to draw in arctic air after they pass by the state , leaving bitter cold temperatures and wind chills in their wake . Panhandle Hooks are responsible for some of the most famous blizzards that have occurred in the Midwest , including the Great Storm of 1975 . 
 = = Spring = = 
 Spring is a time of major transition in Minnesota . As winter nears its end , the sun rises higher in the sky and temperatures begin to moderate . As this happens much of the Midwest starts to experience severe thunderstorms and tornadoes . Storm systems that move inland from the Pacific begin to collide with the increasingly warm and moist air from the Gulf of Mexico . In the early part of the spring , Minnesota is usually not in a geographically favorable position to experience severe weather since the warm air needed for it has not yet pushed that far to the north . Early spring tornado outbreaks do occur occasionally in Minnesota though , as evidenced by the 1998 <unk> – St. Peter tornado outbreak on March 29 , 1998 . More often , Minnesota is on the northern ( cooler ) side of major storm systems in the early spring , which instead results in only rain and possibly snow . Even though the winter snow pack typically starts to melt in southern Minnesota in early March , there is usually still enough cold air present over Canada to allow for major snow storms in Minnesota until late April . 
 As spring progresses , the jet stream starts to push storm systems farther to the north , and southern Minnesota becomes more prone to severe thunderstorms and tornadoes . As spring moves into the later stages , the chances for snow continue to drop and eventually disappear , south to north . By the time it gets warm enough for severe weather in northern Minnesota , the strength of storm systems have usually started to decrease , which results in fewer severe storms in northern Minnesota compared to the southern part of the state . 
 = = = Wind = = = 
 With the exception of areas along the shores of Lake Superior , winds in Minnesota generally prevail from the north and northwest in the winter , and south and southeast in the summer . On average , autumn and spring are the windiest times of the year in Minnesota . October is the windiest month in northwest Minnesota , while April is the windiest over the rest of the state . Winds generally average between 9 – 11 mph ( 14 – 18 km / h ) across the state , with one major exception . The heaviest winds in the state are found on the Buffalo Ridge , or Coteau des Prairies , a flatiron @-@ shaped area extending from Watertown , South Dakota , diagonally across southwestern Minnesota and into Iowa . Created by two lobes of a glacier parting around a pre @-@ existing plateau during the ( Pleistocene ) Ice Age , the Buffalo Ridge is ideal for wind power generation , with average wind speeds of 16 @.@ 1 mph ( 26 @.@ 8 km / h ) . 
 = = = Floods = = = 
 Minnesota is prone to flooding in its major rivers by spring snowmelt runoff and ice jams . Spring flooding to some degree occurs almost annually on some Minnesota rivers , but major floods have occurred in 1965 , 1969 , 1997 , 2001 , and 2009 . The flooding in 1965 was the worst flood in Minnesota history on the Mississippi River , while the flooding in 1997 was the worst in history on the Red River . The Red River flood of 1997 was aided heavily by the 11 blizzards that struck Minnesota that winter . Besides heavy winter and spring snowfall , cold winter temperatures and heavy autumn and spring rains causing sudden run @-@ off surges are also common causes of spring river flooding in Minnesota . 
 Minnesota is also prone to both river flooding and localized flash flooding by extended periods of heavy late @-@ spring and summer rainfall . The Great Flood of 1993 on the Mississippi River was caused by copious amounts of rain that fell after the spring snow melt . 
 The 2007 Midwest flooding , which affected the hilly Driftless area of southeast Minnesota was the result of a training pattern of storms mixing warm moist air from Tropical Storm Erin with cooler Canadian air , resulting in record 24 @-@ hour rainfall totals of up to 17 inches ( 432 mm ) , with a similar flooding event in 2010 as a result of the remnants of tropical storm Georgette in the eastern Pacific and Hurricane Karl in the Gulf of Mexico . 
 = = Summer = = 
 During a Minnesota summer , heat and humidity predominate in the south , while warm and less humid conditions are generally present in the north . A main feature of summer weather in Minnesota and the Midwestern United States as a whole is the weakening of the jet stream , leading to slower movement of air masses , a general increase in the stability of temperatures , and less wind . The strong wind that does blow almost always comes from the south , bringing in warm temperatures and humidity . These humid conditions and a jet stream that has pushed into the northern parts of the U.S. initiate thunderstorm activity 30 – 40 days per year . 
 = = = Temperature = = = 
 Daily average summer temperatures in Minnesota range from the low 70s ( 22 ° C ) in the south to the mid 60s ° F ( 19 ° C ) in the north . Because summer time air masses are not as volatile as in the winter , daily high and low temperatures rarely vary more than 15 degrees ( 7 ° C ) either side of normal . While summertime around much of the country means long stretches of hot and humid weather , Minnesota is located far enough north where periods of cooler , drier polar air frequently move in behind polar fronts dropping south from Canada . The polar air typically does not linger very long however and is quickly replaced by the warmer and more humid air from the Gulf of Mexico again . The cool , dry polar air colliding with hot and humid summertime air keep the threat of thunderstorms and tornadoes in Minnesota through July and August . Northern Minnesota is considerably cooler and less humid than southern Minnesota during the summer months . For example , Duluth 's annual average temperature and dew point are 6 degrees ( 3 @.@ 4 ° C ) cooler than Minneapolis ' . 
 July is the hottest month in Minnesota statewide and is usually the month when the peak heat waves occur . In July 1936 , Minnesota and the rest of the Midwest suffered through its most severe heat wave on record . Most of the state was engulfed in 100 ° F ( 38 ° C ) temperatures for several days in a row , and Minnesota 's all @-@ time record high temperature of 114 ° F ( 46 ° C ) was equaled during this stretch . This heat wave was also responsible for the Twin Cities ' all @-@ time record high of 108 ° F ( 42 ° C ) , as well as the all @-@ time record high of several other cities across the state . 
 The western region of Minnesota experiences the hottest summer temperatures . Coteau des Prairies can heat cities to the north of it similar to how places in the Rocky Mountains are warmed by Chinook winds . As southwest winds blow down the slope of Coteau des Prairies , the air compresses and warms . This heats the hot air even further and often brings locations such as Beardsley and Moorhead the warmest temperatures in the state , despite their higher latitudes . 
 = = = Precipitation = = = 
 The summer months of June , July , August , and September account for nearly half of the annual precipitation total across the state of Minnesota . Most of this rain falls from thunderstorms , a frequent summer occurrence . Even though summer is the primary season for Minnesota to experience thunderstorms , they can occur from March to November . These storms can become severe , producing large hail , strong tornadoes , and large bow echos that result in damaging straight @-@ line winds . Minnesota has experienced several major derecho events , most recently the Boundary Waters @-@ Canadian Derecho which blew down millions of trees in the Boundary Waters Canoe Area Wilderness on July 4 , 1999 . 
 Summertime thunderstorms are fueled by dew points that often reach into the 70s ° F ( 21 ° C ) and sometimes even 80 ° F ( 27 ° C ) . In addition to severe conditions , thunderstorms produce heavy rain and cloud to ground lightning . Heavy rain brings flash floods to Minnesota an average of three days per year . With the exception of hail , summer precipitation in Minnesota is almost always in the form of rain . The lone exception is in far northern Minnesota , where in mid @-@ September , small amounts of snow become a possibility . 
 = = = = Droughts = = = = 
 Droughts are an annual summer concern in Minnesota , especially for farmers . The growing season ( which varies from 90 days per year in the Iron Range to 160 days in southeast Minnesota ) is when Minnesota averages its highest percentage of annual precipitation , so a lack of rainfall during this time period can be devastating to crops . The last major drought in Minnesota was in 1988 . During that year , the period of April – July was the 2nd driest in the previous century , and the period of May – August was the hottest on record . The combination of dry skies and heat caused a severe drought which cost the state approximately 1 @.@ 2 billion dollars in crop losses . 
 Other memorable drought years were 1976 and the Dust Bowl years of the 1930s . During the dust bowl , inappropriate farming techniques enhanced by years of drought conditions led to dust storms in Minnesota and the other parts of the Midwest . Drought conditions also have helped spawn forest fires . In 1894 the Great Hinckley Fire destroyed Hinckley killing an estimated 459 people , and in 1918 a forest fire killed 453 people in the vicinity of <unk> . More recently , in 2006 , the Cavity Lake Fire burned 31 @,@ 830 acres ( 129 km ² ) in the Boundary Waters Canoe Area Wilderness . 
 = = = = Tornadoes = = = = 
 Tornadoes are possible in Minnesota from March – November , but the peak tornado month is June , followed by July , May , and August . Tornadoes are most common in the southern half of the state , which is located on the northern edge of Tornado Alley . Just over a third of tornadoes in Minnesota strike between 4 : 00 pm – 6 : 00 pm . The state averages 27 tornadoes per year , 99 % of which have ratings of F2 or weaker . On average Minnesota has an F5 tornado once every 25 years . Some of the notable Minnesota tornadoes and outbreaks are : 
 August 21 , 1883 : An F5 tornado struck Rochester , killing 37 . This tornado led to the construction of a new hospital , which eventually evolved into the Mayo Clinic . 
 April 14 , 1886 : A large tornado struck Sauk Rapids , killing 72 . This was Minnesota 's deadliest tornado on record . 
 June 22 , 1919 : The second @-@ deadliest tornado in Minnesota history tore through Fergus Falls , killing 59 . 
 May 6 , 1965 : Four F4 tornadoes ripped through the Twin Cities metro area ( two of them in <unk> ) , killing 13 . 
 June 16 , 1992 : Minnesota experienced its second @-@ largest tornado outbreak with 27 recorded twisters . The largest tornado in this family was an F5 that struck Chandler , Minnesota , killing one . This is the most recent F5 tornado to strike the state . 
 March 29 , 1998 : An F4 and an F3 tornado that were part of a larger outbreak tore through the towns of <unk> and St. Peter . They killed two and caused damage in the millions of dollars in Minnesota 's earliest recorded tornado outbreak . 
 June 17 , 2010 : Three EF4 and six EF3 tornadoes were part of 48 twisters that touched down in Minnesota 's largest tornado outbreak on record . 
 = = Autumn = = 
 Autumn weather in Minnesota is marked by the rapid decrease of severe thunderstorms , dramatic cooling , and eventually the possibility of blizzards . With summer @-@ time heat still prevalent in the southern U.S. and colder air quickly taking hold in Canada , Minnesota can be affected by wide temperature swings in short periods of time . Because of this , the jet stream , which tends to weaken during the summer months , begins to re @-@ strengthen . This leads to quicker changes in weather patterns and increasingly strong storm systems . As autumn moves on , these storm systems bring with them progressively colder air , eventually changing the rain over snow , generally starting in October in the northern part of the state and November in the south . From September to December the average temperature in the state falls by approximately 43 ° F ( 23 ° C ) , the largest such temperature swing within any Minnesota season . 
 By late October and November atmospheric dynamics are generally in place to allow storm systems to become very intense . In fact , Minnesota 's all @-@ time record low pressure was recorded during autumn on October 26 , 2010 . If these powerful storm systems are able to draw enough cold air southward from Canada , they can evolve into powerful blizzards . Some of Minnesota 's most memorable winter storm events have occurred during the middle part of the autumn season . On November 11 , 1940 , the southeast half of Minnesota was surprised by the Armistice Day Blizzard . Temperatures in the 60s ° F ( 16 ° C ) on the morning of November 11 dropped into the single digits ( below – 12 ° C ) by the morning of November 12 , bringing with them 27 inches ( 69 cm ) of snow and 60 mph ( 100 km / h ) winds . Known deaths in this blizzard reached 154 , 49 of them in Minnesota . On October 31 , 1991 , much of Minnesota was hit by the Halloween Blizzard . A band of snowfall of 24 + in ( 60 + cm ) fell from the Twin Cities north to Duluth . It was the single largest snowfall ever recorded in many communities across eastern Minnesota . 
 = = Image and popular culture = = 
 Minnesota 's climate has done much to shape the image of the state . Minnesota has a late but intense spring , a summer of water sports , an autumn of brilliantly colored leaves , and a long winter with outdoor sports and activities . 
 " Summer at the lake " is a Minnesota tradition . Water skiing was invented in Minnesota by Ralph Samuelson , and the Minneapolis <unk> features a milk carton boat race . Contestants build boats from milk cartons and float them on Minneapolis area lakes , with recognition based more on colorful and imaginative designs than on actual racing performance . 
 But while Minnesota 's warm summers provide its natives and tourists with a variety of outdoor activities , the state is known for its winters . The state has produced curlers , skiers , and lugers who have competed in the Winter Olympics , pioneers who invented the snowmobile , and legions of ice fishing enthusiasts . 
 The state is also known for enthusiastic ice hockey players , both at the amateur and professional levels . Eveleth , Minnesota , home to the United States Hockey Hall of Fame , boasts of the number of quality players and the contributions of the city ( and the rest of the Mesabi Range ) to the growth and development of hockey in the United States . 
 To many outsiders , Minnesota 's winters appear to be cold and inhospitable . A World War II newscaster , in describing the brutally cold conditions of the Russian front , stated that at least Minnesotans could understand it . A New York journalist visited St. Paul and declared that the city was " another Siberia , unfit for human habitation . " In response , the city decided to build a huge ice palace in 1886 , similar to one that Montreal had built in 1885 . They hired the architects of the Canadian ice palace to design one for St. Paul and built a palace 106 ft ( 32 @.@ 3 m ) high with ice blocks cut from a nearby lake . This began the tradition of the Saint Paul Winter Carnival , a ten @-@ day festival which celebrates Minnesota 's winter season . 
 Minnesota 's winters are the setting of several television programs and Hollywood films , including the 1996 film Fargo which features the backdrop of a Minnesota winter , but like most of the characters in the movie , the climate is portrayed as bleak and inhospitable . 
 = Cetiosauriscus = 
 Not to be confused with another sauropod dinosaur , Cetiosaurus . 
 Cetiosauriscus ( / <unk> / meaning " whale lizard like " i.e. " Cetiosaurus @-@ like " ) is an extinct genus of sauropod dinosaur . It lived in the Callovian ( Middle to Late Jurassic Period ) of England ( about 165 to 161 million years ago [ mya ] ) . Cetiosauriscus was a quadrupedal , herbivorous , saurischian , and was possibly the earliest diplodocid . It was named by Friedrich von Huene in 1927 , for the species Cetiosaurus leedsi . Before 1993 it was shown that C. leedsi was not a Cetiosauriscus species , so that year Alan J. Charig sent a petition to the ICZN to designate C. stewarti as the type species . The remains include a series of vertebra , a hind leg , a partial sacrum , and a front leg . A potential additional specimen includes a diplodocid whiplash tail . Cetiosauriscus has , over time , been classified in Cetiosauridae , Diplodocidae , and <unk> . It lived alongside <unk> , Callovosaurus , and Lexovisaurus . 
 = = Description = = 
 Cetiosauriscus was a relatively small quadrupedal , herbivorous sauropod . It is estimated by Gregory S. Paul that Cetiosauriscus stood 6 metres ( 20 ft ) high and was 15 metres ( 49 ft ) in length , weighing about 4 tonnes ( 3 @.@ 9 long tons ; 4 @.@ 4 short tons ) . Another estimate , by Thomas R. Holtz Jr . , had Cetiosauriscus standing up to 15 metres ( 49 ft ) long and weighing roughly 14 tonnes ( 14 long tons ; 15 short tons ) . 
 The only overlapping material between BMNH R3078 and the holotype of Cetiosauriscus leedsi is an ilium . However , in both specimens the ilium was preserved in insufficient ways . Since the only overlapping material was impossible to compare , Charig found that BMNH R3078 was of a different species and he named it Cetiosauriscus stewarti . <unk> 1 is short and massive , with the prominent process on the lower part of the posterior margin of the lateral face , a characteristic of the diplodocoids Diplodocus , Apatosaurus , Cetiosauriscus and Dicraeosaurus . 
 Huene felt the vertebrae of BMNH R3078 had proportions different enough from Cetiosaurus to warrant its own genus . Also , the fusion of centra with minimal osseous proliferation is manifest in the caudal vertebrae of Cetiosauriscus . The Cetiosaurus specimen OUMNH <unk> has a low horizontal ridge on each of its lateral surfaces , creating a slightly <unk> transverse cross @-@ section , and is also seen on Cetiosauriscus , as well as the anterior caudals of Haplocanthosaurus , and caudals 15 to 30 of <unk> . Also , the area around the periphery of each articular face is flattened , creating a ' bevelled ' appearance , and also occurs in Cetiosaurus and Haplocanthosaurus . A whiplash tail was apparently found in the same deposits but it is not certain it belongs to the same individual . Since there is no overlapping material , this assignment to Cetiosauriscus should be treated with caution . 
 = = Classification = = 
 Von Huene originally classified Cetiosauriscus as a member of the <unk> within the Cetiosauridae . In 1978 , McIntosh concluded it belonged to the Diplodocidae because of double chevrons under its caudal vertebrae , the short front legs and a tabular bump on the lower end of its first metatarsal . This would make Cetiosauriscus the oldest known diplodocid . Two years later , Charig came to the same conclusion of <unk> origins . If Cetiosauriscus is a diplodocid , it moves the origin of Diplodocidae to the Callovian . If not , Diplodocidae is restricted to less than 10 million years . Many recent analysis 's have found Cetiosauriscus in Eusauropoda . The recent analysis done by Darren Naish and M. <unk> in 2007 has suggested it could have belonged to the <unk> instead , a group which also features double chevrons . Cetiosauriscus was included in the phylogenetic analysis of Carrano ( 2005 ) , where it was found to be a basal diplodocoid near Amphicoelias . 
 The below cladogram was published by Tschopp et al. in 2015 , during a specimen @-@ level analysis of Diplodocoidea . 
 = = = Distinguishing characteristics = = = 
 A characteristic that distinguishes Cetiosauriscus is that it has axially concave summits on the cranial and middle caudal neural spines . Barosaurus differs from it in having a more complex sculpting laterally and ventrally in the caudals ; in having a larger humerus @-@ femur ratio ; and in having differently developed chevrons . 
 = = Paleoecology = = 
 Cetiosauriscus lived during the Callovian , an epoch in the Middle Jurassic , about 165 to 161 mya , of the Lower Member of the Oxford Clay Formation . Other genera found within the same member include the indeterminate brachiosaurid " Ornithopsis " leedsi ; the stegosaurid Lexovisaurus ; the indeterminate ankylosaurian <unk> ; the ornithopod Callovosaurus ( previously Camptosaurus ) ; an unnamed <unk> ; and dinosaur eggs . The theropod Eustreptospondylus is also from the formation , but the Middle Member , along with indeterminate theropods and sauropods , and it may have preyed upon Cetiosauriscus . 
 = = Discovery and naming = = 
 In 1927 , German paleontologist Friedrich von Huene new genus for Cetiosaurus leedsi and its specimens BMNH <unk> – 1988 and BMNH R.3078 , Cetiosauriscus , after identifying sufficient differences from the former genus . He based his new name off Cetiosaurus ( " whale lizard " ) by adding the Latin suffix <unk> , meaning " like " , translating fully to " whale lizard like " . In 1939 Huene also moved " Ornithopsis " greppini , a species from Switzerland , to Cetiosauriscus , creating the new combination " Cetiosauriscus " greppini . In 1980 Alan J. Charig concluded that due to lack of comparable bones , BMNH R.3078 could not be assigned to the same taxon as BMNH <unk> – 1988 , and created a new species for the former : Cetiosauriscus stewarti . The specific name was chosen to honour Sir Ronald Stewart , the chairman of the London Brick Company , which owned the clay pit the fossils had been found in . Furthermore , Charig considered both C. leedsi and " C. " greppini nomina dubia , and C. stewarti valid . In 1993 , Charig decided to send a petition to the International Commission on Zoological Nomenclature ( ICZN ) , to ask them to change the type species of Cetiosauriscus from the dubious C. leedsi , to the taxonomically stable C. stewarti . This was accepted by the ICZN in 1995 , making BMNH R.3078 , the holotype of C. stewarti , the basis for Cetiosauriscus . C. stewarti is senior synonym in <unk> of Ornithopsis leedsi ( = Cetiosauriscus leedsi ; Cetiosaurus leedsi ) , as its holotype was once referred to this taxon . 
 BMNH R.3078 was found at Peterborough , Cambridgeshire , in strata of the Upper Oxford Clay and consists of a series of vertebrae from the rear half of the skeleton . Other remains , including a front leg with fossilized cartilage in its joint , a hind leg , and a partial sacrum have been referred to and accepted as C. stewarti . A whiplash tail from the same locality was thought by Charig as possibly belonging to Cetiosauriscus , but the assignment is not fully accepted by paleontologists . With that much material , Cetiosauriscus is one of the most complete sauropods from the United Kingdom . 
 = = = Historic species = = = 
 Over the years , multiple species that have once been assigned to Cetiosauriscus have been considered invalid , reassigned , or sunk as a synonym : 
 Cetiosauriscus leedsi : In 1887 , John Whittaker Hulke named a new species of sauropod , Ornithopsis leedsi . He designated BMNH <unk> – 1988 as its type series , bones from the collections found by Alfred Nicholson Leeds . In 1905 , Harry Govier Seeley made a suggestion to Arthur Smith Woodward , who took Seeley 's advice and renamed O. leedsi , Cetiosaurus leedsi . Woodward also referred an additional specimen to the species , BMNH <unk> The specimen was mounted and displayed for many years in the Dinosaur Gallery of the British Museum of Natural History ( now the Natural History Museum ) in London . An additional specimen , BMNH <unk> , referred to C. leedsi under the genus Cetiosaurus , includes some ribs , and may belong to a pliosaur . All referrals of C. leedsi outside of Ornithopsis are no longer accepted , and the species is thought to represent a new indeterminate brachiosaurid . 
 Cetiosauriscus greppini : Another species previously in Ornithopsis that was included in Cetiosauriscus , O. greppini was reclassified by Huene in 1929 . " Cetiosauriscus " greppini was later renamed again by Huene in 1932 as Cetiosaurus greppini , a junior synonym of " Cetiosauriscus " greppini . " Cetiosauriscus " greppini is from the <unk> Formation , a formation of Early Kimmeridgian age . It is known from three individuals , the holotype being the most complete . " Cetiosauriscus " greppini differs from Cetiosauriscus stewarti by having caudal transverse processes that are <unk> flat and have a distinct dorsal wing @-@ like expansion . It also differs in having anterior posterior <unk> laminae situated ventrally from the anterior caudal transverse process , a coracoid with a rounded outline and with a notch ventrally to the glenoid articular face , remarkably straight shafts of humerus and femur , a distal end of the humerus with a higher medial than lateral <unk> , a more proximally placed 4th trochanter , and a longer and straighter ischium shaft . These characters certify that both taxa differ on the generic level . The discovery of cartilaginous tissue relatively proximal to the end of the humerus of " Cetiosauriscus " greppini has suggested that the cartilage caps of sauropods may have been larger than predicted by an Alligator CCF and that the cartilage caps extended fairly far onto the metaphysics of some long bones . " Cetiosauriscus " greppini is known from a femur with bite marks on it . The marks strongly match the teeth of <unk> , meaning that <unk> scavenged or possibly regularly preyed on animals like Cetiosauriscus . " Cetiosauriscus " greppini is now considered to be Eusauropoda incertae sedis . 
 Cetiosauriscus longus : In 1990 , John Stanton McIntosh recombined Cetiosaurus longus as a species of Cetiosauriscus . This classification is not accepted and Cetiosauriscus longus is a junior objective synonym of Cetiosaurus longus because it cannot be proven to possess any characteristic autapomorphies of Cetiosauriscus . In 1993 , Charig found the species to be a nomen dubium . 
 Cetiosauriscus glymptonensis : Phillips ( 1871 ) named Cetiosaurus glymptonensis on the basis of nine middle @-@ distal caudal centra from the Forest Marble Formation of Oxfordshire , England . In 1990 , McIntosh renamed Cetiosaurus glymptonensis as " Cetiosauriscus " glymptonensis . Upchurch and Martin ( 2003 ) reexamined this material and concluded that it was potentially a diplodocid and was distinct from both Cetiosaurus <unk> and Cetiosauriscus . The centra are elongated , as occurs in many diplodocids . The lateral surfaces of the centra bear two parallel horizontal ridges , causing the centra to be octagonal in transverse cross @-@ section . The upper ridge is also present in Cetiosauriscus but the lower ridge is unique . This was later renamed into Cetiosauriscus . " Cetiosauriscus " glymptonensis is diagnosed by middle @-@ distal caudal centra having a distinct horizontal ridge approximately one @-@ third the way up the lateral surface . " Cetiosauriscus " glymptonensis is considered to be Eusauropoda incertae sedis , in need of a new genus . 
 = Jaws ( novel ) = 
 Jaws is a 1974 novel by American writer Peter Benchley . It tells the story of a great white shark that preys upon a small resort town and the voyage of three men trying to kill it . The novel grows out of Benchley 's interest in shark attacks after he learned about the exploits of shark fisherman Frank Mundus in 1964 . Doubleday commissioned him to write the novel in 1971 , a period where Benchley struggled as a freelance journalist . 
 Through a marketing campaign orchestrated by Doubleday and paperback publisher Bantam , Jaws was incorporated into many book sales clubs catalogues and attracted media interest . After first publication in February 1974 , the novel was a great success , with the hardback staying on the bestseller list for some 44 weeks and the subsequent paperback selling millions of copies in the following year . Reviews were mixed , with many literary critics finding the prose and characterization lacking despite the novel 's effective suspense . 
 Film producers Richard D. Zanuck and David Brown read the novel before its publication and bought the film rights , selecting Steven Spielberg to direct the film adaptation . The Jaws film , released in June 1975 , omitted many of the novel 's minor subplots , focusing more on the shark and the characterizations of the three protagonists . Jaws became the highest grossing movie in history up to that point , becoming a watershed film in motion picture history and the father of the summer blockbuster film . Three sequels followed the film . 
 = = Plot summary = = 
 The story is set in Amity , a fictional seaside resort town on Long Island , New York . One night , a massive great white shark kills a young tourist named Chrissie Watkins while she skinny dips in the open waters . After finding what remains of her body washed up on the beach , investigators realize she was attacked by a shark . Police chief Martin Brody orders Amity 's beaches closed , but mayor Larry Vaughn and the town 's selectmen overrule him out of fear for damage to summer tourism , the town 's main industry . With the connivance of Harry Meadows , the editor of the local newspaper , they hush up the attack . 
 A few days later , the shark kills a young boy named Alex Kintner and an old man not far from the shore . A local fisherman , Ben Gardner , is sent by Amity 's authorities to kill the shark but disappears on the water . Brody and deputy Leonard Hendricks find Gardner 's boat anchored off @-@ shore , empty , and covered with large bite holes , one of which has a massive shark tooth stuck in it . Blaming himself for these deaths , Brody again tries to close the beaches , while Meadows investigates the Mayor 's business contacts to determine why he wants to keep the beaches open . Meadows uncovers links to the Mafia , who pressure Vaughn to keep the beaches open in order to protect the value of Amity 's real estate , in which the Mafia invested a great deal of money . Meadows also recruits marine biologist Matt Hooper from the Woods Hole Institute to advise them on how to deal with the shark . 
 Meanwhile , Brody 's wife Ellen misses the affluent life she had before marrying Brody and having children . She starts a romantic relationship with Hooper , who is the younger brother of a man she used to date , and the two have a brief affair in a motel outside of town . Throughout the rest of the novel , Brody suspects they have had a liaison and is haunted by the thought . 
 With the beaches still open , people pour to the town , hoping to glimpse the killer shark . Brody sets up patrols to watch for the fish . After a boy narrowly escapes another attack close to the shore , Brody closes the beaches and hires Quint , a professional shark hunter , to kill the shark . Brody , Quint , and Hooper set out on Quint 's vessel , the Orca . The trio are soon at odds with one another . Quint 's methods anger Hooper , especially when he disembowels a blue shark , and then uses an illegally fished unborn dolphin for bait . All the while , Quint taunts Hooper as a rich college boy . Brody and Hooper also argue , as Brody 's suspicions about Hooper 's possible affair with Ellen grow stronger ; Brody eventually attempts to strangle Hooper . 
 Their first two days at sea are unproductive and they return to port each night . On the third day , Hooper wants to bring along a shark proof cage . Initially Quint refuses , considering it a suicidal idea , but he relents when Hooper offers him a hundred dollars . On the ocean , the shark finally shows up . Hooper guesses the animal must be at least twenty feet long , and is visibly excited and in awe . After several unsuccessful attempts by Quint to harpoon the shark , Hooper goes underwater in the cage . He resolves to first take photos of the shark , before trying to kill it with a bang stick . However , the shark attacks the cage , tearing it apart , and kills and eats Hooper . 
 Larry Vaughn arrives at the Brody house before Brody returns home , and informs Ellen that he and his wife are leaving Amity . Before he leaves , he tells Ellen that he always thought they would have made a great couple . When Brody and Quint return to sea the following day , the shark starts ramming the boat , but Quint is able to harpoon it . The shark leaps out of the water and onto the stern of the Orca , ripping a huge hole in the aft section and causing the boat to begin to sink . Quint plunges another harpoon into the shark , but as it falls back into the water , his foot gets entangled in the rope , and he is dragged underwater and drowns . Brody , now floating on a seat cushion , spots the shark swimming towards him and prepares for his death . When the shark gets within a few feet of him , it succumbs to its many wounds , rolls over in the water , and dies . The great fish sinks down out of sight , dragging Quint 's still entangled body behind it . Brody manages to paddle back to shore on his makeshift float , the lone survivor of the ordeal . 
 = = Development = = 
 Peter Benchley had a long time fascination with sharks , which he frequently encountered while fishing with his father Nathaniel in Nantucket . As a result , for years , he had considered writing " a story about a shark that attacks people and what would happen if it came in and wouldn 't go away . " This interest grew greater after reading a 1964 news story about fisherman Frank Mundus catching a great white shark weighing 4 @,@ 550 pounds ( 2 @,@ 060 kg ) off the shore of Montauk Point , Long Island , New York . 
 In 1971 , Benchley worked as a freelance writer struggling to support his wife and children . In the meantime , his literary agent scheduled regular meetings with publishing house editors . One of them was Doubleday editor Thomas Congdon , who had lunch with Benchley seeking book ideas . Congdon did not find Benchley 's proposals for non @-@ fiction interesting , but instead favored his idea for a novel about a shark terrorizing a beach resort . Benchley sent a page to Congdon 's office , and the editor paid him $ 1 @,@ 000 for 100 pages . Those pages would comprise the first four chapters , and the full manuscript received a $ 7 @,@ 500 total advance . Congdon and the Doubleday crew were confident , seeing Benchley as " something of an expert in sharks " , given the author self @-@ described " knowing as much as any amateur about sharks " as he had read some research books and seen the 1971 documentary Blue Water White Death . After Doubleday commissioned the book , Benchley then started researching all possible material regarding sharks . Among his sources were the Peter Matthiessen 's Blue Meridian , Jacques Cousteau 's The Shark : Splendid Savage of the Sea , Thomas B. Allen 's Shadows In The Sea , and David H. Davies ' About Sharks And Shark Attacks . 
 Benchley only began writing once his agent reminded him that if he did not deliver the pages , he would have to return the already cashed and spent money . The hastily written pages were met with derision by Congdon , who did not like Benchley 's attempt at making the book comedic . Congdon only approved the first five pages , which went into the eventual book without any changes , and asked Benchley to follow the tone of that introduction . After a month , Benchley delivered rewritten chapters , and which Congdon approved , alongside a broader outline of the story . The manuscript took a year and a half to complete . During this time , Benchley worked in his makeshift office above a furnace company in Pennington , New Jersey during the winter , and in a converted turkey coop in the seaside property of his wife 's family in Stonington , Connecticut during the summer . Congdon dictated further changes from the rest of the book , including a sex scene between Brody and his wife which was changed to Ellen and Hooper . Congdon did not feel that there was " any place for this wholesome marital sex in this kind of book " . After various revisions and rewrites , alongside sporadic payments of the advance , Benchley delivered his final draft in January 1973 . 
 Benchley was also partly inspired by the Jersey Shore shark attacks of 1916 where there were four recorded fatalities and one critical injury from shark attacks from July 1 through July 12 , 1916 . The story is very similar to the story in Benchley 's book with a vacation beach town on the Atlantic coast being haunted by a killer shark and people eventually being commissioned to hunt down and kill the shark or sharks responsible . There is another similarity in the 1916 incident and the book where kids are attacked in a body of water other than the ocean - in the 1916 incident a child and an adult who attempted to save him were attacked and killed in Matawan Creek , a brackish / freshwater creek about 30 miles inland from the Atlantic and in the novel / film Mike Brody is nearly killed in the " pond " which is actually small inland cove that connects to the open ocean through a small tributary . 
 = = = Title and cover = = = 
 Shortly before the book went to print , Benchley and Congdon needed to choose a title . Benchley had many working titles during development , many of which he calls " pretentious " , such as The Stillness in the Water and Leviathan Rising . Benchley regarded other ideas , such as The Jaws of Death and The Jaws of Leviathan , as " melodramatic , weird or pretentious " . Congdon and Benchley brainstormed about the title frequently , with the writer estimating about 125 ideas raised . The novel still did not have a title until twenty minutes before production of the book . The writer discussed the problem with editor Tom Congdon at a restaurant in New York : 
 We cannot agree on a word that we like , let alone a title that we like . In fact , the only word that even means anything , that even says anything , is " jaws " . Call the book Jaws . He said " What does it mean ? " I said , " I don 't know , but it 's short ; it fits on a jacket , and it may work . " He said , " Okay , we 'll call the thing Jaws . 
 For the cover , Benchley wanted an illustration of Amity as seen through the jaws of a shark . Doubleday ’ s design director , Alex Gotfryd , assigned book illustrator Wendell Minor with the task . The image was eventually vetoed for sexual overtones , compared by sales managers to the vagina dentata . Congdon and Gotfryd eventually settled on printing a typographical jacket , but that was subsequently discarded once Bantam editor Oscar Dystel noted the title Jaws was so vague " it could have been a title about dentistry " . Gottfried tried to get Minor to do a new cover , but he was out of town , so he instead turned to artist Paul Bacon . Bacon drew an enormous shark head , and Gottfried suggested adding a swimmer " to have a sense of disaster and a sense of scale " . The subsequent drawing became the eventual hardcover art , with a shark head rising towards a swimming woman . 
 Despite the acceptance of the Bacon cover by Doubleday , Dystel did not like the cover , and assigned New York illustrator Roger Kastel to do a different one for the paperback . Following Bacon 's concept , Kastel illustrated his favorite part of the novel , the opening where the shark attacks Chrissy . For research , Kastel went to the American Museum of Natural History , and took advantage of the Great White exhibits being closed for cleaning to photograph the models . The photographs then provided reference for a " ferocious @-@ looking shark that was still realistic . ” After painting the shark , Kastel did the female swimmer . Following a photoshoot for Good Housekeeping , Kastel requested the model he was photographing to lie on a stool in the approximate position of a front crawl . The oil @-@ on @-@ board painting Kastel created for the cover would eventually be reused by Universal Studios on the film posters . 
 = = Themes and style = = 
 The story of Jaws is limited by how the humans respond to the shark menace . The fish is given much detail , with descriptions of its anatomy and presence creating the sense of an unstoppable threat . <unk> the menace are violent descriptions of the shark attacks . Along with a carnivorous killer on the sea , Amity is populated with equally predatory humans : the mayor has ties with the mafia , an adulterous housewife , criminals among the tourists . 
 In the meantime , the impact of the predatory deaths resemble Henrik Ibsen 's play An Enemy of the People , with the mayor of a small town panicking over how a problem will drive away the tourists . Another source of comparison raised by critics was Moby @-@ Dick , particularly regarding Quint 's characterization and the ending featuring a confrontation with the shark ; Quint even dies the same way as Captain Ahab . The central character , Chief Brody , fits a common characterization of the disaster genre , an authority figure who is forced to provide guidance to those affected by the sudden tragedy . Focusing on a working class local leads the book 's prose to describe the beachgoers with contempt , and Brody to have conflicts with the rich outsider Hooper . 
 = = Publication history = = 
 Benchley says that neither he nor anyone else involved in its conception initially realized the book 's potential . Tom Congdon , however , sensed that the novel had prospects and had it sent out to The Book of the Month Club and paperback houses . The Book of the Month Club made it an " A book " , qualifying it for its main selection , then Reader 's Digest also selected it . The publication date was moved back to allow a carefully orchestrated release . It was released first in hardcover in February 1974 , then in the book clubs , followed by a national campaign for the paperback release . Bantam bought the paperback rights for $ 575 @,@ 000 , which Benchley points out was " then an enormous sum of money " . Once Bantam 's rights lapsed years later , they reverted to Benchley , who subsequently sold them to Random House , who has since done all the reprints of Jaws . 
 Upon release , Jaws became a great success . According to John Baxter 's biography of Steven Spielberg , the novel 's first entry on California 's best @-@ seller list was caused by Spielberg and producers Richard D. Zanuck and David Brown , who were on pre @-@ production for the Jaws film , buying a hundred copies of the novel each , most of whom were sent to " opinion @-@ makers and members of the chattering class " . Jaws was the state 's most successful book by 7 p.m. on the first day . However , sales were good nationwide without engineering . The hardcover stayed on The New York Times bestseller list for some 44 weeks - peaking at number two behind Watership Down - selling a total of 125 @,@ 000 copies . The paperback version was even more successful , topping book charts worldwide , and by the time the film adaptation debuted in June 1975 the novel had sold 5 @.@ 5 million copies domestically , a number that eventually reached 9 @.@ 5 million copies . Worldwide sales are estimated at 20 million copies . The success made the American Broadcasting Company invite Benchley for an episode of The American Sportsman where the writer wound up swimming with sharks in Australia , in what would be the first of many nature @-@ related television programs Benchley would take part in . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Despite the commercial success , reviews were mixed . The most common criticism focused on the human characters . Michael A. Rogers of Rolling Stone declared that " None of the humans are particularly likable or interesting " and confessed the shark was his favorite character " and one suspects Benchley 's also . " Steven Spielberg shared the sentiment , saying he initially found many of the characters unsympathetic and wanted the shark to win , a characterization he changed in the film adaptation . 
 Critics also derided Benchley 's writing . Time reviewer John <unk> described the novel as " cliché and crude literary calculation " , where events " refuse to take on life and momentum " and the climax " lacks only Queequeg 's coffin to resemble a bath tub version of Moby @-@ Dick . " Writing for The Village Voice , Donald Newlove declared that " Jaws has rubber teeth for a plot . It 's boring , pointless , listless ; if there 's a trite turn to make , Jaws will make that turn . " An article in The Listener criticized the plot , stating the " novel only has bite , so to say , at feed time , " and these scenes are " naïve attempts at whipping along a flagging story @-@ line . " Andrew Bergman of The New York Times Book Review felt that despite the book serving as " fluid entertainment " , " passages of hollow <unk> creep in " while poor scene " connections [ and ] stark manipulations impair the narrative . " 
 Nevertheless , some reviewers found Jaws 's description of the shark attacks entertaining . John Spurling of the New Statesman asserted that while the " characterisation of the humans is fairly rudimentary " , the shark " is done with exhilarating and alarming skill , and every scene in which it appears is imagined at a special pitch of intensity . " Christopher Lehmann @-@ Haupt praised the novel in a short review for The New York Times , highlighting the " strong plot " and " rich thematic substructure . " The Washington Post 's Robert F. Jones described Jaws as " much more than a gripping fish story . It is a tightly written , tautly paced study , " which " forged and touched a metaphor that still makes us tingle whenever we enter the water . " New York Magazine reviewer Eliot Fremont @-@ Smith found the novel " immensely readable " despite the lack of " memorable characters or much plot surprise or originality " ; Fremont @-@ Smith wrote that Benchley " fulfills all expectations , provides just enough civics and ecology to make us feel good , and tops it off with a really terrific and grisly battle scene " . 
 In the years following publication , Benchley began to feel responsible for the negative attitudes against sharks that his novel engendered . He became an ardent ocean conservationist . In an article for the National Geographic published in 2000 , Benchley writes " considering the knowledge accumulated about sharks in the last 25 years , I couldn 't possibly write Jaws today ... not in good conscience anyway . Back then , it was generally accepted that great whites were <unk> ( they ate people ) by choice . Now we know that almost every attack on a human is an accident : The shark mistakes the human for its normal prey . " Upon his death in 2006 , Benchley 's widow Wendy declared the author " kept telling people the book was fiction " , and comparing Jaws to The Godfather , " he took no more responsibility for the fear of sharks than Mario Puzo took responsibility for the Mafia . " 
 = = Film adaptation = = 
 Richard D. Zanuck and David Brown , film producers at Universal Pictures , both heard about the book before publication at the same time . Upon reading it , both agreed the novel was exciting and deserved a feature film adaptation , even if they were unsure how to accomplish it . Benchley 's agent sold the adaptation rights for $ 150 @,@ 000 , plus an extra $ 25 @,@ 000 for Benchley to write the screenplay . Although this delighted the author , who had very little money at the time , it was a low sum , as the agreement occurred before the book became a surprise bestseller . After securing the rights , Steven Spielberg , who was making his first theatrical film , The Sugarland Express , for the Universal producers , was hired as the director . To play the protagonists , the producers cast Robert Shaw as Quint , Roy Scheider as Brody and Richard Dreyfuss as Hooper . 
 Benchley 's contract promised him the first draft of the Jaws screenplay . He wrote three drafts before passing the job over to other writers ; the only other writer credited beside Benchley was the author responsible for the shooting script , actor @-@ writer Carl Gottlieb . Benchley also appears in the film playing a small onscreen role as a reporter . For the adaptation , Spielberg wanted to preserve the novel 's basic concept while removing Benchley 's many subplots and changing the characterizations , having found the characters of the book unlikable . Among the changes were the removal of the adulterous affair between Ellen Brody and Matt Hooper , making Quint a survivor of the World War II USS Indianapolis disaster , and changing the cause of the shark 's death from extensive wounds to a scuba tank explosion . The director estimated the final script had a total of 27 scenes that were not in the book . Amity was also relocated ; while scouting the book 's Long Island setting , Brown found it " too grand " and not fitting the idea of " a vacation area that was lower middle class enough so that an appearance of a shark would destroy the tourist business . " Thus now the setting was an island in New England , filmed in Martha 's Vineyard , Massachusetts . 
 Released on theaters in 1975 , Jaws became the highest @-@ grossing film ever at the time , a record it held for two years until the release of Star Wars . Benchley was satisfied with the adaptation , noting how dropping the subplots allowed for " all the little details that fleshed out the characters " . The film 's success lead to three sequels , which Benchley had no involvement despite drawing on his characters . According to Benchley , once his payment of the adaptation @-@ related royalties got late , he called his agent and she replied that the studio was arranging a deal for sequels . Benchley disliked the idea , saying " I don 't care about sequels ; who 'll ever want to make a sequel to a movie about a fish ? " . He subsequently relinquished the Jaws sequel rights , aside for a one @-@ time payment of $ 70 @,@ 000 for each one . 
 = 1936 FA Cup Final = 
 The 1936 FA Cup Final was a football match between Arsenal and Sheffield United on 25 April 1936 at Wembley . The showpiece match of English football 's primary cup competition , the Football Association Challenge Cup ( better known as the FA Cup ) , it was the 64th Cup final , and the fourteenth at the national stadium . 
 Each team received a bye to the third round of the tournament , and then progressed through five rounds before reaching the final . Arsenal were in a successful phase , with this final following recent First Division titles , while Sheffield United were attempting to emulate the success of their rivals Sheffield Wednesday in the tournament the year before . A closely fought first half was followed by a dominant second half by Arsenal , who won by a single goal , scored by Ted Drake in the 74th minute . A media ban by the stadium 's bosses caused reporters to fly above the stadium in autogyros to see the match and the BBC experimented with sports commentators for the first time during its live broadcast of the final . 
 = = Route to the final = = 
 = = = Arsenal = = = 
 Being from the First and Second Divisions respectively , both Arsenal and Sheffield United were seeded into the third round of the FA Cup . In the third round itself , Arsenal was drawn away against Third Division South team Bristol Rovers . Arsenal missed a penalty , and the third Division team went a goal up in the first half ; Arsenal were playing so poorly that it seemed they would struggle even for a draw . The turnaround in the match occurred when Cliff Bastin took over from Bobby Davidson at the inside left position . Arsenal equalized in the 65th minute , and scored further four times over the course of the following fourteen minutes to win the game by five goals to one , with a single goal from Bowden and two each from Drake and Bastin . 
 They followed this in the fourth round with a 2 – 0 victory over Liverpool at Anfield . The match was played seven days after the death of King George V , with both teams wearing black armbands . The crowd of 60 @,@ 000 stood to sing Abide with Me and God Save the King before the kickoff . In the fifth round they were drawn against Newcastle United , in a rematch of the 1932 final . Newcastle had already knocked out the current cup holders , Sheffield Wednesday , in an earlier round . On the day , the gates to St James ' Park needed to be closed before the match started to keep additional spectators out , some 64 @,@ 484 fans already being inside the ground . The match resulted in a 3 @-@ 3 draw , Arsenal having gone a goal ahead each time , but Newcastle coming back and equalizing . The reason being according to the report in The Times was because " Whenever the lead was gained , the side concentrated entirely on defense . " In the replay at home , Arsenal won the game 3 – 0 . They had gone a goal up in the first half from a penalty scored by Bastin after the Newcastle centre half David Davidson handled the ball in the box . Newcastle were unlucky not to draw level , and only Eddie Hapgood clearing a shot off the line prevented the scoreline being equal once more . The second goal came during an advance by Arsenal , where the Newcastle goalkeeper , Norman Tapken , cleared the ball directly to Arsenal midfielder Pat Beasley , who shot the ball into the back of an empty net . The final goal was another penalty , caused when Bastin was brought down in the box , who then promptly took and scored the shot himself . 
 In their quarter final , they defeated Second Division Barnsley 4 – 1 , having outplayed them right from the start , the first goal coming in the fourth minute from Beasley in an attacking move . Bowden scored the second goal , and the third came from a penalty scored by Bastin . The fourth and final Arsenal goal was Beasley 's second , with Barnsley 's consolation goal coming a couple of minutes from the end of the match . In the semi final , played at Huddersfield Town 's ground , beating Grimsby Town 1 – 0 in a match that was described by reporters as completely one sided , with the goal coming from Bastin five minutes before half time . 
 = = = Sheffield United = = = 
 Meanwhile , Sheffield United 's third round match at Burnley ended in a 0 – 0 draw , before winning 2 – 1 in the replay at home on a snow @-@ covered pitch in a game that was marred by heavy fog at the start . Harold Barton scored for United , before Ted Hancock equalized for Burnley . Bobby Barclay scored United 's second goal before the break . An additional goal by Jock Dodds for United was disallowed in the second half due to the player being ruled offside . 
 The fourth round saw them drawn away again , this time at Preston North End again drawing 0 – 0 in the initial match , the return match at home on 30 January this time resulting in a 2 – 0 victory after playing the entire second half with only ten men in front of a crowd of 34 @,@ 259 supporters . In comparison , a record crowd of 68 @,@ 287 at Bramall Lane saw Sheffield United defeat Leeds United 3 – 1 , the first time in the tournament they won without going to a replay . They repeated that scoreline against Tottenham Hotspur in the quarter final on a marshy pitch in driving snow . United were up by half time thanks to a goal by Barclay . In the second half , Spurs came back strongly , but two goals from Dodds won the game for United , with Tottenham scoring a consolation goal late on . 
 Sheffield United were drawn against Fulham in the semi final , which guaranteed that a Second Division team would make it through to the final . The match was held at Wolverhampton Wanderers ' Molineux Stadium on 21 March , where United won 2 – 1 . The two teams faced each other again a week later in a league match , where Fulham won 1 @-@ 0 thanks to a penalty , ending an unbeaten run of 22 games for United . 
 = = Pre @-@ match = = 
 Arsenal had most recently appeared in the final in 1932 , being defeated by Newcastle United , while their most recent FA Cup victory came two seasons earlier in 1930 against Huddersfield Town . Meanwhile , Sheffield United had won the title in their previous appearance , beating Cardiff City in the 1925 final . Arsenal had been the more successful team in recent years , having won three First Division titles in succession in the past few seasons ; while Sheffield United were keen to win the trophy after the success of rival team Sheffield Wednesday in the 1935 Final . 
 Both teams had provided players to the England national football team earlier in the month for a match against Scotland , with Arsenal providing George Male , Jack Crayston and Cliff Bastin , while Sheffield United gave Bobby Barclay . Alex James , despite being Arsenal 's captain and having previously played for the Scottish international team , was not chosen for that match , which resulted in a 1 – 1 draw , enabling Scotland to win the 1936 British Home Championship . 
 Wembley bosses were in dispute with newsreel companies over the broadcast rights for the 1936 final . Gaumont British Film Company initially had offered £ 900 to film inside the ground , but this was refused by the authorities who wanted a sum of £ 1 @,@ 500 . They later backed down and said that they would accept the initial offer , but the film company was now only willing to pay £ 500 . A solution could not be reached , and the media were banned from inside of the stadium . To get around the ban and be able to report on the match , a number of autogyros were hired to fly the reporters over the stadium giving them a birds – eye view of the match , with the only filming inside Wembley conducted by the official stadium cameraman . <unk> had been used to film the final in 1935 , and also by the Metropolitan police for crowd control . 
 It was the first year that commentators were used in the broadcast of an FA Cup final , with the BBC describing it as an " experiment " . The first commentators were Ivan Sharpe and Norman Creek , who broadcast from 2 : 30 pm onwards before the game to take in the pre – match entertainment . 
 Arsenal played in red and white shirts in an FA Cup final for the first time , on previous occasions in 1930 and 32 they wore fully red shirts . Additionally , before the 1967 / 68 season , Arsenal only wore team badges on their shirts on special occasions , such as FA Cup Finals . The 1936 cup final was the fourth occasion such a badge was worn . Sheffield United also wore crested red and white shirts , their vertical stripe design . 
 = = Match = = 
 More than 93 @,@ 000 spectators attended the match , with fans from Sheffield travelling from the north on specially laid @-@ on trains . Changes to the teams were made before the match , with Ted Drake available for Arsenal following an injury . Sheffield United replaced Don Bird with Bertie Williams on the outside left , and Charlie Wilkinson was brought back into the team to replace Albert Cox who had played in the semi final against Fulham while Wilkinson was injured . 
 While the weather was fine , the wind whipped up to such an extent at pitch level that the ball was taken out of its proper flight on occasion . In the third minute Sheffield United were nearly a goal up after Arsenal goalkeeper Wilson dropped the ball to the ground and fumbled at it trying to pick it up . United players Barclay and Dodds both charged in to take advantage , but an Arsenal defender cleared the ball away before they could turn the opportunity into a goal . During the first fifteen minutes , United were the superior team with the work of their forwards only failing against the work of Arsenal 's full backs and goalkeeper with Wilson continuing to looking not entirely safe . Arsenal 's defenders eventually settled with Crayston and Copping stepping up for their team . 
 During the match , the attacks of Arsenal were mostly held at bay by Sheffield United 's backs , with Bowden and Bastin both performing poorly , although it was Bastin who set up the move that resulted in the only goal of the game . Arsenal 's attacking tactics had favored these two players , with not much play going through to Drake . The standout player was Joe Hulme who managed to cut inside repeatedly , threatening United with an extra yard or two of speed over his marker . James also performed well , getting in more attacks on goal than usual . Smith , in goal for the Blades , had a particularly steady game and their forwards Barclay and Pickering played particularly well with their attacks only prevented by the work of Male who was described by The Times as having the " game of his life " . United 's attacks were mostly restricted by the Arsenal defence to long range shooting . The first half of the match finished at a 0 – 0 draw , with the attacks spread equally between the two teams . 
 The second half started off with Crayston briefly taking on the role of a forward , driving in a shot that Smith did well to save . Arsenal 's forwards followed this with a flowing move from James , Hulme and Bastin , with the final move resulting in Bastin heading just wide of the post . Although play in the first half was relatively equal , in the second half Arsenal were the superior side , simply outclassing the Second Division Sheffield United . In the 74th minute a movement was started by James , who passed the ball to Bastin . Bastin dribbled the ball past Hooper before crossing the ball into the centre for Drake , who drove the ball into the roof of the net with his left foot . Moments after the goal United were on the attack , Barton broke down the right wing , crossing the ball in for Dodds who , finding his marker out of position , headed the ball against the bar . Dodds later said in an interview , " I was just about to direct the ball down into the net when a wee fellow called Wilf Copping went up behind me and , in striving to get to the ball , punched me in the back . This had the unfortunate effect of knocking my head backwards so the ball <unk> against the crossbar instead of nestling itself in the back of the net . But for that , who knows , things might have turned out different . " Arsenal won the game with a single goal , the match having been mostly full of positive play and relatively free of fouls , although Drake was penalised on five occasions for using his elbows too much . 
 = = = Match details = = = 
 Match rules 
 90 minutes . 
 30 minutes of extra @-@ time if necessary . 
 Replay if scores still level . 
 = = Post match = = 
 Arsenal returned to Brighton following the game to rest , where they had conducted their pre @-@ match training . Each of the victorious player 's wives were presented with a silver wristwatch . Neither club reported any injuries sustained during the match . This was not the final match of the season for Arsenal , who followed the final with a further three league matches in a week , including a game against London rivals Chelsea . Their final match of the season was against Brentford in the London Challenge Cup on 4 May , where they won 4 – 2 . Arsenal finished the season in sixth position in the First Division , having drawn 2 – 2 with Leeds in their final match . Sheffield United finished the Second Division in third place , missing out on promotion to the higher tier by one place . 
 As of the 2013 – 14 FA Cup , Sheffield United is yet to return to an FA Cup Final , the closest the club has been in FA Cup is the semi @-@ finals where they lost to Leicester City in 1961 , Sheffield Wednesday in 1993 , Newcastle United in 1998 , Arsenal in 2003 only to be defeated again by Arsenal , months before losing to Liverpool in the same round in the 2003 Football League Cup and Hull City in 2014 The shirt worn by Alex James during the 1936 final is displayed in the Arsenal Museum . Jock Dodds , who died on 23 February 2007 , was the last surviving player from the final . 
 = 1976 Canada Cup = 
 The 1976 Canada Cup was an international ice hockey tournament held September 2 – 15 , 1976 , in Ottawa , Toronto , Montreal , Winnipeg and Quebec City , Canada as well as in Philadelphia , United States . It was the first of five Canada Cup tournaments held between 1976 and 1991 . It was organized by Alan Eagleson and sanctioned by the International Ice Hockey Federation ( IIHF ) , Hockey Canada and the National Hockey League ( NHL ) . It was a six @-@ team , round robin tournament with a best @-@ of @-@ three final between the top two teams . Canada finished atop the standings and defeated Czechoslovakia in the final in two consecutive games . Bobby Orr was named the most valuable player of the tournament , and Viktor <unk> was the leading scorer . 
 The Canada Cup was the first true best @-@ on @-@ best world championship in hockey history as it allowed any player to represent their team regardless of amateur or professional status . Consequently , it marked the end of Canada 's six @-@ year boycott of the IIHF . The success of the event paved the way for greater use of professional players in the World Championship and Winter Olympics . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Canadian Amateur Hockey Association ( CAHA ) had complained for years that Team Canada faced a competitive disadvantage in international tournaments as it was restricted from using its best players , who were professionals in the National Hockey League ( NHL ) , while European teams masked the status of their best players . The issue came to a head in 1970 when International Ice Hockey Federation ( IIHF ) president Bunny Ahearne reneged on a promise to allow each team to use up to nine professional players at the 1970 World Championship . In response , the CAHA withdrew Canada from all international competition until the IIHF gave it the right to use its best players as the European teams could . 
 Around the same time , talks were begun to hold a friendly tournament between Canada 's top players and the Soviet national team . These talks culminated in the Summit Series in 1972 that was narrowly claimed by Canada 's NHL all @-@ stars . A second Summit Series in 1974 saw the Soviets easily defeat the World Hockey Association 's ( WHA ) top all @-@ stars , but the two series created demand for a true best @-@ on @-@ best world championship . It was during the 1974 Summit Series that National Hockey League Players Association ( NHLPA ) executive @-@ director Alan Eagleson began negotiations with Soviet and European authorities to create such a tournament . The negotiations , which grew to include the IIHF and Hockey Canada and lasted over two years , resulted in numerous agreements : Canada would return to international competition in 1977 , the World Championships moved to an open format that allowed professionals to play and club teams of the Soviet League would tour North America and face NHL teams in what became the Super Series . The key agreement was the creation of the Canada Cup , to be held in 1976 . 
 Having gained international approval , Eagleson then convinced the NHLPA 's players to support the tournament with promises of increased pension contributions resulting from their participation . The NHL 's owners supported the concept after agreeing that half of the proceeds from the games would go to them . Some teams remained uneasy , however . The Philadelphia Flyers were afraid their players might suffer injuries in the tournament and vowed that no player from their roster would be permitted to play . They were convinced to back down on their threats after being promised two games would be played in Philadelphia with the Flyers receiving their share of the revenue . Though the tournament was held in September so as not to interfere with the NHL season , league president Clarence Campbell remained skeptical of the tournament 's viability , calling it " wasteful " . 
 = = Teams = = 
 Six teams competed in the 1976 Canada Cup . Canada was favoured to win as they had brought what was argued to be the strongest team in the nation 's history to the tournament – 17 of the 25 players on the roster would later be elected into the Hockey Hall of Fame . Seeking its best possible roster , the Canadian team put aside the bitter rivalry between the NHL and WHA , selecting players from both leagues , though overwhelmingly from the NHL . Bobby Orr , plagued by growing knee problems nearly turned down the invitation to play before reconsidering , while goaltender Rogatien Vachon , who was not initially invited to join the team , wound up playing every minute in the Canadian goal . 
 While the fans hoped for a Canada @-@ Soviet Union final , analysts ranked the Soviets as only the fourth best team entering the tournament . They chose to leave most of its elite players home for reasons that remain unclear . Officially , Soviet officials said many of their players were suffering from fatigue , though goaltender Vladislav Tretiak later claimed the omissions were the result of a power struggle between Olympic coach Boris Kulagin and Canada Cup team coach Viktor Tikhonov and that the former sought to undermine the latter by forcing him to coach a weaker team . The Soviets downplayed the importance of the tournament , stating their true focus was the World Championships and the Winter Olympics . As a result , they sent a much younger , " experimental " team to Canada . Valeri Kharlamov , considered by many to be their best forward , also did not play in the series ; at the time of the tournament , he was recovering from serious injuries suffered in a car accident . 
 The Czechoslovakian team was predicted to face Canada in the final by most experts as they brought the same team that won the 1976 World Championship a few months prior . Their goaltender , Jiří Holeček , was considered the best in the world outside the NHL . Czech coach Karel Gut anticipated his team would emerge to show the world that there was " more to international hockey than Canada and the Soviet Union " . Sweden was ranked third entering the tournament and had a large mixture of amateurs and professionals who were playing in the NHL and WHA . The United States and Finland rounded out the tournament and were not expected to be competitive . 
 = = Round robin games = = 
 The tournament opened in Ottawa on September 2 as Finland faced a Canadian team focused on avoiding a sense of complacency following defeats against the Soviets in 1974 and 1975 . Rick Martin scored a hat trick to lead Canada in a rout of the Finns , 11 – 2 . Sweden then defeated the United States , 5 – 2 , on the strength of four first period powerplay goals . Swedish star Börje Salming , who played in the NHL for the Toronto Maple Leafs , was greeted with a five @-@ minute standing ovation by the Toronto crowd prior to the game . 
 The third game featured the world champion Czechs against the Olympic champion Soviets . Czechoslovakia justified pre @-@ tournament expectations by winning 5 – 3 while the Soviets complained about the scheduling , claiming organizers deliberately matched them up against the Czechs in their opening game to set them at an early disadvantage in the tournament . The Soviet complaints grew louder following a 3 – 3 tie against Sweden . While the Swedish press was hailing Salming as the greatest player in their nation 's history after his second consecutive dominant effort , the Soviets threatened to quit the tournament as they were upset about the officiating of Canadian referee Andre Legace . Organizers did not take the Soviet threats to quit the tournament seriously . 
 The Czechs remained dominant , defeating the Finns 8 – 0 in a game where they out @-@ shot their opponent 49 – 15 . Czech goaltender Holeček recorded the first shutout in the tournament 's history . The Finns were similarly decimated by the Soviets , who did not withdraw from the tournament , by an 11 – 3 score . Meanwhile , the Americans , criticized in the media as being " team useless " over their perceived lack of talent , earned a measure of respect when they lost to Canada 4 – 2 in a game where the outcome was not certain until the final minute of play , then earned a 4 – 4 tie against the Czechs , and the respect of their coach , in a game played at Philadelphia . 
 A 4 – 0 loss to Canada followed by a shocking 8 – 6 defeat at the hands of their Scandinavian rival Finland eliminated Sweden from contention . The Finns , who overcame a 4 – 1 deficit , felt the result vindicated their placement in the tournament while the Swedes considered the result an embarrassment . The Soviets remained alive by defeating the United States 5 – 0 in Philadelphia while Canada faced the Czechoslovaks at the same time in Montreal . The game featured a goaltender battle between Canada 's Rogatien Vachon and the Czech 's Vladimír Dzurilla and was immediately claimed to be one of the greatest games of all time . Milan <unk> scored with less than five minutes to play to lift the Czechs to a 1 – 0 victory and assured them a place in the final . The result meant that the winner of the Canada – Soviet Union game would claim the second spot in the final . 
 Three games marked the final day of the round robin on September 11 . The United States overcame a 2 – 0 deficit to defeat Finland 6 – 3 to finish fifth in the tournament . American co @-@ general manager Tommy Ivan expressed his pride in his team 's tournament , and predicted that this tournament had set the stage for the United States to grow into a contender in hockey . The Swedes , meanwhile , earned a 2 – 1 victory over Czechoslovakia in a game that had no impact on the standings . 
 While fans expected Canada and the Soviet Union would meet in the final , ultimately , they squared off in an unofficial semi @-@ final . The two teams played the game at a furious pace , trading goals in a first period from which Canada emerged with a 2 – 1 lead . Canada extended their lead in the second period then relied on defenceman Bobby Orr 's stellar play to hold off the Soviets and advance to the final . As they had earlier in the tournament , the Soviets complained of biased officiating playing a role in the outcome of the game . 
 = = Final = = 
 The 1976 Canada Cup final was a best @-@ of @-@ three series . The first game was played September 13 at Maple Leaf Gardens in Toronto . The Czechs started Dzurilla in goal after his brilliant display against Canada in the round robin . Dzurilla was unable to duplicate his success as Gilbert Perreault opened the scoring one minute into the game en route to a four @-@ goal onslaught by the Canadians in the first period . The Czechs were stronger in the final 40 minutes , but were unable to beat Canada 's Vachon , who recorded his second shutout of the tournament in a 6 – 0 victory for Canada . During the game , the Czechs were angered when Canada 's Steve Shutt crosschecked Jiří Novák from behind . Novak suffered a concussion and was unable to play the remainder of the series . Shutt was apologetic after the game , claiming he had not intended to hit his opponent in the fashion he did . 
 Game two was played in the Montreal Forum on September 15 . Jiri Holeček , who replaced Dzurilla in goal after the first period of the first game , started game two for Czechoslovakia , while Vachon remained in the Canadian net . As they had in the first game , Canada jumped out to an early lead , scoring two goals in the first three minutes of play . Holeček was quickly pulled and replaced with Dzurilla , who completed the game . The Czechs replied with a second period goal and another early in the third to tie the game . Bobby Clarke re @-@ established the Canadian lead midway through the period before Josef Augusta and Marián Šťastný scored goals one minute apart to give Czechoslovakia its first lead , 4 – 3 , with four minutes remaining in the third period . Dzurilla was strong in net as the Canadians put 39 shots on goal in regulation time , but made a critical mistake with less than three minutes remaining . His attempt to clear a puck from his zone went instead to Canada 's Bill Barber , who scored into an open net to tie the game and send it to overtime . 
 The teams played an intense overtime period filled with end @-@ to @-@ end rushes and brilliant saves by the goaltenders . At one point , Canada 's Guy Lafleur put a shot on net that snuck through the Czech goaltender , but Ivan Hlinka deliberately shoved the net out of place before the puck crossed the line . He received a delay of game penalty , but prevented a Canadian win . A few moments later , Guy Lapointe rifled a low shot that again beat Dzurilla , however this goal was also disallowed as the buzzer had sounded to end the first ten @-@ minutes of the overtime period one @-@ tenth of a second before it crossed the line . International rules of the time dictated that play was to be stopped at the ten @-@ minute mark of each overtime period and the teams would switch the side of the ice they defended . During the break , Canadian assistant coach Don Cherry noted to his team that Dzurilla often came far out of his net to defend and could be beaten on a shot from a sharp angle . 
 Less than two minutes into the second half of the overtime period , Darryl Sittler received a pass from Marcel Dionne as he skated into the Czech zone close to the side boards . As Dzurilla came out to challenge , Sittler faked a shot that froze the goaltender , took two more strides then fired the puck into an open net . The goal touched off a wild celebration amongst the Canadian players on the ice and the fans in the stands . Sittler 's championship winning goal remains one of the most famous in hockey history . During the celebrations , the players of both teams traded uniforms ; Bobby Orr was presented with the Most Valuable Player award while wearing a Czech jersey . Prime Minister Pierre Trudeau presented Canadian captain Bobby Clarke with the Canada Cup . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The tournament finale was the most watched television event in Canadian history at the time . 10 @,@ 700 @,@ 000 people were estimated to have watched the game , representing nearly half of all Canadians in 1976 . The team that represented Canada is still considered one of the greatest national teams to ever represent the nation in a hockey tournament . For many players , winning the Canada Cup was the highlight of their careers . Bobby Orr and Lanny McDonald both rated winning this tournament ahead of winning the Stanley Cup . 
 The Canada Cup established a new era in international hockey . It marked Canada 's formal return to the international stage after a six @-@ year boycott , and was the first true best @-@ on @-@ best world championship in the sport 's history . For North American audiences , the tournament established that Czechoslovakia and Sweden could compete with Canada and the Soviet Union , while the Finns and Americans proved they were capable of playing with the sport 's elite teams . 
 = = Standings = = 
 = = Results = = 
 = = = Round @-@ robin = = = 
 = = = Final ( best of three ) = = = 
 = = Statistical leaders = = 
 = = = Scoring = = = 
 = = = Goaltending = = = 
 Minimum 120 minutes played 
 = = Awards = = 
 = Si Ronda = 
 Si Ronda is a 1930 silent film from the Dutch East Indies which was directed by Lie Tek Swie and starred Bachtiar Effendi . Based on contemporary Betawi oral tradition , it follows the exploits of a bandit , skilled in silat ( traditional Malay martial arts ) , known as Si Ronda . In the lenong stories from which the film was derived , Ronda was often depicted as a Robin Hood type of figure . The production , now thought lost , was one of a series of martial arts films released between 1929 and 1931 . Si Ronda received little coverage in the media upon its release . A second adaptation of the tale , Si Ronda Macan Betawi , was made in 1978 . 
 = = Production = = 
 Si Ronda was adapted from a lenong ( a Betawi oral tradition similar to a stage play ) popular with ethnic Chinese and native audiences of the time . The Ronda stories follow the Betawi bandit of the same name , who is skilled at silat ( traditional martial arts ) and reputed to take from the rich to give to the poor . The Indonesian film scholar Misbach Yusa Biran suggests that Ronda was selected for adaptation because of its potential action sequences . In the domestic cinema , such sequences had generally been inspired by American works and been well received by audiences . 
 Similar stories to Si Ronda 's include those of Si <unk> and Si Pitung ; these stage plays centred on extraordinary men ( referred to as <unk> ) who , though living outside the law , generally fought for the common populace . Adaptations of the genre , manifested as bandit films , became popular in domestic cinema following the release of Si Tjonat by Batavia Motion Picture in 1929 . This release was followed by the Wong brothers ' <unk> Preanger ( also 1929 ) , and an adaptation of the Si Pitung stories in 1931 . Not all films in this genre , which consisted of a quarter of all domestic releases for 1929 – 1931 , maintained the heroic qualities of the central character : the Wongs ' adaptation of Si Pitung , for instance , portrayed him as a simple bandit and not the Robin Hood figure of stage . 
 Si Ronda was directed by Lie Tek Swie and produced by Tan Khoen Yauw of Tan 's Film . The two had previously worked together on the company 's highly profitable Njai Dasima in 1929 . Cinematography was handled by A. <unk> . Shot in black @-@ and @-@ white , this silent film starred Bachtiar Effendi , a set decorator with Tan 's , in his on @-@ screen debut playing the title role . It also featured Momo , an actor who had appeared in the film Njai Dasima . 
 = = Release and legacy = = 
 Si Ronda was released in 1930 ; Effendi stated that it was released before Tan 's Nancy <unk> Pembalesan ( Nancy Takes Revenge ) , a sequel to Njai Dasima , began screening in May 1930 . Dutch newspapers indicate that it had screened in Medan , North Sumatra , by 1932 . Biran writes that the film received little coverage ; he notes that Sinematek Indonesia has no news clippings related to Si Ronda . 
 After Si Ronda , Lie and Tan collaborated on three further films . Lie left Tan 's in 1932 , reportedly as his approach no longer matched Tan 's low @-@ class target audience and caused the works to go over budget . Effendi continued to work with Tan 's until 1932 , when he left to head the cinema magazine Doenia Film . Momo continued acting until 1941 , first with Tan 's and later with Standard Film . The film is likely lost . The American visual anthropologist Karl G. Heider writes that all Indonesian films from before 1950 are lost . However , JB Kristanto 's Katalog Film Indonesia ( Indonesian Film Catalogue ) records several as having survived at Sinematek Indonesia 's archives . 
 Another film based on the Ronda stories , titled Si Ronda Macan Betawi ( Ronda the Betawi Tiger ) , was released in 1978 . Directed by Fritz G. Schadt , it starred Dicky <unk> in the title role and Lenny <unk> as his lover . In this adaptation Ronda uses his silat skills to fight corrupt land owners and colonial government workers . 
 = 26th Infantry Division ( United States ) = 
 The 26th Infantry Division was an infantry division of the United States Army . A major formation of the Massachusetts Army National Guard , it was based in Boston , Massachusetts for most of its history . Today , the division 's heritage is carried on by the 26th Maneuver Enhancement Brigade . 
 Formed on 18 July 1917 and activated 22 August 1917 at Camp Edwards , MA , consisting of units from the New England area , the division 's commander selected the nickname " Yankee Division " to highlight the division 's geographic makeup . Sent to Europe in World War I as part of the American Expeditionary Forces , the division saw extensive combat in France . Sent to Europe once again for World War II , the division again fought through France , advancing into Germany and liberating the Gusen concentration camp before the end of the war . 
 Following the end of World War II , the division remained as an active command in the National Guard , gradually expanding its command to contain units from other divisions which had been consolidated . However , the division was never called up to support any major <unk> or see major combat , and was eventually deactivated in 1993 , reorganized as a brigade under the 29th Infantry Division . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = World War I = = = 
 The 26th Infantry Division was first constituted on 18 July 1917 as the 26th Division . It was formally activated on 22 August of that year in Boston , Massachusetts . The division commanded two brigades comprising national guard units from Massachusetts , Connecticut , Rhode Island , New Hampshire , Vermont , and Maine . The 51st Infantry Brigade contained the 101st Infantry Regiment and the 102nd Infantry Regiment , while the 52nd Infantry Brigade contained the 103rd Infantry Regiment and the 104th Infantry Regiment . Shortly thereafter , division commander Major General C. R. Edwards called a press conference to determine a nickname for the newly formed division . Edwards decided to settle on the suggestion of " Yankee Division " since all of the subordinate units of the division were from New England . Shortly thereafter , the division approved a shoulder sleeve insignia with a " <unk> " monogram to reflect this . 
 On 21 September 1917 , the division arrived at Saint @-@ Nazaire , France . It was the second division of the American Expeditionary Forces to arrive into the theater at the time , and the first division wholly organized in the United States , joining the 1st Infantry Division . Two additional divisions completed the first wave of American troop deployment , with the 2nd Division formed in France and the 42nd Division arriving at St. Nazaire on 29 October . The division immediately moved to Neufchâteau for training , as most of the division 's soldiers were raw recruits , new to military service . Because of this , much of the division 's force was trained by the experienced French forces . It trained extensively with the other three US divisions , organized as the U.S. I Corps in January 1918 , before being moved into a quiet sector of the trenches in February . 
 The 26th Infantry Division remained in a relatively quiet region of the lines along the Chemin des Dames for several months before it relieved the 1st Division near St. Mihiel on 3 April . The line here taken over extended from the vicinity of <unk> , on the west , in front of <unk> @-@ <unk> , <unk> , and Bois de <unk> , as far as the Bois de Jury , on the right , where the French line joined the American line . Division Headquarters were at <unk> . 
 The stay of the Division in this sector was marked by several serious encounters with the enemy , where considerable forces were engaged . There were furthermore almost nightly encounters between patrols or ambush parties , and the harassing fire of the artillery on both sides was very active . 
 On 10 , 12 and 13 April , the lines held by the 104th Infantry in Bois Brule ( near <unk> ) , and by the French to the left , were heavily attacked by the Germans . At first the enemy secured a foothold in some advanced trenches which were not strongly held , but sturdy counterattacks succeeded in driving the enemy out with serious losses , and the line was entirely re @-@ established . 
 In late April , German infantry conducted a raid on positions of the 26th Division , one of the first attacks on Americans during the war . At 0400 on 20 April , German field artillery bombarded the 102nd Infantry 's positions near <unk> before German <unk> moved against the village . The artillery box barrage , continuing 36 hours , isolated American units . The Germans overwhelmed a machine gun company and two infantry companies of the 102nd and temporarily breached the trenches before elements of the division rallied and recaptured the village . The Germans withdrew before the division could counterattack but inflicted 634 casualties , including 80 killed , 424 wounded , and 130 captured , while losing over 600 men , including 150 killed of their own . Similar raids struck the 101st infantry at <unk> on 27 May , and the 103rd Infantry at <unk> @-@ et @-@ <unk> on 16 June , but were repulsed . The 26th Division was relieved by the 82nd Division on 28 June , moved by train to Meaux , and entered the line again northwest of Chateau Thierry , relieving the U.S. 2nd Division on 5 July . 
 As the size of the American Expeditionary Force grew , the division was placed under command of I U.S. Corps in July . When the Aisne @-@ Marne campaign began shortly thereafter , the division , under I U.S. Corps was placed under command of the French Sixth Army protecting its east flank . When the offensive began , the division advanced up the spine of the Marne salient for several weeks , pushing through Belleau Wood , moving 10 miles from 18 to 25 July . On 12 August it was pulled from the lines near Toul to prepare for the next offensive . The division was then a part of the offensive at St. Mihiel , during the Battle of Saint @-@ Mihiel . The division then moved in position for the last major offensive of the war , at Meuse @-@ Argonne . This campaign was the last of the war , as an armistice was signed shortly thereafter . During World War I the division spent 210 days in combat , and suffered 1 @,@ 587 killed in action and 12 @,@ 077 wounded in action . The division returned to the United States and was demobilized on 3 May 1919 at Camp Devens , Massachusetts . 
 In the years following World War I , the division remained in the National Guard , seeing periodic reorganizations but no major deployments except for weekend training . In 1921 , the 102nd Infantry Regiment was replaced in the guard by the 182nd Infantry Regiment . In 1923 , the 103rd Infantry Regiment was replaced with the 181st Infantry Regiment . In 1941 , the 101st Infantry Regiment was replaced with the 164th Infantry Regiment briefly ; one year later it was relieved from the division , along with the 182nd Infantry Regiment , in order to form the Americal Division . 
 = = = World War II = = = 
 As a part of Army @-@ wide reorganization , the division 's brigade headquarters were disbanded in favor of regimental commands . The division was instead based around three regiments ; the 101st Infantry Regiment , the 104th Infantry Regiment , and the 328th Infantry Regiment . Also assigned to the division were the 101st , 102nd , 180th , and 263rd Field Artillery Battalions , the 39th Signal Company , the 726th Ordnance Company , the 26th Quartermaster Company , the 26th Reconnaissance Troop , the 101st Engineer Combat Battalion , and the 114th Medical Battalion . Major General Willard S. Paul took command of the division , which he would lead through the rest of the war . Before deploying overseas to the ETO , the 26th ID trained at Camp Campbell , Kentucky . 
 = = = = Europe = = = = 
 The division was assigned to III Corps of the U.S. Ninth Army , part of the 12th Army Group , commanded by Lieutenant General Omar Bradley . It was shipped from the United States directly to France , and was never sent to Britain . The 26th Infantry Division landed in France at Cherbourg and Utah Beach on 7 September 1944 , but did not enter combat as a division until a month later . Elements were on patrol duty along the coast from Carteret to <unk> from 13 to 30 September . The 328th Infantry Regiment saw action with the 80th Infantry Division from 5 to 15 October . The division was then reassigned to XII Corps of the U.S. Third Army . On 7 October , the 26th relieved the 4th Armored Division in the <unk> @-@ <unk> @-@ Canal du Rhine au Marne sector , and maintained defensive positions . The division launched a limited objective attack on 22 October , in the <unk> woods . On 8 November , the 26th then went on the offensive , took <unk> on 20 November , advanced across the Saar River to Saar Union , and captured it on 2 December , after house @-@ to @-@ house fighting . Reaching Maginot fortifications on 5 December , it regrouped , entering <unk> on 8 December . Around this time it was reassigned to III Corps . 
 Rest at Metz was interrupted by the German offensive in the Ardennes , the Battle of the Bulge . The division moved north to Luxembourg from 19 to 21 December , to take part in the battle of the Ardennes break @-@ through . It attacked at <unk> and <unk> on 22 December , beat off strong German counterattacks , captured <unk> on Christmas Day after heavy fighting , attacked toward the Wiltz River , but was forced to withdraw in the face of determined German resistance . After regrouping on 5 – 8 January 1945 , it attacked again , crossing the Wiltz River on 20 January . The division continued its advance , taking <unk> on 21 January , and crossed the <unk> River on 24 January . The division was reassigned to XX Corps . The division immediately shifted to the east bank of the Saar , and maintained defensive positions in the <unk> area from 29 January until 6 March 1945 . 
 The division 's drive to the Rhine River jumped off on 13 March 1945 , and carried the division through <unk> from 17 March , to the Rhine by 21 March , and across the Rhine at Oppenheim on 25 – 26 March . The division was then reassigned to XII Corps . It took part in the house @-@ to @-@ house reduction of Hanau on 28 March , broke out of the Main River bridgehead , drove through Fulda on 1 April , and helped reduce Meiningen on 5 April . Moving southeast into Austria , the division assisted in the capture of Linz , 5 May . It had changed the direction of its advance , and was moving northeast into Czechoslovakia , across the <unk> River , when the cease @-@ fire order was received . One day later , the division overran the Gusen concentration camp in conjunction with the 11th Armored Division , liberating it from German forces . There , it discovered that the Germans had used forced labor to carve out an elaborate tunnel system with underground aircraft production facilities . SS officers at the camp allegedly planned to demolish the tunnels with the prisoners inside , but the movement of the 26th Infantry and 11th Armored Divisions prevented this . 
 = = = = Post @-@ war = = = = 
 During World War II , the 26th Infantry Division spent 199 days in combat . During that time , it suffered 1 @,@ 678 killed in action , 7 @,@ 379 wounded in action , 740 missing in action , 159 prisoners of war , and 6 @,@ 895 non @-@ battle casualties , for a total of 16 @,@ 851 casualties during the conflict . Soldiers of the division received two Medals of Honor , and won 38 Distinguished Service Crosses , seven Legions of Merit , 927 Silver Stars , 42 Soldier 's Medals , 5 @,@ 331 Bronze Star Medals , and 98 Air Medals . The division returned to the United States and inactivated at Camp Myles Standish , Massachusetts on 21 December 1945 . 
 = = = Cold War = = = 
 The division was reactivated on 11 April 1947 in Boston . It remained as the major command of the Massachusetts Army National Guard , but its command took control of units from other states following consolidation of the Army National Guard . The division remained as an active reserve component of the Army National Guard , but it was not selected for any deployments to cold war <unk> . In 1956 the division received its distinctive unit insignia . 
 The division was reorganized in accordance with the Pentomic organization , probably in 1959 . Among the battle groups of the division were 1st Battle Group , 101st Infantry , and 1st Battle Group , 182nd Infantry . The 104th Infantry Regiment was reorganized on 1 May 1959 under the Combat Arms Regimental System as the 1st Battle Group , 104th Infantry . 
 In 1963 , the division was reorganized under the Reorganization Objective Army Division plan . Its regimental commands were inactivated in favor of brigades . The 101st Infantry Regiment became the 1st Brigade , 26th Infantry Division , headquartered in Dorchester , Massachusetts . The 104th Infantry Regiment became the 3rd Brigade , 26th Infantry Division , headquartered in Springfield , Massachusetts . Among the division 's units in 1965 were the 1 @-@ 101 infantry , 1 @-@ 104 , 2 @-@ 104 , 1 @-@ 181 , 1 @-@ 182 , 1 @-@ 220 Infantry , and 1 @-@ 101 FA . The division was organized as a light infantry division , and at the same time , the 26th Aviation Battalion was established to provide air support . In 1967 the 43rd Infantry Division of the Connecticut Army National Guard was consolidated into the 43rd Brigade , 26th Division , and put under the command of the 26th Infantry Division . 
 In 1987 , the 26th Aviation Battalion was dissolved and the 126th Aviation Regiment arose in its place . The 126th Aviation Regiment 's battalions formed the basis of the new divisional 26th Aviation Brigade . 
 On 1 April 1988 , the division was relocated to Camp Edwards , Massachusetts . The division headquarters was consolidated with 1st Brigade , 26th Infantry Division . In its place , the 86th Infantry Brigade was assigned to the division as a round @-@ out unit . 
 = = = = Inactivation = = = = 
 Following the end of the Cold War , the Army began a process of downsizing its forces . The Army reactivated the 29th Infantry Division and began reorganizing its forces and further consolidating them . As a result , the Army decided to downsize the 26th Infantry Division into a brigade , and put it under the command of the 29th Infantry Division . On 1 September 1993 , the division was inactivated , and the 26th Infantry Brigade designated in its place , based in Springfield . The 3rd and 43rd brigades , 26th Infantry Division were inactivated , and the 86th Infantry Brigade was put under the command of the 42nd Infantry Division . On 1 October 1995 , the division was formally designated the 26th Brigade , 29th Infantry Division . In 2004 , the 26th Brigade transitioned into the 26th ( Yankee ) Infantry Brigade Combat Team . 
 = = Honors = = 
 The division received six campaign streamers in World War I and four campaign streamers in World War II , for a total of 10 campaign streamers in its operational lifetime . 
 = = = Campaign streamers = = = 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The beltway around the city of Boston , Massachusetts Route 128 , is nicknamed the " Yankee Division Highway " in honor of the 26th Infantry Division . For its contribution in liberating the Gusen concentration camp , the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum continually flies the division 's colors at its entrance and for high @-@ profile memorial ceremonies , honoring it as one of 35 US divisions to have assisted in the liberation of German concentration camps . 
 Notable members of the division include Walter Krueger , Edward Lawrence Logan , J. Laurence Moffitt , the last surviving veteran of the Yankee Division from World War One , and Sergeant Stubby , a dog that served with the Division in combat in World War I. PFC Michael J. Perkins , a resident of South Boston and a member of the Division was awarded the Medal of Honor in France in World War I. Additionally , two members of the division received the Medal of Honor in World War II , Ruben Rivers , and Alfred L. Wilson . 
 = Ontario Highway 404 = 
 King 's Highway 404 ( pronounced " four @-@ oh @-@ four " ) , also known as Highway 404 and colloquially as the 404 , is a 400 @-@ series highway in the Canadian province of Ontario connecting Highway 401 and the Don Valley Parkway ( DVP ) in Toronto with East Gwillimbury . The 50 @.@ 1 @-@ kilometre ( 31 @.@ 1 mi ) controlled @-@ access highway also connects with Highway 407 in Markham . Highway 404 provides access to the eastern edge of Richmond Hill , Aurora and Newmarket , in addition to the southern edge of Keswick . 
 Construction on the freeway began soon after the completion of the Don Valley Parkway , with the first section south of Steeles Avenue opening in 1977 . Over the next twelve years , the Ministry of Transportation of Ontario ( MTO ) undertook a continuous construction program to build the freeway to Davis Drive in Newmarket . This was completed on October 24 , 1989 . The route has undergone a periodic series of smaller extensions and widening in the years since , now travelling a further 15 @.@ 5 km ( 9 @.@ 6 mi ) north to Woodbine Avenue near Ravenshoe Road in the town of East Gwillimbury . Future proposals may one day result in an extension to southeast of Beaverton . 
 Highway 404 is one of several freeways in the Greater Toronto Area ( GTA ) with High @-@ Occupancy Vehicle ( HOV ) lanes ; the southbound lane was one of the initial projects in the province and opened on December 13 , 2005 . The northbound lane opened on July 23 , 2007 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 Running parallel to Highway 400 approximately 15 kilometres ( 9 @.@ 3 mi ) to the east , Highway 404 extends 50 @.@ 1 km ( 31 @.@ 1 mi ) on a north – south orientation between Highway 401 and Woodbine Avenue . There are 16 interchanges along its length , mostly of the Partial cloverleaf A4 configuration . Exit numbers on the freeway start at 17 , suggesting that the length of the Don Valley Parkway was considered in distance calculations ; there are no exit numbers posted on the DVP . 
 Officially , the Ministry of Transportation of Ontario ( MTO ) jurisdiction over the freeway begins as the opposing directions of travel diverge south of the Highway 401 interchange . Northbound , two lanes from the DVP are joined by a third from the eastbound collectors of Highway 401 . These narrow to two lanes before merging with a single lane from westbound Highway 401 immediately south of Sheppard Avenue . An additional two lanes from westbound Highway 401 converge and form a separate carriageway with no access to Sheppard . Southbound , the freeway is divided into two carriageways , both of which provide access to the DVP . The outer carriageway also provides access from Sheppard and to Highway 401 , including the westbound express lanes , while the inner carriageway is intended for DVP @-@ bound traffic . The HOV lane also provides access to westbound Highway 401 via a dedicated tunnel , which passes beneath the other southbound lanes . To the east of Highway 404 is the Consumers Road office park . To the west and north of Sheppard Avenue is Fairview Mall , which has its own connection with the southbound lanes attached to the Sheppard interchange . 
 The highway continues directly north along the old Woodbine Avenue right @-@ of @-@ way to just south of Steeles Avenue , where it diverges to the west before continuing north . From just north of Sheppard , a northbound HOV lane is present alongside the central median . Southbound , the HOV lane continues as far as Highway 401 . Alongside Highway 404 to the east is an industrial warehouse and commercial office area , while on the west is a suburban subdivision of North York . Northbound , the freeway is six lanes wide from Sheppard Avenue to Finch Avenue , where one lane diverges onto an off @-@ ramp , re @-@ emerging north of Finch . Southbound , it is six lanes wide from Steeles south to Sheppard . 
 At Steeles Avenue , the freeway enters the Regional Municipality of York . To the east are industrial units , while on the west are residential suburbs . This land @-@ use persists north to the Highway 407 ETR interchange , a multi @-@ level stack interchange with two flyovers . North of Highway 407 , the freeway crosses Highway 7 , where the HOV lanes transition to standard through lanes . The freeway passes west of <unk> Municipal Airport and then interchanges with 16th Avenue . It narrows and the central barrier ends ; a grass median taking its place between the opposing lanes . The land @-@ use density continues to drop , with the appearance of some open spaces and farms interspersed with industrial and commercial buildings . By 19th Avenue , just north of the Honda Canada headquarters in Markham , the land @-@ use is agricultural on both sides of Highway 404 . Highway 404 continues north , forming the eastern boundary of the municipalities of Richmond Hill , Aurora and Newmarket . North of Wellington Street , the highway reduces in width to four lanes , which is its configuration north through East Gwillimbury . The route continues , passing east of the community of Sharon , eventually curving northeast and terminating at an at @-@ grade intersection with Woodbine Avenue immediately south of Ravenshoe Road ( York Regional Road 32 ) . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Initial construction = = = 
 A freeway east of Highway 11 was planned as early as 1954 , when the province extended Highway 48 south from Port Bolster . A large cloverleaf interchange was constructed with the Toronto Bypass , and plans formulated for a dual highway around the east side of Lake Simcoe , connecting with Highway 11 near Orillia or Gravenhurst . This route was dropped when Metropolitan Toronto began planning for the northern extension of the DVP in 1957 , as subdivisions encroached upon Woodbine Avenue north of Highway 401 . The six @-@ lane expressway was to follow the alignment of Woodbine from its southern terminus at Lawrence Avenue to north of Steeles Avenue , where the Department of Highways ( DOH ) would continue the road as a " new King 's Highway " . 
 In 1959 , the DOH announced that they would construct and maintain the new route once the DVP was completed to Highway 401 and designate it Highway 404 . The proposed route of the freeway was presented at a special delegation on December 13 , 1960 by Harold Barry , a representative of the department . Design work started in 1973 , and construction began following the awarding of a C $ 6 @.@ 9 million contract in March 1976 . This contract included construction of the Finch Avenue interchange , overpasses at McNicoll and Van Horne Avenues and 4 @.@ 5 km ( 2 @.@ 8 mi ) of six @-@ lane freeway between Sheppard and Steeles Avenues . Shortly thereafter , on April 20 , Ernest Avenue and Van Horne Avenue were closed to traffic at Woodbine . The first section of Highway 404 between Highway 401 and Steeles Avenue opened in late 1977 , including the flyover ramp from southbound Woodbine Avenue . The freeway was separated by a grass median with a steel beam acting as a barrier between the lanes . Construction north of Toronto proceeded quickly , with the contract for the section from Steeles to Highway 7 being awarded in 1976 and the section opening on November 10 , 1978 . The next extension , to Stouffville Road ( then known as the Gormley Side Road ) , was opened ceremoniously on December 9 , 1980 by minister James Snow ; the segment north of Highway 7 was four lanes wide . 
 The section of Highway 404 north of Stouffville Road was the subject of considerable controversy when work began to clear the route on May 15 , 1981 before the completion of an environmental impact assessment . The Ministry of Transportation and Communications was charged with violating the newly enacted Environmental Assessment Act , which it contested came into effect after construction of the Highway 404 extension had begun . Minister James Snow was charged with violating the act , and called upon to resign . The Minister did not resign , but paid a $ 3 @,@ 500 fine . Despite the issues surrounding it , the extension between Stouffville Road and Bloomington Road was opened ceremoniously on the morning of August 10 , 1982 . 
 Construction on the segment north of Bloomington to Aurora Sideroad was already in progress by this point . It was opened to traffic in late September 1985 . Construction on the 6 @.@ 5 km ( 4 @.@ 0 mi ) section from Wellington Street to Davis Drive began in early 1986 , and the section opened to traffic on October 24 , 1989 at 8 : 30 am . This final segment cost $ 22 @.@ 1 million , ending the continuous construction program undertaken since 1973 at a cost of $ 83 @.@ 3 million . 
 = = = Expansion = = = 
 Studies and environmental assessments into various extensions began almost immediately after the completion of the route to Newmarket in 1989 ; it would take over a decade for any northward progression to take place . The completion of the route to Davis Drive was met with scorn as traffic in Newmarket rapidly increased as the bedroom community grew with the new highway access . Municipal officials warned prior to the opening of the route that major traffic delays would be faced along Davis Drive . Then @-@ mayor Ray <unk> began an immediate push to widen Green Lane — at that time an unpaved rural route – into a bypass of the town . Traffic delays were also compounded at the southern end of Toronto , where drivers whom had previously made use of Yonge Street , Bayview Avenue or Leslie Street would shift to make use of the new freeway . 
 By 1992 , York Region was moving forward with plans to expand Green Lane into a four lane road , while the province was urged to consider extending Highway 404 north to it , and eventually around the east side of Lake Simcoe . The province studied this and other options over the following years , before a formal announcement was made by Minister of Transportation Tony Clement on June 22 , 1998 along with York Region chairman Bill Fisch . The plan called for an extension of Highway 404 north to Green Lane , and expansion of Highway 9 ( now part of York Region Road 31 ) , the western extension of Davis Drive outside of town , to five lanes between Highway 400 and Bathurst Street . At the time over 20 @,@ 000 vehicles used Davis Drive on an average day . 
 In the interim period , work went into expanding the six lane freeway through Toronto and Markham . In early 1998 , the MTO announced plans for two contracts to widen Highway 404 south of Highway 7 . The first contract converted the grass median into an additional lane in each direction with a central barrier between them . High @-@ mast lighting was also installed , replacing the unique luminaires used on the freeway . The second contract resulted in an additional lane in each direction on the outside of the existing freeway south of Steeles Avenue , making it ten lanes wide . The proposal to eventually convert the inner lanes into HOV lanes was announced at the same time . The next year , Highway 404 was widened to six lanes between Highway 7 and Major Mackenzie Drive . 
 On June 19 , 2003 , Transportation Minister and Oak Ridges MPP Frank <unk> opened a new interchange at Regional Road 73 ( 16th Avenue ) . Traffic was permitted onto the ramp following the ceremony , also attended by Thornhill MPP Tina Molinari . 
 One of the three original HOV lanes in Ontario opened on Highway 404 in late 2005 ; the other two were the lanes on Highway 403 . In early 2004 , construction began on a new ramp to westbound Highway 401 , curving beneath the southbound lanes of Highway 404 . On December 13 , 2005 , the southbound HOV lane was opened to traffic . Work on the northbound HOV lane began shortly thereafter , opening at 8 : 30 am on Monday , July 23 , 2007 . 
 = = = Extension = = = 
 The MTO formally announced plans to alleviate traffic in Newmarket on August 28 , 2000 : a three contract project to widen and extend Highway 404 . The first contract added an additional lane in each direction in the grass median from Major Mackenzie Drive to Bloomington Road . A second contract then extended those two lanes north to Aurora Sideroad . These two projects both began in the summer of 2001 and were completed in December . The third contract called for a four lane extension from Davis Drive to Green Lane and the reconstruction of Green Lane into a four @-@ laned arterial road between Leslie Street and Woodbine Avenue . This contract began shortly after the announcement in September 2000 . The extension was opened to traffic on February 8 , 2002 at a ceremony attended by York North MPP Julia Munro and Bill Fisch . 
 On May 16 , 2006 , the MTO announced plans to extend Highway 404 by 15 kilometres ( 9 @.@ 3 mi ) from Green Lane to Ravenshoe Road at the south end of Keswick . The first contracts were awarded later that year for the construction of the northbound bridge over Green Lane , followed by two structures over Mount Albert Road , west of Woodbine Avenue , begun in late 2008 and completed in 2009 . By April 2011 , the extension had been cleared and graded . Completion was originally scheduled for December 15 , 2012 with landscaping work to continue the following spring . However , due to soil conditions and utility relocation issues , the project was delayed by nearly two years . The C $ 99 million extension opened on September 17 , 2014 . 
 = = Future = = 
 The MTO proposed to extend HOV lanes north from Highway 7 to Aurora Road including additional regular lanes , high @-@ mast lighting , and overhead signage . Construction is slated to begin in 2016 and will be completed in the next 2 years . Consultation with the public is ongoing regarding future expansion of the route between Highway 407 and Green Lane . 
 Long term proposals by the province call for Highway 404 to be extended to Highway 12 , between Sunderland and Beaverton . This extension would follow a new alignment to Port Bolster , east of which the freeway would incorporate the existing two lanes of Highway 48 . It has drawn criticism from various environmental groups who claim it will only serve to accelerate urban sprawl north of Toronto . 
 = = Exit list = = 
 The following table lists the major junctions along Highway 404 , as noted by the Ministry of Transportation of Ontario . 
 = The Astonishing = 
 The Astonishing is the thirteenth studio album by American progressive metal band Dream Theater , released on January 29 , 2016 through Roadrunner Records . It is the band 's second concept album , with a story conceived by guitarist John Petrucci and music written by Petrucci and keyboardist Jordan Rudess . Composer David Campbell assisted with orchestrating the album 's strings and choirs . The album was recorded throughout 2015 at Cove City Sound Studios in Long Island , New York , with the exception of vocals , which were recorded in Canada . Mixing and sound engineering were performed by the band 's longtime collaborator , Richard Chycki , with Petrucci producing . 
 The Astonishing is set in a dystopian future United States and follows the Ravenskill Rebel Militia in their efforts to defy the Great Northern Empire of the Americas using the magical power of music . It was inspired by contemporary fantasy and science fiction franchises such as Game of Thrones and Star Wars , as well as Petrucci 's observations on the ubiquity of technological automation in modern @-@ day society . In their effort to match the album 's narrative , Dream Theater wrote songs in a wide variety of styles ranging from mellow ballads to their more conventional progressive metal sound . 
 Leading up to the The Astonishing 's release , the band marketed the album with its own website , fan mailing lists , and trailer . It debuted in the top ten of nine different countries and became the first Dream Theater album to reach number one on the US Billboard Rock Chart . It has received generally favorable reviews from music critics and the band toured to support the album through July 2016 . 
 = = Background = = 
 In mid @-@ 2013 , guitarist John Petrucci began writing a story for a concept album , presenting it to the rest of Dream Theater about a year later . The band and the record label were receptive to the idea , with Petrucci recalling , " Everybody had the ' go for it ' mentality . And from the very first meeting that we had with Dave Rath at Roadrunner , when I presented this and even just said the title , he was 100 percent on board . The involvement of everybody at Roadrunner has been absolutely unbelievable , so supportive . It kind of ignited the secret nerd in all of us that loves this sort of stuff , because it 's fun , it 's different . " From its conception , Petrucci envisioned the story as eventually being re @-@ worked into a film , play , or video game . 
 Petrucci and keyboardist Jordan Rudess wrote the album 's music independently from the rest of Dream Theater by getting together everyday , going over ideas in the morning , and then working through the music during the day and night . Upon finishing their initial drafts , they presented them to the rest of the band , who worked on writing parts for their own instruments . In an interview with Artisan News , drummer Mike Mangini reflected , " The biggest challenge for me was interpreting the initial music that was given to me , because there were no drums . So [ I was like ] , ' All right , I need to listen to this , really , as a whole piece to understand where I should kind of let loose or I should lay back a lot . ' All that . Just to see it as a whole , ' cause I don 't wanna play blindly or try to fit too much where it doesn 't belong . " 
 As Petrucci and Rudess felt that the album needed real string lines and choirs , as well as other organic sounds , they enlisted the help of veteran composer David Campbell to assist with aspects of the orchestration and handle the logistics of recording all of the necessary musicians . Reflecting on the process for Keyboard , Rudess explained , " Our initial thought was , let ’ s do it all on rock instruments and let David arrange it , but that wasn ’ t really thinking ahead in terms of who we are . When we go into the studio , we tend to work on things until they ’ re pretty polished . So we got into what we called pre @-@ orchestrating . I ’ d use any sound at my disposal to place strings where we wanted to hear strings , choir where we wanted choir , and so forth — but without getting overly specific about a certain patch or instrument library being the one , because we knew it was all going to be replaced with real players . " Once the album 's arrangements were complete , they were performed and recorded in studios around the world , with Campbell conducting and leading the sessions from Los Angeles . 
 Dream Theater began recording the album 's bass , drums , guitars , and keyboards in January 2015 at Cove City Sound Studios in Long Island , New York , where they also recorded their two previous albums , A Dramatic Turn of Events ( 2011 ) and Dream Theater ( 2013 ) . Longtime collaborator Richard Chycki , who Petrucci described as " a sixth member of the band " , was again brought in as the album 's sound engineer , while Petrucci served as producer . In July , they took a break from the studio to play some shows in Europe , but did some writing while on the road . In August , James LaBrie began recording vocals in Canada with Chycki . Singing as multiple characters , he took it upon himself to create unique interpretations of each one , with Petrucci offering him sporadic advice and feedback . Recording completed in late September , with mixing beginning the next month and mastering concluding in mid @-@ December . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 The following is based on The Astonishing 's official synopsis , published by Dream Theater upon the album 's release . 
 = = = Act I = = = 
 In <unk> , the northeastern region of the United States has turned into a dystopia ruled by the oppressive Great Northern Empire of the Americas . The only resemblance to entertainment that exists is the electronic noise of the Noise Machines ( NOMACs ) . The empire is ruled by Emperor Nafaryus , Empress Arabelle , Crown Prince Daryus , and Princess Faythe . In a distant village called Ravenskill , a man named Gabriel possesses the natural ability to make music and sing ( " The Gift of Music " ) . He has an older brother , Commander Arhys of the Ravenskill Rebel Militia , who has a son , Xander , with his deceased wife , Evangeline ( " A Better Life " ) . 
 Nafaryus hears a rumor about Gabriel being the savior of the people . He and his family travel to Ravenskill to see him for themselves ( " Lord Nafaryus " ) . In the Ravenskill town square , Gabriel is performing for the people when the royal family shows up . He continues playing at the emperor 's request ( " A Savior in the Square " ) , nearly bringing them all to tears ( " When Your Time Has Come " ) . As he plays , Faythe remembers how she found a music player when she was a child and kept it a secret all her life , and as she and Gabriel stare at each other they fall in love ( " Act of Faythe " ) . Nafaryus , though briefly moved by Gabriel 's song , sees him as a threat to his rule and gives the people of the town three days to deliver their savior to him or he will destroy the town ( " Three Days " ) . Arhys hides his brother and refuses to give him up ( " Brother , Can You Hear Me ? " ) . 
 Back at the Emperor 's palace , Faythe decides she must see Gabriel again . Disguising herself , she begins to travel back to Ravenskill . Arabelle , knowing about her daughter 's intentions , instructs Daryus to follow and protect her . Daryus feels he has always been overlooked by his father in favor of his sister , so he travels to the town with his own intentions ( " A Life Left Behind " ) . Faythe arrives in the town and finds Xander , who trusts her and leads her to his father Arhys . Faythe convinces Arhys that she can help , so he brings her to Gabriel 's hideout . Gabriel and Faythe embrace , and she tells him that she believes she can convince her father to give up his hunt for Gabriel ( " Ravenskill " ) . Gabriel tells her that if he could just meet with the Emperor , he could inspire him to restore peace to the land using his gift of music ( " Chosen " ) . 
 Meanwhile , Daryus finds Arhys ' home and takes Xander captive . Daryus promises he will guarantee the safety and wealth of Xander in return for Arhys bringing Gabriel to him . Daryus does this hoping that it will gain him respect from his father ( " A Tempting Offer " ) . Arhys is forced to agree to the deal , remembering a promise he made to Evangeline to protect their son ( " The X Aspect " ) . Faythe travels back to her father 's palace and learns that her music player once belonged to her father . After a while , Nafaryus bows to the pleas of his daughter ( " A New Beginning " ) and agrees to meet with Gabriel at an abandoned amphitheater called Heaven 's Cove ( " The Road to Revolution " ) . 
 = = = Act II = = = 
 Arhys informs Daryus that Gabriel will be at Heaven 's Cove that night ( " Moment of Betrayal " ) . While the meeting time approached ( " Heaven 's Cove " ) , Faythe decides that she wants to use the power of her royal status to change the world for good ( " Begin Again " ) . At the amphitheater , Arhys changes his mind on the deal , and when Daryus shows up , they start a fight . Daryus overpowers Arhys and kills him ( " The Path That <unk> " ) , unaware that Xander followed them and saw the whole scene . As Xander runs to his father 's dead body , Daryus sees the silhouette of someone approaching him . Assuming it to be Gabriel , he attempts to kill him , realising too late that it is actually Faythe ( " The Walking Shadow " ) . Gabriel arrives at the scene and sees his dead brother and the dying Faythe . Covering Xander 's ears , he unleashes a scream that causes Daryus to go deaf and that is heard by Nafaryus , Arabelle , and the entire town ( " My Last Farewell " ) . 
 Nafaryus and Arabelle arrive and beg Gabriel to use his gift to save Faythe ( " Losing Faythe " ) , but Gabriel is unable to sing after screaming so loudly ( " Whispers on the Wind " ) . The people , attracted by the scream , show up and start singing , giving Gabriel hope . He finds his ability to sing and brings Faythe back to life ( " Hymn of a Thousand Voices " ) . Nafaryus , realising what he has done , decides to end the conflict with Gabriel and shuts down the NOMACs for good . Daryus is forgiven for his actions , and Gabriel and Faythe raise Xander as a family ( " Our New World " ) . Nafaryus promises to govern the empire as a fair leader in a new world where music is appreciated again ( " Astonishing " ) . 
 = = Composition = = 
 The Astonishing is Dream Theater 's second concept album after 1999 's Metropolis Pt 2 : Scenes from a Memory . Described as an " honest @-@ to @-@ God rock opera " by Rolling Stone , it has been compared to The Who 's Tommy ( 1969 ) , Rush 's 2112 ( 1976 ) , Pink Floyd 's The Wall ( 1979 ) , and Queensrÿche 's Operation : Mindcrime ( 1988 ) . 2112 also revolves around music being used to achieve freedom in a futuristic setting . The album 's story was inspired by Petrucci 's love of fantasy and science fiction franchises such as Game of Thrones , Lord of the Rings , and Star Wars , as well as his observations on the role of technology in modern @-@ day society . In an interview with Billboard , he explained , “ I was thinking of all of the things now that people used to do that they don ’ t do anymore because they ’ re automated or done by robots : lots of jobs , self @-@ driving cars coming right around the corner ... My thought was , ' What would happen if ... music [ became ] all artificial ? ’ ” 
 Clocking in at over two hours in length and containing 34 tracks , The Astonishing was planned as an immersive experience that would be best enjoyed as a full album as opposed to a collection of singles . The album plays out similarly to a film , with Loudwire observing , " It ’ s an enormous amount of music to absorb in one sitting , but when you think about it , most movies are around two hours in length , and The Astonishing is very much like a movie in the way it delivers the storyline . " Certain songs , such as " A Savior in the Square " and " Our New World " , have reoccurring themes , while others stand more on their own in order to move the plot along . 
 In writing music to match the The Astonishing 's narrative , Dream Theater ended up playing in a wide variety of styles , from cinematic instrumentals to mellow ballads to the band 's more conventional progressive metal . Compared to previous Dream Theater albums , there is more acoustic playing , both in terms of guitar and piano . In an interview with Ultimate Guitar , Petrucci specifically mentioned the song " A Life Left Behind " , recalling , " [ It ] starts with an acoustic , kind of proggy riff , which is something we 've never done and has a very Yes sort of feel . " Several songs introduced new elements to the band 's music , such as " The X Aspect " , which is the first Dream Theater song to use bagpipes , and " Three Days " , which features a saloon @-@ style swing section that was written as a juxtaposition to the bleaker aspects of the album 's story . Five of the album 's tracks are short , electronic songs that represent the music of NOMACs . 
 = = Release = = 
 Dream Theater began their marketing campaign for The Astonishing in October 2015 , prompting visitors to visit their official website to choose between mailing lists for the Great Northern Empire or the Ravenskill Rebel Militia . <unk> were then notified of updates to their side 's Twitter page as they occurred . In early November , the band announced that their thirteenth studio album would be titled The Astonishing and launched a promotional website that suggested it would be a concept album . The website slowly revealed key elements of the album 's story , including its characters , map , and track listing . In December , The Astonishing was given an official January 29 release date , with multiple special editions being made available for pre @-@ sale including a deluxe set with a handmade <unk> 3D model . Leading to the album 's release , the band released a single , " The Gift of Music " , on December 15 , and premiered another song , " Moment of Betrayal " , on January 21 . They also made an official trailer available via YouTube . 
 Upon its release , The Astonishing debuted on many album charts , including top ten placements in Norway , Hungary , Italy , Sweden , Portugal , the Netherlands , Germany , Austria , and Canada . In the United States , it entered and peaked on the Billboard 200 at number eleven overall and became Dream Theater 's first ever number one debut on the Billboard Rock Chart . In February , the band released a music video for " The Gift of Music " , which mixed live performance footage with CGI animation and was filmed in New Jersey . Later that month , the band announced that it had partnered with Turbo Tape Games to create a video game adaptation of the album 's story for PC , Mac , iOS and Android . On May 7 , a music video was released for " Our New World " , followed by a video of tour visuals for " Hymn of a Thousand Voices " on June 14 . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 The Astonishing has received generally favorable reviews . At Metacritic , which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream publications , the album holds an average score of 80 , based on six reviews . Critics were especially complimentary of the band 's willingness to write a long , unconventional album , with AllMusic commenting , " Dream Theater have invested in the ' album ' concept ( and in listeners ' attention spans ) even as the music biz doubles down on the notion that long @-@ players are merely envelopes to hold singles . " Rolling Stone echoed these sentiments , concluding , " The results won 't please every Dream Theater partisan , nor will they convert the skeptical . But it would take a hard heart to deny Petrucci , co @-@ composer and keyboardist Jordan Rudess and their mates credit for the boldness of their aspirations and the assurance with which they achieve them . " Loudwire was also supportive of the band 's unique approach , but warned that it might make the album polarizing for fans . 
 Some reviewers were critical of The Astonishing 's concept , including Consequence of Sound , who described it as " very silly " , but ultimately gave the album an overall positive review . By contrast , Record Collector described the storytelling as " seamless " . In their write @-@ up , RTÉ.ie advised , " park the <unk> before pressing the play button because while The Astonishing makes Iron Maiden 's recent 92 @-@ minute double The Book of Souls look like a Ramones record , it 's great fun ... Mental elbow grease is required , and the quintet wouldn 't have it any other way . " 
 LaBrie 's vocals on The Astonishing were singled out by many critics as being particularly strong . In their review , Loudwire elaborated , " A concept album with different characters puts a lot of pressure on the vocalist , and James LaBrie lives up to the challenge . From mellow crooning to Broadway belting to edgier singing , he utilizes every style in his arsenal and delivers a first @-@ class performance . " The band as a whole were also praised , although AllMusic observed that Mangini and bassist John Myung weren 't featured as prominently as usual . 
 = = = Supporting tour = = = 
 In November 2015 , Dream Theater announced some European tour dates for early 2016 . The next month , they announced North American tour dates beginning in April and ending in May . As the band felt that The Astonishing would lend itself well to a live performance , they decided to play the album in full for each show and hired a production company to help with their presentation . They also made it a point to book historical concert halls and theaters such as Radio City Music Hall . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All track information taken from The Astonishing liner notes ; all lyrics written by John Petrucci , all music composed by Petrucci and Jordan Rudess . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 All credits taken from The Astonishing liner notes . 
 Dream Theater 
 James LaBrie – lead vocals 
 John Petrucci – guitar , production , story and concept 
 Jordan Rudess – keyboards 
 John Myung – bass 
 Mike Mangini – drums , percussion 
 Additional musicians 
 Eric Rigler – bagpipes on " The X Aspect " 
 City of Prague Philharmonic Orchestra 
 Production 
 Richard Chycki – engineering , mixing 
 <unk> – cover art 
 David Campbell – orchestral and choir arrangements 
 Mike Schuppan - engineering 
 Travis Warner – engineering 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Hurricane Marco ( 1996 ) = 
 Hurricane Marco caused significant flooding in the Greater Antilles and Central America , despite remaining well offshore . The thirteenth tropical cyclone , thirteenth named storm , and ninth hurricane of the 1996 Atlantic hurricane season , Marco developed in the western Caribbean Sea on November 16 after the interaction of a cold front and several tropical waves . Initially a tropical depression , it remained weak as it tracked southwestward and eventually southward . By November 19 , the depression strengthened into Tropical Storm Marco , shortly before slowly curving in a general eastward direction . Marco briefly became a hurricane on November 20 , though upper @-@ level winds caused it to weaken back to a tropical storm later that day . The storm then tracked northeastward toward Hispaniola , but later become nearly stationary and curve eastward , then doubled @-@ back to the west . 
 After weakening to a tropical depression on November 23 , Marco re @-@ strengthened to a tropical storm on the following day . Marco tracked northwestward while fluctuating in intensity before finally weakening and dissipating on November 26 . Despite not making landfall , Marco produced heavy rainfall in Cuba , Hispaniola , Central America , and Jamaica , which caused significant flooding in some areas . In Honduras , 4 @,@ 000 homes were destroyed , 40 bridges washed away , nearly 50 @,@ 000 acres of banana and fruit plantations flooded , and nine deaths were reported . Flooding also effected other Central American countries , albeit effects were less severe . Heavy rainfall was reported in Cuba , although flood damage is unknown . Marco contributed to an ongoing flood in Jamaica and caused three additional fatalities in the Dominican Republic . Overall , Marco caused 15 fatalities and approximately $ 8 @.@ 2 million ( 1996 USD ) in damage . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 On November 9 , a cold front moved into the northwest Caribbean Sea , shortly before an abnormally strong high pressure system entered in the area . The front then became nearly stationary and interacted with several tropical waves over the next week . The Intertropical Convergence Zone became active , causing monsoonal southwesterly flow to enter the system from the eastern Pacific Ocean . On November 13 , surface weather analysis indicated a weak low pressure area had developed north of Colombia . Despite a well @-@ defined low @-@ level circulation , the system did not meet the criteria for a tropical cyclone because convective activity was not organized or concentrated within the vicinity of the center . Several small , weak centers of low pressure formed in the general area , and the entire system drifted northward for a couple days . In combination with a high pressure area over the United States , the system produced gale @-@ force winds on Florida , Cuba , the Bahamas and the Gulf of Mexico . 
 Convection gradually developed over the broad low pressure area , and post @-@ storm analysis indicated that Tropical Depression Thirteen developed at 1800 UTC on November 16 , while centered about 160 miles ( 260 km ) southwest of Kingston , Jamaica . Operationally , the National Hurricane Center did not issue advisories until 2100 UTC on November 18 . The depression tracked generally southward , soon encountering a more favorable environment for tropical cyclone development . Although environmental conditions were favorable for intensification , the depression initially failed to strengthen further . However , the depression later developed significant amounts of deep convection and intensified into Tropical Storm Marco on November 19 . After intensifying into a tropical storm , Marco then headed slowly east @-@ northeastward and continued to strengthen . By early on November 20 , Marco was upgraded to a hurricane . Simultaneously , Marco attained its peak intensity with maximum sustained winds of 75 mph ( 120 km / h ) and a minimum barometric pressure of 983 mbar ( 29 @.@ 0 inHg ) . 
 However , shortly thereafter , Marco began to move into a less favorable environment with strong upper @-@ level westerly winds . As a result , it weakened back to a tropical storm later on November 20 , after being a hurricane for only twelve hours . Despite the lesser favorable environment , Marco began to re @-@ strengthen starting on the following day . By November 22 , it nearly re @-@ gained hurricane status , with winds remaining at 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) . However , Marco subsequently weakened to a tropical depression at 1800 UTC on November 23 while south of Jamaica . A mid @-@ level ridge rebuilt over the Bahamas and Florida , which forced Marco westward , and then northwestward . The cyclone re @-@ organized and thus re @-@ intensified into a tropical storm on November 24 . Tropical Storm Marco reached a third peak intensity with winds at 60 mph ( 100 km / h ) on November 25 at 1200 UTC , before it weakened again . The storm maintained tropical storm status until 1200 UTC on November 26 , when it weakened to a tropical depression once again . Marco then interacted with a cold front , causing it to degenerate into a remnant low pressure system at 1800 UTC on November 26 . Three hours later , the National Hurricane Center issued its final advisory on Marco , stating that the storm was merely a low @-@ level swirl devoid of deep convection . After dissipating , the remnants of Marco drifted southward and produced heavy rainfall over Belize and Honduras . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 At 1500 UTC on November 19 , a tropical storm watch was issued for Jamaica and was upgraded to a hurricane warning 24 hours later . However , by 2100 UTC on November 20 , the hurricane warning was downgraded to a tropical storm warning . It was further downgraded to a tropical storm watch and discontinued by November 22 . Other than hurricane / tropical storm watches and warnings , a flash flood warning was also posted on November 20 , and sailors were advised to remain at port . Disaster committees cautioned residents to stock up on supplies such as batteries and canned food . At 1500 UTC on November 20 , a hurricane watch was issued for Haiti and areas east of Camagüey , Cuba , though it was downgraded to a tropical storm watch six hours later . On the following day , the tropical storm watch was dropped . In addition , a tropical storm warning was issued on November 25 for the Isle of Youth and Pinar del Río , Cuba , though it was discontinued about 24 hours later . 
 = = Impact = = 
