 Related to this use of resonance , Messiaen also composed music in which the lowest , or fundamental , note is combined with higher notes or chords played much more quietly . These higher notes , far from being perceived as conventional harmony , function as harmonics that alter the timbre of the fundamental note like mixture stops on a pipe organ . An example is the song of the golden oriole in Le loriot of the Catalogue d 'oiseaux for solo piano ( Example 4 ) . 
 In his use of conventional diatonic chords , Messiaen often transcended their historically banal connotations ( for example , his frequent use of the added sixth chord as a resolution ) . 
 = = = Birdsong = = = 
 Birdsong fascinated Messiaen from an early age , and in this he found encouragement from his teacher Dukas , who reportedly urged his pupils to " listen to the birds " . Messiaen included stylised birdsong in some of his early compositions ( including L <unk> d 'oiseaux from the Quatuor pour la fin du temps ) , integrating it into his sound @-@ world by techniques like the modes of limited transposition and chord colouration . His evocations of birdsong became increasingly sophisticated , and with Le <unk> des oiseaux this process reached maturity , the whole piece being built from birdsong : in effect it is a dawn chorus for orchestra . The same can be said for " <unk> " , the five @-@ minute sixth movement of " Chronochromie " , which is scored for eighteen violins , each one playing a different birdsong . Messiaen notated the bird species with the music in the score ( examples 1 and 4 ) . The pieces are not simple transcriptions ; even the works with purely bird @-@ inspired titles , such as Catalogue d 'oiseaux and Fauvette des jardins , are tone poems evoking the landscape , its colours and atmosphere . 
 = = = Serialism = = = 
 For some compositions , Messiaen created scales for duration , attack and timbre analogous to the chromatic pitch scale . He expressed annoyance at the historical importance given to one of these works , Mode de valeurs et d 'intensités , by musicologists intent on crediting him with the invention of " total serialism " . 
 Messiaen later introduced what he called a " communicable language " , a " musical alphabet " to encode sentences . He first used this technique in his Méditations sur le mystère de la Sainte Trinité for organ ; where the " alphabet " includes motifs for the concepts to have , to be and God , while the sentences encoded feature sections from the writings of St. Thomas Aquinas . 
 = = Works = = 
 = = = Compositions = = = 
 = = = = Published = = = = 
 Le banquet céleste ( " The heavenly banquet " ) , organ ( 1928 , a recomposition of a section from his unpublished orchestral piece Le banquet <unk> ) 
 Préludes , piano ( 1928 – 29 ) 
 <unk> ( " Diptych " ) , organ ( 1930 ) 
 La mort du nombre ( " The death of numbers " ) , soprano , tenor , violin and piano ( 1930 ) 
 Les offrandes oubliées ( " The forgotten offerings " ) , orchestra ( 1930 ) 
 Trois mélodies , song cycle ( 1930 ) 
 Le Tombeau <unk> , orchestra ( 1931 ) 
 Apparition de l 'église <unk> ( " Apparition of the eternal church " ) , organ ( 1932 ) 
 Fantaisie burlesque , piano ( 1932 ) 
 Hymne au Saint Sacrement ( " Hymn to the Holy Sacrament " ) , orchestra ( 1932 , lost 1943 , reconstructed from memory 1946 ) 
 Thème et variations , ( " Theme and Variations " ) violin and piano ( 1932 ) 
 L <unk> ( " The Ascension " ) , orchestra ( 1932 – 33 ; organ version including replacement movement , 1933 – 34 ) 
 La Nativité du Seigneur ( " The Lord 's nativity " ) , organ ( 1935 ) 
 Pièce pour le tombeau de Paul Dukas ( " Piece written as a memorial of Paul Dukas " ) , piano , ( 1935 ) 
 <unk> , voice and piano ( 1935 ) 
 Poèmes pour Mi ( " Poems for Mi " ) , song cycle ( 1936 , orchestral version 1937 ) 
 O sacrum <unk> ! , choral motet ( 1937 ) 
 Chants de terre et de ciel ( " Songs of earth and heaven " ) , song cycle ( 1938 ) 
 Les corps <unk> ( " Glorious bodies " ) , organ ( 1939 ) 
 Quatuor pour la fin du temps ( " Quartet for the end of time " ) , violin , cello , clarinet , piano ( 1940 – 41 ) 
 Rondeau , piano ( 1943 ) 
 Visions de l 'Amen ( " Visions of the Amen " ) , two pianos ( 1943 ) 
 Trois petites liturgies de la <unk> divine ( " Three small liturgies of the Divine Presence " ) , women 's voices , piano solo , ondes Martenot solo , orchestra ( 1943 – 44 ) 
 Vingt regards sur l 'enfant @-@ Jésus ( " Twenty gazes on the Christ @-@ child " ) , piano ( 1944 ) 
 Harawi : Chants d 'amour et de mort , ( " Harawi : Songs of love and death " ) song cycle ( 1944 ) 
 Turangalîla @-@ Symphonie , piano solo , ondes Martenot solo , orchestra ( 1946 – 48 ) 
 Cinq <unk> , 12 singers ( 1948 ) 
 <unk> , piano ( 1949 ) 
 Messe de la <unk> ( " Pentecost mass " ) , organ ( 1949 – 50 ) 
 Quatre études de rythme ( " Four studies in rhythm " ) , piano ( 1949 – 50 ) 
 Île de feu 1 
 Mode de valeurs et d 'intensités 
 <unk> <unk> 
 Île de feu 2 
 Le merle noir ( " Blackbird " ) , flute and piano ( 1952 ) 
 Livre d <unk> , organ ( 1951 – 2 ) 
 Réveil des oiseaux ( " Dawn chorus " ) , solo piano and orchestra ( 1953 ) 
 Oiseaux <unk> ( " Exotic birds " ) , solo piano and wind ensemble ( 1955 – 56 ) 
 Catalogue d 'oiseaux ( " Bird catalogue " ) , piano ( 1956 – 58 ) 
 Book 1 
 i Le <unk> des <unk> ( " Alpine chough " ) 
 ii Le loriot ( " Golden oriole " ) ( loriot and Loriod are homophones ) 
 iii Le merle bleu ( " Blue rock thrush " ) 
 Book 2 
 iv Le <unk> <unk> ( " Black @-@ eared wheatear " ) 
 Book 3 
 v La <unk> <unk> ( " Tawny owl " ) 
 vi L <unk> <unk> ( " Woodlark " ) 
 Book 4 
 vii La <unk> <unk> ( " Reed warbler " ) 
 Book 5 
 viii L <unk> <unk> ( " Short @-@ toed lark " ) 
 ix La <unk> ( " Cetti 's warbler " ) 
 Book 6 
 x Le merle de <unk> ( " Rufous @-@ tailed rock thrush " ) 
 Book 7 
 xi La <unk> variable ( " Buzzard " ) 
 xii Le <unk> <unk> ( " Black wheatear " ) 
 xiii Le <unk> <unk> ( " Curlew " ) 
 Chronochromie ( " Time @-@ colour " ) , orchestra ( 1959 – 60 ) 
 <unk> pour la fête de la <unk> ( " Verse for the festival of dedication " ) , organ ( 1960 ) 
 Sept <unk> ( " Seven haikus " ) , solo piano and orchestra ( 1962 ) 
 Couleurs de la cité céleste ( " Colours of the Celestial City " ) , solo piano and ensemble ( 1963 ) 
 Et <unk> resurrectionem mortuorum ( " And I await the resurrection of the dead " ) , wind , brass and percussion ( 1964 ) 
 La Transfiguration de Notre Seigneur Jésus @-@ Christ ( " The Transfiguration of Our Lord Jesus Christ " ) , large 10 @-@ part chorus , piano solo , cello solo , flute solo , clarinet solo , xylorimba solo , vibraphone solo , large orchestra ( 1965 – 69 ) 
 Méditations sur le mystère de la Sainte Trinité ( " Meditations on the mystery of the Holy Trinity " ) , organ ( 1969 ) 
 La fauvette des jardins ( " Garden warbler " ) , piano ( 1970 ) 
 Des canyons aux étoiles … ( " From the canyons to the stars ... " ) , solo piano , solo horn , solo glockenspiel , solo xylorimba , small orchestra with 13 string players ( 1971 – 74 ) 
 Saint @-@ François d 'Assise ( " St Francis of Assisi " ) , opera ( 1975 – 1983 ) 
 Livre du Saint Sacrement ( " Book of the Holy Sacrament " ) , organ ( 1984 ) 
 Petites <unk> d 'oiseaux ( " Small sketches of birds " ) , piano ( 1985 ) 
 Un <unk> et des oiseaux ( " Stained @-@ glass window and birds " ) , piano solo , brass , wind and percussion ( 1986 ) 
 La ville d 'en @-@ haut ( " The city on high " ) , piano solo , brass , wind and percussion ( 1987 ) 
 Un <unk> ( " A smile " ) , orchestra ( 1989 ) 
 Pièce pour piano et quatuor à <unk> ( " Piece for piano and string quartet " ) ( 1991 ) 
 Éclairs sur l 'au @-@ delà ... ( " Illuminations on the beyond ... " ) , orchestra ( 1988 – 92 ) 
 = = = = Unpublished , posthumously published , or lost = = = = 
 A number of Messiaen 's compositions were not sanctioned by the composer for publication . They include the following , some of which have been published posthumously and recorded , and some of which are lost . 
 La dame de <unk> , for piano ( 1917 ) 
 La banquet <unk> , for orchestra ( 1928 ) 
 Variations <unk> , for organ ( 1928 ) 
 Mass , 8 sopranos and 4 violins ( 1933 ) 
 Fantaisie , for violin and piano ( 1933 ; published 2007 ) 
 Fête des belles eaux , for six ondes <unk> ( 1937 ) 
 Musique de scène pour un <unk> , electronic ( 1942 ) 
 Chant des <unk> , chorus and orchestra ( 1945 , then lost , rediscovered 1991 ) 
 <unk> @-@ <unk> , musique concrète ( 1952 ) , realised by Pierre Henry in the radiophonic workshop of French radio , an experiment which Messiaen later deemed a failure 
 <unk> <unk> for piano and ondes <unk> ( published 2001 ) 
 Concert à quatre ( " Quadruple concerto " ) , piano , flute , oboe , cello and orchestra ( 1990 – 91 , almost finished at the time of his death , completed by Loriod and Benjamin , premiered in 1994 , published in 2003 ) 
 La Fauvette <unk> ( " Subalpine warbler " ) , piano ( 1961 ) , one of Messiaen 's birdsong pieces for solo piano , discovered and edited for performance by Peter Hill and premiered by him in November 2013 
 Un oiseau des <unk> de vie ( <unk> tui ) ( " A bird of the trees of life ( Tui bird ) " ) , a discarded movement from Éclairs sur l ’ au @-@ delà … , piano sketch with orchestration annotations discovered among Messiaen 's papers , orchestrated by Christopher Dingle and first performed at The Proms in August 2015 
 = = = Treatises = = = 
 Technique de mon langage musical ( " The technique of my musical language " ) . Paris : Leduc , 1944 . 
 Vingt <unk> d <unk> ( " 20 harmony lessons " ) . Paris : Leduc , 1944 . 
 Traité de rythme , de couleur , et d <unk> ( 1949 – 1992 ) ( " Treatise on rhythm , colour and ornithology " ) , completed by Yvonne Loriod . 7 parts bound in 8 volumes . Paris : Leduc , 1994 – 2002 . 
 Analyses of the Piano Works of Maurice Ravel , edited by Yvonne Loriod , translated by Paul Griffiths . [ Paris ] : Durand , 2005 . 
 = = = Films = = = 
 Apparition of the Eternal Church – Paul Festa 's 2006 film about responses of 31 artists to Messiaen 's music . 
 Messiaen at 80 ( 1988 ) . Directed by Sue Knussen . BFI database entry . 
 Olivier Messiaen et les oiseaux ( 1973 ) . Directed by Michel Fano and Denise <unk> . 
 Olivier Messiaen – The Crystal Liturgy ( 2007 [ DVD release date ] ) . Directed by Olivier Mille . 
 Olivier Messiaen : Works ( 1991 ) . DVD on which Messiaen performs " Improvisations " on the organ at the Paris Trinity Church . 
 The South Bank Show : Olivier Messiaen : The Music of Faith ( 1985 ) . Directed by Alan Benson . BFI database entry . 
 = = = Listening = = = 
 Thème et variations – Helen Kim , violin ; Adam Bowles , piano Luna Nova New Music Ensemble 
 Le merle noir – John McMurtery , flute ; Adam Bowles , piano Luna Nova New Music Ensemble 
 Quatuor pour la fin du temps – Luna Nova New Music Ensemble 
 Regard de l 'esprit de joie from Vingt regards ... , Tom Poster , pianist 
 Birdsong in Messiaen on YouTube 
 Example of Birdsong in Messiaen on YouTube played on a <unk> pipe organ 
 In @-@ depth feature on Olivier Messiaen by Radio France International 's English service 
 Excerpts from sound archives of Messiaen 's works . 
 = Malvern water = 
 Malvern water is a natural spring water from the Malvern Hills on the border of the counties of Herefordshire and Worcestershire in England . The Hills consist of very hard granite and limestone rock . <unk> in the rock retain rain water , which slowly permeates through , escaping at the springs . The springs release an average of about 60 litres a minute and the flow has never been known to cease . 
 Beneficial properties of the water have been reported for over four hundred years , and the reason for such benefits was a topic of scholarly discussion by 1817 . In the 19th century Malvern became famous for the water cure , resulting in its rapid development from a village to a busy town with many large Victorian and Edwardian hotels . The writings of the hydrotherapists James Gully and James Wilson , and well known patients who included Lord Lytton contributed to Malvern 's renown at that time . The water has been bottled on an industrial scale under the Schweppes brand from 1850 until 2010 , and is still bottled by a family @-@ owned company since 2009 as Holywell Malvern Spring Water . In 2012 the Holywell Water Co Ltd was granted permission to use the world famous " Malvern " name in its branding , thus becoming Holywell Malvern Spring Water . It has been drunk by several British monarchs . Elizabeth I drank it in public in the 16th century ; Queen Victoria refused to travel without it . 
 = = Purity = = 
 Malvern water has long been acclaimed for its purity . In 1756 Dr John Wall tested the water , found that it contained very few minerals , and said : " The Malvern water is famous for containing just nothing at all ... ! " William Heberden also noted the purity of Malvern water , stating " the Malvern water is purer than that of any other springs in England , which I ever examined or heard of " . 
 The natural untreated water is generally devoid of all minerals , bacteria , and suspended matter , approaching the purity of distilled water . In 1987 Malvern gained official EU status as a natural mineral water , a mark of purity and quality . However , in spite of regular quality analysis , drought in 2006 dried out the rock that filters the water , allowing the water to flow through it too quickly for the natural filtering process . Due to the slight impurities , the Coca @-@ Cola Company , manufacturer of the Schweppes brand , had to install filtration equipment , which reclassifies the water as spring water under EU law . 
 = = Springs = = 
 There are sources in about 70 locations around the Hills , where residents regularly fill containers free of charge , including the St Ann 's Well , which is housed in a building dating from 1815 , in the town of Great Malvern . Major popular water sources are : 
 Beauchamp Fountain – Cowleigh Road 
 Enigma Fountain plus Malvhina water feature , Belle Vue Terrace – town centre 
 Evendine Spring – Jubilee Drive ( west flank of the Hills ) 
 <unk> Spring – West Malvern Road 
 Holy Well – Malvern Wells 
 Jubilee Fountain – Malvern Wells 
 Morris Well , Wells Common – Lower Wyche 
 St Ann 's Well – Great Malvern 
 The <unk> Well dating from around 250 BC is one of the earliest to be documented . 
 = = Medicinal use = = 
 Local legend has it that the curative benefit of the spring water was known in mediaeval times . The medicinal value and the bottling of Malvern water are praised in verses 15 and 16 of " a poem attributed to the Reverend Edmund Rea , who became Vicar of Great Malvern in 1612 " . These are part of " an old song in praise of Malvern " , that was published with comments on a different and uncertain provenance by Chambers in his history of the town . 
 In 1622 , Richard Banister , the pioneering oculist , wrote the following verse about the Eye Well , close to the Holy Well in his Breviary of the Eyes . 
 In 1756 , Dr. John Wall published a 14 @-@ page pamphlet on the benefits of Malvern water , that reached a 158 @-@ page 3rd edition in 1763 . Further praise came from the botanist Benjamin Stillingfleet in 1757 , the poet Thomas Warton in 1790 , quoted in a review by the medical historian W.H. McMenemy . Cure tourism in Malvern got press mention . In a letter dated 18 July 1759 to Mrs Montague , Benjamin Stillingfleet wrote : " I have been at Malvern about twelve days , where , with difficulty , I have got a lodging , the place is so full , nor do I wonder at it , there being some instances of very extraordinary cures , in cases looked on as desperate , even by Dr. Wall , who first brought these waters into vogue ... The road is very fine , and made on purpose for the convenience of the drinkers " . Chambers , in a footnote to the " song " quoted above , wrote " Though modern visitors do not now lie in bushes , yet so crowded was Malvern one season that a lady of rank and fashion , with her equipage and servants were actually obliged to be sent to the Workhouse . It is now the custom , during the season , to let out this house to visitors , and the money gained this way is applied to the funds for maintaining the poor . " Nicholas Vansittart brought his wife Catherine to Malvern for a rest cure in 1809 . In 1828 , William Addison , the physician of The Duchess of Kent ( mother of Queen Victoria ) lectured about Malvern at the Royal Institution commending " its pure and invigorating air , the excellence of its water , and the romantic beauty of its scenery " . 
 In 1842 Drs James Manby Gully and James Wilson opened water cure clinics at Malvern , thus beginning the town 's prosperity . Based on the therapy offered at Vincent <unk> 's clinic in Gräfenberg , Silesia , then part of the Austrian Empire ( now in the Czech Republic ) , the centre was Britain 's first purpose built water cure establishment . As the fame of the establishment grew , Gully and Wilson became well @-@ known national figures . Two more clinics were opened at Malvern . Famous patients included Charles Darwin 's daughter ( who died and is buried in Malvern ) , Thomas Carlyle , Florence Nightingale , Lord Tennyson , Samuel Wilberforce , and Sir Edward Bulwer Lytton , whose writing contributed to the popularity of Malvern water . The fame of Gully and Wilson was not without detractors ; Sir Charles Hastings , the founder of the British Medical Association , was extremely critical of hydropathy , and of Dr Gully in particular . The cure was satirized by " Dr. <unk> " . 
 = = Commercialisation = = 
 Malvern water has been bottled and distributed in the UK and abroad from as early as the reign of James I , with water bottling at the Holy Well being recorded in 1622 . Various local grocers have bottled and distributed Malvern water during the 19th and early 20th centuries , but it was first bottled on a large commercial scale by Schweppes , who opened a bottling plant at Holywell in Malvern Wells in 1850 . As official caterers to the Great Exhibition of 1851 , Schweppes introduced the water as Malvern Soda , later renaming it Malvern Seltzer Water in 1856 . In 1890 Schweppes moved away from Holywell , entered into a contract with a Colwall family , and built a bottling plant in the village in 1892 . The Holywell was subsequently leased to John and Henry Cuff , who bottled there until the 1960s . The Holywell became derelict until 2009 when with the aid of a Lottery Heritage grant , production of 1200 bottles per day of Holywell Spring Water was recommenced by an independent family @-@ owned company . The well is believed to be the oldest bottling plant in the world . 
 In the 1850s Malvern Water was bottled by John and William Burrow at the Bottling Works Spring in Robson Ward 's yard on Belle Vue Terrace in Great Malvern . Bottling ceased here in the 1950s and the former bottling works are now furniture showrooms . Water for the Bottling Works Spring is piped from St Ann 's Well . 
 In 1927 , Schweppes acquired from the Burrows family <unk> Spring , in Colwall , on the western side of the Herefordshire Beacon , approximately two miles from Colwall village . The source here emerges at the fault line between the Silurian thrust and the Precambrian diorite and granite above it . The spring was renamed <unk> Spring , and in 1929 Schweppes commenced bottling . The factory employed 25 people who filled 26 million bottles annually . It was operated by Coca @-@ Cola Enterprises Ltd . , and the water was sold under the Schweppes brand name . On 20 October 2010 Coca @-@ Cola Enterprises , who owned the Malvern brand , announced that production would be ceasing as of 3 November 2010 . This decision , which was widely criticised both in the town and beyond , was due to the declining market share Malvern has on the overall water market . On 28 October 2011 , it was reported that the bottling plant is being sold to a property company . 
 = = Interest groups = = 
 Among the interest groups promoting the legacy of Malvern water , the two primary ones are The Malvern Spa Association , and The Friends of Malvern Springs and Wells . 
 The Malvern Spa Association ( MSA ) is a non @-@ profit organisation , founded in September 1998 , with two primary aims . " To conserve , protect and restore the Springs , Wells , Spouts and Fountains of the Malvern Hills " , and " to promote the study , conservation , development and awareness " of them , and of " Great Malvern as a Spa Town " . Apart from various fundraising activities and membership fees , the MSA receives funding through the Heritage Lottery Fund , which is managed by the Malvern Hills Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty Unit ( Malvern Hills AONB ) , under the umbrella of the National Association for Areas of Outstanding Natural Beauty ( <unk> ) . The Malvern Hills AONB also provides grants via such mechanisms as the Sustainable Development Fund . The MSA was originally founded by the Spa Water Strategy Working Group , comprising Malvern town councillors and artist Rose Garrard . Its patrons are Lord and Lady Sandys , after whose family a spout located in Spring Lane , Malvern Link is named , and which was restored in 2005 as part of the Malvern heritage Project . In 2004 , in order to finance improvements and restoration to 20 historical sites , a grant of £ 270 @,@ 000 was awarded by the Heritage Lottery Fund . The MSA produces a free newsletter available at the Tourist Information Centre in Great Malvern , at St Ann 's Well and for download . 
 The Friends of Malvern Springs and Wells is an informal group that publishes a newsletter and promotes interest in the wells , including an award scheme for conservation or renovation of springs and wells and their immediate environment . The award scheme is the St Werstan Award for the Enhancement of Water Heritage , given in honour of St. Werstan , one of the earliest saints associated with Malvern . In August 2008 , the group 's St Werstan award for conservation or renovation of the springs and wells and their surroundings was presented to Coca @-@ Cola Great Britain . At the behest of the Friends , the company is also sponsoring a project to transfer an iconic mulberry tree sapling from Melbourne , Australia . The <unk> derives from a cutting taken from a mulberry tree originally planted in 1936 by George Bernard Shaw at the Malvern Festival . The tree was destroyed in a storm in 2000 , but research by members of the Friends group revealed that in 1956 , a cutting from the tree was sent to Malvern in Victoria , Australia . The Friends group also assists in the general maintenance of wells and spouts , and in organising events and well dressing ceremonies . According to research made by local historians , a tradition of well dressing in the Malverns dates from the 12th and 13th centuries when around 5 August each year , tribute was paid to St Oswald for water cures . The tradition of well dressing continues , fostered by interest groups and activities such as arts projects . 
 = = Art projects = = 
 In 1996 the Malvern Hills District Council appointed a Malvern Spa Water Strategy Working Group . Independently , in June 1996 , sculptor Rose Garrard proposed to the <unk> the creation of a sculpture trail by nationally known sculptors , placed at forgotten springs around the town centre . The council began with the installation of new water features as part of its plan to beautify the town centre . In 1997 the District Council implemented a Spring Water Arts Project to map water sources around the hills . Garrard undertook a two @-@ month artist 's residency and collaborated with the public , who provided locations of over two hundred water sources . Garrard was commissioned to create the drinking spout , Malvhina , which was unveiled on 4 September 1998 . 
 On 26 May 2000 , the Enigma Fountain , also by Garrard , was unveiled by The Duke of York . Its cost of £ 5 @,@ 000 was funded by the Malvern Hills District Council , public subscription , and support from by Severn Trent Water , West Midlands Arts , and local businesses . Located on the Bellevue Terrace island in the very centre of the town , together with the statue of Edward Elgar , the group of sculptures embodies both music and water , the two major aspects of Malvern 's cultural history . 
 Art projects continue in various ways . Each year in April a well dressing competition is organised around a theme set by the Malvern Spa Association , with Gold , Silver and Bronze awards presented to adult 's and children 's groups . The well dressing initiative usually takes place over a period of four or five days with the Malvern spouts starting the annual season of well dressing around the country in the Derbyshire tradition . In 2003 , photographer Bob <unk> gave permission to the BBC to publish 21 of his special <unk> views of the decorated wells and spouts . 
 For the 2010 competition based on ' Celebrations ' , a group of pupils of a local primary school decorated the Great Malvern Railway Station Trough with paper figures representing famous people who have visited Malvern , such as Shaw and Elgar , celebrating 150 years of the railway in the town . Also in 2010 , the connection of Florence Nightingale with Malvern water is being celebrated with the help of the Malvern Museum 's school poster competition . 
 Other art projects encapsulate different connections with Malvern water . In 2002 the Elmley Foundation donated an 8 @-@ foot water clock designed by French sculptor , and horologist Bernard <unk> to the Malvern theatre and the people of Malvern . The clock which is on permanent exhibition in the foyer area of the theatre represents the three main industries of the town : its science , theatre , and water . 
 = Ninja Gaiden II : The Dark Sword of Chaos = 
 Ninja Gaiden II : The Dark Sword of Chaos , known in Japan as Ninja Ryukenden II : Ankoku no Jashin Ken ( <unk> II <unk> , lit . " Legend of the Ninja Dragon Sword II : The Demonic Sword of Darkness " ) and as Shadow Warriors II : The Dark Sword of Chaos in Europe ( alternatively known as Shadow Warriors II : Ninja Gaiden II ) , is a side @-@ scrolling platforming video game developed and published by Tecmo for the Nintendo Entertainment System ( NES ) . This is the second installment in the Ninja Gaiden trilogy for the NES and it was released in Japan on April 6 , 1990 ( 1990 @-@ 04 @-@ 06 ) , in North America in May 1990 , and in Europe on October 27 , 1994 ( 1994 @-@ 10 @-@ 27 ) . The game was later released for the Commodore Amiga and DOS @-@ based PCs by <unk> in 1991 . It was then released for the Virtual Console North America service on October 15 , 2007 ( 2007 @-@ 10 @-@ 15 ) for the Wii and on August 22 , 2013 ( 2013 @-@ 08 @-@ 22 ) for the Nintendo 3DS . 
 The events in Ninja Gaiden II take place one year after the events in the first Ninja Gaiden game . It is about an evil emperor named Ashtar who , after hearing of Jaquio 's defeat , devises a plan to take over the world and engulf it in darkness through an evil sword called the Dark Sword of Chaos . A U.S. Army agent named Robert T. Sturgeon recruits the game 's protagonist Ryu Hayabusa and tells him that he is the only person who can stop him . The game received positive praise in previews from Electronic Gaming Monthly and Nintendo Power and continued to receive high ratings and coverage , being nominated for several awards from Nintendo Power in 1991 . Overall , reviewers have said that visuals and controls of Ninja Gaiden II improved over its predecessor while maintaining a high level of difficulty for players ; the game was criticized for having a more generic and predictable plot . The game maintains lasting appeal among players , with one reviewer saying that Ninja Gaiden II is " a challenging experience the likes of which gamers in the 8 @-@ bit era lived and died for " . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The story begins one year after the events of the first Ninja Gaiden game . The story opens in the Realm of Darkness as Ashtar , the evil lord who controlled Jaquio , is informed of Jaquio 's defeat ; he devises a plan to rule over Earth by opening the Gate of Darkness . A U.S. Army Special Intelligence unit member named Robert T. Sturgeon is sent to find Ryu to take out Ashtar . Robert informs Ryu that Irene Lew has been captured and that he must go to the Tower of Lahja to save her . After hopping on a freight train and then battling up the mountain in which the tower lies , he is ambushed by a figure who describes himself as a tribesman of the World of Chaos , led by the Emperor of Darkness Ashtar . After making it to the top of the tower , Ryu finds Irene , who has been captured by Ashtar . Ashtar then blasts Ryu with energy from his own sword ; before Ashtar can finish off Ryu , Robert appears and shoots Ashtar in the back , stopping him . Robert orders Ashtar to hand over his sword and give up , but Ashtar escapes with Irene , telling Ryu to follow him into the Maze of Darkness . 
 After Ashtar escapes into the Maze of Darkness , Robert tells Ryu about Ashtar 's plot to take over the world by using the full power of his sword , the Dark Sword of Chaos . Robert implores Ryu to stop Ashtar before his Dark Sword reaches full power . After battling through the Maze of Darkness and into the World of Chaos , Ryu hears echoes of Ashtar 's plan in the distance . Ryu then catches up with Ashtar . He releases Irene , but immediately after releasing her he stabs her with the Dark Sword . Robert then shows up , only to find out that Irene has been mortally wounded ; Ashtar then blasts Robert with energy from his Dark Sword and then challenges Ryu to battle . Ryu defeats Ashtar , and before he dies , he says that the forces of Darkness will soon awaken and implores the forces of Chaos to engulf the world into darkness . While he is saying this , the Dark Sword of Chaos vanishes into thin air . After Ashtar 's death , Irene tells Ryu that an evil altar that Ashtar prepared to open the Gate of Darkness must be destroyed . Ryu then leaves Irene behind and tells Robert to take her and leave the World of Chaos . 
 As Ryu enters the World of Darkness to destroy the altar , Irene and Robert , while traveling back , are stopped by a shadowy figure that Irene has seen before . Meanwhile , after defeating <unk> whom he noted he fought in his fight against Jaquio ( in the previous Ninja Gaiden game ) , Ryu finds Robert on the ground and mortally wounded . He tells Ryu that Irene has been captured again and that he must prevent the Gate of Darkness from opening . Robert then tells Ryu to leave him behind while he fends off the demons . Ryu eventually makes it to the evil altar where he finds Irene and the shadowy figure who captured her ; the figure reveals himself as Jaquio – the antagonist from the first Ninja Gaiden installment – who was reborn after his first battle with Ryu . 
 Jaquio tells Ryu his master plan of using Ashtar as a pawn , used to awaken the true evil . He plans to use the Dark Sword of Chaos to use Irene 's life force to open the Gate of Darkness and call up all the demons , while Ryu awakens them from their sleep . Jaquio then challenges Ryu to a showdown in which Ryu defeats him . Before Ryu and Irene can destroy the evil altar though , Jaquio 's blood awakens the Dark Sword , which opens up the Gate of Darkness , shocks Irene and Ryu with its energy . The Demon Jashin arrives through the Gate of Darkness and reanimates the corpse of Jaquio . He then turns into a demonic wall , which Ryu , after borrowing strength from his Dragon Sword , defeats . Jashin is once again sealed away , the Dark Sword then breaks apart , the Gate of Darkness closes and disappears , and Ryu flees with Irene out of the temple just as it collapses . He then begins to mourn for Irene , who is presumed to be dead , when the power of the Dragon Sword revives her . Irene tells Ryu that she felt like she had been dreaming for a long time . Ryu tells her that the incident is over , and the game ends as the two watch the sun set . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 As with the previous Ninja Gaiden game , the player controls Ryu Hayabusa through a series of platforming levels called " Acts " . Players have the ability to jump and latch on and off walls and ladders . Two new abilities that Ryu can do in Ninja Gaiden II are climbing up and down walls and attacking with " Power Boosting Items " while on walls and ladders . Ryu has a strength meter on top of the screen that decreases whenever he takes damage from enemies . The player loses a life if Ryu 's strength meter runs out , Ryu falls off the screen or if the timer runs out ; the game ends if players lose all their lives . The player can continue and restart the game from the beginning of the level in which they lost all their lives . 
 Players dispatch enemies by either thrusting at them with his Dragon Sword or by defeating them using Power Boosting Items . These special items consume Ryu 's " ninja power " , also located on the top of the screen . Power Boosting Items include the following : shurikens ; " Windmill Throwing Stars " that move back and forth like a boomerang ; " The Art of the Fire Wheel " which hurls fireballs diagonally upwards ; " Fire Dragon Balls " which hurls fireballs diagonally downwards ; and the " Invincible Fire Wheel " that creates a barrier of three fireballs around Ryu , destroying any enemy that touches them . These items can be found in various crystal balls scattered throughout the levels , and they can be switched out by collecting another Power Boosting Item . The amount of ninja power used depends on the type of Power Boosting Item used . At the end of each Act Ryu fights a boss which has its own strength meter , located on the top of the screen . The boss 's strength meter decreases every time the player damages it , and the boss is destroyed when the player completely depletes its strength meter . 
 Along the way , the player can collect items that are found in crystal balls scattered throughout the levels . These items include the following : items that increase Ryu 's ninja power ; bottles that increase the player 's score ; " Scrolls of the Spirit of the Dragon " that increase Ryu 's maximum ninja power ; medicine that partially refills Ryu 's strength meter ; Power Boosting Items ; and 1 @-@ ups . Another new feature in Ninja Gaiden II is the ability for Ryu to " split his body " and clone himself when the player collects an orange ninja symbol . Collecting this symbol creates for Ryu an orange shadow of him that follows behind and copies every move Ryu makes , including climbing walls and ladders and attacking enemies . Using this technique , the player can strategically position Ryu and his clones to more easily defeat enemies and bosses . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Electronic Gaming Monthly previewed Ninja Gaiden II in late 1989 and early 1990 . The game first appeared in its September – October 1989 issue and again in its November 1989 issue ; they noted the new levels , power @-@ ups , and an " explosive story that 's loaded with twists and turns " . In the magazine 's January issue , Steve Harris praised the game for its new power @-@ ups , scrolling backgrounds , and more detailed cinematic cutscenes . He said that the game was going to take the series " one step further than before " . The game was shown to the public for the time at the Winter 1990 Consumer Electronics Show in Las Vegas , in which Nintendo Power gave " four star ratings for its great cinema scenes and challenge " . The same magazine previewed the game in its " Pak Watch " section in their March – April 1990 issue . They said that at first look the game had better cutscenes than the first Ninja Gaiden game , and they noted the great and diverse gameplay and high level of challenge . After the game 's release , it debuted at # 4 on the magazine 's " Top 30 " list for September – October 1990 . In March 1991 , the game was nominated for the " Nintendo Power Awards ' 90 " in the following categories : " Best Theme & Fun " ; " Best Play Control " ; " Best Hero " ( Ryu Hayabusa ) ; " Best Bad Guy " ( Ashtar ) ; and " Best Overall " . It did not win any of those categories . Later , in its 100th issue in September 1997 , Ninja Gaiden II was listed as the 49th best game of all time on its " 100 Best Games of All Time " list . It was also listed as having one of the best 100 cheat codes of all time , which was pressing a series of buttons on the title screen to enable various sound tests . In a 1991 issue of Game Players in its list of Annual Awards , the game received the " Game Player 's NES Excellence Award " as one of the best NES games of 1990 . GamesRadar ranked it the 20th best NES game ever made . The staff felt that it was a large improvement over its predecessor due to improved gameplay , audio , visuals , and control . 
 Ninja Gaiden II was reviewed in the July 1990 issue of Electronic Gaming Monthly and received very high ratings . Steve Harris said that the game improved on its predecessor 's gameplay , graphics , and cinematic cutscenes ; he praised the diverse level environments and the new abilities that Ryu has received , but he noted that some power @-@ ups from the first Ninja Gaiden game were missing in this one . A reviewer under the pseudonym " Sushi @-@ X " echoed Harris ' praise but pointed about that some of the bosses in the first game were reused ; he added afterwards that " it 's still worth the price of admission " . Ed Semrad called Ninja Gaiden II one of the best video game sequels to ever be released ; he referred to the graphics , difficulty , gameplay , and storyline as " near @-@ perfect " , though he points out that the game does get very difficult in the latter levels . Martin Alessi called it one of the best NES games ever and one of the best video games of 1990 . In the same issue , Ninja Gaiden II was featured on the front cover and was denoted as the " Game @-@ of @-@ the @-@ Month " . The game received further praise for taking the Ninja Gaiden series to new levels and featuring other surprises . They showed a partial walkthrough of the first Act and provided short tips for the second through fourth Acts . Near the end of the feature the staff pointed out rumors of a third installment to the series ( which would eventually become Ninja Gaiden III : The Ancient Ship of Doom ) . At the end of the feature rock band Anthrax members Charlie Benante and Frank Bello were shown with Tecmo developer Jason Magness playing Ninja Gaiden II in a private showing . 
 Ninja Gaiden II was reviewed again in 2007 when the game was released for the Virtual Console and received some praise as well as criticism from reviewers . Austin Shau from GameSpot compared the game with the first Ninja Gaiden game as examples of " mean @-@ spirited games " on the NES with high , unforgiving difficulty and excellent controls and gameplay . He applauds Tecmo 's artistic detail in the cutscenes , saying that it enhances the storyline and offsets the tedious dialogue . He said that the visuals are better than those in the first game with the usage of " dynamic environments " such as speeding trains , and he praises the game 's fast @-@ paced sound . He and IGN 's Lucas Thomas praised the improvement in the controls from its predecessor , more specifically Ryu 's ability to freely climb up and down walls and use special weapons while on the walls . Thomas enjoyed the game 's " chief innovation " of Ryu 's ability to clone himself and use them to take care of enemies – something in which he says " make progressing through levels and taking down bosses much easier and quicker " . Reviewers said that the game 's difficulty remains high for players as with the previous Ninja Gaiden game . Shau noted that the game is still difficult as was its predecessor but said that the sequel is slightly easier . Thomas stated that the sequel is not any easier to beat than its predecessor and that players will still get frustrated , especially with new environmental features such as blowing wind and rain and absolute darkness in which flashes of lightning illuminates the platforms . Thomas ' only criticism of the game was that the storyline was not as good as its predecessor , saying that the plot seemed more predictable and that the cutscenes seemed more generic the second time around . Overall , he noted the lasting appeal of the game , saying that Ninja Gaiden II is " a challenging experience the likes of which gamers in the 8 @-@ bit era lived and died for " . 
 = Past Prologue = 
 " Past Prologue " is the third episode of the American science fiction television series Star Trek : Deep Space Nine , broadcast during the first season . It originally aired in broadcast syndication beginning on January 10 , 1993 . The episode was written by Katharyn Powers , with additional elements added by executive producer Michael Piller and co @-@ producer Peter Allan Fields . It was directed by Winrich Kolbe . 
 Set in the 24th century , the series follows the adventures on Deep Space Nine , a space station located near a stable wormhole between the Alpha and Gamma quadrants of the Milky Way Galaxy . In this episode , a Bajoran terrorist seeks asylum aboard the station from pursuing Cardassians , publicly renouncing his past violent ways . He begins liaising with the Duras sisters ( Barbara March and Gwynyth Walsh ) , leading to suspicion that he was planning further acts of terrorism and causing Major Kira Nerys ( Nana Visitor ) to consider her loyalties . 
 The episode introduces the character of Garak , played by Andrew Robinson , who would return in the second season and made continued appearances throughout the series . The character 's traits were developed by Robinson , who was praised for his work by Kolbe . " Past Prologue " was the second most watched episode of the season , receiving a Nielsen rating of 13 @.@ 4 percent . It was received positively by critics , who praised the introduction of Garak , although it was suggested that the plot was predictable due to the need to maintain the status quo at the end of the episode . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The crew of Deep Space Nine rescue the Bajoran Tahna Los ( Jeffrey Nordling ) from a vessel that is being attacked by the Cardassians . They state that Tahna is a known member of a terrorist organization and demand his return , but Tahna asks for political asylum , pleading to his former friend Major Kira Nerys ( Nana Visitor ) for help . Commander Benjamin Sisko ( Avery Brooks ) grants his request . Later , Odo ( René Auberjonois ) spots Tahna with the Duras sisters ( Barbara March and Gwynyth Walsh ) making covert discussions . Tahna also seeks to gain the use of a runabout from Kira . 
 Dr. Julian Bashir ( Alexander Siddig ) , thanks to his new @-@ found friend Elim Garak ( Andrew Robinson ) , overhears the Duras sisters planning to rendezvous with the Bajoran to give him materials that could be used to build a bomb . The crew allow him to take a runabout and to arrest him after the transaction . Kira finds herself confused about her own past with the Bajoran resistance and where her current loyalties stand , and offers to go with Tahna in the runabout . Commander Sisko and Chief Miles O 'Brien ( Colm Meaney ) wait in a second runabout nearby while Tahna and Kira complete the transaction . When the second runabout appears , Tahna realizes he has been set up ; matters are further complicated by the arrival of the Cardassian warship . 
 Tahna orders Kira at gunpoint to return to the station , intending to collapse the wormhole with an explosive device , because then Bajor will have no motivation to invite Federation presence on Bajoran territory , which he sees as a new occupation . Kira lurches the runabout to one side , causing Tahna to fall over and allowing her to pilot the ship through the wormhole to the Gamma Quadrant ; where she ejects the bomb causing it to explode harmlessly in space . However , Tahna has regained control of his weapon and orders Kira to return to the Alpha Quadrant . There , Sisko gives Tahna an ultimatum , either to give himself over to the station 's authorities , or to wait to be destroyed by the Cardassians . Tahna hands over his weapon to Kira , and turns himself in ; Kira explains that he may come to understand why this was the right thing to do someday . 
 = = Production = = 
 Although it was shown second in broadcast order following the pilot , " Past Prologue " was filmed third , following " A Man Alone " . There were several changes to hair and makeup following " A Man Alone " , including modifications to Odo , and a simpler , closer haircut for Nana Visitor in her role as Major Kira . Visitor had pushed for her changes as she did not find it believable that the character would style her hair on a daily basis , instead wanting a look that took minimal effort . The episode was directed by Winrich Kolbe , in line with executive producer Rick Berman 's policy of only allowing directors with previous experience on Star Trek : The Next Generation work on the first season of Deep Space Nine . He had previously directed the series finale of The Next Generation , " All Good Things ... " , and would go on to direct 48 episodes of the franchise across four separate series . 
 Katharyn Powers received the sole writing credit on the episode , although elements such as Garak were created by co @-@ producer Peter Allan Fields . Powers had previously written " Code of Honor " , a first season episode of The Next Generation . An initial version of her script featured Kira and Tahna as lovers , which was rejected by executive producer Michael Piller . The ending originally showed the terrorist giving up his violent ways and seeking peace with the Cardassians before being killed by the Bajorans . The episode was named after the line from William Shakespeare 's The Tempest ; " what ’ s past is prologue . " 
 = = = Guest appearances = = = 
 Following a suggestion by Piller , the Duras sisters were written into the episode . The duo had previously appeared in the two @-@ part The Next Generation episode " Redemption " and would go on to appear in " Firstborn " and the film Star Trek Generations . The character of Admiral Rollman made her first appearance in " Past Prologue " , and would later return in the second season episode " Whispers " . Susan Bay , who played Rollman , has a long @-@ standing relationship with the Star Trek franchise as she is the wife of Leonard Nimoy , the actor who portrayed Spock in Star Trek : The Original Series and the film series . Also appearing in this episode was Vaughn Armstrong , who would go on to play thirteen different characters within the franchise , including the recurring part of Rear Admiral Maxwell Forrest in Star Trek : Enterprise . 
 The episode is best known for the introduction of recurring character Elim Garak . Fields said of the character at the time , " we didn 't want to make him an out and out spy , because then what would you do with him after the episode ? You 'd have to put him in jail on Bajor . So we tread a pretty thin line . " Fields had decided when creating the character that the station needed a Cardassian on @-@ board and when no @-@ one objected to his suggestion to put him in a tailor shop , that became Garak 's profession . This was a reference to the The Man from U.N.C.L.E. , which used a tailor shop as a front , as Fields had begun his writing career on that series . Andrew Robinson had originally been considered for the part of Odo , and was one of the final three actors vying for the part alongside Gerrit Graham and René Auberjonois . Robinson was invited back to audition for Garak , while Graham was cast as the Hunter in " Captive Pursuit " . 
 Kolbe thought at first that casting Robinson was " really off @-@ the @-@ way " but he felt the actor made the episode " bloom " . He gave general guidelines to Robinson about how he could approach the character , but it was Robinson who developed the traits of the character . Kolbe also praised the writing saying that " I wish there was more writing like this for television . I think we 'd have a much healthier industry . " Robinson said that Garak was a complicated character which required the use of subtext , adding that it wasn 't a simple way to portray a character " but when you do it well , you really get people 's attention " . He was told by the producers that they intended to bring him back onto the show , but in a later interview , he said that this was commonplace in the industry and doesn 't usually occur . When he was brought back for the second season episode " Cardassians " , executive producer Ira Steven Behr apologized for not bringing him back sooner . 
 = = Reception and home media release = = 
 " Past Prologue " was first released in broadcast syndication on January 11 , 1993 . It received a Nielsen rating of 13 @.@ 4 percent , placing second in its timeslot . This was the second highest rated episode of the season , behind " Emissary " . 
 Keith DeCandido , writing for Tor.com , said that Garak could have been a " walking , talking cliché " , and that Robinson " imbues him with such charm that it ’ s impossible not to love the character " . He said that it was an excellent episode , due in part to the way that the character 's dynamics are formed . He gave it a rating of eight out of ten . Zack Handlen in his review for the A.V. Club , said that Garak was " striking " from his first appearance , and it was immediately apparent that he was an important character . He compared Kira 's problem of loyalty to those experienced by Ro Laren in The Next Generation episode " Preemptive Strike " , however it didn 't work as well since the show would have to maintain the status quo by the end of the episode since Kira was a main character . He summarised , saying that it was a good episode but not great . 
 The first home media release of the episode was on VHS cassette in the United States on September 10 , 1996 . It was part of the initial launch of cassettes by Paramount Home Video which saw the first six episodes released and was on a single episode cassette . It was released on DVD as part of the season one box set on June 3 , 2003 . 
 = P. G. T. Beauregard = 
 Pierre Gustave Toutant @-@ Beauregard ( / <unk> / ; May 28 , 1818 – February 20 , 1893 ) was a Southern military officer , politician , inventor , writer , civil servant , and the first prominent general of the Confederate States Army during the American Civil War . Today he is commonly referred to as P. G. T. Beauregard , but he rarely used his first name as an adult . He signed correspondence as G. T. Beauregard . 
 Trained as a civil engineer at the United States Military Academy , Beauregard served with distinction as an engineer in the Mexican – American War . Following a brief appointment as superintendent at West Point in 1861 , after the South seceded he resigned from the United States Army and became the first brigadier general in the Confederate States Army . He commanded the defenses of Charleston , South Carolina , at the start of the Civil War at Fort Sumter on April 12 , 1861 . Three months later he won the First Battle of Bull Run near Manassas , Virginia . 
 Beauregard commanded armies in the Western Theater , including at the Battle of Shiloh in Tennessee , and the Siege of Corinth in northern Mississippi . He returned to Charleston and defended it in 1863 from repeated naval and land attacks by Union forces . His greatest achievement was saving the important industrial city of Petersburg , Virginia , in June 1864 , and thus the nearby Confederate capital of Richmond , from assaults by overwhelmingly superior Union Army forces . 
 His influence over Confederate strategy was lessened by his poor professional relationships with President Jefferson Davis and other senior generals and officials . In April 1865 , Beauregard and his commander , General Joseph E. Johnston , convinced Davis and the remaining cabinet members that the war needed to end . Johnston surrendered most of the remaining armies of the Confederacy , including Beauregard and his men , to Major General William T. Sherman . Following his military career , Beauregard returned to Louisiana , where he served as a railroad executive , and became wealthy as a promoter of the Louisiana Lottery . 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 Beauregard was born at the " Contreras " sugar @-@ cane plantation in St. Bernard Parish , Louisiana , about 20 miles ( 32 km ) outside New Orleans , to a French Creole family . Beauregard was the third child of Hélène Judith de Reggio , a descendant of Francesco M. de Reggio , member of an Italian noble family who had migrated to France and then to Louisiana , and her husband , Jacques Toutant @-@ Beauregard , of French and Welsh ancestry . He had three brothers and three sisters . Beauregard attended New Orleans private schools and then went to a " French school " in New York City . During his four years in New York , beginning at age 12 , he learned to speak English , as French had been his first language in Louisiana . 
 He then attended the United States Military Academy at West Point , New York . One of his instructors was Robert Anderson , who later became the commander of Fort Sumter and surrendered to Beauregard at the start of the Civil War . Upon enrolling at West Point , Beauregard dropped the hyphen from his surname and treated Toutant as a middle name , to fit in with his classmates . From that point on , he rarely used his first name , preferring " G. T. Beauregard . " He graduated second in his class in 1838 and excelled both as an artilleryman and military engineer . His Army friends gave him many nicknames : " Little Creole " , " Bory " , " Little Frenchman " , " Felix " , and " Little Napoleon " . 
 = = Career in U.S. Army = = 
 During the Mexican – American War , Beauregard served as an engineer under General Winfield Scott . He was appointed brevet captain for the battles of Contreras and Churubusco and major for Chapultepec , where he was wounded in the shoulder and thigh . He was noted for his eloquent performance in a meeting with Scott in which he convinced the assembled general officers to change their plan for attacking the fortress of Chapultepec . He was one of the first officers to enter Mexico City . Beauregard considered his contributions in dangerous reconnaissance missions and devising strategy for his superiors to be more significant than those of his engineer colleague , Captain Robert E. Lee , so he was disappointed when Lee and other officers received more <unk> than he did . 
 Beauregard returned from Mexico in 1848 . For the next 12 years , he was in charge of what the Engineer Department called " the Mississippi and Lake defenses in Louisiana . " Much of his engineering work was done elsewhere , repairing old forts and building new ones on the Florida coast and in Mobile , Alabama . He also improved the defenses of Forts St. Philip and Jackson on the Mississippi River below New Orleans . He worked on a board of Army and Navy engineers to improve the navigation of the shipping channels at the mouth of the Mississippi . He created and patented an invention he called a " self @-@ acting bar excavator " to be used by ships in crossing bars of sand and clay . While serving in the Army , he actively campaigned for the election of Franklin Pierce , the Democratic presidential candidate in 1852 , and a former general in the Mexican War who had been impressed by Beauregard 's performance at Mexico City . Pierce appointed Beauregard as superintending engineer of the U.S. Custom House in New Orleans , a huge granite building that had been built in 1848 . As it was sinking unevenly in the moist soil of Louisiana , Beauregard had to develop a renovation program . He served in this position from 1853 to 1860 and stabilized the structure successfully . 
 During his service in New Orleans , Beauregard became dissatisfied as a peacetime officer . He informed the U.S. Army Engineer Department late in 1856 that he was going to join the filibuster with William Walker , who had seized control of Nicaragua ; he had offered Beauregard the rank of second @-@ in @-@ command of his army . Senior officers , including general @-@ in @-@ chief Winfield Scott , convinced Beauregard to stay in the United States . He briefly entered politics as a reform candidate for mayor of New Orleans in 1858 , where he was promoted by both the Whig and Democratic parties to challenge the Know Nothing party candidate . Beauregard was narrowly defeated . 
 Employing the political influence of his brother @-@ in @-@ law , John Slidell , Beauregard obtained an appointment as superintendent of the U.S. Military Academy on January 23 , 1861 . His orders were revoked and he relinquished the office after only five days when Louisiana seceded from the Union . He protested to the War Department that they had cast " improper reflection upon [ his ] reputation or position in the Corps of Engineers " by forcing him out as a Southern officer before any hostilities began . 
 = = Family = = 
 In 1841 , Beauregard married Marie Antoinette Laure Villeré ( March 22 , 1823 – March 21 , 1850 ) , the daughter of Jules Villeré , a sugar cane planter in Plaquemines Parish and a member of one of the most prominent French Creole families in southern Louisiana . Marie 's paternal grandfather was Jacques Villeré , the second governor of Louisiana . She was described as having blue eyes and fair skin . The couple had three children : René ( 1843 – 1910 ) , Henri ( 1845 – 1915 ) , and Laure ( 1850 – 1884 ) . Marie died in March 1850 , while giving birth to Laure . 
 Ten years later , the widower Beauregard married Marguerite Caroline <unk> , the daughter of André <unk> , a sugar cane planter from St. John the Baptist Parish . Caroline was a sister @-@ in @-@ law of John Slidell , a Louisiana U.S. Senator and later a Confederate diplomat . She died in New Orleans in March 1864 , when it was under Union occupation . They had no children together . 
 = = Civil War = = 
 = = = Charleston = = = 
 Beauregard traveled by steamship from New York to New Orleans and immediately began giving military advice to the local authorities , which included further strengthening Forts St. Philip and Jackson , which guarded the Mississippi approaches to New Orleans . He hoped to be named commander of the state army , but was disappointed that the state legislature appointed Braxton Bragg . Aware that Beauregard might resent him , Bragg offered him the rank of colonel . Instead Beauregard enrolled as a private in the " Orleans Guards " , a battalion of French Creole aristocrats . At the same time , he communicated with Slidell and the newly chosen President Davis , angling for a senior position in the new Confederate States Army . Rumors that Beauregard would be placed in charge of the entire Army infuriated Bragg . Concerned about the political situation regarding the Federal presence at Fort Sumter in Charleston Harbor , Davis selected Beauregard to take command of Charleston 's defenses . Beauregard seemed the perfect combination of military engineer and charismatic Southern leader needed at that time and place . 
 Beauregard became the first Confederate general officer , appointed a brigadier general in the Provisional Army of the Confederate States on March 1 , 1861 . ( On July 21 , he was promoted to full general in the Confederate Army , one of only seven appointed to that rank ; his date of rank made him the fifth most senior general , behind Samuel Cooper , Albert Sidney Johnston , Robert E. Lee , and Joseph E. Johnston . ) 
 Arriving in Charleston on March 3 , 1861 , Beauregard met with Governor Pickens and inspected the defenses of the harbor , which he found to be in disarray . He was said to display " a great deal in the way of zeal and energy ... but little professional knowledge and experience . " Major Robert Anderson at Fort Sumter wrote to Washington , D.C. , that Beauregard , who had been his student at West Point in 1837 , would guarantee that South Carolina 's actions be exercised with " skill and sound judgment . " Beauregard wrote to the first Confederate capital of Montgomery , Alabama , that Anderson was a " most gallant officer " . Beauregard did not relish firing on his old friend and former instructor . He sent several cases of fine brandy and whiskey and boxes of cigars to Anderson and his officers at Sumter , but Anderson ordered that the gifts be returned . 
 By early April , political tensions were mounting and Beauregard demanded that Sumter surrender before a planned Union expedition to re @-@ provision the fort could arrive . Early on the morning of April 12 , negotiations with Anderson had failed and aides of Beauregard , sent to deal personally with Anderson , ordered the first shots of the American Civil War to be fired from nearby Fort Johnson . The bombardment of Fort Sumter lasted for 34 hours . Subjected to thousands of rounds fired from batteries ringing the harbor , Anderson surrendered Fort Sumter on April 14 . Biographer T. Harry Williams described the extravagant praise from throughout the Confederacy that " The Hero of Fort Sumter " received for his victory : " He was the South 's first paladin . " 
 Beauregard also had a slave from Louisiana that would wax his mustache every day . 
 = = = First Bull Run ( First Manassas ) = = = 
 Summoned to the new Confederate capital of Richmond , Virginia , Beauregard received a hero 's welcome at the railroad stations along the route . He was given command of the " Alexandria Line " of defenses against an impending Federal offensive that was being organized by Brig. Gen. Irvin McDowell ( one of Beauregard 's West Point classmates ) against the Confederate railroad junction at Manassas . Beauregard devised strategies to concentrate the forces of ( full ) General Joseph E. Johnston from the Shenandoah Valley with his own , aiming not only to defend his position , but to initiate an offensive against McDowell and Washington . Despite his seniority in rank , Johnston lacked familiarity with the terrain and ceded tactical planning of the impending battle to Beauregard as a professional courtesy . President Davis considered many of Beauregard 's plans to be impractical for an army as inexperienced as the Confederates could field in 1861 ; throughout the war , Davis and Beauregard would argue about Beauregard 's tendencies to devise grand strategies based on formal military principles . Davis believed he lacked a pragmatic grasp of logistics , intelligence , relative military strengths , and politics . 
 The First Battle of Bull Run ( First Manassas ) began early on July 21 , 1861 , with an element of surprise for both armies — both McDowell and Beauregard planned to envelop their opponent with an attack from their right flank . McDowell struck first , crossing Bull Run and threatening Beauregard 's left flank . For a while , Beauregard persisted in moving his troops for an attack on his right flank ( McDowell 's left , toward Centreville ) , but Johnston urged him to travel with him to the threatened flank at Henry House Hill , which was weakly defended . Seeing the strength of the Union attack at that point , Beauregard insisted that Johnston leave the area of immediate action and coordinate the overall battle from a position 1 @.@ 5 miles ( 2 @.@ 4 km ) to the rear . Beauregard rallied the troops , riding among the men , brandishing regimental colors , and giving inspirational speeches . The Confederate line held . 
 As Johnston 's final troops arrived from the Shenandoah Valley , the Confederates launched a counterattack that routed the Union Army , sending it streaming in disorder back toward Washington . William C. Davis credits Johnston with the majority of the tactical decisions that led to the victory , judging that " Beauregard acted chiefly as a dime novel general , leading the charge of an individual regiment , riding along the line to cheer the troops , accepting the <unk> of the soldiers and complementing them in turn . The closest he came to a major tactical decision was his fleeting intention to withdraw from the Henry Hill line when he briefly mistook the advance of Johnston 's reinforcements for the arrival of fresh Union troops . " Nonetheless , Beauregard received the bulk of the acclaim from the press and general public . On July 23 , Johnston recommended to President Davis that Beauregard be promoted to full general . Davis approved , and Beauregard 's date of rank was established as the date of his victory , July 21 . 
 After Bull Run , Beauregard advocated the use of a standardized battle flag other than the " Stars and Bars " Confederate national flag to avoid visual confusion with the U.S. flag . He worked with Johnston and William Porcher Miles to create the Confederate Battle Flag . Confederate women visiting Beauregard 's army contributed silk material from their dresses to create the first three flags , for Beauregard , Johnston , and Earl Van Dorn ; thus , the first flags contained more feminine pink than martial red . Throughout his career , Beauregard worked to have the flag adopted , and he helped to make it the most popular symbol of the Confederacy . 
 As the Army went into winter quarters , Beauregard caused considerable friction with the Confederate high command . He strongly advocated an invasion of Maryland to threaten the flank and rear of Washington . With his plan rebuffed as impractical , he requested reassignment to New Orleans , which he assumed would be under Union attack in the near future , but his request was denied . He quarreled with Commissary General Lucius B. Northrop ( a personal friend of Davis ) about the inadequate supplies available to his army . He issued public statements challenging the ability of the Confederate Secretary of War to give commands to a full general . And he enraged President Davis when his report about Bull Run was printed in the newspaper , which suggested that Davis 's interference with Beauregard 's plans prevented the pursuit and full destruction of McDowell 's army and the capture of Washington . 
 = = = Shiloh and Corinth = = = 
 Having become a political liability in Virginia , Beauregard was transferred to Tennessee to become second @-@ in @-@ command to General Albert Sidney Johnston ( no relation to Joseph E. Johnston ) in his Army of Mississippi , effective March 14 , 1862 . The two generals planned the concentration of Confederate forces to oppose the advance of Maj. Gen. Ulysses S. Grant before he could combine his army with that of Maj. Gen. Don Carlos Buell in a thrust up the Tennessee River toward Corinth , Mississippi . In the Battle of Shiloh , which began April 6 , 1862 , the Confederates launched a surprise attack against Grant 's Army of the Tennessee and nearly defeated it . Once again a more senior general named Johnston deferred to the junior Beauregard in planning the attack . The massive frontal assault was marred by Beauregard 's improper organization of forces — successive attacks by corps in lines 3 miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) long , rather than assigning each corps a discrete portion of the line for a side @-@ by @-@ side assault . This arrangement caused intermingling of units and confusion of command ; it failed to concentrate mass at the appropriate place on the line to affect the overall objectives of the attack . In midafternoon , Johnston , who was near the front of the battle action , was mortally wounded . Beauregard , positioned in the rear of the army to send reinforcements forward , assumed command of the army and Johnston 's overall Western department ( officially designated " Department Number Two " ) . As darkness fell , he chose to call off the attack against Grant 's final defensive line , which had contracted into a tight semicircle backed up to the Tennessee River at Pittsburg Landing . 
 Beauregard 's decision was one of the most controversial of the Civil War . Numerous veterans and historians have wondered what might have happened if the assault had gone forward into the night . Beauregard believed that the battle was essentially won and his men could finish off Grant in the morning . He knew the terrain to be crossed ( a steep ravine containing a creek named Dill Branch ) was extremely difficult and Grant 's defensive line was heavy with massed artillery . Unbeknownst to Beauregard , Buell 's Army of the Ohio began arriving that afternoon , and he and Grant launched a massive counterattack on April 7 . Overwhelmed , the Confederates retreated to Corinth . 
 Grant was temporarily disgraced by the surprise attack and near defeat , causing his superior , Maj. Gen. Henry W. Halleck , to assume field command of the combined armies . Halleck cautiously and slowly approached Beauregard 's fortifications at Corinth ; his action became derisively called the Siege of Corinth . Beauregard withdrew from Corinth on May 29 to Tupelo , Mississippi . He was able to deceive Halleck into thinking the Confederates were about to attack ; he ran empty trains back and forth through the town while whistles blew and troops cheered as if massive reinforcements were arriving . Beauregard retreated because of the overwhelming Union force and because of contaminated water supplies in Corinth . In April and May , the Confederates lost almost as many men to death by disease in Corinth as had been killed in battle at Shiloh . Nevertheless , his leaving the critical rail junction at Corinth without a fight was another controversial decision . When Beauregard went on medical leave without requesting permission in advance , President Davis relieved him of command and replaced him with Gen. Braxton Bragg . 
 = = = Return to Charleston = = = 
 At Beauregard 's request , his allies in the Confederate Congress petitioned Davis to restore his command in the West . Davis remained angry at Beauregard 's absence and told him he should have stayed at his post even if he had to be carried around in a litter . He wrote , " If the whole world were to ask me to restore General Beauregard to the command which I have already given to General Bragg , I would refuse it . " Beauregard was ordered to Charleston and took command of coastal defenses in South Carolina , Georgia , and Florida , replacing Maj. Gen. John C. Pemberton . The latter was promoted to lieutenant general and transferred to command the defenses of Vicksburg , Mississippi . 
 Beauregard was unhappy with his new assignment , believing that he deserved command of one of the great Confederate field armies . He performed successfully , however , preventing the capture of Charleston by Union naval and land attacks in 1863 . On April 7 , 1863 , Rear Admiral Samuel Francis Du Pont , commander of the South Atlantic Blockading Squadron , led an ironclad attack against Fort Sumter that was repulsed by highly accurate artillery fire from Beauregard 's forces . In July through September 1863 , land forces under Brig. Gen. Quincy A. Gillmore launched a series of attacks on Fort Wagner on Morris Island and other fortifications at the mouth of the harbor , while Rear Adm. John A. Dahlgren attempted to destroy Fort Sumter . Because the latter operation failed , the successful seizure of Morris Island was not effective in threatening Charleston . 
 During this period , Beauregard promoted innovative naval defense strategies , such as early experimentation with submarines , naval mines ( called " torpedoes " in the Civil War ) , and with a small vessel called a torpedo @-@ ram . A swift boat fitted with a torpedo on a pole projecting from its bow under water , it could be used to surprise an enemy vessel and impale it underneath the water line . He was also busy devising strategies for other generals in the Confederacy . He proposed that some of the state governors meet with Union governors of the Western states ( what are called the Midwest states today ) for a peace conference . The Davis administration rejected the idea , but it caused considerable political maneuvering by Davis 's enemies in the Congress . Beauregard also proposed a grand strategy — submitted anonymously through his political allies so that it was not tainted by his reputation — to reinforce the Western armies at the expense of Robert E. Lee 's army in Virginia , destroy the Federal army in Tennessee , which would induce Ulysses S. Grant to relieve pressure on Vicksburg and maneuver his army into a place where it could be destroyed . The Confederate Army would continue to Ohio , and induce the Western states to ally with the Confederacy . Meanwhile , a fleet of torpedo @-@ rams built in England could be used to recapture New Orleans , ending the war . There is no record that his plan was ever officially presented to the government . 
 While visiting his forces in Florida , which had just repelled a Union advance at Jacksonville , Beauregard received a telegram that his wife had died on March 2 , 1864 . Living in Union @-@ occupied New Orleans , she had been seriously ill for two years . A Northern @-@ leaning local newspaper printed an opinion that her condition had been exacerbated by the actions of her husband . This so fanned negative popular opinion that 6 @,@ 000 people attended her funeral . Union Maj. Gen. Nathaniel P. Banks provided a steamer to carry her body upriver for burial in her native parish . Beauregard wrote that he would like to rescue " her hallowed grave " at the head of an army . 
 = = = Richmond = = = 
 In April 1864 , Beauregard saw little opportunity for military glory because he foresaw that there would be no more significant assaults against Charleston , and prospects for a major field command were unlikely . He requested a leave to recover from fatigue and a chronic throat ailment , but he instead received an order to report to Weldon , North Carolina , near the Virginia border , to play a key role in the defense of Virginia . His new assignment , the Department of North Carolina and Cape Fear , also included Virginia south of the James River . When he took command on April 18 , he renamed it , on his own initiative , the Department of North Carolina and Southern Virginia . The Confederates were preparing for the spring offensive of Union Lt. Gen. Ulysses S. Grant and were concerned that attacks south of Richmond could interrupt the critical supply lines to Richmond and the army of Robert E. Lee . 
 As Grant moved south against Lee in the Overland Campaign , Maj. Gen. Benjamin Butler launched the surprise Bermuda Hundred Campaign with landings up the James River . Beauregard successfully lobbied with Jefferson Davis 's military adviser , Braxton Bragg , to prevent significant units of his small force from being transferred north of Richmond to the aid of Lee . His timely action , coupled with the military incompetence of Butler , bottled up the Union army , nullifying its threat to Petersburg and Lee 's supply line . Now that this sector was stable , pressure began to rise to transfer troops from Beauregard 's front to Lee 's . Beauregard did send a division ( Maj. Gen. Robert Hoke 's ) to Lee for the Battle of Cold Harbor , but Lee urgently wanted more and took the step of offering Beauregard command of the right wing of the Army of Northern Virginia for his cooperation . Beauregard replied in a passive – aggressive manner , " I am willing to do anything for our success , but cannot leave my Department without orders of War Department . " 
 After Cold Harbor , Lee and the Confederate high command were unable to anticipate Grant 's next move , but Beauregard 's strategic sense allowed him to make a prophetic prediction : Grant would cross the James River and attempt to seize Petersburg , which was lightly defended , but contained critical rail junctions supporting Richmond and Lee . Despite persistent pleas to reinforce this sector , Beauregard could not convince his colleagues of the danger . On June 15 , his weak 5 @,@ 400 @-@ man force — including boys , old men , and patients from military hospitals — resisted an assault by 16 @,@ 000 Federals , known as the Second Battle of Petersburg . He gambled by withdrawing his Bermuda Hundred defenses to reinforce the city , assuming correctly that Butler would not capitalize on the opening . His gamble succeeded , and he held Petersburg long enough for Lee 's army to arrive . It was arguably his finest combat performance of the war . 
 Beauregard continued commanding the defenses of Petersburg in the early days of the siege , but with the loss of the Weldon Railroad in the Battle of Globe Tavern ( August 18 – 21 ) , he was criticized for not attacking more forcefully and he became dissatisfied with the command arrangements under Lee . He hoped for an independent command , but his desires were thwarted in two instances : Lee chose Lt. Gen. Jubal Early to lead an expedition north through the Shenandoah Valley and threaten Washington , and Davis chose Lt. Gen. John Bell Hood to replace the faltering Joseph E. Johnston in the Atlanta Campaign . 
 = = = Return to the West = = = 
 After the fall of Atlanta in September 1864 , President Davis considered replacing John Bell Hood in command of the Army of Tennessee and he asked Robert E. Lee to find out if Beauregard would be interested . Beauregard was indeed interested , but it is unclear whether Davis seriously considered the appointment , and in the end decided to retain Hood . Davis met with Beauregard in Augusta , Georgia , on October 2 and offered him command of the newly created Department of the West , responsible for the five Southern states from Georgia to the Mississippi River , with the armies of Hood and Richard Taylor under his ostensible command . However , it was a thankless job that was limited to logistical and advisory responsibilities , without true operational control of the armies unless he should join them in person during an emergency . Nevertheless , anxious to return to the field , he accepted the assignment . 
 The major field operation of the fall was Hood 's Franklin @-@ Nashville Campaign , an invasion of Tennessee , which he undertook despite Beauregard 's counsel that it made little operational or logistical sense . Hood did not treat Beauregard with the respect due to the department commander , communicating his plans reluctantly and making movements without regard to the consequences for his supply line , which Beauregard scrambled to maintain . While Hood traveled through Alabama and into Tennessee , Union Maj. Gen. William T. Sherman began his March to the Sea from Atlanta to Savannah , which focused Beauregard 's attention back to Georgia . He was ineffective in stopping , or even delaying , Sherman 's advance . He had inadequate local forces and was reluctant to strip defenses from other locations to concentrate them against Sherman . Furthermore , Sherman did an excellent job of deceiving the Confederates as to the intermediate and final targets of his march . Savannah fell on December 21 and Sherman 's army began to march north into South Carolina in January . Also in late December , Beauregard found out that Hood 's army had been severely damaged in its defeat at the Battle of Nashville ; there were very few men in fighting condition who could oppose Sherman 's advance . 
 Beauregard attempted to concentrate his small forces before Sherman could reach Columbia , South Carolina , the state capital . His urgent dispatches to Richmond were treated with disbelief — Davis and Robert E. Lee ( now the general in chief of all the Confederate armies ) could not believe that Sherman was advancing without a supply line as quickly as Beauregard was observing him do . Also concerned about what he considered Beauregard 's " feeble health , " Lee recommended to Davis that he be replaced by Joseph E. Johnston . The change of command came on February 22 and Beauregard , although outwardly cooperative and courteous to Johnston , was bitterly disappointed at his replacement . For the remainder of the war , Beauregard was Johnston 's subordinate , assigned to routine matters without combat responsibilities . Johnston and Beauregard met with President Davis on April 13 and their assessment of the Confederate situation helped convince Davis that Johnston should meet with Sherman to negotiate a surrender of his army . The two surrendered to Sherman near Durham , North Carolina , on April 26 , 1865 , and were paroled in Greensboro on May 2 . Beauregard traveled to Mobile and then took a U.S. naval transport to his hometown of New Orleans . In August that year Beauregard 's house was surrounded by troops who suspected he was harbouring Edmund Kirby Smith . All the inhabitants were locked in a cotton press overnight . Beauregard complained to General Philip Sheridan who expressed his annoyance at his erstwhile enemy 's treatment . 
 = = Postbellum life = = 
 After the war , Beauregard was reluctant to seek amnesty as a former Confederate officer by publicly swearing an oath of loyalty , but both Lee and Johnston counseled him to do so , which he did before the mayor of New Orleans on September 16 , 1865 . He was one of many Confederate officers issued a mass pardon by President Andrew Johnson on July 4 , 1868 . His final privilege as an American citizen , the right to run for public office , was restored when he petitioned the Congress for relief and the bill on his behalf was signed by President Grant on July 24 , 1876 . 
 Beauregard pursued a position in the Brazilian Army in 1865 , but declined the Brazilians ' offer . He claimed that the positive attitude of President Johnson toward the South swayed his decision . " I prefer to live here , poor and forgotten , than to be endowed with honor and riches in a foreign country . " He also declined offers to take command of the armies of Romania and Egypt . 
 As a lifelong Democrat , Beauregard worked to end Republican rule during Reconstruction . His outrage over the perceived excesses of Reconstruction was a principal source for his indecision about remaining in the United States and his flirtation with foreign armies , which lasted until 1875 . He was active in the Reform Party , an association of conservative New Orleans businessmen , which spoke in favor of civil rights and voting for the recently freed slaves , hoping to form alliances between African @-@ Americans and Democrats to vote out the Radical Republicans in the state legislature . 
 Beauregard 's first employment following the war was in October 1865 as chief engineer and general superintendent of the New Orleans , Jackson and Great Northern Railroad . In 1866 he was promoted to president , a position he retained until 1870 , when he was ousted in a hostile takeover . This job overlapped with that of president of the New Orleans and Carrollton Street Railway ( 1866 – 1876 ) , where he invented a system of cable @-@ powered street railway cars . Once again , Beauregard made a financial success of the company , but was fired by stockholders who wished to take direct management of the company . 
 In 1869 he demonstrated a cable car and was issued U.S. Patent 97 @,@ 343 . 
 After the loss of these two railway executive positions , Beauregard spent time briefly at a variety of companies and civil engineering pursuits , but his personal wealth became assured when he was recruited as a supervisor of the Louisiana Lottery in 1877 . He and former Confederate general Jubal Early presided over lottery drawings and made numerous public appearances , lending the effort some respectability . For 15 years the two generals served in these positions , but the public became opposed to government @-@ sponsored gambling and the lottery was closed down by the legislature . 
 Beauregard 's military writings include Principles and Maxims of the Art of War ( 1863 ) , Report on the Defense of Charleston , and A Commentary on the Campaign and Battle of Manassas ( 1891 ) . He was the uncredited co @-@ author of his friend Alfred Roman 's The Military Operations of General Beauregard in the War Between the States ( 1884 ) . He contributed the article " The Battle of Bull Run " to Century Illustrated Monthly Magazine in November 1884 . During these years , Beauregard and Davis published a series of bitter accusations and counter @-@ accusations retrospectively blaming each other for the Confederate defeat . 
 Beauregard served as adjutant general for the Louisiana state militia , 1879 – 88 . In 1888 , he was elected as commissioner of public works in New Orleans . When John Bell Hood and his wife died in 1879 , leaving ten destitute orphans , Beauregard used his influence to get Hood 's memoirs published , with all proceeds going to the children . He was appointed by the governor of Virginia to be the grand marshal of the festivities associated with the laying of the cornerstone of Robert E. Lee 's statue in Richmond . But when Jefferson Davis died in 1889 , Beauregard refused the honor of heading the funeral procession , saying " We have always been enemies . I cannot pretend I am sorry he is gone . I am no hypocrite . " 
 Beauregard died in his sleep in New Orleans . The cause of death was " heart disease , aortic insufficiency , and probably myocarditis . " Edmund Kirby Smith , the last surviving full general of the Confederacy , served as the " chief mourner " as Beauregard was interred in the vault of the Army of Tennessee in historic Metairie Cemetery . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Beauregard Parish in western Louisiana is named for him , as is Camp Beauregard , a former U.S. Army base , and now a National Guard camp near Pineville in central Louisiana . The unincorporated community of Beauregard , Alabama , is also named for him . 
 An equestrian monument by Alexander Doyle depicts him at Beauregard Circle , the intersection where Esplanade Avenue enters City Park in New Orleans . 
 Beauregard 's residence in New Orleans is now called the Beauregard @-@ Keyes House , and is operated as a historic house museum . 
 Four camps are named after Beauregard in the Sons of Confederate Veterans . 
 = Twenty @-@ fifth Amendment to the United States Constitution = 
 The Twenty @-@ fifth Amendment ( Amendment XXV ) to the United States Constitution deals with succession to the Presidency and establishes procedures both for filling a vacancy in the office of the Vice President , as well as responding to Presidential disabilities . It supersedes the ambiguous wording of Article II , Section 1 , Clause 6 of the Constitution , which does not expressly state whether the Vice President becomes the President or Acting President if the President dies , resigns , is removed from office or is otherwise unable to discharge the powers of the presidency . The Twenty @-@ fifth Amendment was adopted on February 10 , 1967 . 
 = = Text = = 
 Section 1 . In case of the removal of the President from office or of his death or resignation , the Vice President shall become President . 
 Section 2 . Whenever there is a vacancy in the office of the Vice President , the President shall nominate a Vice President who shall take office upon confirmation by a majority vote of both Houses of Congress . 
 Section 3 . Whenever the President transmits to the President pro tempore of the Senate and the Speaker of the House of Representatives his written declaration that he is unable to discharge the powers and duties of his office , and until he transmits to them a written declaration to the contrary , such powers and duties shall be discharged by the Vice President as Acting President . 
 Section 4 . Whenever the Vice President and a majority of either the principal officers of the executive departments or of such other body as Congress may by law provide , transmit to the President pro tempore of the Senate and the Speaker of the House of Representatives their written declaration that the President is unable to discharge the powers and duties of his office , the Vice President shall immediately assume the powers and duties of the office as Acting President . 
 Thereafter , when the President transmits to the President pro tempore of the Senate and the Speaker of the House of Representatives his written declaration that no inability exists , he shall resume the powers and duties of his office unless the Vice President and a majority of either the principal officers of the executive department or of such other body as Congress may by law provide , transmit within four days to the President pro tempore of the Senate and the Speaker of the House of Representatives their written declaration that the President is unable to discharge the powers and duties of his office . Thereupon Congress shall decide the issue , assembling within forty @-@ eight hours for that purpose if not in session . If the Congress , within twenty @-@ one days after receipt of the latter written declaration , or , if Congress is not in session , within twenty @-@ one days after Congress is required to assemble , determines by two @-@ thirds vote of both Houses that the President is unable to discharge the powers and duties of his office , the Vice President shall continue to discharge the same as Acting President ; otherwise , the President shall resume the powers and duties of his office . 
 = = Background = = 
 Article II , Section 1 , Clause 6 of the Constitution states : 
 In Case of the Removal of the President from Office , or of his Death , Resignation , or Inability to discharge the Powers and Duties of the said Office , the Same shall devolve on the Vice President , and the Congress may by Law provide for the Case of Removal , Death , Resignation or Inability , both of the President and Vice President , declaring what Officer shall then act as President , and such Officer shall act accordingly , until the Disability be removed , or a President shall be elected . 
 That clause was unclear regarding Presidential succession and inability ; it did not state who had the power to declare a President incapacitated . Also , it did not provide a mechanism for filling a Vice Presidential vacancy prior to the next Presidential election . The vagueness of this clause caused difficulties many times before the Twenty @-@ fifth Amendment 's adoption : 
 In 1841 , President William Henry Harrison became the first U.S. President to die in office . Representative John Williams had previously suggested that the Vice President should become Acting President upon the death of the President . John Tyler asserted that he had succeeded to the presidency , as opposed to only obtaining its powers and duties . He also declined to acknowledge documents referring to him as " Acting President " . Although he felt his vice presidential oath negated the need for the presidential oath , Tyler was persuaded that being formally sworn @-@ in would clear up any doubts about his right to the office . Having done so , he then moved into the White House and assumed full presidential powers . Tyler 's claim was not formally challenged , and both houses of Congress adopted a resolution confirming that Tyler was the tenth President of the United States , without any qualifiers . The precedent of full succession was thus established . This became known as the " Tyler Precedent " . 
 There had been occasions when a President was incapacitated . For example , following Woodrow Wilson 's stroke no one officially assumed the Presidential powers and duties , in part because the First Lady , Edith Wilson , together with the White House Physician , Cary T. Grayson , covered up President Wilson 's condition . 
 The office of Vice President had been vacant sixteen times due to the death or resignation of the Vice President or his succession to the presidency . For example , there was no Vice President for nearly four years after the death of Franklin D. Roosevelt . 
 President Dwight D. Eisenhower attempted to clarify procedures through a signed agreement with Vice President Richard Nixon , drafted by Attorney General Herbert Brownell Jr .. However , this agreement did not have the authority of a constitutional amendment . 
 All of these incidents made it evident that clearer guidelines were needed . There were two proposals for providing those guidelines . 
 = = = Keating – Kefauver proposal = = = 
 In 1963 , Senator Kenneth Keating of New York proposed a Constitutional amendment which would have enabled Congress to enact legislation providing for how to determine when a President is disabled , rather than , as the Twenty @-@ fifth Amendment does , having the Constitution so provide . This proposal was based upon a recommendation of the American Bar Association in 1960 . 
 The text of the proposal read : 
 In case of the removal of the President from office or of his death or resignation , the said office shall devolve on the Vice President . In case of the inability of the President to discharge the powers and duties of the said office , the said powers and duties shall devolve on the Vice President , until the inability be removed . The Congress may by law provide for the case of removal , death , resignation or inability , both of the President and Vice President , declaring what officer shall then be President , or , in case of inability , act as President , and such officer shall be or act as President accordingly , until a President shall be elected or , in case of inability , until the inability shall be earlier removed . The commencement and termination of any inability shall be determined by such method as Congress shall by law provide . 
 Senators raised concerns that the Congress could either abuse such authority or neglect to enact any such legislation after the adoption of this proposal . Tennessee Senator Estes Kefauver ( the Chairman of the Senate Judiciary Committee 's Subcommittee on Constitutional Amendments ) , a long @-@ time advocate for addressing the disability question , spearheaded the effort until he died of a heart attack on August 10 , 1963 . Senator Keating was defeated in the 1964 election , but Senator Roman <unk> , a Republican from Nebraska , took up Keating 's objections as a new member of the Subcommittee on Constitutional Amendments . 
 = = = Kennedy assassination = = = 
 The assassination of President John F. Kennedy showed the need for a clear way to determine presidential succession in the context of the Cold War . The new President , Lyndon B. Johnson , had once suffered a heart attack , and the next two people in line for the presidency were the 71 year old Speaker of the House John McCormack , and the 86 year old Senate President pro tempore Carl Hayden . Senator Birch Bayh succeeded Kefauver as Chairman of the Subcommittee on Constitutional Amendments and set about advocating for a detailed amendment dealing with presidential succession . 
 = = = Bayh – Celler proposal = = = 
 On January 6 , 1965 , Senator Birch Bayh proposed S. J. Res. 1 in the Senate and Representative Emanuel Celler ( Chairman of the House Judiciary Committee ) proposed H. J. Res. 1 in the House of Representatives what became the Twenty @-@ fifth Amendment . Their proposal specified the process by which a President could be declared disabled , thereby making the Vice President an Acting President , and how the President could regain the powers of his office . Also , their proposal provided a way to fill a vacancy in the office of Vice President before the next presidential election . This was as opposed to the Keating – Kefauver proposal , which neither provided for filling a vacancy in the office of Vice President prior to the next presidential election nor provided a process for determining presidential disability . In 1964 , the American Bar Association endorsed the type of proposal which Bayh and Celler advocated . On January 28 , 1965 , President Johnson endorsed S. J. Res. 1 in a statement to Congress . 
 On February 19 , the Senate passed the amendment , but the House passed a different version of the amendment on April 13 . On April 22 , it was returned to the Senate with revisions . There were four areas of disagreement between the House and Senate versions : 
 the Senate official who was to receive any written declaration under the amendment 
 the period of time during which the Vice President and Cabinet must decide whether they disagree with the President 's declaration that he is fit to resume his duties 
 the time before Congress meets to resolve the issue between the President , Vice President , and the Cabinet 
 the time limit for Congress to reach a decision 
 On July 6 , after a conference committee ironed out differences between the versions , the final version of the amendment was passed by both Houses of the Congress and presented to the states for ratification . 
 = = Proposal and ratification = = 
 The Congress proposed the Twenty @-@ fifth Amendment on July 6 , 1965 , and the amendment was ratified by the following states : 
 The following states have not ratified the amendment : 
 North Dakota 
 Georgia 
 South Carolina 
 Just six days after its submission , Nebraska and Wisconsin were the first states to ratify the amendment . On February 10 , 1967 , Minnesota and Nevada were the 37th and 38th states to ratify , respectively . On February 23 , 1967 , in a ceremony in the East Room of the White House , General Services Administrator Lawson Knott certified the amendment 's adoption . 
 = = Effect = = 
 = = = Section 1 : Presidential succession = = = 
 Section 1 codified the " Tyler Precedent " regarding when a President is removed from office , dies , or resigns . In any of these situations , the Vice President immediately becomes President . 
 = = = Section 2 : Vice Presidential vacancy = = = 
 Prior to the Twenty @-@ fifth Amendment 's adoption , a Vice Presidential vacancy remained until the start of the next presidential term . The Vice Presidency has been vacant several times due to death , resignation , or succession to the Presidency . Often these vacancies lasted for several years . 
 Under Section 2 , whenever there is a vacancy in the office of Vice President , the President nominates a successor who becomes Vice President if confirmed by a majority vote of both Houses of the Congress . 
 = = = Section 3 : Presidential declaration = = = 
 Section 3 provides that when the President transmits a written declaration to the President pro tempore of the Senate and the Speaker of the House of Representatives , stating that he is unable to discharge the powers and duties of the Presidency , and until the President sends another written declaration to the aforementioned officers declaring himself able to resume discharging those powers and duties , the Vice President serves as Acting President . 
 = = = Section 4 : Vice Presidential – Cabinet declaration = = = 
 Section 4 is the only part of the amendment that has never been invoked . It allows the Vice President , together with a majority of either " the principal officers of the executive departments " ( i.e. , the Cabinet ) or of " such other body as Congress may by law provide " , to declare the President disabled by submitting a written declaration to the President pro tempore of the Senate and the Speaker of the House of Representatives . As with Section 3 , the Vice President would become Acting President . 
 Section 4 is meant to be invoked if the President 's incapacitation prevents him from discharging the duties of his office and he does not provide a written declaration to that effect . The President may resume exercising the Presidential duties by sending a written declaration to the President pro tempore and the Speaker of the House . 
 Should the Vice President and Cabinet believe the President is still disabled , they may within four days of the President 's declaration submit another declaration that the President is incapacitated . The Congress must then assemble within 48 hours if not in session . The Congress then has 21 days to decide the issue . If within the 21 days allotted two @-@ thirds of each House of Congress vote that the President is incapacitated , Section 4 states that the Vice President would " continue " to be Acting President . Should the Congress resolve the issue in favor of the President , or if the Congress makes no decision within the 21 days allotted , then the President would " resume " discharging all of the powers and duties of his office . The use of the words " continue " and " resume " imply that the Vice President remains Acting President while Congress deliberates . 
 However , the President may again submit a written declaration of recovery to the President pro tempore and the Speaker of the House . That declaration could be responded to by the Acting President and the Cabinet in the same way as stated earlier . The allotted 21 @-@ day Congressional procedure would start again . 
 = = <unk> = = 
 The Twenty @-@ fifth Amendment has been invoked six times since its ratification . The first three times were applications of Sections 1 and 2 in the context of scandals surrounding the Nixon Administration . The latter three were applications of Section 3 in connection to the President 's undergoing a medical procedure requiring general anesthesia . 
 = = = Appointment of Gerald Ford as Vice President ( 1973 ) = = = 
 On October 12 , 1973 , following Vice President Spiro Agnew 's resignation two days earlier , President Richard Nixon nominated Representative Gerald Ford of Michigan to succeed Agnew as Vice President . 
 The United States Senate voted 92 – 3 to confirm Ford on November 27 and , on December 6 , the House of Representatives did the same by a vote of 387 – 35 . Ford was sworn in later that day before a joint session of the United States Congress . 
 = = = Succession of Gerald Ford to Presidency ( 1974 ) = = = 
 President Richard Nixon resigned on August 9 , 1974 , resulting in Vice President Gerald Ford succeeding to the office of President . Gerald Ford is the only person ever to be Vice President , and later President , without being elected to either office . 
 = = = Appointment of Nelson Rockefeller as Vice President ( 1974 ) = = = 
 When Gerald Ford became President , the Vice Presidency became vacant . On August 20 , 1974 , after having previously considered Melvin Laird and George Bush , President Ford nominated former New York Governor Nelson Rockefeller to succeed him as Vice President . 
 On December 10 , 1974 , Rockefeller was confirmed 90 – 7 by the Senate . On December 19 , 1974 , Rockefeller was confirmed 287 – 128 by the House and sworn into office later that day in the Senate chamber . 
 = = = Acting Presidents = = = 
 = = = = George H. W. Bush ( 1985 ) = = = = 
 On July 12 , 1985 , President Ronald Reagan underwent a colonoscopy , during which a pre @-@ cancerous lesion called a villous adenoma was discovered . Upon being told by his physician ( Dr. Edward <unk> ) that he could undergo surgery immediately or in two to three weeks , Reagan elected to have it removed immediately . 
 That afternoon , Reagan consulted with White House counsel Fred Fielding by telephone , debating whether to invoke the amendment and , if so , whether such a transfer would set an undesirable precedent . Fielding and White House Chief of Staff Donald Regan recommended that Reagan transfer power and two letters doing so were drafted : the first letter specifically invoked Section 3 of the Twenty @-@ fifth Amendment ; the second only mentioned that Reagan was mindful of this provision . At 10 : 32 a.m. on July 13 , Reagan signed the second letter and ordered its delivery to the appropriate officers as required under the amendment . 
 Books such as The President Has Been Shot : Confusion , Disability and the 25th Amendment , by Herbert Abrams , and Reagan 's autobiography , An American Life , argue President Reagan 's intent to transfer power to Vice President Bush was clear . Fielding himself adds : 
 I personally know he did intend to invoke the amendment , and he conveyed that to all of his staff and it was conveyed to the VP as well as the President of the Senate . He was also very firm in his wish not to create a precedent binding his successor . 
 = = = = Dick Cheney ( 2002 ; 2007 ) = = = = 
 On June 29 , 2002 , President George W. Bush underwent a colonoscopy and chose to invoke Section 3 of the amendment , temporarily transferring his powers to Vice President Dick Cheney . The medical procedure began at 7 : 09 a.m. EDT and ended at 7 : 29 a.m. EDT . Bush woke up twenty minutes later , but did not resume his presidential powers and duties until 9 : 24 a.m. EDT after the president 's doctor , Richard Tubb , conducted an overall examination . Tubb said he recommended the additional time to make sure the sedative had no aftereffects . Unlike Reagan 's 1985 letter , Bush 's 2002 letter specifically cited Section 3 as the authority for the transfer of power . 
 On July 21 , 2007 , President Bush again invoked the amendment in response to having to undergo a colonoscopy , temporarily transferring his powers to Vice President Cheney . President Bush invoked Section 3 at 7 : 16 a.m. EDT . He reclaimed his powers at 9 : 21 a.m. EDT . As happened in 2002 , Bush specifically cited Section 3 when he transferred the Presidential powers to the Vice President and when he reclaimed those powers . 
 = = Considered Section 4 invocations = = 
 There are two documented instances in which invocation of Section 4 of the Twenty @-@ fifth Amendment was considered , both of which involved the 40th President of the United States , Ronald Reagan . 
 = = = 1981 : Reagan assassination attempt = = = 
 Following the attempted assassination of Ronald Reagan on March 30 , 1981 , Vice President George Bush did not assume the presidential powers and duties as Acting President . Reagan was unable to invoke Section 3 , because he was in surgery . Bush did not invoke Section 4 , because he was on a plane returning from Texas . Reagan was out of surgery by the time Bush arrived in Washington . In 1995 , Birch Bayh , the primary sponsor of the amendment in the Senate , wrote that Section 4 should have been invoked . 
 = = = 1987 : Reagan 's alleged incapacity = = = 
 Upon assuming the role of White House Chief of Staff in 1987 , Howard Baker was advised by his predecessor 's staff to be prepared for a possible invocation of the Twenty @-@ fifth Amendment due to Reagan 's perceived laziness and ineptitude . 
 According to the PBS program American Experience , 
 What Baker 's transition team was told by Donald Regan 's staff that weekend shocked them . Reagan was ' inattentive , inept , ' and ' lazy , ' and Baker should be prepared to invoke the 25th Amendment to relieve him of his duties . 
 Reagan biographer Edmund Morris stated in an interview aired on the program , 
 The incoming Baker people all decided to have a meeting with him on Monday , their first official meeting with the President , and to cluster around the table in the Cabinet room and watch him very , very closely to see how he behaved , to see if he was indeed losing his mental grip . 
 Morris went on to explain , 
 Reagan who was , of course , completely unaware that they were launching a death watch on him , came in stimulated by the press of all these new people and performed splendidly . At the end of the meeting , they figuratively threw up their hands realizing he was in perfect command of himself . 
 = Thomasomys ucucha = 
 Thomasomys ucucha , also known as the ucucha <unk> , is a rodent in the genus Thomasomys of the family Cricetidae . Found only in the Cordillera Oriental of Ecuador , a mountain range , it lives in forests and grasslands at 3 @,@ 380 to 3 @,@ 720 m ( 11 @,@ 090 to 12 @,@ 200 ft ) above sea level . It may occur with seven other species of Thomasomys . First collected in 1903 , Thomasomys ucucha was formally described in 2003 and most closely resembles T. hylophilus , which occurs further to the north . Habitat destruction may threaten T. ucucha , so that it is listed as " Vulnerable " on the IUCN Red List . 
 Medium @-@ sized , dark @-@ furred , and long @-@ tailed , Thomasomys ucucha can be distinguished from all other species of Thomasomys by its large , broad , procumbent upper incisors . Head and body length is 94 to 119 mm ( 3 @.@ 7 to 4 @.@ 7 in ) and body mass is 24 to 46 g ( 0 @.@ 85 to 1 @.@ 62 oz ) . The tail is scarcely furred . The front part of the skull is flat , short , and broad . The incisive foramina , openings at the front of the palate , are short , and the palate itself is broad and smooth . The root of the lower incisor is contained in a prominent capsular process . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The first three specimens of Thomasomys ucucha were collected in 1903 at <unk> in Pichincha Province , Ecuador , by L. Söderström . It was not found again until Robert S. Voss of the American Museum of Natural History collected a total of forty @-@ three specimens at nearby Papallacta , Napo Province , in 1978 and 1980 . Papallacta is in a remote area that is difficult to access , and the mammal fauna of the region remains poorly known . In 2003 , he formally described the animal as a new species , Thomasomys ucucha , in a publication in American Museum Novitates in which he also reviewed the mammal fauna of Papallacta . The generic name , Thomasomys , honors English zoologist Oldfield Thomas , who named about 2 @,@ 900 taxa of mammals , and the specific name , ucucha , is the local Quechua word for " mouse " . T. ucucha most closely resembles T. hylophilus , which is found further north in Colombia and Venezuela . Both are members of Thomasomys , a diverse genus that occurs in the northern Andes , from Bolivia to Venezuela . Together with Rhipidomys and a few other , smaller genera , Thomasomys forms the tribe Thomasomyini , which includes over fifty species found in South America and Panama . Thomasomyini in turn is part of the subfamily Sigmodontinae of the family Cricetidae , along with hundreds of other species of mainly small rodents . 
 = = Description = = 
 Thomasomys ucucha is a medium @-@ sized Thomasomys with a relatively long tail . The dense , fine , and soft fur is dark brown on the upperparts , changing gradually into the grey underparts . The mystacial vibrissae ( whiskers above the mouth ) are long and extend beyond the ears when laid back against the head . Sparse short , dark hairs are present on the ears . The digits and metapodials ( bones of the centers of the hand and feet ) of the hands and feet are covered with dark hairs , but the ungual tufts at the bases of the claws consist of longer , gray hairs . The fifth digit of the foot is long , with the tip of its claw almost reaching the base of the claw of the fourth digit . The tail is dark and hardly furred , except for a pencil of long hairs at the end ; some animals have a white tail tip . Females have six mammae . In thirty @-@ six specimens , head and body length is 94 to 119 mm ( 3 @.@ 7 to 4 @.@ 7 in ) , averaging 110 mm ( 4 @.@ 3 in ) ; tail length is 122 to 151 mm ( 4 @.@ 8 to 5 @.@ 9 in ) , averaging 140 mm ( 5 @.@ 5 in ) ; hindfoot length is 26 to 30 mm ( 1 @.@ 0 to 1 @.@ 2 in ) , averaging 28 mm ( 1 @.@ 1 in ) ; ear length is 17 to 20 mm ( 0 @.@ 67 to 0 @.@ 79 in ) , averaging 18 mm ( 0 @.@ 71 in ) ; and weight is 24 to 46 g ( 0 @.@ 85 to 1 @.@ 62 oz ) , averaging 36 g ( 1 @.@ 3 oz ) . 
 The front ( rostral ) part of the skull is short — shorter and broader than in T. hylophilus — and flat and the notches in the zygomatic plates at the sides are poorly developed . The plates themselves are broad . The zygomatic arches ( cheekbones ) spread broadly and are rounded in shape . The narrow interorbital region ( between the eyes ) is hourglass @-@ shaped . The braincase is robust . 
 The incisive foramina , which perforate the palate between the incisors and the molars , are short and do not reach near the first molars ; they are longer in T. hylophilus . They are widest where the premaxillary and maxillary bones meet . The palate itself is also short , not extending beyond the third molars , and is broad and lacks ridges or grooves . There are simple posterolateral palatal pits at the back of the palate , near the third molars . The mesopterygoid fossa , an opening located behind the end of the palate , is broad and its roof is either fully ossified or perforated by small sphenopalatine vacuities where the <unk> and <unk> bones meet . An alisphenoid strut separates two foramina ( openings ) at the base of the skull , the buccinator @-@ masticatory foramen and the foramen ovale accessorium . The pattern of grooves and foramina on the head indicates that the circulation of the arteries in the head of T. ucucha follows the primitive pattern . The tegmen tympani , the roof of the tympanic cavity , overlaps the suspensory process of the squamosal bone . At the back of the mandible ( lower jaw ) , there is a capsular process to receive the root of the lower incisor , which is absent in T. hylophilus . 
 The large upper incisors are orthodont , with their cutting edge at about a right angle to the upper molars , and heavily pigmented with orange . Those of T. hylophilus are narrower , less procumbent , and less pigmented . The orthodont upper incisors suffice to distinguish T. ucucha from all other members of the genus but T. australis and T. daphne , which have much shorter and narrower incisors . The left and right molar rows are parallel . The molars are more hypsodont ( high @-@ crowned ) than in other Thomasomys . The anterocone , the cusp at the front of the first upper molar , is divided into distinct cuspules at the lingual ( inner ) and labial ( outer ) sides by an anteromedian flexus . The accessory ridges on the upper molars , the <unk> and mesolophs , are less well @-@ developed than in T. hylophilus . The third upper molar is reduced relative to the second , much more so than in T. hylophilus . The lower molars are generally similar to the uppers , but the anteroconid ( the equivalent of the anterocone on the first lower molar ) is often undivided and the third molar is unreduced . 
 The glans penis is rounded , short , and small and is superficially divided into left and right halves by a trough at the top and a ridge at the bottom . Most of the glans is covered with penile spines , except for an area near the tip . 
 = = Distribution and ecology = = 
 Thomasomys ucucha occurs only in the Cordillera Oriental of Ecuador in the provinces of Pichincha and Napo . At Papallacta , Thomasomys ucucha was collected in a variety of habitats at 3 @,@ 380 to 3 @,@ 720 m ( 11 @,@ 090 to 12 @,@ 200 ft ) altitude , including páramo ( high @-@ mountain grassland with shrubs and forest patches ) and subalpine rainforest . Most were taken in runways ( paths through vegetation made by animals ) and a few alongside small streams or on a low tree . Other muroid rodents found at the same places as T. ucucha include two <unk> ( grass mice ) , Akodon latebricola and Akodon mollis ; two <unk> ( water rats ) , <unk> <unk> and <unk> <unk> ; two oryzomyines ( rice rats ) , <unk> altissimus and M. minutus ; the <unk> <unk> <unk> ; and five other species of Thomasomys , T. aureus , T. <unk> , T. <unk> , T. <unk> , and T. <unk> . Other species have been recorded nearby , and Voss wrote that T. ucucha may occur sympatrically with seven other species of Thomasomys . With Akodon latebricola and Thomasomys <unk> , T. ucucha is one of three species that are known only from the northeastern Andes of Ecuador . 
 = = Conservation status = = 
 Thomasomys ucucha is locally common , but has a very limited known distribution . Its conservation status has been assessed as " Vulnerable " by the IUCN because of its small distribution ; it may be threatened by the destruction of its habitat for agricultural purposes , but occurs near two protected areas . 
 = Confusion ( album ) = 
 Confusion is a studio album by Nigerian Afrobeat musician Fela Kuti and his band the Africa 70 . It was arranged , composed , and produced by Kuti , and released in 1975 by EMI . He recorded the album after choosing to emphasize his African heritage and nationalism in his music . Confusion is a commentary on the confused state of post @-@ colonial Lagos and its lack of infrastructure and proper leadership at the time . Kuti 's pidgin English lyrics depict difficult conditions in the city , including a frenetic , multilingual trading market and inextricable traffic jams in Lagos ' major intersections . 
 Confusion is a one @-@ song Afrobeat album that begins with an entirely instrumental first half , which features free form interplay between Kuti 's electric piano and drummer Tony Allen . It leads to an extended mid @-@ tempo section with Allen 's polyrhythms and tenor saxophone by Kuti , who subsequently delivers call @-@ and @-@ response vocal passages . In retrospective reviews , the album was praised by music critics , who found it exemplary of Kuti 's Afrobeat style and recommended it as a highlight from his extensive catalog . In both 2000 and 2010 , Confusion was reissued and bundled with Kuti 's 1973 album Gentleman . 
 = = Background = = 
 After becoming dissatisfied with studying European composers at the Trinity College of Music , Fela Kuti formed his first band <unk> <unk> in 1961 and quickly became a popular act in the London club scene . He returned to his native Nigeria in 1963 and formed another band that played a rhythmic fusion of traditional highlife music and jazz . Kuti dubbed his hybrid style " Afrobeat " , which served in part as his critique of African performers whom he felt had forsaken their native musical roots for American popular music trends . In 1969 , he toured with his band in Los Angeles and was introduced by a friend to the writings of Black nationalist and <unk> proponents such as Malcolm X and Eldridge Cleaver . Inspired by what he had read , Kuti decided to write more political and critical music , and changed the name of his band to Nigeria 70 and later on Africa 70 . 
 During the 1970s , Kuti began to emphasize his identification with Africa and its culture in his music and opposed the colonial mentality of identification with Western powers such as the United States and the United Kingdom . His albums during this period expressed aspects of his ideology such as his African heritage and nationalism . On his 1973 song " Eko lie " , Kuti declared that Lagos was his home rather than London or New York City , where he had performed earlier in his career . Lagos and its landmark events became common themes in his songs . He revisited the theme on Confusion in 1974 to acknowledge that he identifies with the city despite its problems . 
 = = Composition = = 
 Confusion is a one @-@ song album with a duration of 25 minutes and 36 seconds . The album 's first side is entirely instrumental . It begins with a free @-@ form introduction , which musically depicts the disorienting impact of Lagos ' problems . Although he occasionally used amplified instruments , Kuti rarely employed elaborate electronic effects and instead relied on more natural sounds . Kuti , who plays electric piano , and drummer Tony Allen start the introduction out of tempo and exhibit abstract musical techniques , including dramatic free jazz interplay between their instruments . Although he was known for his critical background in classical study , Kuti allowed Allen to improvise in the Africa 70 's rhythm section and viewed him as a drummer with the mind of a composer , or " one who composes on the spot " . 
 The introduction 's keyboard fantasia gradually opens the band 's languid , expansive interplay . The song 's groove is established with the introduction of a bass guitar ostinato at 4 : 50 . Rhythm and tenor guitars and a horn section are played in the next two minutes . During the bridge , Allen 's drumming intensifies within the song 's seven @-@ minute mark , which leads to a fully developed Afrobeat section . Afrobeat is a type of loose funk music embellished with African syncopation , R & B @-@ styled horn instruments , and improvisatory solos . Confusion 's extended mid @-@ tempo section has complex arrangements of danceable grooves , multiple solos , and Allen 's polyrhythms . In this section , Kuti plays tenor saxophone , which he had learned after Africa 70 's original tenor player <unk> Chico left in 1973 . The music is complemented by his outspoken call @-@ and @-@ response vocal passages . The song 's final 10 minutes comprise raucous trumpet , tenor saxophone solos , and Kuti 's lead vocals . Its closing section revisits the abstract interplay of the introduction . 
 = = Lyrics and themes = = 
 Confusion is a commentary on the confused state of post @-@ colonial , urban Nigeria , particularly Lagos , and its lack of infrastructure and proper leadership at the time . In the opening lines , Kuti comments on his social reality : " When we talk say confusion / Everything out of control " . His lyrics decry what he viewed as the colonial mindset of some Africans and employ pidgin English , which was the lingua franca of most people in English @-@ speaking West Africa ; he sings the phrase " pafuka " , which means " all over " or " finished " , and the interjection " o " to add emphasis . 
 According to Nigerian historian <unk> <unk> , Confusion depicts the complicated , frenetic , and multilingual market of the Ojuelegba crossroad , and in doing so addresses the " infrastructural nightmare of Lagos and the continued hegemony of the West in all aspects of African life " . Kuti makes reference to three dialects and currencies that make trading in urban Nigeria difficult : " Dem be three men wey sell for roadside @-@ o / Dem three speak different language @-@ o / Dem speak Lagos , Accra , and Conakry / One white man come pay them money @-@ o / He pay them for pounds , dollars and French money @-@ o / For the thing wey he go buy from them / He remain for them to share am @-@ o / Me I say , na confusion be that @-@ o / He go say he pafuka o . " African Arts journalist E.J. Collins interpreted the latter verse as a reference to the protracted nature of transactions in Lagos . 
 Kuti uses ironic humor to express pride in Nigerians ' ability to drive and work within difficult conditions : " Before @-@ before Lagos traffic na special , eh / Number one special all over the world / You go get Ph.D. for driving for Lagos , eh / You go get M.A. for driving for Lagos , eh / You go get M.Sc. for driving for Lagos , oh / For me for me I like am like that , eh / Ah @-@ ha @-@ ha @-@ ha , na my country – why not ? / For me for me I like am like that , eh . " He subsequently describes major intersections throughout Lagos , including Surulere , Ojuelegba , and <unk> Centre , which lack the supervision of a traffic officer . They are characterized by aggressive , temperamental drivers , who force their vehicles into inextricable traffic jams : " For Ojuelegba , moto dey come from south / Moto dey come from north / Moto dey come from east / Moto dey come from west / And policeman no dey for centre / Na confusion be that @-@ i o / He go say he pafuka o . " According to The Rough Guide to World Music ( 2006 ) , the album uses a " hectic crossroads in Lagos ... as a metaphor to explore the problems of an entire corrupt nation . " 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 Confusion was first released in Nigeria in 1975 by EMI . It was reissued in 1984 by EMI Records . In a retrospective review for AllMusic , Sam Samuelson gave it five stars and called it " a highly recommended 25 @-@ minute Afro @-@ beat epic " . He said that it shows Kuti and his band at the peak of their instrumental skills and vague jeers , which he felt became more explicit and intense on 1977 's Zombie . Samuelson found Confusion to be exemplary of Kuti 's " genius " formula , in which he startles musically enraptured listeners with his commentary . Music journalist Peter Shapiro called it a lyrical masterpiece and said that the bridge following the song 's " cosmic " introduction is " pretty much the pinnacle of Afro @-@ futurism " . Nic Harcourt recommended Confusion as a starting point for new listeners of Kuti 's music . 
 In 2000 , MCA Records reissued and bundled Confusion with Kuti 's 1973 album Gentleman . It was the last installment in a 10 @-@ CD , 20 @-@ album reissue project for Kuti . Rob Brunner of Entertainment Weekly gave the album 's reissue an " A " and viewed it as one of Kuti 's best works , while Derrick A. Smith from All About Jazz cited Confusion as one of his " best statements on any instrument " . In a four @-@ star review , Down Beat praised his combination of " raw energy and sophistication " , and said that it is as noteworthy as when it was first released . Robert Christgau gave the two @-@ album reissue an " A – " in his review for The Village Voice , calling Confusion " one Fela song / track / album it would be a waste to edit ... the proof of Africa 70 's presumptive funk . " He ranked the reissue number 80 in his dean 's list for the Pazz & Jop critics ' poll in 2000 . 
 In 2005 , New Nation ranked Confusion 91st on their list of the " Top 100 Best Albums by Black Artists " . In his 2008 book 1 @,@ 000 Recordings to Hear Before You Die , music journalist Tom Moon wrote that it is both one of Kuti 's best albums and " a demonstration of just how rousing Afro @-@ Beat 's deftly interlocked rhythms can be . " In 2010 , the album was bundled again with Gentleman by Knitting Factory Records as a part of their extensive reissue of Kuti 's 45 @-@ album discography . Michaelangelo Matos of Paste magazine gave it a score of " 9 @.@ 3 / 10 " and cited it as the essential release in both the reissue and Kuti 's catalog : " an oasis in a sandpaper @-@ like catalog . " 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs were arranged , composed , and produced by Fela Ransome @-@ Kuti . 
 Side one 
 " Confusion Pt . I " – 14 : 08 
 Side two 
 " Confusion Pt . II " – 11 : 28 
 The album was released as a single track on its subsequent CD reissue . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits are adapted from the album 's liner notes . 
 James <unk> – sticks 
 Tony Allen – lead drums , solo drums 
 Africa 70 – band 
 <unk> <unk> – baritone saxophone 
 George Mark Bruce – bass guitar 
 Segun Edo – tenor guitar 
 Henry Kofi – first conga 
 Daniel <unk> – second conga 
 Tony <unk> – trumpet 
 Emmanuel <unk> – engineering , mixing 
 Isaac <unk> – maracas 
 Remi <unk> – graphics 
 Fela Ransome @-@ Kuti – arrangement , tenor saxophone , piano , production , vocals 
 Tutu <unk> – rhythm guitar 
 = Bang ( The Good Wife ) = 
 " Bang " is the fifteenth episode of the first season of the American legal drama television series The Good Wife . It originally aired on CBS in the United States on March 2 , 2010 . In the episode , ex States Attorney Peter Florrick ( Chris Noth ) is released from prison to his home . He is confined by house arrest and starts working on restarting his legal career . His wife Alicia Florrick ( Julianna Margulies ) has conflicted emotions about his return and distracts herself with a legal case , in which she defends a man of killing a mutual fund manager who assisted in Bernard Madoff 's investment scandal . 
 The episode was written by co @-@ producer and staff writer Courtney Kemp <unk> and directed by Rod Holcomb . " Bang " included guest appearances by actors Alan Cumming and Gary Cole . Cole plays a forensics expert with a country persona and a strong set of ethics , while Cumming plays a cutthroat political operative several commentators said closely resembled White House Chief of Staff Rahm Emanuel . The opening scene of " Bang " , in which Peter returns home to his family , was planned to be the final scene of the series if the first season was unsuccessful and additional episodes were not ordered . 
 " Bang " received generally positive reviews , with several critics complimenting the ensemble performances , as well as Cole and actress Christine Baranski . According to Nielsen Media Research , the episode was seen by 13 @.@ 3 million viewers , a 13 percent drop from the previous episode . It was the 15th most watched television program the week it first aired . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Ex @-@ State 's Attorney Peter Florrick ( Chris Noth ) returns home to an emotional reunion with his children , Zach ( Graham Phillips ) and Grace ( <unk> Vega ) , while his wife Alicia ( Julianna Margulies ) looks on . Peter had been imprisoned for several months after being convicted of charges of corruption . He is allowed to return home under house arrest while his appeal is considered . Peter must wear an ankle monitor and cannot leave the apartment or communicate with the outside world . Alicia is uncomfortable about Peter 's return because of his infidelity , which was exposed at the time of his conviction . 
 Zach shows Peter incriminating photos he had been hiding from Alicia , which are doctored to show Peter being unfaithful . Zach intercepted the photos when they were anonymously delivered to the Florrick residence . Zach also shows Peter a photo he secretly took of a man bugging the Florrick apartment entranceway . Peter hires hardened and blunt political operative Eli Gold ( Alan Cumming ) to assist in the appeal . Gold recognizes the man as a federal investigator and informs Peter he is under investigation by the FBI . Peter reveals to Alicia that Zach hid the photos from her to spare her feelings . 
 Because of Peter 's imprisonment Alicia , a lawyer herself , is working as a junior associate at a law firm . Alicia serves as second chair for senior partner Diane Lockhart ( Christine Baranski ) in a murder trial . Their client , Brad Broussard ( Tom Degnan ) , is charged with shooting Miles Wagner . Wagner was an unpopular mutual fund manager who defrauded Broussard and many other out of their life savings by assisting in Bernard Madoff 's investment scandal . Broussard was found covered in blood next to Wagner 's body , but insists on his innocence . Diane consults ballistics expert Kurt McVeigh ( Gary Cole ) , a mustachioed country man with a strict principle that he will not work if the client is guilty . Kurt testifies that Wagner was shot inside a car despite being found on the floor . Wagner 's partner , Martin Knox ( Kevin O 'Rourke ) , had a strong financial motive to kill Wagner . Knox 's wife , Rachel ( Geraldine Hughes ) , strongly dislikes her husband and is willing to implicate him , but is bound by spousal privilege laws . Alicia discovers a conspiracy tactic that will allow Rachel to testify , and Broussard is vindicated and set free . The firm 's investigator Kalinda Sharma ( Archie Panjabi ) visits FBI agent Lana Delaney ( Jill Flint ) inquiring about the investigation into Peter . Delaney asks Kalinda to feed her information about Peter , but Kalinda declines . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Bang " was written by Courtney Kemp <unk> and directed by Rod Holcomb . The writers based the episode on the Ponzi scheme orchestrated by Bernard Madoff , who was sentenced to prison in 2009 after pleading guilty to defrauding thousands of clients out of billions of dollars with an investor fraud scheme . The anger expressed by onlookers at the Miles Wagner trial in The Good Wife reflected the passionate emotions the real @-@ life Madoff scandal evoked . " Bang " featured guest appearances by actors Alan Cumming and Gary Cole . Some commentators suggested Cummings ' character , Eli Gold , was based on White House Chief of Staff Rahm Emanuel . Both are political operatives from Chicago noted for bullying tactics and their use of foul language . 
 If The Good Wife had not been successful and the first season was not renewed beyond its first 13 episodes , creators Robert and Michelle King planned to end their final episode with a scene in which Peter returns home and greets his emotionally conflicted wife ; because the season was continued , it ultimately became the opening scene of " Bang " . Robert King said he considered using it as a final scene because , " You would never have wanted to end it where it would be such a conclusion that everyone ’ s satisfied , because that ’ s not Alicia ’ s life . Alicia ’ s life is filled with questions . " Chris Noth said now that Peter is back home , much of the rest of the season will focus on whether Alicia can forgive his past infidelity , adding , " I don 't know if they 'll be able to recover or not . That 's part of the ongoing drama . " 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 Poole refers to Eli Gold as a " wartime consigliere " , a reference to the Tom Hagen lawyer character in the 1972 Mafia film The Godfather , which is itself based on a Mario Puzo novel of the same name . In turn , Gold disparagingly refers to Poole as a " <unk> Bambi " , a reference to the title character of the 1942 Disney animated film Bambi , about a naive deer unaccustomed to the realities and horrors of the real world . Kurt McVeigh 's country mannerisms and dress prompt Diane to refer to him as the Marlboro Man , a cowboy @-@ like figure used in tobacco advertisements for Marlboro cigarettes . Upon learning about his morals , Diane said he was like something out of a novel by Herman Melville , the 19th century novelist who wrote Moby @-@ Dick and Billy Budd . She also jokingly asks whether Kurt is related to Timothy McVeigh , the man convicted of the 1995 Oklahoma City bombing , by saying : " Oh my goodness what an unfortunate name . Hopefully no relation . " Diane , a liberal , is taken aback by the conservative Kurt 's enthusiasm for Sarah Palin , the 2008 Republican vice presidential nominee . As a joke , Kurt sends her a copy of Palin 's 2009 memoir , Going Rogue : An American Life . She in turn sends him the parody book Going Rouge : A Candid Look Inside The Mind Of Political Conservative Sarah Palin , which is filled with empty pages . 
 = = Distribution = = 
 " Bang " first aired on CBS in the United States on March 2 , 2010 , marking the first episode of The Good Wife in three weeks after a break due to the 2010 Winter Olympics . At the same time , it was simulcast on the Global Television Network in Canada . The episode aired on NET 5 in the Netherlands on April 2 , 2010 . The day following its American broadcast , " Bang " was made available for download at the digital media store iTunes . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original American broadcast , " Bang " was seen by 13 @.@ 3 million viewers among adults between ages 18 and 49 , according to Nielsen Media Research . It marked a 13 percent drop in viewership from the previous original episode . Commentators suggested The Good Wife suffered slightly in the ratings due to the NBC debut of Parenthood , which premiered in the same timeslot to 8 @.@ 1 million viewers in the 18 to 49 age group . " Bang " was the 15th most watched television program the week it first aired . It received a 2 @.@ 7 rating / 8 share among viewers between 18 and 49 . 
 The episode received generally positive reviews . Jeremy Gerard of Bloomberg L.P. said the episode continues to maintain " with considerable grace " a strong balance between legal and domestic drama . Gerard also praised the performances of Cumming , Margulies and Panjabi . Mandi Bierly particularly praised the sexual tension between Alicia and Will , calling their moment together " one of the sexiest scenes between two non @-@ touching people wearing suits ever " . USA Today television critic Robert Bianco said the Broussard murder plot was " unusually weak " , but praised the performances of Cumming , Cole and Baranski , who she said was turning Diane from a two @-@ dimensional mean boss into an " appealingly complicated , generally admirable character " . Hal Boedeker of the Orlando Sentinel called it " another outstanding episode " and particularly praised the scenes between Baranski and Cole . The Cincinnati Enquirer described it as a " pivotal episode " due to Peter 's return home from jail , and listed it as a " must see " show . 
 Los Angeles Times writer Meredith Blake praised the episode , particularly the chemistry between Diane and Gary , which she called the " most amusing plotline " of the episode . Blake also complimented Alan Cummings ' performance and the sexual tension between Will and Alicia . Philadelphia Daily News television critic Ellen Gray said the homecoming between Peter and Alicia was satisfying , as was the chemistry between Alicia and Will . Gray praised the performances of Cumming and particularly Noth , who he said " manages to command attention whenever he 's onscreen " . 
 = Redwood National and State Parks = 
 The Redwood National and State Parks ( RNSP ) are old @-@ growth temperate rainforests located in the United States , along the coast of northern California . Comprising Redwood National Park ( established 1968 ) and California 's Del Norte Coast , Jedediah Smith , and Prairie Creek Redwoods State Parks ( dating from the 1920s ) , the combined RNSP contain 133 @,@ 000 acres ( 540 km2 ) . Located entirely within Del Norte and Humboldt Counties , the four parks , together , protect 45 % of all remaining coast redwood ( Sequoia sempervirens ) old @-@ growth forests , totaling at least 38 @,@ 982 acres ( 157 @.@ 75 km2 ) . These trees are the tallest and one of the most massive tree species on Earth . In addition to the redwood forests , the parks preserve other indigenous flora , fauna , grassland prairie , cultural resources , portions of rivers and other streams , and 37 miles ( 60 km ) of pristine coastline . 
 In 1850 , old @-@ growth redwood forest covered more than 2 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 acres ( 8 @,@ 100 km2 ) of the California coast . The northern portion of that area , originally inhabited by Native Americans , attracted many lumbermen and others turned gold miners when a minor gold rush brought them to the region . Failing in efforts to strike it rich in gold , these men turned toward harvesting the giant trees for booming development in San Francisco and other places on the West Coast . After many decades of unrestricted clear @-@ cut logging , serious efforts toward conservation began . By the 1920s the work of the Save @-@ the @-@ Redwoods League , founded in 1918 to preserve remaining old @-@ growth redwoods , resulted in the establishment of Prairie Creek , Del Norte Coast , and Jedediah Smith Redwoods State Parks among others . Redwood National Park was created in 1968 , by which time nearly 90 % of the original redwood trees had been logged . The National Park Service ( NPS ) and the California Department of Parks and Recreation ( <unk> ) administratively combined Redwood National Park with the three abutting Redwood State Parks in 1994 for the purpose of cooperative forest management and stabilization of forests and watersheds as a single unit . 
 The ecosystem of the RNSP preserves a number of threatened animal species such as the tidewater goby , Chinook salmon , northern spotted owl , and Steller 's sea lion . In recognition of the rare ecosystem and cultural history found in the parks , the United Nations designated them a World Heritage Site on September 5 , 1980 and part of the California Coast Ranges International Biosphere Reserve on June 30 , 1983 . 
 = = History = = 
 Modern day Native groups such as the Yurok , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , and Wiyot all have historical ties to the region , and some Native American groups still live in the park area today . Archaeological study shows they arrived in the area as far back as 3 @,@ 000 years ago . An 1852 census determined that the Yurok were the most numerous , with 55 villages and an estimated population of 2 @,@ 500 . They used the abundant redwood , which with its linear grain was easily split into planks , as a building material for boats , houses , and small villages . For buildings , the planks would be erected side by side in a narrow trench , with the upper portions bound with leather strapping and held by notches cut into the supporting roof beams . Redwood boards were used to form a shallow sloping roof . 
 Previous to Jedediah Smith in 1828 , no other explorer of European descent is known to have thoroughly investigated the inland region away from the immediate coast . The discovery of gold along the Trinity River in 1850 led to a minor secondary rush in California . This brought miners into the area and many stayed on at the coast after failing to strike it rich . This quickly led to conflicts wherein native peoples were placed under great strain , if not forcibly removed or massacred . By 1895 , only one third of the Yurok in one group of villages remained ; by 1919 , virtually all members of the <unk> tribe had either died or been assimilated into other tribes . The miners logged redwoods for building ; when this minor gold rush ended , some of them turned again to logging , cutting down the giant redwood trees . Initially , over 2 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 acres ( 8 @,@ 100 km2 ) of the California and southwestern coast of Oregon were old @-@ growth redwood forest , but by 1910 , extensive logging led conservationists and concerned citizens to begin seeking ways to preserve the remaining trees , which they saw being logged at an alarming rate . In 1911 , U.S. Representative John E. Raker , of California , became the first politician to introduce legislation for the creation of a redwood national park . However , no further action was taken by Congress at that time . 
 Preservation of the redwood stands in California is considered one of the most substantial conservation contributions of the Boone and Crockett Club . The Save @-@ the @-@ Redwoods League was founded in 1918 by Boone and Crockett Club members Madison Grant , John C. Merriam , Henry Fairfield Osborn , and future member , Frederick Russell Burnham . The initial purchases of land were made by Club member Stephen Mather and Mr. William Kent . In 1921 , Boone and Crockett Club member Dr. John C. Phillips donated $ 32 @,@ 000 to purchase land and create the Raynal Bolling Memorial Grove in the Humboldt Redwoods State Park . This was timely as U.S. Route 101 , which would soon provide nearly unfettered access to the trees , was under construction . Using matching funds provided initially by the County of Humboldt and later by the State of California , the Save @-@ the @-@ Redwoods League managed to protect areas of concentrated or multiple redwood groves and a few entire forests in the 1920s . As California created a state park system , beginning in 1927 , three of the preserved redwood areas became Prairie Creek Redwoods , Del Norte Coast Redwoods , and Jedediah Smith Redwoods State Parks . A fourth became Humboldt Redwoods State Park , by far the largest of the individual Redwood State Parks , but not in the Redwood National and State Park system . Because of the high demand for lumber during World War II and the construction boom that followed in the 1950s , the creation of a national park was delayed . Efforts by the Save @-@ the @-@ Redwoods League , the Sierra Club , and the National Geographic Society to create a national park began in the early 1960s . After intense lobbying of Congress , the bill creating Redwood National Park was signed by President Lyndon Johnson on October 2 , 1968 . The Save @-@ the @-@ Redwoods League and other entities purchased over 100 @,@ 000 acres ( 400 km2 ) , which were added to existing state parks . In 1978 , 48 @,@ 000 acres ( 190 km2 ) were added to Redwood National Park in a major expansion . However , only a fifth of that land was old @-@ growth forest , the rest having been logged . This expansion protected the watershed along Redwood Creek from being adversely affected by logging operations outside the park . The federal and state parks were administratively combined in 1994 . 
 The United Nations designated Redwood National and State Parks a World Heritage Site on September 5 , 1980 . The evaluation committee noted 50 prehistoric archaeological sites , spanning 4 @,@ 500 years . It also cited ongoing research in the park by Humboldt State University researchers , among others . The park is part of a much larger region designated the California Coast Ranges International Biosphere Reserve on June 30 , 1983 . The California Coast Ranges biosphere is overseen by the University of California Natural Reserve System . 
 The park has served as a filming location for numerous films . Scenes set on the forest moon Endor in Star Wars Episode VI : Return of the Jedi were filmed in the Tall Trees Redwood Grove in the northern part of Humboldt County , though the majority of filming was in private and public forests near the town of Smith River , California . Scenes for The Lost World : Jurassic Park as well as the movie Outbreak were filmed at the nearby Prairie Creek Redwoods State Park and at Patrick 's Point State Park . 
 = = Park management = = 
 Redwood National Park headquarters is located in Crescent City , California , with a service office located in Arcata and an operations center located in <unk> , California . 
 Lack of money has precluded major improvements , however , and timber companies have replanted much of the logged area with non @-@ native tree species . Coastline areas , including dunes and coastal prairie , have been invaded by exotic species , partly due to the suppression of forest fires until the 1980s . A fire management plan now allows controlled burning as one method to return the parkland to its original state . Since the redwoods were logged on the basis of accessibility , with inaccessible areas being cut last , large old @-@ growth forest sections were isolated from one another , sometimes by many miles . In these cases it will be decades more before mature forest can return , regardless of the amount of money used to rehabilitate the ecosystem . 
 The park has transformed a few logging roads into scenic public drives . These do not meet current safety standards , but funding to improve them is not available at present . Park structures such as visitor centers and employee housing also need updating to meet increasing demands . Park employees perform air and water quality surveys , monitor endangered and threatened species , and work closely with the California Coastal National Monument , which is managed by the U.S. Bureau of Land Management . In 2005 , the parks were authorized to expand another 25 @,@ 000 acres ( 100 km2 ) to include the Mill Creek watershed . 
 = = Natural resources = = 
 The Redwood National and State Parks form one of the most significant protected areas of the Northern California coastal forests ecoregion . 
 = = = Flora = = = 
 It is estimated that old @-@ growth redwood forest once covered close to 2 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 acres ( 8 @,@ 100 km2 ) of coastal northern California . 96 % of all old @-@ growth redwoods have been logged , and almost half ( 45 % ) of the redwoods remaining are found in Redwood National and State Parks . The parks protect 38 @,@ 982 acres ( 157 @.@ 75 km2 ) of old @-@ growth forest almost equally divided between federal 19 @,@ 640 acres ( 79 @.@ 5 km2 ) and state 19 @,@ 342 acres ( 78 @.@ 27 km2 ) management . Redwoods have existed along the coast of northern California for at least 20 million years and are related to tree species that existed 160 million years ago . 
 The native range of coast redwood is from the northern California coast north to the southern Oregon Coast . The tree is closely related to the giant sequoia of central California , and more distantly to the dawn redwood which is indigenous to the Sichuan – Hubei region of China . Coast redwoods are the tallest trees on Earth ; as of September 2006 , the tallest tree in the park was Hyperion at 379 @.@ 1 feet ( 115 @.@ 5 m ) , followed by Helios and Icarus which were 376 @.@ 3 feet ( 114 @.@ 7 m ) and 371 @.@ 2 feet ( 113 @.@ 1 m ) respectively . 
 Before September 2006 , the tallest living specimen known was the Stratosphere Giant , outside the park in Humboldt Redwoods State Park , which was 370 feet ( 110 m ) in 2004 . For many years , one specimen simply named Tall Tree in Prairie Creek Redwoods State Park and within the RNSP was measured at 367 @.@ 8 feet ( 112 @.@ 1 m ) , but the top 10 feet ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) of the tree was reported to have died in the 1990s . One tree that fell in 1991 was reported to be 372 @.@ 04 feet ( 113 @.@ 40 m ) . Only the giant sequoia has more mass . The largest redwood by volume is the 42 @,@ 500 cubic foot ( 1 @,@ 205 m ³ ) Lost Monarch , located in Jedediah Smith Redwoods State Park . Mature Coast redwoods live an average of 500 – 700 years and a few are documented to be 2 @,@ 000 years old , making them some of the longest @-@ living organisms on earth . They are highly resistant to disease , due to a thick protective bark and high tannin content . Redwoods prefer sheltered slopes , slightly inland and near water sources such as rivers and streams . 
 Redwood trees develop enormous limbs that accumulate deep organic soils and can support tree @-@ sized trunks growing on them . This typically occurs above 150 feet ( 46 m ) . Scientists have recently discovered that plants which normally grow on the forest floor also grow in these soils , well above ground . The soil mats provide homes to invertebrates , mollusks , earthworms , and salamanders . During drought seasons , some treetops die back , but the trees do not die outright . Instead , redwoods have developed mechanisms to regrow new trunks from other limbs . These secondary trunks , called reiterations , also develop root systems in the accumulated soils at their bases . This helps transport water to the highest reaches of the trees . Coastal fog also provides up to one @-@ third of their annual water needs . 
 Another large tree commonly found in the forest is the coast Douglas @-@ fir , which has been measured at heights of over 300 feet ( 91 m ) . Sitka spruce are plentiful along the coast and are better adapted to salty air than other species . The evergreen hardwood tanoak produces a nut similar to the acorns produced by the related genus Quercus ( oak ) . Both <unk> and oaks are members of the beech family . Trees such as the Pacific madrone , bigleaf maple , California laurel , and red alder are also widespread throughout the parks . 
 Huckleberry , blackberry , and salmonberry are part of the forest understory and provide food for many animal species . The California rhododendron and azalea are flowering shrubs common in the park , especially in old @-@ growth forest . Plants such as the sword fern are prolific , particularly near ample water sources . In Prairie Creek Redwoods State Park , Fern Canyon is a well @-@ known ravine 30 to 50 feet ( 9 @.@ 1 to 15 @.@ 2 m ) deep , with walls completely covered in ferns . 
 = = = Fauna = = = 
 The ecosystems of RNSP preserve a number of rare animal species . Numerous ecosystems exist , with seacoast , river , prairie , and densely forested zones all within the park . The tidewater goby is a federally listed endangered species that live near the Pacific coastline . The bald eagle , which usually nests near a water source , is listed as a state of California endangered species . The Chinook salmon , northern spotted owl , and Steller 's sea lion are a few of the other animal species that are threatened . 
 Over 40 species of mammals have been documented , including the black bear , cougar , bobcat , beaver , river otter , black @-@ tailed deer , elk , and coyote . Along the coastline , California sea lions , Steller sea lions and harbor seals live near the shore and on <unk> , rocky outcroppings forming small islands just off the coast . Dolphins and Pacific gray whales are occasionally seen offshore . Roosevelt elk are the most readily observed of the large mammals in the park . Successful herds , brought back from the verge of extinction in the region , are now a common site in park areas south of the Klamath River . Many smaller mammals live in the high forest canopy . Different species of bats , such as the big brown bat , and other smaller mammals including the red squirrel and northern flying squirrel spend most of their lives well above the forest floor . 
 Brown pelicans and double @-@ crested cormorants are mainly found on cliffs along the coast and on <unk> , while sandpipers and gulls inhabit the seacoast and inland areas . Inland , freshwater @-@ dependent birds such as the common merganser , osprey , red @-@ shouldered hawk , great blue heron , and Steller 's jay are a few of the bird species that have been documented . At least 400 bird species have been documented in the forestlands . 
 Reptiles and amphibians can also be found in the parks , with the northwestern ringneck snake , northern red @-@ legged frog , Pacific giant salamander , and the rough @-@ skinned newt most commonly seen . 
 = = = Invasive species = = = 
 Currently , there are over 200 exotic species known to live in Redwood National and State Parks . Of these thirty have been identified as invasive species , ten of these are considered threats to local species and ecosystems . Exotic species currently account for about a quarter of the total flora in the parks . Only about one percent of plant growth in old @-@ growth areas are of exotic species , while areas such as the Bald Hills prairies have a relative cover of fifty to seventy @-@ five percent exotic . The type of foreign vegetation also varies , with plants such as the English Ivy ( <unk> helix ) , Spotted <unk> ( Centaurea maculosa ) , and the Poison Hemlock ( Conium maculatum ) . The spotted knapweed and poison hemlock are both under consideration for addition to a high priority watch list maintained by the park system . 
 = = = Geology = = = 
 The northern coastal region of California , which includes RNSP and the adjacent offshore area , is the most seismically active in the U.S. Frequent minor earthquakes in the park and offshore under the Pacific Ocean have resulted in shifting river channels , landslides , and erosion of seaside cliffs . The North American , Pacific , and Gorda Plates are tectonic plates that all meet at the Mendocino Triple Junction , only 100 miles ( 160 km ) southwest of the parks . During the 1990s , more than nine magnitude 6 @.@ 0 earthquakes occurred along this fault zone , and there is always potential for a major earthquake . The park ensures that visitors are aware of the potential for a major earthquake through the use of pamphlets and information posted throughout the parks . The threat of a tsunami is of particular concern , and visitors to the seacoast are told to seek higher ground immediately after any significant earthquake . 
 Both coastline and the Coast Ranges can be found within park boundaries . The majority of the rocks in the parks are part of the Franciscan Assemblage , uplifted from the ocean floor millions of years ago . These sedimentary rocks are primarily sandstone , siltstone , and shale , with lesser amounts of metamorphic rocks such as chert and greenstone . For the most part , these rocks are easily eroded , and can be viewed along the seacoast and where rivers and streams have cut small gorges . Formed during the Cretaceous age , they are highly deformed from uplift and folding processes . In some areas , river systems have created fluvial deposits of sandstone , mudstone , and conglomerate , which are transported into the park from upstream . Redwood Creek follows the Grogan Fault ; along the west bank of the creek , schist and other metamorphic rocks can be found , while sedimentary rocks of the Franciscan Assemblage are located on the east bank . 
 = = = Climate = = = 
 The Redwood National and State Parks have an oceanic temperate rainforest climate , with cool @-@ summer Mediterranean characteristics . Weather in RNSP is greatly influenced by the Pacific Ocean . Coastal temperatures generally range between 40 and 60 degrees Fahrenheit ( 4 – 15 ° C ) all year round , while further from the coast summers are hotter and drier , and winters are colder . Redwoods mostly grow a mile or two ( 1 @.@ 5 – 3 km ) from the coast , and never more than 50 miles ( 80 km ) from it . In this temperate but humid coastal zone , the trees receive moisture from both heavy winter rains and persistent summer fog . The presence and consistency of the summer fog is actually more important to overall health of the trees than heavy precipitation . This fact is born out in annual precipitation totals , which range between 25 and 122 inches ( 64 and 310 cm ) annually , with healthy redwood forests throughout the areas of less precipitation because excessive needs for water are mitigated by the ever @-@ present summer fog and the cooler temperatures it ensures . Snow is uncommon even on peaks above 1 @,@ 500 feet ( 460 m ) , further exemplifying the mild , temperate nature of this northern latitude ; however , light snow mixed with rain is common during the winter months . 
 = = = Fire management = = = 
 Wildfires are a natural part of most terrestrial ecosystems . In many ways nature has adapted to fire , and the absence of fire can often be disadvantageous . Wildfire eliminates dead and decayed plant and tree matter , enriching the soil and ensuring that healthier trees have less competition for limited nutrients . Prescribed fire is currently part of the fire management plan and helps to eliminate exotic species of plants and allows a more fertile and natural ecosystem . Fire is also used to protect prairie grasslands and to keep out forest encroachment , ensuring sufficient rangeland for elk and deer . The oak forest regions also benefit from controlled burns , as Douglas fir would otherwise eventually take over and decrease biodiversity . The use of fire in old @-@ growth redwood zones reduces dead and decaying material , and lessens the mortality of larger redwoods by eliminating competing vegetation . In the park , a fire management plan monitors all fires , weather patterns and the fuel load ( dead and decaying plant material ) . This fuel load is removed from areas near structures and where fire poses high risk to the public , and controlled burns are used elsewhere . The National Interagency Fire Center provides additional firefighters and equipment in the event of a large fire . 
 = = Recreation = = 
 The <unk> Redwood Youth Hostel , a low @-@ amenities shared lodging facility ( near Klamath ) , has now closed . There are no hotels or motels within the parks boundaries . However , nearby towns such as Klamath , Requa , and <unk> provide small hotels and inns , with extensive lodging options available in the regional trading centers of Crescent City on the northern end of the park and Arcata and Eureka located to the south . The park is about 260 miles ( 420 km ) north of San Francisco , and 300 miles ( 480 km ) south of Portland , Oregon ; U.S. Route 101 passes through it from north to south . The Smith River National Recreation Area , part of the Six Rivers National Forest , is adjacent to the north end of RNSP . 
 While the state parks have front country campsites that can be driven to , the federal sections of the park do not , and hiking is the only way to reach back country campsites . These are at Mill Creek campground in Del Norte Coast Redwoods State Park and Jedediah Smith campground in Jedediah Smith Redwoods State Park , which together have 251 campsites ; the Elk Prairie campground in Prairie Creek Redwoods State Park which has 75 ; and the Gold Bluffs Beach campground which has 25 campsites . Other nearby state parks have additional front country camping . 
 Back country camping is by permit only and is only allowed in designated sites , except on gravel bars along Redwood Creek . Access to the back country is highly regulated to prevent overuse while permitting as many groups as possible to explore the forest . Camping in the back country is therefore limited to five consecutive nights , and 15 nights in any one year . Proper food storage to minimize encounters with bears is strongly enforced , and hikers and backpackers are required to take out any trash they generate . 
 Almost 200 miles ( 320 km ) of hiking trails exist in the parks , but during the rainy season some temporary footbridges are removed , as they would be destroyed by high streams . Throughout the year , trails are often wet and hikers need to be well prepared for rainy weather and consult information centers for updates on trail conditions . 
 Horseback riding and mountain biking are popular but are only allowed on certain trails . Kayaking is popular along the seacoast and in the various rivers and streams . <unk> and canoeists frequently travel the Smith River , which is the longest undammed river remaining in California . Fishing for salmon and steelhead , a highly prized anadromous form of rainbow trout over 16 inches ( 41 cm ) , is best in the Smith and Klamath rivers . A California sport fishing license is required to fish any of the rivers and streams . Hunting is not permitted anywhere in the parks , but is allowed in nearby National Forests . 
 The park has three visitor centers , where guided nature walks and general information are available , along with two additional information points . Each campground offers campfire talks during the summer months as well as guided tours . The parks have many picnic areas , which are all easily accessed by vehicle . 
 = Sandy Koufax = 
 Sanford " Sandy " Koufax ( / <unk> / ; born Sanford Braun ; December 30 , 1935 ) is a former American Major League Baseball ( MLB ) left @-@ handed pitcher . He pitched 12 seasons for the Brooklyn / Los Angeles Dodgers , from 1955 to 1966 . Koufax , at age 36 in 1972 , became the youngest player ever elected to the Baseball Hall of Fame . 
 Koufax 's career peaked with a run of six outstanding years from 1961 to 1966 , before arthritis in his left elbow ended his career prematurely at age 30 . He was an All @-@ Star for six seasons and was the National League 's Most Valuable Player in 1963 . He won three Cy Young Awards in 1963 , 1965 , and 1966 , by unanimous votes , making him the first three @-@ time Cy Young winner in baseball history and the only one to win three times when one overall award was given for all of major league baseball instead of one award for each league . Koufax also won the NL Triple Crown for pitchers those same three years by leading the NL in wins , strikeouts , and earned run average . 
 Koufax was the first major league pitcher to pitch four no @-@ hitters and the eighth pitcher to pitch a perfect game in baseball history . Despite his comparatively short career , Koufax 's 2 @,@ 396 career strikeouts ranked 7th in history as of his retirement , trailing only Warren Spahn ( 2 @,@ 583 ) among left @-@ handers . Koufax , Randy Johnson , Pedro Martínez , and Nolan Ryan are the only four pitchers elected to the Hall of Fame who had more strikeouts than innings pitched . 
 Koufax is also remembered as one of the outstanding Jewish athletes in American sports . His decision not to pitch Game 1 of the 1965 World Series because it fell on Yom Kippur garnered national attention as an example of conflict between professional pressures and personal beliefs . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Koufax was born in Brooklyn , New York , to a Jewish family , and raised in Borough Park . His parents , Evelyn ( née Lichtenstein ) and Jack Braun , divorced when he was three years old . His mother was remarried when he was nine , to Irving Koufax . Shortly after his mother 's remarriage , the family moved to the Long Island suburb of Rockville Centre . Before tenth grade , Koufax 's family moved back to the Bensonhurst section of Brooklyn . 
 Koufax attended Brooklyn 's Lafayette High School , where he was better known for basketball than for baseball . At the time , school sports were not available because New York 's teachers were refusing to supervise extracurricular activities without monetary compensation . As an alternative , Koufax started playing basketball for the Edith and Carl Marks Jewish Community House of Bensonhurst local community center team . Eventually , Lafayette had a basketball team ; Koufax became team captain in his senior year , and ranked second in his division in scoring , with 165 points in 10 games . In 1951 , at the age of 15 , Koufax also joined a local youth baseball league known as the " Ice Cream League . " He started out as a left @-@ handed catcher before moving to first base . While playing first base for Lafayette High School 's baseball team with teammate and friend Fred <unk> , he was spotted by Milt Laurie , the father of two Lafayette teammates and a baseball coach . Laurie recognized that Koufax might be able to pitch , and recruited the 17 @-@ year @-@ old Koufax to pitch for the Coney Island Sports League 's <unk> . 
 Koufax attended the University of Cincinnati and was a walk @-@ on on the freshman basketball team , a complete unknown to coach Ed <unk> . He later earned a partial scholarship . In spring 1954 , he made the college baseball varsity team . That season , Koufax went 3 – 1 with a 2 @.@ 81 ERA , 51 strikeouts and 30 walks , in 32 innings . Bill <unk> , a scout for the Brooklyn Dodgers , sent the Dodgers front office a glowing report that apparently was filed and forgotten . 
 After trying out with the New York Giants at the Polo Grounds , Koufax did the same for the Pittsburgh Pirates at Forbes Field . During his Pirates tryout , Koufax 's fastball broke the thumb of Sam Narron , the team 's bullpen coach . Branch Rickey , then the general manager of the Pirates , told his scout Clyde <unk> that Koufax had the " greatest arm [ he had ] ever seen . " The Pirates , however , failed to offer Koufax a contract until after he was already committed to the Dodgers . Dodgers scout Al Campanis heard about Koufax from a local sporting goods store owner . After seeing Koufax pitch for Lafayette , Campanis invited him to an Ebbets Field tryout . With Dodgers manager Walter Alston and scouting director Fresco Thompson watching , Campanis assumed the hitter 's stance while Koufax started throwing . Campanis later said , " There are two times in my life the hair on my arms has stood up : The first time I saw the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel and the second time , I saw Sandy Koufax throw a fastball . " The Dodgers signed Koufax for a $ 6 @,@ 000 ( $ 53 @,@ 000 today ) salary , with a $ 14 @,@ 000 ( $ 123 @,@ 000 today ) signing bonus . Koufax planned to use the signing bonus as tuition to finish his university education , if his baseball career failed . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 = = = Early years ( 1955 – 60 ) = = = 
 Because Koufax 's signing bonus was greater than $ 4 @,@ 000 ( $ 35 @,@ 000 today ) , he was known as a bonus baby . This forced the Dodgers to keep him on the major league roster for at least two years before he could be sent to the minors . To make room for him , the Dodgers optioned their future Hall of Fame manager , Tommy Lasorda , to the Montreal Royals of the International League . Lasorda would later joke that it took Koufax to keep him off the Dodger pitching staff . 
 Koufax made his major league debut on June 24 , 1955 against the Milwaukee Braves , with the Dodgers trailing 7 – 1 in the fifth inning . Johnny Logan , the first batter Koufax faced , hit a bloop single . Eddie Mathews bunted , and Koufax threw the ball into center field . Koufax walked Hank Aaron on four pitches to load the bases , then struck out Bobby Thomson on a full count . 
 Koufax 's first start was on July 6 . He lasted only 4 2 ⁄ 3 innings , giving up eight walks . He did not start again for almost two months , but on August 27 , Koufax threw a two @-@ hit , 7 – 0 complete game shutout against the Cincinnati Reds for his first major league win . Koufax made only 12 appearances in 1955 , pitching 41 2 ⁄ 3 innings and walking almost as many men ( 28 ) as he struck out ( 30 ) . His only other win in 1955 was also a shutout . 
 During the fall , he enrolled in the Columbia University School of General Studies , which offered night classes in architecture . The Dodgers won the 1955 World Series for the first title in franchise history , but Koufax did not appear in the series . After the final out of Game Seven , Koufax drove to Columbia to attend class . 
 The year 1956 was not very different from 1955 for Koufax . Despite the blazing speed of his fastball , Koufax continued to struggle with his control . He saw little work , pitching only 58 @.@ 7 innings with a 4 @.@ 91 ERA , 29 walks and 30 strikeouts . When Koufax allowed baserunners , he was rarely permitted to finish the inning . Teammate Joe Pignatano said that , as soon as Koufax threw a couple of balls in a row , Alston would signal for a replacement to start warming up in the bullpen . Jackie Robinson , in his final season , clashed with Alston on Koufax 's usage . Robinson saw that Koufax was talented and had flashes of brilliance , and objected to Koufax being benched for weeks at a time . 
 To prepare for the 1957 season , the Dodgers sent Koufax to Puerto Rico to play winter ball . On May 15 , the restriction on sending Koufax down to the minors was lifted . Alston gave him a chance to justify his place on the major league roster by giving him the next day 's start . Facing the Chicago Cubs at Wrigley Field , Koufax struck out 13 while pitching his first complete game in almost two years . For the first time in his career , he was in the starting rotation , but only for two weeks . Despite winning three of his next five with a 2 @.@ 90 ERA , Koufax didn 't get another start for 45 days . In that start , he struck out 11 in seven innings , but got a no @-@ decision . On September 29 , Koufax became the last man ever to pitch for the Brooklyn Dodgers before their move to Los Angeles , by throwing an inning of relief in the final game of the season . 
 Over the next three seasons , Koufax was in and out of the Dodger starting rotation due to injuries . In 1958 , he began 7 – 3 , but sprained his ankle in a collision at first base , finishing the season at 11 – 11 and leading the NL in wild pitches . In June 1959 , Koufax set the record for a night game with 16 strikeouts . On August 31 , 1959 , he surpassed his career high with 18 strikeouts , setting the NL record and tying Bob Feller 's major league record for strikeouts in one game . 
 In 1959 , the Dodgers won a close pennant race against the Braves and the Giants , then beat the Chicago White Sox in the World Series . Koufax pitched two perfect relief innings in the Series opener , though they came after the Dodgers were already behind 11 – 0 . Alston gave him the start in the fifth game , at the Los Angeles Coliseum in front of 92 @,@ 706 fans . Koufax allowed only one run in seven innings , but lost the 1 – 0 game when Nellie Fox scored on a double play . Returning to Chicago , the Dodgers won the sixth game and the Series . 
 In early 1960 , Koufax asked Dodgers GM Buzzie Bavasi to trade him because he wasn 't getting enough playing time . By the end of 1960 , after going 8 – 13 , Koufax was thinking about quitting baseball to devote himself to an electronics business that he 'd invested in . After the last game of the season , he threw his gloves and spikes into the trash . <unk> Kawano , the clubhouse supervisor , retrieved the equipment to return to Koufax the following year ( or to somebody else if Koufax did not return to play ) . 
 = = = Domination ( 1961 – 64 ) = = = 
 = = = = 1961 season = = = = 
 Koufax tried one more year of baseball and showed up for the 1961 season in better condition than he had in previous years . Years later he recalled , " That winter was when I really started working out . I started running more . I decided I was really going to find out how good I can be . " During spring training , Dodger scout Kenny Myers discovered a hitch in Koufax 's windup : he 'd rear back so far that his vision was obstructed and he couldn 't see the target . 
 A day later , Koufax was pitching for the " B team " in Orlando . Teammate Ed <unk> missed the flight , so Koufax was told he would need to pitch at least seven innings . In the first inning , Koufax walked the bases loaded on 12 straight pitches . Catcher Norm Sherry advised Koufax to throw slightly less hard in order to improve his control . The advice worked , as Koufax struck out the side , going on to pitch seven no @-@ hit innings . 
 It was the beginning of Koufax 's breakout season . Posting an 18 – 13 record for the Dodgers in 1961 , Koufax led the league with 269 strikeouts , breaking Christy Mathewson 's 58 @-@ year @-@ old NL mark of 267 . Koufax was selected as an All @-@ Star for the first time and made two All @-@ Star Game appearances ; MLB held two All @-@ Star games from 1959 through 1962 . He faced only one batter in the 9th inning in the first game , giving up a hit to Al Kaline and he pitched two scoreless innings in the second game . 
 = = = = 1962 season = = = = 
 In 1962 , the Dodgers moved from the Los Angeles Coliseum , which had a 250 @-@ foot left field line , to pitcher @-@ friendly Dodger Stadium . The new park had a large foul territory and a comparatively poor hitting background . Koufax was an immediate beneficiary of the change , lowering his home ERA from 4 @.@ 29 to 1 @.@ 75 . On June 30 against the expansion New York Mets , Koufax threw his first no @-@ hitter . In the first inning of that game , Koufax struck out three batters on nine pitches to become the sixth National League pitcher and the 11th pitcher in Major League history to accomplish a nine @-@ pitch / three @-@ strikeout half @-@ inning . With the no @-@ hitter , a 4 @-@ 2 record , 73 strikeouts , and a 1 @.@ 23 ERA for June , he was named Player of the Month . It would be the only time in his career he earned this distinction . 
 Koufax had his strong season despite an injured pitching hand . While batting in April , Koufax had been jammed by a pitch from Earl Francis . A numbness developed in Koufax 's index finger on his left hand , and the finger became cold and white . Koufax was pitching better than ever , however , so he ignored the problem , hoping that the condition would clear up . By July , though , his entire hand was becoming numb and he was unable to complete some games . In a start in Cincinnati , his finger split open after one inning . A vascular specialist determined that Koufax had a crushed artery in his palm . Ten days of experimental medicine successfully reopened the artery . Koufax finally was able to pitch again in September , when the team was locked in a tight pennant race with the Giants . But after the long layoff , Koufax was ineffective in three appearances as the Giants caught the Dodgers at the end of the regular season , forcing a three @-@ game playoff . 
 The night before the National League playoffs began , Manager Walter Alston asked Koufax if he could start the first game the next day . With an overworked pitching staff , there was no one else , as Don Drysdale and Johnny Podres had pitched the prior two days . Koufax obliged . Koufax later said , " I had nothing at all . " He was knocked out in the second inning , after giving up home runs to Hall of Famer Willie Mays and Jim Davenport . After winning the second game of the series , the Dodgers blew a 4 – 2 lead in the ninth inning of the deciding third game , losing the pennant . 
 = = = = 1963 season = = = = 
 In 1963 , Major League Baseball expanded the strike zone . Compared to the previous season , National League walks fell 13 percent , strikeouts increased six percent , the league batting average fell from .261 to .245 , and runs fell 15 percent . Koufax , who had reduced his walks allowed per nine innings to 3 @.@ 4 in 1961 and 2 @.@ 8 in 1962 , reduced his walk rate further to 1 @.@ 7 in 1963 , which ranked fifth in the league . The top pitchers of the era – Don Drysdale , Juan Marichal , Jim Bunning , Bob Gibson , Warren Spahn , and above all Koufax – significantly reduced the walks @-@ given @-@ up @-@ to @-@ batters @-@ faced ratio for 1963 , and subsequent years . 
 On May 11 , Koufax no @-@ hit the San Francisco Giants 8 @-@ 0 , besting future Hall of Fame pitcher Juan Marichal — himself a no @-@ hit pitcher a month later , on June 15 . Koufax carried a perfect game into the eighth inning against the powerful Giants lineup , including future Hall of Famers Willie Mays , Willie McCovey , and Orlando Cepeda . He walked Ed Bailey on a 3 @-@ and @-@ 2 pitch in the 8th , and pinch @-@ hitter McCovey on four pitches in the 9th , before closing out the game . As the Dodgers won the pennant , Koufax won the pitchers ' Triple Crown , leading the league in wins ( 25 ) , strikeouts ( 306 ) and ERA ( 1 @.@ 88 ) . Koufax threw 11 shutouts , setting a new record for shutouts by a left @-@ handed pitcher that stands to this day ( the previous record of 9 shutouts had been held by Babe Ruth for nearly 50 years ) . Only Bob Gibson , a right @-@ hander , has thrown more shutouts ( 13 ) since , and that was in 1968 , " the year of the pitcher . " 
 Koufax won the NL MVP Award and the Hickok Belt , and was the first @-@ ever unanimous selection for the Cy Young Award . 
 Facing the Yankees in the 1963 World Series , Koufax beat Whitey Ford 5 – 2 in Game 1 and struck out 15 batters @-@ including the first 5 , breaking Carl Erskine 's decade @-@ old record of 14 ( Gibson would break Koufax 's record by striking out 17 Detroit Tigers in the 1968 World Series opener ) . After seeing Koufax 's Game 1 performance , Yogi Berra said , " I can see how he won 25 games . What I don 't understand is how he lost five , " to which Maury Wills responded , " He didn 't . We lost them for him . " In Game 4 , Koufax completed the Dodgers ' series sweep with a 2 – 1 victory over Ford , clinching the Series MVP Award for his performance . 
 = = = = 1964 season = = = = 
 Koufax 's 1964 season started with great expectations . On April 18 , he struck out three batters on nine pitches in the third inning of a 3 – 0 loss to the Cincinnati Reds , becoming the only National League pitcher to have two nine @-@ pitch / three @-@ strikeout half @-@ innings . On April 22 , however , he felt something " let go " in his arm . Koufax ended up getting three cortisone shots for his sore elbow , and missed three starts . 
 On June 4 , playing at Connie Mack Stadium against the Phillies , Koufax walked Richie Allen on a very close full @-@ count pitch in the fourth inning . Allen , who was thrown out trying to steal second , was the only Phillie to reach base that day . With his third no @-@ hitter in three years , Koufax became only the second pitcher of the modern era ( after Bob Feller ) to pitch three no @-@ hitters . 
 Koufax jammed his pitching arm in August while diving back to second base to beat a pick @-@ off throw . He managed to pitch and win two more games . However , the morning after his 19th win , a shutout in which he struck out 13 batters , he could not straighten his arm . He was diagnosed by Dodgers ' team physician Robert Kerlan with traumatic arthritis . With the Dodgers out of the pennant race , the book was closed on Koufax and his 19 – 5 record . 
 = = = Playing in pain ( 1965 – 66 ) = = = 
 = = = = 1965 season = = = = 
 The 1965 season brought more obstacles for Koufax . On March 31 , the morning after pitching a complete spring training game , Koufax awoke to find that his entire left arm was black and blue from hemorrhaging . Koufax returned to Los Angeles to consult with Kerlan , who advised Koufax that he would be lucky to be able to pitch once a week . Kerlan also told Koufax that he would eventually lose full use of his arm . Koufax agreed not to throw at all between games — a resolution that lasted only one start . To get himself through the games he pitched in , Koufax resorted to <unk> with codeine for the pain , which he took every night and sometimes during the fifth inning . He also took <unk> for inflammation , applied capsaicin @-@ based <unk> ointment ( called " atomic balm " by baseball players ) before each game , and soaked his arm in a tub of ice afterwards . 
 Despite the constant pain in his pitching elbow , Koufax pitched 335 ⅔ innings and led the Dodgers to another pennant . He finished the year by winning his second pitchers ' Triple Crown , leading the league in wins ( 26 ) , ERA ( 2 @.@ 04 ) and strikeouts ( 382 ; the highest modern day total at the time . Nolan Ryan struck out 383 batters in 1973 ) . Koufax captured his second unanimous Cy Young Award . Koufax held batters to 5 @.@ 79 hits per nine innings , and allowed the fewest base runners per 9 innings in any season ever : 7 @.@ 83 , breaking his own record ( set two years earlier ) of 7 @.@ 96 . Koufax had 11 @-@ game winning streaks in both 1964 and 1965 . 
 = = = = Perfection = = = = 
 On September 9 , 1965 , Koufax became the sixth pitcher of the modern era , and eighth overall , to throw a perfect game , the first by a left @-@ hander since 1880 . The game was Koufax 's fourth no @-@ hitter , setting a Major League record ( subsequently broken by Nolan Ryan ) . Koufax struck out 14 batters , at the time the most recorded in a perfect game ( now tied by Matt Cain ) . The game also featured a quality performance by the opposing pitcher , Bob Hendley of the Cubs . Hendley pitched a one @-@ hitter and allowed only two batters to reach base . Both pitchers had no @-@ hitters intact until the seventh inning . 
 This remains the only nine @-@ inning major league game where the teams combined for just one hit . The game 's only run , scored by the Dodgers , was unearned . The Dodger run was scored without a recorded at bat — Lou Johnson walked , reached second on a sacrifice bunt , stole third , and scored when the throw to get him out at third went wild . 
 = = = = = World Series and Yom Kippur = = = = = 
 Koufax garnered headlines by declining to pitch Game 1 of the World Series because of his observance of the Jewish religious holiday of Yom Kippur . This decision garnered national attention as an example of conflict between professional pressures and personal religious beliefs . Don Drysdale pitched the opener , but was hit hard by the Minnesota Twins . 
 In Game 2 , Koufax pitched six innings , giving up two runs , but the Twins won the Game 5 – 1 and took an early 2 – 0 lead in the series . The Dodgers fought back in Games 3 and 4 , with wins by Claude Osteen and Drysdale . With the Series tied at 2 to 2 , Koufax pitched a complete game shutout in Game 5 for a 3 – 2 Dodgers lead as the Series returned to Minnesota 's Metropolitan Stadium for Game 6 . The Twins won Game 6 to force a seventh game . Starting Game 7 on just two days of rest , Koufax pitched through fatigue and arthritic pain . Despite giving up on his curveball early in the game after failing to get it over for strikes in the first two innings and pitching the rest of the game relying almost entirely on fastballs , he threw a three @-@ hit shutout to clinch the Series . The performance earned him his second World Series MVP award . Koufax also won the Hickok Belt a second time , the first time anyone had won the belt more than once . He was awarded Sports Illustrated magazine 's Sportsman of the Year award . 
 = = = = 1966 season = = = = 
 = = = = = <unk> = = = = = 
 Before the 1966 season began , Koufax and Drysdale met separately with Dodger GM Buzzie Bavasi to negotiate their contracts for the upcoming year . After Koufax 's meeting , he met Drysdale for dinner and complained that Bavasi was using Drysdale against him in the negotiations , asking , " How come you want that much when Drysdale only wants this much ? " Drysdale responded that Bavasi did the same thing with him , using Koufax against him . Drysdale 's first wife , Ginger Drysdale , suggested that they negotiate together to get what they wanted . They demanded $ 1 million ( $ 7 @,@ 290 @,@ 000 today ) , divided equally over the next three years , or $ 167 @,@ 000 ( $ 1 @,@ 218 @,@ 000 today ) each for the next three seasons . Both players were represented by an entertainment lawyer , J. William Hayes , which was unusual during an era when players were not represented by agents . At the time , Willie Mays was Major League Baseball 's highest paid player at $ 125 @,@ 000 ( $ 912 @,@ 000 today ) per year and multi @-@ year contracts were very unusual . 
 Koufax and Drysdale did not report to spring training in February . Instead , they both signed to appear in the movie Warning Shot , starring David Janssen . Drysdale was to play a TV commentator and Koufax a detective . Meanwhile , the Dodgers waged a public relations battle against them . After four weeks , Koufax gave Drysdale the go @-@ ahead to negotiate new deals for both of them . Koufax ended up getting $ 125 @,@ 000 and Drysdale $ 110 @,@ 000 ( $ 802 @,@ 000 today ) . They rejoined the team in the last week of spring training . In April 1966 , Kerlan told Koufax it was time to retire and that his arm could not take another season . Koufax kept Kerlan 's advice to himself and went out every fourth day to pitch . He ended up pitching 323 innings , a 27 – 9 record , and a 1 @.@ 73 ERA . Since then , no left @-@ hander has had more wins , nor a lower ERA , in a season ( Phillies pitcher Steve Carlton did match the 27 @-@ win mark in 1972 ) . In the final game of the regular season , the Dodgers had to beat the Phillies to win the pennant . In the second game of a doubleheader , Koufax faced Jim Bunning for the second time that season , in a match @-@ up between perfect game winners . Koufax , on two days rest , pitched a complete game , 6 – 3 victory to clinch the pennant . He started 41 games ( for the second year in a row ) ; only two left @-@ handers started as many games in any season over the ensuing years through 2013 . 
 = = = = = Season = = = = = 
 The Dodgers went on to face the Baltimore Orioles in the 1966 World Series . Game 2 marked Koufax 's third start in eight days . Koufax pitched well enough — Baltimore first baseman Boog Powell told Koufax 's biographer , Jane Leavy , " He might have been hurtin ' but he was <unk> ' " — but three errors by Dodger center fielder Willie Davis in the fifth inning produced three unearned runs . Baltimore 's Jim Palmer pitched a four @-@ hitter and the Dodgers ended up losing the game 6 – 0 . Alston lifted Koufax at the end of the sixth inning with the idea of getting him extra rest before pitching a potential fifth Series game . It never happened ; the Dodgers were swept in four , not scoring a single run in the last three . After the World Series , Koufax announced his retirement due to his arthritic condition . 
 = = = Career overall = = = 
 In his 12 @-@ season career , Koufax had a 165 – 87 record with a 2 @.@ 76 ERA , 2 @,@ 396 strikeouts , 137 complete games , and 40 shutouts . He was the first pitcher to average fewer than seven hits allowed per nine innings pitched in his career ( 6 @.@ 79 ) and to strike out more than nine batters ( 9 @.@ 28 ) per nine innings pitched in his career . He also became the 2nd pitcher in baseball history to have two games with 18 or more strikeouts , and the first to have eight games with 15 or more strikeouts . In his last ten seasons , from 1957 to 1966 , batters hit .203 against Koufax , with a .271 on @-@ base percentage and a .315 slugging average . 
 Koufax 's postseason record is impressive : a 4 – 3 won @-@ lost record with a 0 @.@ 95 earned run average , in four World Series . He is on the very short list of pitchers who retired with more career strikeouts than innings pitched . Koufax was selected as an All @-@ Star for six consecutive seasons and made seven out of eight All @-@ Star Game appearances those seasons ( not selected for 2nd All @-@ Star Game in 1962 ) . He pitched 61 ⁄ 3 innings in four All @-@ Star games including being the starting pitcher for 3 innings in the 1966 All @-@ Star Game . 
 Koufax was the first pitcher to win multiple Cy Young Awards , as well as the first pitcher to win a Cy Young Award by a unanimous vote . He is also the only pitcher to win three Cy Young Awards in the era in which the award was presented to one pitcher across the board , rather than one in each major league , and one of three Dodgers pitchers to win the one @-@ across @-@ the @-@ board Cy Young Award . ( The others were Don Newcombe , the first Cy Young winner in 1956 , and Don Drysdale in 1962 . ) Each of Koufax 's three Cy Young Awards were by unanimous vote . Koufax and Juan Marichal are the only two pitchers in the post @-@ war era ( 1946 @-@ date ) to have more than one 25 @-@ win season , with each pitcher recording three . 
 Among NL pitchers with at least 2 @,@ 000 innings pitched who have debuted since 1913 , he has the highest career winning percentage ( <unk> ) and had the lowest career ERA ( 2 @.@ 76 ) until surpassed by Tom Seaver , whose NL career mark is 2 @.@ 73 . While Seaver ended his career with an overall career ERA of 2 @.@ 86 , this included three seasons in the American League . Seaver passed Koufax 's record in 1974 when he ended the season with more than 2 @,@ 000 NL innings and an ERA of 2 @.@ 47 . Koufax is currently second on the list of overall career ERA in the live @-@ ball era , surpassed only by Whitey Ford ( 2 @.@ 75 ) . Through 2010 , he was first all @-@ time in career strikeouts ( ahead of Ken Holtzman ) , second in wins ( behind Holtzman ) and ERA ( behind Barney <unk> ) , and seventh in games pitched ( behind Alan Levine ) among Jewish major league baseball players . 
 = = Pitching style = = 
 Whereas many pitchers throw with a three @-@ quarter or sidearm motion , Koufax threw with a pronounced over @-@ the @-@ top arm action . This may have increased his velocity , but reduced the lateral movement on his pitches , especially movement away from left @-@ handed hitters . Most of his velocity came from his strong legs and back , combined with a high kicking wind @-@ up and long forward stretch toward the plate . Throughout his career , Koufax relied mostly on two pitches . His four @-@ seam fastball gave batters the impression of rising as it approached them , due to <unk> . It not only appeared to move very late but also might move two or three distinct times . His overhand curveball , spun with the middle finger , dropped vertically 12 to 24 inches due to his arm action . Rob Neyer called it the best curve of all time . He also occasionally threw a changeup and a forkball . 
 At the beginning of his career , Koufax worked with coaches to eliminate his tendency to " tip " pitches ( i.e. reveal which pitch was coming due to variations in his wind @-@ up ) . Late in his career , and especially as his arm problems continued , this variation — usually in the position he held his hands at the top of the wind @-@ up — became even more pronounced . Good hitters could often predict what pitch was coming , but were still unable to hit it . 
 = = Post @-@ playing career = = 
 In 1967 , he signed a 10 @-@ year contract with NBC for US $ 1 million ( $ 7 @,@ 097 @,@ 000 today ) to be a broadcaster on the Saturday Game of the Week . He quit after six years , just prior to the start of the 1973 season . 
 Koufax married Anne Widmark , daughter of movie star Richard Widmark , in 1969 ; the couple was divorced in the 1980s . He then remarried and divorced again in the 1990s . 
 In his first year of eligibility in 1972 , Koufax was elected to the Baseball Hall of Fame , just weeks after his 36th birthday . His election made him the Hall 's youngest member ever elected , five months younger than Lou Gehrig upon his election in 1939 , though because the 1972 induction ceremony was nearly eight months after the election , Koufax 's age at induction was slightly higher than Gehrig 's , making Gehrig the youngest player ever inducted . On June 4 of that same year , Koufax 's uniform number 32 was retired alongside those of Dodger greats Roy Campanella ( 39 ) and Jackie Robinson ( 42 ) . 
 The Dodgers hired Koufax to be a minor league pitching coach in 1979 . He resigned in 1990 , saying he wasn 't earning his keep , but most observers blamed it on his uneasy relationship with manager Tommy Lasorda . Koufax returned to the Dodger organization in 2004 when the Dodgers were sold to Frank McCourt . 
 In 1999 , The Sporting News placed Koufax at number 26 on its list of " Baseball 's 100 Greatest Players . " That same year , he was named as one of the 30 players on the Major League Baseball All @-@ Century Team . Although he rarely makes public appearances , he went to Turner Field in Atlanta for the introduction ceremony before Game 2 of the 1999 World Series . Koufax threw out a ceremonial first pitch at opening day 2008 at Dodger Stadium , to help commemorate the Dodgers ' 50th Anniversary in Los Angeles . 
 Koufax was the final player chosen in the inaugural Israel Baseball League draft in April 2007 . Koufax , 71 , was picked by the Modi 'in Miracle . " His selection is a tribute to the esteem with which he is held by everyone associated with this league " , said Art <unk> , who managed the Miracle . " It 's been 41 years between starts for him . If he 's rested and ready to take the mound again , we want him on our team . " Koufax declined to join the Miracle . 
 Currently , Koufax serves as a member of the advisory board of the Baseball Assistance Team , a 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) non @-@ profit organization dedicated to helping former Major League , Minor League , and Negro League players through financial and medical difficulties . 
 On January 23 , 2013 the Dodgers hired Koufax as a Special Advisor to team Chairman Mark Walter . Koufax worked with the pitchers during spring training and will consult during the season . On April 1 , 2013 , Koufax threw out the first pitch during ceremonies at Dodger Stadium . 
 On July 14 , 2015 , before the 2015 MLB All @-@ Star Game in Cincinnati , Koufax was introduced as one of the four best living players ( as selected by the fans of major league baseball ) , along with Willie Mays , Hank Aaron and Johnny Bench . He threw the ceremonial first pitch to Bench from in front of the base of the mound . 
 = = Acting roles = = 
 Koufax appeared on television from 1959 through 1962 . He was cast as Ben Cassidy in the 1959 episode " Too Smart to Live " of the syndicated western series , Shotgun Slade , starring Scott Brady . In 1960 , he played the role of " Johnny " in the episode <unk> of the ABC / Warner Brothers western series , Colt .45 , with Donald May as Sam Colt , Jr . He made minor appearances in two other ABC / WB productions , 77 Sunset Strip and Bourbon Street Beat . 
 Koufax also appeared as himself along with several Dodger teammates in an episode of Mister Ed entitled " Leo Durocher Meets Mister Ed " in September 1963 . 
 Koufax portrayed himself on CBS 's Dennis the Menace in the 1962 episode Dennis and the Dodger . He also appeared as himself on NBC 's detective series , Michael Shayne in the 1961 episode entitled " Strike Out " . 
 = = White House recognition = = 
 On May 27 , 2010 , Koufax was included among a group of prominent Jewish Americans at the first White House reception in honor of Jewish American Heritage Month . U.S. President Barack Obama recognized how well @-@ known Koufax 's decision not to play on the Jewish holy day of Yom Kippur was in a humorous mention in his welcome remarks . Saying that he had " something in common " with Koufax , President Obama continued : " He can 't pitch on Yom Kippur . I can 't pitch . " The President also directly acknowledged the high esteem in which Koufax is held : 
 " This is a pretty fancy ... pretty distinguished group " , he said of the invited guests , which included members of the House and Senate , two justices of the Supreme Court , Olympic athletes , entrepreneurs , Rabbinical scholars , " and Sandy Koufax . " The mention of his name brought the biggest cheer at the event . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = = Books = = = 
 Jews and Baseball : The Post @-@ Greenberg Years , 1949 – 2008 , Burton Alan Boxerman , Benita W. Boxerman , McFarland , 2010 , ISBN 0 @-@ 7864 @-@ <unk> @-@ 7 
 The Baseball Talmud : The Definitive Position @-@ by @-@ Position Ranking of Baseball 's Chosen Players , Howard <unk> , Collins , 2009 , ISBN 0 @-@ 06 @-@ <unk> @-@ 5 
 The New Big Book of Jewish Baseball : An Illustrated Encyclopedia & Anecdotal History , Peter S. Horvitz , Joachim Horvitz , Perseus Distribution Services , 2007 , ISBN 1 @-@ 56171 @-@ 821 @-@ 1 
 Jews and Baseball : Entering the American mainstream , 1871 – 1948 , Burton Alan Boxerman , Benita W. Boxerman , McFarland , 2006 , ISBN 0 @-@ 7864 @-@ <unk> @-@ 7 
 The Big Book of Jewish Baseball : An Illustrated Encyclopedia & Anecdotal History , Peter S. Horvitz , Joachim Horvitz , SP Books , 2001 , ISBN 1 @-@ 56171 @-@ 973 @-@ 0 
 The Jewish Baseball Hall of Fame : a Who 's Who of Baseball Stars , Erwin Lynn , <unk> Publishers , 1986 , ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 17 @-@ 2 
 Jewish Baseball Stars , Harold Uriel <unk> , Meir Z. <unk> , Hippocrene Books , 1984 , ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 898 @-@ 0 
 " Sandy Koufax : Pitcher Nonpareil and Perfect Gentleman " . In American Jews and America 's Game : Voices of a Growing Legacy in Baseball , Larry <unk> , University of Nebraska Press , 2013 , ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 8032 @-@ <unk> @-@ 5 . This chapter in <unk> 's history discusses Koufax 's American , Jewish , baseball , and life experiences from youth to the present . 
 = Cyclone Amara = 
 Cyclone Amara brought stormy conditions to Rodrigues in December 2013 . Amara was the first named storm in the southwest Indian Ocean during the later half of 2013 , and developed from a disturbance within the monsoon trough on December 14 . The following day , the system attained tropical depression status . Despite its ill @-@ defined organization , the depression was able to continue strengthening , reaching moderate tropical storm status on December 16 as it tracked southwest . Situated in a favorable atmospheric environment , a period of rapid intensification ensued after Amara reached tropical cyclone status on December 18 . After fluctuating in strength , the cyclone peaked with maximum sustained winds of 205 km / h ( 125 mph ) and a minimum barometric pressure of 933 mbar ( hPa ; 27 @.@ 55 inHg ) on December 21 , making it an intense tropical cyclone based on the intensity scale utilized by Météo @-@ France . Shortly after , wind shear strengthened as Amara tracked southeast , resulting in a weakening phase . The shearing effects caused the cyclone to rapidly decay , and by December 23 , Amara degenerated into a remnant low . 
 Amara was initially expected to track directly over the island of Rodrigues , prompting widespread precautionary measures and resulting in the issuance of a Class 4 warning – denoting a warning of highest urgency – by the Mauritius Meteorological Services . Though the tropical cyclone eventually passed to the east of the island , Amara was close enough to Rodrigues to severely effect the island . Strong winds , peaking at a measured 152 km / h ( 94 mph ) in Pointe Canon , resulted in widespread infrastructural damage , including the tearing of metal sheeting and uprooting of trees . Widespread power outage cut power to 12 @,@ 000 homes and shut off communications to and from the island . Heavy rains produced by Amara also triggered flooding in some locations and caused soil erosion . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 The origin of Amara can be traced back to an area of low pressure embedded within a monsoon trough southeast of Diego Garcia on December 13 , 2013 . Computer models suggested that surrounding atmospheric conditions would later become more conducive for tropical cyclogenesis . Over the course of the day , the localized area of circulation remained sheared , though convection remained persistent . Despite the hindering atmospheric environment , the system organized faster than anticipated , and was classified as a tropical disturbance by Météo @-@ France at 1200 UTC on December 14 . Shortly after development , the disturbance underwent a reformation phase and consequently a new center of circulation developed , allowing the system to reach tropical depression status early on December 15 . Nonetheless , the storm 's overall structure remained ill @-@ defined due to the presence of wind shear and multiple mesovortices . 
 At 1330 UTC on December 16 , the Mauritius Meteorological Services designated the system as a moderate tropical storm , thus assigning it the name Amara . At the time the storm had a minimum barometric pressure estimated at 995 mbar ( hPa ; 29 @.@ 39 inHg ) . During the subsequent hours , the storm began to slowly track west @-@ southwest under the periphery of a nearby subtropical ridge . Amara 's circulation center consolidated and rainbands became more tightly wrapped around the center , at which time the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) began to monitor the system . Late on December 17 , Amara began to develop an eye , observable via microwave imagery . Based on the antecedent developments , Météo @-@ France upgraded the system to severe tropical storm intensity at 0000 UTC the following day . Nine hours later , the JTWC upgraded Amara to tropical cyclone intensity , with Météo @-@ France following suit three hours later . Situated in a location with low vertical wind shear and outspread outflow , Amara was forecast to continue strengthening , though at the same time the cyclone was expected to move very slowly due to its interaction with weak steering currents in between two subtropical ridges . Rapid intensification ensued throughout the latter hours of December 18 , coinciding with the development of a ragged eye feature within the tropical cyclone on infrared imagery . Météo @-@ France upgraded Amara to intense tropical cyclone status at 0000 UTC on December 19 . By this time the storm 's central pressure had fallen to 944 mbar ( hPa ; 27 @.@ 88 inHg ) . Shortly after , however , Amara 's once well @-@ defined outflow pattern became suppressed , resulting in a slight weakening and a downgrade from intense tropical cyclone status just twelve hours later . 
 This weakening phase was brief , and shortly thereafter Amara was reclassified as an intense tropical cyclone on December 21 . At 0600 UTC that day , Amara reached its peak intensity as an intense tropical cyclone with maximum sustained winds of 205 km / h ( 125 mph ) and a minimum pressure of 933 mbar ( hPa ; 27 @.@ 55 inHg ) . Following peak intensity , an approaching upper @-@ level , mid @-@ latitude trough increased wind shear and forced the storm towards the southeast , resulting in the cyclone weakening . By 0600 UTC the next day , Météo @-@ France determined that Amara had weakened below intense tropical cyclone status . The strong wind shear continued to take its toll on the cyclone , stripping away and exposing Amara 's low @-@ level circulation center away from the rest of its associated convection . At 1200 UTC on December 22 , Amara weakened to severe tropical storm intensity , and was later downgraded further to tropical depression intensity the following day . Amara 's downgrade to such an intensity marked the cessation of Météo @-@ France 's tropical cyclone bulletins . The remnant vortex associated with Amara continued to persist over the next few days and curved westward , though it lacked persistent convection . The remnant circulation gradually became increasingly diffused and was last noted by Météo @-@ France at 1200 UTC on December 28 . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 Due to Amara 's projected path near Rodrigues , the Mauritius Meteorological Services issued a " Class 1 " warning for the island early on December 19 , following the cyclone 's upgrade to intense tropical cyclone intensity . Hours later , the meteorological service upgraded their warning to a " Class 2 . " Based on forecasts that continued to indicate that Amara would track directly over Rodrigues , the Mauritius Meteorological Services issued a " Class 3 warning " in the morning hours of December 20 , describing Amara as a " real threat for Rodrigues . " This resulted in a complete suspension of flights to and from the island . These cancellations were attributable to Air Mauritius , which was the only air carrier for Rodrigues . Fishing boats were rerouted back to the island and refugee centers readied their resources in preparation for the tropical cyclone . Large scale precautionary measures took place in Port Mathurin . On December 21 , Mauritius Meteorological Services issued their highest applicable cyclone warning , a " Class 4 warning , " for Rodrigues . 
 Rodrigues began to experience the effects of Amara on December 20 , when strong gusts caused by the tropical cyclone swept across the island . These initial winds uprooted trees and toppled utility poles , resulting in power outage . At the height of power outages , over 12 @,@ 000 households were without power , primarily in Port Sud @-@ Est , Mount Lubin , and Rivière @-@ Cocos . By the afternoon of December 22 , only 20 % of homes had access to electricity . Some of the fallen trees rendered roads impassable . Heavy rains caused some creeks to overflow their banks , and riffles became impassable . The rainfall also caused extensive soil erosion . Amara also triggered a strong storm surge , resulting in coastal flooding . Despite the heavy rainfall , total precipitation amounts remained relatively low , peaking at 78 mm ( 3 @.@ 07 in ) in Citronelle . On December 21 , a wind gust of 152 km / h ( 94 mph ) was reported in the locality of Pointe Canon , which was the highest wind measurement recorded in associated with Amara . Another station at Sir Gaëtan Duval Airport reported a similarly strong wind gust clocked at 135 km / h ( 84 mph ) . The strong winds tore metal sheets off of buildings and cut telecommunications between Rodrigues and the rest of the world . Despite the widespread precautionary measures taken beforehand , Port Mathurin suffered marginal impacts . Following the storm , local police groups and the Special Mobile Force were mobilized in order to assist in relief efforts . Technicians from the Mauritius Central Electricity Board were dispatched to resolve power issues . 
 = Whale tail = 
 Whale tail is the Y @-@ shaped waistband of a thong or G @-@ string when visible above the waistline of low @-@ rise jeans , shorts , or a skirt that resembles a whale 's tail . Intentionally or unintentionally , a whale tail is exposed above the trousers mostly when sitting or bending , or even while standing . The frequency or occasion depends on the style of trousers , the style of underwear , and the way they are worn . Displaying whale tails became popular in the early 2000s , together with the rise of low @-@ rise jeans and thong underwear . The trend , popularized by a number of female celebrities including WWE female wrestler Amy Dumas aka Lita , Christina Aguilera , Victoria Beckham , Mariah Carey , Melanie Blatt , Paris Hilton , Jordan , Anna Kournikova , and Britney Spears , waned within the decade . 
 Specially designed trousers like low @-@ rise jeans or hip @-@ huggers and higher cut thongs led to greater exposure of the whale tail . The trend was also associated with the trend of sporting lower back tattoos . The word was selected by the American Dialect Society in January 2006 as the " most creative word " of 2005 . The concepts of visible panty line , buttock cleavage , and sagging are closely related to the whale tail . 
 = = History = = 
 The rising popularity of low @-@ rise jeans led to increased exposure of thong tops in the early 2000s , which quickly became mainstream as a Gucci model revealed one on the catwalk , Melanie Blatt of All Saints was photographed showing her thong as she got out of a taxi , and Victoria Beckham suggested that her husband enjoyed her wearing her G @-@ strings around the home . Britney Spears has been portrayed as a major contributor to the whale tail 's popularity . Her whale tail display has been referred to in such creative literature books as Married to a Rock Star by <unk> Nugent , Thong on Fire by Noire , The Magical Breasts of Britney Spears by Ryan G. Van Cleave , and Off @-@ Color by Janet McDonald . The Oregonian , a Portland , Oregon , newspaper , wrote in 2004 that an abundance of whale tails had become a distraction on the campus . Social commentator Ann C. Hall identified this campus trend as an " apparent intersection between everyday campus fashion and soft porn " . The layered clothing trend of the early 2000s was partly led by the whale tail style that incorporates hip @-@ hugger jeans , crop tops and high riding thongs popularized by celebrities . 
 = = = Rise = = = 
 By the mid @-@ 2000s , whale tails became common to celebrities , providing opportunities to the paparazzi . Whale tail display spawned a new accessory — clip @-@ on jewelry for the visible straps . Jess Cartner @-@ Morley of The Guardian claimed that following pop stars in the hipster trousers gave rise to the " low @-@ slung jeans , whale @-@ tail G @-@ string era " . On 17 September 2004 , a writer for the Chicago Sun @-@ Times stated , " Britney Spears and Christina Aguilera regularly were photographed with thong straps riding high above their low @-@ rise jeans . And even usually tasteful Halle Berry succumbed to the thong craze by attending an awards show with bejeweled thong straps peeking out from above her miniskirt . " Actresses Gillian Anderson , Natalie Portman , Sarah Jessica Parker , Kim Cattrall and Tara Reid , MTV 's Molly Sims , model Kate Moss , singers Beyoncé Knowles , Mariah Carey , Jennifer Lopez , Janet Jackson , LeAnn Rimes and Britney Spears have been associated as propagators of the trend by the American Broadcasting Company . 
 In France , clothing brands started creating the thong or le string in styles that encourage a projection above low @-@ hung jeans , such as designs that had little jewels or luminous stars sewn into the rear . In India , thongs peeked out of low @-@ rise jeans in page three parties and university bashes . Indian model Shefali <unk> displayed a whale tail in the MTV <unk> @-@ winning music video " <unk> <unk> " and shot to fame and public debate in 2003 . In Japan , clothing company Sanna 's brought forward an extreme low @-@ rise hip @-@ hugging jeans design with built @-@ in thong whale tails . R & B artist Sisqó rhapsodized about whale tails in his " Thong Song " — " I like it when the beat goes da na da na / Baby make your booty go da na da na / Girl I know you wanna show da na da na / That thong th thong thong thong . " Pornographic film director Mike Metropolis made three films based on whale tails — Whale Tail ( 2005 ) , Whale Tail I ( 2005 ) and Whale Tail II ( 2006 ) — with Mark Ashley in the lead . Another movie titled Whale Tail : Thong Dreams was released in 2005 featuring Sunny Lane and Kirsten Price . In 2003 , web content developer Gavin Hamilton created the site whale @-@ <unk> with content featuring whale tail display . Since then the domain has commanded a fair fetching price . The website has been quoted by ABC Radio , NY Times , FHM ( UK ) and Fuel Magazine ( Australia ) , and has been nominated as a Best Adult Web Site by Australian Adult Industry Awards in 2008 . 
 = = = Legal debates = = = 
 In 2004 , Louisiana , USA State Representative Derrick Shepherd proposed a bill ( <unk> ) , also known as the Baggy Pants Bill to Louisiana House of Representatives . The bill proposed that " it shall be unlawful for any person to appear in public wearing his pants below his waist and thereby exposing his skin or intimate clothing " and that violators would be subjected to three eight @-@ hour days of community service and a fine of up to US $ 175 . The measure died in the face of opposition from the American Civil Liberties Union . The bill was proposed again in 2008 and was rejected by a state Senate panel . In two Louisiana towns , <unk> ( a maximum penalty of US $ 615 fine or up to six months in prison ) and Opelousas ( a maximum penalty of US $ 500 fine or up to six months in prison ) , wearing low slung pants that reveal buttock cleavage or undergarments is considered a misdemeanor . Garments that reveal underpants were banned in four other Louisiana towns including Alexandria and Shreveport , where violators face fines of US $ 150 or 15 days in jail , as well as Hawkinsville , Georgia . 
 In February 2005 , the Senate Courts of Justice Committee of Virginia voted unanimously in a hastily convened meeting against a bill proposed by Delegate Algie T. Howell Jr . ( Norfolk , Virginia ) to impose a US $ 50 fine on any person who publicly and intentionally " wears and displays his below @-@ waist undergarments , intended to cover a person 's intimate parts , in a lewd or indecent manner " in a public place . The bill ( <unk> ) , also known as the Droopy <unk> Bill , was earlier passed by Virginia House of Delegates by a 60 – 34 vote . Atlanta , Georgia , Dallas , Texas , Baltimore , Maryland , Charlotte , North Carolina , Yonkers , New York , Duncan , Oklahoma , Natchitoches , Louisiana , Stratford , Connecticut , Pine Bluff , Arkansas , and Trenton and Pleasantville of New Jersey , as well as three other Georgia towns including Rome Brunswick and Plains have seen attempts to ban underwear peeking over the pants . School dress codes sometimes also banned some low @-@ rising pants or visible underwear . 
 = = = Decline = = = 
 By the end of the decade whale tails suffered a bit of a backlash . Trinny Woodall , presenter of BBC1 's What Not to Wear , described women who wore thongs showing above their trousers as " disgusting " . Jessica Kaminsky wrote in I Hate the Gym , a lifestyle commentary , " I hate when girls let their ' whale tails ' creep out of their pants . " In 2007 , religious writer <unk> Bixler Lung wrote , " There is something wrong when Christian guys and girls want to run around with their underwear hanging out the top of their pants , or their thong strap sticking out the back of their low @-@ rise jeans . " In 2008 , model and reality TV star Jodie Marsh said , " Showing your thong is a bit old now . " 
 The trend of wearing whale tail @-@ revealing jeans started to dissipate somewhat in the mid 2000s when American clothing designers started shifting focus from low @-@ slung jeans and exposed midriffs to high @-@ waisted trousers and cardigans . Jess Cartner @-@ Morley , fashion writer of The Guardian , claimed that the whale tail and the muffin top ( the bulge of flesh hanging over the top of low @-@ rider jeans ) , " twin crimes of modern fashion " , had led to the decline in the popularity of hipster jeans . She quoted Louise <unk> , editor of the British edition of InStyle , as saying — " When a look goes too mainstream , people start wearing it badly . And then the really fashionable people run a mile " . While the thong still represented 24 % of the US $ 2 @.@ 5 billion annual market in women 's underwear , it stopped growing by end of 2004 . By 2007 , thongs were overtaken by <unk> and accounted for only 12 % of the panties market . Some vendors , including Victoria 's Secret and DKNY , started selling thongs that do not result in whale tails . Adam <unk> , founder of the lingerie line ADAM , said , " Women got tired of it . And they got sick and tired of seeing string hanging out of the top of every celebrity 's jeans . " 
 = = Socio @-@ cultural analysis = = 
 Attributing whale tails to mainstreaming of the sexualization of young women , The Press Democrat termed the trend as " stripper chic " . Post @-@ modern thinker Yasmin <unk> and co @-@ writers described the trend in Girlhood : Redefining the Limits as an attempt to redefine girlhood while acknowledging the debate around it . The book termed the trend as the " slut " look popularized by Britney Spears . Some experts even dubbed visible whale tails as " thong feminism " for young girls . Other experts accused marketers of " outrageous selling of sex to children " . 
 One conjecture assumes that the style of exposed thong may have " bubbled @-@ up " from the street level to the high streets , like the jeans and t @-@ shirt look of James Dean . Another assumes the fad was initiated by glamor model Jordan in England and singers Mariah Carey and Spears in the United States . The phenomenon has been compared to the phenomenon of visible bra straps . Saying that " just as Madonna made bras a public garment in the 1980s , Ms. Lewinsky , Paris Hilton and Britney Spears transformed women 's panties into a provocative garment intended for public display " , the New York Times claimed that the thong , with straps worn high over the hips and exposed by fashionable low @-@ rise jeans and " Juicy Couture " sweat pants , had become a public icon . 
 = = Word of the year = = 
 " Whale tail " was selected in January 2006 as the " most creative word " of 2005 by the American Dialect Society , a group of linguists , editors , and academics . It received 44 votes to " muffin top 's " 25 , " flee @-@ <unk> 's " ( a reference to runaway bride Jennifer Wilbanks ) 15 , and " <unk> 's " ( a very old Wollemi pine tree near Australia 's Blue Mountains ) 6 . 
 While discussing these new coinages , Sali <unk> , associate professor of linguistics at the University of Toronto , observed that young women in North America were ahead of young men as influencers . The use of the word to indicate an underwear phenomenon has shown up in serious mainstream news media , sometimes in reference to the pop stars who made the fashion trend popular . Wayne <unk> , member of the Georgia College and State University faculty and head of the New Word Committee of the Dialect Society , said about the happening , " Language is just going on its merry way , creating many new words . It 's time for men to win something . " 
 Though the word is not included in major formal dictionaries , web @-@ based user @-@ generated dictionaries like the Urban Dictionary ( which provides " pull me thong " as an alternative term for whale tail ) , the Double @-@ Tongued Dictionary and the Wiktionary , have entries for the word . The book compilation of Urban Dictionary describes the whale tail as " the shape formed when a G @-@ string rides up high over a woman 's pants or skirt " . The Dialect Society mentioned " longhorn " as an alternate term for the whale tail . A related term – sagging – implies the practice of wearing pants or shorts below the waist so as to reveal some or all of the wearer 's underwear . Another related term – buttock cleavage – implies a minor exposure of the buttocks and the gluteal cleft between them not covered by an underwear . A third related term – Visible Panty Line ( VPL ) – implies underwear becoming visible through clothes . 
 = Diva ( Ivy Queen album ) = 
 Diva is the third studio album by Puerto Rican reggaetón recording artist Ivy Queen . It was released on August 23 , 2003 and independently distributed by Real Music Group after being dropped from Sony Discos . The recording followed her two previous studio albums which were commercially unsuccessful and a hiatus from her musical career beginning in 1999 . It featured collaborations with Latin hip hop artists including Mexicano 777 , Bimbo and K @-@ 7 while the album 's production was handled by a variety of musical producers ; Luny Tunes , DJ Nelson , Noriega , and Iván Joy were enlisted , while DJ Adam produced a majority of the tracks . Lyrically , the album explored female empowerment , infidelity , heartbreak and love with " a veritable compendium of her artistic passion , femininity , and culture " . The musical styles of the recording alternate between reggaetón and hip @-@ hop while Queen experiments with R & B and pop balladry . 
 Diva spawned a total of seven singles : " Quiero Bailar " , " Quiero Saber " , " Papi Te Quiero " , " Guillaera " , " Tuya Soy " , " Tu No Puedes " , and " <unk> " , which were released over the course of three years . " Quiero Bailar " became a commercial success and her first big hit in the United States and Puerto Rico , while the other six singles failed to acquire chart success on national charts . Highly anticipated and acclaimed , Diva peaked at number twenty @-@ four on the Billboard Top Latin Albums chart , number eight on the Billboard Top Heatseekers chart for the South Atlantic area , number four on the Billboard Reggae Albums and number one on the Billboard Tropical Albums chart . It became the eighth best @-@ selling Tropical Album of 2004 , while the recording helped Queen to become the eighth best @-@ selling Tropical Artist of that year . The album was recognized as a " door @-@ opener " for reggaetón 's mainstream exposure in 2004 . 
 = = Background = = 
 After the failed commercial success of Ivy Queen 's first two studio albums , En Mi Imperio ( 1997 ) and The Original Rude Girl ( 1998 ) , she was dropped from the Sony label and took a hiatus from her musical career in 1999 . The 1999 single , " In The Zone " , a duet with Haitian singer Wyclef Jean , was a moderate success in the United States . The following single " Ritmo Latino " and its parent album , were overlooked by consumers and failed to chart . However , The Original Rude Girl was critically acclaimed by many including an editor for Allmusic who awarded the album four out of five stars and listed it as an selected " Allmusic Pick " . This occurred after she left Sony and stepped out of Wyclef Jean 's shadow . 
 In 2001 and 2002 , Queen began appearing on reggaetón compilation albums spawning hits like " Quiero Bailar " from The Majestic 2 and " Quiero Saber " from <unk> . In 2003 , Queen and her then @-@ husband Gran Omar signed with Real Music , an independent label based in Miami , Florida and established by Jorge Guadalupe and Anthony Pérez . They appeared on the label 's first album Jams Vol . 1 which Pérez released after several major record labels turned him down . She benefited from Pérez producing the " important reggaetón television show " The Roof , which aired on <unk> and detailed urban music and lifestyle by frequently appearing and performing on the show . 
 = = Recording and production = = 
 Recording sessions for the album began in 2000 and ended in 2003 in various recording studios . Queen recorded at After Dark Studios in Cartersville , Georgia ; Boricua Music Studios in Bridgeport , Connecticut ; Flow Music Studios in San Juan , Puerto Rico ; Imperio Music Studios in the Bronx , New York ; Los Angeles Recording in California ; The Lab Studios and Mad Jim Studios . Production of the album were handled by a variety of musical producers . Queen 's principal songwriter for her previous albums , DJ Nelson , produced the track " Quiero Saber " . Luny Tunes , Noriega , Iván Joy , Ecko , DJ Alex , DJ Eric , Rafi Mercenario , Tony " CD " Kelly and Omar Navarro also contribute to musical production while DJ Adam produced eight of the fifteen tracks . Collaborations on the album include " Guillaera " , " Money Making " , which also features rapper Japanese , the remix of " Babe " and " Quiero Saber " with her then @-@ husband Gran Omar ; " Sangre " with Mexicano 777 ; " Bounce " with Bimbo ; and " Dile Que Ya " with K @-@ 7 . 
 = = Release and promotion = = 
 The recording was released on August 19 , 2003 and independently distributed by Real Music Group . On January 27 , 2004 , Diva : Platinum Edition was released with remixes to songs on the standard edition . These include " Papi Te Quiero " , an English remix of " Papi Te Quiero " , a reggaetón remix of " Tu No Puedes " , " Quiero Saber " and " Quiero Bailar " . It was released in the United Kingdom on February 3 , 2004 . Queen embarked on a worldwide tour , the Reggaeton Tour 2004 in support for Diva . On one of the legs in Ecuador , she performed " Papi Te Quiero " and " Tu No Puedes " , which was her first South American tour . This followed presentations in Atlanta , Brooklyn and New York City where she was " designated as the Puerto Rico Youth God Mother of the National Puerto Rican Day Parade " in June 2004 . Often referring to herself as " la <unk> " ( bitch ) and " la <unk> " ( female mare ) , the latter " points to her calls of female sexual agency " , as this is similar to the metaphor " black stallion " for phallic potency . Queen desired to name the album La <unk> , however , Universal Music Latino would not sign off on the title as they considered it to be too threatening . 
 = = Composition = = 
 Diva is a mixture of " reggaetón and rap fusion " . The musical styles of the recording alternated between reggaetón and hip @-@ hop while Queen experimented with R & B , pop , and tropical music genres . Its lyrics feature " beat @-@ happy female @-@ empowerment anthems " . The introductory to the album asserts herself as the " queen " , using the metaphor of a boxing match , with phrases like " one more round " , in which she uses to " express her role as the queen and diva of reggaetón " . Making the connection of the sport of boxing to reggaetón , which are both a male @-@ dominated arena ; Queen " alludes to her previous video for " Muchos <unk> <unk> " ( Many Want To Knock Me Down ) in which she takes the role of a female boxer , while also referring to women 's power as underestimated . 
 " Guillaera " ( Attitude ) , a duet with Gran Omar , explains what type of man she does and does not desire . According to <unk> Sanneh of The New York Times , " Drama " sets her " rapid @-@ fire monologue atop a sublime , head @-@ nodding hip @-@ hop beat . " On " Tuya Soy " , ( I 'm Yours ) she explains " the story of woman who suspects her husband of infidelity " , a controversial theme which has been prominent in Queen 's lyrical content . " Bésame " , ( Kiss Me ) is an evocative theme , expressing the need to go to the dance floor with the guy she like . " Me <unk> " ( I Got Accustomed ) and " Dile Que Ya " ( Tell Him Okay ) are " hip @-@ hop ballads " . " Alerta " ( Alert ) features " choppy rhythms , handclaps , and vaguely nefarious horns , plus an ingratiating synth line played by a one @-@ fingered android " . 
 " <unk> " , ( Vengeance ) speaks up against the mistreatment of women , which embodies what Queen represents within her musical compositions . The mid @-@ tempo , " bubble @-@ gum pop " " Papi Te Quiero " ( Daddy I Love You ) , named one of the album 's biggest hits , " pairs a straightforward love song with the well known reggae riddim Buyout . " Ramiro Burr of Billboard stated " Papi Te Quiero " showcases how " effortlessly and quickly she alternately sings and raps , claiming that she has a distinct vocal style that evokes Gwen Stefani " . Although , the literal translation of " Papi Te Quiero " is " Daddy I Love You " , it is not directed towards Queen 's father but to her love interest ; " Papi " can be translated to " baby " . " Quiero Bailar " ( I Want To Dance ) incorporates the Liquid riddim , a musical riddim produced by the " Jamaican cross @-@ over guru " Jeremy Harding . The song 's lyrics " warn her dance partner not to misinterpret her moves . " She degrades her partner who thinks that just because she dances with him that she is automatically going to have sexual relations with him . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Commercial = = = 
 Diva was a commercial success , peaking at # 24 on the Billboard Top Latin Albums chart . On the Billboard Top Heatseekers ( South Atlantic ) chart , the recording peaked at number eight . Diva peaked at number four on the Billboard Reggae Albums chart . On the Billboard Tropical Albums chart , Diva peaked at number one , spending four nonconsecutive weeks at the top with a total of 86 weeks on the chart , becoming the eighth best @-@ selling Tropical Album of 2004 . This also made Queen the eighth best @-@ performing Tropical Artist of 2004 as well . 
 On the Billboard Hot Latin Songs chart , " Quiero Bailar " debuted at # 35 for the week of September 3 , 2005 , becoming the " Hot Shot Debut " of that week and peaked at # 29 for the week of September 17 , 2005 . While on the Billboard Latin Rhythm Songs chart , it peaked at number eight for the week of October 29 , 2005 . It debuted under the name " Yo Quiero Bailar " at # 37 on the week of December 20 , 2003 and peaked at # 24 for the issue dated January 17 , 2004 on the Billboard Tropical Songs chart . The song re @-@ entered the Billboard Tropical Songs chart under the name " Quiero Bailar " at # 36 on the week of March 6 , 2004 and peaked at # 16 for the week of July 9 , 2005 . It became the first Spanish @-@ language track to reach # 1 on Miami 's WPOW Rhythmic Top 40 , an American radio station based in Miami , Florida that does not usually play Spanish music . She explained : " I 've worked very hard in my career , but I get surprised because I 've never expected to get to these places . " She added : " When I read Sony 's reports and they tell me my albums are being heard in London and my song is number one , I [ got ] surprised and look [ ed ] for explanations . " The other five singles did not gain significant airplay in the United States , however , they were heard on Miami 's WPOW Rhythmic Top 40 . Kid Curry , of the station commented that the commercial failure of these songs are the fault of the record label . According to him , labels were not servicing reggaetón singles at the time and that he was receiving them " by word @-@ of @-@ mouth " . By March 2004 , the original version of the album had sold 10 @,@ 000 units in the United States and Puerto Rico . 
 = = = Critical = = = 
 The album garnered mainly positive reviews from critics . Sarah Bardeen of Rhapsody said the album established Queen as " the voice for women " , complimenting her " self @-@ assured delivery " . She claimed that the tracks in which featured guest artists " get the sense that the guys she 's trading verses with are trying to keep up with her and not the other way around , " noting that the platinum edition " launched the monster hit " Quiero Bailar " . Rachel Devitt , also writing for Rhapsody , categorized the album as " Urban Latin " music . Michael Endelman of Entertainment Weekly called the album their number one pick for crossover success in the United States while complimenting the " catchy hooks and sticky grooves " found on the album . <unk> Sanneh of The New York Times said " [ Queen ] celebrates her hybrid genre by refusing to stay put " , while claiming Queen to sometimes depart from " reggaeton 's sharp , steady shuffle to explore other rhythms " . She later said that the album would make Queen a " likely candidate for crossover success , if only she didn 't sing in Spanish " . An editor for the Chicago Tribune selected the album as one of three to " add to your reggaetón collection " other than Daddy Yankee 's Barrio Fino ( 2004 ) . The writer noted the included hits ( " Quiero Bailar " and " Papi Te Quiero " ) , along with " [ the album 's ] handful of remixes – and a whole lot of attitude " . The album was highly anticipated and acclaimed and widely regarded as a factor in reggaeton 's mainstream exposure in 2004 along with her next studio album Real ( 2004 ) , Daddy Yankee 's Barrio Fino and Tego Calderon 's El Enemy de los Guasíbiri ( 2004 ) , after being certified Platinum in the Latin field signifying sales of over 100 @,@ 000 by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) . Jonathan Widran of Allmusic described " Quiero Bailar " as a song that " gets the party and people moving " and as well as being one of Queen 's hits . Kid Curry , of Rhythmic Top 40 WPOW ( Power 96 ) cites Ivy Queen 's release of " Yo Quiero Bailar " as " the last reggaetón super @-@ hit " . " Papi Te Quiero " was selected as one of the hits from " The Golden Era of Reggaetón " which lasted from 2003 until 2007 by Jesus Trivino of Latina magazine . The album was nominated for " Reggaeton Album of the Year " at the 2005 Billboard Latin Music Awards where she was also nominated for " Tropical Airplay Track of the Year , Female " and " Tropical Airplay Track of the Year , New Artist " . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Standard Edition 
 = = = Samples = = = 
 " Sangre " samples " Mi <unk> " from the 1969 album <unk> Lo Que <unk> by Raphael . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 The credits are taken from the albums ' liner notes 
 = = = Technical credits = = = 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Sales and certifications = = 
 = Skin of Evil = 
 " Skin of Evil " is the 23rd episode of the first season of the science fiction television series Star Trek : The Next Generation , and originally aired on April 25 , 1988 , in broadcast syndication . The story premise was written by Joseph Stefano , and the screenplay was re @-@ written by Hannah Louise Shearer . The episode was directed by Joseph L. Scanlan . 
 The series follows the adventures of the crew of the Starfleet starship Enterprise @-@ D. In this episode , the Enterprise races to rescue Deanna Troi ( Marina Sirtis ) from a crashed shuttle , which is being held captive by an alien life form called Armus ( Mart McChesney , voiced by Ron Gans ) . In investigating the crash , Lieutenant Tasha Yar ( Denise Crosby ) is killed by Armus , and Troi is eventually rescued after Captain Picard ( Patrick Stewart ) distracts the alien . 
 Yar 's death in the episode was the result of Crosby asking to be released from her contract , although her last filmed episode was actually " Symbiosis " as it was filmed subsequent to " Skin of Evil " . The manner of her death was intended to be typical of the threat posed to a security officer , and was what the show 's creator Gene Roddenberry had intended . The reception of the episode was poor overall from critics , especially the manner of Yar 's death and the Armus creature in general . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The Enterprise receives a distress signal from a shuttlecraft returning Deanna Troi from a conference . They find that the shuttle has crashed on a desolate planet , Vagra II , and while they can find the life signs of Troi and the pilot , they are unable to beam the two to the ship . An away team beams down and discovers an animated pool of a tar @-@ like substance , a malevolent life form that calls itself Armus . When Lt. Yar attempts to approach the shuttle , Armus hurls her back with a psychokinetic blast , killing her instantly . The away team is brought back to the Enterprise but the damage to Yar is too great for Dr. Crusher ( Gates McFadden ) to repair , and they are unable to resuscitate her . A second away team is sent to the planet . Armus taunts the crew members and maintains his grasp of the shuttle . During this time , Troi has communicated with Armus and learned that it is a physical manifestation of evil from the bodies of an ancient race , abandoned on Vagra II . 
 The away team scans Armus ' energy field , finding that when Armus engulfs the shuttle and speaks to Troi , expressing his remorse and pity , the field disrupting their transporter signals is weakened which could allow them to beam Troi and the pilot out of the shuttle . After Armus toys with Troi by completely engulfing Commander Riker ( Jonathan Frakes ) , Captain Picard beams down to speak to Armus directly , sending the rest of the away team to the ship . Picard engages Armus in a heated discussion to discover its motive , which is to seek revenge on those that abandoned it on Vagra II . Armus is riled to a point where the energy field is dissipated enough , allowing for Picard , Troi and the pilot to be safely beamed back to the Enterprise . After destroying the shuttlecraft from orbit , Picard orders a quarantine on Vagra II . 
 As they leave Vagra II , the crew holds a memorial service for Lt. Yar , with a pre @-@ recorded simulation of Yar addressing each of the senior crew members telling them what they meant to her and what she learned from each of them . After the service , Data ( Brent Spiner ) , who had previously become close to Yar , tells Picard that he is confused as to the purpose of the service . He says that his thoughts are for himself , because he can only think of how empty his life will be without Tasha . He asks if he has missed the point , but Picard assures him he got it . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Story and casting = = = 
 The original story , then titled " The Shroud , " was written by Joseph Stefano , who had previously worked on The Outer Limits . Hannah Louise Shearer was given the task of re @-@ writing the original take . The first draft had Yar 's death occur earlier in the episode with the main focus of the episode being the Armus creature rather than her death . It was the show 's creator , Gene Roddenberry who argued in favor of her sudden demise as he felt it was suitable for a security officer . Roddenberry also argued against killing Armus in retaliation . Shearer later described the decision , saying " Gene felt we couldn 't kill the creature , because it is not up to us as human beings to make a moral judgement on any creature that we encounter , because we are not God " . 
 Yar 's death in the episode was after Crosby had asked to be let out of her contract , and rumours had circulated of her departure . She later described her time spent on Star Trek : The Next Generation as " miserable " , and it was well known at the time that she was unhappy with the way her role had been developed . She later said that if she 'd had more scenes written for her similar to the one she shared with Worf at the start of the episode then she wouldn 't have wanted to leave the show . Yar 's memorial scene was filmed twice , the first was with Crosby reciting the lines while looking straight ahead , which was the director 's preferred choice . However a version with her looking towards each of the other characters in turn was ultimately used . Scanlan later said " Don 't ask me how she knew where they 'd be standing " . Marina Sirtis ' tears in the scene were real , as she was cued by Crosby standing off camera . " Skin of Evil " was not the last episode in the first season in which Denise Crosby appeared . " Symbiosis " was subsequently filmed after this episode , but was aired earlier in the run . In fact , toward the end of " Symbiosis " you can see Crosby waving goodbye to the fans ( it is the scene where Picard and Crusher leave the cargo bay ) . Crosby would also later return to the Yar role in " Yesterday 's Enterprise " , the two part series finale " All Good Things ... " and as Yar 's half @-@ Romulan daughter Sela in several episodes . Guest stars in " Skin of Evil " included Walker Boone as Leland T. Lynch , Brad Zerbst as a nurse and Raymond <unk> as Ben Prieto . Even though this episode marked the death of Yar , Crosby would be credited for the remaining three first season episodes . 
 = = = Creature effects = = = 
 Armus was originally intended to be based on the <unk> theatre group style , but was discarded in favor of a " shroud " type creature . Director Joseph L. Scanlan was determined to make the creature believable , and it was aimed to have the creature rise up out of the oil slick , drawing it up with him . A test was made using a melting miniature figure of Armus with the intention to play it in reverse , but it didn 't provide the required effect . The construction of the suit for Mart McChesney to wear as Armus was split between two teams . Michael Westmore and Gerald Quist spent a day sculpting the head , while the construction of the body was outsourced to an external company . McChesney as Armus was lowered into and out of the oil by means of a grate under the surface . Although the head was designed to enable the clearing of McChesney 's airways quickly should there be a problem , no oxygen tank was included in the construction and so he had to hold his breath whilst under the surface of the oil . <unk> kept track of the length of time he was under by using a stopwatch . The oil itself was a water @-@ soluble <unk> material which was dyed black using printer 's ink . During production the crew found that for some reason the liquid kept dissolving the seams of the suit , although the head was unaffected . A backup suit had been ordered before production began at the last minute , and was required in order to shoot all the scenes . 
 After they started to break apart , further orders were placed for additional suits and all the suits used eventually fell apart during the four days they were used on set . In order to film one scene , McChesney wore the suit open @-@ backed due to the damage . No optical effects were used in creating Armus . For the scene where Riker is pulled into the oil , a stuntman was used as a stand in for Jonathan Frakes . Where Riker 's face emerges from the oil , it was actually a plaster cast of Frakes ' face painted black . It was placed on the same grate used to lift McChesney , and filmed lifting out of the liquid . The twitching effect in Yar 's death was due to a wire tied around Crosby 's waist being pulled on . 
 = = Reception and home media release = = 
 " Skin of Evil " aired in broadcast syndication during the week commencing April 29 , 1988 . It received Nielsen ratings of 9 @.@ 7 , reflecting the percentage of all households watching the episode during its timeslot . This was a decrease of 1 @.@ 1 ratings points from the previous episode , " Symbiosis " , and was the same ratings level received by the following episode , " We 'll Always Have Paris " . 
 Several reviewers re @-@ watched Star Trek : The Next Generation after the end of the series . Zack Handlen for A.V. Club gave the episode an overall score of C- , saying that at points the episode just got annoying especially when Troi was describing Armus ' feelings . He thought that Yar 's death scene was out of place in the episode and that overall Armus was unthreatening , saying " Murdering Yar should make Armus seem much more dangerous , but he 's just so whiny and petulant and bland that he could 've killed half a dozen cast members without leaving an impression . " Keith DeCandido for Tor.com thought that Yar 's death was " pointless " , but thought that it was in a manner suitable for a security officer in Star Trek . He also felt that it was one of Troi 's better episodes , but that Armus " fails in every possible way as a villain , and that ’ s entirely on the backs of the people doing the visual effects and the voice casting . " 
 IGN reviewer RL Shaffer thought it was a " silly episode , riddled with terrible dialogue , that 's only notable because of Tasha Yar 's untimely death " . It was given a score of five out of ten , marking it as one of the worst four episodes of the season . Yar 's death was included in a list of the top 21 " Naff Sci @-@ Fi Deaths " by SFX magazine in 2012 , and was also listed by the magazine as a bad example of a " Somebody Dies Episode " . 
 The first home media release of " Skin of Evil " was on VHS cassette on November 11 , 1992 . The episode was later included on the Star Trek : The Next Generation season one DVD box set , released in March 2002 . It was released as part of the season one Blu @-@ ray set on July 24 , 2012 . 
 = BackupHDDVD = 
 BackupHDDVD is a small computer software utility program available in command line and GUI versions which aids in the decryption of commercial HD DVD discs protected by the Advanced Access Content System . It is used to back up discs , often to enable playback on hardware configurations without full support for HDCP . The program 's source code was posted online , but no licence information was given . 
 Written by an anonymous programmer using the handle <unk> , BackupHDDVD is distributed with none of the cryptographic keys necessary for decryption . Users wanting to use the software to decrypt a protected disc 's contents must obtain the appropriate keys separately , a task with which neither the original author nor his or her versions of BackupHDDVD assist . 
 BackupHDDVD represented the first known successful attack against AACS . The utility circumvents content protection by decrypting video files directly with AES , the underling cryptographic cipher used by AACS . Using this technique , BackupHDDVD is able to completely bypass the AACS chain of trust , rendering it immune to revocation . The cost of this immunity is that users are forced to rely on keys leaking from commercial player software to use BackupHDDVD with new discs . 
 = = History = = 
 According to the creator of BackupHDDVD , he or she first set out to circumvent AACS to bypass a restriction in software HD DVD players which reduced the quality of AACS restricted 1080p high definition video to that of standard definition DVD video or refused to play outright unless an HDCP compliant chain of video hardware was present . At the time only a few computer monitors and video cards supported HDCP . As a result , configurations that would have allowed high @-@ definition HD DVD viewing in software players were exceptionally rare . 
 On December 18 , 2006 , a video which showed BackupHDDVD being used to decrypt and copy the film Full Metal Jacket to a hard drive was uploaded to YouTube . Two days after the video was uploaded , the initial version of the utility along with its source code and documentation was uploaded to a file hosting service . A link to the file was then posted by the utility 's creator on the forums of Doom9 , a website devoted to DVD backup . The utility 's documentation , along with the forum post , contained little information as to how necessary keys could be obtained . The author elaborated in another forum post , claiming that keys could be obtained by exploiting the necessity for them to be held in memory to allow playback in player software . 
 On January 2 , 2007 , the author posted the 1 @.@ 0 version of the BackupHDDVD utility , which included support for the decoding of discs using volume keys . For several weeks following the utility 's release no success using the author 's key extraction technique was reported . In mid @-@ January 2007 , a volume key was published by another member of the Doom9 forum along with an explanation of the technique used to obtain it . Other forum members quickly discovered keys for different titles . Keys for many discs are now readily available on the internet . 
 Further development of BackupHDDVD was being hosted on SourceForge until the site received a DMCA takedown notice alleging a violation in late February . In compliance with the notice , the project was immediately removed . Several versions of BackupHDDVD have been released by individuals other than the original author , including some versions with GUIs and the ability to locate keys on the internet or scan for them in memory automatically . <unk> , a port of BackupHDDVD to C with a native Windows GUI is also available . This version supports multiple CPU threads and runs faster than its Java counterparts . While development of BackupHDDVD has ceased , a commercial HD DVD decryption utility called <unk> <unk> HD exists which relies on compromised AACS processing or media keys to allow for the backup or unrestricted viewing of any AACS @-@ protected discs without the need for title or volume keys . 
 = = Background = = 
 The AACS Licensing Authority ( LA ) assigns a series of 253 unique cryptographic keys to device manufacturers . When an AACS protected disc is manufactured , a series of up to 64 keys called title keys are generated and the video content on the disc is encrypted using these keys . The title keys are stored on the disc and themselves encrypted with another key called the volume unique key . The volume unique key for any disc can be calculated by all authorized devices using another key called a processing key , which is derived from a media key block stored on each disc . Authorized devices use one or more of the manufacturer 's assigned device keys to decrypt the media key block , yielding a processing key and enabling further decryption of the volume and title keys , and finally the content . 
 If a device key is to be revoked , the media key blocks on all discs manufactured after the time of revocation are encrypted in a way which does not enable the revoked device to obtain a valid processing key . Users trying to view new content on a revoked player would be forced to upgrade their player software to a more secure version , thereby limiting the scope of the compromise each time an exploit is discovered . While a compromised device or processing key could be used to decrypt a large number of discs , BackupHDDVD does not use these keys because they can be revoked by AACS LA . Because the AACS revocation system works by preventing a given device or player from calculating a valid volume unique key , BackupHDDVD circumvents the system entirely by relying on volume or title keys leaked from authorized players . With these keys BackupHDDVD is not subject to device revocation and is able to decrypt the content directly , bypassing the key exchange and verification process . 
 = = Features and limitations = = 
 Users must have either found decryption keys themselves or obtained them elsewhere for most versions of BackupHDDVD to work . The utility reads a text file containing volume or title keys and attempts to find a set of corresponding keys for the inserted disc . Through a standard AES library , it then decrypts each video file on the disc using the appropriate keys and writes the results to a location specified by the user . Direct file decryption allows the utility 's functionality to remain unaffected by device key revocation and its performance unencumbered with AACS overhead . 
 Originally intended to be a proof of concept , BackupHDDVD is severely limited in its ability to produce fully functional copies of commercial discs . Early versions were unable to properly decrypt discs which used the in @-@ movie experience technology . New versions work around this limitation by excluding interactive content from decrypted copies . The utility cannot process HD DVD navigation functionality which enables menus , chapters , secondary audio tracks and subtitles , so these features are inaccessible in copies created by BackupHDDVD . Most versions provide no validation for keys and will still attempt to decrypt a disc 's contents with an incorrect key , resulting in corrupt files . 
 = = Legality = = 
 Under United States anti @-@ circumvention law created by the Digital Millennium Copyright Act , BackupHDDVD may qualify as a device primarily intended to " circumvent a technological measure that effectively controls access to a [ protected ] work . " If identified as such , it would be illegal to use or distribute . 
 = = Reaction = = 
 Reaction to the utility by Doom9 forum members , bloggers , and mainstream media has ranged from supportive to intensely hostile . By some , the circumvention of AACS was seen as a reaffirmation of fair use . Others felt that the utility was no more than a piracy tool and would bring about group punishment against consumers in the form of player revocation . One article compared proponents of BackupHDDVD to terrorists . When the release of the tool was first publicized , several articles claimed that AACS had been cracked . In fact no cryptographic weaknesses constituting a crack have yet been found in AES , the underlying cryptographic system of AACS . Keys are actually obtained through a side @-@ channel attack . 
 Initially , it was thought that the compromise of HD DVD 's security would entice some studios into adopting the competing Blu @-@ ray format , but Blu @-@ ray 's AACS implementation has since been circumvented using a similar method . However , Blu @-@ ray offers an additional layer of protection called BD + . 
 There was some speculation that the player used by the utility 's author to obtain keys would be revoked . <unk> , which sells the PowerDVD player software , was quick to deny that its software could be used to obtain keys . Corel was silent about the role its WinDVD software had played in the leaking of volume and title keys . Both companies have since released updates for their player software . 
 The consortium behind the HD DVD format and the studios delivering films on the format did not release an official statement beyond that they were investigating the utility . On January 24 , 2007 AACS LA issued a statement acknowledging that AACS security had been compromised while urging software vendors to limit the availability of keys in memory . Beginning with discs manufactured in late April , versions of PowerDVD and WinDVD responsible for leaking keys have been revoked and free updates are available to owners of affected versions . 
 = Turtle ( submersible ) = 
 Turtle ( also called American Turtle ) was the world 's first submersible with a documented record of use in combat . She was built in Old Saybrook , Connecticut in 1775 by American David Bushnell as a means of attaching explosive charges to ships in a harbor . Bushnell designed her for use against British Royal Navy vessels occupying North American harbors during the American Revolutionary War . Connecticut Governor Jonathan Trumbull recommended the invention to George Washington ; although the commander @-@ in @-@ chief had doubts , he provided funds and support for the development and testing of the machine . 
 Several attempts were made using Turtle to affix explosives to the undersides of British warships in New York Harbor in 1776 . All failed , and her transport ship was sunk later that year by the British with the submarine aboard . Bushnell claimed eventually to have recovered the machine , but its final fate is unknown . Modern replicas of Turtle have been constructed ; the Connecticut River Museum , the U.S. Navy 's Submarine Force Library and Museum , the Royal Navy Submarine Museum and the Oceanographic Museum ( Monaco ) have them on display . 
 = = Development = = 
 In the early 1770s , David Bushnell , a Yale College freshman and Patriot , began experimenting with underwater explosives . By 1775 , with tensions on the rise between the Thirteen Colonies and Great Britain , Bushnell had practically perfected these explosives . That year he also began work near Old Saybrook , Connecticut on a small manned submersible craft capable of affixing such a charge to the hull of a ship . The charge would then be detonated by a clockwork mechanism that released a musket firing mechanism , probably a flintlock , adapted for the purpose . According to Dr. Benjamin Gale , a doctor who taught at Yale , the firing mechanism and other mechanical parts of the submarine were manufactured by a New Haven clockmaker named Isaac Doolittle . 
 Named for its shape , Turtle resembled a large clam as much as a turtle ; it was about 10 feet ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) long ( according to the original specifications ) , 6 feet ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) tall , and about 3 feet ( 0 @.@ 9 m ) wide , and consisted of two wooden shells covered with tar and reinforced with steel bands . It dived by allowing water into a bilge tank at the bottom of the vessel and ascended by pushing water out through a hand pump . It was propelled vertically and horizontally by hand @-@ cranked propellers . It also had 200 pounds ( 91 kg ) of lead aboard , which could be released in a moment to increase buoyancy . Manned and operated by one person , the vessel contained enough air for about thirty minutes and had a speed in calm water of about 3 mph ( 2 @.@ 6 kn ; 4 @.@ 8 km / h ) . 
 Six small pieces of thick glass in the top of the submarine provided natural light . The internal instruments had small pieces of bioluminescent foxfire affixed to the needles to indicate their position in the dark . During trials in November 1775 , Bushnell discovered that this illumination failed when the temperature dropped too low . Although repeated requests were made to Benjamin Franklin for possible alternatives , none was forthcoming , and Turtle was sidelined for the winter . 
 Bushnell 's basic design included some elements present in earlier experimental submersibles . The method of raising and lowering the vessel was similar to that developed by Nathaniel Simons in 1729 , and the gaskets used to make watertight connections around the connections between the internal and external controls also may have come from Simons , who constructed a submersible based on a 17th @-@ century Italian design by Giovanni Alfonso Borelli . 
 = = Preparation for use = = 
 Bushnell 's work began to receive more attention in August 1775 , when Franklin was informed of it . Despite Bushnell 's insistence on secrecy surrounding his work , news of it quickly made its way to the British , abetted by a Loyalist spy working for New York Congressman James Duane . On November 16 , 1775 , a coded message to William Tryon , the last royal governor of the Province of New York , brought Bushnell 's work to British attention . The details of the report were highly inaccurate , implying Turtle was nearly ready to be deployed in Boston harbor against the fleet that was part of the British siege effort there . In fact , Bushnell and his brother Ezra were still testing the machine in the Connecticut River . In the spring of 1776 , after the British withdrew from Boston , Bushnell offered the submarine to General George Washington for use in the defense of New York City . Washington agreed , and provided some funding to the inventor to prepare the vessel for deployment . 
 In August 1776 , Bushnell asked General Samuel Holden Parsons for volunteers to operate Turtle , because his brother Ezra , who had been its operator during earlier trials , was taken ill . Three men were chosen , and the submersible was taken to Long Island Sound for training and further trials . While these trials went on , the British gained control of western Long Island in the August 27 Battle of Long Island . Since the British now controlled the harbor , Turtle was transported overland from New Rochelle to the Hudson River . 
 = = Attack on Eagle = = 
 General Washington then authorized an expedition by Turtle in New York Harbor . At 11 : 00 PM on September 6 , one of the volunteers , Sergeant Ezra Lee , took the Turtle out to attempt an attack on Admiral Richard Howe 's flagship , HMS Eagle , then moored off Governors Island . 
 According to Lee 's account , Turtle was towed by rowboats as close as was felt safe to the British fleet . He then navigated for more than two hours before slack tide made it possible to reach Eagle . His first attempt to attach the explosive failed because the screw struck a metal impediment . Lee tried and tried to turn the drill , but could not achieve penetration . A popular story held that he failed due to the copper lining covering the ship 's hull . The Royal Navy had recently began installing copper sheathing on the bottoms of their warships to protect from damage by <unk> and other marine life , however the lining was paper @-@ thin and could not have stopped Lee from drilling through it . Bushnell believed Lee 's failure was probably due to an iron plate connected to the ship 's rudder hinge . When Lee attempted another spot in the hull , he was unable to stay beneath the ship , and eventually abandoned the attempt . It seems more likely that he was suffering from fatigue and carbon dioxide inhalation , which made him confused and unable to properly carry out the process of drilling through the Eagle 's hull . Lee reported British soldiers on Governors Island spotted the submersible and rowed out to investigate . He then released the charge ( which he called a " torpedo " ) , " expecting that they would seize that likewise , and thus all would be blown to atoms . " Suspicious of the drifting charge , the British retreated back to the island . Lee reported that the charge drifted into the East River , where it exploded " with tremendous violence , throwing large columns of water and pieces of wood that composed it high into the air . " It was the first recorded use of a submarine to attack a ship ; however , the only records documenting it are American . British records contain no accounts of an attack by a submarine or any reports of explosions on the night of the supposed attack on HMS Eagle . 
 According to British naval historian Richard Compton @-@ Hall , the problems of achieving neutral buoyancy would have rendered the vertical propeller useless . The route Turtle would have had to take to attack Eagle was slightly across the tidal stream which would , in all probability , have resulted in Lee becoming exhausted . In the face of these and other problems , Compton @-@ Hall suggests the entire story was fabricated as disinformation and morale @-@ boosting propaganda , and if Lee did carry out an attack it was in a covered rowing boat rather than Turtle . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 On October 5 , Sergeant Lee again went out in an attempt to attach the charge to a frigate anchored off Manhattan . He reported the ship 's watch spotted him , so he abandoned the attempt . The submarine was sunk some days later by the British aboard its tender vessel near Fort Lee , New Jersey . Bushnell reported salvaging Turtle , but its final fate is unknown . Washington called the attempt " an effort of genius " , but " a combination of too many things was requisite " for such an attempt to succeed . 
 = = Replicas = = 
 Functional replicas of the Turtle have been created and tested , as well as non @-@ functioning cutaway ones for museum displays . 
 In 1976 , a replica of Turtle was designed by Joseph Leary and constructed by Fred <unk> as a project marking the United States Bicentennial . It was christened by Connecticut 's governor , Ella Grasso , and later tested in the Connecticut River . This replica is owned by the Connecticut River Museum . 
 On August 3 , 2007 three men were stopped by police while escorting and piloting a replica of Turtle within 200 feet ( 61 m ) of RMS Queen Mary 2 , then docked at the cruise ship terminal in Red Hook , Brooklyn . The replica was created by New York artist Philip " Duke " Riley and two residents of Rhode Island , one of whom claimed to be a descendant of David Bushnell . The Coast Guard issued Riley a citation for having an unsafe vessel , and for violating the security zone around Queen Mary 2 . 
 In 2015 , replicas of the exterior and interior of Turtle were used in the television series <unk> : Washington ’ s Spies . 
 = = Image gallery = = 
 = Ivar Hippe = 
