 Ivar Hippe ( born 19 March 1953 ) is a Norwegian political consultant , former journalist and presenter . He received national media attention in 1982 when he was expelled from Argentina by the government . On his return to Norway he began working for the Norwegian Broadcasting Corporation ( NRK ) . In 1999 he became editor @-@ in @-@ chief of the Norwegian financial journal <unk> Rapport . 
 In 2003 he wrote the book <unk> og <unk> : Tore Tønne , media og <unk> bak <unk> , which followed Tore Tønne 's last days before his suicide . The book received good reviews and , after the book 's release , Hippe became Gerd @-@ Liv Valla 's consultant . He is the older brother of Jon Hippe , the current leader of the Fafo Foundation . Hippe is currently working for the public relations ( PR ) company <unk> . 
 = = Career = = 
 Hippe was born in Oslo and studied at the University of Oslo where he earned the academic degree <unk> rerum <unk> . By the late 1970s Hippe had joined the Latin American Group in Oslo and became one of its leading members . The organisation had around 80 members and had collaborated with Amnesty International on projects involving Latin America . Hippe later landed a job as a journalist for the Norwegian newspaper Dagbladet and became the paper 's correspondent in Argentina . Hippe and Frode Holst , a journalist from Norwegian newspaper Verdens Gang , were arrested and expelled from Argentina in 1982 by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs who claimed that they were spies working for the British government . Holst was put on a plane to Brazil and Hippe left for Santiago , Chile . In a press conference Argentina 's Minister of Interior Bernardo Menendez claimed that the journalists were " compromising national security " . In 1984 he sent a job application to the Norwegian Broadcasting Corporation ( NRK ) to become their correspondent in Latin America . When he moved back to Norway he worked for NRK Arbeiderbladet and Fafo . Until 1999 Hippe worked in the economic news sector at NRK . 
 In 1999 Hippe became Editor @-@ in @-@ Chief of <unk> Rapport ( <unk> ) . Hippe openly supported the Labour Party Prime Minister of Norway , Jens Stoltenberg from mid 2000 in Stoltenberg 's first term ( 17 March 2000 to 19 October 2001 ) . Hippe believed the government needed to spend more money from the Norwegian oil fund , saying : " The greatest paradox today is that the government refuses to investigate what it will mean to buy goods and services abroad in fear that someone will come up with the idea of spending more money than we do today . The government plays with the lives of the sick and aggravates children 's education because of the dogma that oil money cannot be used " . Hippe left his position as Editor @-@ in @-@ Chief in 2002 because the new owners did not share the same future plans for the magazine as he did . He was succeeded by Joachim <unk> . Six months after Hippe left a number of journalists and most of the old leadership staff had also left the magazine . 
 After quitting his job he was asked to write a book about Tore Tønne , and his recent suicide . When writing the book Hippe interviewed 60 key acquaintances , with the exception of Kjell Inge Røkke who had a friendly relationship with Tønne before his death . The book , entitled <unk> og <unk> : Tore Tønne , media og <unk> bak <unk> ( English : Powerful and Powerless : Tore Tønne , Media and the Power Play Behind the Scenes ) , was published in 2003 and received considerable acclaim . Before becoming a political consultant he was one of four who applied for the position as director of the Institute for Journalism in 2006 . He was not chosen and instead became a consultant for the leader of the Norwegian Confederation of Trade Unions , Gerd @-@ Liv Valla . In 2006 he worked alongside Erik Solheim and Jonas Gahr Støre on the " Norwegian Project " , a government @-@ funded project with Brazil . According to Hippe the project works for an extensive social dialogue between the employers where they " deliberately chose cooperation and dialogue rather than confrontation and conflict with society around them " . As of 2010 he works as a consultant for the public relations company <unk> and Hippe Consult , a company owned by himself . In May 2010 Hippe chaired a debate for the Norwegian Ministry of Justice and the Police on the proposal to introduce data storage directives into Norwegian law . Hippe briefly worked as the consultant to Ellen Kristin Dahl @-@ Pedersen who was set to inherit parts of Ellen <unk> 's fortune . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 He is the older brother of Jon Hippe , the former leader of Fafo . Hippe , along with his brother , has a friendly relationship with the former Prime Minister of Norway and current NATO secretary general Jens Stoltenberg . He has two sons , Mathias and Trym Hippe . Currently , he 's in a relationship with renowned author Vigdis <unk> . 
 = R. V. C. Bodley = 
 Ronald Victor Courtenay ( R. V. C. ) Bodley , MC ( 3 March 1892 – 26 May 1970 ) was a British Army officer , author and journalist . Born to English parents in Paris , he lived in France until he was nine , before attending Eton College and then the Royal Military Academy Sandhurst . He was commissioned into the King 's Royal Rifle Corps and served with them during the First World War . After the war he spent seven years in the Sahara desert , and then travelled through Asia . Bodley wrote several books about his travels . He was considered among the most distinguished British writers on the Sahara , as well as one of the main western sources of information on the South Pacific Mandates . 
 Bodley moved to the United States in 1935 , where he worked as a screenwriter . He re @-@ enlisted in the British Army at the outbreak of the Second World War and was sent to Paris to work for the Ministry of Information . He later immigrated to the United States , where he continued to work as a writer and also as an advisor to the United States Office of War Information . 
 = = Early life and First World War = = 
 Bodley was born in Paris on 3 March 1892 to civil servant and writer John Edward Courtenay Bodley and Evelyn Frances Bodley ( née Bell ) . He was the oldest of three children ; his brother Josselin and sister Ava were born in 1893 and 1896 respectively . Bodley was a cousin of Gertrude Bell , a writer and archeologist who helped establish the Hashemite dynasties , and he was also a descendant of diplomat and scholar Sir Thomas Bodley , founder of the Bodleian Library . He lived in France with his parents until he was nine . His grandfather owned a Turkish palace in Algiers , which Bodley often visited as a child . 
 Bodley was educated at a Lycée in Paris before he was sent to Eton College and then to the Royal Military Academy Sandhurst . Bodley showed interest as a writer during this time , writing poetry at Eton and for a cadet magazine at Sandhurst . From Sandhurst he was commissioned into the King 's Royal Rifle Corps as a second lieutenant in September 1911 . He spent three years serving in a regiment in India where he began to write and stage plays . His commanding officer once remarked " The plays are amusing . You 're a credit to the regiment and all that , but did you join the army to become a soldier or a comedian ? " Shortly thereafter the First World War commenced , and Bodley was sent to the Western Front for four years . He was wounded several times , including by chemical gas . At the age of 26 he was given the rank of lieutenant colonel and command of a battalion . He was appointed assistant military attaché to Paris on 15 August 1918 , and attended the 1919 Paris Peace Conference . What he heard there reportedly made him feel that he and the millions of other soldiers had fought for nothing ; he wrote later that " selfish politicians [ were ] laying the groundwork for the Second World War – each country grabbing all it could for itself , creating national antagonisms , and reviving the intrigues of secret . " Disillusioned with the military , Bodley considered a career in politics instead , on the advice of David Lloyd George . 
 Gertrude Bell introduced Bodley to T. E. Lawrence . Bodley ran into Lawrence one day outside the Paris Peace Conference and told him of his intent to move into politics . Lawrence responded furiously , calling him a moron and a traitor . When he replied that he had no other prospects now that the war was over and asking what he should do , Lawrence suggested " Go live with the Arabs . " Bodley said his conversation with Lawrence , which lasted " less than 200 seconds " , proved to be life @-@ changing . He promptly sorted his affairs and went to live in the Sahara . His bemused friends held him a farewell party . They all agreed he would be back in six weeks ; he stayed in the Sahara for seven years . 
 = = Travels through the Sahara and Asia = = 
 Bodley spent his seven years in the Sahara desert living with a nomad Bedouin tribe . He purchased a herd of sheep and goats and used them as a source of income . He hired 10 shepherds to care for his flock , and consistently earned 120 % on his investment . He wore Arab dress , spoke Arabic , practiced the Muslim faith and abstained from alcohol ; Bodley continued to be a non @-@ drinker after leaving the Sahara . He left the tribe on the advice of its chief , who told him there was no use in continuing to pretend to be an Arab . In 1927 he wrote Algeria From Within , after being encouraged to do so by publisher Michael Joseph . The book is based on his experiences living in the country . The book 's success greatly exceeded his expectations , prompting him to continue writing . His first novel , Yasmina , was published later that year ; it sold well and was reprinted . His next novel , Opal Fire , published the following year , was a commercial failure , though this did not discourage him from continuing to write . He regarded his time in the Sahara as " the most peaceful and contented years " of his life . He was considered amongst the most distinguished British writers on the Sahara . 
 After leaving the Sahara , Bodley spent three months in Java working on a tea plantation , before travelling to China and Japan . The success of Algeria From Within made it easy for him to obtain work as a journalist in Asia . He became a foreign correspondent for The Sphere in London and The Advertiser in Australia . Bodley was one of several westerners to be granted access to the South Pacific Mandates by Japan in the 1930s , and he has been cited as one of the main sources of information on the area at the time . Like other westerners allowed to visit the region , he reported that there was no evidence that Japan was <unk> the area . Bodley 's movements were " carefully choreographed " by the <unk> @-@ shō . He wrote about his experiences and findings in his 1934 book The Drama in the Pacific , in which he wrote , " having visited practically every island … I am convinced that nothing has been done to convert any place into a naval base " . In his 1998 book Nan 'yo : the Rise and Fall of the Japanese in Micronesia , 1885 – 1945 , Mark Peattie stated that while it is easy to accuse Bodley and the other writers of naivety , the militarisation of the area was complex and occurred in several stages . Bodley was a passenger aboard the ship Shizuoka Maru when it was wrecked on a reef north of Yap in April 1933 . The vessel was lost , though there were no injuries . Bodley was offered a job teaching English at Keio University , and did so for nine months ; he wrote about the experience in his 1933 book A Japanese Omelette . Bodley and Keio university Professor <unk> Hori provided voluminous notes in the 1934 Japanese textbook version of Round the Red Lamp by Arthur Conan Doyle , and in 1935 Bodley published a biography of Tōgō Heihachirō . 
 = = Later life = = 
 In 1935 Bodley moved to the United States to work as a screenwriter , leaving Japan aboard the Chichibu Maru . In October 1936 Bodley was hired by Charlie Chaplin to adapt the D.L. Murray novel Regency into a feature film . It was the first time Chaplin had hired someone to write a script ; he had previously written his own scripts . Bodley had a rough draft ready by January 1937 , and completed his work in March , though in late May that year Chaplin abandoned the script , in favour of another project he was working on . Bodley also worked on the script for the 1938 film A Yank at Oxford . In the United States Bodley was known to his friends as " Ronnie " and was often referred to in the press as Bodley of Arabia . 
 When the Second World War commenced , Bodley immediately rejoined the King 's Royal Rifle Corps and was given the rank of major , though according to his book The Gay Deserters he was regarded as too old for active service in the infantry . He was instead sent to work for the Ministry of Information in Paris . He was in Paris when the German army invaded in 1940 . According to his book The Soundless Sahara after Paris fell he went to work behind the German lines until he came under suspicion of the Gestapo , then escaped across the Pyrenees on foot . He returned to the United States via Portugal . Upon his return he became a US citizen and an advisor to the Arabic desk of the US Office of War Information , and focused on a career in writing and lecturing . Bodley would go into complete isolation in order to write a book , spending about 10 weeks to complete his work . He wrote several of his books in York Harbor , Maine . Bodley frequently gave lectures while travelling the United States , speaking in almost every state and referring to himself as " Colonel " or " Major " . Having reached the mandatory age for retirement , he ceased to be a member of the British Army on 3 March 1943 . 
 In 1944 Bodley published Wind in the Sahara . By 1949 the book was in its seventh edition and had been translated into eight different languages . In 1945 he wrote the satire novel The Gay Deserters , which was inspired by his flight from the German army , though it was not well received . Robert Pick from the Saturday Review wrote " it isn 't even humorous at all . " He wrote an essay entitled I Lived in the Garden of Allah , which was featured in the 1948 book How to Stop Worrying and Start Living . In 1953 he wrote The Warrior Saint , a biography on Charles de Foucauld . John Cogley from The New York Times said Bodley had " written a clean , poetic and frankly admiring account " of Foucauld 's life . In 1955 he wrote the partly @-@ autobiographical self @-@ help book In Search of Serenity . Elsie Robinson from The Index @-@ Journal and Phyllis Battle from the Tipton Tribune gave favourable reviews , with Robinson calling it " a must for every <unk> spirit " . His next and final book , The Soundless Sahara , was published in 1968 ; according to the book 's back cover he spent part of his years living in Massachusetts , and the rest in either England or France . He provided information for the book The Secret Lives of Lawrence of Arabia , which was published by Thomas Nelson in 1969 . He died on 26 May 1970 in a nursing home in Bramley , Surrey . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Bodley married Ruth Mary Elizabeth Stapleton @-@ Bretherton on 30 April 1917 while on furlough . They had one son , Mark Courtenay Bodley , born 22 May 1918 . His wife filed for divorce on the grounds that Bodley was adulterous and drank excessively . He did not contest the petition and the divorce was finalised on 8 June 1926 . In his 1931 memoir <unk> of a Young Man , Bodley said the marriage was an " unfortunate action " which " proved the folly of very young people ignoring the advice of their parents . " In 1927 he married Australian Beatrice Claire Lamb , who he met while travelling in North Africa . She filed for divorce around 1939 . Bodley 's son , who became a lieutenant in the Royal Armoured Corps , was killed in action in Libya in 1942 ; Wind in the Sahara is dedicated to him . In November 1949 Bodley married American divorcee Harriet Moseley ; according to The Soundless Sahara , published in 1968 , they were still married . According to a biographical journal article on Bodley by William Snell from Keio University , there is very little information on his last years , but he believed that Bodley 's marriage to Moseley ended in divorce no later than 1969 . 
 = = Awards = = 
 Bodley was awarded the Military Cross in the 1916 King 's Birthday Honours . He was awarded the Croix de Chevalier of the Legion d 'Honneur by the President of France in 1919 , and appointed Officer of the Ordre de l 'Etoile Noire in 1920 , Knight Officer of The Order of the Crown by Ferdinand of Romania in 1920 , and the Order of Wen @-@ Hu ( 4th Class ) by the Republic of China in 1921 . 
 = = Publications = = 
 Bodley published 18 books during his career : 
 = Vermont Route 129 = 
 Vermont Route 129 is a short , 5 @.@ 415 @-@ mile ( 8 @.@ 715 km ) connector route for Isle La Motte and Alburgh in the state of Vermont in the United States . VT 129 begins at an intersection in the centre of Isle La Motte , heads northward and terminates at an intersection with U.S. Route 2 in Alburgh . The route originated as Vermont Route F @-@ 2 in 1926 , and was the name of the road that approached a ferry to Chazy . Route F @-@ 2 followed the same routing as the current VT 129 , to which it was renumbered by 1947 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 VT 129 begins at an intersection with School and Church Streets on Isle La Motte , heading northward as a portion of Main Street . This part of the highway is town maintained and is not signed as a state route . VT 129 then heads north , intersecting with Shrine Road ( Town Highway 2 ) before leaving Isle La Motte over a bridge for Alburgh . The highway turns eastward , intersecting with local roads and passing to the south of <unk> Golf Links . VT 129 then heads to the south , paralleling the shores of the La Motte Passage ( a part of Lake Champlain ) . At a curve to the east , VT 129 intersects with a short extension of a nearby highway , which terminates quickly . The route leaves the connector and heads eastward towards US 2 , soon terminating at an intersection with US 2 on the shores of another connector in South Alburgh . 
 = = History = = 
 The entire length of Vermont 129 was originally designated as VT F @-@ 2 in 1926 . VT F @-@ 2 originally went from US 2 to a ferry across Lake Champlain to Chazy , New York . Many of the F @-@ x series routes along the shores of Lake Champlain were changed to new designations in the 1940s , 1950s , and 1960s . VT F @-@ 2 was redesignated by 1947 as VT 129 . Between 1959 and 2008 , VT 129 was truncated to School Street on Isle La Motte . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in Grand Isle County . 
 = Say Say Say = 
 " Say Say Say " is a song written and performed by Paul McCartney and Michael Jackson , released in 1983 . The track was produced by George Martin for McCartney 's album , Pipes of Peace . The song was recorded during production of McCartney 's 1982 Tug of War album , about a year before the release of " The Girl Is Mine " , the pair 's first duet from Jackson 's album Thriller ( 1982 ) . 
 After its release in October 1983 , " Say Say Say " became Jackson 's seventh top @-@ ten hit inside a year . It was a number one hit in the United States , Canada , Norway , Sweden , and several other countries , reached number two in the United Kingdom , and peaked within the top ten in Australia , Austria , New Zealand , The Netherlands , Switzerland , and over 20 other nations . In 2013 , Billboard magazine listed the song as the 40th biggest hit of all @-@ time on the Billboard Hot 100 charts . 
 The single was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America in December 1983 , representing sales of one million copies . The single was promoted with a music video directed by Bob Giraldi . The video , filmed in Santa Ynez Valley , California , features cameo appearances by Linda McCartney , La Toya Jackson and Giraldi . The short film centers around two con artists called " Mac and Jack " ( played by McCartney and Jackson ) , and is credited for the introduction of dialogue and storyline to music videos . 
 = = Background , recording , and composition = = 
 McCartney biographer Ray Coleman asserted that the majority of the song 's lyrics were written by Jackson , and given to McCartney the next day . Recording began at AIR Studios in London in May 1981 . At the time , McCartney was recording Tug of War , the former Beatle 's first solo album after the breakup of his group Wings . 
 Jackson stayed at the home of McCartney and his wife Linda during the recording sessions , and became friends with both . While at the dining table one evening , Paul McCartney brought out a booklet that displayed all the songs to which he owned the publishing rights . " This is the way to make big money " , the musician informed Jackson . " Every time someone records one of these songs , I get paid . Every time someone plays these songs on the radio , or in live performances , I get paid . " McCartney 's words influenced Jackson 's later purchase of ATV Music Publishing in 1985 . 
 McCartney played several instruments on " Say Say Say " , including percussion , synthesiser , guitar , and bass guitar . The harmonica was played by Chris Smith and the rhythm guitar was played by David Williams . The song was engineered by former Beatles sound engineer , Geoff Emerick . The production of " Say Say Say " was completed in February 1983 , after it had been refined and overdubbed at Cherokee Studios in California . 
 George Martin , who had worked with The Beatles , produced the song . He said of his experience with Jackson , " He actually does radiate an aura when he comes into the studio , there 's no question about it . He 's not a musician in the sense that Paul is ... but he does know what he wants in music and he has very firm ideas . " 
 Jackson also spoke of the experience in his autobiography , Moonwalk . The younger singer revealed that the collaboration boosted his confidence , as Quincy Jones — producer of Thriller — was not present to correct his mistakes . Jackson added that he and McCartney worked as equals , stating , " Paul never had to carry me in that studio . " 
 According to Musicnotes.com by Alfred Music Publishing , " Say Say Say " was performed in common time , with a dance beat of 116 beats per minute . It is in the key of B ♭ minor and sung in a vocal range from F4 to B ♭ 5 . The lyrics to " Say Say Say " reflect an attempt to " win back " a girl 's affection ; Deseret News considered the song to be a " pleading kind of love song " . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 Following the release of Thriller and most of its singles , " Say Say Say " was released on 3 October 1983 by Parlophone Records in the UK and Columbia Records in the US . It remained atop Billboard 's Hot 100 for six weeks and became Jackson 's seventh top ten hit of 1983 , breaking a record that until then was held jointly by The Beatles and Elvis Presley . Also in the US , " Say Say Say " reached number two on the R & B chart and number three on the Hot Adult Contemporary Tracks chart . Although the song had peaked at number ten in the UK , it began to fall steadily ; McCartney subsequently held an early weekday live television interview , where he discussed the song 's music video . This , along with screenings of the video on Top of the Pops ( which normally played only singles that were rising in the charts ) , The Tube and Noel Edmonds ' The Late , Late Breakfast Show , helped propel the song to number two on the UK Singles Chart . " Say Say Say " reached number one in Norway and Sweden , and the single also reached the top ten in Austria , Australia , New Zealand , the Netherlands , and Switzerland . With wholesale shipments of at least one million units , the single was later certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America . 
 " Say Say Say " received mixed reviews from music critics . The lyrics were named the worst of 1983 by The Buffalo News 's Anthony Violanti , while the Lexington Herald @-@ Leader stated in a review of Pipes of Peace that , aside from " Say Say Say " and " The Man " , " McCartney waste [ d ] the rest of the album on bathos and whimsy " . The Los Angeles Times ' Paul Grein also reviewed the McCartney album and opined that the singer had redeemed himself with the success of the " spunky " song " but plunged back into <unk> with ' No More Lonely Nights ' " . Journalist Whitney Pastorek compared the song to McCartney 's 1982 duet with Stevie Wonder , " Ebony and Ivory " . She asserted that " Say Say Say " was a better song , and had a better " though slightly more nonsensical " music video , adding that the song had no " heavy @-@ handed social content " . Penn State 's The Daily Collegian described the track as a good song , despite its ad nauseam broadcasts . 
 Deseret News stated that the " pleading love song " had a " masterful , catchy hook " . In a Rolling Stone review , the track was described as an " amiable though vapid dance groove " . The reviewer , Parke Puterbaugh , added that it was an " instantly hit @-@ bound froth @-@ funk that tends , after all , toward banality " . Music critic Nelson George stated that " Say Say Say " would not have " deserved the airplay it received without McCartney and Jackson " . Salon.com later described the song as a " sappy duet " . The online magazine concluded that McCartney had become a " wimpy old fart " . Billboard listed " Say Say Say " as Michael Jackson 's all @-@ time biggest Hot 100 single . In a 2007 article , a writer for the magazine Vibe listed " Say Say Say " as the 22nd greatest duet of all time . The writer commented that the song was " a true falsetto fantasy " and that it was " still thrilling to hear the sweet @-@ voiced duo trade harmonies on the chorus " . In 2005 , Dutch musicians Hi Tack sampled " Say Say Say " on their debut single , " Say Say Say ( Waiting 4 U ) " . The song featured Jackson 's vocals from the original recording , plus McCartney 's " Baby " . 
 = = = 2015 version = = = 
 On October 6 , 2015 , McCartney released a new version of the song in which the vocal roles of him and Jackson are reversed . It was remixed by Steve Orchard and Mark " Spike " Stent . On the new version , which is over three minutes longer than the original , the opening of the first is sung by Jackson instead of McCartney . Orchard said of the remix : " Paul remembered that there were two unused lead vocal performances by Michael and himself . We rearranged the vocal sequence and inverted the original performance so that Michael opened the first verse instead of Paul , to give the song a different take to the original version . " The song appears on a the 2015 re @-@ issue of Pipes of Peace . A radio edit of the 2015 remix was released for streaming on October 30 , 2015 , while an instrumental version of it is available for download at <unk> 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Paul McCartney : bass guitar , guitars , keyboards , synthesizer , drums , vocals 
 Michael Jackson : vocals 
 Chris Hammer Smith : harmonica 
 David Williams : guitar 
 = = Music video = = 
 = = = Production , plot , and reception = = = 
 The music video ( or " short film " ) for " Say Say Say " was directed by Bob Giraldi , who had previously directed Michael Jackson 's music video for " Beat It " . Cameo appearances in the video are made by McCartney 's then wife Linda , as well as Jackson 's older sister La Toya . According to <unk> Jackson , during filming of the video , the McCartneys were staying at a piece of property called Sycamore Ranch . Michael visited them and expressed interest in someday buying the property . In 1988 , he would , renaming it Neverland Ranch . To accommodate Jackson 's busy schedule the video was filmed at Los Alamos near Santa Barbara , California . McCartney flew in specially for filming . The video cost $ 500 @,@ 000 to produce . 
 The British television premiere of the video was extremely controversial . The video had not been ready when the track debuted in the UK singles chart . By the time it was finalised , the track had dropped in the chart . McCartney flew to London to premiere the video on the BBC1 TV show Top Of The Pops , but the show had a strict policy that no single that had dropped in position could feature on the programme and refused to show it . A furious argument ensued , with claims McCartney threatened to withdraw all his music from the corporation . As a compromise , the BBC offered to air the video two days later on The Late , Late Breakfast Show hosted by Noel Edmonds , a variety show that featured live music performances , but rarely aired videos . They agreed to show it on the programme only if McCartney appeared live and gave an interview . He reluctantly agreed and appeared with his wife Linda live on the show on Saturday , 29 October 1983 ; his first live UK TV appearance since 1973 . The interview was stilted and the McCartneys made little or no effort to answer any of Edmonds ' questions . After some reportedly hostile negotiations , the programme 's entire show was built around the ' medicine men ' theme of the video and the guest who had been booked to appear that week Olivia Newton John had to agree to appear to promote the video in a skit , reportedly against her will and she expressed anger at having her ' starring ' role in the show downgraded into a lesser guest spot to make way for the video and McCartney . The airing of the video on this highly rated show was successful as the track climbed back up the chart the following week and aired on Top Of The Pops on Thursday , 4 November 1983 . 
 In the short film , the duo play " Mac and Jack " , a pair of conmen who sell a " miracle potion " . The salesman ( McCartney ) offers Jackson the potion , and claims that it is " guaranteed to give you the strength of a raging bull " . Jackson drinks the potion and challenges a large man to arm @-@ wrestle . Unbeknownst to a watching crowd , the man — along with Linda — is also in on the scam . After Jackson wins the rigged contest , the crowd of people surge forward and buy the potion . Mac and Jack then donate all of the money earned from the scam to an orphanage . After this scene , McCartney and Jackson star as vaudeville performers who sing and dance at a bar . On stage , the duo appear in clown makeup at one point and quickly go through a number of costume changes . Jackson flirts with a young woman portrayed by his real @-@ life sister La Toya . When law @-@ enforcement officers appear at the back of the venue , Mac quickly starts a small fire onstage and Linda hollers " FIRE ! " , emptying the venue and allowing the group to escape via backstage ( yet somehow finding time to change into <unk> first ) . The video ends with Paul , Linda , and Michael as they drive off into the sunset . La Toya , who was handed a bunch of flowers by McCartney , is left at the roadside . 
 The video also features appearances by director Giraldi as a pool shark who is conned by McCartney , and Art Carney as an audience member for the vaudeville show . 
 Giraldi said of Jackson and McCartney , " Michael didn 't <unk> Paul , and Paul didn 't <unk> Michael " . He added that production of the video was hard work because " the egos could fill a room " . The video introduced both dialogue and storyline , an element extended upon in Michael Jackson 's Thriller . In a 1984 study of music videos conducted by the National Coalition on Television Violence , the Jacksons were rated " very violent , " citing Michael Jackson 's " Billie Jean , " " Thriller " , and " Say Say Say " as well as Jermaine Jackson 's " Dynamite " and the Jacksons ' " Torture . " In a list compiled by Billboard at the end of 1984 , the music video was named the fourth best of the year , and the rest of the top four were also short films by Jackson . 
 The Manchester Evening News later described the " Say Say Say " video as an " anarchic caper " that " plays out like an Emir Kusturica feature " . PopMatters stated that the music videos of " Say Say Say " and " Goodnight Tonight " turned " a pair of otherwise forgettable songs into something worth watching " . Steven Greenlee of The Boston Globe reflected that the video was both " horrifying and compelling " , and stated the ridiculousness of a potion which could aid Jackson in beating somebody at arm wrestling . He added , " It 's even harder to believe that the two of them didn 't get the pulp beaten out of them in that bar for dressing like a pair of Chess King employees " . The " Say Say Say " video was later included on the DVDs The McCartney Years and Michael Jackson 's Vision . 
 = = = Themes = = = 
 Two authors later reviewed the short film and documented two central themes . The first is a " Child / Man " theme ; the role of both a boy and an adult , which writer James M. Curtis states Jackson plays throughout the music video for " Say Say Say " . Curtis writes that the bathroom scene involving the shaving foam is reminiscent of boys copying their fathers . He adds that the scene marks " the distinction between Michael 's roles as a Child and as a Man " . The writer also highlights the part where the singer supposedly becomes strengthened with a miracle potion , a further play on the " Child / Man " theme . Furthermore , Curtis observes that Paul and Linda McCartney seem to act as if they are Jackson 's parents in the short film . The author also notes that in a scene where Jackson is handed a bouquet of flowers from a girl , it is a reversal of one from City Lights , a 1931 film starring Charlie Chaplin , whom the singer greatly adored . 
 The second of the two main themes in the music video is of African American history and culture , as some of the vaudeville scenes in the short film acknowledge minstrel shows and blackface . Author W. T. Lhamon writes that the video is set in the Californian Depression , and that McCartney and Jackson " convey a compactly corrupt history of blackface " as they con their way to riches with the Mac and Jack show . Lhamon was critical of the pair and of the video because he felt that the African American theme had not been made explicitly known . The author expressed his view that aspects of the short film were historically out @-@ of @-@ synch with interracial relations . He stated , " Nearly everything in the video is backward . Mack 's white hand continually helping black Jack on board , for instance , reverses the general process I have shown of blacks providing whites with their sustaining gestures . " Lhamon added , " In a just world , Jackson should be pulling McCartney onto the wagon , not the other way around . " 
 = = Track listing = = 
 UK 7 " single 
 " Say Say Say " ( with Michael Jackson ) – 3 : 55 
 " Ode to a Koala Bear " – 3 : 45 
 US 12 " single 
 " Say Say Say " ( special version ) ( with Michael Jackson ) – 5 : 40 
 " Say Say Say ( Instrumental ) " ( with Michael Jackson ) – 7 : 00 
 " Ode to a Koala Bear " – 3 : 45 
 Digital streaming 
 " Say Say Say " ( radio edit / 2015 remix ) ( with Michael Jackson ) – 3 : 41 
 Digital download - via <unk> 
 " Say Say Say " ( radio edit instrumental / 2015 remix ) ( with Michael Jackson ) - 3 : 41 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = Trevor ( The X @-@ Files ) = 
 " Trevor " is the seventeenth episode of the sixth season of the science fiction television series The X @-@ Files . It premiered on the Fox network on April 11 , 1999 in the United States . The episode was written by Jim Guttridge and Ken Hawryliw , and directed by Rob Bowman . " Trevor " is a " Monster @-@ of @-@ the @-@ Week " episode , unconnected to the series ' wider mythology . " Trevor " earned a Nielsen household rating of 10 @.@ 4 , being watched by 17 @.@ 6 million people in its initial broadcast . The episode received mixed reviews from critics . 
 The X @-@ Files centers on a pair of FBI Special Agents Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) who work on cases usually , but not exclusively , linked to the paranormal , called X @-@ Files . Agent Mulder is a believer in the paranormal , while the skeptical Agent Scully has been assigned by the FBI to debunk his work . However , the two have developed a close friendship . In " Trevor " , Agents Mulder and Scully search for an escaped convict in Mississippi who was suspected of killing his prison warden under mysterious circumstances . They then set out to find and apprehend him , but in doing so , Agents Mulder and Scully quickly discover that he has the uncanny ability to pass through solid , conductive materials . 
 " Trevor " was co @-@ written by Ken Hawryliw and Jim Guttridge , who developed a partnership after working on the television series Millennium . The episode was originally supposed to be set in Oklahoma , but was changed to Mississippi for budgetary reasons . In addition , many of the special effects used in the episode were created by conventional methods in order to not exceed the budget of the show ; this included the removal of a scene that would have shown Pinker moving through the walls in a motel . 
 = = Plot = = 
 At a prison farm in Stringer , Mississippi , the prisoners are being made to prepare and fortify the prison for a series of devastating tornadoes , which are due to pass through within the next few hours . An argument breaks out between Wilson " Pinker " Rawls ( John Diehl ) and another inmate , causing Pinker to pin the other prisoner 's hand to a wall with a nail . After reporting to the prison warden for the incident , Pinker is made to sit through the tornado in a tiny shack , referred to as " the box " by the prisoners and guards . After the tornadoes pass through the county , the prisoners and guards emerge from their shelters and discover that " the box " has been totally destroyed . One of the prison guards later finds the prison warden 's body split in half around the waist , propping his office door shut from the inside . 
 Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) , Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) soon arrive to investigate . Scully performs an autopsy and concludes that the severing of the torso and severe burn marks could have been caused by the weather conditions at the time and that a substantial amount of the torso is missing from the severing . The prison guard who found the warden 's body insists that it was the work of Pinker , but cannot bring himself to explain how Pinker did it . Mulder finds that a wall in the office has become extremely brittle and crumbles at the slightest touch . 
 Meanwhile , in Meridian , Mississippi , a woman and her boyfriend are watching the television when a news report describes the tornado killing Pinker as it hit the prison . The woman is visibly disturbed by the news . Elsewhere , it is revealed that Pinker is alive and has broken into a clothing store . He is confronted by the strip mall 's private security guard and handcuffed . However , Pinker quickly slips out of the handcuffs and escapes , stealing the security guard 's car . Later , Mulder inspects the handcuffs and finds that they too have become brittle like the wall at the prison , crumbling into dust . Meanwhile , Pinker begins to ransack the house of an old friend looking for something when the occupant returns . After a brief discussion with Pinker requesting the whereabouts of their mutual ex @-@ girlfriend - the woman from earlier watching the television report - the man pulls a gun . However , as he tries to shoot Pinker , the bullets merely pass through him and Pinker kills him by apparently burning his face off . Mulder and Scully arrive shortly thereafter ; Mulder examines the bullets embedded in the wall and finds that they , too , crumble into dust when compressed . He muses that Pinker , after being struck by lightning , must have developed the ability to pass through solid objects . Scully argues that Pinker cannot possibly defy the laws of chemistry . 
 Evidence leads the agents to track down the lady who was upset over Pinker 's death , June . June 's sister , Jackie , tries to warn her , but Pinker accosts her and her son Trevor . Mulder and Scully later discover Jackie , who tells the agents that Pinker has the ability to walk through walls . June changed her last name to avoid Pinker ; the agents find her living with her new boyfriend and convince her to go into witness protection . Pinker , who was hiding in the agents ' car , leaves a charred message on June 's house wall , but the agents discover that glass , acting as an insulator to electricity , repulses <unk> abilities . Scully deciphers a doctor 's note and learns that Pinker is actually in search of his son , who he has not met yet . 
 June is placed into witness protection at a motel by the Mississippi Highway Patrol . However , Pinker kidnaps June after killing the state trooper assigned to guard her . Pinker discovers his child is actually Trevor , who has been living with Jackie for the past several years as her child . Pinker attempts to kidnap Trevor , but is confronted by Mulder , who is armed with a shotgun loaded with rubber bullets . Pinker manages to evade Mulder and continues to chase after Trevor and Scully , whom he quickly corners . Scully , using Mulder 's glass insulator hypothesis , locks herself inside a telephone booth with Trevor . After failing to break into the telephone booth , Pinker sees his son trembling before him . Realizing that he does not want to scare his son anymore , Pinker decides to walk away . However , June appears and hits Pinker with her car ; he passes through the metal components of the car , but not its glass windshield , and is cut in half as a result , killing him instantly . Mulder goes to June , who says she had to do it or else Pinker would have hurt Trevor . She then asks what did he [ Pinker ] want , to which Mulder replies " Maybe another chance . " , causing June to cry . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 " Trevor " was co @-@ written by Ken Hawryliw and Jim Guttridge . Hawryliw had been The X @-@ Files ' property master from 1993 to 1998 while the show was filmed in Vancouver . Over the years , he had written several scripts but had never submitted them to The X @-@ Files writing staff . Eventually , he moved on to work on Millennium , where he developed a friendship with Guttridge . Guttridge showed Hawryliw a script he had been writing that he wanted to submit for The X @-@ Files . Although the story was not written like an X @-@ Files script , Hawryliw enjoyed the premise . The two decided to form a partnership : Guttridge would craft the basic story and script and Hawryliw would help to craft it into an X @-@ Files script . Hawryliw later explained that the idea to make Pinker search out his son : " There 's this unique man who can walk through walls . Now , who would this ability best apply to ? Well , a convict obviously — a guy in prison . But then we had to give him an even stronger , more compelling reason to want his freedom , and that was where his son came from " . 
 After the episode was submitted , several re @-@ writes were requested . Originally , the story was supposed to take place in Oklahoma , noted for being the center of Tornado Alley . For budgetary reasons , the episode was relocated to Mississippi . Another scene , originally scripted to take place at a motel , featured Pinker taking a short cut through a wall . This scene was cut not only because of budgetary reasons , but also because the writers and producers wanted to shift the episode from a supernatural focus to an emotional one . 
 = = = Casting and filming = = = 
 To play the part of Pinker , cast director Rick Millikan read a number of actors . At the last minute , Millikan decided to make a call to noted actor John Diehl , famous for his work in Nixon , Stargate , and Miami Vice . Millikan explained that , " [ Diehl ] had been on my list to put into the show since Day One . [ ... ] It turned out the producers like him too — he 'd read for us a couple of times already — and we were able to get him in without even a reading " . 
 In order to film the episode without exceeding the budget , director Rob Bowman used a combination of " clever camera angles , strategic use of breakaway cement , and — in the case of Mulder 's trunk lid — the miracle of auto @-@ body repair substance Bondo " . Bowman was most proud of the scene where Mulder pushes on the prison 's walls , only to have it crumble in the shape of a man . He explained that , " the first time we did it , all we got was a big square hole [ ... ] but we didn 't want it to look like Bugs Bunny with his ears sticking out , either " . Eventually , the crew was able to create a breakaway section that " suggested , rather than outlined perfectly " , the shape of a human body . Finally , hair department head Dena Green was instructed to sweep Diehl 's hair to the back of his head during any scene that featured him after he had walked through a solid object . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Trevor " first aired in the United States on April 11 , 1999 . This episode earned a Nielsen rating of 10 @.@ 4 , with a 16 share , meaning that roughly 10 @.@ 4 percent of all television @-@ equipped households , and 16 percent of households watching television , were tuned in to the episode . It was viewed by 17 @.@ 6 million viewers . The episode aired in the United Kingdom and Ireland on Sky1 on June 27 , 1999 and received 0 @.@ 73 million viewers . The episode was the third most watched episode that week , being beaten by The X @-@ Files episode " Milagro " . Fox promoted the episode with the tagline " The walls are alive ! How can Mulder and Scully chase a killer who can pass through anything ? " 
 Critical reception to the episode was mostly mixed . Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson , in their book Wanting to Believe : A Critical Guide to The X @-@ Files , Millennium & The Lone Gunmen , rated the episode two stars out of five , calling it " The X @-@ Files at its most generic " . The two noted that the episode had only one good visual gimmick ; the ability for Pinker to walk through walls , which , they argue , was never exploited to its full extent . Ultimately , the two conduced that , " ' Trevor ' is just a bit too disposable and routine to hold much interest " . Todd VanDerWerff of The A.V. Club awarded the episode a " C " and wrote that the story " almost works " , but that it " focuses too much on the ' monster ' and not enough on Mulder and Scully . " He called the finished product " something that has a very manufactured quality to it " . Furthermore , he criticized the name of the episode , noting that , since half @-@ way through the episode no one has turned up with the name Trevor and the antagonist is obviously motivated by something instead of money , Pinker " must have a son " . VanDerWerff did , however , positively compliment the death sequences as well as the corpses , calling the latter " nicely gruesome " . In a comparative list between Fringe episodes and The X @-@ Files episodes , UGO Networks writer Alex Zalben named " Trevor " as the least effective " walking through walls " story , being beaten by the Fringe episode " Safe " . 
 Not all reviews were completely negative . Paula Vitaris from Cinefantastique gave the episode a moderately positive review and awarded it two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half stars out of four . Vitaris , despite criticizing the shaky science behind the tornado with the ability to allow someone to pass through matter , called the episode 's special effects " superb " : she later cited the " fake corpses " as the best examples . Tom Kessenich , in his book Examination : An Unauthorized Look at Seasons 6 – 9 of the X @-@ Files wrote positively of the episode , writing , " With ' Trevor ' [ the show ] offered solid proof to those who thought otherwise that The X @-@ Files can still deliver a powerful [ Monster @-@ of @-@ the @-@ Week ] when the mood strikes . " 
 = Science and technology of the Song dynasty = 
 The Song dynasty ( Chinese : 宋朝 ; 960 – 1279 CE ) provided some of the most significant technological advances in Chinese history , many of which came from talented statesmen drafted by the government through imperial examinations . 
 The ingenuity of advanced mechanical engineering had a long tradition in China . The Song engineer Su Song admitted that he and his contemporaries were building upon the achievements of the ancients such as Zhang Heng ( 78 – 139 ) , an astronomer , inventor , and early master of mechanical gears . The application of movable type printing advanced the already widespread use of woodblock printing to educate and amuse Confucian students and the masses . The application of new weapons employing the use of gunpowder enabled the Song to ward off its militant enemies — the Liao , Western Xia , and Jin with weapons such as cannons — until its collapse to the Mongol forces of Kublai Khan in the late 13th century . 
 Notable advances in civil engineering , <unk> , and metallurgy were made in Song China , as well as the introduction of the windmill to China during the thirteenth century . These advances , along with the introduction of paper @-@ printed money , helped revolutionize and sustain the economy of the Song dynasty . 
 = = Polymaths and mechanical engineering = = 
 = = = Polymaths = = = 
 Polymath personalities – that is , people knowledgeable across an encyclopaedic range of topics – such as Shen Kuo ( 1031 – 1095 ) and Su Song ( 1020 – 1101 ) embodied the spirit of early empirical science and technology in the Song era . Shen is famous for discovering the concept of true north and magnetic declination towards the North Pole by calculating a more accurate measurement of the astronomical meridian , and fixed the calculated position of the pole star that had shifted over the centuries . This allowed sailors to navigate the seas more accurately with the magnetic needle compass , also first described by Shen . Shen was made famous for his written description of Bi Sheng , the inventor of movable type printing . Shen was also interested in geology , as he formulated a theory of geomorphology and climate change over time after making observations of strange natural phenomena . Using contemporary knowledge of solar eclipses and lunar eclipses , he theorized that the sun and moon were spherical in shape , not flat , while expanding upon the reasoning of earlier Chinese astronomical theorists . Along with his colleague Wei Pu in the Bureau of Astronomy , Shen used cosmological hypotheses when describing the variations of planetary motion , including retrogradation . One of Shen 's greatest achievements , aided by Wei Pu , was correcting the lunar error by diligently recording and plotting the moon 's orbital path three times a night over a period of five years . Unfortunately Shen had many political rivals at court who were determined to sabotage his work . The court fully accepted their corrections to lunar and solar error , but only partially adopted Shen and Wei 's corrected plotting of the planetary orbital paths and various speeds . Su Song , one of Shen Kuo 's political rivals at court , wrote a famous pharmaceutical treatise in 1070 known as the Bencao <unk> , which included related subjects on botany , zoology , metallurgy , and mineralogy . This treatise included many medicinal applications , including the use of <unk> as a pharmaceutical drug . He also was the author of a large celestial atlas of five different star maps , and his extensive written and illustrative work in cartography helped solve a heated border dispute between the Song dynasty and its Khitan neighbor of the Liao dynasty . However , Su was most famous for his hydraulic @-@ powered astronomical clock tower , crowned with a mechanically driven armillary sphere , which was erected in the capital city of Kaifeng in the year 1088 . Su 's clock tower employed the escapement mechanism two centuries before it was applied in clocks of Europe . Su 's clock tower also featured the earliest known endless power @-@ transmitting chain drive in the world , as outlined in his horological treatise of 1092 . The cases of these two men display the eagerness of the Song in drafting highly skilled officials who were knowledgeable in the various sciences which could ultimately benefit the administration , the military , the economy , and the people . 
 Intellectual men of letters like the versatile Shen Kuo dabbled in subjects as diverse as mathematics , geography , geology , economics , engineering , medicine , art criticism , archaeology , military strategy , and diplomacy , among others . On a court mission to inspect a frontier region , Shen Kuo once made a raised @-@ relief map of wood and glue @-@ soaked sawdust to show the mountains , roads , rivers , and passes to other officials . He once computed the total number of possible situations on a game board , another time the longest possible military campaign given the limits of human carriers who would bring their own food and food for other soldiers . Shen Kuo is also noted for improving the designs of the inflow clepsydra clock for a more efficient higher @-@ order interpolation , the armillary sphere , the gnomon , and the astronomical sighting tube ; increasing its width for better observation of the pole star and other celestial bodies . Shen Kuo also experimented with camera obscura , only a few decades after the first to do so , Ibn al @-@ Haytham ( 965 – 1039 ) . 
 = = = <unk> and south @-@ pointing chariot = = = 
 There were many other important figures in the Song era besides Shen Kuo and Su Song , many of whom contributed greatly to the technological innovations of the time period . Although the mechanically driven mile @-@ marking device of the carriage @-@ drawn odometer had been known in China since the ancient Han dynasty , the Song Shi ( compiled in 1345 ) provides a much greater description and more in @-@ depth view of the device than earlier Chinese sources . The Song Shi states : 
 The odometer . [ The mile @-@ measuring carriage ] is painted red , with pictures of flowers and birds on the four sides , and constructed in two storeys , handsomely adorned with carvings . At the completion of every li , the wooden figure of a man in the lower storey strikes a drum ; at the completion of every ten li , the wooden figure in the upper storey strikes a bell . The carriage @-@ pole ends in a phoenix @-@ head , and the carriage is drawn by four horses . The escort was formerly of 18 men , but in the 4th year of the <unk> reign period ( 987 ) the emperor Taizong increased it to 30 . In the 5th year of the Tian @-@ Sheng reign @-@ period ( 1027 ) the Chief Chamberlain Lu Daolong presented specifications for the construction of odometers as follows : [ ... ] 
 What follows is a long dissertation made by the Chief Chamberlain Lu Daolong on the ranging measurements and sizes of wheels and gears . However , the concluding paragraph provides description at the end of how the device ultimately functions : 
 When the middle horizontal wheel has made 1 revolution , the carriage will have gone 1 li and the wooden figure in the lower story will strike the drum . When the upper horizontal wheel has made 1 revolution , the carriage will have gone 10 li and the figure in the upper storey will strike the bell . The number of wheels used , great and small , is 8 inches ( 200 mm ) in all , with a total of 285 teeth . Thus the motion is transmitted as if by the links of a chain , the " dog @-@ teeth " mutually engaging with each other , so that by due revolution everything comes back to its original starting point . 
 In the Song period ( and once during the earlier Tang period ) , the odometer device was combined with the south @-@ pointing chariot device , which was probably first invented by the ancient Chinese mechanical engineer Ma Jun ( 200 – 265 ) . The south @-@ pointing chariot was a wheeled vehicle that may , in some cases , have incorporated complex differential gears . ( These are used now in nearly all modern automobiles to apply equal amounts of torque to wheels rotating at different speeds while turning . ) The differential gears could have been used to keep a mechanically operated pointer aiming in a fixed direction , to the south , compensating for whatever turns the chariot made . Other arrangements of gears could also have been used for the same purpose . The device used mechanical dead reckoning , rather than the magnetism of a compass , in order to navigate and find one 's directional bearings . Yan Su ( <unk> ; c . 961 – 1040 ) , the Divisional Director in the Ministry of Works , recreated a south @-@ pointing chariot device in 1027 , and his specifications for creating the device were provided in the Song Shi . This is of little surprise , as Yan was somewhat of a polymath like Shen Kuo and Su Song , improving the design of the clepsydra clock , writing on mathematical harmonics , theory about tides , etc . The Song Shi text records that it was the engineer Wu Deren who combined the south @-@ pointing chariot and odometer in the year 1107 : 
 In the first year of the Da @-@ Guan reign period ( 1107 ) , the Chamberlain Wu Deren presented specifications of the south @-@ pointing carriage and the carriage with the li @-@ recording drum ( odometer ) . The two vehicles were made , and were first used that year at the great ceremony of the ancestral sacrifice . 
 The text then went on to describe in full detail the intricate mechanical design for the two devices combined into one . ( See the article on the south @-@ pointing chariot ) . 
 = = = Revolving repositories = = = 
 Besides clockwork , hydraulic @-@ powered armillary spheres , odometers , and mechanical compass vehicles , there were other impressive devices of mechanical engineering found during the Song dynasty . Although literary references for mechanical revolving repositories and book cases of Buddhist temples trace back to at least 823 during the Tang dynasty , they came to prominence during the Song dynasty . The invention of the revolving book case is considered to have happened earlier , and is credited to the layman Fu Xi in 544 . Revolving bookcases were popularized in Buddhist monasteries during the Song dynasty under the reign of Emperor Taizu , who ordered the mass printing of the Buddhist Tripiṭaka scriptures . Furthermore , the oldest surviving rotating book case dates to the Song period ( 12th century ) , found at the <unk> Monastery of <unk> , Hebei province . However , there were nine prominently known revolving repositories during the Song period , and one of them was even featured in an illustration of Li Jie 's book Yingzao Fashi ( ' Treatise on Architectural Methods ' ) of 1103 . The rotating repository of 1119 in Kaifu Temple near Changsha had five wheels which all turned together , and the revolving repository at Nanchan Temple of Suzhou featured a brake system of some sort ( sinologists are still uncertain how this operated , since the earliest known curve brake bands appear in the time of Leonardo da Vinci in Europe ) . A later Muslim traveler Shah Rukh ( son of the Turco @-@ Mongol warlord Timur ) came to Ming dynasty China in 1420 during the reign of the Yongle Emperor , and described a revolving repository in Ganzhou of Gansu province that he called a ' kiosque ' : 
 In another temple there is an octagonal kiosque , having from the top to the bottom fifteen stories . Each story contains apartments decorated with lacquer in the <unk> manner , with ante @-@ rooms and verandahs ... It is entirely made of polished wood , and this again gilded so admirably that it seems to be of solid gold . There is a vault below it . An iron shaft fixed in the center of the kiosque traverses it from bottom to top , and the lower end of this works in an iron plate , whilst the upper end bears on strong supports in the roof of the edifice which contains this pavilion . Thus a person in the vault can with a trifling exertion cause this great kiosque to revolve . All the carpenters , smiths , and painters in the world would learn something in their trades by coming here ! 
 = = = Textile machinery = = = 
 In the field of manufacturing textiles , Joseph Needham ( 1900 – 1995 ) wrote that the Chinese invented the quilling @-@ wheel by the 12th century , and wrote the mechanical belt drive was known since the 11th century . Qin Guan 's book Can Shu ( Book of Sericulture ) of 1090 described a silk @-@ reeling machine with an oscillating ' proto @-@ flyer ' , as the apparatus of the main reel of which the silk is bound is wound and powered by treadle motion . In this device the ramping arm of the flyer was activated simultaneously by a subsidiary belt drive . This machine was portrayed in an illustration of the Geng Zhi Tu book of 1237 , and again a more elaborate illustration was provided in a 17th @-@ century book . Qin Guan 's 1090 book stated that : 
 The pulley ( bearing the eccentric lug ) is provided with a groove for the reception of the driving belt , an endless band which responds to the movement of the machine by continuously rotating the pulley . 
 An endless rope or cord may have been used in Du Shi 's device of waterwheels that powered bellows of the blast furnace in the 1st century ( see Wind Power below ) . 
 = = Movable type printing = = 
 Printing technology in the form of movable type was invented by Bi Sheng ( <unk> ; 990 – 1051 ) in the 11th century . The work of Bi Sheng was written of by Shen Kuo in his Dream Pool Essays ( Mengxi Bitan ) . Movable type , alongside woodblock printing , increased literacy with the mass production of printed materials . This meant that parents could encourage sons to learn to read and write and therefore be able to take the imperial examination and become part of the growing learned bureaucracy . Movable type printing was further advanced in Joseon era Korea , where Bi Sheng 's baked clay characters were scrapped for metal type characters in 1234 . The movable type of Bi Sheng was later improved upon by Wang Zhen ( 1290 – 1333 ) , who invented wooden movable type c . 1298 , and Hua Sui ( 1439 – 1513 ) , who invented bronze movable type in China in 1490 ; yet the Koreans had metal movable type before Hua Sui , and even Wang Zhen had experimented with tin @-@ metal movable type . Although movable type and woodblock printing would remain the dominant types of printing methods for centuries , the European printing press ( employing the Hellenistic screw @-@ press ) was eventually adopted by East Asian countries . 
 For printing , the mass production of paper for writing was already well established in China . The papermaking process had been perfected and standardized by the Han dynasty court eunuch Cai Lun ( 50 – 121 ) in 105 , and was in widespread use for writing even by the 3rd century . The Song dynasty was the world 's first government in history to issue paper @-@ printed money — the banknote ( see Jiaozi and Huizi ) . Toilet paper had been in general use in China since the 6th century , paper bags for preserving the flavor of tea leaves by the 7th century , and by the Song dynasty government officials who had done a great service were rewarded by the court with gifts of paper @-@ printed money wrapped in paper envelopes . During the Song dynasty , independent and government sponsored industries were developed to meet the needs of a growing population that had reached over 100 million . For example , for the printing of paper money alone , the Song court established several government @-@ run mints and factories in the cities of Huizhou , Chengdu , Hangzhou , and Anqi . The size of the workforce employed in these paper money factories was quite large , as it was recorded in 1175 that the factory at Hangzhou alone employed more than a thousand workers a day . 
 = = Gunpowder warfare = = 
 Advances in military technology aided the Song dynasty in its defense against hostile neighbors to the north . The flamethrower found its origins in Byzantine @-@ era Greece , employing Greek fire ( a chemically complex , highly flammable petrol fluid ) in a device with a siphon hose by the 7th century . The earliest reference to Greek Fire in China was made in 917 , written by Wu Renchen in his Spring and Autumn Annals of the Ten Kingdoms . In 919 , the siphon projector @-@ pump was used to spread the ' fierce fire oil ' that could not be doused with water , as recorded by Lin Yu in his Wuyue <unk> , hence the first credible Chinese reference to the flamethrower employing the chemical solution of Greek fire ( see also Pen Huo Qi ) . Lin Yu mentioned also that the ' fierce fire oil ' derived ultimately from one of China 's maritime contacts in the ' southern seas ' , Arabia ( <unk> ) . In the Battle of Langshan Jiang in 919 , the naval fleet of the Wenmu King from Wuyue defeated a Huainan army from the Wu state ; Wenmu 's success was facilitated by the use of ' fire oil ' ( ' huo you ' ) to burn their fleet , signifying the first Chinese use of gunpowder in a battle . The Chinese applied the use of double @-@ piston bellows to pump petrol out of a single cylinder ( with an upstroke and downstroke ) , lit at the end by a slow @-@ burning gunpowder match to fire a continuous stream of flame . This device was featured in description and illustration of the Wujing Zongyao military manuscript of 1044 . In the suppression of the Southern Tang state by 976 , early Song naval forces confronted them on the Yangtze River in 975 . Southern Tang forces attempted to use flamethrowers against the Song navy , but were accidentally consumed by their own fire when violent winds swept in their direction . 
 Although the destructive effects of gunpowder were described in the earlier Tang dynasty by a Daoist alchemist , the earliest @-@ known existent written formulas for gunpowder come from the Wujing Zongyao text of 1044 , which described explosive bombs hurled from catapults . The earliest developments of the gun barrel and the projectile @-@ fire cannon were found in late Song China . The first art depiction of the Chinese ' fire lance ' ( a combination of a temporary @-@ fire flamethrower and gun ) was from a Buddhist mural painting of Dunhuang , dated circa 950 . These ' fire @-@ lances ' were widespread in use by the early 12th century , featuring hollowed bamboo poles as tubes to fire sand particles ( to blind and choke ) , lead pellets , bits of sharp metal and pottery shards , and finally large gunpowder @-@ propelled arrows and rocket weaponry . Eventually , perishable bamboo was replaced with hollow tubes of cast iron , and so too did the terminology of this new weapon change , from ' fire @-@ spear ' ( ' huo qiang ' ) to ' fire @-@ tube ' ( ' huo tong ' ) . This ancestor to the gun was complemented by the ancestor to the cannon , what the Chinese referred to since the 13th century as the ' multiple bullets magazine <unk> ' ( ' bai zu lian zhu pao ' ) , a tube of bronze or cast iron that was filled with about 100 lead balls . 
 The earliest known depiction of a gun is a sculpture from a cave in Sichuan , dating to 1128 , that portrays a figure carrying a vase @-@ shaped bombard , firing flames and a cannonball . However , the oldest existent archaeological discovery of a metal barrel handgun is the Heilongjiang hand cannon from the Chinese Heilongjiang excavation , dated to 1288 . The Chinese also discovered the explosive potential of packing hollowed cannonball shells with gunpowder . Written later by Jiao Yu in his Huolongjing ( mid 14th century ) , this manuscript recorded an earlier Song @-@ era cast iron cannon known as the ' flying @-@ cloud thunderclap eruptor ' ( <unk> <unk> pi @-@ li pao ) . The manuscript stated that : 
 The shells are made of cast iron , as large as a bowl and shaped like a ball . Inside they contain half a pound of ' magic ' gunpowder . They are sent flying towards the enemy camp from an eruptor ; and when they get there a sound like a thunder @-@ clap is heard , and flashes of light appear . If ten of these shells are fired successfully into the enemy camp , the whole place will be set ablaze ... 
 As noted before , the change in terminology for these new weapons during the Song period were gradual . The early Song cannons were at first termed the same way as the Chinese trebuchet catapult . A later Ming dynasty scholar known as Mao <unk> would explain this use of terminology and true origins of the cannon in his text of the Wubei Zhi , written in 1628 : 
 The Song people used the turntable trebuchet , the single @-@ pole trebuchet and the squatting @-@ tiger trebuchet . They were all called ' fire trebuchets ' because they were used to project fire @-@ weapons like the ( fire- ) ball , ( fire- ) falcon , and ( fire- ) lance . They were the ancestors of the cannon . 
 The 14th century Huolongjing was also one of the first Chinese texts to carefully describe to the use of explosive land mines , which had been used by the late Song Chinese against the Mongols in 1277 , and employed by the Yuan dynasty afterwards . The innovation of the detonated land mine was accredited to one Luo <unk> in the campaign of defense against the Mongol invasion by Kublai Khan , Later Chinese texts revealed that the Chinese land mine employed either a rip cord or a motion booby trap of a pin releasing falling weights that rotated a steel flint wheel , which in turn created sparks that ignited the train of fuses for the land mines . Furthermore , the Song employed the earliest known gunpowder @-@ propelled rockets in warfare during the late 13th century , its earliest form being the archaic Fire Arrow . When the Northern Song capital of Kaifeng fell to the Jurchens in 1126 , it was written by Xia Shaozeng that 20 @,@ 000 fire arrows were handed over to the Jurchens in their conquest . An even earlier Chinese text of the Wujing Zongyao ( " Collection of the Most Important Military Techniques " ) , written in 1044 by the Song scholars Zeng <unk> and Yang Weide , described the use of three spring or triple bow arcuballista that fired arrow bolts holding gunpowder packets near the head of the arrow . Going back yet even farther , the Wu Li Xiao Shi ( 1630 , second edition 1664 ) of Fang <unk> stated that fire arrows were presented to Emperor Taizu of Song ( r . 960 – 976 ) in 960 . 
 = = Civil engineering = = 
 In ancient China , the sluice gate , the canal lock , and flash lock had been known since at least the 1st century BCE ( as sources then alluded that they were not new innovations ) , during the ancient Han dynasty ( 202 BCE – 220 CE ) . During the Song dynasty that the pound lock was first invented in 984 by the Assistant Commissioner of Transport for Huainan , the engineer Qiao Weiyue . During his day , the Chinese became concerned with a barge traffic problem at the <unk> <unk> section of the Grand Canal , as ships often became wrecked while passing the double slipways and were robbed of the tax grain by local bandits . The historical text of the Song Shi ( compiled in 1345 ) stated that in 984 : 
 Qiao Weiyue also built five double slipways ( lit. dams ) between <unk> and <unk> ( or , the quays on the Huai waterfront ) . Each of these had ten lanes for the barges to go up and down . Their cargoes of imperial tax @-@ grain were heavy , and as they were passing over they often came to grief and were damaged or wrecked , with loss of the grain and peculation by a cabal of the workers in league with local bandits hidden nearby . Qiao Weiyue therefore first ordered the construction of two gates at the third dam along the West River ( near <unk> ) . The distance between the two gates was rather more than 50 paces ( 250 ft ) and the whole space was covered over with a great roof like a shed . The gates were ' hanging gates ' ; ( when they were closed ) the water accumulated like a tide until the required level was reached , and then when the time came it was allowed to flow out . He also built a horizontal bridge to protect their foundations . After this was done ( to all the double slipways ) the previous corruption was completely eliminated , and the passage of the boats went on without the slightest impediment . 
 This practice became widespread , and was even written of by the Chinese polymath scientist Shen Kuo in his Dream Pool Essays ( 1088 ) . Shen Kuo wrote that the establishment of pound lock gates at Zhenzhou ( presumably <unk> along the Yangtze ) during the Tian Sheng reign period ( 1023 – 1031 ) freed up the use of five hundred working laborers at the canal each year , amounting to the saving of up to 1 @,@ 250 @,@ 000 strings of cash annually . He wrote that the old method of hauling boats over limited the size of the cargo to 300 tan of rice per vessel ( roughly 21 long tons / 21 @,@ 000 kg ) , but after the pound locks were introduced , boats carrying 400 tan ( roughly 28 long tons / 28 @,@ 000 kg ) could then be used . Shen wrote that by his time ( c . 1080 ) government boats could carry cargo weights of up to 700 tan ( 49 @.@ 5 long tons / 50 @,@ 300 kg ) , while private boats could hold as much as 800 bags , each weighing 2 tan ( i.e. 113 long tons / 115 @,@ 000 kg ) . Shen Kuo also noted that proper use of sluice gates at irrigation canals was the best means of achieving success in the silt fertilization method . However , agricultural and transportation needs had the potential to conflict with one another . This is best represented in the Dongpo <unk> of the governmental official and famous poet Su Shi ( 1037 – 1101 ) , who wrote about two decades before Shen Kuo in 1060 : 
 Several years ago the government built sluice gates for the silt fertilization method , though many people disagreed with the plan . In spite of all opposition it was carried through , yet it had little success . When the torrents on Fan Shan were abundant , the gates were kept closed , and this caused damage ( by flooding ) of fields , tombs , and houses . When the torrents subsided in the late autumn the sluices were opened , and thus the fields were irrigated with silt @-@ bearing water , but the deposit was not as thick as what the peasants call ' steamed cake silt ' ( so they were not satisfied ) . Finally the government got tired of it and stopped . In this connection I remember reading the <unk> of Bai Juyi ( the poet ) in which he says that he once had a position as Traffic Commissioner . As the Bian River was getting so shallow that it hindered the passage of boats he suggested that the sluice gates along the river and canal should be closed , but the Military Governor pointed out that the river was bordered on both sides by fields which supplied army grain , and if these were denied irrigation ( water and silt ) because of the closing of the sluice gates , it would lead to shortages in army grain supplies . From this I learnt that in the Tang period there were government fields and sluice gates on both sides of the river , and that irrigation was carried on ( continuously ) even when the water was high . If this could be done ( successfully ) in old times , why can it not be done now ? I should like to enquire further about the matter from experts . 
 Although the drydock had been known in Ptolemaic Egypt since the late 3rd century BCE ( by a Phoenician ; not used again until Henry VII of England in 1495 ) , the scientist and statesman Shen Kuo wrote of its use in China to repair boats during the 11th century . In his Dream Pool Essays ( 1088 ) , Shen Kuo wrote : 
 At the beginning of the dynasty ( c . 965 ) the two Zhe provinces ( now Zhejiang and southern Jiangsu ) presented ( to the throne ) two dragon ships each more than ( 60 @.@ 00 m / 200 ft ) in length . The upper works included several decks with palatial cabins and saloons , containing thrones and couches all ready for imperial tours of inspection . After many years , their hulls decayed and needed repairs , but the work was impossible as long as they were afloat . So in the Xi @-@ Ning reign period ( 1068 to 1077 ) a palace official Huang Huaixin suggested a plan . A large basin was excavated at the north end of the <unk> Lake capable of containing the dragon ships , and in it heavy crosswise beams were laid down upon a foundation of pillars . Then ( a breach was made ) so that the basin quickly filled with water , after which the ships were towed in above the beams . The ( breach now being closed ) the water was pumped out by wheels so that the ships rested quite in the air . When the repairs were complete , the water was let in again , so that the ships were afloat once more ( and could leave the dock ) . Finally the beams and pillars were taken away , and the whole basin covered over with a great roof so as to form a hangar in which the ships could be protected from the elements and avoid the damage caused by undue exposure . 
 = = <unk> = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 The Chinese of the Song dynasty were adept sailors who traveled to ports of call as far away as Fatimid Egypt . They were well equipped for their journeys abroad , in large seagoing vessels steered by stern @-@ post rudders and guided by the directional compass . Even before Shen Kuo and Zhu Yu had described the mariner 's magnetic needle compass , the earlier military treatise of the Wujing Zongyao in 1044 had also described a thermoremanence compass . This was a simple iron or steel needle that was heated , cooled , and placed in a bowl of water , producing the effect of weak magnetization , although its use was described only for navigation on land and not at sea . 
 = = = Literature = = = 
 There were plenty of descriptions in Chinese literature of the time on the operations and aspects of seaports , maritime merchant shipping , overseas trade , and the sailing ships themselves . In 1117 , the author Zhu Yu wrote not only of the magnetic compass for navigation , but also a hundred @-@ foot line with a hook that was cast over the deck of the ship , used to collect mud samples at the bottom of the sea in order for the crew to determine their whereabouts by the smell and appearance of the mud . In addition , Zhu Yu wrote of watertight bulkhead compartments in the hulls of ships to prevent sinking if damaged , the for @-@ and @-@ aft lug , taut mat sails , and the practice of beating @-@ to @-@ windward . Confirming Zhu Yu 's writing on Song dynasty ships with bulkhead hull compartments , in 1973 a 78 @-@ foot ( 24 m ) long , 29 @-@ foot ( 8 @.@ 8 m ) wide Song trade ship from c . 1277 was dredged from the water near the southern coast of China that contained 12 bulkhead compartment rooms in its hull . Maritime culture during the Song period was enhanced by these new technologies , along with the allowance of greater river and canal traffic . All around there was a bustling display of government run grain @-@ tax transport ships , tribute vessels and barges , private shipping vessels , a multitude of busy fishers in small fishing boats , along with the rich enjoying the comforts of their luxurious private yachts . 
 Besides Zhu Yu there were other prominent Chinese authors of maritime interests as well . In 1178 , the Guangzhou customs officer Zhou Qufei , who wrote about the Arab slave trade of Africans as far as Madagascar , stated this about Chinese seagoing ships , their sizes , durability at sea , and the lives of those on board : 
 The ships which sail the southern sea and south of it are like houses . When their sails are spread they are like great clouds in the sky . Their rudders are several tens of feet long . A single ship carries several hundred men , and has in the stores a year 's supply of grain . Pigs are fed and wine fermented on board . There is no account of dead or living , no going back to the mainland when once the people have set forth upon the <unk> sea . At daybreak , when the gong sounds aboard the ship , the animals can drink their fill , and crew and passengers alike forget all dangers . To those on board everything is hidden and lost in space , mountains , landmarks , and the countries of foreigners . The shipmaster may say ' To make such and such a country , with a favourable wind , in so many days , we should sight such and such a mountain , ( then ) the ship must steer in such and such a direction ' . But suddenly the wind may fall , and may not be strong enough to allow of the sighting of the mountain on the given day ; in such a case , bearings may have to be changed . And the ship ( on the other hand ) may be carried far beyond ( the landmark ) and may lose its bearings . A gale may spring up , the ship may be blown hither and thither , it may meet with shoals or be driven upon hidden rocks , then it may be broken to the very roofs ( of its deckhouses ) . A great ship with heavy cargo has nothing to fear from the high seas , but rather in shallow water it will come to grief . 
 The later Muslim Moroccan Berber traveler Ibn Batutta ( 1304 – 1377 ) wrote in greater detail about Chinese sailing vessels than Zhou Qufei . He noted that in and around the seas of China , only the distinct Chinese junk ships were used to sail the waters . He noted that the largest type of Chinese ships boasted a total of twelve sailing masts , while the smaller ones had three . On Chinese ships and their crews , Ibn Batutta stated : 
 The sails of these vessels are made of strips of bamboo , woven into the form of matting . The sailors never lower them ( while sailing , but simply ) change the direction of them according to whether the wind is blowing from one side or the other . When the ships cast anchor , the sails are left standing in the wind . Each of these ships is worked by 1 @,@ 000 men , 600 sailors and 400 marines , among whom there are archers and crossbowmen furnished with shields , and men who throw ( pots of ) <unk> . Each great vessel is followed by three others , a ' <unk> ' , a ' <unk> ' and a ' <unk> ' ( f <unk> : a pinnace , a small boat fitted with a rudder , and a rowing boat ) . These vessels are nowhere made except in the city of <unk> ( Quanzhou ) in China , or at Sin @-@ <unk> , which is the same as Sin al @-@ Sin ( Guangzhou ) . 
 Ibn Batutta then went on describing the means of their construction , and accurate depictions of separate bulkhead compartments in the hulls of the ships : 
 This is the manner in which they are made ; two ( parallel ) walls of very thick wooden ( planking ) are raised , and across the space between them are placed very thick planks ( the bulkheads ) secured longitudinally and transversely by means of large nails , each three ells in length . When these walls have thus been built , the lower deck is fitted in , and the ship is launched before the upper works are finished . The pieces of wood , and those parts of the hull , near the water ( <unk> ) serve for the crew to wash and to accomplish their natural necessities . On the sides of these pieces of wood also the oars are found ; they are as big as masts , and are worked by 10 or 15 men ( each ) , who row standing up . 
 Although Ibn Batutta had mentioned the size of the sailing crew , he described the sizes of the vessels further , as well as the lavish merchant cabins on board : 
 The vessels have four decks , upon which there are cabins and saloons for merchants . Several of these ' <unk> ' contain cupboards and other conveniences ; they have doors which can be locked , and keys for their occupiers . ( The merchants ) take with them their wives and concubines . It often happens that a man can be in his cabin without others on board realizing it , and they do not see him until the vessel has arrived in some port . The sailors also have their children in such cabins ; and ( in some parts of the ship ) they sew garden herbs , vegetables , and ginger in wooden tubs . The Commander of such a vessel is a great Emir ; when he lands , the archers and the <unk> ( i.e. black slaves , yet in China these men @-@ at @-@ arms would have most likely been Malays ) march before him bearing javelins and swords , with drums beating and trumpets blowing . When he arrives at the guesthouse where he is to stay , they set up their lances on each side of the gate , and mount guard throughout his visit . 
 = = = Paddle @-@ wheel ships = = = 
 During the Song dynasty there was also great amount of attention given to the building of efficient automotive vessels known as paddle wheel craft . The latter had been known in China perhaps since the 5th century , and certainly by the Tang dynasty in 784 with the successful paddle wheel warship design of Li Gao . In 1134 the Deputy Transport Commissioner of Zhejiang , Wu Ge , had paddle wheel warships constructed with a total of nine wheels and others with thirteen wheels . However , there were paddle wheel ships in the Song that were so large that 12 wheels were featured on each side of the vessel . In 1135 the famous general Yue Fei ( 1103 – 1142 ) ambushed a force of rebels under Yang Yao , entangling their paddle wheel craft by filling a lake with floating weeds and rotting logs , thus allowing them to board their ships and gain a strategic victory . In 1161 , gunpowder bombs and paddle wheel crafts were used effectively by the Song Chinese at the Battle of Tangdao and the Battle of Caishi along the Yangtze River against the Jurchen Jin dynasty during the Jin – Song Wars . The Jurchen invasion , led by Wanyan Liang ( the Prince of Hailing ) , failed to conquer the Southern Song . In 1183 the Nanjing naval commander Chen Tang was given a reward for constructing ninety paddle wheel craft and other warships . In 1176 , Emperor Xiaozong of Song ( r . 1162 – 1189 ) issued an imperial order to the Nanjing official Guo Gang ( who desired to convert damaged paddle wheel craft into junk ships and galleys ) not to limit the number of paddle wheel craft in the navy 's dockyards , since he had high esteem for the fast assault craft that won the Chinese victory at Caishi . However , paddle wheel craft found other uses besides effective assaults in warfare . The Arab or Persian Commissioner of Merchant Shipping for Quanzhou , the Muslim Pu Shougeng ( who served from 1250 to 1275 ) noted that paddle wheel ships were also used by the Chinese as tugboats for towing . 
 = = Metallurgy = = 
 The art of metallurgy during the Song dynasty built upon the efforts of earlier Chinese dynasties , while new methods were incorporated . The Chinese of the ancient Han dynasty ( 202 BCE – 220 CE ) figured out how to create steel by smelting together the carbon intermediary of wrought iron and cast iron by the 1st century BCE . However , there were two new Chinese innovations of the Song dynasty to create steel during the 11th century . This was the " <unk> " method that produced inferior , inhomogeneous steel , while the other was a precursor to the modern Bessemer process that utilized partial <unk> via repeated forging under a cold blast . 
 The per capita iron output rose sixfold between 806 and 1078 , and by 1078 Song China was producing 127 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 kg ( 125 @,@ 000 long tons ; 127 @,@ 000 t ) in weight of iron per year . The historian Donald B. Wagner points out that this estimate was based upon the total number of government tax receipts on iron from the various iron @-@ producing prefectures in the empire . In the smelting process of using huge bellows driven by hydraulics ( i.e. large waterwheels ) , massive amounts of charcoal were used in the production process , leading to a wide range of deforestation in northern China . However , by the end of the 11th century the Chinese discovered that using bituminous coke could replace the role of charcoal , hence many acres of forested land and prime timber in northern China were spared by the steel and iron industry with this switch of resources to coal . This massive increase in output of the iron and steel industry in China was the result of the Song dynasty 's needs for military expansion , private commercial demands for metal products such as cooking utensils found in the market and a wide variety of agricultural tools , and by new canals linking major centers of iron and steel production to the capital city 's bustling market . The many uses for manufactured iron products in the Song period included iron for weapons , implements , coins , architectural elements , musical bells , artistic statues , and components for machinery such as the hydraulic @-@ powered trip hammer , which had been known since the 1st century BCE during the ancient Han dynasty , and used extensively during the Song . Due to the enormous amount of production , the economic historian Robert Hartwell noted that Chinese iron and coal production in the following 12th century was equal to if not greater than England 's iron and coal production in the early phase of the Industrial Revolution during the late 18th century . However , the Chinese of the Song period did not harness the energy potential of coal in ways that would generate power mechanically , as in the later Industrial Revolution that would originate in the West . There were certain administrative prefectures during the Song era where the Chinese iron industry was mostly concentrated . For example , the poet and statesman Su Shi wrote a memorial to the throne in 1078 that specified 36 ironwork smelters , each employing a work force of several hundred people , in the <unk> Industrial Prefecture ( under his governance while he administered Xuzhou ) . 
 = = Wind power = = 
 The effect of wind power was appreciated in China long before the introduction of the windmill during the Song period . It is uncertain when the ancient Chinese used their very first inflatable bellows as wind @-@ blowing machines for kilns and furnaces . They existed perhaps as far back as the Shang dynasty ( 1600 BCE – 1050 BCE ) , due to the intricate bronze casting technology of the period . They were certainly used since the advent of the blast furnace in China from the 6th century BCE onwards , since cast iron farm tools and weapons were widespread by the 5th century BCE . In 31 the Han dynasty governmental prefect and engineer Du Shi ( d . 38 ) employed the use of horizontal waterwheels and a complex mechanical gear system to operate the large bellows that heated the blast furnace in smelting cast iron . Bellows continued in use for purposes of metallurgy , but other sources of wind power were discovered and harnessed . The Han dynasty artisan Ding Huan ( fl . 180 ) not only pioneered the invention of the <unk> suspension , but also the rotary fan , which could be used as a simple air conditioner . This employed seven wheel each about 3 m ( 10 ft ) in diameter and manually powered , but by the Tang dynasty ( 618 – 907 ) palaces featured water @-@ powered rotary fans for air conditioning , and in the Song dynasty , states Needham , " the refrigerant effects of artificial draught seem to have been appreciated ever more widely . " There was also an intricate Chinese rotary fan winnowing machine depicted in Wang Zhen 's agricultural treatise of the Nong Shu of 1313 ( although the earliest depiction of a winnowing machine was from a Han dynasty tomb model dated from the 2nd century BCE to the 2nd century ) . After these innovations , the windmill was finally introduced to China in the early 13th century via the Jin dynasty in northern China , during the late Song dynasty . 
 The Persian scholar Ali ibn Sahl Rabban al @-@ Tabari wrote c . 850 that the earlier Caliph Umar ibn al @-@ Khattab was murdered in 644 by the technician Abu Lu 'lu 'a , who claimed to construct mills driven by the power of wind . More reliable than this account were the windmills of the Banu Musa brothers ( 850 to 870 ) , while there are also several authors confirming the windmills of Sistan ( Iran ) , written of by Abu Ishaq al @-@ Istakhri and Abu al @-@ Qasim ibn <unk> . The northern Chinese under the rule of the Jurchen Jin dynasty became acquainted with the windmills of the Islamic world in the early 13th century . This is seen in an account of the Shu Zhai Lao Xue Cong Tan ( Collected Talks of the Learned Old Man of the Shu Studio ) , written by Sheng <unk> . It read : 
 In the collection of the private works of the ' Placid Retired Scholar ' ( Zhan Ran Ju Shi ) , there are ten poems on <unk> Fu . One of these describes the scenery of that place [ … ] and says that ' the stored wheat is milled by the rushing wind and the rice is pounded fresh by hanging pestles . The westerners ( i.e. Turks ) there use windmills ( feng mo ) just as the people of the south ( i.e. the Southern Song ) use watermills ( shui mo ) . And when they pound they have the <unk> hanging vertically ' . 
 Here Sheng <unk> quotes a written selection about windmills from the ' Placid Retired Scholar ' , who is actually Yelü <unk> ( 1190 – 1244 ) , a prominent Jin and Yuan statesman ( after the Jin fell in 1234 to the Mongols ) . The passage refers to Yelü 's journey to Turkestan ( modern Xinjiang ) in 1219 , and <unk> Fu is actually Samarkand ( in modern Uzbekistan ) . Afterwards , the Chinese applied the ' fore @-@ and @-@ aft ' sail riggings of typical Chinese junk ships to horizontal windmills . These windmills were used to operate the square @-@ pallet chain pumps used in Chinese irrigation since the ancient Han dynasty . Windmills of this nature were still in use during modern times in Tianjin and along the Yangtze River . The first European to view Chinese windmills was Jan <unk> , who spotted them in Jiangsu while traveling along the Grand Canal in 1656 , as part of the Dutch embassy to Beijing . The first European windmills written of were those of Dean Herbert of East Anglia in 1191 , who competed with the mills of the Abbey of Bury St Edmunds . 
 After the windmill , wind power applications in other devices and even vehicles were found in China . There was the ' sailing carriage ' that appeared by at least the Ming dynasty in the 16th century ( although it could have been known beforehand ) . European travelers to China in the late 16th century were surprised to find large single @-@ wheel passenger and cargo wheelbarrows not only pulled by mule or horse , but also mounted with ship @-@ like masts and sails to help push them along by the wind . 
 = = Archaeology = = 
 During the early half of the Song dynasty ( 960 – 1279 ) , the study of archaeology developed out of the antiquarian interests of the educated gentry and their desire to revive the use of ancient vessels in state rituals and ceremonies . This and the belief that ancient vessels were products of ' sages ' and not common people was criticized by Shen Kuo , who discussed metallurgy , optics , astronomy , geometry , and ancient music measures in addition to archeology . His contemporary Ouyang Xiu ( 1007 – 1072 ) compiled an analytical catalogue of ancient rubbings on stone and bronze . In accordance with the beliefs of the later Leopold von Ranke ( 1795 – 1886 ) , some Song gentry — such as Zhao <unk> ( 1081 – 1129 ) — valued archaeological evidence over historical works written after the fact , finding written records unreliable when they failed to match with the archaeological discoveries . Hong Mai ( 1123 – 1202 ) used ancient Han dynasty era vessels to debunk what he found to be fallacious descriptions of Han vessels in the <unk> archaeological catalogue compiled during the latter half of Huizong 's reign ( 1100 – 1125 ) . 
 = = Geology and climatology = = 
 Shen Kuo also made hypotheses in regards to geology and climatology in his Dream Pool Essays of 1088 . Shen believed that land was reshaped over time due to perpetual erosion , uplift , and deposition of silt , and cited his observance of horizontal strata of fossils embedded in a cliffside at Taihang as evidence that the area was once the location of an ancient seashore that had shifted hundreds of miles east over an enormous span of time . Shen also wrote that since petrified bamboos were found underground in a dry northern climate zone where they had never been known to grow , climates naturally shifted geographically over time . 
 = = = Gunpowder and ' fire @-@ weapons ' = = = 
 Chinese Fire Arrows 
 The History of Early Fireworks and Fire Arrows 
 Gunpowder and Firearms in China 
 Chinese Siege Warfare : Mechanical Artillery & Siege Weapons of Antiquity 
 = = = Other = = = 
 Chinese Inventions and Technology 
 Technology in the Song 
 Su Song 's Clock 1088 
 = Master Juba = 
 Master Juba ( ca . 1825 – ca . 1852 or 1853 ) was an African @-@ American dancer active in the 1840s . He was one of the first black performers in the United States to play onstage for white audiences and the only one of the era to tour with a white minstrel group . His real name was believed to be William Henry Lane , and he was also known as " Boz 's Juba " following Dickens 's graphic description of him in American Notes . 
 As a teenager , he began his career in the rough saloons and dance halls of Manhattan 's Five Points neighborhood , moving on to minstrel shows in the mid @-@ 1840s . " Master Juba " frequently challenged and defeated the best white dancers , including the period favorite , John Diamond . At the height of his American career , Juba 's act featured a sequence in which he imitated a series of famous dancers of the day and closed by performing in his own style . Being a black man , he appeared with minstrel troupes in which he imitated white minstrel dancers caricaturing black dance using the phenomenon Blackface . Even with his success in America , his greatest success came in England . 
 In 1848 " Boz 's Juba " traveled to London with the Ethiopian Serenaders , an otherwise white minstrel troupe . Boz 's Juba became a sensation in Britain for his dance style . He was a critical favorite and the most written about performer of the 1848 season . Nevertheless , an element of exploitation followed him through the British Isles , with writers treating him as an exhibit on display . Records next place Juba in both Britain and America in the early 1850s . His American critics were less kind , and Juba faded from the limelight . He died in 1852 or 1853 , likely from overwork and malnutrition . He was largely forgotten by historians until a 1947 article by Marian Hannah Winter resurrected his story . 
 Existing documents offer confused accounts of Juba 's dancing style , but certain themes emerge : it was percussive , varied in tempo , lightning @-@ fast at times , expressive , and unlike anything seen before . The dance likely incorporated both European folk steps , such as the Irish jig , and African @-@ derived steps used by plantation slaves , such as the walkaround . Prior to Juba 's career , the dance of blackface performance was more faithful to black culture than its other aspects , but as <unk> clowns and minstrels adopted elements of his style , Juba further enhanced this authenticity . By having an effect upon blackface performance , Juba was highly influential on the development of such American dance styles as tap , jazz , and step dancing . 
 = = Early life and career = = 
 Little is known about Juba 's life . Scant details appear in primary sources , and secondary sources — most dating to years after his death — are of dubious validity . Dance historian Marian Hannah Winter proposed that Juba was born to free parents in 1825 or later . Showman Michael B. Leavitt wrote in 1912 that Juba came from Providence , Rhode Island , and theater historian T. Allston Brown gives his real name as William Henry Lane . According to an item in the August 11 , 1895 edition of the New York Herald , Juba lived in New York 's Five Points District . This was a slum where Irish immigrants and free black people lived amidst brothels , dance houses , and saloons where black people regularly danced . The Irish and black populations intermingled and borrowed elements of folk culture from each other . One area of exchange was dance , and the Irish jig blended with black folk steps . In this environment , Juba learned to dance from his peers , including " Uncle " Jim Lowe , a black jig and reel dancer who performed in low @-@ brow establishments . Juba was dancing for food and tossed coins by the early 1840s . Winter speculated that by about age 15 , Juba had no family . 
 Primary sources show that Juba performed in dance competitions , minstrel shows , and variety theaters in the Northeastern United States beginning in the mid @-@ 1840s . The stage name Juba probably derives from the juba dance , itself named for the central or west African term <unk> . " <unk> " and " Juba " were common names for slaves in this period , especially those rumored to have dancing or musical talent . Documentation is confusing , as there were at least two black dancers using the name Juba at this time . For example , in 1840 a man named Lewis Davis was using the name " Master Juber " and making his living " travelling through the states , dancing negro extravaganzas , breakdowns , & c " . He was arrested for theft in New York City . 
 An anonymous letter from 1841 or early 1842 in the tabloid newspaper the Sunday Flash states that Juba was working for showman P. T. Barnum . The writer stated that Barnum had managed the dancer since 1840 , when he had disguised the boy as a white minstrel performer — by making him up in blackface — and put him on at the New York Vauxhall Gardens . In 1841 , the letter alleges , Barnum went so far as to present his charge as the Irish @-@ American performer John Diamond , the most celebrated dancer of the day . The letter further accuses Barnum of entering Juba @-@ as @-@ Diamond in rigged dance competitions against other performers : 
 The boy is fifteen or sixteen years of age ; his name is " Juba ; " and to do him justice , he is a very fair dancer . He is of harmless and inoffensive disposition , and is not , I sincerely believe , aware of the meanness and audacity of the swindler to which he is presently a party . As to the wagers which the bills daily blazon forth , they are like the rest of his business — all a cheat . Not one dollar is ever bet or staked , and the pretended judges who aid in the farce , are mere blowers . 
 Writer Thomas Low Nichols supported parts of the story in an 1864 book of social history . He states that in 1841 Diamond quit his work as a dancer in the employ of Barnum and was replaced by " a genuine negro " , whom Barnum billed as " the champion nigger @-@ dancer of the world " . The black dancer would have debuted in the spring of 1841 . Nichols never identified the dancer as Juba , but later writers concluded that the boy was that performer . Historian Eric Lott has identified the irony of this arrangement : a black man imitating a white man imitating a black man . 
 Beginning in the early 1840s , Juba began a series of dance competitions known as challenge dances . He faced white rival John Diamond , who advertised that he " delineate [ d ] the Ethiopian character superior to any other white person " . Sources disagree about the date of their first contest ; it may have occurred while Diamond was still working for Barnum or a year or two later . This advertisement from the July 8 , 1844 , New York Herald is typical of the publicity the matches generated : 
 GREAT PUBLIC <unk> 
 Between the two most renowned dancers in the world , the Original JOHN <unk> and the colored boy <unk> , for a Wager of $ 200 , on <unk> <unk> July 8 at the <unk> <unk> , which building has been expressly hired from the Proprietor , Mr. Smith , for this night only , as its accommodations will afford all a fair view of each step of these wonderful Dancers . The fame of these two Celebrated Breakdown Dancers has already spread over the Union , and the numerous friends of each claim the Championship for their favorite , and who have anxiously wished for a Public Trial between them and thus known which is to bear the Title of the Champion Dancer of the World . The time to decide that has come , as the friends of Juba have challenged the world to produce his superior in the art for $ 100 . That Challenge has been accepted by the friends of Diamond , and on Monday Evening they meet and Dance three Jigs , Two Reels , and the <unk> <unk> . Five Judges have been selected for their ability and knowledge of the Art , so that a fair decision will be made . 
 Rule — Each Dancer will select his own Violin and the victory will be decided by the best time and the greatest number of steps . 
 Historian James W. Cook has suggested that Juba and Diamond may have staged their first competition as a form of mutual publicity . Claims of black superiority over an acclaimed white rival were otherwise unheard of in the climate of racial segregation and white supremacy that permeated New York City and the country at large in the mid @-@ 1840s . 
 Challenge dances usually employed three judges . One sat on the stage and counted time , another sat in or near the orchestra pit and judged style , and the third went under the stage and observed the dancer 's execution to listen for " missing taps , defective rolls and heel work , the lagging in the breaks " . After the dance , they compared notes and chose the winner . Audience members and friends of the competitors bet on the outcome and could name the victor by popular acclaim in the case the judges could not come to a decision . According to an undated reference by Leavitt , Juba lost one challenge , at the Boylston Gardens in Boston , but records show that he beat Diamond in all other competitions . An undated clipping from the Harvard Theatre Collection , written by a fan of minstrelsy , describes the single dance competition that Diamond managed to win : " One of the fiddlers played a reel for him [ Juba ] , and he shuffled , and twisted , and walked around , and danced on for one hour and fifteen minutes by the watch . " Then Juba made a loud strike with his left foot as the crowd cheered and he got a drink from the bar . Diamond was next and tried to act cool but resolute . He knew that he would displease Barnum by losing and he had his race at stake : " There was another thing about this match @-@ dance that made Diamond want to win . You see it was not only a case of Barnum 's Museum against Pete Williams 's dance @-@ house , but it was a case of white against black . So Jack Diamond went at his dancin ' with double energy — first , for his place , next , for his color . " He beat Juba 's time and " gave a hop , skip and a jump , a yell and a bow " . A black man shouted out , " He 's a white man , sure ... but he 's got a nigger in his heel . " The two had their most famous matchup in New York City in 1844 , where Juba beat Diamond for $ 500 . Juba then traveled to Boston , billing himself as the " King of All the Dancers " , and played for two weeks , with competitions versus Frank Diamond ( no relation to John ) . 
 In 1842 , English writer Charles Dickens toured New York 's Five Points . This was around the time of the challenge dances , and Dickens was possibly drawn by rumors of Barnum 's disguising of a black youth as a white minstrel performer . There the writer witnessed a performance by " a lively young negro " at the <unk> 's tavern and brothel at 67 Orange Street in the infamous Mulberry Bend . The November 11 , 1842 , edition of the New York Herald later identified this dancer as Juba . Dickens wrote in his American Notes , 
 The corpulent black fiddler , and his friend who plays the tambourine , stamp upon the boarding of the small raised orchestra in which they sit , and play a lively measure . Five or six couples come upon the floor , marshalled by a lively young negro , who is the wit of the assembly , and the greatest dancer known . He never leaves off making queer faces , and is the delight of all the rest , who grin from ear to ear incessantly ... 
 ... But the dance commences . Every gentleman sets as long as he likes to the opposite lady , and the opposite lady to him , and all are so long about it that the sport begins to languish , when suddenly the lively hero dashes in to the rescue . Instantly the fiddler grins , and goes at it tooth and nail ; there is new energy in the tambourine ; new laughter in the dancers ; new smiles in the landlady ; new confidence in the landlord ; new brightness in the very candles . 
 Single shuffle , double shuffle , cut and cross @-@ cut ; snapping his fingers , rolling his eyes , turning in his knees , presenting the backs of his legs in front , spinning about on his toes and heels like nothing but the man 's fingers on the tambourine ; dancing with two left legs , two right legs , two wooden legs , two wire legs , two spring legs — all sorts of legs and no legs — what is this to him ? And in what walk of life , or dance of life , does man ever get such stimulating applause as thunders about him , when , having danced his partner off her feet , and himself too , he finishes by leaping gloriously on the bar @-@ counter , and calling for something to drink , with the chuckle of a million of counterfeit Jim Crows , in one inimitable sound ! 
 Juba may have capitalized on the free publicity given him by Dickens as he made the jump from the saloon to the stage . An undated excerpt from the New York Herald describes Juba 's appearance with a minstrel troupe at Pete Williams ' dance hall on Orange Street : 
 ... [ T ] hose who passed through the long hallway and entered the dance hall , after paying their shilling to the darky doorkeeper , whose " box @-@ office " was a plain soap box , or a wooden one of that description , saw this phenomenon , " Juba , " imitate all the dancers of the day and their special steps . Then Bob Ellingham , the interlocutor and master of ceremonies , would say , " Now , Master Juba , show your own jig . " Whereupon he would go through all his own steps and specialties , with never a resemblance in any of them to those he had just imitated . 
 In this performance , Juba imitated the white minstrel performers Richard Pelham , Frank Brower , John Daniels , John Smith , James Sanford , Frank Diamond , and John Diamond . The idea that Juba could " imitate himself " after mimicking his rivals points up , according to Lott , " minstrelsy 's fundamental consequence for black culture , the dispossession and control by whites of black forms that would not for a long time be recovered " . Nevertheless , Juba 's imitations of his white rivals asserted his greater mastery of the styles then current in Blackface dance . They also asserted that this was an artistic medium worthy of imitation . James W. Cook writes , " in a sense , the Imitation Dance served as a powerful act of defiance from someone who , more typically , would have lacked any means of broader representational control " . 
 Dancers came to recognize Juba as the best , and his fame soared . By 1845 , he was so well known that he no longer had to impersonate a white minstrel on stage . He toured through New England with the Georgia Champion Minstrels in 1844 . The bill called him " The Wonder of the World Juba , Acknowledged to be the Greatest Dancer in the World . Having danced with John Diamond at the Chatham Theatre for $ 500 , and at the Bowery Theatre for the same amount , and established himself as the King of All Dancers . No conception can be formed of the variety of beautiful and intricate steps exhibited by him with ease . You must see to believe . " 
 In 1845 , Juba began touring with the Ethiopian Minstrels . The troupe gave him top billing over its four white members , unprecedented for a black performer . From 1846 , Juba toured with White 's Serenaders , under the tutelage of Charles " Charlie " White , as a dancer and tambourine player off and on until at least 1850 . He played a character named <unk> <unk> , " the barber 's boy " in a piece called " Going for the Cup , or , Old Mrs. Williams 's Dance " , one of the earliest known minstrel sketches . It focused on Juba 's dancing in a milieu of competition and showing off . The plot follows two characters trying to fix a dance contest by soaping the floor in a way that will make all of the competitors fall except <unk> . They bet on <unk> , but in the end , the judge steals the money . 
 = = European tour = = 
 In 1848 , a dancer billed as " Boz 's Juba " performed in London , England . He was a member of the Ethiopian Serenaders , a blackface minstrel troupe under the leadership of Gilbert W. Pell ( or Pelham ) . The company had performed in England two years prior , when they had made minstrelsy palatable to middle @-@ class British audiences by adopting refinements such as formal wear . With Boz 's Juba as its newest member , the company toured middle @-@ class theaters and lecture halls in the British Isles for the next 18 months . 
 The identity of Boz 's Juba is open to doubt . " Boz " was a pen name used by Dickens . The Ethiopian Serenaders quoted from Dickens 's American Notes in their press releases , and The Illustrated London News considered the black dancer to be the same person Dickens had seen in New York in 1842 . Dickens never refuted the claims . Nevertheless , the Serenaders ' assertions were promotional , and Dickens may not have remembered the exact look or characteristics of the dancer he had seen in the Five Points . Writers from the period and later have generally identified Boz 's Juba as the same person Dickens had seen during his visit to New York and who had danced against Diamond . 
 Boz 's Juba seems to have been a full member of Pell 's troupe . He wore blackface makeup and played the <unk> , Mr. Tambo ( a tambourine player ) opposite Pell 's Mr. Bones ( on the bone castanets ) . He sang standard minstrel songs , such as " Juliana Johnson ] " and " Come Back , Steben " , and he performed in sketches and " conundrum " contests . Despite this apparent level of integration into the act , advertisements for the troupe set Juba 's name apart from the other members . The Serenaders continued through Britain and played establishments such as the Vauxhall Gardens . The tour ended in 1850 . Its run of 18 months was the longest uninterrupted minstrel tour in Britain at that time . Juba and Pell then joined the troupe headed by Pell 's brother , Richard Pelham . The company was renamed G. W. Pell 's Serenaders . 
 Juba was the most written about performer in London for the summer 1848 season , no easy feat considering the large number of competitors . He proved a critical favorite , with commentators doting on him praise normally accorded to popular ballet dancers . That August , the Theatrical Times wrote , " The performances of this young man are far above the common performances of the <unk> who give imitations of American and Negro character ; there is an ideality in what he does that makes his efforts at once grotesque and poetical , without losing sight of the reality of representation . " An anonymous clipping from the 1848 season says , 
 [ T ] he dancing of Juba exceeded anything ever witnessed in Europe ... The American Juba has for some years drawn immense audiences whenever he has appeared . He is quite young , being only in his seventeenth year . Mr. Dickens , in his ' American Notes , ' gives a graphic description of this extraordinary youth , who , we doubt not , before many weeks have elapsed , will have the honor of displaying his dancing attainments in Buckingham Palace . 
 One reviewer wrote , " Juba is a musician , as well as a dancer . To him , the intricate management of the nigger tambourine is confined , and from it he produces marvelous harmonies [ sic ] . We almost question whether , upon a great emergency , he could not play a fugue upon it " . His only known negative review during his British tour came from The Puppet @-@ Show on August 12 , 1848 : 
 The principal feature in entertainments at Vauxhall is Juba : as such at least he is put forth — or rather put first — by the proprietors . Out of compliment to Dickens , this extraordinary nigger is called ' Boz 's Juba , ' in consequence , we believe , of the popular writer having said a good word for him in his American Notes : on this principle we could not mention the Industrious Fleas as being clever without having those talented little animals puffed all over London as being under the overwhelming patronage of the Showman . Juba 's talent consists in walking round the stage with an air of satisfaction and with his toes turned in ; in jumping backwards in a less graceful manner than we should have conceived possible ; and in shaking his thighs like a man afflicted with palsy . He makes a terrible clatter with his feet , not owing so much to activity on his part as to stupidity on the part of his boot @-@ maker , who has furnished him with a pair of clumsy Wellingtons sufficiently large for the feet and legs of all the Ethiopians in London : besides this , he sometimes moves about the stage on his knees , as if he was praying to be endowed with intelligence , and had unlimited credit with his tailor . As a last resource , he falls back on the floor ... 
 The piece goes on to describe a drunken man the critic met after Juba 's performance : 
 When again we saw him he was labouring ( like a horse — or , rather , an ass ) under the influence of champagne . We understood that he was imitating Juba , and he behaved so ridiculously that he may actually be said to have surpassed him . 
 Master Juba 's stint with Pell makes him the earliest known black performer to tour with a white minstrel troupe . Scholars disagree over why he was allowed to do so . Dance historian Marian Hannah Winter argues that Juba was simply too talented to be held back . Dance historian Stephen Johnson sees Juba 's talent as less central to the matter , and emphasizes the element of exoticism and exhibition in the tour . During the same period , exhibits of Arab families , Bushmen , <unk> Zulus , and Ojibway warriors appeared in London . A reviewer for the Manchester Guardian gave an almost anthropological description of Juba , unheard of for other performers : 
 But the great feature of the entertainment , and that which we imagine attracted the large and respectable audience present , was undoubtedly " Master Juba , " the immortalized of Boz . This " phenomenon " ( as the bills describe him ) is a copper @-@ coloured votary of Terpsichore , — the Monsieur Perrot of Negro life in the southern states ; and possesses the additional attraction of being a " real nigger , " and not a " sham , " like his vocal associates . He is apparently about eighteen years of age ; about 5 feet 3 inches in height ; of slender make , yet possessing great muscular activity . His head is very small , and his countenance , when at rest , has a rather mild , sedate , and far from <unk> expression . 
 Pell 's advertising repeatedly alleged that Juba 's dance was authentic , and the reviewers seem to have believed him . The same Manchester critic remarked that Juba 's dances " illustrated the dances of his own simple people on festive occasions " . The few reviews of Juba as a solo performer after his tour with Pell ( and thus out of the exhibitionist mode ) are more negative . Dance scholar Thomas <unk> has said that Master Juba 's stage persona " buffered associations between the potent black body onstage and the preferred impotent everyday , male slave body " . Scholar of African American studies Maurice O. Wallace adds that Juba was an example of how " those strategies of black cultural performance ... have historically coalesced to shape black masculine <unk> in Eurocentric contexts " . However , Wallace cautions that by the time Juba had reached London , he had " [ transcended ] the racial gaze " and was seen as a dancer first and black man second . 
 = = Later life and career = = 
 Documents next show Juba back in the United States , performing a solo act in working @-@ class music halls , concert saloons , and entr 'actes in nondescript theaters in New York : he had gone from obscurity to the limelight and back again . The American critics were not as kind as their English counterparts . A reviewer for the Era wrote on August 4 , 1850 , that " [ Juba is ] jumping very fast at the Colosseum , but too fast is worse than too slow , and we advise [ Juba ] to be wise in time . It is easier to jump down than to jump up " ; and on August 11 , 1850 , " Juba has jumped away — by the way of an earnest yet friendly caution , let us hope that he will not throw himself away . Be wise in time is a wholesome motto " . The Huddersfield Chronicle and West Yorkshire Advertiser on November 30 , 1850 , wrote , " The performances of Boz 's Juba have created quite a sensation in the gallery , who greeted his marvellous feats of dancing with thunders of applause and a standing encore . In all the rougher and less refined departments of his art , Juba is a perfect master . " 
 The last known record of Juba places him at the City Tavern in Dublin , Ireland , in September 1851 : " Boz 's Juba appears here nightly and is well received " . A performer known as Jumbo is reported as having died two weeks later in Dublin . Dance historian Marian Hannah Winter said that Juba died in 1852 in London . More than 30 years later , theater historian T. Allston Brown wrote that Juba " married too late ( and a white woman besides ) , and died early and miserably . In a note addressed to Charley White , Juba informed him that , when next he should be seen by him [ White ] , he would be riding in his own carriage . It has been said that in 1852 his skeleton , without the carriage , was on exhibition at the Surrey Music Hall , Sheffield , England . " Mahar has given the date as 1853 . He would have been in his late 20s . 
 The cause of Juba 's death is a matter of speculation . Winter cited his " almost superhuman schedule " and the " [ burning ] up his energies and health " as the culprits . Assuming all of the <unk> are the same person , the record suggests that Juba worked day and night for 11 years — from 1839 to 1850 . Especially in his early days , Juba worked for food , and would have been served the typical tavern meal of the time , fried eels and ale . Such a demanding schedule , coupled with poor food and little sleep , likely doomed Juba to his early death . 
 = = Performance style = = 
 <unk> tell us , broadly , what Juba did during his performances . No known description of Juba 's dancing by a contemporary was written by anyone of his own race , class , or profession . While he was clearly a remarkable dancer , it is impossible to gain precise knowledge of his style and technique , or of the degree to which he differed from his largely forgotten black contemporaries . The sources lack precise points of comparison . The more detailed accounts come from British critics , to whom Juba must have been more of a novelty than to Americans . These writers were catering to a white , middle class , British audience . Other descriptions come from promotional material and thus cannot be trusted to be objective . Juba was described as a " jig dancer " at a time when the word still connoted Irish folk dancing but was in the process of changing to encompass black dance . The Irish jig was common at this time , so skillful improvisation may account for the inordinate amount of attention Juba received . 
 These accounts offer only ambiguous choreographic descriptions . While these descriptions often offer exacting detail , they contradict one another . Some attempt an almost scientific precision , while others emphasize the impossibility of Juba 's style . The reviews do agree that Juba 's dance was novel to the point of <unk> , frenzied , varied in tempo and tone , well @-@ timed , percussive , and expressive . 
 He was an integral member of the troupes with which he toured , as evidenced by the roles he played in the minstrel show presented by Pell 's Ethiopian Serenaders . Juba did three dances in two forms . He performed " festival " and " plantation " dances in formal attire with Thomas F. Briggs on banjo , and dressed in drag to perform the role of Lucy Long in the song of that name , sung by Pell . There is little evidence to indicate whether Juba portrayed the wench role in sexual or burlesque style . However , a review from Manchester , England , implies that it was the former : 
 With a most bewitching bonnet and veil , a very pink dress , <unk> to the waist , lace @-@ fringed trousers of the most spotless purity , and red leather boots , — the ensemble completed by the green parasol and white cambric pocket handkerchief , — Master Juba certainly looked the black demoiselle of the first ton to the greatest advantage . The playing and singing by the <unk> of a version of the well @-@ known negro ditty , furnished the music to Juba 's performance , which was after this fashion : <unk> in a circle to the left for a few bars , till again facing the audience , he then commenced a series of steps , which altogether baffle description , from their number , oddity , and the rapidity with which they were executed ... The promenade was then repeated ; then more dancing ; and so on , to the end of the song . 
 Existing images of Juba offer more hints . Two depictions , from a review of Juba at the Vauxhall Gardens , published in The Puppet @-@ Show on August 12 , 1848 , show a drunken man imitating Juba 's performance ; he seems to be doing a cake @-@ walk , his leg kicked high , his hat in his extended arm . A caricature of Juba shows him with knees bent and legs spread , one leg poised to land hard on the floor ; arms in close . The most common image of Juba , originally from June 18 , 1848 , edition of The Era , shows him in a position similar to this one ; his hands rest in his pockets . One British account , in an issue of The Illustrated London News from August 5 , 1848 , is accompanied by an illustration that shows Juba performing what seems to be a jig . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Writers struggled to find words to describe what they saw Juba do . A Brighton reviewer wrote that " [ t ] he effort baffles description . It is certainly original , and unlike anything we have ever seen before " . Another wrote of " a series of steps , which altogether baffle description , from their number , oddity , and the rapidity with which they were executed " . Writers struggled to compare Juba 's steps to forms familiar to British audiences . Inevitably , the comparisons were to rural folk dances or to those of the exotic reaches of the British Empire : 
 The dances he introduced were distinguished for eccentricity , rapidity of motion , and the accuracy of the time kept . They approximated , in some respects , to those wild dances that may be witnessed sometimes in the remoter parts of the Highlands , including the sword dance , as there known ; besides having the same idea of clanking the heels , as pervades the Polka . But it is not the office of the legs alone to do all this ; the head , arms , and body generally take full share of duty , and assume such extraordinary positions , that only a being possessed of the power of Proteus could calculate upon taking . 
 Nevertheless , such comparisons cannot be taken as true indications of Juba 's personal style . As a blackface minstrel , and thus parodist , Juba may have incorporated conscious parodies of such dances into his act . He also made facial expressions as he danced . Charles Dickens wrote of the young black dancer in New York that " [ h ] e never leaves off making queer faces " . 
 = = = Eccentricity = = = 
 Juba seems to have presented varied styles at different tempos during a single performance . Confused reviewers struggled to explain how he moved each part of his body independently at its own speed and how he repeatedly changed his rhythm and tone . A critic for The Morning Post wrote , " Now he languishes , now burns , now love seems to sway his motions , and anon rage seems to impel his steps . " A London audience member who saw Juba at the Vauxhall Gardens wondered , " How could he tie his legs into such knots , and fling them about so recklessly , or make his feet twinkle until you lose sight of them altogether in his energy . " The Mirror and United Kingdom Magazine declared , " Such mobility of muscles , such flexibility of joints , such <unk> , such <unk> , such gyrations , such toes and such <unk> , such <unk> and <unk> , such posturings , such firmness of foot , such elasticity of tendon , such mutation of movement , such vigour , such variety , such natural grace , such powers of endurance , such potency of pastern . " The Manchester Examiner captured something of the rhythm of Juba 's performance : 
 Surely he cannot be flesh and blood , but some more subtle substance , or how could he turn , and twine , and twist , and twirl , and hop , and jump , and kick , and throw his feet almost with a velocity that makes one think they are playing hide @-@ and seek with a flash of lightning ! Heels or toes , on feet or on knees , on the ground or off , it is all the same to Juba ; his limbs move as if they were stuffed with electric wires ... 
 = = = Percussion = = = 
 The percussive sounds Juba made during his performances were another element that distinguished his dance from standard Irish jigs . Contemporary reviewers often alluded to these sounds . <unk> asked audiences to remain silent during Juba 's dances so they could hear the percussion of his steps . The Manchester Guardian remarked , " To us , the most interesting part of the performance was the exact time , which , even in the most complicated and difficult steps , the dancer kept to the music . " An anonymous clipping from c . 1848 said , " ... the dancing of Juba exceeded anything ever witnessed in Europe . The style as well as the execution is unlike anything ever seen in this country . The manner in which he beats time with his feet , and the extraordinary command he possesses over them , can only be believed by those who have been present at his exhibition . " A critic in Liverpool compared his steps to Pell on the bones and Briggs on the banjo . The Morning Post wrote , " He trills , he shakes , he screams , he laughs , as though by the very genius of African melody . " Descriptions also show elements of the hand jive in his dance . 
 Juba accompanied his dances with rapid @-@ fire laughter synchronized to the tempo of the dance . An anonymous London critic wrote , 
 [ T ] here never was such a laugh as the laugh of Juba — there is in it the concentrated laugh of fifty comic pantomimes ; it has no relation to the chuckle , and , least of all to the famous horse laugh ; not a bit of it — it is a laugh distinct , a laugh apart , a laugh by itself — clear , ringing , echoing , resonant , harmonious , full of rejoicing and mighty mirth , and fervent fun ; you may hear it like the continuous humming sound of nature , permeating everywhere ; it enters your heart and you laugh sympathetically — it creeps into your ear , and clings to it , and all the subsequent sounds seemed to be <unk> with the <unk> quality ... " Well , though the laugh of Juba be wondrous , what may be said of Juba 's dancing ? " 
 = = = Authenticity = = = 
 Juba 's dance certainly incorporated elements of authentic black culture , but to what extent is uncertain . Elements of Juba 's style are part of the black dance aesthetic : percussion , variable time signature , use of the body as an instrument , changes in tone and pacing , extreme gestures and poses , and emphasis on solo dancing . Juba may very well have exuded Africa 's cool aesthetic : composure and vitality . 
 Historians have ascribed the inability of British critics to describe Juba 's style to his use of African @-@ derived forms unfamiliar to the British middle class . White accounts of his performances reflect similar descriptions of slave dances from the Caribbean and the United States . Juba was heir to the traditions of free northern black people , and Johnson has pointed to evidence that he was performing " a quite specific , African @-@ infused plantation dance " . Descriptions of his dance hint that Juba performed black steps such as the walk @-@ around , the pigeon wing , a primordial Charleston , the long @-@ bow J , trucking , the turkey trot , the backward spring , the wailing jawbone , and tracking upon the heel . However , Johnson cautions that " I might see any number of dance steps here , if I look longingly enough . " 
 Juba was in a white @-@ dominated field playing for largely white audiences ; he likely compromised his culture 's music and dance in order to survive in show business . This was true of his comedy sketches and songs , which did not stray from standard minstrel fare . One London observer in the 1840s who witnessed slave dances on a South Carolina plantation called them " poor <unk> compared to the pedal inspirations of Juba " . Juba 's dance may have been an amalgamation of African and European precedents . Dickens 's piece on the New York dancer , describing leg movements only , points to the Irish jig , but he also refers to Juba performing the single and double shuffle , which are black @-@ derived steps . Historians Shane and Graham White have argued that black people of this period performed European steps in a different style from whites . Historian Robert Toll has written that Juba " had learned a European dance , blended it with African tradition , and produced a new form , an Afro @-@ American dance that had a great impact on minstrelsy " . Dance historians Marshall and Jean Stearns have agreed , saying that " in the person of William Henry Lane , the blend of British folk with American Negro dance in the United States had , by 1848 , resulted in a striking new development . So foreign observers , who were in a position to view its emergence objectively , treated it as an original creation . " 
 = = Legacy and historiography = = 
 The terms juba dancer and juba dancing became common in variety theaters after Master Juba popularized them . Actors , minstrels , and British clowns inspired by Juba and other minstrels adopted blackface and performed dances similar to Juba 's as a stage character called the " Gay Negro Boy " . The character spread to France ( from 1860 ) and Belgium ( from 1865 ) when British circuses toured there . Elements of these dances were still found among British whiteface clowns as late as the 1940s . Juba 's rave reception in Manchester may have presaged that city 's later status as the center of dance in the United Kingdom . Less happily , Juba reinforced the racist caricature of the naturally musical black among white audiences . 
 While the name Juba passed into dance history , for many decades the man himself did not . For over 90 years after his death , Juba was largely forgotten by dancers and historians , appearing only in brief , racist passages in sources such as histories of minstrelsy . Stephen Johnson has postulated that this indicates that either white entertainers and historians consciously downplayed Juba 's significance , or that Juba was simply not that influential . Even black historians ignored Juba until the mid @-@ 20th century , preferring to focus on Juba 's older and more obviously respectable contemporary Ira Aldridge , an African American actor who became a leading light of the European stage . 
 In 1947 , dance and popular culture historian Marian Hannah Winter began the resurrection of Juba 's reputation with her article " Juba and American <unk> " . Juba , according to Winter , surmounted the hurdles of race and class to succeed as a professional dancer . Winter was the first to write of Juba as a man who introduced elements of African dance to the Western lexicon and thus fostered the creation of a distinct American dance idiom . In so doing , Juba , according to Winter , reclaimed for African Americans elements that had been stolen in the racist culture of 19th @-@ century America and , in the process , invented tap dancing . In short , Winter " made [ Juba ] significant " . 
 When Winter wrote her article , there was little scholarship in African American studies , dance history , or minstrelsy studies . Winter based her article on , at most , six sources . Nonetheless , later writers have largely accepted and echoed her thesis . As recently as 1997 , musicologist Dale Cockrell wrote that " [ t ] he best treatment of Juba , though it is shot through with errors , is still Winter 1948 " . Winter 's view that Juba was the " most influential single performer of nineteenth @-@ century American dance " is now the consensus . His career shows that black and white people actually did collaborate to an extent in blackface minstrelsy . 
 Scholars in recent decades have repeatedly pointed to Juba as the progenitor of tap dancing and , by extension , step dancing . Winter wrote that " [ t ] he repertoire of any current tap @-@ dancer contains elements which were established theatrically by him " . Dancer Mark Knowles has echoed this assertion , calling Juba " America 's first real tap dancer " . Music historian Eileen Southern calls him the " principal black professional minstrel of the antebellum period ( and ) a link between the white world and authentic black source material " . Scholars point to Juba as the first African American to insert aspects of authentic black culture into American dance and theater . In so doing , Juba ensured that blackface dance was more authentically African than the other elements of the minstrel show . Wallace has gone so far as to call Juba " the pater <unk> of black masculine dance history , and the ' initiator and determinant of the form itself , ' a form which lends visible expression to the difficult dialectics of black masculinity " . Johnson , however , has cautioned against this interpretation . His reading of the primary sources sees more evidence of eccentricity in Juba 's dance than of a proto @-@ tap or <unk> . 
 = Jose Calugas = 
 Jose <unk> Calugas ( December 29 , 1907 – January 18 , 1998 ) was a member of the Philippine Scouts during World War II . He received the Medal of Honor for actions during the Battle of Bataan . 
 At the age of 23 , Calugas joined the Philippine Scouts of the United States Army and completed training as an artilleryman and served with different artillery batteries of the Philippine Scouts until his unit was mobilized to fight in World War II . After noticing one of his unit 's gun batteries had been destroyed and its crew killed , he gathered several members of his unit together , dug in and attempted to defend the line . He was captured along with other members of his unit and forced to march to a distant enemy prison camp , where he was held as a prisoner of war . When he was released in 1943 , he was secretly assigned to a guerrilla unit the Philippines where he fought for the liberation of the Philippines from the Japanese . 
 After World War II Calugas received a direct commission and became United States Citizen . Retiring from the Army , he settled in Tacoma , Washington . 
 = = Early life and military training = = 
 Calugas was born in Barrio <unk> , Leon , Iloilo , Philippines , December 29 , 1907 . His mother died when he was ten , and he later left high school in order to work and support his family . In 1930 , he enlisted in the United States Army and had received his basic training at Fort Sill , Oklahoma . Upon completion , he received additional training as an artilleryman , and then assigned to the 24th Artillery Regiment of the Philippine Scouts at Fort Stotsenburg , Pampanga . While stationed at Fort Stotsenburg , he married and began to raise a family . His next unit was the 88th Field Artillery Regiment of the Philippine Scouts . He was a Sergeant with Battery B when the United States and the Philippine Commonwealth , declared war with Japan in 1941 . His unit was mobilized for duty and sent to Bataan in December 1941 . 
 = = Action in World War II = = 
 = = = Medal of Honor action at Bataan = = = 
 On January 6 , 1942 , his unit was covering the withdrawal of a portion of the U.S. Army Forces Far East ( USAFFE ) , with the 26th Cavalry Regiment of the Philippine Scouts and the 31st Infantry Regiment . Calugas was working as a mess sergeant in charge of a group of soldiers who were preparing the day 's meals , known as KP duty . He noticed that one of his unit 's guns had been silenced , and its crew killed . Without orders , he ran the 1 @,@ 000 yards ( 914 m ) across the shell @-@ swept area to the inactive gun position . Once there , he organized a squad of volunteers who returned Japanese artillery fire . The position remained under constant and heavy fire for the rest of the afternoon . While Calugas and his squad maintained a steady fire on the enemy positions , other soldiers had time to dig in and defend the line . As the day ended and combat subsided , he returned to KP . For his actions on that day , his superiors recommended Calugas for the United States military 's highest decoration for valor , the Medal of Honor . Before he could receive it , however , all American forces on Bataan surrendered to Japanese forces . 
 = = = Surrender of Bataan and the death march = = = 
 Arguably , the Battle of Bataan represented the most intense phase of Imperial Japan 's invasion of the Philippines during World War II . During the final stage of the Battle of Bataan and after repeated assaults and artillery fire by Japanese forces , the communications and defenses of the allies on Bataan peninsula had been almost completely destroyed . On the last two days , the entire Allied defense collapsed , clogging all roads with refugees and fleeing troops . By April 8 , the senior U.S. commander on Bataan , Major General Edward " Ned " P. King , Jr . , recognized the futility of further resistance , and explored proposals for capitulation . On April 9 , 1942 , approximately 76 @,@ 000 Filipino and American troops surrendered to a Japanese army of 54 @,@ 000 men under Lt. General Masaharu Homma . This was the single largest surrender of one of its military forces in American history . 
 After the surrender , Calugas and the other prisoners marched from Mariveles to Camp O 'Donnell , a prison camp in the province of Tarlac . The Japanese , having expected the fighting to continue , anticipated about 25 @,@ 000 prisoners of war and were inadequately prepared or unwilling to transport a group of prisoners three times the size . The majority of the prisoners of war were immediately relieved of their belongings and endured a 61 @-@ mile ( 98 km ) march in deep dust , over vehicle @-@ broken macadam roads , and crammed into rail cars for the portion of the journey from San Fernando to <unk> . En route , over 21 @,@ 000 men and women died from disease , starvation , dehydration , heat prostration , untreated wounds , and wanton execution . The deaths of Filipinos to Americans was disproportionately high : approximately 5 @,@ 000 – 10 @,@ 000 Filipino and 600 – 650 American prisoners of war died on the Bataan Death March . Calugas remained a prisoner at Camp O 'Donnell until January 1943 , when he was released to work for the Japanese . 
 = = = Post POW release = = = 
 His release placed him as a laborer in a Japanese rice mill , and while assigned there he secretly joined a guerrilla unit , # 227 Old Bronco . As an officer of the guerrilla unit , he participated in the attack on the Japanese garrison at <unk> . His unit fought in the continued campaign against the Japanese , which eventually led to the liberation of the Philippines . 
 After the liberation of the Philippines in 1945 , he finally received the Medal of Honor for which he had been approved the beginning of the war . The Medal was presented to him by General of the Army General George Marshall . Calugas subsequently accepted a direct commission in the United States Army , and was later assigned to the 44th Infantry Regiment , which was assigned with the occupation of Okinawa . After the unit was disbanded in 1947 , he was assigned to the <unk> Command , on the Ryukyu Islands in the South China Sea , where he remained until 1953 . He was later assigned to Fort Lewis , Washington . 
 = = = Citizenship = = = 
 Although he had been born in a U.S. territory , and had fought in the United States ' Army , Calugas technically was not a citizen . Following the Spanish American War in 1898 , Philippine residents were classified as U.S. nationals . The 1934 Tydings – McDuffie Act , or Philippine Independence Act , reclassified Filipinos as aliens , and set a quota of 50 immigrants per year to the United States , with the exception of those who joined the U.S. Navy , but not the U.S. Army . While serving in Okinawa , Calugas completed the process of becoming a naturalized United States citizen . 
 = = Retirement and post military life = = 
 Calugas eventually retired from the army with the rank of Captain and in 1957 he moved into Tacoma , Washington with his family . After retiring from the army he earned a degree in Business Administration from the University of Puget Sound in 1961 and worked for the Boeing Corporation . In addition to furthering his education and starting a new career , he was involved in several veterans groups within the Seattle and Tacoma area . He died in Tacoma on January 18 , 1998 at age 90 and is buried at Mountain View Memorial Park in Tacoma , Washington . He was survived by his three children , including retired Sergeant First Class Jose Calugas , Jr . , eleven grandchildren , and six great @-@ grandchildren . His wife of 52 years died in 1991 . 
 = = Honors and awards = = 
 Calugas earned multiple military decorations before he died , including the Medal of Honor . 
 = = = Medal of Honor citation = = = 
 The action for which the award was made took place near <unk> , Bataan Province , Philippine Islands , on 16 January 1942 . A battery gun position was bombed and shelled by the enemy until 1 gun was put out of commission and all the cannoneers were killed or wounded . Sgt. Calugas , a mess sergeant of another battery , voluntarily and without orders ran 1 @,@ 000 yards across the shell @-@ swept area to the gun position . There he organized a volunteer squad which placed the gun back in commission and fired effectively against the enemy , although the position remained under constant and heavy Japanese artillery fire . 
 = = = Other honors = = = 
 On Mount Samat , there is a relief commemorating the event that lead to the awarding of the Medal of Honor . Within the family housing area of Fort Sam Houston , Texas , a street known as Calugas Circle was dedicated in his honor , with his family present , in 1999 . His Medal of Honor was given to the Fort 's museum for safekeeping and display by Calugas and his family before his death . In 2006 , a 36 @-@ unit apartment building , designed for low @-@ income and disabled residents was dedicated as the " Sgt. Jose Calugas , Sr. Apartments " in High Point , Seattle . On Memorial Day in 2009 , his memory was honored at the Living War Memorial Park on a memorial that had previously been established there . 
 = John Balmer = 
 John Raeburn Balmer , OBE , DFC ( 3 July 1910 – 11 May 1944 ) was a senior officer and bomber pilot in the Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) . Born in Bendigo , Victoria , he studied law before joining the RAAF as an air cadet in 1932 . An instructor at Point Cook from 1935 to 1937 , he achieved renown in Air Force circles when he reportedly parachuted from a training aircraft to motivate his pupil to land single @-@ handedly . He also became known to the general public as a cross @-@ country motorist , setting records for trans @-@ Australia and round @-@ Australia trips prior to World War II . 
 A flight lieutenant when war broke out , Balmer was promoted to squadron leader in June 1940 , becoming the inaugural commanding officer of No. 13 Squadron , which operated Lockheed Hudsons out of Darwin , Northern Territory . He was raised to temporary wing commander in April 1941 , and within a year had taken charge of the RAAF 's first Bristol Beaufort unit , No. 100 Squadron . Appointed an Officer of the Order of the British Empire in June 1942 , he led the Beauforts on bombing and torpedo missions against Japanese targets in the New Guinea campaign . 
 Posted to England in June 1943 , Balmer took command of No. 467 Squadron RAAF , flying Avro Lancasters in the air war over Europe . He led his unit through the Battle of Berlin from November 1943 to March 1944 . In April he was awarded the Distinguished Flying Cross , and the following month promoted to temporary group captain . Days later , on the night of 11 / 12 May , the last scheduled operation of his tour as No. 467 Squadron 's commanding officer , Balmer failed to return from a mission over Belgium . Initially posted as missing , his plane was later confirmed to have been shot down , and all of the crew killed . Balmer was buried outside Brussels . 
 = = Early life = = 
 The son of lawyer Sydney Balmer and his wife Catherine ( " Kittie " ) , John Balmer was born in Bendigo , Victoria , on 3 July 1910 . He attended Scotch College before studying law at the University of Melbourne , where he was a resident of Trinity College , and rowed in the Second Eight . In December 1932 , he enlisted as an air cadet in the RAAF active reserve , known as the Citizen Air Force ( CAF ) . Nicknamed " Sam " , Balmer undertook flying instruction on the 1933 " B " ( reservists ) course conducted at RAAF Station Point Cook , Victoria , where his classmates included future group captain John Lerew . Balmer qualified as a pilot and was commissioned in April 1933 . His first posting was to No. 1 Squadron , flying Westland Wapitis ; he transferred from the CAF to the Permanent Air Force in November . 
 Promoted to flight lieutenant , from July 1935 to November 1937 Balmer was assigned to No. 1 Flying Training School , Point Cook , as an instructor . He gained a reputation as a hard taskmaster , and on one occasion — according to RAAF folklore — parachuted from a training aircraft to give his student the proper motivation to make a solo landing , though at least one newspaper at the time reported that he had in fact fallen out . On 15 August 1938 , Balmer was forced to crash land an Avro Anson near Whitfield , Victoria , after its wings iced up — one of a series of accidents that befell the type following its introduction to Australian service . By mid @-@ 1939 he was instructing on Hawker Demon biplane fighters with No. 3 Squadron at RAAF Station Richmond , New South Wales . 
 Parallel to his Air Force career , in the years leading up to the outbreak of World War II Balmer gained national attention as a long @-@ distance motorist . Partnered by a fellow officer , he set a cross @-@ country record of 65 hours and 10 minutes travelling from Perth , Western Australia , to Melbourne in December 1936 . He and another driver followed this up with a record @-@ breaking round @-@ Australia journey in October – November 1938 , completing their run in 23 ½ days , almost halving the previous best time . 
 = = World War II = = 
 = = = South West Pacific = = = 
 When Australia declared war in September 1939 , Flight Lieutenant Balmer was a member of No. 22 Squadron , which conducted coastal surveillance out of Richmond with Ansons and , later , CAC Wirraways . Promoted to squadron leader , he was posted to RAAF Station Darwin , Northern Territory , on 1 June 1940 , becoming the inaugural commander of No. 13 Squadron , which had been " cannibalised " from the base 's resident unit , No. 12 Squadron . Retaining its Wirraway flight , No. 12 Squadron gave up its two flights of Ansons to the new formation ; these were replaced later that month by more capable Lockheed Hudsons . From August 1940 until February 1941 , No. 13 Squadron was responsible for patrolling the sea lanes off Australia 's north coast . On occasion , Balmer detected Japanese luggers that were illegally fishing in Australian waters and , according to Mark Johnston , overflew them at such a low altitude that " his Hudson 's slipstream rocked the boats violently " and the crew " shook their fists " at him . He was promoted to temporary wing commander in April . The following month , No. 13 Squadron conducted familiarisation flights over the Dutch East Indies . Balmer handed over command of the unit in August , and transferred to a liaison post at Headquarters RAAF Station Darwin . In January 1942 he briefly took charge of No. 7 Squadron , flying Hudsons on maritime patrol and convoy escort duties from RAAF Station Laverton , Victoria . 
 In March 1942 , Balmer assumed command of the first RAAF unit to operate Australian @-@ built Bristol Beauforts , No. 100 Squadron . It was formed at Richmond using the number of a Royal Air Force squadron that had been decimated in the Malayan Campaign . In tribute to its original incarnation , Balmer adopted the RAF unit 's crest , which featured a skull @-@ and @-@ crossbones emblem and the motto Sarang <unk> Jangan <unk> ( Malay for " Do not stir up a hornet 's nest " ) . No. 100 Squadron transferred to Mareeba in Far North Queensland on 22 May , after Balmer decided that a proposed base at Cairns was unsuitable owing to periodic flooding . While his crews at Mareeba gained experience on maritime patrols , he travelled to Port Moresby , New Guinea , on 26 May to test the Beaufort in operational conditions ; as he came in to land he was fired upon by US anti @-@ aircraft batteries , whose gunners had " never seen a Goddamn aircraft like that before " , but escaped damage . Balmer was appointed an Officer of the Order of the British Empire in the King 's Birthday Honours on 11 June 1942 . On 25 June he took five of No. 100 Squadron 's Beauforts to Port Moresby , joining two other Beauforts that were already stationed there . That night he led five aircraft from his squadron on their first bombing mission , against a Japanese ship reported in the Huon Gulf near Lae . Despite finding his bomb release gear faulty , necessitating three low @-@ level attack runs in the face of increasingly heavy anti @-@ aircraft fire , Balmer managed to score two hits , while his companions also successfully bombed the vessel . The ship appeared to be on fire and sinking , and the squadron received credit for its destruction at the time , but later investigation could not confirm its loss . The unit withdrew to Laverton for training and patrol work during July and August , before moving to Milne Bay to again take part in the New Guinea campaign . On 7 September 1942 , Balmer commanded a combined force of P @-@ 40 Kittyhawks from Nos. 75 and 76 Squadrons , Bristol Beaufighters from No. 30 Squadron , Hudsons from No. 6 Squadron , and his own No. 100 Squadron Beauforts in an assault on Japanese shipping near Milne Bay . It was the first time the Beauforts had been armed with torpedoes in combat , and they failed to score any hits . 
 Beginning in October , Nos. 6 and 100 Squadrons were given what the official history of the RAAF in World War II called the " huge task " of keeping open the sea lanes between Australia and New Guinea , while disrupting as best they could Japanese lines of communication and supply . The units kept up a punishing schedule of daily long @-@ range reconnaissance and anti @-@ submarine patrols , " practically without navigation aids , frequently through rain storms and heavy cloud " but , " supported by ground staffs as enduring as themselves , the crews maintained an almost inflexibly high standard and achieved considerable success " . On the night of 4 / 5 October , Balmer took ten of his Beauforts from Milne Bay on a far @-@ ranging assault against Japanese ships in the vicinity of the Shortland Islands , near Bougainville . Two aircraft disappeared along the way in storms and the remainder became separated into two flights that nevertheless managed to rendezvous near the target . Seven of these launched their torpedoes against as many ships and the crews believed that four were accurate , but were unable to confirm any hits because of dwindling visibility . The 950 @-@ nautical @-@ mile ( 1 @,@ 760 km ) mission was considered a failure but this was put down to problems with the torpedoes and not the aircrew . Subsequent reports suggested that three ships had in fact been damaged . Balmer came down with malaria in November , and went on three weeks sick leave the following month ; he returned to operations on 2 January 1943 . In March , during the Battle of the Bismarck Sea , No. 100 Squadron launched its last torpedo attack ; bad weather prevented all but two aircraft finding their targets , and no hits were registered . Towards the end of the month the unit dropped 17 @,@ 000 pounds ( 7 @,@ 700 kg ) of bombs on Japanese installations in Salamaua . 
 = = = Europe = = = 
 Balmer relinquished command of No. 100 Squadron in April 1943 , and was posted from the South West Pacific to the European theatre that June . His planned secondment to the Royal Air Force was for two years . Partly in an effort to bolster Australian aspirations to form a distinct RAAF group within RAF Bomber Command , in August he was appointed commanding officer of No. 467 Squadron , based at RAF <unk> , Leicestershire . The squadron had been raised under Article XV of the Empire Air Training Scheme , and operated Avro Lancaster heavy bombers . Balmer led his unit in a costly raid on Nuremberg the night of 27 / 28 August , before attacking Hanover in September and October . From its new base at RAF Waddington , Lincolnshire , Balmer then took No. 467 Squadron through the Battle of Berlin that commenced in November 1943 and continued until March 1944 . The statistical likelihood of surviving an operational tour of 30 missions in Bomber Command was never more than 50 per cent , and during the Battle of Berlin , loss rates were far higher . No. 467 Squadron was the only Australian unit to take part in all sixteen heavy attacks against the German capital during the battle . In the same period it also raided Frankfurt , Leipzig , Stettin , Stuttgart , Essen , and Augsburg . Following the Battle of Berlin , No. 467 Squadron began to concentrate on targets in France and Belgium as the Allied air campaign shifted focus from strategic bombing to destroying airfields and disrupting lines of communication prior to the invasion of the continent . On the night of 10 / 11 April , Balmer led not only his own unit but a total of 148 aircraft of No. 5 Group RAF in an assault on Toulouse , striking at an airfield , and aircraft and explosives factories . The bombing was highly accurate , and the Australians suffered no losses on the raid . 
 Considered a " dynamic " leader and a " brilliant " pilot , Balmer was decorated with the Distinguished Flying Cross ( DFC ) for " great skill and devotion to duty " during " a varied tour of operations " ; promulgated in the London Gazette on 18 April , the award citation further described him as " a most efficient squadron commander , whose keenness and zeal have set a fine example " . He also earned the respect of his crews with displays of empathy such as the occasion one of his young pilots , who had flown on 15 missions , refused to take off on his next sortie . Rather than take disciplinary action , Balmer allowed the man medical leave and sought out respite for him in the country , after which the pilot returned to active duty and completed his tour of operations . From early April , No. 467 Squadron began playing a leading role in a series of attacks against railways , which continued into the following month . Balmer was promoted to temporary group captain on 4 May . On 10 / 11 May , his Lancasters took part in a raid on Lille , losing three of their number . In an effort to shore up the morale of his younger crews , Balmer decided to personally lead their next mission the following night , against a military camp at Bourg @-@ Léopold ( <unk> ) , Belgium . It was planned to be his last operation before going on to a more senior position . His aircraft failed to return from the raid , causing considerable shock to his unit . The next day , Balmer 's place as commanding officer of No. 467 Squadron was taken by Wing Commander William Brill , previously a member of No. 463 Squadron RAAF , which was also based at Waddington . 
 Initially posted as missing , Balmer and his crew were later confirmed to have died when their Lancaster crashed near <unk> in provincial Antwerp , after being attacked by a night fighter . He was buried in <unk> War Cemetery , outside Brussels . The Daily Mail reported that he had accumulated almost 5 @,@ 000 flying hours , and compared his place in the RAAF to that of Leonard Cheshire 's in the RAF . Aged 33 , Balmer was unmarried at his death . His DFC was presented to his mother Kittie by the Governor @-@ General of Australia shortly after the end of the war . Balmer 's name appears at panel 110 of the Commemorative Area at the Australian War Memorial , Canberra . 
 = Maslama ibn Abd al @-@ Malik = 
 Maslama ibn Abd al @-@ Malik ( Arabic : <unk> بن عبد الملك , in Greek sources <unk> , <unk> ; fl . 705 – 738 ) was an Umayyad prince and one of the most prominent Arab generals of the early decades of the 8th century , leading several campaigns against the Byzantine Empire and the Khazar Khaganate . He achieved great fame especially for leading the second and last Arab siege of the Byzantine capital Constantinople , and for strengthening the Muslim presence in the Caucasus , becoming the " founder of Islamic Derbent " . 
 = = Early life and career = = 
 Maslama was the son of the Umayyad caliph Abd al @-@ Malik ibn Marwan ( reigned 685 – 705 ) and half @-@ brother of the caliphs al @-@ Walid I ( r . 705 – 715 ) , Sulayman ( r . 715 – 717 ) , Yazid II ( r . 720 – 724 ) and Hisham ( r . 724 – 743 ) . Maslama himself was excluded from the line of succession as his mother was a slave . 
 He is first mentioned as leading , along with his nephew al- ' Abbas ibn al @-@ Walid , the annual summer campaign ( <unk> 'if ) against the Byzantine Empire in 705 . His first major expedition was the 707 – 708 campaign against the Byzantine city of Tyana in southeastern Asia Minor , which was launched in retaliation for the defeat and death of the distinguished general Maimun the Mardaite the year before . The siege lasted through winter and the Arab army faced great hardship , but after the Arabs defeated a Byzantine relief force in spring 708 , the city surrendered . A few months later , in the summer , Maslama led another expedition into Asia Minor and defeated a Byzantine army near Amorium , while in 709 he raided into the region of Isauria . 
 In the same year , Maslama was appointed military governor of Armenia and Azerbaijan , succeeding his uncle Muhammad ibn Marwan . This he added to the post of governor of Jund Qinnasrin in northern Syria , which he already held . His governorship of Jund Qinnasrin was not as well @-@ documented by early Arabic chroniclers as his other posts , although historian Jere L. Bacharach claims Maslama was the likely patron of the Umayyad Mosque of Aleppo and possibly responsible for some construction works in Qinnasrin . Together , command of these provinces effectively gave him complete control of the Caliphate 's entire northwestern border . From this position he launched several campaigns against the Byzantines , devastating Galatia and sacking <unk> in 712 , and taking Melitene in 714 . He was also the first to establish the Caliphate 's presence north of the Caucasus , leading to the commencement of direct conflict with the Khazars ( the Second Arab – Khazar War ) . In 710 and again in 714 , he marched his army up to Bab al @-@ Abwab ( " Gate of Gates " , the Arabic name of Derbent ) , which he took and destroyed during the latter expedition . 
 = = Siege of Constantinople = = 
 From 715 Maslama was the leading general in the plans of his brother , Caliph Sulayman , to conquer the Byzantine capital , Constantinople , as Sulayman himself was too ill to lead the campaign in person . Maslama led a huge army , which sources report to have numbered 120 @,@ 000 men and 1 @,@ 800 ships . In late 715 , the Arab vanguard crossed the Taurus Mountains into Byzantine territory , Maslama following in spring 716 with the main army and the fleet . The Arabs ' plans were aided by the recurrence of civil strife , which had plagued the Byzantines since 695 ; Emperor Anastasius II was overthrown by Theodosius III in 715 , who was in turn opposed by the strategos of the Anatolic Theme , Leo the Isaurian . Maslama hoped to use the divisions among the Byzantines for his own benefit and initiated contacts with Leo , but the latter used the negotiations to outwit the Arab general and occupied for himself the strategic city of Amorium , which Maslama had intended to use as his winter base . As a result , Maslama marched further west , to the coastlands of the Thracesian Theme . There he spent the winter , while Leo marched onto Constantinople , which he entered in March 717 . 
 In early summer 717 , Maslama with his army crossed from Asia into Europe over the Dardanelles , and proceeded to besiege Constantinople from land and sea . His navy , however , was soon neutralized by the use of Greek fire , and as his army was unable to overcome the city 's land defences , the siege continued into the winter , which was especially severe that year , with snow covering the ground for three months . Maslama had brought along many supplies , but they either soon ran out or were lost — Arab accounts make much of Leo tricking the Arab general yet again during negotiations into handing over or destroying a significant part of his hoarded supplies — and the army began to suffer from hunger and disease . In spring , reinforcements arrived in the shape of two large fleets from Egypt and Ifriqiya , but a large part of their crews , who were mostly conscripted Christians , went over to the Byzantines , and Leo 's navy managed to destroy or capture the Arab fleets . The Byzantines also defeated an Arab army marching to aid the besiegers through Asia Minor , while Maslama 's men had to contend with attacks by the Bulgars as well , which cost them many men . The siege had clearly failed , and the new Caliph , Umar II ( r . 717 – 720 ) , ordered Maslama to retreat . On 15 August 718 , after thirteen months of siege , the Arabs departed . 
 Despite its failure , Maslama 's attempt to capture Constantinople became celebrated in later Muslim literature , with several surviving accounts , mostly semi @-@ fictional , in which the historical defeat was transformed into a sort of victory : Maslama was said to have departed only after symbolically entering the Byzantine capital on his horse accompanied by thirty riders ; Leo received him with honour and led him to the Hagia Sophia , where the emperor paid homage to the Arab general . The tales of the siege influenced similar episodes in Arabic epic literature , where Maslama appears associated with another legendary Arab hero of the wars against Byzantium , Abdallah al @-@ Battal . Furthermore , Byzantine tradition , as recorded in the 10th @-@ century De Administrando Imperio , held that during the siege Maslama convinced the Byzantines to build Constantinople 's first mosque , near the city 's praetorium . Later Ottoman tradition also ascribed the building of the Arap Mosque ( located outside Constantinople proper in Galata ) to Maslama , although it erroneously dated this to around 686 , probably confusing Maslama 's attack with the first Arab siege in the 670s . In reality , the mosque near the praetorium was most likely erected in about 860 , as a result of an Arab embassy in that year . 
 = = Governorship in Iraq and the Caucasus = = 
 After his failure at Constantinople , Maslama was dispatched to Iraq to quell the Kharijites . Following Umar 's death and the accession of his brother Yazid II in 720 , he was tasked with the suppression of the revolt of Yazid ibn al @-@ Muhallab , whom he defeated and killed in August 720 . He nevertheless fell out of favour with the Caliph , who resented and feared his power as governor of both <unk> , as well as his interfering in the succession : Maslama favoured his brother Hisham over Yazid 's son Walid . Yazid soon recalled Maslama from his post , ostensibly because he had failed to deliver his provinces ' tax haul to Damascus , and replaced him by his protege , Umar ibn Hubayra . 
 Maslama then disappears from the sources and re @-@ emerges in 725 , shortly after Yazid 's death and the accession of Hisham , who sent Maslama to replace al @-@ Djarrah ibn Abdallah al @-@ Hakami in the Caucasus front against the Khazars . Initially , however , Maslama was mostly active in the Byzantine front , and the war against the Khazars was delegated to al @-@ Harith ibn Amr al @-@ Ta 'i . In winter 725 , Maslama led an expedition against Asia Minor from Melitene , which culminated in the sack of Caesarea on 13 January 726 . Along with the capture of Gangra by Abdallah al @-@ Battal in 727 , this was one of the major successes of Arab arms against the Byzantines in the 720s . A few months later , he also led the otherwise unremarkable northern summer expedition into Byzantine territory . In 727 – 728 , his attention was diverted by Khazar attacks which reached deep into Azerbaijan . Although Maslama was able to drive them back and recover control of the Darial Pass , his 728 campaign across the Caucasus was difficult , bloody and indecisive . Maslama 's troops were reportedly engaged in up to thirty or forty days of constant fighting in miserable weather , and although he claimed victory in a battle over the Khazar khagan himself , the expedition did not achieve any results , and came close to being defeated . Certainly it did little to stop Khazar attacks south of the Caucasus , which resumed in 729 . Maslama was removed from office in the same year , and replaced by al @-@ Djarrah . He is then recorded by the Byzantine chronicler Theophanes the Confessor as having been responsible for the sack of the fortress of Charsianon in late 730 , but Arab sources credit Mu 'awiya ibn Hisham for this act . 
 In the Caucasus , the situation quickly deteriorated after Maslama 's departure . While al @-@ Djarrah campaigned north of the Caucasus , the Khazars swung behind him and attacked his main base , Ardabil . <unk> to relieve the city , al @-@ Djarrah was defeated and killed , and his army practically annihilated in a battle outside the city on 9 December 730 . Faced with this crisis , the Caliph appointed Maslama as the new governor of Armenia and Azerbaijan but , in the meantime , the veteran general Sa 'id ibn Amr al @-@ Harashi managed to recover the situation and defeat the Khazar army . Maslama , allegedly out of jealousy for Sa 'id 's successes , had Sa 'id imprisoned until Hisham ordered his release . Throughout 730 and 731 Maslama , with a large army at his disposal , cleared the provinces south of the Caucasus of the Khazars , and then advanced beyond the mountains , sacking a couple of settlements and defeating the khagan in pitched battle . He also recovered the strategic fortress of Bab al @-@ Abwab from the Khazars who had occupied it by poisoning its water supply , and reorganized it as a military colony ( <unk> ) , resettling it with 24 @,@ 000 soldiers . His tenure however was evidently judged as not successful enough , and he was replaced on 3 March 732 by Marwan ibn Muhammad . 
 Maslama thereafter retired from public life , possibly to his extensive estates in northern Syria . He died on 24 December 738 . 
 = Sneak King = 
 Sneak King is an advergame title from Burger King for the Xbox and Xbox 360 video game consoles , released in 2006 . Burger King sold the game with the purchase of value meals . Players take control of Burger King 's mascot The King , in a stealth food @-@ delivery themed game that spans four unique levels based on Burger King 's own commercial advertisements . Sneak King is one of three titles released by Burger King and developed by Blitz Games as part of five week promotional campaign between November 19 and December 24 , 2006 . Blitz Games was chosen to develop the games , originally for the online Xbox Live Arcade , but this was later changed to a single disc that would run the game on both the Xbox and Xbox 360 consoles . 
 Development of the project was closely tied to the other two games , and Sneak King 's development was directly led by Burger King . The game started as a tile @-@ based puzzle game , but quickly became a Spy vs Spy @-@ style caper until Burger King made design choices that removed conventional hazards and competition elements in favor of a stealth game with no human opponents . Sneak King did not win critical acclaim and its reviews often reflected its unusual design elements , but the project was a financial success and resulted in millions of units being sold . Collectively , the games ranked amongst the top 10 best selling games of 2006 . Burger King 's Russell Klein would attribute the three game project as being the driving force behind the company 's 40 % quarterly sales increase . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 The player takes control of The King , the mascot for Burger King , who is tasked with sneaking around while delivering Burger King meals to hungry people . Sneak King 's gameplay consists of four levels to explore : the Saw Mill , Cul @-@ De @-@ Sac , Construction Zone , and Downtown . Each level features a unique map with 20 challenges to be completed . There are two game modes , free @-@ play mode and challenge mode . Free @-@ play mode occurs whenever the player is not currently undertaking a challenge or after the player changes levels . In this mode , the player can freely explore the area without noise or sight detection and use the minimap to see unlocked challenges and non @-@ player characters ( NPCs ) . 
 In Challenge mode , the player must sneak around and deliver food to hungry NPCs . Hunger is indicated above thought bubbles which float above the heads of the NPCs . An NPC with a burger icon over their head is able to be given food , but they will lose their appetite if spotted by the player . NPCs move around the map in a set pattern and have a narrow cone of vision to detect player . Erik Brudvig of IGN described this narrow cone of vision as being similar to those of Metal Gear Solid . NPCs can also detect the player by excessive noise , the amount of sound a player is making is indicated by a noise meter . Challenges can be failed if a player alerts NPCs to their presence . Successful delivery of an item requires sneaking up behind an NPC or surprising them from a hiding place . Points are awarded based on how hungry a character is , the player 's stealth and proximity to the NPC and style points on delivery . When presenting food , a Flourish meter appears which quickly fills and empties , requiring a timed button press . The higher the flourish meter , the more style points . Each level has 20 associated challenges and fulfilling half the challenges on a level opens the way to the next level . Once all 80 challenges are completed , an alternative costume is unlocked . <unk> is rewarded for achieving certain goals or style on the Xbox 360 version . 
 = = Development = = 
 The origin of three Burger King @-@ themed Xbox Games , including Sneak King , began when senior executives from Microsoft and Burger King met at Cannes to accept awards for their I Love Bees and Subservient Chicken advertising campaigns . Microsoft and Burger King 's executives decided to produce Xbox games that would take place in Burger King @-@ themed context that would not be reduced to blatant advertisements . Blitz Games Studios would become involved in the project after Blitz Games Studios ' co @-@ founder , Philip Oliver , discussed an interest in producing Xbox Live games with Microsoft 's Xbox Live Arcade portfolio manager , Ross Erickson . Oliver 's interest was hampered by a lack of funding , but Erickson agreed to notify Oliver of any leads on advertisers looking for product placement . A week or two after that , Oliver received a call from Erickson about Burger King 's interest in creating three games . In the fall of 2005 , Blitz Games entered into talks with Burger King and the development began in February 2006 . 
 The development originally began as downloadable Xbox Live games , but Burger King soon announced that they wanted the games to also be playable on the Xbox . This would require distribution of the games in boxes instead of digitally because original Xbox console platform was not able to access Xbox Live Arcade . With physical distribution in mind , Burger King wanted both the Xbox and Xbox 360 versions of the game to be available on the same disc . For the project , Blitz Games assigned two project managers for the games , Chris Swan and John Jarvis . Swan and Jarvis held daily conference calls with Burger King and Microsoft 's Xbox division throughout the development period . In order to better work together , Blitz Games showed Burger King the development process for a previous game , from " first the black and white sketches , then the color concepts , environment <unk> , texturing and lighting , and finally the results on screen . " By showing an example of their workflow process , Blitz Games hoped to bridge the presentation gap between the companies could potentially " cripple the project . " 
 Originally Blitz Games had a staff of fifteen working on the original project , but this grew to nearly 80 people after Burger King increased the contract and budget for the games . The task of producing two different versions of the games were made easier by Blitz Games ' production toolchain , which had built @-@ in compatibility for Xbox . Blitz Studios ' developers were able to adjust the game with appropriate hardware coding that had already been previously developed by the company . Blitz Games extended their development cycle by two months : one month due to challenges in production , and the other because Microsoft agreed to " fast track " the games through the Quality Assurance process . The development period concluded after three months , with the completion of all three games and the production of two million units of each game . 
 Burger King and Blitz Studios split the creative process up for the three games . Sneak King is the game that Burger King had creative control over , and which was envisioned based on the King commercials . Oliver stated , " Sneak King is derived by them , purely from their commercials . It was basically ' here 's our commercials , we have to have a video game around them . ' They threw in all their ideas , and we made it work . " Originally , Sneak King was designed as a tile @-@ based puzzle game , but it soon evolved into a Spy vs Spy caper with multiple Kings who are " trying to out @-@ deliver one another while laying traps for their enemies " . 
 Burger King 's creative control over the game impacted its development defined as a set of rules . The first rule was that there was only one King character . In response , the developers had the idea of the Xbox avatars playing the game and finding the crown to become the King . This idea was rejected by Burger King who said players could not become the King . The developers ' next idea was to have one person be the King and the other players lay traps to interfere with his deliveries , but this idea was again rejected by Burger King because the King could not be exposed to any danger . With the usual hazards and competition elements of the video games removed , the developers decided upon a stealth format with no human opponents . In order to better capture the accuracy and authenticity of the King 's movements , the King was flown to Britain for motion capture for the game 's production . Blitz Games ' Edward Linley described Sneak King as the riskiest game concept of the project because it " is the appearance and antics of the King himself that give the game its humor and life ; without him , the game simply wouldn 't work . Until we had the finished King model and motion capture in the game , we couldn 't be certain the concept would gel . Fortunately , the moment he went in , we knew we had created something truly unique . " Sneak King 's programming code consists of 60 @,@ 000 active lines with another 43 @,@ 000 developer comment lines . The game 's instruction manual does not include a list of credits . 
 = = Release = = 
 Sneak King is one of three promotional Burger King @-@ themed releases for North American winter 2006 . The other two games are <unk> Racer and Big Bumpin ' . The Burger King exclusive marketing run was from November 19 through December 24 , 2006 . The games were available for $ 3 @.@ 99 with any purchase of any Burger King value meal . In January 2007 , the marketing firm Crispin Porter + Bogusky stated that more than 2 @.@ 7 million games were sold in the promotion . It was reported that more than 3 @.@ 2 million copies were sold , although Sneak King distinct sales were not given , in Game Developer 's April 2007 issue . 
 = = Reception and impact = = 
 GameSpot 's Jeff Gerstmann gave it a 5 @.@ 8 out of 10 and although describing it as weird and poorly made , he concluded that " Sneak King is a one @-@ trick pony that is an interesting curiosity with a subversive sense of humor . " IGN 's Brudvig noted that the game 's US $ 3 @.@ 99 price point made it the cheapest Xbox Live game . Although noting the presence of game @-@ breaking bugs , he said the budget game was worth purchasing because of its food delivery dances . Brudvig also noted that the graphics were impressive for the cost of the game , but the interactive maps were found to be quite limited and environmentally sparse . X @-@ Play rated the game as one out of five , but noted that " [ t ] his is the game that really got the buzz going about BK 's whole foray into gaming , thanks mostly to screenshots of the Burger King hiding in a garbage can , lying in wait for what appeared to be a college @-@ age woman walking toward him . Stalking in the name of great taste . " Kate Macarthur of Advertising Age noted that , " Burger King 's Sneak King video game for Xbox may not have won rave reviews , but gamers still bought more than 2 million copies . " 
 The immediate impact of Sneak King on Blitz Games was a financial boost . This allowed the company to improve its technology , and partially funded the company 's Blitz Arcade . Collectively , sales sufficed to be ranked amongst the top 10 best selling games of 2006 . Story wrote , " Using Xbox data on game use , the Burger King game equates in time spent to more than 1 @.@ 4 billion 30 @-@ second commercials [ . ] " Including Sneak King , the success of the project was noted as a key part of Burger King 's 40 % increase in sales during the quarter . It was affirmed by Russell Klein that Burger King attributed the majority of that success to the game project . 
 = Lois Lane ( Smallville ) = 
 Lois Lane is a fictional character on the television series Smallville ; she was portrayed continually by Erica Durance since her first appearance in the season four premier " Crusade " to the series finale . Durance began as a guest star in season four , but was promoted to series regular status beginning in season five . The character of Lois Lane , first created for comic books by Jerry Siegel and Joe Shuster in 1938 to be the love interest for Clark Kent and his alter @-@ ego Superman , was adapted to television in 2001 by Alfred Gough and Miles Millar — this is the fourth time the character has been adapted to a live action television series . 
 In Smallville , Lois comes to town to investigate the apparent death of her cousin Chloe Sullivan at the start of the fourth season . After finding Chloe still alive , Lois is forced to enroll in Smallville High to complete the remaining credits of high school she failed to achieve . As the series progresses , her interest in journalism grows , first writing a couple of articles for the Smallville High Torch in season four , landing a job at the Inquisitor in season six , and finally being hired at the Daily Planet in season seven . Throughout seasons four , five , six and seven , Lois 's relationship with Clark Kent is depicted more as a brother / sister relationship , with the two characters often butting @-@ heads . By season eight , Lois begins to realize that she is falling in love with Clark , and by season nine the two become an official couple . During season ten the relationship goes through several milestones and midseason the pair get engaged . 
 Series developers Gough and Millar had always envisioned bringing the character of Lois Lane to Smallville , but it was not until the end of season three that the creative team had the right storyline to bring her in . Erica Durance was hired to portray the iconic female reporter from the comic books . Smallville 's interpretation of Lois was designed to embody similar traits to that of various leading female characters in film . Described as " fiercely independent " , critics have favorably compared this version of Lois Lane against the other live @-@ action performances of the character in both film and television . 
 = = Role in Smallville = = 
 Lois Lane makes her first appearance in season four 's " Crusade " , when she comes to Smallville investigating the supposed death of her cousin Chloe Sullivan ( Allison Mack ) . While investigating Chloe 's death with Clark Kent ( Tom Welling ) in " Gone " , the pair uncover the truth that Chloe is still alive , but in witness protection until Lionel Luthor 's trial , the man she is testifying against with evidence that he orchestrated the death of his own parents . Lionel ( John Glover ) discovers the truth and sends someone to kill her , but Lois and Clark stop the would @-@ be killer , allowing Chloe to testify . Before Lois can leave Smallville , her father ( Michael Ironside ) informs her that she failed to achieve all of her high school credits , and that he has enrolled her in Smallville High so that she can complete her twelfth grade year . Staying with the Kents , Lois begins attending Smallville High . In " <unk> " , Chloe convinces her to become a reporter for the Torch in an effort to help Lois earn some of her remaining credits . With Lex Luthor 's ( Michael Rosenbaum ) help in the episode " Devoted " , Clark manages to get Lois her remaining credits ahead of schedule so that she can attend Metropolis University , and vacate his bedroom . 
 In season five 's " Fanatic " , Jonathan Kent ( John Schneider ) , who is running for the state senate , asks Lois to be his campaign manager after witnessing her take charge against his former campaign manager , whom Jonathan fires when he published a statement that goes against Jonathan 's values . In " Fragile " , Lois continues her duties under Martha Kent ( Annette O 'Toole ) , who is requested by the Governor to take Jonathan 's place after he suffers a fatal heart attack . In season six 's " Sneeze " , Lois discovers an interest in journalism after she is almost struck by a barn door that falls out of the sky while she is jogging . Her story is bought by the Inquisitor , a tabloid newspaper that gives her a job as a reporter . In " Wither " , she begins a romantic relationship with billionaire Oliver Queen ( Justin Hartley ) , who , unbeknown to her , masquerades at night as the vigilante Green Arrow . Queen 's " job " as Green Arrow often gets in the way of their relationship . In " Hydro " , Lois deduces that Oliver is Green Arrow , setting up an elaborate scheme to prove it . Clark and Oliver are wise to her plan , however , and Clark dresses up as Green Arrow to throw Lois off Oliver 's trail . When Oliver is forced to leave Metropolis to track down all of Lex 's experimental facilities , in the episode " Justice " , his relationship with Lois comes to an end . In season six 's " Prototype " , Lois discovers that Lex has been doing experimental research on army soldiers , one of which was her best friend . As a result , Lois decides in " Phantom " to begin looking into Lex 's LuthorCorp projects . 
 In season seven 's " Kara " , while looking into Lex 's research projects , Lois discovers an alien spaceship . Her attempt to craft a news story out of the situation lands her a job at the Daily Planet — in the basement alongside her cousin Chloe . While at the Daily Planet , Lois begins a new relationship with her editor Grant Gabriel ( Michael Cassidy ) in the episode " Wrath " . Their relationship comes under scrutiny from Chloe and Lex in " Blue " , with Chloe seeing it as reason for co @-@ workers to doubt Lois 's true ability as a journalist , and Lex believing it will jeopardize the secret of Grant 's true identity . In " Gemini " , the two finally agree to part ways . In the season eight premiere , Lois believes that Lex is responsible for Chloe 's arrest by the Department of Domestic Security , and goes to his mansion to search his files for her location . She eventually discovers Chloe 's whereabouts and arrives , alongside Clark , to save her . In " Plastique " , Lois takes Clark under her wing — teaching him how to be a reporter — after he accepts an internship at the Daily Planet , sitting at the desk directly across from Lois . Her feelings for Clark become stronger as the season progresses , admitting in the episode " Committed " that she is in love with Clark , and stating to Oliver in the episode " Bride " that she has never felt this way about someone before . In the same episode , she almost shares a kiss with Clark before being interrupted by the arrival of Clark 's ex @-@ girlfriend Lana Lang ( Kristin Kreuk ) . In the season eight finale , Lois and Tess Mercer ( Cassidy Freeman ) , Lex Luthor 's handpicked successor to LuthorCorp , get into a physical fight at the Daily Planet . During the fight , Lois picks up a Legion ring that falls out of Clark 's desk and is instantly transported to another time and place . 
 In season nine , Lois returns from the future suffering from visions of Earth having been overrun by aliens , led by Zod ( Callum Blue ) . This season , Lois and Clark officially begin a romantic relationship , while Lois also begins assisting " The Blur " in his heroic endeavors . Lois 's trust in Clark is shaken when she thinks Clark is jealous of her relationship with " The Blur " , and that he does not understand her need to find value in her own life 's work . Ultimately , Lois deduces Clark 's true identity as " The Blur " in the season nine finale . Lois and Clark 's relationship reaches its peak in the tenth and final season . Clark finally confesses his secret to her in " Isis " and they begin their relationship again free of secrets . He proposed marriage in " Icarus " . In the episode " Beacon " , with Chloe 's help , Lois rallies faithful fans of " The Blur " and repeals the Vigilante Registration Act ( <unk> ) , helping Clark and the Justice League preserve their secret identities . In " Masquerade " and " Booster " , Lois convinces Clark to develop an alter @-@ ego as a way of hiding his true identity as the heroic " Blur " . In the episode " Prophecy " , Lois is given Clark 's powers for day , as a wedding gift by his biological father Jor @-@ El , and realizes that the devotion they have for each other is Clark 's greatest weakness , and calls off the wedding . In the series finale , Clark convinces Lois that her being in his life makes him stronger , but the ceremony is interrupted by Darkseid 's sudden invasion of the Earth . Lois convinces the US military not to bomb Darkseid 's home world of Apokolips , allowing Clark to finally embrace his destiny and defeat Darkseid himself . 
 = = Portrayal = = 
 Series developer Al Gough contends that it was always the producer 's intention to bring in the iconic Lois Lane , they just needed a good reason to do it — Chloe 's supposed death at the end of season three appeared to be that reason . Gough explains that , when casting for the role , they looked to Margot Kidder — Lois Lane in the Superman film series — for inspiration . They wanted an actress who was " pretty " , " smart " , and who came with some " wit " . Dozens of actresses auditioned for the role of Lois Lane , but it was not until a tape from Erica Durance showed up that everyone felt that they had found the right Lois . As executive producer Greg Beeman describes Durance , " She had a toughness about her . She was tough and sexy and direct . " Another plus , according to Beeman , was the chemistry between Durance and Tom Welling . Durance came on set that first afternoon and the two hit it off , becoming friends and developing a brother / sister relationship on the set . 
 The lateness of her casting forced Durance to start filming only three days after being hired , with no time to prepare for the role . Under the initial agreement , Durance was only to portray the character for a total of four episodes , but , after a discussion with Peter Roth over how they planned to use the character on the show — insisting that she and Clark would not be having a romantic relationship — the feature film division then cleared the character for more episodes . After the character was cleared for more episodes , the creative team decided to plant her in the Kent home so that she could provide a constant annoyance to Clark . To separate the physical appearance of Lana and Lois from each other , the producers had highlights added to Durance 's hair , as she and Kristin Kreuk both shared a similar brunette coloring . 
 = = Character development = = 
 = = = Storyline = = = 
 Series writer Brian Peterson discusses how the writing staff chose to develop the character : " In the Smallville pilot , Al and Miles established Lex and Clark as best friends , which is , to me , one of the best aspects of the show . So when you 're introducing his future love interest , why not introduce her , not as an enemy , but as the one who is constantly going to butt heads with him , where they 're not gonna like each other at all at first ? I think that because we chose such a different take on her , it wasn 't that intimidating . She could grow into the person that everybody sees on @-@ screen later . " For season six , the writers chose to start Lois down the path of investigative journalism , only in this version of the character she gets her start working for a tabloid newspaper . Writer Kelly Souders felt that if tabloid beginnings were good enough for Perry White — an additional character established in season three 's " Perry " — then they are good enough for Lois Lane . It adds depth to the character by showing how she struggled before becoming " the reporter we all know and love " . As Lois steps closer to her ultimate destiny at the Daily Planet , the writers have continued to evolve the character by having her grow out of the " black and white " mindset and have her begin seeing shades of gray . The writers wanted the character to realize that there is sometimes a middle road that has to be taken . In season eight , Durance sees Clark taking a job at the Daily Planet as a chance for her character to " step it up and be more involved " . In this case , Lois is acting more mature , taking charge in being a mentor to Clark as he transitions into his new job . Durance describes the eighth season as a lesson in duality , with Clark realizing that he has to be two different people if he wants to have a life and save the day ; Durance believes that the same applies to Lois . As Durance explains , " [ Lois has ] got her confidence as a journalist and on the inside , she 's going oh my god I 'm truly in love with [ Clark ] , more in love than I 've ever been with anyone . " 
 = = = Characteristics = = = 
 When developing the characteristics of their version of Lois Lane , the writers took inspiration from other leading ladies in cinema , for example , Karen Allen 's character Marion Ravenwood , from Raiders of the Lost Ark . Todd Slavkin describes the character as having a " sophisticated , worldly experience " , and was considered to be more of an adult than the rest of the cast . Durance believes that she embodies many of the characteristics that the creative team wanted to show in their version of Lois , specifically the fact that Lois has a lot of " nervous energy " from trying to " find herself " , the same nervous energy that Durance brings to the role . The actress also relates to Lois 's sassy , and independent nature , but , conversely , she is not as extroverted as Lois . Gough describes the character as coming from the school of hard knocks ; she is street smart , and a very capable woman . Durance believes her character is " fiercely independent " , but at the same time she is not afraid to admit that she has flaws , and she is only human ; Lois also does not feel sorry about having those flaws . She goes into further detail , identifying the character as more of a tomboy who is vulnerable , with Gough adding that she is also " slightly neurotic " . BuddyTV 's John Kubicek characterizes her as a fast @-@ talking woman , who , though she whines over petty annoyances , can take care of herself . He goes on to further describe how she is not afraid of getting herself into trouble just so she can dig herself out . 
 = = = Relationships = = = 
 One of Lois 's key relationships is with Clark , who is her husband in the comics . For Smallville , the characters ' relationship is in constant development . Darren Swimmer describes the relationship between Lois and Clark in season five as " a bit of a melting of the ice " . The two characters continue to " butt heads " , but the audience can see where there is a growing attraction and that either would be there for the other in a time of need . According to Erica Durance , in season five it is not yet clear if either character realizes the attraction , but the joking between the two characters represents a foreshadowing of a greater relationship . Durance believes that because of Lois 's self @-@ imposed walls , even if she thought about Clark in a romantic notion for just an instant she would immediately make it out to be a joke because she is not ready for that type of closeness , yet . The actress sees season five as being too soon for the characters to be " in @-@ love " , because they are still getting to know each other . Writer Brian Peterson describes Lois 's relationship with Oliver Queen in season six as a precursor to her future relationship with Clark . As Peterson sees it , it is the dynamic between her and Oliver , with her willingness to accept Oliver 's secret identity as Green Arrow as mirroring the relationship she will have with Clark . As far as season six is concerned , the relationship between Lois and Clark is still undefined for the audience . As Durance describes it , neither character is willing to put an official label on their relationship . The pair have learned to deal with each other 's " quirks " , but there are still moments that both feel uncomfortable with . Instead at this point , Durance believes that Clark and Lois are satisfied with identifying with a " brother @-@ sister friendship " label , than trying to discover how they both truly feel about each other . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Erica Durance has been nominated for two Saturn Award nominations in the Best Supporting Actress category for her performance as Lois Lane . The first came in 2005 , after her first season with the show , and then again the following year . Before the end of Smallville 's seventh season , IGN 's Daniel Phillips compared the actresses who have portrayed the character of Lois Lane over the past three decades . Up against the most recognizable version of Lois Lane , Margot Kidder , the 2006 film incarnation played by Kate Bosworth , and the previous live @-@ action television version portrayed by Teri Hatcher , Erica Durance was rated the highest . Although Phillips acknowledges that Kidder is the best representation of Lois ' personality , he claims that Durance is the best overall embodiment of the character . Apart from her beauty , Phillips states , " Durance makes Lois intelligent , capable , funny and dangerously curious – exactly the type of woman Clark Kent would fall for . " Mike Moody of TV Squad named Lois as one of five reasons to watch Smallville 's eighth season . Moody believes that Durance 's Lois is " one of the best versions of the character " because Durance plays her as " tough , brainy , sexy and catty " , which makes her portrayal that much better than Kate Bosworth 's Lois Lane in Superman Returns . BuddyTV 's John Kubicek likens the actress 's performance — her " stylized delivery of lines " — to that of actresses from the 1940s screwball comedy era . 
 = = Other media appearances = = 
 In 2012 , the Smallville series was continued through the comic book medium with Smallville : Season 11 . Written by Bryan Q. Miller , who also wrote for the television series , Lois 's story continues as she lives her life with Clark , who has now become known to the world as " Superman " . Her involvement with Clark also allows her to meet Gotham City 's elusive vigilante Batman , and subsequently learn his secret identity and befriend Batman 's partner Nightwing ( Barbara Gordon ) . She also teams up with the Amazon Princess Diana Prince , and DEO 's agent Steve Trevor was one of Lois 's former boyfriends . 
 When Lois accepts an assignment to Africa to investigate mysterious reports surrounding a vigilante , known as " Angel of the Plateau . " She is caught in a terrorist attack after her arrival , but is saved by Lana , who is revealed to be the superheroine Lois investigates . After they are acquainted , Lois learns that Lana has been using her abilities to protect children from people who would exploit them . However , Lois tries to keep the fact that Clark is now in the relationship with her from Lana . Both Lois and Lana also find themselves targeted by the latter 's enemies , and they send John Corben to defeat Lana . Lois helps the powerless Lana in defeating Corben , and Lana reveals that she knows about her relationship with Clark as she saw the engagement ring before Lois hid it . Lois receives the blessing from Lana . 
 = Italian ironclad Principe di Carignano = 
 Principe di Carignano was the lead ship of the Principe di Carignano class of ironclad warships built for the Italian Regia Marina in the 1860s . She was the first ironclad built in Italy ; her keel was laid January 1861 , her hull was launched in September 1863 , and she was completed in June 1865 . Principe di Carignano was a broadside ironclad armed with a battery of ten 8 @-@ inch ( 200 mm ) guns and twelve 164 @-@ millimeter ( 6 @.@ 5 in ) guns . 
 Principe di Carignano saw action during the Battle of Lissa in 1866 during the Third Italian War of Independence . There , she led the Italian line , the flagship of Admiral Giovanni Vacca ; the leading squadron of the Italian fleet became separated from the rest of the fleet and was not heavily engaged . Her career was limited after the war , owing to the emergence of more modern ironclads and a severe reduction in the Italian naval budget following their defeat at Lissa . The ship was stricken from the naval register in 1875 and broken up for scrap to free up funds needed for new ironclads under construction . 
 = = Design = = 
 Principe di Carignano was 72 @.@ 98 meters ( 239 @.@ 4 ft ) long between perpendiculars ; she had a beam of 15 @.@ 1 m ( 50 ft ) and an average draft of 7 @.@ 18 m ( 23 @.@ 6 ft ) . She displaced 3 @,@ 446 metric tons ( 3 @,@ 392 long tons ) normally and up to 3 @,@ 912 t ( 3 @,@ 850 long tons ) at full load . She had a crew of 572 . Her propulsion system consisted of one single @-@ expansion steam engine that drove a single screw propeller , with steam supplied by four coal @-@ fired , rectangular fire @-@ tube boilers . Her engine produced a top speed of 10 @.@ 4 knots ( 19 @.@ 3 km / h ; 12 @.@ 0 mph ) from 1 @,@ 968 indicated horsepower ( 1 @,@ 468 kW ) . She could steam for about 1 @,@ 200 nautical miles ( 2 @,@ 200 km ; 1 @,@ 400 mi ) at a speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . To supplement her steam engine , the ship was barquentine @-@ rigged . 
 Principe di Carignano was a broadside ironclad , and she was armed with a main battery of ten 72 @-@ pounder 8 in ( 200 mm ) guns and twelve 164 mm ( 6 @.@ 5 in ) rifled muzzle @-@ loading guns . The ship was equipped with a spur @-@ shaped ram at the bow . The ship 's hull was sheathed with wrought iron armor that was 4 @.@ 75 in ( 121 mm ) thick . 
 = = Service history = = 
 Principe di Carignano was laid down at the Cantiere della <unk> shipyard in Genoa in January 1861 , the first Italian ironclad to be domestically produced . She was launched on 15 September 1863 and was completed on 11 June 1865 . She was the only member of her class ready for service by the time the Third Italian War of Independence broke out between Italy and the Austrian Empire in June 1866 , which was fought concurrently with the Austro @-@ Prussian War . The Italian fleet commander , Admiral Carlo Pellion di Persano , initially adopted a cautious course of action ; he was unwilling to risk battle with the Austrian Navy , despite the fact that the Austrian fleet was much weaker than his own . Persano claimed he was simply waiting on the ironclad ram Affondatore , en route from Britain , but his inaction weakened morale in the fleet , with many of his subordinates openly accusing him of cowardice . 
 Rear Admiral Wilhelm von Tegetthoff brought the Austrian fleet to Ancona on June 27 , in an attempt to draw out the Italians . At the time , many of the Italian ships were in disarray ; Principe di Carignano had not yet received her heavy 8 @-@ inch guns , and other ships were experiencing various difficulties with their engines or armament . Nevertheless , Principe di Carignano formed up with the ironclads San Martino , Regina Maria Pia , and Castelfidardo in preparation to confront Tegetthoff . Persano held a council of war aboard Principe di Carignano to determine whether he should sortie to engage Tegetthoff , but by that time , the Austrians had withdrawn , making the decision moot . The Minister of the Navy , Agostino Depretis , urged Persano to act and suggested the island of Lissa , to restore Italian confidence after their defeat at the Battle of Custoza the previous month . On 7 July , Persano left Ancona and conducted a sweep into the Adriatic , but encountered no Austrian ships and returned on the 13th . 
 = = = Battle of Lissa = = = 
 On 16 July , Persano took the Italian fleet out of Ancona , bound for Lissa , where they arrived on the 18th . With them , they brought troop transports carrying 3 @,@ 000 soldiers ; the Italian warships began bombarding the Austrian forts on the island , with the intention of landing the soldiers once the fortresses had been silenced . In response , the Austrian Navy sent the fleet under Tegetthoff to attack the Italian ships . Principe di Carignano was at that time the flagship of Admiral Giovanni Vacca , commander of the 1st Division , along with the ironclads Ancona and Castelfidardo . After arriving off Lissa on the 18th , Persano ordered the 1st Division to bombard the Austrian fortresses protecting the island , but Vacca informed him that his ships ' guns could not elevate high enough to hit the high fortifications . Persano then sent Vacca 's division to Vis to force the harbor defenses , but by the time they arrived , night was approaching , and so he cancelled the attack . 
 The next morning , Persano ordered the ironclad Formidabile to enter Vis harbor and attack the Madonna battery , supported by Principe di Carignano and the rest of the 1st Division . Vacca found it impossible to employ his ships in the confined waters , and so he left Formidabile to handle the battery . With the day 's attacks again having yielded no results , Persano decided to make another attempt on the 20th . Vacca would take his three ships to patrol to the north @-@ east of the island while the rest of the fleet would again try to land the soldiers . Before the Italians could begin the attack , the dispatch boat Esploratore arrived , bringing news of Tegetthoff 's approach . Persano 's fleet was in disarray ; Vacca 's ships were three miles to the northeast from Persano 's main force , and three other ironclads were further away to the west . Persano immediately ordered his ships to form up with Vacca 's , first in line abreast formation , and then in line ahead formation . Principe di Carignano led the Italian line . 
 Shortly before the action began , Persano left his flagship , Re d 'Italia , and transferred to the turret ship Affondatore , though none of his subordinates on the other ships were aware of the change . They were thus left to fight as individuals without direction . More dangerously , by stopping Re d 'Italia , he allowed a significant gap to open up between Vacca 's three ships and the rest of the fleet . Principe di Carignano opened fire first at 10 : 43 , at a range of about 1 @,@ 000 yards ( 910 m ) , while the Austrians were approaching the gap . The Italian gunnery was poor , and their initial shooting missed the Austrian ships . Tegetthoff took his fleet through the gap between Vacca 's and Persano 's ships in an attempt to initiate a melee , though he failed to ram any Italian vessels on the first pass . The Austrians then turned back toward Persano 's ships , and took Re d 'Italia , San Martino , and the coastal defense ship Palestro under heavy fire . Vacca turned Principe di Carignano and Castelfidardo to port , taking them away from the Austrian ships hammering Persano 's division . He briefly attempted to engage the Austrian wooden ships in the rear , but was driven off by heavy fire from three steam frigates . 
 Principe di Carignano , Castelfidardo , and the coastal defense ship Varese engaged the wooden ship of the line Kaiser , but failed to inflict fatal damage to her before she withdrew . By this time , Re d 'Italia had been rammed and sunk , and Palestro had been set on fire , soon to be destroyed by a magazine explosion . Persano broke off the engagement , and though his ships still outnumbered the Austrians , Persano refused to counter @-@ attack with his badly demoralized forces . The Italian fleet began to withdraw , followed by the Austrians ; as night began to fall , the opposing fleets disengaged completely , heading for Ancona and Pola , respectively . In the course of the battle , Principe di Carignano had had one of her armor plates shattered by Austrian shells , and one of her guns had exploded . In return , Principe di Carignano hit the Austrian ironclad SMS Drache and killed the ship 's commander . 
 = = = Later career = = = 
 After the battle , Vacca replaced Persano ; he was ordered to attack the main Austrian naval base at Pola , but the war ended before the operation could be carried out . The ship 's postwar career was limited ; rapidly surpassed first by central battery and then turret ships , the first generation of ironclads with traditional broadside quickly became obsolete . In addition , the government lost confidence in the fleet after the defeat at Lissa and drastically reduced the naval budget . The cuts were so severe that the fleet had great difficulty in mobilizing its ironclad squadron to attack the port of Civitavecchia in September 1870 , as part of the wars of Italian unification . Instead , the ships were laid up and the sailors conscripted to man them were sent home . Around 1870 , the ship 's armament was revised to four 8 in guns and sixteen 164 cm guns . Principe di Carignano was stricken from the naval register in 1875 and subsequently broken up for scrap . The Navy discarded both of her sisters , along with the ironclad Re di Portogallo between 1875 and 1880 to remove the cost of maintaining them from the naval budget , as part of an effort to reduce the financial impact of the new Caio Duilio and Italia @-@ classes then under construction . 
 = Mycena mustea = 
 Mycena mustea is a species of mushroom in the Mycenaceae family . First described as a new species in 2007 , the fungus is known only from Kanagawa , Japan , where it grows on dead fallen twigs in lowland forests . The mushroom 's dull violet to grayish @-@ violet cap , initially covered with a fine whitish powder , becomes smooth as it matures , and eventually reaches a diameter of up to 10 mm ( 0 @.@ 39 in ) . The stem is slender , up to 90 mm ( 3 @.@ 5 in ) long , and is covered with stiff white hairs at the base . Underneath the cap are distantly spaced pale brownish gills that are narrowly attached to the stem . Microscopic characteristics of the mushroom include the weakly amyloid spores ( turning bluish to black when stained with Melzer 's reagent ) , the club @-@ shaped cheilocystidia ( cystidia on the gill edge ) featuring one or more short knob @-@ like protuberances , the absence of pleurocystidia ( cystidia on the gill face ) , the diverticulate cap cuticle hyphae , and the absence of clamp connections . 
 = = Taxonomy , naming , and classification = = 
 The species was first collected in Japan by <unk> Takahashi in 1999 , and reported as a new species in a 2007 publication . The specific epithet is the Latin word mustea , meaning " fresh " . The Japanese name is Sumire @-@ ashinagatake . 
 The infrageneric classification of the fungus is unclear , and depends on what taxonomic characters are deemed most important . According to Takahashi , the mushroom 's violet pigment , the inamyloid ( not staining when treated with Melzer 's reagent ) hymenophoral tissue ( hymenium @-@ bearing tissue ) , and the smooth hyphae of the outer layer of stem suggest a placement in the section <unk> ( Fr . ) Quel . , as defined by the Dutch Mycena specialist Maas Geesteranus . However , if greater taxonomic emphasis is placed on the weakly amyloid basidiospores , it would be more appropriate in the section Fragilipedes ( Fr . ) Quél . 
 = = Description = = 
 The cap is conical to convex to bell @-@ shaped , occasionally with a low and broad umbo , and reaches 7 to 10 mm ( 0 @.@ 28 to 0 @.@ 39 in ) in diameter . When moist , it is partly translucent , and grooves corresponding to the position of the gills under tha cap can be seen . The surface is somewhat hygrophanous — it changes color as it loses or absorbs moisture . The surface is initially pruinose — covered with what appears to be a fine white powder ( remnants of the universal veil that covered the immature fruit body ) — but this soon sloughs off , leaving it smooth . The cap surface is a dull violet color when young , then becomes somewhat paler near the margin . The flesh is up to 0 @.@ 5 mm thick , white , and lacks any distinctive odor and taste . The slender stem is 40 to 90 mm ( 1 @.@ 6 to 3 @.@ 5 in ) long by 0 @.@ 5 to 1 @.@ 5 mm ( 0 @.@ 020 to 0 @.@ 059 in ) thick , cylindrical , centrally attached to the cap , and hollow . Its surface is dry , dull violet to grayish @-@ violet over the entire length . Like the cap surface , it is initially entirely pruinose , but becomes smooth in maturity . The base of the stem is covered with sharp , straight , and stiff white hairs . The gills are narrowly attached to the stem , and distantly spaced , with between 15 and 19 gills reaching the stem . The gills are up to 1 @.@ 2 mm broad , thin , and pale brownish . The gill edges are pruinose , and the same color as the gill faces . 
 = = = Microscopic characteristics = = = 
 The spores are roughly ellipsoid and measure 11 – 12 by 6 – 7 µm . They are smooth , colorless , inamyloid to weakly amyloid , and thin @-@ walled . The basidia ( spore @-@ bearing cells ) are 28 – 37 by 8 – 10 µm , club @-@ shaped , and mostly four @-@ spored . The cheilocystidia ( cystidia on the gill edge ) are club @-@ shaped , abundant , and measure 30 – 45 by 8 – 11 µm . They form a sterile gill edge . Near their tips they have one or more short knob @-@ like excrescences ( outgrowths ) that are colorless , and thin @-@ walled . M. mustea does not have cystidia on the gill face ( pleurocystidia ) . The hymenophoral tissue is made of hyphae that are 5 – 16 µm wide , cylindrical ( often somewhat inflated ) with thin walls , smooth , colorless , and inamyloid . The cap cuticle is made of parallel , bent @-@ over hyphae that are 2 – 6 µm wide , cylindrical , and covered with scattered , warty or finger @-@ like hyaline ( translucent ) thin @-@ walled diverticulae . The layer of hyphae under the cap cuticle are parallel , hyaline or pale violet , dextrinoid ( turning reddish to reddish @-@ brown in Melzer 's reagent ) , and contain short and inflated cells that are up to 25 µm wide . The stem cuticle is made of parallel , bent @-@ over thin @-@ walled hyphae that are 2 – 6 µm wide , cylindrical , smooth , and hyaline or pale violet . The stem tissue is made of longitudinally running , cylindrical hyphae that are 8 – 15 µm wide , smooth , colorless , and dextrinoid . Clamp connections are absent in all tissues . 
 = = = Similar species = = = 
 Mycena mustea is similar to the North American species M. <unk> , which is distinguished by having a vinaceous @-@ brown to purplish @-@ black cap , irregularly shaped cheilocystidia that are covered at their tips with long , flexuous excrescences , and clamp connections . Mycena mustea is also similar to the European species M. <unk> , which differs in its blackish @-@ violet cap , broadly club @-@ shaped cheilocystidia covered with numerous , evenly spaced warts , and clamp connections . Mycena mustea also resembles the Japanese M. fonticola , a species described concurrently with M. mustea . Unlike that of M. fonticola , the cap of M. mustea typically becomes pale grayish @-@ purple when mature ; the cheilocystidia have several short finger @-@ like excrescences at their tips ; and the stem cuticle is made up of smooth hyphae . In contrast , the cap of M. fonticola becomes dark violet @-@ brown when mature ; there are no excrescences on the cheilocystidia ; and the hyphae of the stem cuticle are sparsely covered with diverticulae that resemble warts or fingers . 
 = = Habitat and distribution = = 
 Mycena mustea is known only from Kanagawa , Japan . The mushroom is found growing solitary to scattered on dead fallen twigs in lowland forests dominated by the hornbeam carpinus ( Carpinus tschonoskii ) and the Chinese evergreen oak ( Quercus myrsinaefolia ) . 
 = 2011 – 12 Harvard Crimson men 's basketball team = 
 The 2011 – 12 Harvard Crimson men 's basketball team represented Harvard University in the Ivy League athletic conference during the 2011 – 12 NCAA Division I men 's basketball season . The team played its home games in Boston , Massachusetts at the Lavietes Pavilion , located across the Charles River from the university 's main campus in Cambridge with a capacity of 2 @,@ 195 . The team was led by fifth @-@ year head coach Tommy Amaker and senior co @-@ captains Keith Wright and Oliver McNally . 
 Harvard began the season 8 – 0 , the best start by an Ivy League team since Columbia won its first ten games to begin the 1969 @-@ 70 season . On December 5 , 2011 , Harvard made its first @-@ ever appearances in the AP Poll and the Coaches ' Poll , ranking 25th and 24th , respectively . The season included two wins against teams in the powerhouse Atlantic Coast Conference ( ACC ) . 
 Harvard set a school record with 26 wins during the season and tied a school record for conference wins with 12 . Its 14 non @-@ conference wins also tied an Ivy League record previously held by the 2009 @-@ 10 Cornell Big Red . The season culminated in an invitation to the 2012 NCAA Men 's Division I Basketball Tournament , where Harvard lost in the second round . It was Harvard 's first NCAA tournament appearance since 1946 and third consecutive appearance in a postseason tournament . Junior Kyle Casey was a first @-@ team All @-@ Ivy selection , while junior Brandyn Curry and senior Keith Wright earned second @-@ team recognition . 
 = = Preseason = = 
 Harvard came into the 2011 @-@ 12 season off of its first Ivy League championship and two school record @-@ setting years in terms of total wins . The 2010 – 11 team that won the league championship during the 2010 – 11 Ivy League men 's basketball season had no seniors . Ivy League Men 's Basketball Player of the Year Keith Wright returned to the team as a senior , as did All @-@ Ivy League juniors Kyle Casey , Brandyn Curry and Christian Webster . Harvard entered the season with a 17 @-@ game home winning streak , the 10th @-@ longest in the country . Senior co @-@ captain Oliver McNally entered the season with a 32 @-@ shot free throw streak , having finished second in the nation in free throw percentage the previous year . 
 The upperclassmen on the team came from the first top @-@ 25 recruiting class in Ivy League history . Harvard and Wright won numerous preseason honors . Wright was a preseason John R. Wooden Award Top 50 Watchlist honoree as well as a Lou Henson Preseason All @-@ America team selection . Harvard was selected as the conference preseason favorite for the first time in school history . In addition , Harvard received preseason votes in the AP Poll , marking the fourth straight season it received votes at some point in the year . 
 The team 's schedule included power conference opponents Boston College ( ACC ) , Utah ( Pac @-@ 12 ) and Connecticut ( Big East ) as well as a possible second @-@ round Battle 4 Atlantis match against Florida State ( ACC ) . Expectations were high for Harvard , and a December 8 contest against Connecticut was the only Ivy League game scheduled for broadcast on ESPN2 during the season . 
 = = Schedule = = 
 = = Rankings = = 
 On December 5 , 2011 , Harvard made its first @-@ ever appearance in either the AP ( 25th ) or Coaches ' Poll ( 24th ) . That left Brown as the only Ivy League school never to have been ranked in the AP Poll and left only seven Division I schools active since the poll began that have never been ranked in it . Harvard was the first Ivy League team ranked in the Coaches ' Poll since the 2009 – 10 Cornell Big Red and the first Ivy League team ranked in the AP Poll since the 1997 – 98 Princeton Tigers . By January 2 , the team achieved rankings of 22nd in the AP Poll and 21st in the Coaches ' Poll . On February 6 , the team again attained the ranking of 21st in the Coaches ' Poll . 
 = = Season = = 
 Harvard 's season began with a Crimson Madness event on October 15 where the team raised a 2010 – 11 Ivy League Championship banner and held an intrasquad scrimmage . The team opened the season with a victory over MIT on November 11 that extended Harvard 's win streak against MIT to nine games . 
 Following the victory over MIT , Harvard took part in the 2011 Battle 4 Atlantis Tournament . The team beat Utah 75 – 47 in the first game of the tournament , its first @-@ ever win against a Pac @-@ 12 Conference opponent . On November 25 , Harvard faced Florida State , which was then ranked 22nd in the AP poll and 20th in the Coaches ' Poll . Harvard won that game 46 – 41 for the second @-@ ever defeat of a ranked opponent in team history . Harvard then matched up against UCF in the tournament final , winning 59 – 49 . Wright earned Ivy League player of the week for his performance in the Battle 4 Atlantis tournament . McNally extended his free @-@ throw streak to 51 in the Florida State victory , but his run ended in the final minutes of the UCF game . 
 The 2008 – 09 team had previously defeated then @-@ ranked Boston College ( 17th in the AP Poll and 24th in the Coaches ' Poll ) for the first win over a ranked team in the program 's history , but lost to all ranked opponents in the 2009 @-@ 10 and 2010 @-@ 11 seasons . The win against Boston College was the 1000th in school history . The Florida State victory was the school 's second over a ranked team in its history and the highest @-@ ranked opponent in the Coaches ' Poll that Harvard has ever defeated . Florida State went on to win the 2012 ACC Men 's Basketball Tournament . 
 Harvard began the season 8 – 0 , the best start by an Ivy League team since Columbia won its first ten games to begin the 1969 @-@ 70 season . Harvard , then ranked 25th in the AP poll and 24th in the Coaches ' poll , next faced its most formidable challenge yet : <unk> , which then had a 7 – 1 record and was ranked 9th in both polls . Harvard had the better record against common foes , Florida State and UCF ( 2 – 0 versus 1 – 1 ) . Connecticut won the teams ' previous meeting at Harry A. <unk> Pavilion in 2009 by a score of 79 – 73 as the 2009 @-@ 10 Huskies ( then ranked 14th in the AP Poll and 13th in the Coaches ' Poll ) survived a 30 @-@ point , 9 @-@ rebound effort by Jeremy Lin . Harvard lost the 2011 meeting 67 – 53 . 
 Harvard won its next four games , including victories over Boston University and Boston College for a season sweep of city rivals after beating MIT in November . Harvard 's victory over Boston College was its fourth in a row against the Atlantic Coast Conference team , giving it five consecutive wins overall against ACC teams , including its only two wins against ranked opponents . After rising to 21st in the Coaches ' Poll and 22nd in the AP Poll , Fordham upset Harvard 60 – 54 in January . A 65 – 35 win over Yale three weeks later was Harvard 's widest margin of victory against its Ivy League rival in 183 meetings . Harvard lost its third Ivy League game of the season , falling to Princeton on February 11 , but avenged the loss in a home win on February 24 . That victory gave Harvard a new school record for single @-@ season wins as well as single @-@ season non @-@ league wins and tied the record for conference game wins . A day after beating Princeton , however , Harvard lost to Penn , snapping a 28 @-@ game home winning streak dating to February 20 , 2010 . Nonetheless , Harvard finished the season with a 26 – 4 overall record . The team won Ivy League regular @-@ season title and earned its first invitation to the NCAA tournament since 1946 . Harvard entered the tournament with a 2 – 1 record against teams in the field and was seeded 12th in the East Region . Harvard lost in the second round of the tournament to fifth @-@ seeded Vanderbilt on March 15 by a score of 79 – 70 . 
 Harvard set a school record by selling out 10 of 12 home games at Lavietes Pavilion ( the sellouts came in all seven Ivy League matchups , as well as versus MIT , Saint Joseph 's , and George Washington ) . All five of Harvard 's starters and 12 total players returned from the previous year 's championship team , but freshmen accounted for over 22 % of minutes played in the 2011 @-@ 12 season . By sweeping its four games against Massachusetts rivals , Harvard extended an in @-@ state winning streak to 14 games . The program also defeated teams from a record @-@ setting 11 conferences , plus an independent . Other school records set during the season included best Ivy League start and most road wins , with 12 . Harvard 's 14 non @-@ conference wins in the regular season tied an Ivy @-@ League record . 
 = = Honors = = 
 = = = In @-@ season = = = 
 Each week the Ivy League selected a player of the week and a rookie of the week . 
 = = = Postseason honors = = = 
 Kyle Casey and Keith Wright were selected by the U.S. Basketball Writers Association to its 10 @-@ man All @-@ District I ( ME , VT , NH , RI , MA , CT ) team , while Tommy Amaker was named the All @-@ District I Coach of the Year . The National Association of Basketball Coaches announced its Division I All ‐ District 13 team on March 14 , recognizing the nation ’ s best men ’ s collegiate basketball student @-@ athletes . Keith Wright was a first @-@ team selection , while Kyle Casey was a second @-@ team selection . Wright was also selected to participate in the NABC 2012 Reese 's Division I All @-@ Star Game at the 2012 NCAA Tournament final four . 
 The following players earned Ivy League postseason recognition : 
 First Team All @-@ Ivy 
 Kyle Casey , ( Jr . , F , Medway , Mass . ) 
 Second Team All @-@ Ivy 
 Brandyn Curry , ( Jr . , G , Huntersville , N.C. ) 
 Keith Wright , ( Sr. , F , Suffolk , Va . ) 
 = Clevedon = 
 Clevedon is a town and civil parish in the unitary authority of North Somerset , which covers part of the ceremonial county of Somerset , England . The town has a population of 21 @,@ 281 according to the United Kingdom Census 2011 . 
 The town is situated amongst a group of small hills including Church Hill , Wain 's Hill ( which is topped by the remains of an Iron Age hill fort ) , Dial Hill , Strawberry Hill , Castle Hill , <unk> Hill and Court Hill which is a Site of Special Scientific Interest along the Severn estuary . Clevedon was mentioned in the Domesday Book but grew in the Victorian era when it became a popular seaside resort . It was served by a short branch line from the main railway at Yatton , between 1847 and 1966 . The Weston , Clevedon and Portishead Light Railway , which opened in 1897 and closed in 1940 also served the town , 
 The seafront has ornamental gardens , a Victorian bandstand , and other visitor attractions . Salthouse Field has a light railway running round the perimeter and is used for donkey rides during the summer . The shore is a mixture of pebbled beaches and low rocky cliffs , with the old harbour at the western edge of the town at the mouth of the Land Yeo . The rocky beach has been designated as the Clevedon Shore geological Site of Special Scientific Interest . Clevedon Pier , opened in 1869 , is one of the earliest surviving examples of a Victorian pier the United Kingdom . On October 17 , 1970 , two outward spans collapsed when the seventh set of legs from the shore failed during a routine insurance load test . After protracted considerations a trust was formed and the pier and its terminal buildings were restored and reopened on May 27 , 1989 , when the Waverley paddle steamer berthed and took on passengers . Other landmarks include Walton Castle , Clevedon Court the Clock Tower and the Curzon Cinema . Clevedon 's light industry is centred mainly in industrial estates including Hither Green Trading Estate near the M5 motorway junction . It is a dormitory town for Bristol . The town is home to educational , religious and cultural buildings and sporting clubs . 
 = = History = = 
 The name derives from the Old English , <unk> meaning " cleave " or " cleft " and don meaning " hill " . 
 Wain 's Hill is an univallate Iron Age hill fort situated approximately 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) south @-@ west of Clevedon . The hill fort is defined by a steep , natural slope from the south and north with two ramparts to the east . 
 The Domesday Book mentions Clevedon as a holding of a tenant @-@ in @-@ chief by the name of Mathew of <unk> , with eight villagers and ten smallholders . The parish of Clevedon formed part of the Portbury Hundred . 
 The small rivers the Land Yeo and Middle Yeo supported at least two mills . The Tuck Mills lay in the fields south of Clevedon Court and were used for fulling cloth . The other mills , near Wain 's Hill , probably date from the early 17th century . 
 During the Victorian era Clevedon became a popular seaside town ; before that it had been an agricultural village . The Victorian craze for bathing in the sea was catered for in the late 19th century by saltwater baths adjacent to the pier ( since demolished , though the foundations remain ) , and bathing machines on the main beach . 
 Clevedon was home to St Edith 's children 's home for almost 100 years until it closed in 1974 . The building on Dial Hill is listed , and therefore the outside has changed little , but it now houses privately owned flats . The home was run by nuns from the Community of the Sisters of the Church , an international body of women within the Anglican Communion , living under the gospel values of poverty , chastity and obedience . 
 The first large @-@ scale production of penicillin took place in the town . In 1938 Howard Florey was working at Lincoln College , Oxford University with Ernst Boris Chain and Norman Heatley , when he read Alexander Fleming 's paper discussing the antibacterial effects of Penicillium <unk> mould . He made arrangements for this to be grown in deep culture tanks at the Medical Research Council 's Antibiotic Research Station in Clevedon , enabling mass production of this mould for the injections of the forthcoming soldiers of World War II who suffered from infections . 
 Clevedon was served by a short branch line from the main railway at Yatton . It opened in 1847 , six years after the main line itself , but closed in 1966 . The site of the station is now Queen 's Square , a shopping precinct . The town was the headquarters for another railway , the Weston , Clevedon and Portishead Light Railway , which connected the three coastal towns in its name . It opened to Weston @-@ super @-@ Mare in 1897 , was extended to Portishead ten years later , and closed in 1940 . Its trains crossed the road in the town centre , known as The Triangle , preceded by a man with red and green flags . 
 = = Governance = = 
 The town has 7 electoral wards . Their area and population are the same as mentioned above . 
 Clevedon falls within the non @-@ metropolitan district of North Somerset unitary authority which replaced the Woodspring district , having formerly been part of Somerset , and between 1974 and 1996 within the county of Avon . Until 2010 the parliamentary constituency was still called Woodspring and was represented in the House of Commons of the Parliament of the United Kingdom , however following the review of parliamentary representation by the Boundary Commission for England in Somerset , this seat was renamed North Somerset . It elects one Member of Parliament ( MP ) by the first past the post system of election . The current MP is Liam Fox of the Conservative Party . It is also part of the South West England constituency of the European Parliament , which currently elects six MEPs using the d 'Hondt method of party @-@ list proportional representation . 
 = = Geography = = 
 Clevedon is situated on and round seven hills called Church Hill , Wain 's Hill ( which is topped by the remains of an Iron Age hill fort ) , Dial Hill , Strawberry Hill , Castle Hill , <unk> hill and Court Hill which is a Site of Special Scientific Interest . On a clear day there are far reaching views across the Severn estuary to Wales . When the visibility is good the islands of Steep Holm and Flat Holm in the Bristol Channel can be seen . The tidal rise and fall in the Severn Estuary and Bristol Channel can be as great as 14 @.@ 5 m ( 48 ft ) , second only to Bay of Fundy in Eastern Canada . 
 The seafront stretches for approximately half a mile from the pier to Salthouse Field , and includes ornamental gardens , a Victorian bandstand , a bowling green , tennis courts , crazy golf and other amusements . An addition to this list is Marine Lake , which was once a Victorian swimming pool , is now used for boating activities , as well as a small festival once a year where people can try out new sports . The Salthouse Field has a light railway running round the perimeter and is still used for donkey rides during the summer . 
 The shore at Clevedon is a mixture of pebbled beaches and low rocky cliffs , with the old harbour being at the western edge of the town at the mouth of the Land Yeo river . It is remembered as the place at which John Ashley conceived of the idea of creating The Mission to Seafarers . The rocky beach , which has been designated as the Clevedon Shore geological Site of Special Scientific Interest . It is the side of a mineralised fault , which runs east @-@ west adjacent to the pier , and forms a small cliff feature in Dolomitic Conglomerate on the north side of Clevedon Beach , containing cream to pink baryte together with sulfides . The minerals identified at the site include : haematite , chalcopyrite , <unk> , galena , tetrahedrite , <unk> , pyrite , marcasite , <unk> and sphalerite . Secondary alteration of this assemblage has produced <unk> , <unk> and other Copper sulphides . 
 " Poet 's Walk " is a footpath around Wain 's Hill and Church Hill , to the south west of the seafront , and the upper part of the town contains many other footpaths through parks and wooded areas which were laid out in the nineteenth century . The name of the walk is a commemoration of the poets and writers who have visited Clevedon . These include Coleridge in 1795 and Tennyson in 1834 . It is a local nature reserve covering Church Hill and Wain 's Hill and includes calcareous grassland , coastal scrub and woodland . 
 = = = Climate = = = 
 Along with the rest of South West England , Clevedon has a temperate climate which is generally wetter and milder than the rest of the country . The annual mean temperature is approximately 10 ° C ( 50 @.@ 0 ° F ) . Seasonal temperature variation is less extreme than most of the United Kingdom because of the adjacent sea temperatures . The summer months of July and August are the warmest with mean daily maxima of approximately 21 ° C ( 69 @.@ 8 ° F ) . In winter mean minimum temperatures of 1 ° C ( 33 @.@ 8 ° F ) or 2 ° C ( 35 @.@ 6 ° F ) are common . In the summer the Azores high pressure affects the south @-@ west of England , however convective cloud sometimes forms inland , reducing the number of hours of sunshine . Annual sunshine rates are slightly less than the regional average of 1 @,@ 600 hours . In December 1998 there were 20 days without sun recorded at Yeovilton . Most of the rainfall in the South @-@ West is caused by Atlantic depressions or by convection . Most of the rainfall in autumn and winter is caused by the Atlantic depressions , which is when they are most active . In summer , a large proportion of the rainfall is caused by sun heating the ground leading to convection and to showers and thunderstorms . Average rainfall is around 700 mm ( 28 in ) . About 8 – 15 days of snowfall is typical . November to March have the highest mean wind speeds , and June to August have the lightest winds . The predominant wind direction is from the south @-@ west . 
 = = Demography = = 
 The town has a population of 21 @,@ 957 according to the United Kingdom Census 2001 . Of these almost 20 % are over the age of 65 years and 98 @.@ 8 % are white . Almost three quarters of the population described themselves as being Christian , with 17 @.@ 4 % having no religion and another 7 @.@ 3 % not stating any religion . 72 @.@ 4 % of the 15 @,@ 408 people between the ages of 16 and 74 years are economically active . 
 = = Economy = = 
 Clevedon has some light industry , mainly in industrial estates including Hither Green Trading Estate near the M5 motorway junction , and it is also a dormitory town for Bristol . The Clerical Medical pensions and investments group , part of HBOS , had its headquarters in the town on the former site of the Hales Cakes factory , but after its closure , North Somerset Council entered into talks to take over the lease . Percy Daniel & Co is a firm of organ builders , whose work includes the instrument in Brentwood Cathedral . 
 Yeates <unk> was established in 1910 using horses and carts for general haulage in Clevedon and the surrounding areas . The removals company has always been run by family members and is currently headed up by James Griffin who took over from his father John in 2001 . 
 = = Landmarks = = 
 Clevedon Pier was opened on Easter Monday 1869 , one of the earliest examples of a Victorian pier still in existence in the United Kingdom . After a set of legs collapsed during an insurance load check on October 17 , 1970 , it fell into disrepair until in 1985 the pier was dismantled and taken to Portishead dock for restoration , and was rebuilt in 1986 . In 2001 , the pier was upgraded to a grade 1 listed building , The Paddle Steamer Waverley and Motor Vessel Balmoral offer day sea trips from Clevedon Pier to various destinations along the Bristol Channel and Severn estuary . Adjoining the pier and contemporary with it is the Toll House , built in the style of a folly castle and provided as accommodation for the pier @-@ master . 
 The Royal Pier Hotel is a Grade II listed building located next to the pier . The Royal Pier Hotel was built in 1823 by Thomas <unk> , and originally called The Rock House . In 1868 , the building was expanded by local architect Hans Price and renamed Rock House & Royal Pier Hotel , later shortened to Royal Pier Hotel . Since its closure the building has fallen into disrepair , but it is now ( Summer 2015 ) being converted into luxury apartments . 
 Walton Castle is a 17th @-@ century fort located on Castle Hill that overlooks the Walton St Mary area at the northern end of Clevedon . It was built sometime between 1615 and 1620 . The castle was designed as a hunting lodge for Lord Poulett , a Somerset MP . The English Civil War saw the decline of Poulett 's fortunes , and by 1791 the castle was derelict and being used as a dairy by a local farmer . In 1984 , the castle was purchased for £ 1 by Margarita Hamilton , who restored the building to its former glory . 
 Clevedon Court is on Court Hill east of the town centre , close to the road to Bristol . It is one of only a few remaining 14th century manorial halls in England , having been built by Sir John de Clevedon circa 1320 . Since the early eighteenth century the house has been owned by the Elton family , who were responsible for much building work on the house and many improvements in the town , and although the house itself is now owned by the National Trust , the associated estates are still owned by the Elton family . Sir Edmund Elton ( 1846 – 1920 ) was a potter who produced unusually shaped ware in a variety of richly @-@ coloured glazes , including a gold glaze of his own invention , at the Clevedon Elton Sunflower Pottery . 
 Clevedon clock tower in the centre of the town is decorated with " Elton ware " . It was completed in 1898 , and donated by Sir Edmund Elton in celebration of Queen Victoria 's Jubilee . The Curzon cinema was built in 1912 , for Victor Cox , and is the oldest purpose @-@ built , continuously operated cinema in the world . 
 The town 's market hall on Alexandra Road was designed by local architect Hans Price . A monument , known as the " Spirit of Clevedon " , was erected near the seafront to mark the Millennium . Unveiled in June 2000 , the 5 ft ( 1 @.@ 5 m ) tall sculpture cost £ 9 @,@ 000 . It was designed by local citizens and includes panels and plaques representing the history and community in the town . Within its base is a time capsule containing information about the town . 
 = = Education = = 
 Clevedon School is a large secondary comprehensive school serving the whole town and the surrounding rural areas . It has approximately 1 @,@ 200 pupils in years 7 to 11 ( Lower School ) and 12 to 13 ( Upper School or sixth form ) . The school has regained its Language College status . There are also six primary schools in the town : Mary Elton Primary School , John the Evangelist Church of England Primary School , All Saints C Of E Primary School and St. Nicholas ' Chantry <unk> Primary School . Yeo Moor Primary School , which opened on 19 April 2010 , is an amalgamated school joining the Infant and Junior schools that held position on the existing site for many years . 
 St Brandon 's School was an independent boarding school until 1991 and a coeducational infant and junior school until 2004 . 
 = = Religious sites = = 
 There are several churches serving the town , including St. Andrew 's church , which was built in the thirteenth century AD , although there are thought to be Saxon foundations under the present building . It is the burial place of Arthur Hallam , subject of the poem In Memoriam A.H.H. by his friend Alfred , Lord Tennyson . 
 The Church of St John was built in 1875 , by William Butterfield for Sir Arthur Elton . The Church of All Saints was built in 1861 by C E Giles . The tower of Christ Church , on Chapel Hill , is a very important landmark in Clevedon . It was erected 1838 and 1839 from designs by Thomas Rickman in an early 14th @-@ century style . 
 The Copse Road Chapel is an Independent Evangelical Church , which was built in 1851 and has been attributed to Foster and Wood of Bristol , who also designed the United Reformed Church on Hill Road . The Roman Catholic church of the Immaculate Conception is served by the Franciscan order . 
 = = Railways = = 
 The nearest station is Yatton on the Bristol to Exeter Line with trains provided by First Great Western . 
 = = Sport = = 
 Because of its location watersports are a feature of the local scene . Clevedon Canoe Club is based at the marine lake and facilitates sea paddling trips along the North Somerset coast on the Severn Estuary , and to other sites such as the Wye Valley and <unk> . Nearby is based the Clevedon Sailing Club . 
 Clevedon Cricket Club was established in 1874 . The first team now play in the Bristol and Somerset division of the West of England Premier League . Clevedon Town Football Club was started in the late 19th century and were one of the founder members of the Western Football League , winning its championship in the 1990s . The football club plays at the Everyone Active Stadium , formerly known as the Hand Stadium . Another Non @-@ League football club Clevedon United F.C. who play at <unk> Vale . Clevedon Bowling Club was formed in 1910 , and since then has achieved several international honours in Bowls . Other sporting facilities include Clevedon Golf Club who have a Par 72 , 6 @,@ 500 yard course , Riding Centre , Rugby Club , and a range of other sports clubs . 
 = = Culture = = 
 Literary figures associated with the town are Samuel Taylor Coleridge ( who spent some months living in a cottage in the town after his marriage to Sarah Fricker ) , William Makepeace Thackeray ( a frequent guest of the Elton family at Clevedon Court ) , and George Gissing ( The Odd Women is set in the town ) . 
 In the 1993 movie , The Remains of the Day , starring Anthony Hopkins , Emma Thompson and Christopher Reeve , references are made to Clevedon , where the final scene of the film is set and was filmed . The 1998 adaptation of Cider with Rosie also featured scenes filmed in the town . Scenes from the 2010 film , Never Let Me Go , starring Keira Knightley were filmed in Clevedon during the summer of 2009 . Clevedon has its own comic book superhero , Captain Clevedon . 
 Clevedon is twinned with Ettlingen , in Baden @-@ Württemberg , Germany since 1980 ; Épernay , France since 1990 ; and Middelkerke , Belgium since 1991 . 
 Clevedon was the setting for the eponymous town <unk> , a detective drama first aired on ITV on 4 March 2013 . 
 = = Notable people = = 
 In birth order : 
 Edward Tyson ( 1651 – 1708 ) , scientist and physician considered the pioneer of modern comparative anatomy 
 Hartley Coleridge ( 1796 – 1849 ) , writer and son of Samuel Taylor Coleridge 
 Arthur Hallam ( 1811 – 1833 ) , poet and subject of Tennyson 's poem In Memoriam A.H.H. , buried in Clevedon 
 Sir Arthur Elton , 7th Baronet ( 1818 – 1884 ) , politician and local benefactor 
 Emma Jane Guyton ( 1825 – 1887 , born Emma Jane <unk> ) , novelist and editor , born here 
 Frances Freeling Broderip ( 1830 – 1878 ) , children 's writer , died in Clevedon . 
 Mortimer Sloper Howell ( 1841 – 1925 ) , colonial magistrate and Asiatic scholar 
 Sir Arthur Elton , 10th Baronet ( 1906 – 1973 ) , pioneer documentary film maker 
 David Bryant ( born 1931 ) , three @-@ times world outdoors singles bowls champion 
 Graham Tripp ( born 1932 ) , county cricketer 
 Bob Anderson ( born 1947 ) , former world professional darts champion 
 Tuppence Middleton ( born 1987 ) , film and TV actress , grew up in Clevedon . 
 Luke Spiller ( born 1988 ) , lead singer and band member of The Struts grew up in Clevedon 
 Jack Butland ( born 1993 ) , England international & Stoke City goalkeeper 
 Kate Reed ( born 1982 ) British Olympic runner ( Beijing 2008 ) 10 @,@ 000 m 
 = Battle of Moscow = 
 The Battle of Moscow ( Russian : Битва за <unk> ) is the name given by Soviet historians to two periods of strategically significant fighting on a 600 km ( 370 mi ) sector of the Eastern Front during World War II . It took place between October 1941 and January 1942 . The Soviet defensive effort frustrated Hitler 's attack on Moscow , capital of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics ( USSR ) and the largest Soviet city . Moscow was one of the primary military and political objectives for Axis forces in their invasion of the Soviet Union . 
 The German strategic offensive , named Operation Typhoon , was planned to conduct two pincer offensives , one to the north of Moscow against the Kalinin Front by the 3rd and 4th Panzer Armies , simultaneously severing the Moscow – Leningrad railway , and another to the south of Moscow Oblast against the Western Front south of Tula , by the 2nd Panzer Army , while the 4th Army advanced directly towards Moscow from the west . 
 Initially , the Soviet forces conducted a strategic defence of the Moscow Oblast by constructing three defensive belts , deploying newly raised reserve armies , and bringing troops from the Siberian and Far Eastern Military Districts . Subsequently , as the German offensives were halted , a Soviet strategic counter @-@ offensive and smaller @-@ scale offensive operations were executed to force the German armies back to the positions around the cities of Oryol , Vyazma and Vitebsk , nearly surrounding three German armies in the process . 
 = = Background = = 
 The original German invasion plan , which the Axis called Operation Barbarossa , called for the capture of Moscow within four months . On 22 June 1941 , Axis troops invaded the Soviet Union and destroyed most of the Soviet Air Force on the ground , advancing deep into Soviet territory using blitzkrieg tactics , destroying entire Soviet armies . While the German Army Group North moved towards Leningrad , Army Group South took control of Ukraine , and Army Group Center advanced towards Moscow . By July 1941 , Army Group Center crossed the Dnieper River , on the path to Moscow . 
 In August 1941 , German forces captured Smolensk , an important stronghold on the road to Moscow . At this stage , although Moscow was vulnerable , an offensive against the city would have exposed both of the German flanks . In part to address these risks , in part to attempt to secure Ukraine 's food and mineral resources , Hitler ordered the attack to turn north and south and eliminate Soviet forces at Leningrad and Kiev . This delayed the German advance on Moscow . When the advance on Moscow resumed on 2 October 1941 , German forces had been weakened , while the Soviets had raised new forces for the defence of the city . 
 = = Initial German advance ( 30 September – 10 October ) = = 
 = = = Plans = = = 
 For Hitler , the Soviet capital was secondary and he believed the only way to bring the Soviet Union to its knees was to defeat it economically . He felt this could be accomplished by seizing the economic resources of Ukraine east of Kiev . When Walther von Brauchitsch , Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief of the Army , supported a direct thrust to Moscow , he was told that " only ossified brains could think of such an idea . " Franz Halder , head of the Army General Staff , was also convinced a drive to seize Moscow would be victorious after the German Army inflicted enough damage on the Soviet forces . This view was shared by most within the German high command . But Hitler overruled his generals in favor of pocketing the Soviet forces around Kiev in the south , followed by seizure of Ukraine . The move was successful , resulting in the loss of 660 @,@ 000 Red Army personnel by 26 September and further advances . 
 With the end of summer , Hitler redirected his attention to Moscow and assigned Army Group Center to this task . The forces committed to Operation Typhoon included three infantry armies ( the 2nd , 4th and 9th ) supported by three Panzer ( tank ) Groups ( the 2nd , 3rd and 4th ) and by the Luftwaffe 's Luftflotte 2 . Overall , almost two million German troops were committed to the operation , along with 1 @,@ 700 tanks and 14 @,@ 000 guns . German aerial strength , however , had been severely reduced over the summer 's campaigning as the Luftwaffe had lost 1 @,@ 603 aircraft destroyed and 1 @,@ 028 damaged . Luftflotte 2 had only 549 serviceable machines , including 158 medium and dive @-@ bombers and 172 fighters , available for Operation Typhoon . The attack relied on standard Blitzkrieg tactics , using Panzer groups rushing deep into Soviet formations and executing double @-@ pincer movements , pocketing Red Army divisions and destroying them . 
 Facing the Wehrmacht were three Soviet fronts forming a defensive line between the cities of Vyazma and Bryansk which barred the way to Moscow . The armies comprising these fronts had also been involved in heavy fighting . Still , it was a formidable concentration consisting of 1 @,@ 250 @,@ 000 men , 1 @,@ 000 tanks and 7 @,@ 600 guns . The Soviet Air Force / Voyenno @-@ Vozdushnye Sily ( VVS ) had suffered appalling losses of some 7 @,@ 500 or 21 @,@ 200 aircraft . Extraordinary industrial achievements had begun to replace these , and at the outset of Typhoon the VVS could muster 936 aircraft , 578 of which were bombers . 
 Once Soviet resistance along the Vyazma @-@ Bryansk front was eliminated , German forces were to press east , encircling Moscow in similar fashion by outflanking it from the north and south . However , the continuous fighting had reduced their effectiveness . Logistical difficulties became more acute as well . Guderian , for example , wrote that some of his destroyed tanks had not been replaced , and there were fuel shortages at the start of the operation . 
 = = = The Battles of Vyazma and Bryansk = = = 
 The German attack went according to plan , with 3rd Panzer Army pushing through the middle nearly unopposed and then splitting its mobile forces north to complete the encirclement of Vyazma with 4th Panzer Army , and other units south to close the ring around Bryansk in conjunction with 2nd Panzer Army . The Soviet defenses , still under construction , were overrun and spearheads of the Second and Third Panzer Groups met at Vyazma on 10 October 1941 . Four Soviet armies ( the 19th , 20th , 24th and 32nd ) were trapped in a large pocket just west of the city . 
 The encircled Soviet forces continued to fight , and the Wehrmacht had to employ 28 divisions to eliminate them , using troops which could have supported the offensive towards Moscow . The remnants of the Soviet Western and Reserve Fronts retreated and manned new defensive lines around Mozhaisk . Although losses were high , some of the encircled units escaped in small groups , ranging in size from platoons to full rifle divisions . Soviet resistance near Vyazma also provided time for the Soviet high command to reinforce the four armies defending Moscow ( the 5th , 16th , 43rd and 49th Armies ) . Three rifle and two tank divisions were transferred from the Far East with more to follow . 
 In the south near Bryansk , initial Soviet performance was barely more effective than at Vyazma . The Second Panzer Group executed an enveloping movement around the city , linking with the advancing 2nd Army and capturing Orel by 3 October and Bryansk by 6 October . 
 But the weather began to change , hampering the Germans . By 7 October , the first snow fell and quickly melted , turning roads and open areas into muddy quagmires , a phenomenon known as rasputitsa in Russia . German armored groups were greatly slowed , allowing Soviet forces to fall back and regroup . 
 Soviet forces were able to counterattack in some cases . For example , the 4th Panzer Division fell into an ambush set by Dmitri <unk> 's hastily formed 1st Guards Special Rifle Corps , including Mikhail <unk> 's 4th Tank Brigade , near the city of Mtsensk . Newly built T @-@ 34 tanks were concealed in the woods as German armor rolled past them ; as a scratch team of Soviet infantry contained their advance , Soviet armor attacked from both flanks and savaged the German Panzer IV tanks . For the Wehrmacht , the shock of this defeat was so great that a special investigation was ordered . Guderian and his troops discovered , to their dismay , that the Soviet T @-@ 34s were almost impervious to German tank guns . As the general wrote , " Our Panzer IV tanks with their short 75 mm guns could only explode a T @-@ 34 by hitting the engine from behind . " Guderian also noted in his memoirs that " the Russians already learned a few things . " 
 Other counterattacks further slowed the German offensive . The 2nd Army , which was operating to the north of Guderian 's forces with the aim of trapping the Bryansk Front , had come under strong Red Army pressure assisted by air support . 
 According to German assessments of the initial Soviet defeat , 673 @,@ 000 soldiers had been captured by the Wehrmacht in both the Vyazma and Bryansk pockets , although recent research suggests a lower — but still enormous — figure of 514 @,@ 000 prisoners , reducing Soviet strength by 41 % . The personnel losses ( permanent as well as temporary ) calculated by the Soviet command are smaller but still massive , namely 499 @,@ 001 . On 9 October , Otto Dietrich of the German Ministry of Propaganda , quoting Hitler himself , forecast in a press conference imminent destruction of the armies defending Moscow . As Hitler had never had to lie about a specific and verifiable military fact , Dietrich convinced foreign correspondents that the collapse of all Soviet resistance was perhaps hours away . German civilian morale — low since the start of Barbarossa — significantly improved , with rumors of soldiers home by Christmas and great riches from the future Lebensraum in the east . 
 However , Red Army resistance had slowed the Wehrmacht . When , on 10 October the Germans arrived within sight of the Mozhaisk line west of Moscow , they encountered another defensive barrier manned by new Soviet forces . That same day , Georgy Zhukov , who had been recalled from the Leningrad Front on 6 October , took charge of Moscow 's defense and the combined Western and Reserve Fronts , with Colonel General Ivan Konev as his deputy . On 12 October , he ordered the concentration of all available forces on a strengthened Mozhaisk line , a move supported by Vasilevsky . The Luftwaffe still controlled the sky wherever it appeared , and Stuka and bomber groups flew 537 sorties , destroying some 440 vehicles and 150 artillery pieces . 
 On 15 October , Stalin ordered the evacuation of the Communist Party , the General Staff and various civil government offices from Moscow to Kuibyshev ( now Samara ) , leaving only a limited number of officials behind . The evacuation caused panic among Muscovites . On 16 – 17 October , much of the civilian population tried to flee , mobbing the available trains and jamming the roads from the city . Despite all this , Stalin publicly remained in the Soviet capital , somewhat calming the fear and pandemonium . 
 = = Mozhaisk defense line ( 13 – 30 October ) = = 
 By 13 October 1941 , the Wehrmacht had reached the Mozhaisk defense line , a hastily constructed double set of fortifications protecting Moscow 's western approaches that extended from Kalinin towards Volokolamsk and Kaluga . Despite recent reinforcements , only around 90 @,@ 000 Soviet soldiers manned this line – far too few to stem the German advance . Given the limited resources available , Zhukov decided to concentrate his forces at four critical points : the 16th Army under Lieutenant General Rokossovsky guarded Volokolamsk , Mozhaisk was defended by 5th Army under Major General Govorov , the 43rd Army of Major General Golubev defended Maloyaroslavets , and the 49th Army under Lieutenant General <unk> protected Kaluga . The entire Soviet Western Front — nearly destroyed after its encirclement near Vyazma — was being recreated almost from scratch . 
 Moscow itself was also hastily fortified . According to Zhukov , 250 @,@ 000 women and teenagers worked building trenches and anti @-@ tank moats around Moscow , moving almost three million cubic meters of earth with no mechanical help . Moscow 's factories were hastily converted to military tasks : one automobile factory was turned into a submachine gun armory , a clock factory manufactured mine detonators , the chocolate factory shifted to food production for the front , and automobile repair stations worked fixing damaged tanks and military vehicles . Despite these preparations , the capital was within striking distance of German tanks , with the Luftwaffe mounting large @-@ scale air raids on the city . The air raids caused only limited damage because of extensive anti @-@ aircraft defenses and effective civilian fire brigades . 
 On 13 October 1941 ( 15 October , according to other sources ) , the Wehrmacht resumed its offensive . At first , the German forces attempted to bypass Soviet defenses by pushing northeast towards the weakly protected city of Kalinin and south towards Kaluga and Tula , capturing all except Tula by 14 October . Encouraged by these initial successes , the Germans launched a frontal assault against the fortified line , taking Mozhaisk and Maloyaroslavets on 18 October , Naro @-@ Fominsk on 21 October , and Volokolamsk on 27 October after intense fighting . Because of the increasing danger of flanking attacks , Zhukov was forced to fall back , withdrawing his forces east of the Nara River . 
 In the south , the Second Panzer Army initially advanced towards Tula with relative ease because the Mozhaisk defense line did not extend that far south and no significant concentrations of Soviet troops blocked their advance . However bad weather , fuel problems , and damaged roads and bridges eventually slowed the German army , and Guderian did not reach the outskirts of Tula until 26 October . The German plan initially called for the rapid capture of Tula , followed by a pincer move around Moscow . The first attack , however , was repelled by the 50th Army and civilian volunteers on 29 October , after a desperate fight within sight of the city . On 31 October , the German Army high command ordered a halt to all offensive operations until increasingly severe logistical problems were resolved and the rasputitsa subsided . 
 = = Wehrmacht at the gates ( 1 November – 5 December ) = = 
 = = = Wearing down = = = 
 By late October , the German forces were worn out , with only ⅓ of their motor vehicles still functioning , infantry divisions at ⅓ to ½ strength , and serious logistics issues preventing the delivery of warm clothing and other winter equipment to the front . Even Hitler seemed to surrender to the idea of a long struggle , since the prospect of sending tanks into such a large city without heavy infantry support seemed risky after the costly capture of Warsaw in 1939 . 
 To stiffen the resolve of the Red Army and boost the civilian morale , Stalin ordered the traditional military parade on 7 November ( Revolution Day ) to be staged in Red Square . Soviet troops paraded past the Kremlin and then marched directly to the front . The parade carried a great symbolic significance by demonstrating the continued Soviet resolve , and was frequently invoked as such in the years to come . Despite this brave show , the Red Army 's position remained precarious . Although 100 @,@ 000 additional Soviet soldiers had reinforced Klin and Tula , where renewed German offensives were expected , Soviet defenses remained relatively thin . Nevertheless , Stalin ordered several preemptive counteroffensives against German lines . These were launched despite protests from Zhukov , who pointed out the complete lack of reserves . The Wehrmacht repelled most of these counteroffensives , which squandered Soviet forces that could have been used for Moscow 's defense . The offensive 's only notable success occurred west of Moscow near <unk> , where Soviet tanks inflicted heavy losses on the 4th Army because the Germans still lacked anti @-@ tank weapons capable of damaging the new , well @-@ armored T @-@ 34 tanks . 
 From 31 October to 15 November , the Wehrmacht high command stood down while preparing to launch a second offensive towards Moscow . Although Army Group Centre still possessed considerable nominal strength , its fighting capabilities had thoroughly diminished because of combat fatigue . Although the Germans were aware of the continuous influx of Soviet reinforcements from the east as well as the presence of large reserves , given the tremendous Soviet casualties , they did not expect the Soviets to be able to mount a determined defense . But in comparison to the situation in October , Soviet rifle divisions occupied a much stronger defensive position : a triple defensive ring surrounding the city and some remnants of the Mozhaisk line near Klin . Most of the Soviet field armies now had a multilayered defense , with at least two rifle divisions in second echelon positions . Artillery support and sapper teams were also concentrated along major roads that German troops were expected to use in their attacks . There were also many Soviet troops still available in reserve armies behind the front . Finally , Soviet troops — and especially officers — were now more experienced and better prepared for the offensive . 
 By 15 November 1941 , the ground had finally frozen , solving the mud problem . The armored Wehrmacht spearheads , consisting of 51 divisions , could now advance , with the goal of encircling Moscow and linking up near the city of <unk> , east of the capital . To achieve this objective , the German Third and Fourth Panzer Groups needed to concentrate their forces between the Volga Reservoir and Mozhaysk , then proceed past the Soviet 30th Army to Klin and Solnechnogorsk , encircling the capital from the north . In the south , the Second Panzer Group intended to bypass Tula , still held by the Red Army , and advance to Kashira and Kolomna , linking up with the northern pincer at <unk> . The German 4th Field Army in the center were to " pin down the troops of the Western Front . " 
 = = = Final pincer = = = 
 On 15 November 1941 , German tank armies began their offensive towards Klin , where no Soviet reserves were available because of Stalin 's wish to attempt a counteroffensive at Volokolamsk , which had forced the relocation of all available reserve forces further south . Initial German attacks split the front in two , separating the 16th Army from the 30th . Several days of intense combat followed . Zhukov recalled in his memoirs that " The enemy , ignoring the casualties , was making frontal assaults , willing to get to Moscow by any means necessary . " Despite the Wehrmacht 's efforts , the multi @-@ layered defense reduced Soviet casualties as the Soviet 16th Army slowly retreated and constantly harassed the German divisions trying to make their way through the fortifications . 
 The Third Panzer Army captured Klin after heavy fighting on 24 November , and by 25 November Solnechnogorsk as well . Soviet resistance was still strong , and the outcome of the battle was by no means certain . Reportedly , Stalin asked Zhukov whether Moscow could be successfully defended and ordered him to " speak honestly , like a communist . " Zhukov replied that it was possible , but that reserves were desperately needed . By 28 November , the German 7th Panzer Division had seized a bridgehead across the Moscow @-@ Volga Canal — the last major obstacle before Moscow — and stood less than 35 km ( 22 mi ) from the Kremlin ; but a powerful counterattack by the 1st Shock Army drove them back . Just northwest of Moscow , the Wehrmacht reached Krasnaya Polyana , little more than 20 km ( 12 mi ) from Moscow ; German officers were able to make out some of the major buildings of the Soviet capital through their field glasses . Both Soviet and German forces were severely depleted , sometimes having only 150 – 200 riflemen — a company 's full strength — left in a regiment . 
 In the south , near Tula , combat resumed on 18 November 1941 , with the Second Panzer Army trying to encircle the city . The German forces involved were extremely battered from previous fighting and still had no winter clothing . As a result , initial German progress was only 5 – 10 km ( 3 @.@ 1 – 6 @.@ 2 mi ) per day . Moreover , it exposed the German tank armies to flanking attacks from the Soviet 49th and 50th Armies , located near Tula , further slowing the advance . Guderian nevertheless was able to pursue the offensive , spreading his forces in a star @-@ like attack , taking <unk> on 22 November 1941 and surrounding a Soviet rifle division stationed there . On 26 November , German tanks approached Kashira , a city controlling a major highway to Moscow . In response , a violent Soviet counterattack was launched the following day . General Belov 's 2nd Cavalry Corps , supported by hastily assembled formations which included 173rd Rifle Division , 9th Tank Brigade , two separate tank battalions , and training and militia units , halted the German advance near Kashira . The Germans were driven back in early December , securing the southern approach to the city . Tula itself held , protected by fortifications and determined defenders , both soldiers and civilians . In the south , the Wehrmacht never got close to the capital . 
 Because of the resistance on both the northern and southern sides of Moscow , on 1 December the Wehrmacht attempted a direct offensive from the west along the Minsk @-@ Moscow highway near the city of Naro @-@ Fominsk . This offensive had limited tank support and was directed against extensive Soviet defenses . After meeting determined resistance from the Soviet 1st Guards Motorized Rifle Division and flank counterattacks staged by the 33rd Army , the German offensive stalled and was driven back four days later in the ensuing Soviet counteroffensive . On 2 December a reconnaissance battalion managed to reach the town of Khimki — some 8 km ( 5 @.@ 0 mi ) away from Moscow — and captured its bridge over the Moscow @-@ Volga Canal as well as its railway station , which marked the farthest advance of German forces on Moscow . 
 The temperature dropped far below freezing . On 30 November , von Bock reported to Berlin that the temperature was – 45 ° C ( – 49 ° F ) . General Erhard Raus , commander of the 6th Panzer Division , kept track of the daily mean temperature in his war diary . It shows a suddenly much colder period during 4 – 7 December : from – 36 to – 38 ° C ( – 37 to – 38 ° F ) . Other temperature reports varied widely . Zhukov said that November 's freezing weather stayed around – 7 to – 10 ° C ( + 19 to + 14 ° F ) Official Soviet Meteorological Service records show the lowest December temperature reached – 28 @.@ 8 ° C ( – 20 ° F ) . The absolute numbers did not matter to the German troops who were freezing with no winter clothing , and whose equipment was not designed for such severe weather . More than 130 @,@ 000 cases of frostbite were reported among German soldiers . Frozen grease had to be removed from every loaded shell and vehicles had to be heated for hours before use . The same cold weather , typical for the season , hit the Soviet troops , but they were better prepared . 
 The Axis offensive on Moscow stopped . Heinz Guderian wrote in his journal that " the offensive on Moscow failed ... We underestimated the enemy 's strength , as well as his size and climate . Fortunately , I stopped my troops on 5 December , otherwise the catastrophe would be unavoidable . " 
 = = = Artificial floods = = = 
 Some historians suggest that artificial floods played an important role in defending Moscow . They were primarily meant to break the ice and prevent troops and heavy military equipment from crossing Volga river and Moscow sea . The first instance was blowing up Istra waterworks reservoir 's dam on 24 November 1941 . The second was draining the water from 6 reservoirs ( Khimki , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> ) and Moscow sea near Dubna on 28 November 1941 . Both were results of Soviet General Headquarters ' Order <unk> dated 17 November 1941 . Artificial floods were also used as unconventional weapon of direct impact . In addition to nature and enemy damage , they partly submerged some 30 @-@ 40 villages in the severe winter weather conditions of the time . 
 = = Soviet counteroffensive = = 
 Although the Wehrmacht 's offensive had been stopped , German intelligence estimated that Soviet forces had no more reserves left and thus would be unable to stage a counteroffensive . This estimate proved wrong , as Stalin transferred over 18 divisions , 1 @,@ 700 tanks , and over 1 @,@ 500 aircraft from Siberia and the Far East . The Red Army had accumulated a 58 @-@ division reserve by early December , when the offensive proposed by Zhukov and Vasilevsky was finally approved by Stalin . Even with these new reserves , Soviet forces committed to the operation numbered only 1 @,@ 100 @,@ 000 men , only slightly outnumbering the Wehrmacht . Nevertheless , with careful troop deployment , a ratio of two @-@ to @-@ one was reached at some critical points . 
 On 5 December 1941 , the counteroffensive for " removing the immediate threat to Moscow " started on the Kalinin Front . The South @-@ Western Front and Western Fronts began their offensives the next day . After several days of little progress , Soviet armies retook Solnechnogorsk on 12 Dec. and Klin on 15 Dec. Guderian 's army " beat a hasty retreat towards <unk> " and then <unk> . " The threat overhanging Tula was removed . " 
 On 8 Dec. , Hitler had signed his directive <unk> , ordering the Wehrmacht to assume a defensive stance on the whole front . German troops were unable to organize a solid defense at their present locations and were forced to pull back to consolidate their lines . Guderian wrote that discussions with Hans Schmidt and Wolfram von Richthofen took place the same day , and both commanders agreed that the current front line could not be held . On 14 December , Franz Halder and Günther von Kluge finally gave permission for a limited withdrawal to the west of the Oka river , without Hitler 's approval . On 20 December , during a meeting with German senior officers , Hitler cancelled the withdrawal and ordered his soldiers to defend every patch of ground , " digging trenches with howitzer shells if needed . " Guderian protested , pointing out that losses from cold were actually greater than combat losses and that winter equipment was held by traffic ties in Poland . Nevertheless , Hitler insisted on defending the existing lines , and Guderian was dismissed by 25 December , along with generals Hoepner and Strauss , commanders of the 4th Panzer and 9th Army , respectively . Fedor von Bock was also dismissed , officially for " medical reasons . " Walther von Brauchitsch , Hitler 's commander @-@ in @-@ chief , had been removed even earlier , on 19 December . 
 Meanwhile , the Soviet offensive continued in the north . The offensive liberated Kalinin and the Soviets reached Klin on 7 December , overrunning the headquarters of the LVI Panzer Corps outside the city . As the Kalinin Front drove west , a bulge developed around Klin . The Soviet front commander , General Konev , attempted to envelop any German forces remaining . Zhukov diverted more forces to the southern end of the bulge , to help Konev trap the Third Panzer Army . The Germans pulled their forces out in time . Although the encirclement failed , it unhinged the German defenses . A second attempt was made against the Second Panzer Army near Tula , but met strong opposition near Rzhev and was forced to halt , forming a salient that would last until 1943 . In the south , the offensive went equally well , with Southwestern Front forces relieving Tula on 16 December 1941 . A major achievement was the encirclement and destruction of the German XXXIX Corps , protecting Guderian 's Second Panzer Army 's southern flank . 
 The Luftwaffe was paralysed in the second half of December . The weather , recorded as − 42 ° C ( – 44 ° F ) , was a meteorological record . Logistical difficulties and freezing temperatures created technical difficulties until January 1942 . In the meantime , the Luftwaffe had virtually vanished from the skies over Moscow , while the Red Air Force , operating from better prepared bases and benefiting from interior lines , grew stronger . On 4 January , the skies cleared . The Luftwaffe was quickly reinforced , as Hitler hoped it would " save " the situation . Two Kampfgruppen ( Bomber Groups ) ( II . / KG 4 and II . / KG 30 ) arrived from refitting in Germany , whilst four <unk> ( Transport Groups ) with a strength of 102 Junkers Ju 52 transports were deployed from Luftflotte 4 ( Air Fleet 4 ) to evacuate surrounded army units and improve the supply line to the front @-@ line forces . It was a last minute effort and it worked . The German air arm was to help prevent a total collapse of Army Group Centre . Despite the Soviets ' best efforts , the Luftwaffe had contributed enormously to the survival of Army Group Center . Between 17 and 22 December the Luftwaffe destroyed 299 motor vehicles and 23 tanks around Tula , hampering the Red Army 's pursuit of the German Army . 
 In the center , Soviet progress was much slower . Soviet troops liberated Naro @-@ Fominsk only on 26 December , Kaluga on 28 December , and Maloyaroslavets on 2 January , after 10 days of violent action . Soviet reserves ran low , and the offensive halted on 7 January 1942 , after having pushed the exhausted and freezing German armies back 100 – 250 km ( 62 – 155 mi ) from Moscow . Stalin continued to order more offensives in order to trap and destroy Army Group Center in front of Moscow , but the Red Army was exhausted and overstretched and they failed . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The Red Army 's winter counter @-@ offensive drove the Wehrmacht from Moscow , but the city was still considered to be threatened , with the front line relatively close . Because of this , the Moscow theater remained a priority for Stalin , who at first appeared to be in shock due to the initial German success . In particular , the initial Soviet advance was unable to level the Rzhev salient , held by several divisions of Army Group Center . Immediately after the Moscow counter @-@ offensive , a series of Soviet attacks ( the Battles of Rzhev ) were attempted against the salient , each time with heavy losses on both sides . By early 1943 , the Wehrmacht had to disengage from the salient as the whole front was moving west . Nevertheless , the Moscow front was not finally secured until October 1943 , when Army Group Center was decisively repulsed from the Smolensk <unk> and from the left shore of the upper Dnieper at the end of the Second Battle of Smolensk . 
 Furious that his army had been unable to take Moscow , Hitler dismissed his commander @-@ in @-@ chief , Walther von Brauchitsch , on 19 December 1941 , and took personal charge of the Wehrmacht , effectively taking control of all military decisions . Additionally , Hitler surrounded himself with staff officers with little or no recent combat experience . 
 For the first time since June 1941 , Soviet forces had stopped the Germans and driven them back . This resulted in Stalin becoming overconfident and deciding to further expand the offensive . On 5 January 1942 , during a meeting in the Kremlin , Stalin announced that he was planning a general spring offensive , which would be staged simultaneously near Moscow , Leningrad and in southern Russia . This plan was accepted over Zhukov 's objections . Low Red Army reserves and Wehrmacht tactical skill led to a bloody stalemate near Rzhev , known as the " Rzhev meat grinder " , and to a string of Red Army defeats , such as the Second Battle of Kharkov , the failed attempt at elimination of the Demyansk pocket , and the encirclement of General Andrey Vlasov 's army in a failed attempt to lift the siege of Leningrad . Ultimately , these failures would lead to a successful German offensive in the south and to the Battle of Stalingrad . 
 A documentary film , Moscow Strikes Back , ( Russian : <unk> <unk> <unk> под <unk> , " Rout of the German Troops near Moscow " ) , was made during the battle and rapidly released in the Soviet Union . It was taken to America and shown at the Globe in New York in August 1942 . The New York Times reviewer commented that " The savagery of that retreat is a spectacle to stun the mind . " As well as the Moscow parade and battle scenes , the film included images of German atrocities committed during the occupation , " the naked and slaughtered children stretched out in ghastly rows , the youths dangling limply in the cold from gallows that were rickety , but strong enough . " 
 The defense of Moscow became a symbol of Soviet resistance against the invading Axis forces . To commemorate the battle , Moscow was awarded the title of " Hero City " in 1965 , on the 20th anniversary of Victory Day . A Museum of the Defence of Moscow was created in 1995 . 
 = = Casualties = = 
 Both German and Soviet casualties during the battle of Moscow have been a subject of debate , as various sources provide somewhat different estimates . Not all historians agree on what should be considered the " Battle of Moscow " in the timeline of World War II . While the start of the battle is usually regarded as the beginning of Operation Typhoon on 30 September 1941 ( or sometimes on 2 October 1941 ) , there are two different dates for the end of the offensive . In particular , some sources ( such as Erickson and Glantz ) exclude the Rzhev offensive from the scope of the battle , considering it as a distinct operation and making the Moscow offensive " stop " on 7 January 1942 — thus lowering the number of casualties . 
 There are also significant differences in figures from various sources . John Erickson , in his Barbarossa : The Axis and the Allies , gives a figure of 653 @,@ 924 Soviet casualties between October 1941 and January 1942 . Glantz , in his book When Titans <unk> , gives a figure of 658 @,@ 279 for the defense phase alone , plus 370 @,@ 955 for the winter counteroffensive until 7 January 1942 . The estimate of 400 @,@ 000 German casualties by January 1942 reported in the Great Soviet Encyclopedia was published in 1973 – 78 . On the other hand , official Wehrmacht daily casualty reports show 35 @,@ 757 killed in action , 128 @,@ 716 wounded , and 9 @,@ 721 missing in action for the entire Army Group Center between 1 October 1941 and 10 January 1942 . However , this official report does not match unofficial reports from individual battalion and divisional officers and commanders at the front , who record suffering far higher casualties than was officially reported . Under the totalitarian political constraints of the day , no objective reports of costs were possible . 
 = Homer vs. Patty and Selma = 
 " Homer vs. Patty and Selma " is the 17th episode of The Simpsons ' sixth season . It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on February 26 , 1995 . Homer attempts to earn some money through investing , and decides to invest in Halloween pumpkins . After losing his entire investment , he hides his financial problems from Marge . Homer approaches Marge 's sisters Patty and Selma and asks for a loan . They agree , and in return Homer must agree to do what they tell him . Marge finds Homer 's IOU note to Patty and Selma , and the sisters tell Marge about Homer 's money troubles . After failing to become a chauffeur , Homer saves Patty and Selma from a bind by covering for them when they are caught smoking on the job , and they forgive Homer 's debt . A subplot involves Bart taking up ballet lessons , and his instructor is voiced by actress Susan Sarandon . 
 Susan Sarandon had wanted to guest star on The Simpsons because her children were fans of the show — she made a later appearance in the series in the episode " Bart Has Two <unk> " as the voice of a computer . Mel Brooks also makes an appearance in " Homer vs. Patty and Selma " , and had previously accompanied his wife Anne Bancroft to the recording studio when she had a role in the episode " Fear of Flying " . The episode 's script was written by Brent Forrester , and it was his first writing credit on the series . The episode was directed by Mark Kirkland , with David Mirkin as executive producer . 
 Chris Turner cites scenes from the episode in describing Homer 's characteristic qualities in his book Planet Simpson : How a Cartoon Masterpiece Documented an Era and Defined a Generation . Turner notes that the episode illustrates Homer 's impulsiveness , silliness , and " physical stupidity " . Contributor Raja Halwani writes in the compilation work The Simpsons and Philosophy : The D 'oh ! of Homer that the episode shows Homer 's tendency to habitually lie to Marge , and cites Homer 's covering for Patty and Selma when they are caught smoking as a positive aspect of his character . The episode received positive mention from Turner in Planet Simpson , Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood in their book I Can 't Believe It 's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide , and Colin Jacobson of DVD Movie Guide . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Homer decides to invest in pumpkins , but loses his entire investment when he fails to sell before Halloween . Late on a mortgage payment and short on money , he tries to borrow some , but to no avail . Homer keeps his money troubles secret from Marge . Meanwhile , Patty and Selma have received a promotion at the DMV . As a last resort , Homer asks the two if they will lend him the money , and they agree on the condition that he become their loyal servant . Marge finds out about the loan after she sees the IOU note , and her sisters tell her what happened . An enraged Homer throws both sisters out and is confronted by Marge for the cover @-@ up . 
 Meanwhile , Bart cuts school on the day students were choosing their physical education classes . By the time he shows up to sign up , he learns that every other student has signed in the sports he wanted and the only option with sports left is ballet . He is reluctant to take the class because it is too feminine for his taste . After arguing with his instructor , Bart decides to quit because he hates wearing tights . He soon discovers that he has a talent for the dance form , and is invited to star in a school ballet performance . Fearful of being taunted by his fellow students he performs while wearing a mask , but takes it off after discovering that they are impressed with his abilities . After this revelation , school bullies still want to beat him up , and he runs away . Bart attempts to escape by jumping a trench , but fails to make it and takes a nasty fall . The bullies conclude that he 's been hurt enough and walk away . Lisa tells Bart how proud she is of him , that they are now kindred spirits . 
 Homer decides to become a chauffeur in order to earn more money , but is pulled over when he does not have a chauffeur 's license . When he goes to the DMV with Marge to apply for one , Patty and Selma are his evaluators . The two mercilessly fail his driving and written test . The two light up cigarettes and are spotted by their supervisor . She informs them that smoking on the job is an offense which could cost them both their promotions and their jobs . Marge is worried about Patty and Selma possibly being fired from the DMV . However , Homer is excited and wants payback against the sisters for the way they relentlessly mistreated him by making him intentionally fail his DMV test and reminding him of the debt . He soon realizes that Marge will never forgive him if he remorselessly allows her sisters to be fired from their jobs . Homer reluctantly covers for them by claiming the cigarettes as his own and demonstrates it by smoking in the building . Their boss apologizes to Patty and Selma and slaps the cigarettes out of his mouth , criticizing him for smoking inside the building . Marge is proud of Homer , but he tells her that he only did it for her and not her sisters . This spares the Bouvier sisters and in return they clear his debt and allow him not to worry about his chauffeur 's test . 
 = = Production = = 
 The script for " Homer vs. Patty and Selma " was written by Brent Forrester and was the first time he received a writing credit on The Simpsons . Executive producer David Mirkin describes it as a very grounded and emotional episode that seems very " <unk> " . 
 Bart 's ballet teacher was voiced by Susan Sarandon , and was designed to look a little bit like her . Sarandon had wanted to guest star on the show because her children were big fans ; she brought them with her to the recording session . Due to a traffic jam , she was late for the recording session , but once arrived fell into character and worked very hard on getting her accent accurate . Sarandon would later have a cameo appearance as the voice of a computer in the season 17 episode " Bart Has Two <unk> " . Mel Brooks has a cameo appearance as himself , performing the 2000 Year Old Man skit with Homer , who refers to it as the " 2000 @-@ pound man thing " . His wife Anne Bancroft had played a role in the episode " Fear of Flying " and Brooks had accompanied her to the recording session . David Mirkin realized that Brooks was " dying to do the show " and asked him if he would be willing to do a guest part , and he agreed . Many of the writers were fans of Brooks , and Matt Groening described the chance to have him guest star as " an incredible honor . " 
 The episode was directed by Mark Kirkland who was a fan of the characters , having previously directed the season two episode " Principal Charming " , which also focuses on the duo . When directing the sequences where Bart does ballet dancing , Kirkland assigned the scenes to animators who were familiar with dancing . 
 = = Themes = = 
 Chris Turner writes in his book Planet Simpson : How a Cartoon Masterpiece Documented an Era and Defined a Generation that the episode illustrates how Homer Simpson is " an organism of considerable complexity " . Turner comments : " Homer is carrying the full symbolic weight of twentieth @-@ century America on his shoulders , and no garden @-@ variety doofus could manage that task . " Turner discusses a moment from the episode where Marge tells her sisters : " Homer doesn 't mean to be rude , he 's just a very complicated man " , after which Homer breaks a plate over his head and shouts " Wrong ! " Turner writes that this " revelatory moment " is illustrative of " several of the best @-@ known aspects of Homer 's character : his impulsiveness , his inherent silliness , his evident , even physical stupidity . " 
 In the compilation work The Simpsons and Philosophy : The D 'oh ! of Homer edited by William Irwin , Mark T. Conrad and Aeon J. Skoble , the episode is cited as an example where contributor Raja Halwani writes : " Homer is a habitual liar , he lacks honesty . " In addition to " lying about his financial losses in investments " in the episode , Halwani notes Homer lied to Marge in " The Front " about " the fact that he never graduated from high school " , and in the episode " The Cartridge Family " , Homer lied to Marge about getting rid of the gun he had purchased . However , Halwani later highlights positive aspects of Homer 's character , noting that in the episode Homer " pretended he was the one smoking so that Patty and Selma would not get fired for smoking at their workplace " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original broadcast , " Homer vs. Patty and Selma " finished 38th in ratings for the week of February 20 – 26 , 1995 , with a Nielsen rating of 11 @.@ 1 , equivalent to approximately 10 @.@ 6 million viewing households . It was the third highest @-@ rated show on the Fox network that week , following Beverly Hills , 90210 and Married ... with Children . 
 Chris Turner writes in Planet Simpson that the scene where Homer " smashes a dinner plate over his head " is one of his favorite Homer moments . " I 'd like to say it 's the defining Homer moment , but that would do a grave injustice to the extraordinary dramatic achievement that is Homer J. Simpson , " Turner comments . Writing in I Can 't Believe It 's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide , Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood comment on the episode " Quite a fun one this " , and highlight the machinations of Patty and Selma : " Patty and Selma have rarely been more evil than here — they are fabulously cruel . " In a review of the sixth season of The Simpsons , Colin Jacobson of DVD Movie Guide writes : " Homer ’ s disdain for Marge ’ s sisters – and vice versa – has always led to terrific sparks , and “ Vs . ” provides another great round in their eternal battle . It ’ s hilarious to see Homer indebted to the Terrible Two ... " 
 = Ryan Lochte = 
 Ryan Steven Lochte ( / <unk> / , <unk> @-@ tee ; born August 3 , 1984 ) is an American competitive swimmer and an 11 @-@ time Olympic medalist ( five gold , three silver , three bronze ) . His seven individual Olympic medals rank near the top in men 's swimming . As part of the American team , he holds the world record in the 4 × 200 @-@ meter freestyle relay ( long course ) . Individually , he currently holds the world record in the 100 @-@ meter individual medley , 200 @-@ meter individual medley ( long and short course ) , and the 400 @-@ meter individual medley ( short course ) . 
 Lochte 's success has earned him the World Swimmer of the Year Award and the American Swimmer of the Year Award twice . He has also been named the FINA Swimmer of the Year three times . He has won a total of 89 medals in major international competition , 53 gold , 22 silver , and 14 bronze spanning the Olympics , the World , Pan American , and Pan Pacific Championships . 
 Lochte specializes in the backstroke and individual medley , but is also a freestyle and butterfly swimmer . He is noted for the speed and distance he attains while kicking underwater . Lochte is also known for his dominance in the short course format ( 25 @-@ yard and 25 @-@ meter long swimming pools ) . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Ryan Lochte was born in Rochester , New York , the son of Ileana " Ike " ( née Aramburu ) and Steven R. Lochte . His mother is of Spanish and Basque ancestry and was born and raised in Havana , Cuba , while his father is of German , Dutch and English descent . He has two older sisters , Kristin , and Megan , and two younger brothers , Devon , and Brandon . During his early childhood , his family lived in Canandaigua , New York , but moved to Florida so his father could coach swimming . Lochte was taught to swim at the age of five by both of his parents . Ryan was often kicked out of his father 's swimming classes for misbehaving , which often included pulling other children 's legs , blowing bubbles , and hiding at the other end of the pool . Lochte only began taking swimming seriously when he was a junior in high school . Steve Lochte said , " I would send him to go shower when he was messing around . He spent more time in the showers than he did in the pool . " At 14 years old , Ryan 's loss at the Junior Olympics changed his attitude towards swimming : " I suddenly said , ' I 'm sick of losing ' . After that I trained hard and I never lost there again . " 
 = = College career = = 
 Lochte attended the University of Florida and graduated in 2007 , majoring in sport management . As a member of the Florida Gators swimming and diving team , he swam for coach Gregg Troy in National Collegiate Athletic Association ( NCAA ) and Southeastern Conference ( SEC ) competition from 2004 to 2007 . At Florida , Lochte was the NCAA Swimmer of the Year twice , a seven @-@ time NCAA champion , a seven @-@ time SEC champion , and a 24 @-@ time All @-@ American . At the 2006 NCAA Men 's Swimming and Diving Championships , during his senior year , Lochte won national titles in all three of his individual events , setting U.S. Open and American records in the 200 @-@ yard individual medley and 200 @-@ yard backstroke . He also broke Tom Dolan 's nearly decade @-@ old NCAA record in the 400 @-@ yard individual medley . 
 = = International career = = 
 = = = 2004 – 2005 = = = 
 Lochte qualified for his first Olympics after finishing second to Michael Phelps in the 200 @-@ meter individual medley at the 2004 U.S. Olympic Team Trials . He also qualified for the 4 × 200 @-@ meter freestyle relay team after finishing 4th in the 200 @-@ meter freestyle final . At the 2004 Summer Olympics in Athens , Greece , Lochte swam with Phelps , Klete Keller , and Peter Vanderkaay to upset the Australian team and capture the gold medal in the 4 × 200 @-@ meter freestyle relay . It was the first loss for the Australian team in six years . He also narrowly edged out George <unk> and László Cseh in the 200 @-@ meter individual medley to win the silver medal behind Phelps . 
 Later that year at the 2004 FINA Short Course World Championships in Indianapolis , Lochte won the silver medal in the 200 @-@ meter individual medley and the bronze in the 200 @-@ meter freestyle . He also won the gold medal in the 4 × 200 @-@ meter freestyle relay with Chad Carvin , Dan Ketchum , and Justin Mortimer . 
 At the 2005 World Aquatics Championships in Montreal , Lochte won the bronze medals in both the 200 @-@ meter backstroke and 200 @-@ meter individual medley . In the 4 × 200 @-@ meter freestyle relay , Lochte teamed with Phelps , Vanderkaay , and Keller to win gold ahead of Canada and Australia . 
 = = = 2006 – 2007 = = = 
 At the 2006 FINA Short Course World Championships in Shanghai , held just two weeks after the 2006 NCAA Championships , Lochte won three individual titles , one silver , and one bronze . He won the 200 @-@ meter individual medley and the 200 @-@ meter backstroke , setting new world records in both events . He also set another world record in the 100 @-@ meter backstroke in the opening leg of the 4 × 100 @-@ meter medley relay , becoming the first man to complete the distance in under 50 seconds . He won his third gold medal in the 400 @-@ meter individual medley , setting a new championship record . 
 At the 2007 World Aquatics Championships in Melbourne , Australia , Lochte won his first individual gold medal at a long course world championship in the 200 @-@ meter backstroke against compatriot Aaron Peirsol , breaking Peirsol 's world record and his seven @-@ year winning streak in the event . This was Lochte 's first world record in a long course event . A little more than 90 minutes later , Lochte went on to set a world record in the 4 × 200 @-@ meter freestyle relay with Phelps , Keller , and Vanderkaay . He also won silver medals in the 100 @-@ meter backstroke , the 200 @-@ meter individual medley , and the 400 @-@ meter individual medley , making his medal total for the meet second only to Phelps . 
 Within a week of the world championships , Lochte competed in the annual Mutual of Omaha Duel in the Pool where he again beat Peirsol . In the 100 @-@ meter backstroke , he broke Peirsol 's other seven @-@ year winning streak in the shorter of the backstroke races , edging out Peirsol by 0 @.@ 06 seconds . 
 = = = 2008 Summer Olympics = = = 
 = = = = Olympic Trials = = = = 
 At the 2008 U.S. Olympic Team Trials in Omaha , Nebraska , Lochte competed in six individual events and qualified to swim in three individual events at the 2008 Summer Olympics . Also , with his third @-@ place finish in the 200 @-@ meter freestyle , Lochte was ensured a spot on the 4 × 200 @-@ meter freestyle relay . In his first event , Lochte finished second to Phelps in the 400 @-@ meter individual medley . Both Lochte and Phelps finished below Phelps ' previous world record in the event . In his second event , the 200 @-@ meter freestyle , Lochte finished in third place behind Phelps and Vanderkaay . Less than 30 minutes after the 200 @-@ meter freestyle final , Lochte then competed in the 100 @-@ meter backstroke final , finishing in third place behind Aaron Peirsol and Matt Grevers . The next day , Lochte competed in the 100 @-@ meter freestyle but withdrew after the semifinals . Two days later , in the 200 @-@ meter backstroke , Lochte finished in second place behind Peirsol , who equalled Lochte 's world record . Less than 30 minutes after the 200 @-@ meter backstroke final , Lochte finished second to Phelps in the 200 @-@ meter individual medley . 
 = = = = Olympics = = = = 
 In his first event at the 2008 Summer Olympics , Lochte won the bronze medal in the 400 @-@ meter individual medley behind Phelps and Cseh . His time of 4 : 08 @.@ 09 was two seconds slower than the time he swam in Omaha . In his second event , Lochte swam the second leg of the 4 × 200 @-@ meter freestyle relay . With Phelps , Ricky Berens , and Vanderkaay , he won his first gold medal and set his first world record as the American team finished first with a time of 6 : 58 @.@ 56 . The Americans were the first team to break the seven @-@ minute mark in the relay , and broke the previous record , set in Melbourne , Australia , by more than four and a half seconds . In his third event , the 200 @-@ meter backstroke , Lochte won his first individual gold medal and set the world record , beating defending champion Peirsol . Twenty @-@ seven minutes after the final of the 200 @-@ meter backstroke , Lochte went on to win the bronze in the 200 @-@ meter individual medley , finishing behind Phelps and Cseh . 
 = = = 2009 World Championships = = = 
 At the 2009 National Championships , the selection meet for the 2009 World Aquatics Championships , Lochte won individual titles in the 200 and 400 @-@ meter individual medley . Lochte also qualified to swim in the 4 × 100 and 4 × 200 @-@ meter freestyle relay . In the 200 @-@ meter backstroke final , Lochte placed second behind Aaron Peirsol , and lost his world record he set in Beijing when Peirsol recorded a time of 1 : 53 @.@ 08 . 
 In his first event at the 2009 World Aquatics Championships in Rome , Lochte swam the second leg of the men 's 4 × 100 @-@ meter freestyle relay in a time of 47 @.@ 03 . He earned a gold medal in the event along with Phelps , Matt Grevers , and Nathan Adrian . The final time of 3 : 09 @.@ 21 was a championship record and just ahead of Russia ( 3 : 09 @.@ 52 ) and France ( 3 : 09 @.@ 89 ) . With Phelps not competing in the 200 or 400 @-@ meter individual medley at these championships , Lochte won the gold in both events . In the 200 @-@ meter individual medley , Lochte broke Phelps ' world record of 1 : 54 @.@ 23 with a time of 1 : 54 @.@ 10 . In the 200 @-@ meter backstroke , Lochte won the bronze medal , finishing behind Peirsol and Ryosuke Irie of Japan . In the 4 × 200 @-@ meter freestyle relay final , Lochte swam the anchor leg in 1 : 44 @.@ 46 . Combined with Phelps , Berens , and David Walters , Lochte won the gold medal and his team broke the previous world record by one @-@ hundredth of a second with a time of 6 : 58 @.@ 55 . 
 = = = 2010 = = = 
 At the 2010 National Championships , the selection meet for the 2010 Pan Pacific Swimming Championships and the 2011 World Aquatics Championships , Lochte won individual titles in the 200 @-@ meter backstroke , 200 @-@ meter individual medley , and the 400 @-@ meter individual medley . He also placed second in the 100 and 200 @-@ meter freestyle . Lochte 's win in the 200 @-@ meter individual medley was the first time he defeated Phelps in a major national or international meet . 
 At the 2010 Pan Pacific Swimming Championships in Irvine , California , Lochte won a total of six gold medals . His wins included the 200 @-@ meter backstroke , 200 @-@ meter freestyle , the 200 and 400 @-@ meter individual medley , and the 4 × 100 and 4 × 200 @-@ meter freestyle relay . 
 At the 2010 FINA Short Course World Championships in Dubai , Lochte became the first individual in history to win seven medals at the Short Course Worlds and was the only person to set a world record individually since body @-@ length swimsuits were banned . In Dubai , Lochte won gold in the 200 @-@ meter backstroke , 200 @-@ meter freestyle , all the individual medleys ( 100 , 200 , 400 ) , and the 4 × 100 @-@ meter medley relay . He also won silver in the 4 × 200 @-@ meter freestyle relay . Lochte 's world records in Dubai came on consecutive days , first in the 400 @-@ meter individual medley , then in the 200 @-@ meter individual medley . Both world records were broken by considerable margins . 
 At year 's end , Lochte was named the World Swimmer of the Year and American Swimmer of the Year by Swimming World Magazine . He was also named FINA male swimmer of the year for 2010 by FINA Aquatics World Magazine . 2010 saw Lochte win a total of 13 international medals , 12 of them gold . 
 = = = 2011 World Championships = = = 
 At the 2011 World Aquatics Championships , Lochte won a total of six medals , five golds and one bronze . Lochte won his first medal , a bronze , in the 4 × 100 @-@ meter freestyle relay for his contributions in the heats . In the heats , Lochte recorded a time of 48 @.@ 28 , off from the 47 @.@ 98 he recorded last year in Irvine . In his second event , the 200 @-@ meter freestyle , Lochte won the gold with a time of 1 : 44 @.@ 44 , finishing ahead of Michael Phelps who recorded a time of 1 : 44 @.@ 79 . It was Lochte 's first gold in the event in the long course World Championships . Lochte won the 200 @-@ meter individual medley event in a world record time of 1 : 54 @.@ 00 , finishing ahead of Michael Phelps time of 1 : 54 @.@ 16 . In the 200 @-@ meter backstroke , Lochte dominated the competition with a time of 1 : 52 @.@ 96 , over a second ahead of second @-@ place finisher Ryosuke Irie . Shortly after completing the 200 @-@ meter backstroke , Lochte competed in the 4 × 200 @-@ meter freestyle relay with Michael Phelps , Peter Vanderkaay , and Ricky Berens . Swimming the anchor leg in 1 : 44 @.@ 56 , Lochte was able to make up a deficit from France for the win . The final time for the relay was 7 : 02 @.@ 67 . In his last event , the 400 @-@ meter individual medley , Lochte continued his dominance with a win in a time of 4 : 07 @.@ 13 . His closest competitor , Tyler Clary , finished in 4 : 11 @.@ 17 , over four seconds behind . 
 Lochte said he was pleased with his performance at the 2011 World Aquatics Championships but feels that he can improve his times before the 2012 Olympics . " Getting five gold medals is definitely great , but the times that I went , I know I could go a lot faster , " he said . " There are a lot of places in my races that I messed up on that I could have changed and gone faster , but I guess I have a whole year to make sure I have those perfect swims . " 
 At year 's end , Lochte was named the World Swimmer of the Year and American Swimmer of the Year by Swimming World Magazine , and defended his titles from 2010 . He was also named FINA male swimmer of the year for 2011 by FINA Aquatics World Magazine , and also defended this title . 
 = = = 2012 Summer Olympics = = = 
 = = = = Olympic Trials = = = = 
 At the 2012 United States Olympic Trials , the qualifying meet for the 2012 Summer Olympics , Lochte qualified for the Olympic team by finishing first in the 200 @-@ meter backstroke and 400 @-@ meter individual medley , and second in the 200 @-@ meter freestyle and 200 @-@ meter individual medley . Lochte also narrowly missed a spot competing in the individual 100 @-@ meter butterfly by finishing third . 
 = = = = Olympics = = = = 
 At the Olympics in London , Lochte won his first gold medal of the games in the 400 @-@ meter individual medley with a time of 4 : 05 @.@ 18 . Commenting on his first medal of the 2012 Olympics and the head @-@ to @-@ head competition with fellow American and world record holder , Michael Phelps , Lochte acknowledged Phelps ' greatness while positioning himself as the best today . 
 Lochte won a silver medal with the U.S. 4 × 100 @-@ meter freestyle relay team , losing out to the French team with a 47 @.@ 74 split , a full second slower than the French finishing swimmer Yannick Agnel and six tenths of a second slower than teammate Phelps . 
 Lochte placed fourth in the 200 @-@ meter freestyle race . He followed that performance , however , by winning gold with the U.S. 4 × 200 @-@ meter freestyle team . Lochte swam the first split and provided the U.S. team a commanding lead which never relinquished . 
 On the sixth night of the Games , Lochte swam his last two finals , with only 30 minutes in between . First , he won the bronze medal in the 200m backstroke , finishing behind compatriot Tyler Clary and Japan 's Ryosuke Irie . His time of 1 @.@ 53 @.@ 94 tied the time he swam four years ago when he won the gold medal at the 2008 Games , which was then a world record . Half an hour later , Lochte took on Phelps in the 200m individual medley . He won a silver medal behind Phelps in the last head @-@ to @-@ head race of their careers , as Phelps retired after the Games . This was the third consecutive Olympics in which Lochte won a medal in the 200m individual medley . 
 His five medals brought his total to 11 Olympic medals , tied for second among male swimmers with compatriots Mark Spitz and Matt Biondi , behind only Phelps . His seven individual Olympic medals are the second @-@ most in men 's Olympic swimming , surpassing Zoltán <unk> and Mark Spitz , who won six . 
 Lochte has announced he intends to continue swimming through the 2016 Summer Olympics in Rio de Janeiro . He is also considering exploring new events . 
 = = = 2013 World Championships = = = 
 In his first event at the 2013 World Aquatics Championships in Barcelona , Lochte combined with Nathan Adrian , Anthony Ervin , and Jimmy Feigen in the 4 × 100 @-@ meter freestyle relay , with the team finishing behind France . Swimming the second leg , Lochte recorded a split of 47 @.@ 80 , and the team finished with a final time of 3 : 11 @.@ 44 . In his first individual event , the 200 @-@ meter freestyle , Lochte was unsuccessful in defending his title and placed fourth in the final with a time of 1 : 45 @.@ 64 . Lochte won his first individual medal of the competition , a gold , by defending his title in the 200 @-@ meter individual medley , recording a time of 1 : 54 @.@ 98 . The day following his 200 medley gold , Lochte also defended his title in the 200 @-@ meter backstroke , recording a time of 1 : 53 @.@ 79 in the final . On the same day of winning the 200 @-@ meter backstroke ( and swimming in the 100 @-@ meter butterfly semifinals where he set a personal best and qualified for the final ) , Lochte combined with Conor Dwyer , Charlie <unk> , and Ricky Berens , to win the 4 × 200 @-@ meter freestyle relay . Swimming the second leg , Lochte recorded a split of 1 : 44 @.@ 98 , and the team finished with a final time of 7 : 01 @.@ 72 . In winning the <unk> relay , Lochte became the first swimmer to win 5 consecutive gold medals at the World Championships in the 4 × 200 @-@ meter freestyle relay ( while also being the first swimmer , along with compatriot Michael Phelps , to win the 4 × 200 m freestyle relay Olympic Gold Medal on 3 successive occasions ) . 
 The following day , Lochte competed in the 100 @-@ meter butterfly and finished 6th in the final with a time of 51 @.@ 58 , just off his semifinal time of 51 @.@ 48 . 
 = = = 2015 World Championships = = = 
 = = Television appearances and pop culture fame = = 
 Before the 2012 Summer Olympics , Fortune magazine estimated that Lochte earned $ 2 @.@ 3 million from endorsement deals with Speedo , Mutual of Omaha , Gillette , Gatorade , Procter and Gamble , Ralph Lauren , Nissan and AT & T. Lochte has also appeared in commercials for the Nissan Altima and been featured on the covers of Vogue , Time , Men 's Health and Men 's Journal . 
 National Public Radio named Lochte as their " platonic ideal of bro @-@ dom " . 
 Actor and comedian Seth MacFarlane parodied Lochte in the 2012 season premiere of Saturday Night Live , after which Lochte said he would be open to doing a cameo appearance on the show . 
 Lochte appeared as an exaggerated version of himself in the 30 Rock episode " Stride of Pride , " which aired October 18 , 2012 . He also had a guest appearance on 90210 in late 2012 . Additionally , he showed interest in being a participant on Dancing with the Stars . 
 What Would Ryan Lochte Do ? began airing April 21 , 2013 on E ! and was cancelled after only one season , five weeks later . 
 Lochte 's public persona and character have inspired a series of unflattering internet memes . 
 = = Awards = = 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Despite rumors in the Australian press linking Lochte with Australian swimmer Blair Evans , Lochte 's mother , Ileana , confirmed to Us Weekly in a July 28 , 2012 , interview that her son was " too busy " to be in a relationship and stated that it " wouldn 't be fair to the girl . " 
 On August 1 , 2012 , Lochte trademarked his personal catchphrase , " <unk> , " with the U.S. Patent & Trademark Office . 
 = = Career best times = = 
 = Stephen Fry 's Podgrams = 
 Stephen Fry 's Podgrams is a series of podcasts performed and recorded by British comedian and author Stephen Fry . First made downloadable on 20 February 2008 , the series of podgrams is a collection of Fry 's writings , speeches and collective thoughts . The podgrams vary in length and are not released at any set date . 
 The podgrams are one of the most downloaded podcast series on the internet , and have appeared in the top five most downloaded podcasts from iTunes . Critical reception has been positive , as reviewers have found the podgrams interesting and engaging . 
 = = Content = = 
 The subject of Stephen Fry 's Podgrams differs from episode to episode . Normally , each podgram begins with an update from Fry about what he has been doing recently , his activities since the last podgram , and any housekeeping that he needs to do concerning his website , <unk> Fry then continues to discuss his recent activities ; although in other editions the introduction leads in to the main subject . The text of the podgrams is sometimes published as part of Fry 's web logs , or " <unk> " . 
 Fry 's podgrams consist of anecdotes , such as how he broke his arm while filming a documentary in Brazil . He has also presented lectures , discussed certain themes in detail , or argued against things he sees as being wrong in today 's society . In discussing his hatred of dancing , he said of music , " I do not want to use it as an exercise track for a farcical , meaningless , disgusting , brainless physical public exhibition of windmilling , gyrating and thrashing in a hot , loud room or hall . " The material is usually original for each podcast , but he may revisit topics that he has previously discussed . For example , one podgram consisted of a speech he had previously made concerning public service broadcasting . His apologetic explanation for the repeated subject matter described his busy life , and he stated that the podgram was " all I can offer you . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 Stephen Fry 's Podgrams have been well received by critics . The series has been in the list of the top five most downloaded podcasts on iTunes , even though only a few episodes have been made so far . 
 Chris Campling of The Times said that Fry was smug , " but then he has a lot to be smug about , not least the ability to waffle for 30 to 45 minutes about not very much without being boring or condescending . " The Good Web Guide also recommends the series , saying that " whether he is bringing you up to date with his recent adventures of just riffing on something that interests him , he is always compelling company . " The guide also states , " Stephen Fry is one of those very rare people who are incapable of being boring . " 
 Jacques René Zammit of The Malta Independent reviewed one episode in which Fry talked about the problems within journalism . Zammit wrote positively on Fry 's comments saying , " I share Stephen 's worries completely . Every time I sit down to type my excessively long column , I am burdened by the thought that after all this is just a collection of thoughts by someone who may very well be perceived as a pompous ass – and if Stephen Fry has these disquisitions , then I definitely should be doing some worrying myself . " 
 = = Episodes = = 
 The podgrams are released sporadically , with gaps between different podgrams being from one month up to several months . The length of each podgram varies widely as well . The second series began after Fry 's website was revamped . 
 = = = Series 1 = = = 
 = = = Series 2 = = = 
 = Argentine – Chilean naval arms race = 
 In the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries , the South American nations of Argentina and Chile engaged in an expensive naval arms race to ensure the other would not gain supremacy in the Southern Cone . 
 Although the Argentine and Chilean navies possessed insignificant naval forces in the 1860s , with zero and five warships , respectively , Argentina 's concern over a strong Brazilian Navy and the Chilean war against Spain caused them to add capable warships to their fleets in the 1870s . During this time , diplomatic relations between Argentina and Chile soured due to conflicting boundary claims , particularly in Patagonia . By the beginning of the 1880s , after the War of the Pacific , the Chilean government possessed possibly the strongest navy in the Americas . They planned to add to it with an 1887 appropriation for one battleship , two protected cruisers , and two torpedo gunboats . Argentina responded a year later with an order for two battleships of its own . The naval arms race unfolded over the next several years , with each country buying and ordering vessels that were slightly better than the previous ship , but the Argentines eventually pulled ahead with the acquisition of multiple Garibaldi @-@ class cruisers . 
 The race ended in 1902 with the British @-@ arbitrated Pacts of May , which contained a binding naval @-@ limiting agreement . Both governments sold or canceled the ships they had ordered , and three major warships were mostly disarmed to balance the fleets . The pacts proved to be the answer to the Argentine and Chilean disputes , as the countries enjoyed a period of warm relations . This did not last , though , as the Brazilian government 's attempt to rebuild its own naval forces sparked another naval arms race , involving all three countries ' orders for revolutionary new " dreadnoughts " , powerful battleships whose capabilities far outstripped older vessels in the world 's navies . 
 = = Background = = 
 Conflicting Argentine and Chilean claims to Patagonia , the southernmost region in South America , had been causing tension between the two countries since the 1840s . Both countries were incapable of enforcing these claims with a seaborne force , though : in 1860 , the Chileans had only five small vessels , while the Argentine Navy had no seagoing ships . These attitudes quickly changed when the circumstances warranted ; when Chile joined Peru against Spain in the Chincha Islands War , the Spaniards blockaded and bombarded Valparaíso , leading the Chilean government to strengthen the navy . The Argentine government , under President Domingo Sarmiento , decided to build a navy in the 1870s to counter Brazilian naval acquisitions . Two large monitors , Los Andes and El Plata , were ordered from Laird Brothers , a British company , along with two gunboats . They were delivered in 1874 and 1875 . 
 The Patagonian tensions heightened in 1872 and 1878 , when Chilean warships seized merchant ships which had been licensed to operate in the disputed area by the Argentine government . An Argentine warship did the same to a Chilean @-@ licensed American ship in 1877 . This action nearly led to war in November 1878 , when the Argentines dispatched a squadron of warships to the Santa Cruz River . The Chilean Navy responded in kind , and war was only avoided by a hastily signed treaty . 
