 Both countries were incapable of enforcing these claims with a seaborne force in the next few years , as the Argentines were occupied with internal military operations against the indigenous population ( 1870 – 84 ) , and the Chileans involved in the War of the Pacific ( Guerra del Pacífico , 1879 – 83 ) against Bolivia and Peru . Still , several warships were ordered by both nations : the Argentines commissioned a central battery ironclad , Almirante Brown , and a protected cruiser , Patagonia , in 1880 and 1885 , respectively . For their part , the Chileans ordered a protected cruiser , Esmeralda , to bolster its fleet , which was centered on two central battery ironclads , Almirante Cochrane and Blanco Encalada . With these ships , the Chilean Navy emerged from the War of the Pacific as the preeminent navy in the Americas , surpassing even the navy of the United States , which had fallen into steep decline after the American Civil War . The Chilean government utilized this advantage when it deployed Esmeralda to Panama in 1885 to block the U.S. from attempting to annex the region . 
 = = Arms race = = 
 The Chilean government moved first to begin the naval arms race when it ordered a modern ironclad battleship , Capitán Prat , two protected cruisers , and two torpedo boats from France and the United Kingdom . Bought with a £ 3 @,@ 129 @,@ 500 appropriation in the 1887 budget , the ships would have upset the balance of naval power in Latin America — while the Argentines had more vessels , the Chileans had larger warships with far more experienced crewmen . This purchase was made worse , from the Argentine perspective , by a large order for rifles , field guns , sabers , and carbines , enough to arm an 80 @,@ 000 @-@ strong army . The Argentine government responded with two battleships — Independencia and Libertad , though they were individually smaller than their Chilean counterpart — and two protected cruisers , one purchased on the stocks in 1890 ( Veinticinco de Mayo ) and a new @-@ build of the same design in 1891 ( <unk> de Julio ) . The purchases were funded largely through export @-@ related windfall , Chile through nitrates and Argentina through grain and cattle . 
 The Chilean Civil War ( 1891 ) , rather than calming the naval ambitions of Chile , escalated them . In that conflict , the Chilean Navy played a significant role on the congressional side against the president and the army . The resulting victory of the congressional side and subsequent presidency of Admiral Jorge Montt led to a large increase in prestige and consequent funding for the navy . Argentine naval units assisted failed revolts in Argentina , but the continuing acrimony with and naval acquisitions of Chile meant this had little effect . 
 The Chilean government purchased a protected cruiser , Blanco Encalada , on the stocks in 1892 , while the Argentines purchased one , Buenos Aires , being built for the British in late 1893 . The Chileans sold their oldest protected cruiser , Esmeralda , in late 1894 to finance the order of an armored cruiser . This materialized in May 1895 with a new Esmeralda , along with four torpedo boats ; a Brazilian protected cruiser , <unk> <unk> , was purchased while under construction in August 1895 . The Argentines purchased an Italian armored cruiser , Garibaldi , on the stocks on 14 July 1895 . 
 In April 1896 , Chile ordered another armored cruiser , O 'Higgins , and six torpedo boats . Naval historian Robert Scheina states that Argentina replied in the same month with San Martín , a near @-@ sister ship to Garibaldi which was under construction in Italy . However , he notes that the small time lapse between the orders makes it difficult or impossible to know if this , the opposite , or either are true . As historian Jonathan Grant writes , the Argentines may have moved first to secure a definite , if momentarily tenuous , advantage over the Chilean Navy . In May 1898 , the Chilean government found that the Argentines were planning on acquiring one , then two , Garibaldi @-@ class cruisers . With tensions extremely high and war seemingly imminent , the two countries agreed to submit their boundary disputes to the British , which led to the Cordillera of the Andes Boundary Case 1902 ( Argentina , Chile ) . They also signed pacts which led to the resolution of the Puna de Atacama dispute . As the former arbitration took much time , the naval arms race , though it slacked during the time of eased tension which came with the agreements , continued . 
 The Argentines did acquire the two additional armored cruisers , which were named Pueyrredón and General Belgrano , that were more powerful than the previous two . To counter them , the Chilean government ordered two new battleships , Constitución and Libertad , using its gold reserve to pay for them . These battleships ' fast speed would make them suitable for opposing the new Argentine armored cruisers . The Chileans also purchased the protected cruiser Chacabuco , which had been built on speculation , on the stocks in late 1901 . The Argentines responded in May 1901 with an inquiry , possibly a full order , to Ansaldo for a new 15 @,@ 000 @-@ long @-@ ton ( 15 @,@ 000 t ) battleship design . This would mount a 305 mm ( 12 in ) main battery and be capable of steaming at 20 knots ( 23 mph ; 37 km / h ) . 
 The increased tensions and near state of war between Argentina and Chile caused the British to intervene , lest their economic interests in the region , which included the export of British goods and the import of Latin American raw materials , be disrupted . Talks were held in the Chilean capital , Santiago , between the British ambassador to Chile , the Argentine ambassador to Chile , and the Chilean foreign minister and President Germán <unk> . This led to the three Pacts of May on 28 May 1902 , which ended the dispute . The third limited the naval armaments of both countries . Argentina and Chile were barred from acquiring any further warships for five years , unless they gave the other eighteen months of advance notice . The warships under construction were sold to the United Kingdom , with Chile 's battleships becoming the Swiftsure class , and Japan , with Argentina 's armored cruisers becoming the Kasuga class . The two planned Argentine battleships were never ordered , and Garibaldi and Pueyrredón , along with Chile 's Capitán Prat , were disarmed with the exception of their main batteries , as the Argentine Navy had no crane capable of removing the armored cruiser 's gun turrets . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The Argentine – Chilean naval arms race was extremely expensive for both countries . The Argentine government was able to purchase £ 4 @,@ 534 @,@ 800 worth of ships between 1890 and 1898 with large foreign loans , which were given to them despite the country 's role in the Baring crisis of 1890 . The government 's total foreign debt reached 421 million gold pesos by 1896 . As for Chile , it was forced to take out a £ 2 million pound loan in order to purchase Krupp weaponry , and this combined with its other loans led the banking industry to suspend loans to Chile until the diplomatic crisis with Argentina was solved . Both the Argentine President Julio Argentino Roca and American ambassador to Argentina William Paine Lord ascribed the ending of the arms race to the diminished credit of Argentina and Chile . 
 By all measures , the Pacts of May were an unmitigated success . Both Argentina and Chile enjoyed a period of lessened tensions , leaving the near state of war they were in , and the pacts ended their expensive naval buildups . However , the third major country in South America , Brazil , brought this to a crashing halt in 1904 , when its congress passed a large naval construction plan . This culminated in 1907 with a Brazilian order for three " dreadnoughts " , a new form of warship whose advanced armament and propulsion capabilities far outstripped older vessels in the world 's navies . Two would be laid down immediately , with a third to follow . The Argentine and Chilean governments quickly moved to cancel the remaining months of the naval @-@ limiting Pacts of May , and both eventually responded with orders for their own dreadnoughts . 
 = = Endnotes = = 
 = Frank Brimsek = 
 Francis Charles " Mr. Zero " Brimsek ( September 26 , 1915 – November 11 , 1998 ) was an American professional ice hockey goaltender who played ten seasons in the National Hockey League ( NHL ) for the Boston Bruins and Chicago Black Hawks . Brimsek started his career playing exhibition games with the Pittsburgh Yellow Jackets in 1934 – 35 . The Detroit Red Wings initially owned Brimsek 's rights before they traded them to the Bruins in 1937 . In 1938 – 39 , Brimsek made his NHL debut with the Bruins since their starting goalie , Tiny Thompson , sustained an injury during an exhibition match . Initially deemed as a short term call @-@ up , Brimsek soon found himself as the Bruins ' starting goalie . He went on to record six shutouts in his first seven games which earned him the moniker of " Mr. Zero " . 
 Brimsek spent his first nine NHL seasons with the Bruins and during this time , he received numerous individual awards . He won the Calder Memorial Trophy , the Vezina Trophy twice , and he was named to the NHL All @-@ Star Team eight times ( twice on the First Team and six times on the Second Team ) . He was also a member of two Stanley Cup championships ( 1939 and 1941 ) . During World War II , Brimsek left the NHL for two years in order to serve with the United States Coast Guard . After being discharged from the Coast Guard , Brimsek returned to the NHL for the 1945 – 46 season where it was noted that his skills were not as sharp as before he left . Despite this , he still managed to be one of the best goalies in the league . Brimsek was traded to the Black Hawks in 1948 – 49 due to personal reasons . He spent one season with the Black Hawks before retiring from professional hockey . 
 One of the most accomplished American goalies of all @-@ time , Brimsek held the record for most wins , and shutouts recorded by an American netminder at the time of his retirement . His wins record stood for 54 years while his shutouts record stood for 61 years . His eight berths to the NHL All @-@ Star Team rank him second all @-@ time among all goalies . In 1966 , he was inducted into the Hockey Hall of Fame , the first American goalie to be inducted ; and in 1973 , he was part of the inaugural class of the United States Hockey Hall of Fame . In 1998 , Brimsek was ranked number 67 on The Hockey News ' list of the 100 Greatest Hockey Players , the highest ranked American goaltender . 
 = = Background = = 
 Brimsek was born in the hockey hotbed of Eveleth , Minnesota on September 26 , 1915 . His parents were of Slovene descent . The town of Eveleth produced at that time four other hockey players who would play in the National Hockey League ( NHL ) : Mike Karakas , Sam <unk> , Al Suomi and John Mariucci . Brimsek and Karakas played on the same baseball team in high school . Brimsek first started playing hockey when his brother , John , the second @-@ string goalie on the Eveleth High School team , expressed his desire to be a defenseman instead . John was moved to his desired position , while Frank replaced him . Soon , Brimsek found himself spending most of his spare time on the Eveleth rinks playing hockey . Unlike most of his friends who wanted to be high @-@ scoring forwards , Brimsek never showed any desire to play any other position except for goalie . Just before winter , Brimsek and his friends would get on a dry lot , and they would practice shooting at him . After graduating from high school , Brimsek went to play for the St. Cloud State Teachers College hockey team . He also graduated from college with a machine shop student 's degree . 
 = = Playing career = = 
 = = = Early career = = = 
 In the fall of 1934 , Brimsek was invited to the Detroit Red Wings training camp for a shot at playing in the National Hockey League ( NHL ) . Jack Adams , the Red Wings ' coach and manager , made a bad impression on Brimsek . He felt that Adams had a habit of favoritism . This led him to try out for another professional team , the Baltimore Orioles of the Eastern Amateur Hockey League ( EAHL ) . Unfortunately for Brimsek , the Orioles decided to cut him . Disappointed , Brimsek hitchhiked back to Eveleth . On his way back home , he had a chance meeting with the owner of the Pittsburgh Yellow Jackets , John H. Harris . The Yellow Jackets were in need for a goaltender and Harris proceeded to sign Brimsek to the team . Brimsek started for the Yellow Jackets for the first time in 1934 – 35 by playing 16 games exhibition games . Out of those 16 games , he won 14 of them . 
 The next season , the Yellow Jackets joined the EAHL . Brimsek finished with the most wins and shutouts of any goal tender in the league with 20 and 8 respectively . At the end of the season , he was named to the league 's Second All @-@ Star Team and he was awarded the George L. Davis Trophy for having the lowest goals against average ( GAA ) . Impressed by Brimsek , Harris wanted to protect his interests in the goalie so he ironically had the Red Wings put Brimsek on their protected list . Harris then tried to get the Red Wings to call Brimsek up . However , the Red Wings wanted Brimsek to first play one year for their amateur team in Pontiac , but Brimsek turned down the offer . Brimsek opted to stay with the Yellow Jackets instead . Harris then shopped Brimsek around the NHL until he was accepted by the Boston Bruins in October 1937 . The Bruins were already well established in net with future hall @-@ of @-@ famer Tiny Thompson . This led to Brimsek being assigned by the Bruins to the Providence Reds of the International @-@ American Hockey League ( IAHL ) for the 1937 – 38 season . In his only full season with the Reds , Brimsek helped his team win the Calder Cup and he was named to the league 's First All @-@ Star Team . 
 = = = Boston Bruins = = = 
 = = = = Pre World War II = = = = 
 Brimsek started the 1938 – 39 season with the Reds , but he would not stay long with them . During an NHL exhibition game , Thompson got injured and it was unlikely that Thompson would recuperate in time for the beginning of the regular season . Needing a replacement , Brimsek was called up by the Bruins . In his NHL debut , Brimsek helped his team defeat the Toronto Maple Leafs by a score of 3 – 2 . He started in net for one more game , a 4 – 1 victory against the Red Wings , before being sent back down to the Reds as Thompson recovered . Art Ross , the Bruins ' coach and general manager , had seen enough of Brimsek during his two stints in Boston to contemplate promoting Brimsek full @-@ time with the Bruins . Thompson was traded to the Red Wings after playing only five games with the Bruins . Ross then proceeded to promote Brimsek as the team 's new starting goalie . This did not sit well with Bruins fans as Thompson was a favorite and he was the reigning Vezina Trophy winner . 
 In Brimsek 's first game as the starting goalie , his team fell 2 – 0 to the Montreal Canadiens in Montreal . Meanwhile , on that same night , Thompson won his first game with the Red Wings . Also , Brimsek wore red hockey pants instead of the team 's colors , and he was wearing Thompson 's former jersey number , No. 1 . These little details did not help him improve his image with the fans . The next game yielded a more positive result for Brimsek , as he shutout the Chicago Black Hawks . This did not earn him the acknowledgement of Bruins fans yet as when he made his first appearance in Boston , the fans greeted him coldly . However , after shutting out his opponents for the second straight game , the fans warmed up to him immediately . Brimsek earned six shutouts in his first seven games , leading to the fans and the media calling him by the nickname of " Mr. Zero " . During that seven game span , he also set a then modern @-@ NHL record for longest shutout streak of 231 minutes and 54 seconds . At the end of the regular season , Brimsek had backstopped the Bruins to a first @-@ place finish in the league . Brimsek finished the season with the most wins ( 33 ) , shutouts ( 10 ) and the lowest GAA ( 1 @.@ 56 ) in the league . In the playoffs , Brimsek and his team defeated the New York Rangers before beating the Maple Leafs in the 1939 Stanley Cup Finals . Adding to his Stanley Cup victory , Brimsek was awarded the Calder Memorial Trophy , the Vezina Trophy , and he was named to the NHL First All @-@ Star Team . 
 The following season , Brimsek finished first in the league in wins again and he was named to the NHL Second All @-@ Star Team . This would be his first of six berths to the NHL Second All @-@ Star Team . The Bruins were eliminated in the playoffs by the eventual Stanley Cup champions , New York Rangers , in the semi @-@ finals . In 1940 – 41 , Brimsek backstopped the Bruins to their third consecutive first @-@ place finish in the league . The Bruins made it to the 1941 Stanley Cup Finals and were matched up with the Red Wings . The Red Wings fell in four games in a best @-@ of @-@ seven series giving Brimsek his second and last Stanley Cup victory . For his efforts during the regular season , Brimsek was named to the NHL Second All @-@ Star Team for the second year in a row . Continuing on the previous season 's success , Brimsek won the Vezina Trophy and was named to the NHL First All @-@ Star Team for the second time in his career . However , Brimsek 's team could not replicate their playoff success as they were eliminated by the Red Wings in the semi @-@ finals . 
 = = = = World War II and aftermath = = = = 
 Following the outbreak of World War II , three of the Bruins ' best forwards decided to join the Royal Canadian Air Force midway through the 1941 – 42 season . These three forwards made up the Kraut Line , one of the best lines in the NHL . Despite missing three of their best players , the Bruins managed to advance to the Stanley Cup Finals the next season . In the finals , they were eliminated by the Red Wings , four games to none . Due to his play in the regular season , Brimsek was again named to the NHL Second All @-@ Star Team . However , it was popular opinion at the time that Brimsek deserved the spot on the First All @-@ Star Team over Johnny Mowers , including Mowers ' own coach and general manager , Jack Adams . 
 Brimsek decided to help the war effort next season by joining the United States Coast Guard . During his time with the Coast Guard , he played with the Coast Guard Cutters hockey team in Curtis Bay , Maryland , and later served in the South Pacific . After the war ended , Brimsek returned to the Bruins in time for the 1945 – 46 season . However , Brimsek was not as sharp as he was before due to having not played any professional hockey for two years . In his first season back , Brimsek guided the Bruins to the Finals , matching up with the Montreal Canadiens . The Bruins were defeated in five games with three games requiring overtime . Brimsek was applauded for his performance in the playoffs , compensating for his team 's weak defence . This marked Brimsek 's fourth appearance in the Finals and it would be his last . At the end of the season , Brimsek was also named to the NHL Second All @-@ Star Team , the fifth time in his career . 
 Brimsek remained with the Bruins for three more seasons . He was named to the NHL Second All @-@ Star team twice more and was selected to play in the inaugural NHL All @-@ Star Game in 1947 . The Bruins made the playoffs all three seasons but were eliminated in the semi @-@ finals in all of them . Brimsek was also a finalist for the Hart Trophy in 1947 – 48 , finishing behind Buddy O 'Connor of the Rangers . Personal problems plagued Brimsek during his final years in Boston . His 10 @-@ month @-@ old son had died in January 1949 , and his coach and longtime teammate , Dit Clapper , had resigned from his coaching duties . It did not also help that the Boston crowd would occasionally boo Brimsek for his play . After the 1948 – 49 season , Brimsek requested a trade from Boston to Chicago in order to be closer to home , and to the new blueprint business he had started there . Boston granted his request and he was traded to the Chicago Black Hawks in exchange for cash . Brimsek only played one season with the Black Hawks , recording 22 wins , 38 losses and 10 ties in 70 games played . The team finished last in the standings . Brimsek 's lone season with the Hawks was the only season where his team did not reach the playoffs . He retired at the conclusion of the season . 
 = = Retirement and legacy = = 
 Brimsek played a stand @-@ up style of goaltending . <unk> playing this style usually stay on their feet instead of dropping down on their knees to make a save . Brimsek is also remembered for having a quick catching hand and for " taking the feet out " of opposing players that were being a nuisance in front of his net . After retiring , Brimsek returned to Minnesota and worked as a railroad engineer . Even after his retirement , Brimsek regularly received fan mail . In 1966 , Brimsek was inducted into the Hockey Hall of Fame , the first American @-@ born goalie to be inducted , and in 1973 he was an inaugural inductee of the United States Hockey Hall of Fame . Brimsek died on November 11 , 1998 in Virginia , Minnesota , leaving behind his wife , Marguerite , his two daughters , Chris and Karen , and his five grandchildren . 
 In 1998 , Brimsek was ranked number 67 on The Hockey News ' list of the 100 Greatest Hockey Players , the highest ranked American goaltender . An annual award , given to the top high school goaltender in Minnesota , is given in Brimsek 's honor . Brimsek 's 252 wins and 40 shutouts each stood for a long time as the most ever recorded by an American netminder . His wins record was finally broken by Tom Barrasso on February 15 , 1994 and his shutouts record has only been equaled by John Vanbiesbrouck and Jonathan Quick . In addition , Brimsek 's eight berths to the NHL All @-@ Star Team are the second most among goalies in history , behind only Glenn Hall 's ten berths . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = = Regular season = = = 
 = = = Playoffs = = = 
 = = Awards = = 
 = <unk> Ramírez = 
 <unk> Emilio Ramírez ( born March 28 , 1981 ) is a former Dominican professional baseball pitcher . Ramírez appeared in Major League Baseball ( MLB ) as a relief pitcher for the New York Yankees ( 2007 – 2009 ) and Oakland Athletics ( 2010 ) . After finding himself out of baseball in 2004 , Ramírez revitalized his career by developing an effective changeup . 
 Originally a member of the Los Angeles Angels of Anaheim organization , Ramírez pitched for the Angels only in minor league baseball . The Angels released Ramírez before the 2004 season . After spending the next year mastering a changeup , he spent parts of the following two seasons in independent league baseball . Ramírez signed with the Yankees in 2006 , and made his MLB debut the next season . Ramírez enjoyed success and popularity among the fan base during the 2007 and 2008 seasons . He struggled in 2009 , and pitched for the Athletics early in the 2010 season before returning to minor league baseball in the Athletics organization . He pitched in the Mexican League in 2011 . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 = = = Los Angeles Angels of Anaheim : 2001 – 2005 = = = 
 The Los Angeles Angels of Anaheim signed Ramírez as an international free agent in February 2001 . He made his professional debut in minor league baseball with the Arizona Angels of the Rookie @-@ level Arizona League in the 2002 season . He pitched in 13 games for Arizona , and also pitched in two games for the Provo Angels of the Rookie @-@ level Pioneer League . The Angels promoted Ramírez to Class A in the 2003 season . He pitched for the Cedar Rapids Kernels in the Class A Midwest League . He reached the Rancho Cucamonga Quakes of the Class A @-@ Advanced California League . When the Angels invited players of the Quakes to Angel Stadium in Anaheim , Ramírez refused to leave the bleachers and step on the field unless he was invited to play for the Angels . 
 Ramírez had difficulty with his vision ; he could not see which pitch the catcher was calling for . He was fitted for prescription goggles , which he continued to wear throughout his career . Angels ' MLB players of the time did not remember working with Ramírez ; catcher José Molina suggested that Ramírez must not have been in the Angels ' long @-@ term plans , as they had a number of right @-@ handed power pitching relief pitchers in the organization . 
 The Angels released Ramírez in March 2004 , without being promoted beyond the Class A level . Disappointed , Ramírez considered retiring from baseball . With the advice of his father , Ramírez decided that as Major League Baseball pitchers often relied on a slider or curveball as a complimentary pitch to their fastball , he would develop a different pitch . Ramírez spent his time that year learning a changeup on baseball fields in Miami , Florida , and did not pitch professionally during the 2004 season . Working with Maximo Soto , a fellow minor league pitcher released by the Angels , Ramírez developed his changeup to provide him with a new weapon in his pitching arsenal . 
 = = = Independent Leagues : 2005 – 2006 = = = 
 Ramírez played independent league baseball for the next two seasons . After receiving an invitation to try out for the Pensacola Pelicans of the American Association of Independent Professional Baseball , the Pelicans signed Ramirez for the 2005 season . In 43 games with Pensacola , Ramírez pitched to a 1 @.@ 45 earned run average ( ERA ) , struck out 93 batters and walked only 15 . He finished the season with a record of 2 – 2 with 11 saves over 62 innings pitched . In September 2005 , the Angels purchased Ramírez from the Pelicans . He pitched in one game for their Class AAA affiliate , the Salt Lake City Stingers of the Pacific Coast League ( PCL ) . The Angels released Ramírez in spring training in 2006 . Ramírez was not provided with a reason for his release . 
 Ramirez signed with the Edinburg Coyotes of the independent United League Baseball for the 2006 season . He served as the Coyotes ' closer . With Edinburg , he threw 25 1 ⁄ 3 innings of relief over 25 games , finishing with a 1 – 1 record and 16 saves . He also had 46 strikeouts , 10 walks and a 1 @.@ 07 ERA . He appeared in the United League All @-@ Star Game . 
 = = = New York Yankees : 2007 – 2009 = = = 
 Searching for a pitcher recently released by an MLB organization to fill a relief pitching role in Class A , Yankees professional scouting director Billy Eppler purchased Ramírez from Edinburg for an unreported amount of cash , estimated to be between $ 1 @,@ 500 to $ 3 @,@ 000 . It was the first time a United League player was purchased by an MLB organization . Ramírez signed with the Yankees on July 9 , 2006 . Later that July , the Yankees purchased Carlos Mendoza from the Pelicans . Ramírez pitched for their Class A @-@ Advanced affiliate , the Tampa Yankees of the Florida State League , for the remainder of the 2006 season . He pitched 32 2 ⁄ 3 innings , compiled a win – loss record of 4 – 1 , an earned run average ( ERA ) of 1 @.@ 17 , and 47 strikeouts . 
 He began the 2007 season with the Yankees ' Class AA affiliate , the Trenton Thunder of the Eastern League . In nine relief appearances , he had a record of 3 – 0 and one save , allowing only one run in 16 2 ⁄ 3 innings , for an ERA of 0 @.@ 54 . He compiled 33 strikeouts and eight walks . He was promoted to the Scranton / Wilkes @-@ Barre Yankees of the Class AAA International League , where he pitched 26 2 ⁄ 3 innings of relief in 15 games , allowing only two runs over that span , an 0 @.@ 67 ERA . He recorded 47 strikeouts and walked nine batters in that time . 
 Ramírez was called up to the Yankees , his first promotion to MLB , on July 1 , 2007 . In his MLB debut , on July 3 , 2007 against the Minnesota Twins , Ramírez pitched the ninth inning for the Yankees and struck out all three batters he faced , including reigning American League Most Valuable Player Justin Morneau , in an 8 – 0 win for the Yankees . The last Yankee to strike out the side in his MLB debut was Stan Bahnsen during the 1966 season . The only other rookies to strike out the side in their debut inning are Tyler Robertson , Jordan De Jong , Todd Wellemeyer , Jeremy Fikac , Braden Looper , Angelo <unk> , and Paul <unk> . 
 Ramírez remained with the club for nearly three weeks . However , Yankees ' manager Joe Torre used Ramírez sparingly , despite the belief in the Yankees ' front office that Ramírez could be an effective strikeout reliever . At the time of his debut , the Yankees bullpen ranked 25th in MLB in strikeouts . Torre had a reputation as preferring veteran relief pitchers , but the organization needed to wait until the trading deadline to obtain a veteran pitcher from another club . Ramírez was a member of the Yankees for a July series against the Angels at Angel Stadium , finally stepping foot onto the field as an active Yankees player . On July 6 , against the Angels , he gave up one run on two hits in 1 1 ⁄ 3 innings ; as the pitcher of record , he was awarded his first career win in the 14 – 9 Yankees victory . Molina , now serving as the Yankees ' backup catcher , admitted that he didn 't remember Ramírez from their shared years in the Angels ' organization . 
 In the final relief appearance of Ramírez 's first stint with the major league club , he faced the Tampa Bay Devil Rays on July 20 . Without an appearance since July 6 in Anaheim , he was pitching on two weeks of rest . Without control of his pitches , Ramírez walked four batters and allowed a grand slam to Dioner Navarro without recording an out . Only two of his 19 pitches were called strikes . After the game , Ramírez , shaken by his performance , cut short his comments to reporters , and was seen crying at his locker . The Yankees optioned Ramírez back to Scranton / Wilkes @-@ Barre the following day . In his first appearance with Scranton / Wilkes Barre following his demotion , Ramírez continued pitching effectively , striking out two in 1 1 ⁄ 3 hitless innings , helping Joba Chamberlain hold onto his first career Class AAA victory . 
 Between Class AA Trenton and Class AAA Scranton / Wilkes @-@ Barre , Ramírez pitched 56 2 ⁄ 3 innings , in which he allowed 26 hits and 22 walks while striking out 102 . He held opponents to a <unk> batting average and allowed only five earned runs , good for a 0 @.@ 79 ERA . For his performance , Ramírez was named the Minor League Baseball Reliever of the Year for the 2007 season . 
 After the conclusion of the minor league season , Ramírez was recalled by the Yankees on August 15 . He struck out three Baltimore Orioles in 2 1 ⁄ 3 scoreless innings in his return . The success of Ramírez and Joba Chamberlain in the bullpen convinced Yankees ' general manager that he had enough relief pitching depth to trade Scott Proctor for Wilson Betemit . On August 19 , 2007 , Ramírez earned his first save in MLB , in a game against the Detroit Tigers , with two hitless innings , striking out the side in the eighth inning , and remaining in the game to pitch the bottom of the ninth after Betemit added insurance runs in the top of the ninth . 
 Yankees closer Mariano Rivera took Ramírez and fellow reliever José Veras under his wing , mentoring the two in the Yankee bullpen during games . Rivera instructed Ramírez to use his fastball more and save his changeup for key situations . Ramírez started the 2008 season in Scranton / Wilkes @-@ Barre . He was recalled from Class AAA on April 18 , 2008 , but was optioned back a day later . He was called up again on April 29 , 2008 . He did not give up a run at any level of baseball through May 31 , a total of thirteen consecutive appearances . In a July 2008 game against the Orioles , Ramírez intentionally threw a pitch in the area of Kevin Millar 's head during the top of the seventh inning ; in response , Daniel Cabrera threw a fastball near Alex Rodriguez 's head in the eighth inning . Ramírez was suspended three games , while Cabrera was suspended six games . On the season , his 10 @.@ 25 strikeouts per inning ratio was seventh @-@ best among American League relievers . 
 Off of the strength of his 2008 season , the Dominican Republic national baseball team offered Ramírez the opportunity to pitch for his country in the 2009 World Baseball Classic . However , Yankees ' manager Joe Girardi indicated that Ramírez was in competition for a middle @-@ relief job , and Ramírez focused on his chances of making the Yankees ' roster , declining the invitation and remaining in camp with the Yankees . In February , Ramírez suffered shoulder bursitis , which was initially considered mild . Ramírez underwent an MRI on his right shoulder during spring training . He made the Yankees ' Opening Day roster , but disappointed with poor results . Ramírez pitched to a 5 @.@ 19 ERA in 15 games , allowing 15 walks in 17 1 ⁄ 3 innings . On May 19 , 2009 , Ramírez was optioned to Scranton / Wilkes @-@ Barre to make room on the roster for pitcher Brian Bruney , who was activated off of the disabled list . 
 Ramírez pitched for Scranton / Wilkes @-@ Barre for the remainder of the International League season , finishing with a Class AAA record of 1 – 5 with a 3 @.@ 19 ERA in 29 games . Ramírez was promoted to the Yankees when MLB rosters expanded on September 1 . He remained with the Yankees for September ; along with fellow call @-@ ups Jonathan Albaladejo , David Robertson , Mike Dunn and Mark <unk> , Ramírez was expected to absorb some of the workload in the bullpen , helping to spare the overworked Alfredo Aceves , Phil Hughes , Phil Coke , and Dámaso Marte . Towards the end of the season , he was only used on blowout games as a result of his ineffectiveness . Ramírez finished the season with a 5 @.@ 73 ERA , allowing fourteen earned runs in 22 innings ; though he did strike out exactly one batter per inning , he also issued too many walks as he struggled with consistency . Though Ramírez did not appear in the 2009 postseason with the Yankees , the organization did present him with a 2009 World Series ring . 
 = = = Oakland Athletics and return to the minor leagues : 2010 – 2011 = = = 
 During spring training in 2010 , the Yankees signed pitcher Chan Ho Park to a one @-@ year contract . To make room for Park on their roster , Ramírez was designated for assignment by the Yankees on February 28 , 2010 . The Texas Rangers acquired Ramírez from the Yankees on March 9 , 2010 in exchange for cash considerations . After the Oakland Athletics suffered injuries during spring training to relief pitchers Andrew Bailey , Michael Wuertz , and Craig Breslow , the Athletics traded infielder Gregorio Petit to the Rangers in exchange for Ramírez on March 24 . 
 Ramírez began the 2010 season with the Athletics on their Opening Day roster . In his first six appearances , Ramírez recorded 4 @.@ 50 ERA . He was optioned to the Class AAA Sacramento River Cats of the PCL on April 27 . The Athletics recalled Ramírez on May 7 and he made his seventh appearance on May 12 against Texas , allowing one run on two hits and two walks in one inning . After the game , he was designated for assignment , with a 1 – 0 record and a 4 @.@ 91 ERA in seven relief appearances . He was outrighted to the River Cats on May 21 . He spent the rest of the season with Sacramento , and did not return to MLB in September . 
 Ramírez pitched for the Leones de Yucatán of the Class AAA Mexican League in 2011 , where he joined other MLB veterans including Jorge Sosa and D 'Angelo Jiménez . The Leones activated him on their roster on May 21 , 2011 , and he made his first appearance for Yucatán the next day . The Leones released Ramírez in June . 
 = = Scouting report = = 
 At 6 feet 3 inches ( 1 @.@ 91 m ) and 150 pounds ( 68 kg ) , Torre once compared Ramírez 's appearance to a thermometer . Ramírez primarily throws a fastball with slight lateral movement that averages 91 miles per hour ( 146 km / h ) . He also has two offspeed pitches : a standard changeup , and a low 80s circle changeup , his primary strikeout pitch , that has similar movement to a palmball , and is particularly effective against left @-@ handed batters . The changeup , Bruney said , gave the fastball the appearance of being as fast as 98 miles per hour ( 158 km / h ) . He developed a low 80s slider into his repertoire . His delivery was unusual , making it difficult to pick up the ball out of his hand . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Ramírez is from the Dominican Republic . He was born in El <unk> , and raised in Brecon . He is the only MLB player from El <unk> . Ramírez 's father resides in the Dominican Republic . 
 = Rupert D 'Oyly Carte = 
 Rupert D 'Oyly Carte ( 3 November 1876 – 12 September 1948 ) was an English hotelier , theatre owner and impresario , best known as proprietor of the D 'Oyly Carte Opera Company and Savoy Hotel from 1913 to 1948 . 
 Son of the impresario and hotelier Richard D 'Oyly Carte , Rupert inherited the family businesses from his stepmother Helen . After serving in World War I , he took steps to revitalise the opera company , which had not appeared in Central London since 1909 , hiring new designers and conductors to present fresh productions of the Gilbert and Sullivan operas in seasons in the West End . The new productions generally retained the original text and music of the operas . Carte launched international and provincial tours , as well as the London seasons , and he released the first complete recordings of the operas . He also rebuilt the half @-@ century @-@ old Savoy Theatre in 1929 , opening the house with a season of Gilbert and Sullivan . 
 As an hotelier , Carte built on his father 's legacy , expanding the Savoy Hotel , refreshing the other hotels and restaurants in the Savoy group , including Claridge 's and the Berkeley Hotel , and introducing cabaret and dance bands that became internationally famous . He also increased marketing activities , including foreign marketing , of the hotels . 
 P. G. Wodehouse based a character in his novels , Psmith , on a Wykehamist schoolboy whom he identified as Rupert D 'Oyly Carte . At his death , Carte passed the opera company and hotels to his only surviving child , Bridget D 'Oyly Carte . The Gilbert and Sullivan operas , nurtured by Carte and his family for over a century , continue to be produced frequently today throughout the English @-@ speaking world and beyond . 
 = = Life and career = = 
 = = = Early life = = = 
 Rupert D 'Oyly Carte was born in Hampstead , London , the younger son of the impresario Richard D 'Oyly Carte and his first wife Blanche ( née Prowse ) , who died in 1885 . Like his brother , Lucas ( 1872 – 1907 ) , he was given his father 's middle name . He was educated at Winchester College , noted as among the most intellectually rigorous of English public schools . He then worked for a firm of accountants before joining his father as an assistant in 1894 . 
 In a newspaper interview given in the year of his death , Rupert recalled that as a young man he was entrusted , during his father 's illness , with helping W. S. Gilbert with the first revival of The Yeomen of the Guard at the Savoy Theatre . He was elected a director of the Savoy Hotel Limited in 1898 , joining his father and Sir Arthur Sullivan , who had served on the board since the Savoy Hotel was built . By 1899 he was assistant managing director . Richard D 'Oyly Carte died in 1901 , and Rupert 's stepmother , the former Helen Lenoir , who had married Richard in 1888 , assumed full control of most of the family businesses , which she had increasingly controlled during her husband 's decline . Rupert 's elder brother , Lucas , a barrister , was not involved in the family businesses and died of tuberculosis , aged 34 . 
 = = = Taking over the family businesses = = = 
 In 1903 , at the age of 27 , Rupert took over his late father 's role as chairman of the Savoy group , which included the Savoy Hotel , Claridge 's , The Berkeley Hotel , Simpson 's @-@ in @-@ the @-@ Strand and the Grand Hotel in Rome . At this time , the whole group was officially valued at £ 2 @,@ 221 @,@ 708 . He immediately issued £ 300 @,@ 000 of debentures to raise capital for a large extension to the Savoy ( the " East Block " ) . Like his father , Carte was willing to go to great lengths to secure the best employees for his hotels . When Claridge 's needed a new chef in 1904 , he secured the services of François Bonnaure , formerly chef at the Élysée Palace in Paris . The press speculated on how much Carte must have paid to persuade Bonnaure to join him , and compared the younger Carte 's audacity with his father 's coup in securing Paris 's most famous maître d 'hôtel , M. Joseph , a few years earlier . 
 Between 1906 and 1909 , Helen Carte , Rupert 's stepmother , staged two repertory seasons at the Savoy Theatre . Directed by Gilbert and received with much success , they revitalised the D 'Oyly Carte Opera Company , which had been in decline after Richard D 'Oyly Carte 's death . In 1912 , when theatre censorship was under discussion in Britain , Carte was strongly in favour of retaining censorship , because it gave managements complete certainty about what they could or could not stage without fear of interference by the police or others . He joined with other London theatre managers , including Herbert Beerbohm Tree , George Edwardes and Arthur Bourchier in signing a petition for the retention of censorship . In the same year , together with Herbert Sullivan and theatre managers including Beerbohm Tree and Squire Bancroft , Carte was an instigator of a memorial to W. S. Gilbert at Charing Cross . In 1913 , Rupert 's stepmother Helen Carte died . She left all her holdings in the Savoy Hotel group , the Savoy Theatre and the D 'Oyly Carte Opera Company to her stepson . 
 = = = <unk> the D 'Oyly Carte Opera Company = = = 
 After London seasons in 1906 – 07 and 1908 – 09 , the opera company did not perform in the West End again until 1919 , although it continued to tour in Great Britain . According to the theatre writer H. M. Walbrook , " Through the years of the Great War they continued to be on tour through the country , drawing large and grateful audiences everywhere . They helped to sustain the spirits of the people during that stern period , and by so doing they helped to win the victory . " Nevertheless , Carte later recalled , " I went and watched the Company playing at a rather dreary theatre down in the suburbs of London . I thought the dresses looked dowdy .... I formed the view that new productions should be prepared , with scenery and dresses to the design of first class artists who understood the operas but who would produce a décor attractive to the new generation . " In a 1922 memoir , Henry Lytton , having admired Richard D 'Oyly Carte 's keen eye for stagecraft , added , " That ' eye ' for stagecraft ... has been inherited in a quite remarkable degree by his son , Mr. Rupert D 'Oyly Carte . He , too , has the gift of taking in the details of a scene at a glance , and knowing instinctively just what must be corrected " . In 1911 , the company hired J. M. Gordon as stage manager , and Carte later promoted him to director . Gordon , under Carte 's supervision , preserved the company 's traditions in exacting detail for 28 years . 
 During World War I Carte served in the Royal Navy , and no renovation work could be undertaken . On his return , he put his aims into effect . In an interview in The Observer in August 1919 he set out his policy for staging the operas : " They will be played precisely in their original form , without any alteration to the words , or any attempt to bring them up to date . " This uncompromising declaration was modified in a later interview in which he said , " the plays are all being restaged ... Gilbert 's words will be unaltered , though there will be some freshness in the method of rendering them . Artists must have scope for their individuality , and new singers cannot be tied down to imitate slavishly those who made successes in the old days . " 
 Carte 's first London season , at the Prince 's Theatre , 1919 – 20 , featured ten of the thirteen extant Gilbert and Sullivan operas . These included Princess Ida , which had its first London performances since the original production . The new productions retained the text and music of the original 1870s and 1880s productions , and director J. M. Gordon preserved much of Gilbert 's original direction . As his parents had done , Carte licensed the operas to the J. C. Williamson company and to amateur companies , but he required all licensees to present them in approved productions that closely followed the libretto , score and D 'Oyly Carte production stagings . In an interview with The Times in 1922 , Carte said that the Savoy " tradition " was an expression that was frequently misunderstood : " It did not by any means imply any hidebound stage ' business ' or an attempt to standardize the performances of artists so as to check their individual method of expression . All that it implied , in his view , was the highest possible standard of production – with especial attention to clear enunciation .... Many people seemed to think that Gilbert believed in absolutely set methods but this was not by any means the case . He did not hesitate to alter productions when they were revived . " 
 Although he had told the press that the original words and music would not be altered , Carte was willing to make changes in certain cases . In 1919 – 20 , he authorised significant cuts and alterations in both Princess Ida and Ruddigore . In 1921 Cox and Box was produced in a drastically cut @-@ down version , to allow it to be played as a companion piece with the shorter Savoy operas . He also authorised changes to Gilbert 's text : he wrote to The Times in 1948 , " We found recently in America that much objection was taken by coloured persons to a word used twice in The Mikado . " The word in question was Gilbert 's reference to " nigger " ( blackface ) minstrels , and Carte asked A. P. Herbert to suggest an acceptable revision . " He made several alternative suggestions , one of which we adopted in America , and it seems well to go on doing so in the British Empire . " 
 Carte commissioned new costumes and scenery throughout his tenure with the company . For his <unk> , Carte hired Charles Ricketts to redesign The Gondoliers and The Mikado , the costumes for the latter , created in 1926 , being retained by all the company 's subsequent designers . Other redesigns were by Percy Anderson , George Sheringham , Hugo Rumbold and Peter Goffin , a protégé of Carte 's daughter , Bridget D 'Oyly Carte . 
 For London seasons , Carte often engaged guest conductors , first Geoffrey Toye , then Malcolm Sargent , who examined Sullivan 's manuscript scores and purged the orchestral parts of accretions . So striking was the orchestral sound produced by Sargent that the press thought he had retouched the scores , and Carte had the pleasant duty of correcting their error . In a letter to The Times , he noted that " the details of the orchestration sounded so fresh that some of the critics thought them actually new ... the opera was played last night exactly as written by Sullivan . " Carte also hired Harry Norris , who started with the touring company , then was Toye 's assistant before becoming musical director . Isidore Godfrey joined the company as assistant musical director in 1925 and became musical director in 1929 , remaining in that post until 1968 . 
 The possibilities of the gramophone appealed to Carte . After World War I , he supervised a series of complete recordings of the scores of the operas on the HMV label , beginning with The Mikado in 1918 . The first nine sets , made between 1918 and 1925 , were recorded by the early acoustic process . At first , guest singers were chosen who were known for their ability to record well on this technology . Later in this series , more of the regular members of the company were featured . With the introduction of electrical recording and its greatly improved recording process and sound , a new round of recordings began in 1927 . For the electrical series , Carte 's own singers were mostly used . Carte also recognised the potential of radio and worked with the BBC to relay live broadcasts of D 'Oyly Carte productions . A 1926 relay of part of a Savoy Theatre performance of The Mikado was heard by up to eight million people . The London Evening Standard noted that this was " probably the largest audience that has ever heard anything at one time in the history of the world . " Under Carte , the company continued to make broadcasts during the interwar years . In 1932 , The Yeomen of the Guard became the first Gilbert and Sullivan opera to be broadcast in its entirety . 
 = = = Rebuilding the Savoy Theatre and later years = = = 
 In 1929 Carte had the 48 @-@ year @-@ old Savoy Theatre rebuilt and modernised . It closed on 3 June 1929 and was gutted and completely rebuilt to designs by Frank A. Tugwell with décor by Basil Ionides . The old house had three tiers ; the new one had two . The seating capacity ( which had decreased to 986 from its original 1 @,@ 292 ) was restored nearly completely , to 1 @,@ 200 . The theatre reopened 135 days later on 21 October 1929 , with The Gondoliers , designed by Ricketts and conducted by Sargent . The critic Ernest Newman wrote , " I can imagine no gayer or more exhilarating frame for the Gilbert and Sullivan operas than the Savoy as it is now . " 
 Despite its historical connection with Gilbert and Sullivan , most of Carte 's London seasons were staged not at the Savoy but at two larger houses : the Prince 's ( now the Shaftesbury ) Theatre ( 1919 – 20 , 1921 – 22 , 1924 , 1926 , 1942 and Sadler 's Wells ( 1935 , 1936 , 1937 , 1939 , 1947 and 1948 ) . His three Savoy Theatre seasons were in 1929 – 30 , 1932 – 33 , and 1941 . In addition to year @-@ round UK tours , Carte mounted tours of North America in 1927 , 1928 – 29 , 1934 – 35 , 1936 – 37 , 1939 and 1947 – 48 ) . During the 1936 tour an American critic wrote , " If there were only some way of keeping them on this side permanently . I humbly suggest to the New Deal that it cancel England 's war debt in exchange for the D 'Oyly <unk> . We should be much the gainer . " 
 Carte was deeply affected by the death of his son Michael in 1932 , discussed below . The actor Martyn Green said , " The heart dropped right out of him . His interest in both the operas and the hotel seemed to fade away . " Nevertheless , in 1934 the company made a highly successful eight @-@ month North American tour with Green as its new principal comedian , replacing Henry Lytton . Carte gave approval for , and was closely consulted about , a 1938 film version of The Mikado produced and conducted by Geoffrey Toye , starring Green and released by Universal Pictures , but his only new stage production after 1932 was of The Yeomen of the Guard designed in 1939 by Peter Goffin . The re @-@ staging was regarded as radical , but when Goffin took fright at the storm of controversy , Carte told him , " I don 't care what they say about the production . I should care if they said nothing . " 
 On 3 September 1939 , at the outbreak of World War II , the British government ordered the immediate and indefinite closure of all theatres . Carte cancelled the autumn tour and disbanded the company . Theatres were permitted to reopen from 9 September , but it took some weeks to re @-@ form the company . The company resumed touring in Edinburgh on Christmas Day 1939 . It continued to perform throughout the war , but German bombing destroyed the sets and costumes for five of its productions : Cox and Box , The Sorcerer , H.M.S. Pinafore , Princess Ida and Ruddigore . The old productions of Pinafore and Cox and Box were recreated shortly after the war , but the other two operas took longer to rejoin the company 's repertory . On the other hand , for the first wartime season , Peter Goffin designed and directed a new production of The Yeomen of the Guard first seen in January 1940 , and his new Ruddigore debuted in 1948 , shortly after Carte 's death . A return of the Company to the U.S. in 1947 was very successful . 
 = = = Savoy Hotel group = = = 
 From the beginning of his career , Carte maintained the Savoy group in London , disposing in 1919 of the Grand Hotel , Rome , which his father had acquired in 1896 . In the 1920s , he ensured that the Savoy continued to attract a fashionable clientele by a continuous programme of modernisation and the introduction of dancing in the large restaurants . The Savoy Orpheans and the Savoy Havana Band were described by The Times as " probably the best @-@ known bands in Europe " . In 1927 Carte appointed his opera company 's general manager , Richard Collet , to run the cabaret at the Savoy , which began in April 1929 . 
 Until the 1930s , the Savoy group had not thought it necessary to advertise , but Carte and his manager George Reeves @-@ Smith changed their approach . Reeves @-@ Smith told The Times , " We are endeavouring by intensive propaganda work to get more customers ; this work is going on in the U.S.A. , in Canada , in the Argentine and in Europe . " Towards the end of World War II , Carte added to the Savoy group the bombed @-@ out site near Leicester Square of Stone 's Chop House , the freehold of which he purchased with a view to reopening the restaurant there on the lines of the group 's Simpson 's @-@ in @-@ the @-@ Strand . The revived Stone 's reopened after Carte 's death . 
 = = = Personal life = = = 
 In 1907 , Carte married Lady Dorothy Milner Gathorne @-@ Hardy ( 1889 – 1977 ) , the third and youngest daughter of the 2nd Earl of Cranbrook , with whom he had a daughter , Bridget , and a son , Michael ( 1911 – 1932 ) . Michael was killed at the age of 21 in a motor accident in Switzerland . In 1925 , Carte and his wife had a country house built for them in Devon between Paignton and Kingswear , named Coleton Fishacre . The house is still known for its design features and garden with exotic tropical plants . After her parents ' divorce , Bridget D 'Oyly Carte took over the house , which her father , who lived in London , would visit for long weekends . She sold the house after his death , and it is now owned by the National Trust . 
 Carte 's private pastimes included gardening , notably at Coleton Fishacre , driving and yachting . He was an early devotee of the motor car and incurred the displeasure of the courts more than once . He was fined £ 3 for driving at 19 miles an hour in 1902 , and the following year he was subject to criminal prosecution for knocking down and injuring a child when driving at the speed of 24 miles an hour . He made " every provision for the comfort of the child " , who recovered from the accident . In the years after World War I , he was a frequent competitor in yachting races . From 1919 he raced his yacht " Kali " in the Hamble River class . Later , he owned and raced a 19 @-@ ton cutter , " Content " . 
 In 1941 , Carte divorced his wife for adultery . The suit was undefended . Lady Dorothy moved to the Bahamas and married St Yves de Verteuil , who had been the co @-@ respondent in the divorce case . De Verteuil died in 1963 , and Lady Dorothy de Verteuil died in February 1977 . 
 P. G. Wodehouse based the character Psmith , seen in several of his comic novels , on either Rupert D 'Oyly Carte or his brother Lucas . In the introduction to his novel Something Fresh , Wodehouse says that Psmith ( originally named Rupert , then Ronald ) was " based more or less faithfully on Rupert D 'Oyly Carte , son of the Savoy theatre man . He was at school with a cousin of mine , and my cousin happened to tell me about his monocle , his immaculate clothes and his habit , when asked by a master how he was , of replying , ' Sir , I grow thinnah and thinnah ' . " Bridget D 'Oyly Carte , however , believed that the Wykehamist schoolboy described to Wodehouse was not her father but his elder brother Lucas , who was also at Winchester College . Rupert D 'Oyly Carte was " shy , reserved and at times distinctly taciturn . " Psmith , by contrast , is outgoing and garrulous . 
 = = = Death and legacy = = = 
 Carte died at the Savoy Hotel , after a brief illness , at the age of 71 . A memorial service was held for him at the Savoy Chapel on 23 September 1948 . His ashes were scattered on the headland at Coleton Fishacre . He left an estate valued at £ 228 @,@ 436 . At his death , the family businesses passed to his daughter , Bridget D 'Oyly Carte . The Savoy hotel group remained under the control of the Carte family and its associates until 1994 . Carte 's hotels have remained among the most prestigious in London , with the London Evening Standard calling the Savoy " London 's most famous hotel " in 2009 . The year after Carte 's death , the opera company , which had been the personal possession of Richard and Rupert D 'Oyly Carte , became a private company , of which Bridget retained a controlling interest and was chairman and managing director . She inherited a company in strong condition , but the rising costs of mounting professional light opera without any government support eventually became unsustainable , and the company closed in 1982 . 
 The Gilbert and Sullivan operas , nurtured by Carte and his family for over a century , continue to be produced frequently today throughout the English @-@ speaking world and beyond . By keeping the Savoy operas popular throughout the mid @-@ 20th century , Carte continued to influence the course of the development of modern musical theatre . 
 = The Elder Scrolls III : Morrowind = 
 The Elder Scrolls III : Morrowind is an open world fantasy role @-@ playing video game developed by Bethesda Game Studios , and published by Bethesda Softworks and Ubisoft . It is the third installment in The Elder Scrolls series of games , following The Elder Scrolls II : Daggerfall , and preceding The Elder Scrolls IV : Oblivion . It was released in North America in 2002 for Microsoft Windows and the Xbox . Well @-@ received publicly and critically , with over four million sales and more than 60 awards ( including Game of the Year ) , the game spawned two expansion packs for the PC : Tribunal and Bloodmoon . Both were eventually repackaged into a full set containing all three , Morrowind : Game of the Year Edition , which shipped on October 30 , 2003 , for both PC and Xbox . 
 The main story takes place on Vvardenfell , an island in the Dunmer province of Morrowind , which lies in the empire of Tamriel and is far from the more civilized lands to the west and south that typified Daggerfall and Arena . The central quests concern the deity Dagoth Ur , housed within the volcanic Red Mountain , who seeks to gain power and break Morrowind free from Imperial reign . Morrowind was designed with an open @-@ ended free @-@ form style of gameplay in mind , with less of an emphasis on the game 's main plot than its predecessors . This choice received mixed reviews in the gaming press , though such feelings were tempered by reviewers ' appreciation of Morrowind 's expansive and detailed game world . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 = = = Character creation = = = 
 Morrowind begins with the player 's character , having been imprisoned , arriving in Morrowind by boat in order to be pardoned . This is a common introductory segment throughout the main installments of the series . A well @-@ received tutorial depicting the prisoner 's release moves the player through the process of character creation . The player is successively asked questions by a fellow prisoner , an officer , and a bureaucrat as the player is registered as a free citizen ; choosing , in the process , the player character 's name , race , gender , class , and <unk> . These affect the player 's starting attributes , skills , and abilities . The player then determines their class in one of three ways . 
 = = = Skill system = = = 
 The player character 's proficiency with a skill is increased either by practice , training or study . Practice involves performing the specific actions associated with a given skill , which gradually raises the character 's proficiency in that skill . Raising weapon skills requires striking an enemy with the appropriate weapon ; raising armor skills requires being struck while wearing the appropriate type of armor ; etc . Training involves paying cash to NPCs in exchange for immediate proficiency increases in that skill . Study requires reading books found in the game , some of which will immediately raise a skill when read . Weaponry skills ( viz . Short Blade , Long Blade , Axe , Spear , etc . ) affect the character 's chance to hit . Armor skills ( viz . Heavy Armor , Light Armor , <unk> , etc . ) affect the defensive strength of the armor . Other skills ( viz . Alchemy , Athletics and Security ) affect proficiency at other actions such as potion @-@ making , running , lockpicking , etc . 
 Morrowind , like its predecessor Daggerfall , makes a distinction between " attributes " and " skills " ; skills being those individual proficiencies in particular schools of battle or with particular armor classes , and attributes being broader proficiencies , such as " strength " and " endurance " , which are either tied to important features unconnected to any skill , ( viz . Health , evasion chance , etc . ) or improve the efficiency of a wide variety of skills . Strength , for example , improves the damage of any physical blow dealt by the player character . Attributes , however , are improved only when the player levels up . 
 The player levels up their character by gaining levels in ten pre @-@ determined skills , listed as " major " and " minor " skills . Each time the player levels up their character , they can select three attributes to augment as well . The player is better able to augment attributes related to their skill set , as each level gained in a particular skill adds to the multiplier by which the attribute is augmented . 
 = = = Combat = = = 
 On a PC , the simplest melee attack is a chop action . The slightly more complex slash and thrust attacks are performed by clicking in unison with tapping a directional key , though by turning on the " always use best attack " option , players can eliminate the moving element , freeing them to focus on the combat . A melee weapon 's damage potential is rated for each of these attacks . Reviewers found little value in choosing between the three types of attacks for most weapons , and recommended the " always use best attack " option . Hidden arithmetic modifiers , applied to each combatant 's skills , determines whether or not the attack hits . In the game 's original release , the player was given no indication of the amount of health left in their enemies , and no indication of the strength of the player 's attacks . Reviewers took the absence badly , wishing for more visible feedback . Bethesda eventually added enemy health bars in patch 1 @.@ 1 @.@ <unk> , released one month after Morrowind 's initial publication . 
 = = = Free @-@ form design = = = 
 Morrowind , following the tradition established by its predecessors in The Elder Scrolls series , attempts to establish a completely free @-@ form world , with few constricting boundaries on the player 's actions . From the beginning of the game , players are put in a world where they are left to roam , steal , quest and explore , without necessarily following the main quest . Lead Designer Ken Rolston , asked prior to Morrowind 's release what he thought were the " core , untouchable design elements " of the Elder Scrolls series which " set them apart from other games " , responded immediately : " Free @-@ form experience . " In Rolston 's view , the game 's central plot is a chance to introduce the player to a cross @-@ current of conflicting factions , background themes , and to the characters of the game , rather than the primary focus of the player 's experience . " Every TES game has to let you create the kind of character you want , and then do the things you want . We would never have a TES RPG force you to be a certain character or go down a certain path . " 
 To allow for this behavior , Morrowind , in addition to creating an extensive main quest , provides detailed discursive quests for a variety of factions , including various guilds , religious organizations and aristocratic houses , in addition to side @-@ quests found by mere exploration . Even the main plot itself may be undertaken in a number of ways . There are , in the words of critic Craig Lindley , " a very specific set of central plot points within this main plot . But the plot points are partially ordered : seven high level tasks must be completed , but their constituent sub @-@ tasks ... can be accomplished in any order , and this is repeated for the sub @-@ tasks involved in those sub @-@ tasks . " The choices the player makes in their performance of these tasks thus become methods of character interpretation ; a set of dramatic tools establishing the player 's newly created self @-@ identity . 
 According to Gamasutra 's Matt Barton , some have argued that these changes put Morrowind closer in spirit to the original Dungeons & Dragons tabletop game , where players take a more creative role in their play , and where players are left to decide for themselves the " right " action . This is a view paralleled by Rolston , who has stated that " The goal of every TES game is to create something that resembles a pen and paper RPG on the computer . " The sheer number of quest possibilities , combined with what developer Ken Rolston identified as a lack of " narrative urgency " , left many critics dissatisfied with the main plot . Ken Rolston later stated that the main quest might have been presented with greater force , in the style of the game 's successor , The Elder Scrolls IV : Oblivion , without losing the free @-@ form design of the series , but such concerns were not addressed prior to Morrowind 's release . 
 = = Plot = = 
 While Morrowind contains many quests and storylines , the central plot revolves around the reincarnation of the Dunmer hero , <unk> Nerevar . The incarnate of Nerevar , referred to as " The Nerevarine " , has been prophesied to oppose and defeat the rise of the malevolent deity Dagoth Ur and the remnants of his followers . These followers are encompassed in a forbidden faction named " The Sixth House " , and are mainly located within the volcanic region of Red Mountain in the center of Vvardenfell , the island on which the game takes place . Dagoth Ur has used the Heart of Lorkhan , an artifact of great power , to make himself immortal and now seeks to drive the Imperial occupiers from Morrowind using his network of spies , as well as <unk> , an enormous golem powered by the Heart of Lorkhan , which Dagoth Ur had originally been tasked to guard . 
 After a storm and a strange dream vision , the player begins fresh off a boat from a mainland prison in a town called <unk> <unk> , freed by the string @-@ pulling of the current ruler of the <unk> Empire , Emperor Uriel Septim VII , with the task of meeting Caius <unk> , a member of the Blades , a secret group tasked with the protection of the Emperor and the Empire . 
 <unk> inducts the player into the Blades under orders of the Emperor , and sets the player on various quests to uncover the mysterious disappearances and revelations that the citizens of Vvardenfell have experienced , particularly the Sixth House and the <unk> prophecies of the Nerevarine . It is later revealed that The Sixth House , and Dagoth Ur , has been directly influencing the people within their dreams , including attempts to invade the player 's mind . 
 Prophecies from the nomadic people living in the Ashlands , The <unk> , predict that Nerevar 's incarnate will fulfill a set of seven prophecies . The first two prophecies are that the Nerevarine will be born on a certain day to uncertain parents , and will be immune to <unk> disease , a Divine disease created by Dagoth Ur . The player has already fulfilled the first , hence he / she was chosen for the task ; the player becomes immune to <unk> by contracting the disease and surviving an experimental cure . Fulfilling these , the player seeks to complete the third prophecy , a test to find the Moon @-@ and @-@ Star ( also called One @-@ Clan @-@ Under @-@ Moon @-@ And @-@ Star ) , the symbolic ring originally worn by Nerevar , which has the power to instantly kill anyone , apart from himself ( and by extension , the Nerevarine ) , who tries to wear it . Upon finding and equipping the ring , the player receives a vision from Azura , the ancient Daedric Prince of the Dawn and Dusk , who confirms that the player is Nerevar 's incarnate . The Nerevarine completes the fourth and fifth trials , which are to rally the Great Houses and <unk> of Vvardenfell under one banner . After receiving the support and being declared " <unk> " by every Great House and " Nerevarine " by all nomadic <unk> tribes , the player is officially , albeit reluctantly , called " Nerevarine " by the Tribunal Temple , who normally persecute anyone who claims to be the Nerevarine and sentences them to death . 
 The Nerevarine is invited to the palace of the poet god @-@ king Vivec , one of the three deities that forms the basis of Morrowind 's religion , known as the Tribunal , to discuss the assault on Dagoth Ur 's stronghold in the heart of Red Mountain . Vivec presents the player with the gauntlet ' <unk> ' , an ancient <unk> artifact that allows to use the tools of ' Sunder ' and ' <unk> ' . These ancient implements will destroy the fabled Heart of Lorkhan , but without having the <unk> equipped , it will deal a fatal blow to whoever wields it . 
 The player travels into Red Mountain to Dagoth Ur 's citadel . After talking with Dagoth Ur , who attempts to sway the player to his side with the claim that he is merely following Nerevar 's final orders , the player and Dagoth Ur fight . <unk> Dagoth Ur , the player breaks the Heart of Lorkhan with <unk> 's tools , destroying the source of Dagoth Ur 's power and killing him in the process . <unk> 's Chamber where Lorkhan 's heart resides is destroyed , and in turn Red Mountain is cleared of blight and The Sixth House falls . Upon escaping from the chamber , the Nerevarine is congratulated by Azura , who comes to reward the player 's efforts of fulfilling the prophecy . 
 The game does not end upon the main quest 's completion , but the game world Vvardenfell is affected in many different ways . The Blight Storms cease to plague the land , and the weak minded followers of the Sixth House are re @-@ awakened , remembering nothing of their ordeal . The Dreamers who harassed the Nerevarine fall silent , and the Nerevarine becomes widely known as the savior of Vvardenfell . The quintessential consequence of defeating Dagoth Ur was the destruction of the Heart of Lorkhan . Due to their immortality linked to the heart , Vivec and the Tribunal become mortal again , leaving Vivec 's future in question and up to the player to determine his fate . The loss of divinity among the Tribunal is the main plot point of the game 's first expansion , Tribunal . The next main game in the series , Oblivion , features in @-@ game rumors that the Nerevarine eventually left Morrowind on an expedition to the continent <unk> . 
 = = Setting = = 
 Morrowind takes place on Vvardenfell , an island in the Dunmer province of Morrowind , far from the typically " European " lands to the west and south depicted in Daggerfall and Arena . Along with graphical improvements , one of the most obvious differences between Morrowind and the earlier games in the series is that Morrowind takes place in a much smaller area than the previous games . While Arena featured the entirety of Tamriel as an explorable area , and Daggerfall featured sizeable portions of two provinces of Tamriel , <unk> and High Rock , Morrowind includes only the " relatively small " island of Vvardenfell within the province of Morrowind . The change was a result of a conscious choice on the part of the developers to feature more detail and variety in the game . Whereas Daggerfall and Arena 's dungeons were randomly generated , each area in Morrowind was specifically detailed , and each item specifically placed . As a result , reviewers were generally impressed with the game @-@ world 's variety , as this maintained the perception of an " enormous " game @-@ world . The game area expands to Mournhold on Morrowind 's mainland in the Tribunal expansion , and to the island of Solstheim to the northwest of Vvardenfell in the Bloodmoon expansion . 
 Morrowind 's developers , rather than developing the common Medieval European setting of fantasy games , chose a more eclectic route , taking elements from Egyptian , early Japanese , and Middle Eastern cultures , with Middle Eastern architecture cited in particular for its major influence on <unk> 's <unk> architecture . Executive Producer Todd Howard felt that the use of Morrowind as a backdrop was integral in the development of the game 's style . While admitting some elements of the partially medieval Imperial culture more typical of fantasy to retain familiarity with the earlier installments of the series , Morrowind 's dark elven setting " opened huge new avenues for creating cultures and sites that are not traditionally seen in a fantasy setting " . The development team also gave particular credit to the Ridley Scott film Gladiator , high fantasy , The Dark Crystal , and Conan the Barbarian as influences . 
 The game has over 300 books ( not counting scrolls ) . One particular compilation of the text was 1 @,@ 241 sheets of 8 @.@ 26 ' ' by 11 @.@ 00 ' ' paper . PC Gamer weighted the in @-@ game text as equal to 6 standard @-@ size novels . Many of these books provide long , serial stories , and provide hints as to the background and history of the game . One critic in particular , Phillip Scuderi , remembered Morrowind for its great literary richness . To him , the in @-@ game literature and its integration within the game was Morrowind 's " most original and lasting contribution to the history of games " , one that would place it beside Planescape : Torment as one of the most important games of all time . Such themes are echoed in other responses to the game , such as that of RPGamer 's Joseph Witham , who found a story " discreet " in its progression , with a dungeon @-@ crawling feel , standing alongside a " whole world of unique history " with books forming the greater part of the player 's interaction with that world . Most of the books were reused in Oblivion . 
 The game has a great deal of geographic variety in climate , flora , and , to some extent , fauna as well . Beside that there is also some variety in politics and culture among the in @-@ game population , combination of which adds to the uniqueness of different parts of the island . On top of that there is an archaeological aspect to the game , which gives a certain degree of depth to the story as well as the option for further exploration . Additionally , there are various kinds of limits in visibility such as fog and dust , which are countered with " clear day / night " effects that also enhance visibility to some extent . 
 The in @-@ game exploration is chiefly based on walking and running ; however , there are instances when swimming and sometimes flotation is involved . Transportation of other kinds , such as teleportation , traveling by boat or on the back of giant flea @-@ like creatures named " Silt Striders " , is available for a fee when moving between the various settlements on Vvardenfell . 
 = = Development = = 
 A third title in the Elder Scrolls series was first conceived during the development of Daggerfall , though it was originally to be set in the <unk> Isles and called Tribunal . Following the release of Daggerfall , it was set up around an SVGA version of <unk> , which Bethesda later used in <unk> , and set in the province of Morrowind . The game was " much closer to Daggerfall in scope " , encompassing the whole province of Morrowind , rather than the isle of Vvardenfell , and allowing the player to join all five Dunmer Great Houses . The blight was conceived as a dynamic force , progressively expanding and destroying cities in its wake . It was finally decided that the scope of the original design was too grand given the technology current at the time . According to Ken Rolston , something was said approximating " We ’ re not ready for it , we don ’ t want to jump into this and fail " . The project was put on hold in 1997 , as Bethesda went on to develop Redguard and <unk> , though the project remained in the back of the developers ' minds throughout this period . 
 The completion of Redguard in 1998 led to a return to the Morrowind project , as the developers felt a yearning in their audience to return to the classically epic forms of the earlier titles . Finding that the gaps between their own technical capacities and those of rival companies had grown in the interim , Bethesda sought to revitalize itself and return to the forefront of the industry , an effort spearheaded by project leader Todd Howard . The <unk> was scrapped and replaced with a Direct3D powered engine , with transform and lighting capacity , 32 @-@ bit textures and skeletal animation . During their promotional campaign , Bethesda deliberately paralleled their screenshot releases with the announcement of NVIDIA 's GeForce 4 , as " being indicative of the outstanding water effects the technology is capable of " . 
 The scale of the game was much reduced from the earlier concept , focusing primarily on Dagoth Ur and a smaller area of land . It was decided that the game world would be populated using the methods the team had developed in Redguard ; that is , the game objects would be crafted by hand , rather than generated using the random algorithmic methods of Arena and Daggerfall . By 2000 , Morrowind was to be unequivocally a single @-@ player game , with no chance of multiplayer extension . In the words of Pete Hines , Bethesda 's Director of Marketing and PR : " No . Not on release , not three months after , no no no . " The project , despite the reduced scale , became a massive investment . According to the team 's reasonings , the endeavor took " close to 100 man @-@ years to create " . To accomplish this feat , Bethesda tripled their staff and spent their first year of development on The Elder Scrolls Construction Set , allowing the game staff to easily balance the game and to modify it in small increments rather than large . According to project leader Todd Howard , the Construction Set came as the result of a communal yearning to develop a " role @-@ playing operating system " , capable of extension and modification , rather than a particular type of game . Despite the additional staff , designer Ken Rolston would later state that , compared to Oblivion , Morrowind had a small design team . 
 In May 2000 , Bethesda set the first expected PC release date in late 2001 . On May 5 , 2001 , Bethesda announced the development of an additional Morrowind release for Microsoft 's Xbox . The project was , according to the same release , something that Bethesda had been working on with Microsoft since they had first known of the console . Morrowind had an impressive showing at E3 2001 , demonstrating a beta build to the public . The same beta build was demonstrated to the staff of PC Gamer for another preview , and was kept around the office as late as June 19 as the subject of later previews , while another test build was developed alongside . Later order forms , such as those by Electronics Boutique , set the date in November . On October 10 , 2001 , GameSpot reported that Morrowind 's release date had been set back to March 2002 . On October 12 , a press release from Bethesda gave the date of " Spring 2002 " , confirming GameSpot 's supposition of delay without agreeing on the more specific date of " March " . Though no rationale behind the delay was given at the time , developer Pete Hines later attributed the delay to a need for game testing and balancing . Although the PC version of Morrowind had gone gold by April 23 , 2002 , and was released on May 1 in North America , the Xbox release was delayed further . On April 15 , GameSpot suggested an Xbox release date sometime in May and a scheduled " going gold " date for the Xbox version in the first week of the same month . In contradiction of GameSpot 's supposition , a June 4 Bethesda press release set June 7 as the Xbox release date . 
 On January 3 , 2002 , Bethesda announced that game publisher Ubisoft would take control of the European distribution of Morrowind and eight other Bethesda games . Under Ubisoft 's supervision , Morrowind 's European release took place in two stages . A " semi @-@ localized " version of the game was released in May , containing a translated manual but leaving the game 's text in untranslated English . A fully localized version of the game , with translated versions of both , was released in August . Ubisoft group brand manager Thomas Petersen described the difficulties of translating a " universe featuring more than a million words " as " quite a task " . 
 In a break from standard industry practice , Bethesda decided to publish their strategy guide in @-@ house , rather than contracting it out to a third party publisher like BradyGames or Prima Games . The decision resulted from a belief among Bethesda staff that they believed in and understood Morrowind more than any external agency , and deserved more royalties than were commonly rewarded . Bethesda hired Peter Olafson , a noted game journalist and friend of the company , and they began work on the guide in January 2002 , four months prior to release . The resulting product , Morrowind Prophecies Strategy Guide , sold over 200 @,@ 000 copies as of September 24 , 2003 . Although the royalties from most third @-@ party game publishers approach 25 % to 30 % only infrequently , Bethesda managed a 70 % profit margin on their own . In spite of this success , Bethesda decided to allow Prima Games to publish the " official " game guide for the release of The Elder Scrolls IV : Oblivion . 
 = = = Audio = = = 
 Morrowind 's soundtrack was composed by Jeremy Soule , a video game composer whose previous soundtracks for Total Annihilation and Icewind Dale had earned some acclaim from the gaming press . In a Bethesda press release , Soule stated that the " epic quality " of the Elder Scrolls series was " particularly compatible with the grand , orchestral style of music " that Soule enjoys composing " the most " . Outside Bethesda press releases , some have criticized Morrowind 's soundtrack . In their reviews of the game , both GameSpot and GameSpy criticized the length of the game 's soundtrack and praised its general production quality . In the words of GameSpot 's Greg Kasavin : " The very first time you boot up Morrowind , you 'll be treated to a memorable , stirring theme filled with soaring strings and booming percussion . You 'll proceed to hear it literally every five minutes or so during play . " Soule was aware of the problem , and chose to create a soft and minimalist score so as not to wear out players ' ears . 
 In a feature for Gamasutra , Scott B. Morton , although praising the music itself , declared that Morrowind 's soundtrack did not work effectively with the game 's gameplay , accomplishing little as an emotional device . Morrowind 's soundtrack is ambient , with cues only for battle encounters . In Morton 's view , the lack of variation , of response to the game 's action , and of length — Morrowind 's soundtrack is only 45 minutes long — leaves players detached from the game world . Alexander Brandon , in another Gamasutra feature , praised Morrowind 's soundtrack for its innovative instrumentation . In Brandon 's opinion , its use of orchestral elements in conjunction with synthesized ones , and the use of what Brandon termed " the ' Bolero ' approach " , left the game 's soundtrack feeling " incredibly dramatic " . In February 2003 , Morrowind was nominated for the category of " Outstanding Achievement in Original Music Composition " at the 6th Annual Academy of Interactive Arts & Sciences 's Interactive Achievement Awards , but lost to Medal of Honor : Frontline . 
 Morrowind also contained a fair bit of voiced dialogue ; an aspect somewhat better received by the gaming press . Of note is Lynda Carter , television 's Wonder Woman , promoted by Bethesda for her role in voicing the Nordic race in the game . Morrowind 's race @-@ specific voice acting received praise from some reviewers , though was met with disdain from others , who disliked the discord between a culturally inflected voice spoken in an alien dialect and the grammatically flawless dialogue printed in the dialogue boxes . The Special Edition Soundtrack was released over DirectSong as a digital release . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The Elder Scrolls III : Morrowind was well received by critics . It was congratulated most frequently for its breadth of scope , the richness of its visuals , and the freedom it worked into its design . Alongside the compliments , however , came criticism that the game designers had overstretched themselves , leaving glitches in various spots , and made a game too taxing to be run on an average machine , with one reviewer calling it " a resource pig " . In a retrospective by 1UP.com , the breadth and open @-@ endedness of Morrowind is suggested to have contributed to the decline of single @-@ player RPGs on home computers by leading customers to MMORPGs , where they could have a similar experience . 
 In spite of this , reviewers generally felt that the drawbacks of the game were minor in comparison to its strengths . IGN concluded that " Morrowind isn 't perfect and its system requirements are huge ; but its accomplishments outweigh any reservations . " GameSpot 's review concluded with a similar summation . " Morrowind does have numerous drawbacks ... But they 're all generally minor enough that most anyone should be able to look past them ... They 'll otherwise find that Morrowind fulfills its many ambitious intentions . It 's a beautiful @-@ looking , sprawling , and completely open @-@ ended game that allows you to play pretty much however you like " . 
 The game environment of Morrowind was applauded as large and richly detailed , particularly for its real @-@ time weather effects , day / night cycle , and its great variety of plant and animal life . Xbox Nation commended the game for its " sheer scope " , and credited that aspect as the game 's " biggest selling point " , though it criticized the slowdowns , travel times and questing complexities that resulted from it . In contrast to the " generic " nature of Daggerfall 's design , reviewers found Morrowind 's design spectacular , varied , and stunning . GameSpot stated that " Simply exploring Morrowind is possibly the best thing about it . " 
 The mildly complex reciprocal skill system was generally praised , with some few exceptions . IGN , though finding the manual 's description of the system unclear , found the classes well balanced and well designed for all play styles . GameSpot found the system clear and sensible . PC Gamer , by contrast , found the system unbalanced , with combat privileged over other features . Computer Gaming World felt the system 's privileging of combinations of single @-@ handed combat weapons and shields over double @-@ handed weapons unnecessarily exploitable , but appreciated the freedom offered by the broad skillset and action @-@ dependent leveling . GameSpy gave strong commendation to the system , stating that " The advancement system makes so much sense that it makes other games , even games set in the D & D world such as Baldur 's Gate , look silly by comparison " . Morrowind 's combat system was poorly received by the gaming press . GameSpot characterized it as one of the game 's major weak points and GameSpy devoted the majority of their review 's minor complaints to it . The system was disparaged for its simplicity and for its tendency to bore . 
 One element about Morrowind that received particular , and near @-@ universal , criticism , was the game 's journal system . In Morrowind , the player has a journal which is automatically updated with information from time to time following conversations with NPCs and important developments in the plot , each new entry following all those previous . Though IGN and GamePro commended the general interface for its relative ease of use , the journal was almost universally reviled . The journal was found to quickly become a " muddled mess " , " hundreds of pages long " , without any useful method of organization by quest title or completion level . Computer Gaming World simply called the feature an " anal @-@ retentive nightmare of confusion " , and called it one of the game 's two greatest shortcomings . However , Bethesda remedied the complaints to some extent in the subsequent expansion Tribunal . There , the journal was organized by quests and could be more easily navigated . 
 Despite being Bethesda 's first major title to be produced for a console , Morrowind 's Xbox release was well received in the gaming press . The inability to use modifications on the Xbox was unhappily felt , as was non @-@ native resolution , but the qualities of detail and open @-@ endedness which had similarly graced the PC release made good the Xbox release 's faults . Morrowind 's Xbox release sold very well ; it continued to rank among the top 10 sellers on the console one year after its initial release — a feat matched only by Halo : Combat Evolved . In spite of its critical and commercial success , Morrowind did not win any end @-@ of @-@ year press awards for its Xbox release . 
 In 2010 IGN ranked Dagoth Ur 90th in " Top 100 Videogames Villains " . 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 Morrowind won GameSpy 's PC RPG of the Year Award , though it lost to Neverwinter Nights in reader polls , ranking 24 % against Neverwinter 's 34 @.@ 9 % popular support . It won IGN 's RPG Vault 's Game of the Year Award , IGN 's PC Roleplaying Game of the Year Award in both its editorial and popular forms , RPG Vault 's Game of the Year Award 2002 and was IGN 's reader 's choice for Best Story . Morrowind lost GameSpot 's best PC RPG of 2002 award to Neverwinter Nights , but won best Xbox RPG . Morrowind , in addition to its nomination in music composition , was also nominated in the category of " Computer Role @-@ Playing Game of the Year " at the 2003 Interactive Achievement Awards , but lost , again , to Neverwinter Nights . In September 2003 , Morrowind received the dubious honour of ranking 21st on GameSpy 's " 25 Most Overrated Games " list , for its " buggy , repetitive , and dull gameplay " . 
 = = Modification = = 
 Bethesda Softworks , the developer of Morrowind , offers gamers the ability to recreate the world with a variety of mod making tools , such as The Elder Scrolls Construction Set , which allows the <unk> to create and edit different races , signs , abilities , and skills . Characters can be made as strong or as fast as the user wants , and allows the player to experience the game in a way that would not normally be possible within the game 's mechanics . 
 Morrowind is well known for its ability to be changed by plugins ( often referred to as modifications , or mods for short ) using the Elder Scrolls Construction Set , which comes with the PC version of the game . These plugins are usually easy to install and can change almost everything in the game . <unk> can include new creatures , weapons , armor , quests , people , playable species , Easter eggs , stores , player owned houses , cities , expand on the size of cities , and introduce new plotlines , or even entire landmasses with some or all of the above . As of 2014 the Morrowind modding community remains lively . Organized projects , such as <unk> and <unk> , attempt to recreate the originally envisioned Morrowind province in later Elder Scrolls games . There are also interpretations of both Cyrodiil and Skyrim , the settings of the later Elder Scrolls games . While not a mod , <unk> is a game engine that also supports playing Morrowind natively on Linux , <unk> and Windows . Other mods create immensely powerful " god items " and place them in convenient locations . Still other mods change or enhance the graphical aspects of the game , such as lighting , 3D models , colors , and textures . There are also official mods made by Bethesda , such as " Siege at <unk> " , which can be found at the official site . 
 = = = Official plugins = = = 
 All published official plugins are designed for use with the base Morrowind game , and any games saved with the plugin enabled can be played without the plugin ( except the missing materials from the removed plugin ) . 
 <unk> Armor Plugin 
 Area Effect Arrows Plugin 
 Bitter Coast Sounds Plugin 
 Helm of Tohan Plugin 
 Entertainers Plugin 
 Siege at <unk> Plugin 
 <unk> Armor Plugin 
 Master Index Plugin 
 = = Expansions and compilations = = 
 = = = Tribunal = = = 
 The Elder Scrolls III : Tribunal , announced on September 2 , 2002 and scheduled for a PC @-@ only release , went gold on November 1 and was released , with little fanfare , on November 6 . Tribunal puts the player in the self @-@ contained , walled city of Mournhold , the capital of the province of Morrowind ; the new city is not connected to Morrowind 's land mass , Vvardenfell , and the player must teleport to it . The storyline continues the story of the Tribunal deities . 
 The choice to produce the expansion was primarily inspired by the success of Morrowind 's release , as well as a general feeling that Elder Scrolls series games are ongoing experiences that merit new things for their players to do . Development on the game began immediately after Morrowind shipped , giving the developers a mere five @-@ month development cycle to release the game — a very fast cycle for the industry . The prior existence of the Construction Set , however , meant that the team " already had the tools in place to add content and features very quickly . " 
 Interface improvements — specifically , an overhaul of Morrowind 's journal system — were among the key goals for Tribunal 's release . The new journal allowed the player to sort quests individually and by completion , reducing the confusion caused by the original 's jumbling together of every quest into a single chronological stream . The game 's reviewers took well to the change , although some criticized the incomplete implementation of the system , and others found the system continued to be " a bit unwieldy . " 
 Reviews of Tribunal were generally positive , though to lesser amounts than was the case for Morrowind . Aggregate scoring sites Metacritic and GameRankings both gave the game generally favourable scores : Metacritic , a score of 80 ; GameRankings , a score of 82 . Most critics commented on the greater linearity of the experience , combined with a reduction in the total size of the play area , giving the changes mixed reviews . GameSpot reported sullenly on the change : " it 's somewhat surprising that the Tribunal expansion confines your adventures to the relatively small setting of the municipality Mournhold , " and that , in light of this change , " Tribunal doesn 't have many of the features that made Morrowind so appealing . " IGN stated that although " you 'll rarely lose sight of what you 're doing or why , " a fact that may make the game more " comprehensible " for some players , " the lack of interaction with the rest of the world is pretty depressing . " RPGamer , by contrast , was unequivocally positive about the change : " Bethesda ... neatly sidesteps two of the most difficult atmospheric flaws of Morrowind — the constant sense of emptiness , and the bland outdoor landscapes — by having the story take place entirely within the city of Mournhold ... This smaller , tighter playing field ensures that every minor detail can and does get attention . " 
 = = = Bloodmoon = = = 
 The Elder Scrolls III : Bloodmoon , announced on February 14 , 2003 , and scheduled for release in May of the same year , went gold by May 23 , and was released on June 6 . Bethesda began work on the expansion immediately following the release of Tribunal in November 2002 . Bloodmoon is a larger expansion than Tribunal , in terms of area covered and content created ; it expands the game 's main map to include the untamed island of Solstheim located to the northwest of Vvardenfell , a frigid northern tundra sprinkled with forests , and many new varieties of creatures , such as the short but tough <unk> . These additions marked a return to the " open @-@ ended gameplay " and " free @-@ form exploration " of the original , in contrast to the linearity and confinement of Tribunal . Reviews for Bloodmoon were , again , generally positive . Aggregate scoring sites Metacritic and GameRankings both gave the game generally favorable scores : Metacritic , a score of 85 ; GameRankings , a score of 83 . 
 One of the key selling points of Bloodmoon was its reintegration of werewolves ; a feature that had been included in Daggerfall , but absent in Morrowind ; a feature prominently advertised in previews prior to the game 's release , in contrast to Morrowind 's vampirism , which was almost an " Easter Egg " in terms of how many players remained unfamiliar with the feature . Players become werewolves by catching the lycanthropic disease " <unk> Lupinus " and letting three days pass without attempting to cure it . Once the disease has been fully integrated , the player transforms every night , regardless of the lunar cycle . Being a werewolf provides ability increases , though their strength was reduced relative to the major bonuses offered by lycanthropy in Daggerfall . Some reviewers found the addition a welcome challenge , but others thought the addition frustrating and poorly implemented . 
 = = = Game of the Year Edition = = = 
 The Elder Scrolls III : Morrowind Game of the Year Edition was announced May 12 , 2003 and released October 31 of the same year . It compiled both the Tribunal and Bloodmoon expansions , along with patches available only for the PC release , and offered them up in one single package for both PC and Xbox platforms ; something which , previously , Xbox owners had not had access to . Absent , however , from the Xbox version was the improved journal included in Bethesda 's Bloodmoon and Tribunal releases , as well as the later patched editions of Morrowind 's original release . Reviewers responded to the absence negatively . Nonetheless , reviews for the GOTY set were generally positive ; more so than all previous releases . Metacritic gave the game a score of 89 ; GameRankings , an 88 . PC Gamer re @-@ released this version under their " PC Gamer Presents " line . 
 = Hurricane Cindy ( 2005 ) = 
 Hurricane Cindy was a tropical cyclone that briefly reached minimal hurricane strength in the Gulf of Mexico during July in the 2005 Atlantic hurricane season and made landfall in Louisiana . It was the third named storm and first hurricane of the season . Cindy was originally thought to have been a tropical storm at peak strength , but was upgraded to a Category 1 hurricane in the post @-@ storm analysis . 
 Hurricane Cindy initially formed on July 3 just east of the Yucatán Peninsula in the Caribbean Sea . The depression soon made landfall on the peninsula and weakened before reemerging in the Gulf of Mexico on July 4 . The storm strengthened as it moved north becoming a hurricane just before making landfall near Grand Isle , Louisiana , on July 5 . The storm weakened as it moved overland and became extratropical on July 7 . 
 Hurricane Cindy was responsible for 3 deaths in the United States and brought heavy rains to Louisiana , Mississippi , Alabama and Maryland . An unusually strong F2 tornado was spawned from Cindy 's remnants and caused severe damage in Hampton , Georgia . Cindy also caused flooding and a severe blackout in New Orleans , Louisiana , which encouraged the population to evacuate when Hurricane Katrina approached the city the next month . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 On June 24 a vigorous tropical wave moved off the African coast and quickly west across the Atlantic without developing . The wave gradually became more organized as it crossed the Caribbean and late on July 3 it strengthened into Tropical Depression Three about 80 miles ( 130 km ) east of Chetumal , Mexico . The models initially had difficulty predicting the track of the depression and the forecasts from the National Hurricane Center reflected this , indicating that the depression would move towards Texas . The depression developed quickly before making landfall on Yucatán Peninsula early on July 4 with 35 mph ( 55 km / h ) winds and began to lose its circulation overland . 
 A new center of circulation began forming later on July 4 , over the Gulf of Mexico , to the north of the original center . This reformation caused a significant alteration in the forecast models , which now indicated a landfall in Louisiana . The depression moved northwards into the Gulf of Mexico and became a Tropical Storm Cindy early on July 5 . Weakened shear allowed Cindy to strengthen further as it approached Louisiana and the storm was a minimal hurricane with 75 mph ( 120 km / h ) winds when it made landfall near Grand Isle late on July 5 . Initially it was felt that Cindy did not reach hurricane strength , but post @-@ season reanalysis confirmed the upgrade to Category 1 status . 
 Hurricane Cindy weakened back into a tropical storm as it crossed over extreme southeastern Louisiana and Breton Sound before making a second landfall near Waveland , Mississippi with 50 mph ( 85 km / h ) winds on July 6 . Cindy moved to the northeast over Mississippi and Alabama , weakening to a tropical depression that day . The depression became extratropical over the Carolinas on July 7 and moved to the northeast dissipating in the Gulf of St Lawrence on July 9 . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 Upon being declared a tropical depression , meteorologists in Mexico began advising residents about the possibility of heavy rainfall across the Yucatán Peninsula . 
 The National Hurricane Center issued a Tropical Storm Warning from Morgan City , Louisiana to Destin , Florida , and both tourists and residents evacuated the Louisiana and Florida coasts . Workers were evacuated from six oil rigs in the storm 's path , and 23 coastal refineries stopped unloading oil as Cindy 's approach made such activities dangerous . Numerous flights in and out of New Orleans were cancelled and Amtrak suspended passenger rail service until after the storm passed . Recreational vehicles were told to leave Grand Isle in case a full @-@ scale evacuation was needed . In Mississippi , jail inmates filled sandbags which would be distributed to flood prone areas throughout the state . 
 = = Impact = = 
 Five deaths were attributed to Cindy , none of them near the storm 's landfall . Two people were killed in Georgia , one in Alabama , and two in Maryland . Approximately 300 @,@ 000 homes and businesses in southeast Louisiana and the Mississippi Gulf Coast lost electrical power and a storm surge of 4 – 6 feet ( 1 @.@ 2 @-@ 1 @.@ 8 m ) affected the same area , causing some beach erosion near Grand Isle , Louisiana . Hurricane Cindy 's total damage was estimated to be US $ 320 million . 
 In New Orleans , Louisiana , wind gusts reached 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) , many trees were damaged or uprooted and scattered street flooding was reported . As thousands lost electrical power , the city experienced its worst blackout since Hurricane Betsy 40 years earlier . Although still listed as a " Tropical Storm " by the weather service at the time , many laypeople in New Orleans were under the impression that Cindy was a hurricane , and referred to it as " Hurricane Cindy " before it was officially upgraded . Many people in the New Orleans metropolitan area expected minimal effects from the storm , but were cleaning up debris and were without power for days after Cindy 's passage . In Louisiana , 260 @,@ 000 residences were left without power . 
 Even though it had weakened to a depression when it moved inland , Cindy 's effects were still significant across the final portion of its track . The day after its landfall in southeastern Louisiana , Tropical Depression Cindy reached central Alabama . There its rainbands produced heavy rainfall and eight tornadoes . Damage was mostly limited to trees and powerlines , but an F1 tornado in Macon county injured one man , destroyed an auto @-@ repair shop , and damaged several nearby cars . About 35 @,@ 000 residences in Alabama and 7 @,@ 000 in both Florida and Mississippi were left without power following the storm . 
 In Georgia , some parts of Atlanta Motor Speedway and Tara Field airport in Hampton , Georgia suffered US $ 40 million damage from an F2 tornado spawned by the storm . An F1 tornado in Fayette county damaged three homes and caused an estimated US $ 3 million of damage . Four other tornadoes were confirmed across the state , although none of them caused significant damage . Hartsfield @-@ Jackson Atlanta International Airport in Atlanta recorded over 5 inches ( 130 mm ) of rain on July 6 , its sixth @-@ highest one @-@ day rainfall since records began in 1878 ; most of the rain fell during just two hours ( 8 – 10 p.m. EDT ) . This is more rain than the area normally gets in all of July . 
 Cindy 's remnant low moving across western and northern North Carolina combined with a frontal boundary to produce several supercell thunderstorms . These supercells spawned a number of tornadoes in western North Carolina , at the foothills of the Appalachian mountains , but their effects were minimal . Continuing north , Cindy brought over 5 in ( 125 mm ) of rain to areas as distant as Salisbury , Maryland . 
 = Valeri Bure = 
 Valeri Vladimirovich " Val " Bure ( Russian : <unk> <unk> <unk> , / va @-@ <unk> @-@ ee / ; born June 13 , 1974 ) is a Russian @-@ American former ice hockey right winger . He played 10 seasons in the National Hockey League ( NHL ) for the Montreal Canadiens , Calgary Flames , Florida Panthers , St. Louis Blues , and Dallas Stars . A second round selection of the Canadiens , 33rd overall , at the 1992 NHL Entry Draft , Bure appeared in one NHL All @-@ Star Game , in 2000 . He led the Flames in scoring with 35 goals and 75 points in 1999 – 2000 , a season in which he and brother Pavel combined to set an NHL record for goals by a pair of siblings with 93 . 
 Bure left his home in the Soviet Union in 1991 to play junior hockey in the Western Hockey League ( WHL ) for the Spokane Chiefs . A two @-@ time WHL all @-@ star , he was the first Russian player in the league 's history . Internationally , he represented Russia on numerous occasions . He was a member of the bronze medal @-@ winning squad at the 1994 World Junior Championship and was a two @-@ time medalist at the Winter Olympics . Bure and the Russians won the silver medal in 1998 and bronze in 2002 . 
 Back and hip injuries led to Bure 's retirement from hockey in 2005 . He now operates a winery in California with his wife , Candace Cameron . Bure paired with Ekaterina <unk> in 2010 to win the second season of the figure skating reality show Battle of the Blades . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Valeri Bure was born June 13 , 1974 , in Moscow , Soviet Union . He is the younger son of Vladimir and Tatiana Bure . Vladimir , whose family originated from <unk> , Switzerland , was an Olympic swimmer who won four medals for the Soviet Union at three Olympic Games between 1968 and 1976 . Bure 's family had a noble history : his ancestors made precious watches for Russian tsars from 1815 – 1917 and as craftsmen of the imperial family , were granted noble status . 
 Bure was around nine years old when his parents separated . In 1991 , he joined his father and brother , Pavel in moving to North America as his elder sibling embarked on a National Hockey League ( NHL ) career with the Vancouver Canucks . His mother arrived two months later . They settled initially in Los Angeles where Vladimir continued to train and coach both Valeri and Pavel in hockey and physical conditioning . However both became estranged from their father , along with his second wife and their half @-@ sister Katya , by 1998 . Neither brother has explained a reason for the split . 
 = = Playing career = = 
 = = = Junior = = = 
 Bure played three games during the 1990 – 91 season with HC CSKA Moscow of the Soviet Championship League prior to leaving the Soviet Union . As a 17 @-@ year @-@ old , Bure was eligible to play junior hockey upon his arrival in North America , and joined the Spokane Chiefs of the Western Hockey League ( WHL ) . In doing so , he became the first Russian player in the league 's history . He joined the team one year before the Canadian Hockey League , of which the WHL is a member , instituted an import draft . 
 Bure recorded 49 points in 53 games in 1991 – 92 for the Chiefs , his first season in the WHL . The Montreal Canadiens selected him with their second round pick , 33rd overall , at the 1992 NHL Entry Draft . The NHL Central Scouting Bureau praised Bure as being a good skater . In its assessment , the Bureau added : " very smart around the net ; good passer , playmaker . Good shot , quick release . Will take a hit to make the play . Good competitor . " He returned to Spokane for the 1992 – 93 season where Bure led his team and finished second overall in WHL scoring with 147 points . His 68 goals that season remains a Chiefs ' franchise record . He was named to the WHL 's West Division First All @-@ Star Team . Bure attended Montreal 's training camp prior to the 1993 – 94 season , but was again returned to his junior team . He recorded 102 points in his final season in the WHL and was named to the Second All @-@ Star Team . In three seasons with Spokane , Bure recorded 298 points and stands fourth on the Chiefs ' all @-@ time scoring list . 
 = = = Montreal Canadiens = = = 
 Upon turning professional in 1994 – 95 , Bure spent the majority of the season with Montreal 's American Hockey League ( AHL ) affiliate , the Fredericton Canadiens . He had 23 goals and 48 points in 45 games for the club . Bure earned a recall to Montreal late in the season and made his NHL debut on February 28 , 1995 , against the New York Islanders . His first goal came two weeks later , on March 15 , against goaltender Wendell Young of the Pittsburgh Penguins . In 24 games with Montreal , Bure scored 3 goals and added an assist . Playing in his brother 's shadow – Pavel had become a superstar in Vancouver – Valeri struggled to live up to the expectations placed on him . He scored 22 goals and 42 points in his first full season in Montreal , 1995 – 96 , but scored only 14 goals the following season . He battled injuries that season ; two concussions and a kidney injury limited him to 64 games , 13 fewer than the previous season . 
 At five feet , ten inches ( 178 cm ) tall , Bure was a smaller player in the NHL . His linemates Saku Koivu ( five foot ten ) and Oleg Petrov ( five foot nine ) were similarly diminutive , and the trio were known in Montreal as the " Smurf line " . After playing 50 games for the Canadiens in 1997 – 98 , Bure was traded . He was sent to the Calgary Flames in a February 1 , 1998 , deal in exchange for Jonas <unk> and Zarley Zalapski . The deal was welcomed by Bure , who appreciated both the ability to play closer to his family on the west coast as well as increased opportunity by joining a young Flames team . He recorded his first career hat trick in one of his first games in Calgary , against the Edmonton Oilers . Bure appeared in 16 games with the Flames that season and scored 38 points in 66 games combined between Montreal and Calgary . 
 = = = Calgary Flames = = = 
 Bure 's offensive ability emerged in Calgary as he became one of the team 's leading scorers . His totals of 26 goals and 53 points in 1998 – 99 were both third best on the team ; at one point of the season , Bure scored the game @-@ winning goal in four consecutive victories for Calgary . The departure of Flames ' star Theoren Fleury added pressure on Bure to be an offensive leader in 1999 – 2000 , and he responded to become one of the NHL 's early scoring leaders . He used his speed and skating ability to good effect and was eighth in league scoring by mid @-@ December . Bure was named to the World team at the 2000 All @-@ Star Game where he played on a line with his brother . Pavel was named most valuable player of the game by scoring three goals , two of them assisted by Valeri , in a 9 – 4 victory over North America . Bure completed the season as the Flames leader in goals ( 35 ) and points ( 75 , 14th overall in the NHL ) and was the only player on the team to appear in all 82 games . Pavel Bure scored 58 goals for the Florida Panthers , and the brothers ' combined total of 93 goals set an NHL record for a set of siblings . 
 Though his offensive production declined in 2000 – 01 , Bure 's 27 goals was second on the team to Jarome Iginla 's 31 and he finished third with 55 points . He became embroiled in a power struggle with his coaches , first Don Hay who was dismissed mid @-@ season , and then Greg Gilbert , as both wanted him play a more defensive @-@ minded game . Bure struggled to adapt and at one point was held out of the Flames lineup by Gilbert in response . Bure was rumoured to have asked for a trade out of Calgary , and the Florida Panthers ( who had acquired Pavel ) , Buffalo Sabres and New York Rangers were among the teams who showed interest in his services . On June 24 , 2001 , the Flames traded Bure , along with Jason Wiemer to the Panthers for Rob Niedermayer and a second round draft pick . 
 = = = Florida , St. Louis and Dallas = = = 
 As his contract had expired , Bure was a restricted free agent . Initially unable to come to an agreement with the Panthers on salary , Bure did not sign until late September . The delay resulted in his being a brief hold @-@ out from Florida 's training camp in advance of the 2001 – 02 season . Injury interrupted the start of Bure 's Panthers career as a knee ailment that began bothering him before the season worsened as he played the first games of the campaign . Tests revealed damage to his right knee that required arthroscopic surgery to repair ; Bure missed 37 games while recovering . A second knee injury ended Bure 's season in mid @-@ March as the Panthers had fallen out of playoff contention . His brother had already been traded by that point , and the Panthers were also making Valeri available in potential deals . He appeared in only 31 games and recorded 18 points . 
 Bure remained with the Panthers as the 2002 – 03 season began , but his year was marked by an offensive slump . He was also hampered by a hairline fracture to his wrist after Keith Primeau slashed him during an early December game against the Philadelphia Flyers . With only 5 goals and 26 points in 46 games for Florida , Bure was traded on March 11 , 2003 , to the St. Louis Blues in exchange for defenceman Mike Van Ryn . Another knee injury , this time a sprained ligament , kept Bure out of the Blues lineup for much of the remainder of the season . He recorded two assists each in five regular season and six post @-@ season games for St. Louis . After the season , the Blues placed Bure on waivers , and he returned to Florida upon being claimed by the Panthers . 
 Free of injury for the first time in two seasons , Bure was one of the Panthers ' offensive leaders in 2003 – 04 . He reached 20 goals for the fifth time in his NHL career , and as the season 's trade deadline approached , was Florida 's leading scorer with 45 points . However , as the Panthers were out of playoff contention , they traded Bure to the Dallas Stars on March 9 , 2004 , in exchange for Drew Bagnall and a draft pick . Bure was placed on the Stars ' top line with Mike Modano and Jere Lehtinen , and he recorded 7 points in 13 games to conclude the regular season . Bure added three assists in five playoff games . 
 An unrestricted free agent following the 2004 playoffs , Bure did not play anywhere in 2004 – 05 as the entire NHL season was canceled due to a labour dispute . He signed a one @-@ year contract with the Los Angeles Kings for the 2005 – 06 season when the league resumed operations . He never played a regular season game for the Kings . A back injury suffered during the pre @-@ season , initially just described as " soreness " , kept him out of the regular lineup . The injury ultimately required surgery , and a second surgery on his hip caused Bure to miss the entire season . At the age of 31 , he opted to retire following the surgeries . 
 = = = International = = = 
 Bure made his debut internationally with the Russian national junior team at the 1994 World Junior Championship . He was the leading scorer of the bronze medal @-@ winning Russians with eight points in six games and was named to the tournament 's All @-@ Star Team . That same year , Bure first played with the senior team as he scored three goals in six contests at the 1994 World Championship in a fifth @-@ place effort . 
 After appearing in one game at the inaugural World Cup of Hockey in 1996 , Bure played in his first of two Olympic Games in 1998 . The tournament marked the first time he played with his brother Pavel since they were briefly teammates with CSKA Moscow in 1991 . Valeri scored one goal in the tournament , and Russia advanced to the gold medal game . They settled for the silver medal after being shut out by Dominik Hašek and the Czech Republic . Bure returned for the 2002 Salt Lake Games . He scored a goal in the tournament as Russia won the bronze medal . Russia invited him to play at the 2004 World Cup of Hockey , but as he was without an NHL contract at the time , Bure declined to play due to a lack of proper insurance in the event of injury . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Bure married actress Candace Cameron in 1996 . They were introduced by Cameron 's Full House cast mate Dave Coulier at a charity hockey game . The couple has three children : daughter Natasha and sons Lev and Maksim . Bure became an American citizen in December 2001 . Bure cited his family as the reason he retired from hockey in 2005 . He felt he could return from his surgeries , but wanted to spend time with his children and allow his wife to return to acting . The family are devout Christians . 
 In 2007 , Bure and his wife opened a Florida restaurant called " The Milk and Honey Café " , but closed the business when the family moved to California . They operate a Napa Valley , California winery , Bure Family Wines . Bure developed an interest in wine early in his NHL career that he described as growing into a passion : " I fell in love with the behind @-@ the @-@ scenes work and being able to start from the vineyard and put it into a bottle . It 's an amazing process . " Bure modified the Russian imperial seal his great @-@ grandfather stamped on his watches to use as his company 's label . 
 Bure returned to the ice in 2010 as a contestant on the second season of the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation 's figure skating reality show Battle of the Blades . The series is a competition that pairs a former professional hockey player with a figure skater . Bure 's partner was Ekaterina <unk> . The pair won the competition and shared a $ 100 @,@ 000 prize donated to charities of their choice . Bure 's donation was made to Compassion Canada . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = = Regular season and playoffs = = = 
 = = = International = = = 
 = = Awards and honours = = 
 = Quad Electrostatic Loudspeaker = 
 The Quad Electrostatic Loudspeaker ( ESL ) is the world 's first production full @-@ range electrostatic loudspeaker , launched in 1957 by Quad <unk> , then known as the Acoustical Manufacturing Co . Ltd . The speaker is shaped somewhat like a home electric radiator curved slightly on the vertical axis . They are widely admired for their clarity and precision , but known to be difficult speakers to run and maintain . 
 The original ESL , in production between 1957 and 1985 , has been hailed in Sound & Vision as one of the most important speakers of the 20th century . It was succeeded in 1981 by the ESL @-@ 63 , which remained in production until 1999 . As of 2013 , Quad maintains four electrostatic speakers in its range . 
 = = History = = 
 Acoustical Manufacturing Company had launched a ribbon @-@ hybrid , horn @-@ loaded " Corner Ribbon Loudspeaker " in 1949 , but this was not commercially successful . The electrostatics were designed by David Williamson , and the company 's founder , Peter Walker , from a principle elaborated by Edward W. Kellogg for General Electric that was granted a patent in 1934 . However , more immediately , a book published in the US in 1954 extolling the scientific merits of the electrostatic [ ESL ] transducer inspired Walker to develop an electrostatic loudspeaker of his own ; this was technologically enabled by the Mylar film developed by Dupont that came to market in 1949 . Walker demonstrated a prototype electrostatic panel speaker ( with exceptional clarity in the midrange ) , and a full @-@ frequency infinite baffle speaker ( with ample bass response ) at the British Sound Recording Association Annual Exhibition in May 1955 . After more research , the large panel speaker with better response over the whole frequency range was demonstrated to the Physical Society in March 1956 . The ESL entered commercial production in 1957 , and was discontinued only in 1985 . 
 Development of its successor began in 1963 , giving rise to the product name " ESL @-@ 63 " , launched in 1981 . It attempted to address both the deficiency in bass response of the original ESL and its extreme directionality at high frequencies . The latter goal is achieved by splitting the stators into eight concentric rings , each fed with a slight time delay compared to the ring immediately inwards , thereby attempting to emulate a point source . The last ESL @-@ 63 left the factory in 1999 , when it was superseded by the ESL @-@ 988 and ESL @-@ 989 . 
 = = Speaker = = 
 Stereophile described the speaker as having been designed for " serious @-@ music ( call that ' classical ' ) listeners who play records more for musical enjoyment than for the sound " . Quad launched the speaker in 1957 , priced at £ 52 , believing that an audio system should be able to extract everything of value that is on a recording , while de @-@ emphasising the irritations of mediocre sound recordings . It consists of a minimalistic , slightly curved , flat panel . The " Quad Electrostatic Loudspeaker " or " ESL " , as the designers intended to call it , is variously referred to as the Quad 57 and the Quad 55 . Its descendants are still often simply referred to as Quad Electrostatic Loudspeaker as part of the legacy . Walker called the concept behind the ESL @-@ 63 <unk> , being the acronym for " Full @-@ Range Electrostatic <unk> " . 
 = = = Design = = = 
 An electrostatic speaker has only a frame to support the charged diaphragm . It uses ultra @-@ thin stretched Mylar ( <unk> @-@ oriented polyethylene terephthalate ) film as the main component of its drive units . There are two perforated plates with a potential difference of up to 10 @,@ 000 volts , between which a very thin film , coated with a mildly electrically conductive substance , is sandwiched . Sound is produced when the audio signal – amplified by a step @-@ up transformer – sets the film diaphragm into motion . The different charge between the two plates allows the diaphragm to be alternately attracted and repelled by each plate . In the original QUAD , two bass panels flank one treble panel to provide full range sound . 
 Its treble panel diaphragm is further subdivided into midrange and tweeter sections , achieved by clamping it on each side of its centre . Both midrange and tweeter sections are driven separately , and the entire treble unit operates at substantially lower voltages – operating voltages are said to be <unk> for the bass and <unk> for the treble . The speaker needs to be plugged into the mains and must be charged prior to use . This is because the diaphragm operates in a " constant charge " mode , and it takes time for the charge to build up . In practice , the speaker is usable after charging for less than half a minute , but the sound gradually improves as the charge builds up . Best performance is achieved when the speaker has charged fully , which can take up to an hour . The electricity is only to charge the diaphragm , so consumption is negligible . 
 The electrostatic design does away with two major weaknesses of boxed speakers : enclosure colourations and signal degradation due to the crossover . The crossover in the ESL consists merely of resistors which work with the inherent capacitance of the speaker elements to obtain a first @-@ order response . Because it is bipolar , both sides of the elements are not enclosed , but radiate directly into the air . Thus , colourations due to crossover components and box @-@ induced reflections are minimised . 
 Fast transient response and low distortion are both characteristic of electrostatics . The driver , being only 0 @.@ <unk> @-@ inch thick and weighing only 3 mg , is thus capable of stopping and starting seemingly instantaneously with no damping necessary to the drive units . However , the design also limits bandwidth to between 40 Hz and 10 kHz . Kohli of TNT noted that upper register starts to taper above 10 kHz and then falls off severely beyond 13 kHz , and is 15 @-@ <unk> down at 20 kHz . The speaker 's design makes them extremely directional , and the general practice is to toe in the speakers to point directly to the listener . Although a slight deviation did not seem to make a difference , it is in practice not possible for more than one person to enjoy a reasonably balanced sound stage with the ESL . 
 Contrary to the flat appearance of the loudspeaker , all three panels are slightly curved along the vertical axis to improve quality . The panels themselves are flat , but obtain their curvature by being slightly bent to a curved backing . With the bipolar nature of the speaker emitting sound from both front and back surfaces as it does , the application of a felt sheet to the rear of the panels damps and absorbs high frequencies radiating from the back . A crossover network , set at 500 Hz , remains necessary to adjust for back @-@ to @-@ front interference causing loss in output at low frequencies . In addition , the speaker should stand in free space to achieve optimum sound . The instructions book contains advice against placement of the speaker in corners or positions close to or parallel with walls , and further explains that a corner placement will adversely affect bass response and be detrimental to the midrange because of standing waves generated . 
 Its impedance is 1 @.@ 8 ohms at 20 kHz , to over 60 ohms at 150 Hz , and its load is highly capacitive . It does not consume large amounts of power so much as it feeds it back to the amplifier in opposition at some points during each cycle . This is very demanding on amplifiers ' stability . 
 Although it is designed to be used with the QUAD II , 303 , or 405 power amplifiers with limiters , a power amplifier capable of delivering 15 watts per channel suffices – excessive voltage input is known to cause arcing within the speaker panels . In fact , the instructions book states that any properly @-@ regulated amplifier delivering no more than <unk> is unlikely to cause damage to the speaker . Electrostatic speakers are more accurately rated by voltage , not power . In the ESL 's case , at the rated nominal impedance of 16 ohms , the limit of 33 volts would be reached when the amplifier 's power output reaches 15 watts ( if it were driving a conventional load ) . 
 The most common failure modes were loss of sensitivity caused by dust infiltrating the speaker panels , and internal arcing of the panels caused by excessive power to the step @-@ up transformer ; use at high altitudes may also cause the same effect . Also , because of its novel electrical characteristics , the speaker could cause some amplifiers to become unstable and could result in damage to either or both . Late in the speaker 's life , many owners found that the highly @-@ stable 15 @-@ watt Naim NAIT launched in 1983 worked well with the ESL . 
 = = = Construction = = = 
 The ESL measures 31 by 34 @.@ 5 by 10 @.@ 5 inches ( 79 cm × 88 cm × 27 cm ) and weighs 35 pounds ( 16 kg ) . In terms of appearance , the original ESL has an expanded metal grille , and three little wooden feet . The earlier version has golden @-@ bronze grilles and classic teak end caps . Later production versions have black grilles , and end caps have a rosewood finish ; other minor variants exist . The speaker 's electronics components , consisting mainly of an audio transformer , EHT power supply , crossover and mains transformer , are fixed to the base of the cabinet . 
 The original ESL @-@ 57 suffered from reliability issues , frequently caused by use of inappropriate amplification or being driven too hard . In the main , the diaphragm would arc from being overdriven , or the audio transformer would seize up from being exposed to excessive voltages . 
 The design 's lack of structural integrity is seen as another significant weakness of the Quad ESL @-@ 63 since its inception , and lived on in its various successors . Other shortcomings include very limited sound pressure levels , meaning that it won 't play loud , and its bass response was lacking . In addition , one reviewer experienced problems with shut @-@ downs playing music with high intensity bass drums . 
 = = = Product revisions = = = 
 Quad have now brought out five generations of the classic electrostatic design . Originally designed for monaural sound in a domestic context , the popularisation of stereophonic sound prompted the manufacturer to modify the electrostatic panels to improve their stereo dispersion . These speakers featured larger panels and a revolutionary stator design , made up of eight concentric rings fed from the centre outwards through analogue delay lines , so that the audio signal gives the illusion of radiating from a point source one foot behind the panel . 
 Quad addressed the limitations of the original design to some degree with the ESL @-@ 63 . Development of the newer design was initiated in 1963 and the product was released at the CES of 1981 . Because of a changed orientation , the ESL @-@ 63 measures 36 by 26 by 6 inches ( 91 cm × 66 cm × 15 cm ) , the speaker seemed smaller than before . New " <unk> clamping " protection circuit was incorporated to prevent arcing . Another " crowbar action " protection circuit could detect the high @-@ frequency noise that accompanies the ionisation of air when the speaker arcs , and shuts down the power when that occurs . Power rating is increased to <unk> . Furthermore , because the panels in the original ESL were prone to attracting dust , ESL @-@ 63 was made dust @-@ proof . 
 In 1989 , a new marketing position was needed for the US market . As the rising Pound Sterling made the product much more expensive for US customers , it was decided to improve the specification of the ESL @-@ 63 and target the $ 4 @,@ 000 price point with a " US Monitor " version . It was modelled on the more rugged " professional " model that possessed metal grilles and a steel frame ( instead of aluminium ) which had been created for the recording division of Philips . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 Its launch was eagerly awaited : even before it was launched , several articles were written about it in Wireless World in 1955 ; it appeared on the cover of the 1956 Hi @-@ Fi Yearbook . Generally well @-@ received from its launch , the speaker was dubbed " Walker 's Wonder " very early on . The loudspeaker was used as studio monitors for controlling the sound quality of broadcasts . Such professional users included Philips and the BBC . 
 The original ESL , in production between 1957 and 1985 , sold 54 @,@ 000 pairs during its life . Despite some major weaknesses , it is universally hailed as one of the most important speakers of the 20th century . Home Theater Review said it was " the most cherished hi @-@ fi product ever " , and that Walker had been elevated to god @-@ like status in the audio world . What Hi @-@ Fi notes the fanatical loyalty from owners of the speaker or fascination from people who yearn to own them . Demand for second @-@ hand versions of the original 1957 <unk> or the later <unk> remains buoyant many years after their being discontinued . 
 Demand from customers resulted in manufacture of the " ESL @-@ 57 " continuing in the UK until 1995 . Quad 's machine tooling for their manufacture was then bought by QUAD 's representative in Germany , QUAD <unk> who continue to manufacture complete speakers and spare parts , and overhaul customers ' speakers . There are small companies all around the world dedicated to servicing this speaker . 
 Commenting on the ESL @-@ 63 , J. Gordon Holt of Stereophile considered it was a major failure of the speaker for it to shut down during orchestral climaxes . He said that " regardless of the sonic merits it possesses [ the speaker ] simply did not have the power @-@ handling capability " for more recent program material on CD . 
 = = = = Signature sound = = = = 
 The ESL is renowned for sonic transparency and very low distortion . Its midrange performance is usually described in superlative terms , common to other electrostatic designs . Its sound is tonally neutral , exceptionally spacious , and transient response very fast . A properly configured stereo pair would generate a very small ' sweet spot ' where the sound stage snaps into focus . This led to criticisms of the speaker 's directionality which in practice was rarely a problem and had the benefit of reducing the effects of room resonances . 
 The experience of listening to the ELS is often described as non @-@ fatiguing or listenable . Sam Tellig wrote in Stereophile in June 1989 of the neutral sound emanating from the ESL @-@ 63 : " There is no discontinuity from bass to midrange to treble — it 's all so natural . Transient response is excellent . There are no boxy colorations because there are no boxes " . Its superior sonic characteristics were offset by its moderate power handling , and the need for a relatively large space in which to " breathe " . Its usable frequency response is from 40 Hz to well past 20 kHz , and is occasionally criticised for being bass light . Its moderate bass extension is considered adequate for classical music fans , although later incarnations are said to deliver better bass performance . 
 = Triarii = 
 Triarii ( singular : <unk> ) were one of the elements of the early Roman military Manipular legions of the early Roman Republic ( 509 BC – 107 BC ) . They were the oldest and among the wealthiest men in the army , and could afford high quality equipment . They wore heavy metal armor and carried large shields , their usual position being the third battle line . They were equipped with spears . 
 During the Camillan era , they fought in a shallow phalanx formation , supported by light troops . In most battles triarii were not used because the lighter troops usually defeated the enemy before the triarii were committed to the battle . They were meant to be used as a decisive force in the battle , thus prompting an old Roman saying : ' It comes down to the triarii ' ( res ad <unk> <unk> ) , which meant carrying on to the bitter end . 
 = = History and deployment = = 
 Triarii may have evolved from the old first class of the army under the Etruscan kings . The first class comprised the richest soldiers in the legion who were equipped with spears , breastplates and large shields , like heavy Greek hoplites . They served as heavy infantry in the early Roman army , and were used at the front of a very large phalanx formation . After a time , engagements with the Samnites and Gauls appear to have taught the Romans the importance of flexibility and the inadequacy of the phalanx on the rough , hilly ground of central Italy . 
 = = = Camillan era = = = 
 By the 4th century BC , the military formations the Romans had inherited from the Etruscans were still in use . Though their efficiency was doubtful , they proved effective against Rome 's largely local adversaries . When Gauls invaded Etruria in 390 BC , the inhabitants requested help from Rome . The small contingent Rome sent to repel the Gallic invaders provoked a full @-@ scale attack on Rome . The entire Roman army was destroyed at the Battle of the Allia . 
 This crushing defeat prompted reforms by Marcus Furius Camillus . Under the new system , men were sorted into classes according to wealth , the triarii being the richest after the mounted equites . Triarii were armed with spears , or hastae , about 2 metres ( 6 ½ feet ) long . They also carried swords , or gladii , about 84 centimetres ( 29 inches ) long , in case the spear broke or the enemy drew too close . 
 They fought as hoplites , usually carrying <unk> , large round Greek shields , and bronze helmets , often with a number of feathers fixed onto the top to increase stature . Heavy plate armour was favoured , with mail also being popular . Many would paint or engrave portraits of ancestors onto their shield , believing that it would bring them luck in battle . 
 In this type of new Roman legion , the 900 triarii formed 15 maniples , military units of 60 men each , which were in turn part of 15 ordines , larger units made up of a maniple of triarii , a maniple of rorarii and a maniple of accensi . The triarii stood in the third line of the legion , behind the front line of hastati and the second line of principes , and in front of the rorarii and accensi . In a pitched battle , the leves , javelin @-@ armed skirmishers who were attached to maniples of hastati , would form up at the front of the legion and harass the enemy with javelin fire and cover the advance of the hastati , spear armed infantry . 
 If the hastati failed to break the enemy , they would fall back and let the principes , heavier and more experienced infantry , take over . If the principes did not break them , they would retire behind the triarii , who would then engage the enemy in turn — hence the expression rem ad <unk> <unk> , " it has come to the triarii " — signaling an act of desperation . The equites , cavalrymen , were used as flankers and to pursue routing enemies . The rorarii , the poorer reserve soldiers , and accensi , the least dependable troops armed with slings , would be used in a support role , providing mass and supporting wavering areas of the line . 
 = = = Polybian system = = = 
 By the time of the second Punic war of the late 3rd century BC , this system proved inefficient against enemies such as Carthage . After a series of more " organic " changes as opposed to a single intentional reform , a new system gradually came into being . Infantry were sorted into classes according to age and experience rather than wealth , the triarii being the most experienced . Their equipment and role was very similar to the previous system , except they now carried scuta , large rectangular shields that offered a greater degree of protection than the old round <unk> . 
 The number of triarii had been reduced to 600 per legion , now forming 10 maniples of 60 men each . The triarii still made up the third line in the legion , behind the front line of hastati and the second line of principes , but the rorarii and accensi had been phased out . Leves had been replaced with velites , who had a similar role but were also attached to principes and triarii . 
 Pitched battles were conducted in a similar fashion : the velites would gather at the front and fling javelins to cover the advance of the hastati . If the hastati failed to break the enemy , they would fall back on the principes , who now carried swords rather than spears . If the principes could not break them they would retire behind the triarii , who would then engage the enemy . 
 This order of battle was almost always followed , the battle of the Great Plains and the battle of Zama being among the few notable exceptions . At the Great Plains , Scipio , the Roman general , formed his men up in the usual manner , but once the hastati had begun to engage the enemy , he used his principes and triarii as a flanking force , routing the opposing Carthaginians . At Zama , Scipio arranged his men into columns , side by side , with large lanes in between . The opposing Carthaginian elephants were drawn into these lanes where many were killed by velites without inflicting many casualties on the Romans . Once the surviving elephants had been routed , he formed his men into a long line with his triarii and principes in the centre and hastati on the flanks , ready to engage the Carthaginian infantry . 
 = = = Marian reforms = = = 
 With the formal military reforms of Gaius Marius in 107 BC , implemented to combat a shortage of manpower due to wars against Jugurtha in Africa and Germanic tribes to the north , the different classes of units were scrapped entirely . The wealth and age requirements were removed ; anyone could join as a career , rather than as service to the city , and all would be equipped as <unk> , with the same , state @-@ purchased equipment . Auxiliaries , local irregular troops , would fulfill other roles , serving as archers , skirmishers and cavalry . Sallust , in his Jugurthine War , describes several instances in which Roman or allied regular heavy infantry were equipped with light equipment and used as light <unk> . This was supposedly a common practice . 
 = Paxillus involutus = 
 Paxillus involutus , commonly known as the brown roll @-@ rim , common roll @-@ rim , or poison pax , is a basidiomycete fungus widely distributed across the Northern Hemisphere . It has been unintentionally introduced to Australia , New Zealand , and South America , where it has likely been transported in soil with European trees . Various shades of brown in colour , the fruit body grows up to 6 cm ( 2 @.@ 4 in ) high and has a funnel @-@ shaped cap up to 12 cm ( 5 in ) wide with a distinctive inrolled rim and decurrent gills that may be pore @-@ like close to the stipe . Although it has gills , it is more closely related to the pored boletes than to typical gilled mushrooms . It was first described by Pierre Bulliard in 1785 , and was given its current binomial name by Elias Magnus Fries in 1838 . Genetic testing suggests that Paxillus involutus may be a species complex rather than a single species . 
 A common mushroom of deciduous and coniferous woods and grassy areas in late summer and autumn , Paxillus involutus forms ectomycorrhizal relationships with a broad range of tree species . These benefit from the symbiosis as the fungus reduces their intake of heavy metals and increases resistance to pathogens such as Fusarium oxysporum . Previously considered edible and eaten widely in Eastern and Central Europe , it has since been found to be dangerously poisonous , responsible for the death of German mycologist Julius Schäffer in 1944 . It had been recognised as causing gastric upsets when eaten raw , but was more recently found to cause potentially fatal autoimmune hemolysis , even in those who had consumed the mushroom for years without any other ill effects . An antigen in the mushroom triggers the immune system to attack red blood cells . Serious and potentially fatal complications include acute renal failure , shock , acute respiratory failure , and disseminated intravascular coagulation . 
 = = Taxonomy and naming = = 
 The brown roll @-@ rim was described by French mycologist Pierre Bulliard in 1785 as Agaricus <unk> , although the 1786 combination Agaricus involutus of August Batsch is taken as the first valid description . James Bolton published a description of what he called Agaricus <unk> in 1788 ; the taxonomical authority Index Fungorum considers this to be synonymous with P. involutus . Additional synonyms include Omphalia involuta described by Samuel Frederick Gray in 1821 , and <unk> involuta , published by Gottlob Ludwig <unk> in 1844 . The species gained its current binomial name in 1838 when the ' father of mycology ' , Swedish naturalist Elias Magnus Fries erected the genus Paxillus , and set it as the type species . The starting date of fungal taxonomy had been set as January 1 , 1821 , to coincide with the date of Fries ' works , which meant that names coined earlier than this date required sanction by Fries ( indicated in the name by a colon ) to be considered valid . It was thus written Paxillus involutus ( Batsch : Fr . ) Fr . However , a 1987 revision of the International Code of Botanical Nomenclature set the starting date at May 1 , 1753 , the date of publication of Linnaeus ' seminal work , the Species Plantarum . Hence the name no longer requires the ratification of Fries ' authority . 
 The genus was later placed in a new family , Paxillaceae , by French mycologist René Maire who held it to be related to both agarics and boletes . Although it has gills rather than pores , it has long been recognised as belonging to the pored mushrooms of the order Boletales rather than the traditional agarics . The generic name is derived from the Latin for ' peg ' or ' plug ' , and the specific epithet involutus , ' inrolled ' , refers to the cap margin . Common names include the naked <unk> , poison <unk> , inrolled pax , poison pax , common roll @-@ rim , brown roll @-@ rim , and brown chanterelle . Gray called it the " involved navel @-@ stool " in his 1821 compendium of British flora . 
 Studies of the ecology and genetics of Paxillus involutus indicate that it may form a complex of multiple similar @-@ looking species . In a field study near Uppsala , Sweden , conducted from 1981 to 1983 , mycologist Nils Fries found that there were three populations of P. involutus unable to breed with each other . One was found under conifers and mixed woodlands , while the other two were found in parklands , associated with nearby birch trees . He found that the first group tended to produce single isolated fruit bodies which had a thinner stipe and cap which was less inrolled at the margins , while the fruit bodies of the other two populations tended to appear in groups , and have thicker stipes , and caps with more inrolled and sometimes undulating margins . However , there were only general tendencies and he was unable to detect any consistent macroscopic or microscopic features that firmly differentiate them . A molecular study comparing the DNA sequences of specimens of Paxillus involutus collected from various habitats in Bavaria found that those collected from parks and gardens showed a close relationship with the North American species P. vernalis , while those from forests were allied with P. filamentosus . The authors suggested the park populations may have been introduced from North America . A multi @-@ gene analysis of European isolates showed that P. involutus sensu lato ( in the loose sense ) could be separated into four distinct , genetically isolated lineages corresponding to P. <unk> , P. involutus sensu stricto ( in the strict sense ) , P. validus , and a fourth species that has not yet been identified . Changes in host range have occurred frequently and independently among strains within this species complex . 
 = = Description = = 
 Resembling a brown wooden top , the epigeous ( aboveground ) fruit body may be up to 6 cm ( 2 @.@ 4 in ) high . The cap , initially convex then more funnel @-@ shaped ( <unk> ) with a depressed centre and rolled rim ( hence the common name ) , may be reddish- , yellowish- or olive @-@ brown in colour and typically 4 – 12 cm ( 1 @.@ 6 – 5 in ) wide ; the cap diameter does not get larger than 15 cm ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) . The cap surface is initially downy and later smooth , becoming sticky when wet . The cap and cap margin initially serve to protect the gills of young fruit bodies : this is termed <unk> development . The narrow brownish yellow gills are decurrent and forked , and can be peeled easily from the flesh ( as is the case with the pores of boletes ) . Gills further down toward the stipe become more irregular and anastomose , and can even resemble the pores of bolete @-@ type fungi . The fungus darkens when bruised and older specimens may have darkish patches . The juicy yellowish flesh has a mild to faintly sour or sharp odor and taste , and has been described as well @-@ flavored upon cooking . Of similar colour to the cap , the short stipe can be crooked and tapers toward the base . 
 The spore print is brown , and the dimensions of the ellipsoid ( oval @-@ shaped ) spores are 7 @.@ 5 – 9 by 5 – 6 μm . The hymenium has cystidia both on the gill edge and face ( cheilo- and pleurocystidia respectively ) , which are slender and filament @-@ like , typically measuring 40 – 65 by 8 – 10 @.@ 5 μm . 
 = = = Similar species = = = 
 The brownish colour and funnel @-@ like shape of P. involutus can lead to its confusion with several species of Lactarius , many of which have some degree of toxicity themselves . However , the lack of a milky exudate distinguishes it from any milk cap . One of the more similar is L. turpis , which presents a darker olive colouration . The related North American Paxillus vernalis has a darker spore print , thicker stipe and is found under aspen , whereas the closer relative P. filamentosus is more similar in appearance to P. involutus . A rare species that grows only in association with alder , P. filamentosus can be distinguished from it by the pressed @-@ down scales on the cap surface that point towards the cap margin , a light yellow flesh that bruises only slightly brown , and deep yellow @-@ ochre gills that do not change colour upon injury 
 The most similar species are two once thought to be part of P. involutus in Europe . Paxillus <unk> has larger fruit bodies than P. involutus , with caps up to 40 cm ( 16 in ) wide whose margins tend to unroll and flatten with age , and a layer of cream @-@ coloured mycelia covering the base of its tapered stipe . P. validus , also known only from Europe , has caps up to 20 cm ( 7 @.@ 9 in ) wide with a stipe that is more or less equal in width throughout its length . Found under broadleaved trees in parks , it can be reliably distinguished from P. involutus ( and other Paxillus species ) by the presence of crystals up to 2 @.@ 5 μm long in the rhizomorphs , as the crystals found in rhizomorphs of other Paxillus species do not exceed 0 @.@ 5 μm long . 
 = = Ecology , distribution and habitat = = 
 Paxillus involutus forms ectomycorrhizal relationships with a number of coniferous and deciduous tree species . Because the fungus has somewhat unspecialised nutrient requirements and a relatively broad host specificity , it has been frequently used in research and seedling inoculation programs . There is evidence of the benefit to trees of this arrangement : in one experiment where P. involutus was cultivated on the root exudate of red pine ( Pinus resinosa ) , the root showed markedly increased resistance to pathogenic strains of the ubiquitous soil fungus Fusarium oxysporum . Seedlings inoculated with P. involutus also showed increased resistance to Fusarium . Thus P. involutus may be producing antifungal compounds which protect the host plants from root rot . Paxillus involutus also decreases the uptake of certain toxic elements , acting as a buffer against heavy metal toxicity in the host plant . For example , the fungus decreased the toxicity of cadmium and zinc to Scots pine ( Pinus sylvestris ) seedlings : even though cadmium itself inhibits ectomycorrhiza formation in seedlings , colonization with P. involutus decreases cadmium and zinc transport to the plant shoots and alters the ratio of zinc transported to the roots and shoots , causing more cadmium to be retained in the roots of the seedlings rather than distributed through its entire metabolism . Evidence suggests that the mechanism for this detoxification involves the cadmium binding to the fungal cell walls , as well as accumulating in the <unk> compartments . Further , ectomycorrhizal hyphae exposed to copper or cadmium drastically increase production of a metallothionein — a low molecular weight protein that binds metals . 
 The presence of Paxillus involutus is related to much reduced numbers of bacteria associated with the roots of Pinus sylvestris . Instead bacteria are found on the external mycelium . The types of bacteria change as well ; a Finnish study published in 1997 found that bacterial communities under P. sylvestris without mycorrhizae metabolised organic and amino acids , while communities among P. involutus metabolised the sugar fructose . Paxillus involutus benefits from the presence of some species of bacteria in the soil it grows in . As the fungus grows it excretes polyphenols , waste products that are toxic to itself and impede its growth , but these compounds are metabolised by some bacteria , resulting in increased fungal growth . Bacteria also produce certain compounds such as citric and malic acid , which stimulate P. involutus . 
 Highly abundant , the brown roll @-@ rim is found across the Northern Hemisphere , Europe and Asia , with records from India , China , Japan , Iran , and Turkey 's eastern Anatolia . It is equally widely distributed across northern North America , extending north to Alaska , where it has been collected from tundra near Coldfoot in the interior of the state . In southwestern Greenland , P. involutus has been recorded under the birch species Betula nana , B. pubescens and B. glandulosa . The mushroom is more common in coniferous woods in Europe , but is also closely associated with birch ( Betula pendula ) . Within woodland , it prefers wet places or boggy ground , and avoids calcareous ( chalky ) soils . It has been noted to grow alongside Boletus badius in Europe , and Leccinum scabrum and Lactarius plumbeus in the Pacific Northwest region of North America . There it is found in both deciduous and coniferous woodland , commonly under plantings of white birch ( Betula papyrifera ) in urban areas . It is one of a small number of fungal species which thrive in Pinus radiata plantations planted outside their natural range . A study of polluted Scots pine forest around Oulu in northern Finland found that P. involutus became more abundant in more polluted areas while other species declined . Emissions from pulp mills , fertiliser , heating and traffic were responsible for the pollution , which was measured by sulfur levels in the pine needles . 
 Paxillus involutus can be found growing on lawns and old meadows throughout its distribution . Fruit bodies are generally terrestrial , though they may be found on woody material around tree stumps . They generally appear in autumn and late summer . In California , David Arora discerned a larger form associated with oak and pine which appears in late autumn and winter , as well as the typical form that is associated with birch plantings and appears in autumn . Several species of flies and beetles have been recorded using the fruit bodies to rear their young . The mushroom can be infected by Hypomyces chrysospermus , or bolete eater , a mould species that parasitises Boletales members . Infection results in the appearance of a whitish powder that first manifests on the pores , then spreads over the surface of the mushroom , becoming golden yellow to reddish @-@ brown in maturity . 
 Australian mycologist John Burton Cleland noted it occurring under larch ( Larix ) , oak , pine , birch and other introduced trees in South Australia in 1934 , and it has subsequently been recorded in New South Wales , Victoria ( where it was found near Betula and Populus ) and Western Australia . It has been recorded under introduced birch ( Betula ) and hazel ( Corylus ) in New Zealand . Mycologist Rolf Singer reported a similar situation in South America , with the species recorded under introduced trees in Chile . It is likely to have been transported to those countries in the soil of imported European trees . 
 = = Toxicity = = 
 Paxillus involutus was widely eaten in Central and Eastern Europe until World War II , although English guidebooks did not recommend it . In Poland , the mushroom was often eaten after pickling or salting . It was known to be a gastrointestinal irritant when ingested raw but had been presumed edible after cooking . Questions were first raised about its toxicity after German mycologist Julius Schäffer died after eating it in October 1944 . About an hour after he and his wife ate a meal prepared with the mushrooms , Schäffer developed vomiting , diarrhea , and fever . His condition worsened to the point where he was admitted to hospital the following day and developed renal failure , perishing after 17 days . 
 In the mid @-@ 1980s , Swiss physician René Flammer discovered an antigen within the mushroom that stimulates an autoimmune reaction causing the body 's immune cells to consider its own red blood cells as foreign and attack them . Despite this , it was not until 1990 that guidebooks firmly warned against eating P. involutus , and one Italian guidebook recommended it as edible in 1998 . The relatively rare <unk> syndrome occurs following the repeated ingestion of Paxillus mushrooms . Most commonly it arises when the person has ingested the mushroom for a long period of time , sometimes for many years , and has shown mild gastrointestinal symptoms on previous occasions . The Paxillus syndrome is better classed as an allergic reaction than a toxicological reaction as it is not caused by a genuinely poisonous substance but by the antigen in the mushroom . The antigen is still of unknown structure but it stimulates the formation of IgG antibodies in the blood serum . In the course of subsequent meals , antigen @-@ antibody complexes are formed ; these complexes attach to the surface of blood cells and eventually lead to their breakdown . 
 Poisoning symptoms are rapid in onset , consisting initially of vomiting , diarrhea , abdominal pain , and associated decreased blood volume . Shortly after these initial symptoms appear , hemolysis develops , resulting in reduced urine output , hemoglobin in the urine or outright absence of urine formation , and anemia . Medical laboratory tests consist of testing for the presence of increasing bilirubin and free hemoglobin , and falling <unk> . Hemolysis may lead to numerous complications including acute renal failure , shock , acute respiratory failure , and disseminated intravascular coagulation . These complications can cause significant morbidity with fatalities having been reported . 
 There is no antidote for poisoning , only supportive treatment consisting of monitoring complete blood count , renal function , blood pressure , and fluid and electrolyte balance and correcting abnormalities . The use of corticosteroids may be a useful adjunct in treatment , as they protect blood cells against hemolysis , thereby reducing complications . Plasmapheresis reduces the circulating immune complexes in the blood which cause the hemolysis , and may be beneficial in improving the outcome . Additionally , hemodialysis can be used for patients with compromised renal function or renal failure . 
 Paxillus involutus also contains agents which appear to damage chromosomes ; it is unclear whether these have carcinogenic or mutagenic potential . Two compounds that have been identified are the phenols <unk> and <unk> ; the latter is responsible for the brownish discolouration upon bruising . 
 = 2009 Orange Bowl = 
 The 2009 FedEx Orange Bowl was the 75th edition of the annual American college football bowl game known as the Orange Bowl . It pitted the 2008 Atlantic Coast Conference ( ACC ) champion Virginia Tech Hokies against the Big East Conference champion Cincinnati Bearcats on January 1 , 2009 , at Dolphin Stadium in Miami Gardens , Florida . Virginia Tech defeated Cincinnati , 20 – 7 . The game was the second contest in the 2008 – 2009 Bowl Championship Series ( BCS ) of the 2008 NCAA Division I FBS football season and was the concluding game of the season for both teams . The game was televised in the United States on FOX , and an estimated 9 @.@ 3 million viewers watched the broadcast live . 
 Virginia Tech was selected to participate in the Orange Bowl after a 9 – 4 season that culminated in a 30 – 12 victory in the 2008 ACC Championship Game . Cincinnati was selected as the other half of the matchup after an 11 – 2 season that ended with a 29 – 24 win against Hawaii . In the weeks between the teams ' selection and the playing of the game , media attention focused on the nature of Cincinnati 's first BCS game appearance and Virginia Tech 's attempt to win its first BCS game since 1995 . Attention also focused on Cincinnati 's proficient offense and Virginia Tech 's highly rated defense . 
 The game kicked off at 8 : 47 p.m. Eastern Standard Time in warm weather , and Cincinnati scored first , converting the game 's opening possession into a touchdown and a 7 – 0 lead in the first quarter . Virginia Tech responded in the second quarter , tying the game at seven before taking a 10 – 7 lead with a field goal as time expired in the first half . In the third quarter , the two teams battled defensively , with only the Hokies able to score any points as Tech extended its lead to 13 – 7 . During the final quarter , Virginia Tech scored its second touchdown of the game , giving the Hokies a 20 – 7 lead that lasted until time expired . 
 In recognition of his performance during the game , Virginia Tech running back Darren Evans was named the game 's most valuable player . He set a Virginia Tech bowl @-@ game record for carries and tied the Tech record for rushing yards in a bowl game . Cincinnati replaced two coaches after the loss , and three months after the game , players from each team entered the National Football League ( NFL ) via the 2009 NFL Draft . Cincinnati had six players selected in the draft , while Virginia Tech had one . 
 = = Team selection = = 
 The Orange Bowl is one of five Bowl Championship Series ( BCS ) bowl games that have been played at the conclusion of every college football season since 2006 . As defined by contract , the bowl matches the champion of the Atlantic Coast Conference ( ACC ) against an at @-@ large pick chosen by a special committee . On December 6 , 2008 , the Virginia Tech Hokies defeated the Boston College Eagles in the 2008 ACC Championship Game , thus winning an automatic bid to the 2009 Orange Bowl Game . 
 The at @-@ large spot in the Orange Bowl was filled via a round @-@ robin selection procedure defined by the other Bowl Championship series games ( the Sugar , Fiesta , and Rose bowls ) and the automatic bids . The order of at @-@ large selections rotates annually among the BCS bowls . In 2009 , the Fiesta Bowl picked first , followed by the Sugar Bowl , then the Orange Bowl . The Fiesta Bowl picked Ohio State , while the Sugar Bowl selected Utah . The Orange Bowl was thus left to select Big East Conference champion Cincinnati , fulfilling the BCS ' contractual obligation to provide a game for the conference 's champion . 
 = = = Cincinnati = = = 
 The Cincinnati Bearcats ended the 2007 college football season with a 10 – 2 record , including a win in the 2007 PapaJohns.com Bowl over Southern Miss , 31 – 21 . It was only the second time in school history that Cincinnati had won 10 games in a season . Before the 2008 season , the Bearcats hoped quarterback Ben Mauk would be allowed to play an unusual sixth year of college football , a possibility created by a year lost to injury and a redshirt year . After Mauk 's request was denied by the NCAA , the annual poll of media covering Big East football picked Cincinnati to finish fifth in the eight @-@ team Big East . 
 The Bearcats opened the 2008 college football season against Eastern Kentucky , winning 40 – 7 in an offensive effort led by senior quarterback Dustin Grutza , who was named the team 's starter at that position following Mauk 's dismissal . For its second game of the season , Cincinnati traveled to Norman , Oklahoma , to face the Oklahoma Sooners for the first time . In a 52 – 26 loss to a team that would play for the national championship that season , Grutza broke his ankle and was replaced by junior Tony Pike . 
 For their third game of the season , the Bearcats returned to <unk> Stadium — their home field — to play the first of two Mid @-@ American Conference ( MAC ) opponents , in @-@ state rival Miami . In the 113th Battle for the Victory Bell , Cincinnati won , 45 – 20 . Following the victory against Miami , the Bearcats traveled to Akron , Ohio to play the Akron Zips . Against the Zips , Pike broke his arm and was replaced by redshirt freshman Chazz Anderson , who was also injured during the game . Fellow redshirt freshman Zach <unk> then entered the game and led the Bearcats to a 17 – 15 victory . The close win against Akron was followed by a 33 – 10 win over Marshall , the Bearcats ' final nonconference game before beginning Big East play . 
 At the start of conference play , the Bearcats were 4 – 1 , and their only loss was against top @-@ five opponent Oklahoma . With Pike still injured , Cincinnati beat Rutgers , 13 – 10 , in the Bearcats ' first Big East game of the season . The Bearcats suffered their second defeat of the season in the following week , however , losing to the UConn Huskies , 40 – 16 . Pike returned from the injury and had the Bearcats leading at halftime , but he left the game at the half when numbness in his non @-@ throwing hand prevented him from being able to take the snap . In the two weeks that followed the loss to the Huskies , Cincinnati recovered to beat two top @-@ 25 opponents : No. 23 South Florida and No. 20 West Virginia . The two victories pushed the Bearcats to a 3 – 1 conference record and the No. 22 position in the AP Poll before Cincinnati 's annual rivalry game against Louisville . That game , also known as the Battle for The Keg of Nails , ended in a Cincinnati victory for the first time since 2002 . 
 Following the rivalry game win , Cincinnati played the Pittsburgh Panthers in a game for control of first place in the Big East . In front of a record crowd at Cincinnati 's home field , the Bearcats claimed first place with a 28 – 21 win . Heading into its game against the Syracuse Orange , Cincinnati was assured at least a share of the Big East Championship , but a 30 – 10 win over Syracuse gave the Bearcats sole possession of the championship , the first Big East title in school history . After clinching the Big East Championship and a bid to a BCS bowl , Cincinnati ended the regular season with a game in Hawaii against the Hawaiʻi Warriors . Despite trailing for much of the game , the Bearcats scored 19 unanswered points and ended the regular season with a 29 – 24 victory . Already assured a BCS berth by virtue of their Big East championship , on December 7 , 2008 , the Bearcats were selected to participate in the 2009 Orange Bowl . 
 = = = Virginia Tech = = = 
 The Virginia Tech Hokies entered the 2008 season after an 11 – 3 overall 2007 record that included a win in the 2007 ACC Championship Game and a loss to the Kansas Jayhawks in the 2008 Orange Bowl . Although the Hokies won the ACC for the second time in less than four years , fans and analysts anticipated Virginia Tech would spend 2008 rebuilding a team that saw 12 starters graduate or enter the National Football League ( NFL ) Draft . Though picked in a preseason poll to win the Coastal Division of the ACC , the Hokies were upset in their season opener by East Carolina University . 
 Following the loss , Virginia Tech head coach Frank Beamer announced that backup quarterback Tyrod Taylor , who had previously been expected to redshirt and sit out the season , would play in the Hokies ' second game , against Furman . Both Taylor and Sean Glennon performed well against Furman , and Tech won , 24 – 7 . Tech 's third game of the season came against the Georgia Tech Yellow Jackets , who were debuting a new offensive system the spread option under first @-@ year head coach Paul Johnson . Unlike the game against Furman , Taylor started the game and remained at quarterback throughout , guiding the Hokies to their first ACC victory of the season , 20 – 17 . The win gave Tech the tiebreaker against the Yellow Jackets in the event of a tie in the division standings at the end of the season . The Hokies ' fourth game of the season came against the North Carolina Tar Heels , who were defeated by the same margin of victory as Tech 's win against Georgia Tech , 20 – 17 . 
 The twin conference victories were followed by two out @-@ of @-@ conference wins : at Big 12 opponent Nebraska and against independent Western Kentucky . At the end of the four @-@ game winning streak , the Hokies had a 4 – 1 record , 2 – 0 in conference , and were ranked No. 17 in the country . On October 18 , however , the Hokies lost to unranked Boston College in Boston , 28 – 23 . The game was a rematch of the previous year 's ACC Championship Game and was a preview of the 2008 ACC Championship Game matchup . The loss was the start of a skid that saw Tech lose three of four games , only managing a victory against Maryland , 23 – 13 . The final contest of that four @-@ game stretch was a 16 – 13 loss to Coastal Division rival Miami , which then held the tiebreaker over the Hokies in the event of any head @-@ to @-@ head tie . 
 During the last two games of the regular season , however , the Hokies managed two victories : a 14 – 3 win against last @-@ place ACC team Duke , and a 17 – 14 triumph over traditional rival Virginia . Miami , meanwhile , lost its final two games of the season : against Georgia Tech and North Carolina State . These losses dropped Miami to a 4 – 4 record in the ACC , one game behind the Hokies , who were tied with Georgia Tech at 5 – 3 following the end of the regular season . By virtue of the Hokies ' head @-@ to @-@ head win against the Yellow Jackets , Virginia Tech won the Coastal Division and a spot in the ACC Championship Game . When Tech won the championship game against Atlantic Division champion Boston College , 30 – 12 , it was awarded the ACC 's automatic bid to the Orange Bowl . 
 = = Pregame buildup = = 
 Pregame media coverage of the game focused on the fact that the 2009 Orange Bowl was Cincinnati 's first Bowl Championship Series game in school history . For Virginia Tech , coverage focused on the Hokies ' winless history in BCS games since 1995 , as Tech had lost all four of its appearances in a BCS game since an upset win over Texas in the 1995 Sugar Bowl . Also mentioned was the fact that the two teams had faced each other in the 1947 Sun Bowl , which had been each school 's first bowl game . The low win rate of ACC teams in general was another point of interest . Teams from the conference had won just one of their ten appearances in a BCS bowl before the Orange Bowl . Before the Orange Bowl matchup , the two teams last played in 2006 , when the Hokies defeated the Bearcats , 29 – 13 , at Virginia Tech 's home field , Lane Stadium . For the Orange Bowl , spread bettors favored a reversal of that 2006 final , as Cincinnati was initially favored by one point . This expanded to 1 @.@ 5 points by December 9 . The trend toward Cincinnati continued , and on December 27 , betting organizations gave Cincinnati the edge by two or two and a half points . 
 The game featured two teams both ranked lower than the two teams playing in a non @-@ BCS bowl , a first in BCS history . The 2008 Poinsettia Bowl featured the No. 9 Boise State Broncos against the No. 11 TCU Horned Frogs . In Miami , Virginia Tech and Cincinnati each made preparations to switch accommodations to a different hotel on the day before the game to better simulate the feel of a regular @-@ season game . Cincinnati 's move was accelerated a day when rapper Sean " Diddy " Combs moved into the hotel and coaches , seeking to avoid a distraction , moved up the date of the team 's departure . 
 = = = Ticket sales = = = 
 The pace of ticket sales for the Orange Bowl varied wildly between the two schools . Each team received an allotment of 17 @,@ 500 tickets to sell to its fans , and each school sold about 4 @,@ 000 tickets in the two days immediately following the announcement . Media covering Virginia Tech considered the rate of ticket sales to be slow because the Hokies had sold 50 percent more during a similar timeframe the previous year . Media following Cincinnati ticket sales considered the pace to be fast , calling the Orange Bowl game a " hot ticket " . The $ 125 tickets sold by Cincinnati generated the largest amount of ticket sale revenue ever recorded by the Cincinnati Athletics Department , netting the school more than $ 500 @,@ 000 in the first day of sales . Travel agencies offered packages including game tickets , airfare , and a hotel room to fans of both teams . Owing to the demand , fans were warned against the danger of counterfeit tickets . 
 In the days immediately following the announcement of the matchup , ticket sales diverged . By December 12 , Cincinnati sold about 9 @,@ 000 tickets . This total increased to approximately 13 @,@ 000 tickets by December 20 , and the school prepared multiple tour buses for a student convoy to the game . At Virginia Tech , meanwhile , sales lagged . In an effort to spur sales , Tech administrators had head football coach Frank Beamer star in a video asking Hokies fans to buy tickets to the game . Owing to limited demand for tickets , prices in the secondary market plunged . 
 As late as December 31 , neither team had sold its entire allotment of 17 @,@ 500 tickets . Cincinnati fans had bought 13 @,@ 000 tickets , while Virginia Tech fans bought fewer than 5 @,@ 000 tickets from the school 's allotment . Countering Virginia Tech 's low direct ticket sales were large numbers of fans who avoided paying face value for tickets — US $ 125 — by buying them on the secondary market , often for as little as 99 cents . 
 = = = Cincinnati offense = = = 
 Before the Orange Bowl , Cincinnati was ranked 50th ( of 119 Division I FBS teams ) in total offense . The team was ranked 24th in passing offense , with the five quarterbacks pressed into service during the season averaging 254 @.@ 1 passing yards per game . By the end of the season , Tony Pike emerged as Cincinnati 's sole starting quarterback . He finished the regular season having completed 183 of 291 pass attempts for 2 @,@ 168 yards , 18 touchdowns , and 7 interceptions . He ranked second in the Big East and 29th nationally in passing efficiency with a passer rating of 141 @.@ 07 . 
 Among Cincinnati receivers , there was none of the uncertainty that afflicted the Bearcats ' quarterbacks . Wide receiver Mardy Gilyard caught 74 passes during the regular season , setting a Cincinnati record with 1 @,@ 118 receiving yards . He also had 10 touchdowns during the season , leading all Cincinnati players . Gilyard also played as the Bearcats ' primary kick returner . He returned 32 kicks , accumulating a school @-@ record 897 yards and 2 touchdowns . Fellow wide receiver Dominick Goodman outpaced Gilyard in receptions with 78 , but he had only 977 receiving yards and 7 touchdowns . On the first play of Cincinnati 's game against Hawaiʻi , Dominick injured his shoulder and his ability to play in the Orange Bowl was in doubt . 
 Cincinnati 's ground offense was less statistically significant than its passing offense . It was led by running back Jacob Ramsey , who carried the ball 148 times for 630 yards and two touchdowns . Backup running back John Goebel had 124 rushing attempts for 581 yards and 7 touchdowns . 
 = = = Virginia Tech offense = = = 
 At the conclusion of the regular season before the Orange Bowl , Virginia Tech 's offense was ranked among the worst in Division I , 107th among 119 teams . The Hokies averaged just 296 yards per game during the regular season , and during the ACC Championship Game — the last Tech game before the Orange Bowl — had created a season @-@ low 234 yards of offense . Starting left guard Nick Marshman was not expected to play after becoming academically ineligible following the fall semester , and was replaced by redshirt freshman <unk> Brooks . 
 On the field , the Hokies ' offense was led by quarterback Tyrod Taylor , who completed 86 of his 151 pass attempts for 896 yards , 2 touchdowns , and 6 interceptions in the season before the Orange Bowl . He also carried the ball 132 times for a total gain of 691 yards and 6 touchdowns on the ground . As successful as Taylor was rushing the ball , Virginia Tech 's offense on the ground was led by freshman running back Darren Evans , who set a Virginia Tech freshman record for rushing yards by accumulating 1 @,@ 112 during the regular season . He also scored 10 touchdowns , was named a second @-@ team All @-@ ACC player , and finished second in the voting for the ACC 's rookie of the year award . Evans became the sixth freshman in the history of the Atlantic Coast Conference to rush for more than 1 @,@ 000 yards and set a Virginia Tech single @-@ game record for rushing yards when he ran for 253 yards in Tech 's game against Maryland . 
 = = = Cincinnati defense = = = 
 Entering the Orange Bowl , the Bearcats were ranked 26th in total defense , allowing an average of 316 yards per game to opposing offenses . Cincinnati was 26th in scoring defense , permitting an average of 20 @.@ 2 points per game . The Bearcats were No. 1 in sacks among Big East teams , recording 35 during the season . 
 Defensive end Connor Barwin led the Bearcats ' defense in sacks with 11 , a figure that also was the highest in the Big East and No. 14 nationally . He finished the regular season with 48 tackles , a figure that included the 11 sacks . In recognition of his performance , he was named a first @-@ team All @-@ Big East selection , signifying his status as the best player at his position in the conference . 
 In the defensive secondary , the Bearcats were led by cornerback Mike Mickens and safety Brandon Underwood . Mickens was a second @-@ team All @-@ Big East selection , and Underwood was a first @-@ team All @-@ Big East selection . Mickens was Cincinnati 's career leader in interceptions and interception return yardage , and had 65 tackles ( third on the team ) despite missing three games due to injury . Underwood was fifth on the team in tackles with 60 , and had 3 interceptions and 6 pass breakups . 
 The most notable player for Cincinnati , however , was punter Kevin Huber , who was named an Associated Press All @-@ American and became the first player in Bearcats history to earn that honor in two consecutive years . Thanks to Huber 's performance during the regular season , Cincinnati led the country in punting average ( 41 @.@ 5 yards per kick ) and was No. 1 in the Big East for the second consecutive year . 
 = = = Virginia Tech defense = = = 
 Virginia Tech 's defense was considered among the best in Division I before the Orange Bowl . The Hokies were ranked seventh in total defense , allowing just 277 @.@ 08 yards per game on average . Virginia Tech also was highly ranked in several other defensive categories : eighth in turnovers gained ( 30 ) , 13th in scoring defense ( 17 @.@ 46 points per game ) , 15th in pass defense ( 170 @.@ 08 yards per game ) , and 19th in rushing defense ( 107 @.@ 00 yards per game ) . The Hokies ' defense also scored five defensive touchdowns during the regular season . 
 Tech 's defense was led on the field by senior cornerback Victor " Macho " Harris . During the regular season , Harris tied for fifth in the country in interceptions with six , including two returned for touchdowns . He also had 44 tackles , and was named the top defensive player in the state of Virginia . At defensive end , Tech featured Orion Martin , a former walk @-@ on who rose to a starting position and had 7 @.@ 5 sacks , 13 tackles for loss , and 53 tackles during the regular season . Heading into the Orange Bowl , the Hokies ' defense was afflicted by injuries . Defensive end Jason Worilds had a shoulder injury . Starting linebacker Brett Warren , who had 86 tackles , with 5 tackles for loss , 2 forced fumbles , and 2 interceptions during the regular season , suffered a torn anterior cruciate ligament and was expected to miss the game . 
 = = Game summary = = 
 The 2009 Orange Bowl kicked off at 8 : 47 p.m. Eastern Standard Time ( EST ) at Dolphin Stadium in Miami Gardens , Florida . An estimated total of 73 @,@ 602 tickets were sold for the game , but bowl officials estimated 15 @,@ 781 sold tickets went unused , giving a turnstile attendance of 57 @,@ 821 . The game was televised on FOX , and the announcers were Thom Brennaman , Charles Davis , and Chris Myers . An estimated 9 @.@ 3 million viewers watched the broadcast , earning it a Nielsen rating of 5 @.@ 4 . Figures on the total payout vary , but Virginia Tech and Cincinnati each received between $ 17 million and $ 18 million for playing in the Orange Bowl , an amount that was shared with the other teams in each school 's athletic conference . 
 The ceremonial performance of the national anthem was played on trumpet by Arturo Sandoval . At the start of the game , the weather was clear , with an air temperature of 68 ° F ( 20 ° C ) and relative humidity of 69 percent . The wind was from the northeast at 7 miles per hour ( 11 km / h ) . J. O 'Neill was the referee , B. Neale was the umpire , and the linesman was J. Quinn . Orange Bowl Committee chairman Daniel Ponce performed the ceremonial pre @-@ game coin toss to determine first possession . The toss was won by Virginia Tech , which elected to receive the ball to begin the second half , ensuring Cincinnati the right to receive the ball to begin the game . 
 = = = First quarter = = = 
 Virginia Tech 's opening kickoff was returned to the Cincinnati 28 @-@ yard line , where the Bearcats executed the game 's first play , a five @-@ yard run by running back John Goebel . On the next play , the Bearcats earned the game 's initial first down with a 13 @-@ yard pass from quarterback Tony Pike to wide receiver Dominick Goodman . Now at their 46 @-@ yard line , Pike then threw his second @-@ longest completed pass of the game , a 38 @-@ yard pass to wide receiver Mardy Gilyard . The play advanced the Bearcats ' offense to the Virginia Tech 16 @-@ yard line , and three plays later , Pike completed a 15 @-@ yard pass to Gilyard for a touchdown and the game 's first points . The extra point kick by Cincinnati kicker Jake Rogers was good , and with 13 : 08 remaining in the opening quarter , the Bearcats took a 7 – 0 lead over Virginia Tech . 
 Cincinnati 's kickoff after the touchdown was returned to the Virginia Tech 24 @-@ yard line , and the Hokies prepared for their first offensive possession of the game . That play was a 27 @-@ yard run by wide receiver Dyrell Roberts , who ran an end @-@ around for the big gain . Now on the Cincinnati side of the field , Virginia Tech running Back Darren Evans ran for one yard , then Hokies quarterback Tyrod Taylor completed a 34 @-@ yard pass to wide receiver Danny Coale . The catch gave Virginia Tech a first down at the Cincinnati 14 @-@ yard line . On the first play following the long completion , Evans was tackled for a six @-@ yard loss , pushing the Hokies back to the Bearcats ' 20 @-@ yard line . On the next two plays , Tyrod Taylor rushed for a total of 11 yards , but was unable to gain another first down . Facing fourth down , Virginia Tech head coach Frank Beamer sent kicker Dustin Keys into the game to attempt a 26 @-@ yard field goal . The kick sailed right of the uprights , however , and Virginia Tech was denied a scoring opportunity . 
 After the missed kick , Cincinnati 's offense took to the field at their 20 @-@ yard line . The Bearcats were not able to gain a first down , however , and went three and out before punting back to Virginia Tech . Following the kick , the Hokies started at their 16 @-@ yard line . Tech 's first play of the drive was a 14 @-@ yard pass from Taylor to wide receiver Jarrett Boykin for a first down , but the Hokies were unable to gain another first down . Tech punted back to Cincinnati , and the ball rolled out of bounds at the Cincinnati 30 @-@ yard line . The first play of the drive resulted in a short loss , but on the second play , Pike completed a 39 @-@ yard pass to Gilyard . The play advanced the Bearcats deep into Virginia Tech territory and gave them a first down . Despite the long play , Cincinnati was unable to gain another first down , and Rogers entered the game to attempt a 44 @-@ yard field goal . The kick was partially blocked and fell short , denying the Bearcats three points . With 3 : 07 remaining in the quarter , Cincinnati still held a 7 – 0 lead . 
 Following the missed field goal , Virginia Tech 's offense took over at their 27 @-@ yard line , the spot from which the kick had been missed . Taylor completed a 12 @-@ yard pass to Coale , then Evans ran 11 yards , advancing the ball to the 50 @-@ yard line . After a pass from Taylor fell incomplete , he completed his next two attempts for a total gain of 19 yards and a first down . Virginia Tech then committed a five @-@ yard false start penalty , pushing the Hokies back to the Cincinnati 26 @-@ yard line . With time running out in the quarter , however , Virginia Tech running back Josh Oglesby made good the penalty with a 13 @-@ yard run to the Cincinnati 23 @-@ yard line . At the end of the first quarter , Cincinnati still led , 7 – 0 . 
 = = = Second quarter = = = 
 The second quarter began with Virginia Tech in possession of the ball and facing a second down and two at the Cincinnati 24 @-@ yard line . On the first play of the quarter , Cincinnati committed an offsides penalty , giving the Hokies five yards and a first down . From the Bearcats ' 19 @-@ yard line , Taylor completed a two @-@ yard pass . On the next play , Taylor attempted to run forward with the ball , but fumbled before recovering the loose football . Now facing third down , Taylor scrambled 18 yards to the goal line for Virginia Tech 's first touchdown of the game . The extra point kick by Keys was good , and with 13 : 00 remaining in the quarter , the game was tied at 7 – 7 . 
 Virginia Tech 's post @-@ touchdown kickoff was returned to the Cincinnati 28 @-@ yard line , and the Bearcats ' offense began its first possession of the second quarter . Pike threw an incomplete pass , then connected on a 10 @-@ yard throw for a first down . That gain was countered on the next play by a 10 @-@ yard holding penalty against the Bearcats . Cincinnati was unable to regain the yardage lost to the penalty and punted . Following the kick , Virginia Tech was similarly stymied by consecutive penalties and a sack of Taylor by Cincinnati 's Terrill Byrd . Tech punted , and the kick was returned by Cincinnati wide receiver D.J. Woods to the Virginia Tech 45 @-@ yard line . Despite starting in Virginia Tech 's half of the field , Cincinnati was unable to capitalize and went three and out . The Bearcats ' punt was downed at the Virginia Tech three @-@ yard line , and the Hokies ' offense returned to the field . 
 Despite being pinned against their own goal line , the Hokies initially had some success moving the ball . Taylor completed a two @-@ yard pass , Evans ran for six yards , and Taylor ran for two yards on third down to earn a first down at the Tech 13 @-@ yard line . After a Tech timeout , Darren Evans ran for five yards . On the next play , he broke free for a 32 @-@ yard run , advancing the ball to the 50 @-@ yard line . The Hokies were unable to capitalize on Evans ' run , however , as on the next play , a pass from Taylor was intercepted by Cincinnati defender Brandon Underwood at the Cincinnati 28 @-@ yard line . 
 Cincinnati 's offense took over at the spot of the interception and immediately began moving down the field . Pike completed three consecutive passes : a five @-@ yard pass to Gilyard , a 10 @-@ yard throw to Goodman , then a 31 @-@ yard toss to Gilyard . After the long throw , Cincinnati had a first down at the Virginia Tech 26 @-@ yard line . The Bearcats continued their drive after an incomplete pass by Pike with an 18 @-@ yard completion to Goebel that gave the Bearcats a first down at the Virginia Tech eight @-@ yard line . Two plays later , however , Cincinnati 's drive came to an end when Virginia Tech defender Stephan Virgil intercepted a pass from Pike to a player in the end zone , denying the Bearcats a chance to score . Virgil was downed in the end zone for a touchback , and Virginia Tech 's offense started at its 20 @-@ yard line after the turnover . 
 Tech 's drive began with a completed pass for no gain to Evans . This was followed by a five @-@ yard run by Evans and a 23 @-@ yard pass from Taylor to tight end Greg Boone for a first down at the Tech 48 @-@ yard line . Taylor then completed a nine @-@ yard pass to Boone . After two plays were stopped for no gain , Taylor ran two yards for a first down , keeping the drive alive . With time running out in the first half , Taylor completed a nine @-@ yard pass to Boone , then ran six yards for a first down at the Cincinnati 26 @-@ yard line . The Hokies then called another timeout to stop the clock with three seconds remaining in the quarter . Tech kicker Dustin Keys returned to the game , and as time expired in the first half , he kicked a 43 @-@ yard field goal that gave the Hokies a 10 – 7 lead . 
 = = = Third quarter = = = 
 Following a halftime musical performance by The Doobie Brothers , the second half began . Because Cincinnati received the ball to begin the game , Virginia Tech received the ball to begin the second half . 
 The Bearcats ' kickoff was returned to the Tech 14 @-@ yard line , and the Hokies began the first drive of the third quarter . Evans rushed for four yards , but Oglesby lost four yards on a run during the next play . Facing third and ten , Taylor picked up the first down with an 11 @-@ yard run , but fumbled the ball at the end of the play . The loose ball was scooped up by Boone , who kept the Hokies ' drive going at the Tech 30 @-@ yard line . After the fumble , Evans ran for seven yards and Taylor completed a 10 @-@ yard pass to Roberts for a first down at the Tech 47 @-@ yard line . Coale then rushed for seven yards on an end @-@ around , and his run was followed by one by Boone , who ran for 16 yards and a first down at the Cincinnati 30 @-@ yard line . Two more rushes by Roberts and Evans resulted in another first down , but once the Hokies passed the Cincinnati 20 @-@ yard line , the Bearcats ' defense stiffened and denied the Hokies another first down . Facing fourth down , Tech again sent in Keys , who kicked a 35 @-@ yard field goal . The kick extended Tech 's lead to 13 – 7 with 8 : 32 remaining in the quarter . 
 Following Virginia Tech 's kickoff , Cincinnati began its first drive of the second half at its 36 @-@ yard line . Pike was stopped for no gain on a rushing attempt , then attempted a long pass downfield . The ball was intercepted by Virginia Tech defender Kam Chancellor , and the Hokies ' offense returned to the field after just two Cincinnati plays . Tech 's first play after the interception resulted in Taylor being sacked by Cincinnati defender Brandon Underwood for a loss of three yards , but Darren Evans made up the lost yardage by rushing 14 yards to the Tech 43 @-@ yard line for a first down . Taylor and Evans alternated short rushes , then Taylor completed a five @-@ yard pass to Coale for another first down , this one at the Cincinnati 47 @-@ yard line . Once in Cincinnati territory , however , the Hokies ' offense faltered . Evans was tackled for a two @-@ yard loss , then Taylor was sacked again , this time by John Hughes . A long pass attempt fell incomplete , and Tech punted for the first time in the second half . <unk> Danny Milligan fumbled the ball , but he recovered the loose ball and returned it to the Cincinnati 20 @-@ yard line . 
 The Bearcats ' second possession of the second half was more successful than their first . On the first play of the drive , running back Jacob Ramsey broke free of the Tech defense for a 25 @-@ yard run , the longest run of any Cincinnati player in the game . He followed that first @-@ down run by gaining eight more yards on consecutive runs . Pike then ran three yards for a first down at the Tech 44 @-@ yard line . There , however , Cincinnati 's offense sputtered and could not gain another first down . The Bearcats ' punted , and the ball rolled out of bounds at the Tech 14 @-@ yard line with six seconds remaining in the quarter . The Hokies had time for one play , a 21 @-@ yard run by Evans to the Tech 35 @-@ yard line . With one quarter remaining , Virginia Tech had a 13 – 7 lead over Cincinnati . 
 = = = Fourth quarter = = = 
 The fourth quarter began with Virginia Tech in possession of the ball and facing a first down at their 35 @-@ yard line . The first play of the quarter resulted in a 20 @-@ yard gain by Evans on a running play . After that , however , the Hokies did not gain another first down and punted to Cincinnati . Following the kick , the Bearcats started their first possession of the fourth quarter at their 14 @-@ yard line . Running back Isaiah <unk> ran for three yards , but then a pass by Pike was intercepted at the 10 @-@ yard line by Tech defender Orion Martin . Three rushing plays later , Evans ran six yards for a touchdown . The extra point kick was good , and with 11 : 29 remaining in the game , Virginia Tech took a 20 – 7 lead . 
 The Tech kickoff was returned 17 yards by Gilyard to the Cincinnati 40 @-@ yard line , giving the Bearcats good field position to start their drive . Two rushes by Goebel resulted in 11 yards and a first down at the Tech 49 @-@ yard line . This success on the ground was followed by more through the air , as Pike completed three consecutive passes : a 16 @-@ yarder to Gilyard , a 3 @-@ yarder to Goodman , and a 14 @-@ yarder to Gilyard . Goebel then ran five yards to the Tech 11 @-@ yard line . Two Pike passes fell incomplete , setting up fourth down . Rather than attempt to kick a field goal , Cincinnati head coach Brian Kelly ordered the offense to attempt to convert the fourth down . This was done when Pike completed a seven @-@ yard pass to Goodman for a first down at the Virginia Tech four @-@ yard line . Two more Pike passes fell incomplete before Goebel rushed three yards to the Virginia Tech one @-@ yard line . Cincinnati again faced a fourth down , and again , Kelly elected to attempt to score a touchdown rather than kick a field goal . Pike attempted to cross the goal line on a running play , but was stopped by the Virginia Tech defense . With 7 : 25 remaining in the game , Cincinnati turned the ball over on downs to the Virginia Tech offense , which returned to the field . 
 With a firm lead and now in possession of the ball , Virginia Tech began to run out the clock by executing short rushing plays up the center of the field . Since the game clock does not stop in American college football if a player remains in bounds short of the first down marker , the Hokies could hasten the end of the game and preserve their lead by following this strategy . From their one @-@ yard line , Taylor ran the ball for a one @-@ yard gain , followed by two rushes by Evans for another four yards . The Hokies prepared to punt the ball , but during the kick , Cincinnati committed a 15 @-@ yard personal foul penalty by tackling Tech punter Brent Bowden . The penalty gave Virginia Tech a first down and kept their drive going . From the Tech 21 @-@ yard line , Evans was stopped for a loss of one yard , but broke free for an 11 @-@ yard gain and a first down on the next play . As the clock continued to tick down , Cincinnati began to use its timeouts in an effort to stop the clock after each play . This strategy was partially successful , as Tech was denied another first down and punted with 2 : 31 remaining in the game . 
 The kick was returned to the Cincinnati 48 @-@ yard line , and the Bearcats prepared for a desperation drive in hopes of narrowing the Hokies ' lead . On the first play after the punt , however , Pike threw an interception to Virginia Tech defender Cody Grimm . Back in possession of the ball , Taylor kneeled on the ball four times to wind down the game clock . After the final <unk> , Virginia Tech secured the 20 – 7 win . 
 = = Statistical summary = = 
 In recognition of his performance during the game , Virginia Tech running back Darren Evans was named the game 's most valuable player . Evans finished the game with 28 carries for 158 yards and a touchdown . He also caught two passes for five yards , set a Virginia Tech bowl @-@ game record for carries , and tied the Tech record for rushing yards . Evans finished the season with 1 @,@ 265 rushing yards and 11 touchdowns – both marks were Virginia Tech records for a freshman . On the opposite side of the ball , Cincinnati 's rushing offense was led by Jacob Ramsey , who finished the game with 4 carries for 34 yards . Cincinnati 's John Goebel had nine carries but only accumulated 26 rushing yards . 
 Most of the Bearcats ' offense came through the air , however . Cincinnati quarterback Tony Pike finished the game having completed 16 of his 33 pass attempts , resulting in 239 passing yards , 1 touchdown , and 4 interceptions . Pike also ran the ball five times for four yards . Pike 's four interceptions were a career high and marked only the second time he threw more than one interception in a game . For Virginia Tech , quarterback Tyrod Taylor finished the game with 13 completions from 22 pass attempts , resulting in 140 passing yards and 1 interception . In addition to his passing , Taylor ran with the ball 15 times , gaining 47 yards and a touchdown in the process . 
 Taylor 's favorite passing targets were wide receiver Danny Coale , who finished the game having caught three passes for 52 yards , and tight end Greg Boone , who caught 3 balls for 41 yards . On the Bearcats ' side of the field , Cincinnati 's Mardy Gilyard led all receivers with 7 catches for 158 yards and a touchdown . Gilyard 's receiving total was his best of the season and set a new Cincinnati bowl @-@ game record . He also set a Bearcat bowl @-@ game record for kickoff return yardage , recording 97 yards in that category . Fellow Cincinnati receiver Dominick Goodman caught 6 passes for 51 yards , in the process becoming Cincinnati 's all @-@ time leader in career receiving yards . 
 The two teams ' defenses also performed statistically well during the game . Cincinnati 's Terrill Byrd led all defenders by recording 11 tackles during the game . Included in that total were four tackles for loss , including one sack . That performance was his best in terms of quantity during the season , and his four tackles for loss moved him into sixth place on Cincinnati 's list of career tackles for loss leaders . For the Hokies , Dorian Porch had eight tackles , leading all Tech players . Cody Grimm , Orion Martin , Stephan Virgil , and Kam Chancellor each recorded one interception . The four interceptions were a Tech bowl @-@ game record , and Chancellor 's catch gave him six for the season , tying him with Victor Harris for the most on the team . It was the first time since 1968 that two Virginia Tech players had six interceptions apiece . Cincinnati 's sole interception came at the hands of Brandon Underwood , who tallied his third of the season . 
 Each team found success on special teams as well . Cincinnati punter Kevin Huber , a first @-@ team All @-@ American , kicked the ball four times , averaging 45 @.@ 8 yards per punt . A 56 @-@ yard punt in the first quarter marked the ninth consecutive game he had a kick of at least 50 yards . Virginia Tech placekicker Dustin Keys missed his first field goal attempt of the game but successfully converted his next two kicks , giving him 23 field goals and the Tech single @-@ season record in that category . 
 = = Postgame effects = = 
 Virginia Tech 's victory raised it to a final record of 10 – 4 , while Cincinnati 's loss dropped it to a record of 11 – 3 . The Hokies ' 10 @-@ win season was the fifth consecutive year in which Tech recorded at least 10 wins , a feat matched only by the University of Southern California and the University of Texas during the same time period . As a reward for coaching the Hokies to an ACC Championship and an Orange Bowl championship , Virginia Tech coaches were given hundreds of thousands of dollars in bonuses . 
 In Miami , hoteliers and Dolphins Stadium had to quickly prepare for the arrival of Oklahoma and Florida , the two teams that played in the 2009 BCS National Championship Game one week after the Orange Bowl . Signs were changed , the playing field was repainted , and accommodations were prepared for the thousands of expected spectators . In total , South Florida 's economy received an estimated $ 220 million boost from visitors who arrived to watch the two games . 
 = = = Coaching changes = = = 
 In the postseason that followed the Bearcats ' loss to Virginia Tech , Cincinnati assistant head coach and defensive line coach Keith Gilmore resigned to accept the position of defensive line coach at the University of Illinois . To replace Gilmore , Cincinnati promoted special teams coach Mike Elston , who assumed assistant coaching and defensive line duties . In February , Cincinnati defensive coordinator Joe <unk> was fired by the school . He subsequently was hired by the University of South Florida to fill that school 's vacant defensive coordinator position . Replacing <unk> is Virginia defensive coordinator Bob <unk> . 
 = = = 2009 NFL Draft = = = 
 As the final game of the 2008 – 2009 regular season , the 2009 Orange Bowl gave Virginia Tech and Cincinnati players a chance to show their skills before the 2009 NFL Draft . Cincinnati had six players selected in the draft . Defensive end Connor Barwin was the first Bearcats player taken . He was picked in the second round , 46th overall . He was followed by punter Kevin Huber ( 142nd overall ) , cornerback DeAngelo Smith ( 143rd ) , cornerback Brandon Underwood ( 187th ) , cornerback Mike Mickens ( 227th ) , and guard Trevor Canfield ( 254th ) . Several Cincinnati players were signed as free agents after the draft . These included defensive tackle Adam <unk> , linebacker Corey Smith , and offensive lineman Khalil El @-@ Amin . 
 Virginia Tech had just one player taken in the 2009 draft : cornerback Victor Harris , who was picked by the Philadelphia Eagles with the 157th overall selection . Four Hokies were taken as free @-@ agent selections after the draft . Defensive end Orion Martin , quarterback Sean Glennon , center Ryan Shuman , and fullback Devin Perez were signed to try out for various NFL teams . 
 = Midazolam = 
 Midazolam , marketed under the trade names <unk> among others , is a medication used for anesthesia , procedural sedation , trouble sleeping , and severe agitation . It works by making people sleepy , decreasing anxiety , and causing a loss of ability to create new memories . It is also useful for the treatment of seizures . Midazolam can be given by mouth , intravenously , by injection into a muscle , sprayed into the nose , or in the cheek . When given intravenously it begins working typically within five minutes , when injected into a muscle it can take fifteen minutes to begin working . Effects last for between one and six hours . 
 Side effects can include a decrease in efforts to breathe , low blood pressure , and sleepiness . Tolerance to its effects and withdrawal syndrome may occur following long term use . Paradoxical effects , such as increased activity , can occur especially in children and older people . There is evidence of risk when used during pregnancy but no evidence of harm with a single dose during breastfeeding . It is of the benzodiazepine class and works through the GABA neurotransmitter . 
 Midazolam first came into use in 1976 . It is on the WHO Model List of Essential Medicines , the most important medications needed in a basic health system . Midazolam is available as a generic medication and is not very expensive . The wholesale cost in the developing world of a vial is about 0 @.@ 35 USD . In many countries it is a controlled substance . 
 = = Medical uses = = 
 = = = Seizures = = = 
 Midazolam is sometimes used for the acute management of seizures . Long @-@ term use for the management of epilepsy is not recommended , however , due to the significant risk of tolerance ( which renders midazolam and other benzodiazepines ineffective ) and the significant side effect of sedation . A benefit of midazolam is that in children it can be administered buccally or intranasally at home or at school for emergency control of acute seizures , including status epilepticus . Midazolam is effective for status epilepticus that has not improved following other treatments , and has advantages of being water @-@ soluble , having a rapid onset of action and not causing metabolic acidosis from the propylene glycol vehicle , which occurs with other benzodiazepines . <unk> include a high degree of breakthrough seizures — due to the short half @-@ life of midazolam — in over 50 % of people treated , as well as treatment failure in 14 – 18 % of people with refractory status epilepticus . Tolerance develops rapidly to the anticonvulsant effect , and the dose may need to be increased by several times to maintain anticonvulsant therapeutic effects . With prolonged use , tolerance and <unk> can occur and the elimination half @-@ life may increase , up to days . There is evidence buccal and intranasal midazolam is easier to administer and more effective than rectally administered diazepam in the emergency control of seizures . 
 = = = Procedural sedation = = = 
 Intravenous midazolam is indicated for procedural sedation ( often in combination with an opioid , such as fentanyl ) , for preoperative sedation , for the induction of general anesthesia , and for sedation of people who are ventilated in critical care units . Midazolam is superior to diazepam in impairing memory of endoscopy procedures , but propofol has a quicker recovery time and a better memory @-@ impairing effect . It is the most popular benzodiazepine in the intensive care unit ( ICU ) because of its short elimination half @-@ life , combined with its water solubility and its suitability for continuous infusion . However , for long @-@ term sedation , lorazepam is preferred due to its long duration of action , and propofol has advantages over midazolam when used in the ICU for sedation , such as shorter weaning time and earlier tracheal <unk> . 
 Midazolam is sometimes used in neonatal intensive care units . When used , additional caution is required in newborns ; midazolam should not be used for longer than 72 hours due to risks of <unk> , and the possibility of development of a benzodiazepine withdrawal syndrome , as well as neurological complications . <unk> injections should be avoided due to the increased risk of cardiovascular depression , as well as neurological complications . Midazolam is also sometimes used in newborns who are receiving mechanical ventilation , although morphine is preferred , owing to its better safety profile for this indication . 
 = = = Problems sleeping = = = 
 Oral midazolam is indicated for the short @-@ term treatment of moderately severe insomnia in people who have not reacted adequately to other hypnotics , and who have persistent trouble in falling asleep . Because of midazolam 's extremely short duration , it is not used for people who have trouble staying asleep through the night ; <unk> to long @-@ acting benzodiazepines , such as temazepam , nitrazepam , flunitrazepam , and lormetazepam , are used for those purposes . Midazolam and other benzodiazepines may cause a deterioration in sleep quality . 
 = = = Agitation = = = 
 Midazolam in combination with an antipsychotic drug is indicated for the acute management of schizophrenia when it is associated with aggressive or out @-@ of @-@ control behaviour . 
 = = = End of life care = = = 
 In the final stages of end @-@ of @-@ life care , midazolam is routinely used at low doses via subcutaneous injection to help with agitation , myoclonus , restlessness or anxiety in the last hours or days of life . At higher doses during the last weeks of life , midazolam is considered a first line agent in palliative continuous deep sedation therapy when it is necessary to alleviate intolerable suffering not responsive to other treatments , but the need for this is rare . 
 = = Contraindications = = 
 Benzodiazepines require special precaution if used in the elderly , during pregnancy , in children , in alcohol- or other drug @-@ dependent individuals or those with comorbid psychiatric disorders . Additional caution is required in critically ill patients , as accumulation of midazolam and its active metabolites may occur . Kidney or liver impairments may slow down the elimination of midazolam leading to prolonged and enhanced effects . Contraindications include hypersensitivity , acute narrow @-@ angle glaucoma , shock , hypotension or head injury . Most are relative contraindications . 
 = = Side effects = = 
 Side effects of midazolam in the elderly are listed above . People experiencing amnesia as a side effect of midazolam are generally unaware their memory is impaired , unless they had previously known it as a side effect . 
 Long @-@ term use of benzodiazepines has been associated with long @-@ lasting deficits of memory , and show only partial recovery six months after stopping benzodiazepines . It is unclear whether full recovery occurs after longer periods of abstinence . Benzodiazepines can cause or worsen depression . Paradoxical excitement occasionally occurs with benzodiazepines , including a worsening of seizures . Children and elderly individuals or those with a history of alcohol abuse and individuals with a history of aggressive behavior or anger are at increased risk of paradoxical effects . Paradoxical reactions are particularly associated with intravenous administration . After nighttime administration of midazolam , residual ' hangover ' effects , such as sleepiness and impaired psychomotor and cognitive functions , may persist into the next day . This may impair the ability of users to drive safely and may increase the risk of falls and hip fractures . Sedation , respiratory depression and hypotension due to a reduction in systematic vascular resistance , and an increase in heart rate can occur . If intravenous midazolam is given too quickly , hypotension may occur . A “ midazolam infusion syndrome ” may result from high doses , and is characterised by delayed arousal hours to days after discontinuation of midazolam , and may lead to an increase in the length of ventilatory support needed . 
 In susceptible individuals , midazolam has been known to cause a paradoxical reaction , a well @-@ documented complication with benzodiazepines . When this occurs , the individual may experience anxiety , involuntary movements , aggressive or violent behavior , uncontrollable crying or verbalization , and other similar effects . This seems to be related to the altered state of consciousness or disinhibition produced by the drug . Paradoxical behavior is often not recalled by the patient due to the amnesia @-@ producing properties of the drug . In extreme situations , flumazenil can be administered to inhibit or reverse the effects of midazolam . Antipsychotic medications , such as haloperidol , have also been used for this purpose . 
 Midazolam is known to cause respiratory depression . In healthy humans , 0 @.@ 15 mg / kg of midazolam may cause respiratory depression , which is postulated to be a central nervous system ( CNS ) effect . When midazolam is administered in combination with fentanyl , the incidence of hypoxemia or apnea becomes more likely . 
 Although the incidence of respiratory depression / arrest is low ( 0 @.@ 1 @-@ 0 @.@ 5 % ) when midazolam is administered alone at normal doses , the concomitant use with CNS acting drugs , mainly analgesic opiates , may increase the possibility of hypotension , respiratory depression , respiratory arrest , and death , even at therapeutics doses . Potential drug interactions involving at least one CNS depressant were observed for 84 % of midazolam users who were subsequently required to receive the benzodiazepine antagonist flumazenil . Therefore , efforts directed toward monitoring drug interactions and preventing injuries from midazolam administration are expected to have a substantial impact on the safe use of this drug . 
 = = = Pregnancy and breastfeeding = = = 
 Midazolam , when taken during the third trimester of pregnancy , may cause risk to the neonate , including benzodiazepine withdrawal syndrome , with possible symptoms including hypotonia , <unk> spells , cyanosis , and impaired metabolic responses to cold stress . Symptoms of hypotonia and the neonatal benzodiazepine withdrawal syndrome have been reported to persist from hours to months after birth . Other neonatal withdrawal symptoms include <unk> , tremor , and gastrointestinal upset ( diarrhea or vomiting ) . Breastfeeding by mothers using midazolam is not recommended . 
 = = = Elderly = = = 
 Additional caution is required in the elderly , as they are more sensitive to the pharmacological effects of benzodiazepines , metabolise them more slowly , and are more prone to adverse effects , including drowsiness , amnesia ( especially anterograde amnesia ) , ataxia , hangover effects , confusion , and falls . 
 = = = Tolerance , dependence , and withdrawal = = = 
 A benzodiazepine dependence occurs in about one @-@ third of individuals who are treated with benzodiazepines for longer than 4 weeks , which typically results in tolerance and benzodiazepine withdrawal syndrome when the dose is reduced too rapidly . Midazolam infusions may induce tolerance and a withdrawal syndrome in a matter of days . The risk factors for dependence include dependent personality , use of a benzodiazepine which is short @-@ acting , high potency and long @-@ term use of benzodiazepines . Withdrawal symptoms from midazolam can range from insomnia and anxiety to seizures and psychosis . Withdrawal symptoms can sometimes resemble a persons underlying condition . Gradual reduction of midazolam after regular use can minimise withdrawal and rebound effects . Tolerance and the resultant withdrawal syndrome may be due to receptor down @-@ regulation and GABAA receptor alterations in gene expression which results in long @-@ term changes in the function of the GABAergic neuronal system . 
 Chronic users of benzodiazepine medication who are given midazolam experience reduced therapeutic effects of midazolam , due to tolerance to benzodiazepines . Prolonged infusions with midazolam results in the development of tolerance ; if midazolam is given for a few days or more a withdrawal syndrome can occur . Therefore , in order to prevent a withdrawal syndrome a prolonged infusion needs to be gradually withdrawn and sometimes if necessary continued tapering of dose with an oral long @-@ acting benzodiazepine such as clorazepate dipotassium . When signs of tolerance to midazolam occur during intensive care unit sedation the addition of an opioid or propofol is recommended . Withdrawal symptoms can include irritability , abnormal reflexes , tremors , clonus , <unk> , delirium and seizures , nausea , vomiting , diarrhea , tachycardia , hypertension , and <unk> . 
 = = = Overdose = = = 
 A midazolam overdose is considered a medical emergency and generally requires the immediate attention of medical personnel . Benzodiazepine overdose in healthy individuals is rarely life @-@ threatening with proper medical support ; however , the toxicity of benzodiazepines increases when they are combined with other CNS depressants such as alcohol , opioids , or tricyclic antidepressants . The toxicity of benzodiazepine overdose and risk of death is also increased in the elderly and those with obstructive pulmonary disease or when used intravenously . Treatment is supportive ; activated charcoal can be used within an hour of the overdose . The antidote for an overdose of midazolam ( or any other benzodiazepine ) is flumazenil . While effective in reversing the effects of benzodiazepines it is not used in most cases as it may trigger seizures in mixed overdoses and benzodiazepine dependent individuals . 
 Symptoms of midazolam overdose can include : 
 = = = Detection in body fluids = = = 
 The concentrations of midazolam and / or its major metabolite , 1 @-@ <unk> glucuronide , may be quantified in plasma , serum or whole blood in order to monitor for safety in those receiving the drug therapeutically , to confirm a diagnosis of poisoning in hospitalized patients or to assist in a forensic investigation of a case of fatal overdosage . Patients with renal dysfunction may exhibit prolongation of elimination half @-@ life for both the parent drug and its active metabolite , with accumulation of these two substances in the bloodstream and the appearance of adverse depressant effects . 
 = = = Interactions = = = 
 Protease inhibitors , nefazodone , sertraline , grapefruit , fluoxetine , erythromycin , <unk> , clarithromycin inhibit the metabolism of midazolam , leading to a prolonged action . St John 's wort , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , phenytoin enhance the metabolism of midazolam leading to a reduced action . <unk> antidepressants , antiepileptic drugs such as phenobarbital , phenytoin and carbamazepine , sedative antihistamines , opioids , antipsychotics and alcohol enhance the sedative effects of midazolam . Midazolam is metabolized almost completely by cytochrome P450 @-@ 3A4 . <unk> administration along with midazolam results in a reduced elimination rate of midazolam . St John 's wort decreases the blood levels of midazolam . Grapefruit juice reduces intestinal 3A4 and results in less metabolism and higher plasma concentrations . 
 = = Pharmacokinetics = = 
 Midazolam is a short @-@ acting benzodiazepine in adults with an elimination half @-@ life of 1 @.@ 5 @-@ 2 @.@ 5 hours . In the elderly , as well as young children and adolescents , the elimination half @-@ life is longer . Midazolam is metabolised into an active metabolite <unk> @-@ <unk> . Age @-@ related deficits , renal and liver status affect the pharmacokinetic factors of midazolam as well as its active metabolite . However , the active metabolite of midazolam is minor and contributes to only 10 percent of biological activity of midazolam . Midazolam is poorly absorbed orally , with only 50 percent of the drug reaching the bloodstream . Midazolam is metabolised by cytochrome P450 ( CYP ) enzymes and by glucuronide conjugation . The therapeutic as well as adverse effects of midazolam are due to its effects on the GABAA receptors ; midazolam does not activate GABAA receptors directly but , as with other benzodiazepines , it enhances the effect of the neurotransmitter GABA on the GABAA receptors ( ↑ frequency of Cl − channel opening ) resulting in neural inhibition . Almost all of the properties can be explained by the actions of benzodiazepines on GABAA receptors . This results in the following pharmacological properties being produced : sedation , hypnotic , anxiolytic , anterograde amnesia , muscle relaxation and anti @-@ <unk> . 
 = = History = = 
 Midazolam is among about 35 benzodiazepines which are currently used medically , and was synthesised in 1975 by Walser and Fryer at Hoffmann @-@ LaRoche , Inc in the United States . Owing to its water solubility , it was found to be less likely to cause thrombophlebitis than similar drugs . The anticonvulsant properties of midazolam were studied in the late 1970s , but not until the 1990s did it emerge as an effective treatment for convulsive status epilepticus . As of 2010 , it is the most commonly used benzodiazepine in anesthetic medicine . In acute medicine , midazolam has become more popular than other benzodiazepines , such as lorazepam and diazepam , because it is shorter lasting , is more potent , and causes less pain at the injection site . Midazolam is also becoming increasingly popular in veterinary medicine due to its water solubility . 
 = = Society and culture = = 
 = = = Cost = = = 
 Midazolam is available as a generic medication and is not very expensive . Wholesale a vial is about 0 @.@ 35 USD . 
 = = = Availability = = = 
 Midazolam is available in the United States as a syrup or as an injectable solution . Outside of the United States , midazolam is available in tablet form for oral administration . 
 <unk> brand midazolam is marketed by Roche as white , oval , 7 @.@ 5 @-@ mg tablets in boxes of two or three blister strips of 10 tablets , and as blue , oval , 15 @-@ mg tablets in boxes of two ( <unk> 3x ) blister strips of 10 tablets . The tablets are imprinted with " Roche " on one side and the dose of the tablet on the other side . <unk> is also available as 1- , 3- , and 10 @-@ ml ampoules at a concentration of 5 mg / ml . Another manufacturer , Novell Pharmaceutical Laboratories , makes it available as <unk> in 3- and 5 @-@ ml ampoules . Midazolam is the only water @-@ soluble benzodiazepine available . Another maker is Roxanne Laboratories ; the product in an oral solution , Midazolam HCl Syrup , 2 mg / ml clear , in a red to purplish @-@ red syrup , cherry in flavor . It becomes soluble when the injectable solution is buffered to a pH of 2 @.@ 9 – 3 @.@ 7 . Midazolam is also available in liquid form . It can be administered intramuscularly , intravenously , <unk> , intranasally , buccally , or orally . 
 = = = Legal status = = = 
 In the Netherlands , midazolam is a List II drug of the Opium Law . Midazolam is a Schedule IV drug under the Convention on Psychotropic Substances . In the United Kingdom , midazolam is a Class C controlled drug . In the United States , midazolam ( DEA number <unk> ) is on the Schedule IV list of the Controlled Substances Act as a non @-@ narcotic agent with low potential for abuse . 
 = = = Marketing authorization = = = 
 In 2011 , the European Medicines Agency granted a marketing authorisation for a buccal application form of midazolam , sold under the trade name <unk> . <unk> was approved for the treatment of prolonged , acute , convulsive seizures in people from three months to less than 18 years of age . This was the first application of a paediatric @-@ use marketing authorisation . 
 = = = Use in executions = = = 
 The drug has been introduced for use in executions by lethal injection in certain jurisdictions in United States in combination with other drugs . It was introduced to replace pentobarbital after the latter 's manufacturer disallowed that drug 's use . 
 Midazolam has been used as part of a three @-@ drug cocktail , with vecuronium bromide and potassium chloride in Florida and Oklahoma prisons . Midazolam has also been used along with <unk> in a two @-@ drug protocol in Ohio and Arizona . Ohio used midazolam to execute Dennis McGuire in January 2014 . 
 Midazolam acts as a sedative to render the condemned prisoner unconscious , at which time the vecuronium bromide and potassium chloride are administered , stopping the prisoner 's breathing and heart , respectively . Florida used midazolam to execute William Happ in October 2013 . The usage of midazolam in executions has become controversial after condemned inmate Clayton Lockett apparently regained consciousness and started speaking midway through his execution when the state of Oklahoma attempted to execute him with an untested three @-@ drug lethal injection cocktail using 100 mg of midazolam . Prison officials reportedly discussed taking him to a hospital before he was pronounced dead of a heart attack 40 minutes after the execution began . An observing doctor stated that Lockett 's vein had ruptured . It is not clear which drug or drugs caused his death or what quantities of vecuronium bromide and potassium chloride were released before the execution was cancelled . 
 In <unk> v. Gross , three Oklahoma inmates argued that midazolam could not achieve the level of unconsciousness required for surgery , meaning severe pain and suffering was likely . They argued that midazolam was cruel and unusual punishment and thus contrary to the Eighth Amendment to the United States Constitution . In June 2015 , the U.S. Supreme Court ruled they failed to prove that midazolam was cruel and unusual when compared to known alternatives . 
 = The Legend of Zelda : The Minish Cap = 
 The Legend of Zelda : The Minish Cap ( / <unk> / ) ( Japanese : ゼルダの伝説 <unk> , Hepburn : Zeruda no Densetsu : Fushigi no <unk> , lit . The Legend of Zelda : The Mysterious Cap ) is an action @-@ adventure game and the twelfth entry in the The Legend of Zelda series . Developed by Capcom , with Nintendo overseeing the development process , it was released for the Game Boy Advance handheld game console in Japan and Europe in 2004 and in North America and Australia the following year . 
 The Minish Cap is the third Zelda game that involves the legend of the Four Sword , expanding on the story of Four Swords and Four Swords Adventures . A magical talking cap named Ezlo can shrink series protagonist Link to the size of the Minish , a bug @-@ sized race that live in Hyrule . The game retains some common elements from previous Zelda installments , such as the presence of Gorons , while introducing Kinstones and other new gameplay features . 
 The Minish Cap was generally well received among critics . It was named the 20th best Game Boy Advance game in an IGN feature , and was selected as the 2005 Game Boy Advance Game of the Year by GameSpot . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The plot of The Minish Cap revolves around the backstory of Vaati and the birth of the Four Sword , which were important elements of Four Swords and Four Swords Adventures . The Minish , also referred to as the Picori by the <unk> , are a race of tiny creatures that bestowed a young boy with a green garment , a sword , and a shining golden light to drive back the darkness many years before the game is set . There are three types of Minish : Town , Forest , and Mountain . 
 The quest begins when Link is chosen by the king of Hyrule to seek the help of the Picori after Vaati had destroyed the Picori Blade and petrified Princess Zelda . With the blade shattered , evil monsters were released into Hyrule and Vaati was able to create chaos in his search for the Light Force . Link was chosen because only children can see the Picori . On the voyage he rescues Ezlo , a strange being resembling a green cap with a bird @-@ like head , who joins him and can make Link shrink to the size of the Minish . Although it is not revealed at first , he and Vaati are Minish ( Picori ) — Ezlo a renowned sage and craftsman and Vaati his apprentice . Vaati became corrupted by the madness and hatred of men and took a magic hat Ezlo had made for the people in Hyrule . The hat grants any wish made by the bearer , and Vaati wished to become a powerful sorcerer . Vaati then turned his old master , who had tried to stop them , into a hat . With the help of Ezlo , Link retrieves the four elemental artifacts and uses them to restore the Picori Blade to the Four Sword , capable of defeating Vaati . 
 After Link restores the Four Sword , Vaati turns Hyrule Castle into Dark Hyrule Castle — the final dungeon in the game . Link fights Vaati just before he can drain Zelda of all of the Light Force hidden within her . Link defeats Vaati after engaging in a fight that consists of Vaati changing forms . When Link and Zelda flee from the collapsing castle , they meet Vaati as he again changes form for the final battle of the game . After the battle , Ezlo returns to his original form . He finds the cap of wishes he created and gives it to Zelda , granting her a wish . The people cursed by Vaati are cured and the castle is turned back to normal . The hat overflows with the power of life and disappears . Ezlo gives Link a new hat and tells him that he enjoyed traveling with him , then leaves just as the door to the Minish world closes . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 The Minish Cap retains the general gameplay features that were present in previous Zelda installments . The main protagonist , Link , must navigate several dungeons to obtain an item or enhancement at the end of each dungeon that is pivotal towards the quest . Each of the game 's " bosses " are defeated using the item acquired in the boss 's dungeon . The game also includes multiple " side quests " — optional tasks that are not part of the main quest but rewards for completion are beneficial to the gamer . Recurring characters in the Zelda series make appearances and some form part of side quests ; for example , Tingle and his brothers must all be contacted by the player to earn a reward . 
 The Minish Cap features a number of enhancements that benefit from the more powerful Game Boy Advance platform . The game 's camera angle is much closer to the ground , allowing more detail . In the overworld and in dungeons , the game replaces the traditional item interface of the handheld Zelda games with pictures associating items or actions with buttons , similar to the item interface in 3D titles like Ocarina of Time and The Wind Waker . Enemies include familiar creatures from the Zelda universe . Link can also perform special actions present in the 3D Zelda games , such as rolling while running . Along with returning items such as Bombs , Arrows and Pegasus Boots , The Minish Cap introduces three new items : the Mole Mitts , the Gust Jar , and the Cane of <unk> . The Mole Mitts allow Link to dig through dirt barriers to explore new areas , the Gust Jar can suck in nearby items and substances and can be used to suck up certain enemies and fire them as projectiles , and the Cane of <unk> can flip certain objects over and allow Link to launch himself out of holes in the ground . The game advances the combat system from previous handheld installments by allowing Link to learn new sword techniques throughout the game , some of which are techniques from previous games and some of which are new . As the game progresses , Link will collect Elements that fuse with his sword , allowing him make copies of himself using glowing floor panels , used to solve puzzles such as pushing large blocks or hitting multiple switches simultaneously . 
 = = = Kinstones = = = 
 Kinstones are special artifacts which Link can find throughout his quest . Kinstone pieces are fragments of a medallion that are found throughout the course of the game . If the player can find a character or object with a Kinstone piece ( indicated by a thought bubble above their heads ) , the player can try to fuse their Kinstone piece with one of their own to make a match . If a successful fusion is made , something will occur somewhere within the game 's world , including the placement of treasure chests , access to secret areas and certain events which occur among certain characters . Whilst many Kinstone fusions are optional , some fusions , such as those which use Golden Kinstones , are necessary to advance the story . 
 = = = Figurines = = = 
 The Minish Cap also features a figurine @-@ based sidequest , similar to that in The Legend of Zelda : The Wind Waker . The player can collect " Mysterious Shells " like those found in hidden areas in Link 's Awakening , which sometimes appear when defeating enemies and can also be found or bought in different locations throughout the world . These can then be used in a gashapon @-@ like machine in Hyrule Town to obtain figurines of characters , enemies or locations that Link has encountered in the course of the main quest . New figurines only become available once Link has met or killed the subject of that figurine . Each figurine has a short description revealing information about the game , that particular enemy 's weaknesses , or the series in general . Collecting every figurine unlocks a house in Hyrule Town that contains treasure , a Piece of Heart , and the Sound Test . 
 = = Development and promotion = = 
 After Capcom and its scenario writing subsidiary Flagship had finished developing Oracle of Seasons and Oracle of Ages for the Game Boy Color , they began work on a new Zelda game for the Game Boy Advance . Work on the title was suspended to allow the teams to focus on Four Swords , but in February 2003 Shigeru Miyamoto and Eiji Aonuma announced that development of what would later be called The Minish Cap was " well underway " . Nintendo launched a Minish Cap website in September 2004 , showing concepts of Link 's shrinking ability . The game had a cartoonish art style similar to The Wind Waker , as it has a fairy tale setting similar to said game , within " the world of tiny fairies , a universal fairytale story " . 
 A first in the Zelda series , the game was released in European territories before North America . The main cited reason for this was the Nintendo DS : with the European DS Launch scheduled for Spring 2005 , Nintendo of Europe pushed to make Minish Cap its handheld Christmas " killer app " . Conversely , Nintendo of America held back on its release so not to " cannibalize " the DS market . The game is included in the list of Game Boy Advance games that is now available for download for the Nintendo 3DS 's Virtual Console by Nintendo 3DS Ambassadors . 
 = = = Legend of Zelda Triforce Game Boy Advance SP = = = 
 In Europe , the game was available either as a standalone packaged game , or as part of a special pack , which included one of only 25 @,@ 000 limited edition , Zelda @-@ themed Game Boy Advance SP . The Triforce SP is matte gold in color , with a Triforce logo stamped on the lid , and the Hyrule royal family crest printed on the lower right face . As a launch promotion , Nintendo Europe also produced seven 24 @-@ carat gold plated Game Boy Advance SP consoles , with six given away to people who found a golden ticket inside their Triforce SP package , and a seventh as a magazine promotion . Thirty were autographed by Miyamoto himself at the opening of the Nintendo World Store in New York . 
 = = Reception and awards = = 
 The Minish Cap was the best @-@ selling game in its debut week in Japan , selling 97 @,@ 000 copies . It became the 62nd best @-@ selling game of 2004 with 196 @,@ 477 copies , and had a total of 350 @,@ 000 copies overall in the country . In North America , The Minish Cap sold 217 @,@ 000 copies in its debut month of January 2005 , being the fourth best @-@ selling game of the month . It remained among the five best @-@ selling games in February and March . The Minish Cap closed the year as the seventh best @-@ selling game of 2005 . By March 2005 , the game already had sold 1 million units worldwide . 
 In general , the game received highly positive reviews from acclaimed sites and publications . IGN praised the game for continuing the legacy of the successful series , while GameSpot also praised the game for this aspect , saying " Classic Zelda gameplay and flavor will please fans " . The graphical style especially — which continues the whimsical style of Wind Waker — was welcomed by most reviewers . The music of the game was commended by most sites ; GameSpy stated that " Even the music is outstanding , featuring some of the highest quality tunes to ever come out of the GBA 's little speakers " . Despite the criticism of the dungeon lengths , 1UP.com praised the dungeon design , proclaiming it as superior to that of other Zelda games . 
 The main criticism of the game among reviewers is the length of the game . Eurogamer says that " It 's too short " , while RPGamer state that " The typical player can fly through the game 's six relatively short dungeons in about ten hours " . There are also various other complaints from reviewers : IGN claims that the <unk> system is overly repetitive ; Nintendo World Report criticises the game 's visuals on a Game Boy Player , and RPGamer details the game 's low difficulty level as a disadvantage . Despite this , IGN 's Craig Harris liked the way that the ability to become tiny had been incorporated to create fresh puzzles in the Zelda series . He continued to comment that " It 's an idea that 's so well @-@ conceived that I 'd love to see worked in the series ' 3D designs somewhere down the line " . 
 The Minish Cap won the ' Best Game Boy Advance of 2005 ' by GameSpot over such finalists as Fire Emblem : The Sacred Stones and WarioWare : Twisted ! ; GameSpot labelled it as " the Game Boy Advance game we remember the most " . In March 2007 , the game was ranked as the 20th best Game Boy Advance game by IGN . In the acknowledgement , IGN commented that " The inclusion of the ability to shrink and grow was explored to some really good results . " The game was ranked 47th in Official Nintendo Magazine 's " 100 Greatest Nintendo Games " feature . Minish Cap received an average score of 90 percent from GameRankings , a site that compiles media ratings from several publishers to give an average score . 
 = Oneworld = 
 Oneworld ( marketed as oneworld ; CRS : * O ) is an airline alliance founded on 1 February 1999 . The alliance 's stated objective is to be the first @-@ choice airline alliance for the world 's frequent international travelers . Its central alliance office is currently based in New York , New York , in the United States . Its member airlines include Air Berlin , American Airlines , British Airways , Cathay Pacific , Qantas , Iberia , Finnair , Japan Airlines , LATAM Brasil , LATAM Chile , Malaysia Airlines , Qatar Airways , Royal Jordanian , S7 Airlines , and SriLankan Airlines , plus some 30 affiliated airlines . As of 31 March 2016 , Oneworld is the third largest global alliance in terms of passengers with more than 537 million passengers carried , behind Star Alliance ( 637 M ) and SkyTeam ( 587 M ) . Its slogan is " An alliance of the world 's leading airlines working as one . " 
 As of October 2013 , its member airlines collectively operate a fleet of <unk> aircraft , serve about a thousand airports in more than 150 countries , carrying 475 million passengers per year on 14 @,@ 000 daily departures , generating annual revenues of more than US $ 140 billion . 
 = = Management = = 
 Oneworld announced the formation of a central alliance team , the Oneworld Management Company ( oMC ) , in February 2000 , to mark the alliance 's first anniversary . The oMC was established in May 2000 in Vancouver , Canada , and in June 2011 relocated to New York City . It acts as the alliance 's central secretariat , with responsibility for driving future growth and the launch of new customer services and benefits . The oMC was first led by Managing Partner Peter <unk> , previously Director of Sales and Marketing at Cathay Pacific ; followed by John McCulloch , previously the alliance 's Vice @-@ President for Marketing ; and since December 2011 by Bruce Ashby , who previously held roles of CEO of Saudi Arabia 's SAMA Airlines , CEO of India 's IndiGo , and Executive Vice @-@ President for US Airways . Reporting to the CEO are Vice @-@ Presidents for Commercial ; Membership and Customer Experience ; and Corporate Communications , a Chief Financial Officer and an IT Director . 
 The CEO reports to the Oneworld Governing Board , which is made up of the chief executives of each of the member airlines . The Governing Board meets regularly to set strategic direction and review progress . Chairmanship of the board rotates among the alliance members ' chief executives . Cathay Pacific CEO Ivan Chu currently has the role . 
 = = = Headquarters = = = 
 In 2011 , the alliance headquarters relocated to Park Avenue in New York City , sharing premises with the local offices of a number of Oneworld member airlines including American Airlines , British Airways , Cathay Pacific , Finnair , Japan Airlines , and Qantas . 
 = = Membership history = = 
 = = = New global alliance = = = 
 Oneworld was unveiled by its founding members , American Airlines , British Airways , Canadian Airlines ( which left the alliance a few years later on merging with Air Canada ) , Cathay Pacific , and Qantas at a press conference in London , United Kingdom , on 21 September 1998 . Oneworld was officially launched and became operational on 1 February 1999 . The alliance outlined its services and benefits as including : 
 <unk> transfers for passengers travelling across all member airlines 
 Greater support to passengers regardless of which member airline they are travelling with 
 Greater range of round @-@ the @-@ world products 
 Enhanced co ‑ operation in the member airlines ' frequent @-@ flyer programs to provide more rewards 
 Wider recognition and access to more airport lounges . 
 Ahead of the official launch , the alliance embarked on an extensive employee communications and training programme , involving virtually all of the 220 @,@ 000 staff employed by the five member airlines , to ensure they could deliver what the alliance brand promised . At its launch in 1999 , Oneworld 's member airlines and their affiliates served 648 destinations in 139 countries , and carried 181 million passengers with a fleet of 1 @,@ 577 aircraft . 
 = = = = First additional members = = = = 
 Finnair , Finland 's largest airline and flag carrier , was the alliance 's first new recruit on 9 December 1998 . The alliance welcomed Iberia , Spain 's flag carrier , as its second recruit on 15 February 1999 . Both airlines , together with Iberia 's franchisee , Iberia Regional Air <unk> , joined the alliance on 1 September 1999 , adding more than 50 destinations to the Oneworld network . 
 On 19 May 1999 , LanChile ( now known as LAN ) became a member @-@ elect , the alliance 's first representative from Latin America . LanChile 's two subsidiaries , LAN Express and LAN Perú , would also join the alliance . Irish carrier Aer Lingus was formally elected on board and confirmed as the ninth member of the alliance on 2 December 1999 . As LanChile and Aer Lingus joined on 1 June 2000 , Canadian Airlines left the alliance , following the airline 's purchase by Air Canada , a member of the rival Star Alliance . 
 Swiss International Air Lines ( Swiss ) accepted an invitation to join Oneworld in September 2003 , after signing a memorandum of understanding ( MOU ) on 23 September 2003 to establish a wide @-@ ranging commercial agreement with British Airways . However , Swiss later decided not to proceed with key elements of its agreement with British Airways and was therefore released from its commitment to join Oneworld . Swiss was later taken over by Lufthansa in 2005 and joined Star Alliance in 2006 . 
 = = = = 2005 – 2006 : The first big expansion drive = = = = 
 The mid @-@ 2000s saw Oneworld undertake one of the biggest expansions in its history . Hungarian flag carrier Malév signed an MOU in May 2005 as a precursor to a formal invitation to join , extended in November 2005 . On 17 October 2005 , the alliance signed as a member @-@ elect Royal Jordanian , the first airline from the Middle East to accept an invitation to join any global airline alliance . 
 Japan Airlines ( JAL ) , then Asia 's largest airline group , applied to join the alliance on 25 October 2005 . JAL and Oneworld exchanged an MOU on 8 February 2006 , setting out a framework for the remaining steps to be taken before the airline could be formally invited to join . On 5 June 2006 , JAL accepted a formal letter of invitation to join the alliance , along with five members of the JAL Group as affiliate members , including J ‑ Air , JAL Express , JALways , Japan Asia Airways , and Japan Transocean Air . 
 All three of these airline groups — Japan Airlines , Malév , and Royal Jordanian — joined as full members and started offering the alliance 's full range of services and benefits on 1 April 2007 , along with , as Oneworld affiliate members , Japan Airlines ' subsidiaries J ‑ Air , JAL Express , JALways , Japan Asia Airways and Japan Transocean Air , and LAN 's subsidiaries LAN Argentina and LAN Ecuador . They expanded the Oneworld network to almost 700 airports in nearly 150 countries served by 9 @,@ 000 daily departures , carrying around 315 million passengers per year with a fleet of almost 2 @,@ 500 aircraft , with top @-@ tier frequent flyers able to access 400 airport lounges worldwide . 
 On the same day , Aer Lingus voluntarily exited the alliance due to a fundamental change to its business strategy . The Irish carrier was repositioning itself as a low fares point @-@ to @-@ point carrier , while Oneworld 's focus was on the <unk> , premium , frequent international travellers ' market . Although no longer a Oneworld member , Aer Lingus maintained frequent @-@ flyer program partnerships with some of the alliance members and continued to participate in the alliance 's Global Explorer round @-@ the @-@ world fare product . 
 Malév suspended all services indefinitely in February 2012 , citing financial difficulties . Its participation in Oneworld ended when the airline was wound up in the following weeks . 
 = = = = 2009 – 2011 : New recruits and expansion = = = = 
 On 26 May 2009 , Russian airline S7 Airlines was unanimously elected to the alliance . It became a full member on 15 November 2010 , adding to Oneworld one of the most extensive networks covering Russia and the Commonwealth of Independent States ( CIS ) . It expanded the Oneworld network to another 54 cities , 35 of them in Russia . The airline 's subsidiary Globus Airlines joined Oneworld at the same time as an affiliate member . 
 On 10 November 2009 , Oneworld welcomed Mexicana and its subsidiaries , <unk> and <unk> , after the airline accepted a formal invitation to join the alliance on 9 April 2008 . Mexicana and its affiliates added 26 destinations to the alliance map . Mexicana was a former member of Star Alliance , leaving the group in March 2004 when it terminated its codeshare agreement with United Airlines and opted for bilateral agreements with Oneworld members American Airlines and Iberia . On 2 August 2010 , Mexicana filed for insolvency proceedings in Mexico and bankruptcy protection in the United States with its financial situation deteriorating . The airline suspended all operations from 28 August 2010 . With the group under Mexican court protection , it has remained an inactive member of Oneworld since then . 
 On 23 February 2010 , India 's Kingfisher Airlines took its first step to joining Oneworld with its chairman Vijay Mallya and chief executives from the alliance 's existing member airlines signing a memorandum of understanding , subject to Indian regulatory approval . The airline gained approval to join the alliance from the India 's Ministry of Civil Aviation and started participating in the alliance 's Global Explorer round @-@ the @-@ world fare product . However , on 3 February 2012 , just a week before it was due to join the alliance , Kingfisher Airlines ' entry was put on hold to give it more time to strengthen its financial position . Kingfisher Airlines suspended operations on 20 October 2012 and finally ceased operations in February 2013 . 
 On 26 July 2010 , Air Berlin , Germany 's second @-@ largest airline , accepted an invitation to join Oneworld and joined the alliance on 20 March 2012 . 
 On 6 June 2011 , Malaysia Airlines became a new member designate on the sidelines of the IATA World Air Transport Summit in Singapore . Malaysia Airlines became a part of Oneworld on 1 February 2013 . 
 = = = = 2012 – present : The second big expansion = = = = 
 On 11 June 2012 , SriLankan Airlines became Oneworld 's latest member @-@ elect , on the sidelines of the IATA World Air Transport Summit in Beijing . Cathay Pacific is serving SriLankan Airlines as its sponsor through its alliance implementation programme . Its membership implementation was expected to take around 18 months . On 1 May 2014 , SriLankan Airlines became a full @-@ member of the alliance making it the first airline in the Indian subcontinent to join any alliance . 
 On 8 October 2012 , Qatar Airways became a member @-@ elect of Oneworld . Qatar Airways was one of the fastest growing airlines worldwide — adding 15 destinations in 2012 alone — and one of the most highly regarded , having been named Airline of the Year by the Skytrax independent airline quality ratings agency in both 2011 and 2012 . The agreement to join was widely reported in the media as a coup for Oneworld , with Qatar Airways the first among the " Big Three " carriers in the Persian Gulf to sign for any global airline alliance . The airline joined the alliance on 30 October 2013 . 
 On 14 February 2013 , American Airlines began plans to merge with US Airways . Following U.S. Federal Aviation Administration approval , the merger was completed on 9 December 2013 . US Airways left Star Alliance on 30 March 2014 , and joined Oneworld as an affiliate member the following day . 
 On 7 March 2013 , LATAM Airlines Group chose Oneworld as its alliance , and that LAN subsidiary , LAN Colombia , plus TAM Airlines and its subsidiary TAM Paraguay will join Oneworld . LAN Colombia joined the alliance on 1 October 2013 . 
 On 31 March 2014 , TAM Airlines and US Airways joined Oneworld after leaving Star Alliance on 30 March 2014 . 
 = = = Subsidiaries and franchises = = = 
 Besides its full member airlines , Oneworld also includes around 30 " affiliate " members . These are generally regional airlines that are either owned by or have strong commercial links with the alliance 's full members . For customers , they further extend the network the alliance can offer . In governance terms , these affiliates are represented in Oneworld affairs by their " parent " airline . 
 Air Liberté ceased to be an affiliate member of Oneworld when the French airline was sold by British Airways to French investment group <unk> with the UK carrier explaining that it had been unable to receive adequate returns on its investment in the business . Kenya @-@ based Regional Air joined the alliance on 1 July 2001 , following its franchising agreement with British Airways . British Airways terminated its franchise agreement with Regional Air when the African carrier suspended flights in mid April 2005 , ending its affiliate membership of Oneworld . TWA 's regional carriers , which operated under the Trans World Express brand , became Oneworld affiliate members , as their name changed to AmericanConnection on 2 December 2001 , following TWA 's acquisition by American Airlines . Three airlines operated under the AmericanConnection brand at that time : Chautauqua Airlines , Corporate Airlines , and Trans States Airlines . 
 The alliance further strengthened its network in Latin America when LAN 's two subsidiaries , LAN Argentina and LAN Ecuador , became the alliance 's newest affiliate members . LAN Argentina launched passenger and cargo services in June 2005 from its home base in Buenos Aires , while LAN Ecuador launched its services in April 2003 from its home base in Guayaquil . Both airlines officially joined their sister airlines and offer alliance 's services and benefits on 1 April 2007 . Additionally , Cathay Pacific 's newly acquired , wholly owned subsidiary Dragonair , became an affiliate member of the alliance on 1 November 2007 . 
 Conversely , on 5 March 2007 , the alliance ended its relationship with affiliate member and British Airways subsidiary , BA Connect . BA Connect 's UK regional operations were sold to Flybe on 3 November 2006 , in return for a 15 % stake in the latter . Approximately 50 UK regional routes are affected by the sale ; however , Belfast and Southampton would remain linked to the alliance network through other British Airways and alliance members . BA Connect 's operations from London City Airport and between Manchester and New York were retained and operated by another British Airways subsidiary , BA CityFlyer , and the airline itself , respectively . 
 The alliance ended its relationship with affiliate member and British Airways franchisee <unk> on 27 October 2007 , following the purchase of the airline by one of British Airways ' UK rivals , BMI . Four days later , Oneworld welcomed its latest affiliate member and Cathay Pacific wholly owned subsidiary Dragonair to the alliance on 1 November 2007 . Dragonair had the biggest network into mainland China for a non @-@ mainland based carrier , with about 400 departures a week . 
 In 2008 , the alliance lost another two affiliate members as British Airways continued the strategy of reducing its UK franchises . The first franchisee , GB Airways , exited the alliance on 30 March 2008 , following its purchase by EasyJet . British Airways intended to start services from London Heathrow to Faro , Portugal , and Málaga , Spain , and from London Gatwick to Faro , Gibraltar , Ibiza , Málaga , Palma , and Tunis , which were operated under the franchise . The alliance bid farewell to one of its affiliate member Japan Asia Airways on 31 March 2008 , following the airline 's consolidation into its parent , Japan Airlines . The second British Airways franchisee , Loganair , left the alliance on 25 October 2008 , following the ending of its franchise agreement with the airline . A separate agreement for codesharing on some Loganair services replaced the previous franchise , for British Airways passengers connecting through Aberdeen , Edinburgh and Glasgow . 
 = = = = Tenth anniversary = = = = 
 In February 2009 , Oneworld celebrated its tenth anniversary with its ten @-@ member airlines — American Airlines , British Airways , Cathay Pacific , Finnair , Iberia Airlines , Japan Airlines , LAN , Malév , Qantas , and Royal Jordanian . In the past decade , membership has doubled from an initial five members to ten members now ; its member airlines carried a total of 2 @.@ 5 billion passengers and generated almost $ 500 billion , € 450 million in revenue from passenger activities . Alliance fares and sales products generated $ 5 billion , € 2 @.@ 5 billion in revenue alone , with two @-@ thirds or almost $ 3 billion , € 1 @.@ 5 billion would not have been generated if the alliance did not exist . As part of the celebration and to increase awareness of the 10 ‑ member alliance , all the alliance member airlines decorated a proportion of their aircraft fleets in a new standard Oneworld livery — around 40 aircraft in total , mainly types that fly on international routes . The alliance also unveiled a special version of its logo , featuring the text " 10 years " printed behind the word Oneworld as a watermark on its round blue orb . 
 = = Member airlines = = 
 = = = Full members and their affiliates = = = 
 A Founding <unk> Independently operated franchise carriers using the British Airways name , livery and flight <unk> Only on routes operated by Flybe Finland on behalf of <unk> Air Berlin flights may be operated by <unk> , <unk> and Belair using the Air Berlin name , livery and flight <unk> Qantaslink uses the services of Airlink , Eastern Australia Airlines , National Jet Systems and <unk> <unk> American Eagle flights are operated by Air Wisconsin , Compass Airlines , Envoy Air , ExpressJet , Mesa Airlines , Piedmont Airlines , PSA Airlines , Republic Airlines , SkyWest Airlines and Trans States <unk> Iberia Regional flights are operated by Air <unk> . 
 = = = Inactive member and member affiliates = = = 
 A Suspended operations indefinitely on 28 August 2010 due to financial collapse . Has not left the alliance yet , but it is listed as an inactive member . 
 = = = Former members and member affiliates = = = 
 A Founding member and was acquired by Air Canada , a Star Alliance <unk> Left the alliance after suffering financial collapse 
 = = = Former member affiliates of current member airlines = = = 
 A Founding member <unk> AmericanConnection flights were operated by Chautauqua <unk> Merged with American Airlines on 17 October <unk> US Airways Express flights were operated by Air Wisconsin , Mesa Airlines , Piedmont Airlines , PSA Airlines , Republic Airlines and SkyWest Airlines 
 = = = Future members = = = 
 After the buyout by the International Airlines Group , Aer Lingus will rejoin the alliance at an unconfirmed date . 
 = = = = Future member affiliates = = = = 
 = = = = Possible future members = = = = 
 In 2014 , several Oneworld airlines signed codeshare agreements with Mexican carrier Interjet . Oneworld has stated that it is interested in recruiting an airline from Mexico , preferably Interjet . This would fill in the void left by Mexicana de Aviación in 2010 . LAN Airlines is among the airlines supporting Interjet to join the alliance . 
 In November 2014 , Senior Vice President of Royal Air Maroc Habiba <unk> told media she " believes Oneworld is the alliance which appears most compatible with Royal Air Maroc 's developments " and the airline is exploring alliance options . 
 In March 2015 , the Minister of Tourism for French Polynesia , Jean @-@ Christophe <unk> , has told Tahiti Nui Télévision that Air Tahiti Nui is " about to join the Oneworld alliance " and hopes that it would happen " this year " . 
 Meridiana has several codeshare agreements with members such as Iberia , Air Berlin , and S7 . Meridiana 's frequent flyer club is a member of <unk> , which is used by the International Airlines Group ( all Oneworld members ) . The airline is also a member of the Global Explorer Program . Oneworld member Qatar Airways announced on July 14 , 2016 , that it would purchase a 49 % stake in Meridiana . 
 = = Benefits and services = = 
 = = = Premium status = = = 
 Oneworld has three premium status levels — Ruby , Sapphire , and Emerald — based on the customer 's tier status in the member airline 's frequent @-@ flyer program . Emerald status is the highest level in each member 's programme , and all of the statuses are recognised by each of the member airlines . The premium statuses have no specific requirements of their own ; membership is based solely on the frequent @-@ flyer programs of the individual member airline . Alliance benefits are only available to passengers on scheduled flights that are both operated and marketed by a member airline . 
 = = = Alliance fares = = = 
 Alliance fares include : 
 oneworld Explorer : Prices are based on class of travel ( Economy , Premium Economy where available , Business , or First ) and , uniquely , the number of continents visited , rather than mileage of the overall trip , to keep journey planning as simple and flexible as possible . Flights can be on any of the Oneworld <unk> oneworld Explorer was the first multi @-@ airline round @-@ the @-@ world fare bookable online . 
 Global Explorer : Another round @-@ the @-@ world fare , but based on the distance flown . It includes some airlines that are not members of Oneworld , like members elect Qatar Airways and SriLankan , plus Aer Lingus , Air Pacific , Alaska Airlines , Bangkok Airways , <unk> , WestJet , and some flights operated by Air Tahiti Nui , Jetstar , South African Airlines , and Vietnam Airlines , extending the destinations covered still further . 
 Circle Explorer : Similar to oneworld Explorer , but does not require travel to North or South America , so you can fly halfway around the globe and then back again , without actually circumnavigating the planet ( for example , London @-@ Hong Kong @-@ Sydney @-@ Johannesburg @-@ London ) . 
 Circle Pacific : Another Explorer variant . This one is for trips around the Pacific Ocean , covering Australia / NZ , Asia , and North and South America ( for example , Los Angeles @-@ Tokyo @-@ Sydney @-@ Los Angeles ) . 
 Circle Asia and South West Pacific : Covers Northeast and Southeast Asia , as well as the Southwest Pacific . 
 Circle Atlantic : Covers Europe , the Middle East , and North and South America . 
 Visit Passes : Offers multi @-@ sector flights on any Oneworld carrier in a specific continent and also within Japan and Malaysia . 
 = = = Co @-@ location = = = 
 Co @-@ location provides alliance customers with smoother transfers between member airlines ; and better facilities than any of the member airlines could justify on their own . The alliance has combined ticket offices , check @-@ in facilities and lounges at some 50 airports worldwide . 
 = = = Alliance initiatives and performance = = = 
 = = = Customer service initiatives = = = 
 = = = = Interline electronic ticket = = = = 
 On 21 April 2005 , Oneworld became the first airline alliance to enable its customers to fly throughout its members ' network on electronic tickets ( e @-@ tickets ) only , with the completion of interline e @-@ ticketing ( <unk> ) links between all its member airlines . 
 = = = Awards and recognitions = = = 
 = = Livery and logo = = 
 All alliance members ' aircraft bear a small Oneworld logo , 30 centimetres ( 12 in ) in diameter , on the right of the first set of entry doors behind the cockpit . 
 = = = Japan Airlines – 2007 special Oneworld livery = = = 
 In 2007 , Japan Airlines ( JAL ) painted two of its Boeing 777 aircraft , a Boeing 777 @-@ 200ER ( <unk> ) and a Boeing 777 – 300 ( JA8941 ) , in a special Oneworld livery to mark its entrance into the alliance . The first aircraft ( <unk> ) took off from the airline 's main international hub Tokyo Narita International Airport as Japan Airlines Flight 441 bound for Moscow on 16 April 2007 . The design featured " a huge globe in the distinctive horizon blue of Oneworld , painted on the centre of the aircraft , with a stylised motif to symbolise the convenience , comfort , value and choice available to passengers throughout the alliance 's comprehensive global network " . 
 = = = Standard Oneworld livery = = = 
 The new ( optional ) standard Oneworld livery was introduced as part of the alliance 's tenth anniversary celebration in February 2009 . It features the alliance name in large letters that are almost 2 metres ( 6 @.@ 6 ft ) tall and the alliance logo along the side of their fuselage , against a white or a polished metal background . The name of the operating member airline will be placed in smaller lettering in a standard position at the front of the aircraft below the alliance name and logo . Each member airline will also retain its regular tailfin design . 
 = Shah Rukh Khan = 
 Shah Rukh Khan ( born Shahrukh Khan , 2 November 1965 ) , also known as SRK , is an Indian film actor , producer and television personality . Referred to in the media as the " Baadshah of Bollywood " , " King of Bollywood " or " King Khan " , he has appeared in more than 80 Bollywood films , and earned numerous accolades , including 14 Filmfare Awards . Khan has a significant following in Asia and the Indian diaspora worldwide . In terms of audience size and income , he has been described as one of the most successful film stars in the world . 
 Khan began his career with appearances in several television series in the late 1980s . He made his Bollywood debut in 1992 with Deewana . Early in his career , Khan was recognised for portraying villainous roles in the films Darr ( 1993 ) , Baazigar ( 1993 ) and Anjaam ( 1994 ) . He then rose to prominence after starring in a series of romantic films , including Dilwale Dulhania Le Jayenge ( 1995 ) , Dil To Pagal Hai ( 1997 ) , Kuch Kuch Hota Hai ( 1998 ) , Mohabbatein ( 2000 ) and Kabhi Khushi Kabhie Gham ... ( 2001 ) . He earned critical acclaim for his portrayal of an alcoholic in Devdas ( 2002 ) , a NASA scientist in Swades ( 2004 ) , a hockey coach in Chak De ! India ( 2007 ) and a man with Asperger syndrome in My Name Is Khan ( 2010 ) . His highest @-@ grossing films include the comedies Chennai Express ( 2013 ) and Happy New Year ( 2014 ) . Many of his films display themes of Indian national identity and connections with diaspora communities , or gender , racial , social and religious differences and grievances . For his contributions to film , the Government of India honoured him with the Padma Shri , and the Government of France awarded him both the Ordre des Arts et des Lettres and the Légion d 'honneur . 
 As of 2015 , Khan is co @-@ chairman of the motion picture production company Red Chillies Entertainment and its subsidiaries , and is the co @-@ owner of the Indian Premier League cricket team Kolkata Knight Riders . He is a frequent television presenter and stage show performer . The media often label him as " Brand SRK " because of his many endorsement and entrepreneurship ventures . Khan 's philanthropic endeavours have provided health care and disaster relief , and he was honoured with UNESCO 's Pyramide con Marni award in 2011 for his support of children 's education . He regularly features in listings of the most influential people in Indian culture , and in 2008 , Newsweek named him one of their fifty most powerful people in the world . 
 = = Early life and family = = 
 Khan was born on 2 November 1965 in a Muslim family in New Delhi . He spent the first five years of his life in Mangalore , where his maternal grandfather , <unk> Ahmed , served as the chief engineer of the port in the 1960s . According to Khan , his paternal grandfather , Jan Muhammad , an ethnic Pathan was from Afghanistan . Shah Rukh Khan also said in his interviews that he is a Pathan from Peshawar and his entire family used to speak <unk> language at home . Khan 's father , Meer Taj Mohammed Khan , was an Indian independence activist in Peshawar , British India ( present @-@ day Pakistan ) . As of 2010 , Khan 's paternal family was still living in Shah Wali <unk> area of Peshawar 's <unk> <unk> Bazaar . Meer was a follower of Khan Abdul Ghaffar Khan , and affiliated with the All Indian National Congress . He moved to New Delhi in 1948 partition of India . Khan 's mother , Lateef Fatima , was the daughter of a senior government engineer . His parents were married in 1959 . Khan described himself on Twitter as " half Hyderabadi ( mother ) , half Pathan ( father ) , [ and ] some Kashmiri ( grandmother ) " . His paternal cousins in Peshawar claim that the family is of <unk> origin from Kashmir , not Pashtun , and also contradict the claim that his grandfather was from Afghanistan . 
 Khan grew up in the Rajendra Nagar neighbourhood of Delhi . His father had several business ventures including a restaurant , and the family lived a middle @-@ class life in rented apartments . Khan attended St. Columba 's School in central Delhi where he excelled in his studies and in sports such as hockey and football , and received the school 's highest award , the Sword of Honour . In his youth , he acted in stage plays and received praise for his imitations of Bollywood actors , of which his favourites were Dilip Kumar , Amitabh Bachchan and Mumtaz . One of his childhood friends and acting partners was Amrita Singh , who became a Bollywood actress . Khan enrolled at Hansraj College ( 1985 – 88 ) to earn his bachelor 's degree in Economics , but spent much of his time at Delhi 's Theatre Action Group ( TAG ) , where he studied acting under the mentorship of theatre director Barry John . After Hansraj , he began studying for a master 's degree in Mass Communications at Jamia Millia Islamia , but left to pursue his acting career . He also attended the National School of Drama in Delhi during his early career in Bollywood . His father died of cancer in 1981 , and his mother died in 1991 from complications of diabetes . After the death of their parents , his older sister , <unk> <unk> , born in 1960 , fell into a depressed state and Khan took on the responsibility of caring for her . <unk> continues to live with her brother and his family in their Mumbai mansion . 
 Although Khan was given the birth name Shahrukh Khan , he prefers his name to be written as Shah Rukh Khan , and is commonly referred to by the acronym SRK . He married Gauri <unk> , a Punjabi Hindu , in a traditional Hindu wedding ceremony on 25 October 1991 , after a six @-@ year courtship . They have a son Aryan ( born 1997 ) and a daughter <unk> ( born 2000 ) . In 2013 , they became parents of a third child named <unk> , who was born through a surrogate mother . According to Khan , while he strongly believes in Islam , he also values his wife 's religion . His children follow both religions ; at home the Qur 'an is situated next to the Hindu deities . 
 = = Acting career = = 
 = = = 1988 – 92 : Television and film debut = = = 
 Khan 's first starring role was in Lekh Tandon 's television series Dil Dariya , which began shooting in 1988 , but production delays led to the 1989 series <unk> becoming his television debut instead . In the series , which depicted a realistic look at the training of army cadets , he played the leading role of Abhimanyu Rai . This led to further appearances in Aziz Mirza 's television series Circus ( 1989 – 90 ) and Mani Kaul 's miniseries Idiot ( 1991 ) . Khan also played minor parts in the serials <unk> ( 1989 ) and <unk> Ki <unk> ( 1988 – 90 ) , and in the English @-@ language television film In Which Annie Gives It Those Ones ( 1989 ) . His appearances in these serials led critics to compare his look and acting style with those of the film actor Dilip Kumar , but Khan was not interested in film acting at the time , thinking that he was not good enough . 
 Khan changed his decision to act in films in April 1991 , citing it as a way to escape the grief of his mother 's death . He moved from Delhi to Mumbai to pursue a full @-@ time career in Bollywood , and was quickly signed to four films . His first offer was for Hema Malini 's directorial debut Dil Aashna Hai , and by June , he had started his first shoot . His film debut was in Deewana , which was released in June 1992 . In it he starred alongside Divya Bharti as the second male lead behind Rishi Kapoor . Deewana became a box office hit and launched Khan 's Bollywood career ; he earned the Filmfare Best Male Debut Award for his performance . Also released in 1992 were Khan 's first films as the male lead , <unk> , Dil Aashna Hai , and the comedy Raju Ban Gaya Gentleman , which was his first of many collaborations with the actress Juhi Chawla . His initial film roles saw him play characters who displayed energy and enthusiasm . According to Arnab Ray of Daily News and Analysis , Khan brought a new kind of acting as he was " sliding down stairs on a slab of ice , cartwheeling , somersaulting , lips trembling , eyes trembling , bringing to the screen the kind of physical energy ... visceral , intense , maniacal one moment and cloyingly boyish the next . " 
 = = = 1993 – 94 : Anti @-@ hero = = = 
 Among his 1993 releases , Khan garnered the most appreciation for portraying villainous roles in two box office hits : an obsessive lover in Darr , and a murderer in Baazigar . Darr marked the first of Khan 's many collaborations with filmmaker Yash Chopra and his company Yash Raj Films . Khan 's stammering and the use of the phrase " I love you , K @-@ k @-@ k @-@ Kiran " were popular with audiences . For Darr he received a nomination for the Filmfare Award for Best Performance in a Negative Role , also known as the Best Villain Award , but lost to Paresh Rawal for Sir . Baazigar , in which Khan played an ambiguous avenger who murders his girlfriend , shocked Indian audiences with an unexpected violation of the standard Bollywood formula . In The Cambridge Companion to Modern Indian Culture , Sonal <unk> called the character " the consummate anti @-@ hero " . His performance in Baazigar , which would be his first of many appearances with actress Kajol , won Khan his first Filmfare Award for Best Actor . In 2003 , the Encyclopedia of Hindi Cinema stated that Khan " defied the image of the conventional hero in both these films and created his own version of the revisionist hero " . Also in 1993 , Khan performed a nude scene with Deepa Sahi in Maya <unk> , although parts of it were censored by the Central Board of Film Certification . The ensuing controversy prompted him to eschew such scenes in future roles . 
 In 1994 , Khan played a love @-@ struck musician in Kundan Shah 's comedy @-@ drama film Kabhi Haan Kabhi Naa opposite Deepak Tijori and Suchitra Krishnamurthy , which he later professed was his favourite role . His performance earned him a Filmfare Critics Award for Best Performance , and in a retrospective review from 2004 , Sukanya Verma of Rediff.com referred to it as Khan 's best performance , saying " He is spontaneous , vulnerable , boyish , mischievous and acting straight from the heart . " Also in 1994 , Khan won the Filmfare Best Villain Award for his role as an obsessive lover in Anjaam , co @-@ starring Madhuri Dixit and Deepak Tijori . At the time , playing antagonistic roles was considered risky to a leading man 's career in Bollywood . Ray subsequently credited Khan for taking " insane risks " and " pushing the envelope " by choosing to play such characters , through which he established his career in Bollywood . The director Mukul S. Anand called him " the new face of the industry " at the time . 
 = = = 1995 – 98 : Romantic hero = = = 
 Khan starred in seven films in 1995 , the first of which was Rakesh Roshan 's melodramatic thriller Karan Arjun . Co @-@ starring Salman Khan and Kajol , it became the second @-@ highest grossing film of the year in India . His most significant release that year was Aditya Chopra 's directorial debut , the romance Dilwale Dulhania Le Jayenge , in which he played a young Non @-@ resident Indian ( NRI ) who falls in love with Kajol 's character during a trip across Europe . Khan was initially reticent to portray the role of a lover , but this film is credited with establishing him as a " romantic hero " . Lauded by both critics and the public , it became the year 's highest grossing production in India and abroad and was declared an " all time blockbuster " by Box Office India , with a gross of over ₹ 1 @.@ 22 billion ( US $ 18 million ) worldwide . It is the longest @-@ running film in the history of Indian cinema ; it is still showing at the Maratha Mandir theatre in Mumbai after more than 1000 weeks as of early 2015 . The film won ten Filmfare Awards , including the second of Khan 's Best Actor Awards . The director and critic Raja Sen said , " Khan gives a fabulous performance , redefining the lover for the 1990s with great panache . He 's cool and flippant , but sincere enough to appeal to the [ audience ] . The performance itself is , like the best in the business , played well enough to come across as effortless , as non @-@ acting . " 
 In 1996 , all four of Khan 's releases failed critically and commercially , but the following year , his starring role opposite Juhi Chawla in Aziz Mirza 's romantic comedy Yes Boss earned him accolades that included a Filmfare Best Actor nomination . Later in 1997 , he starred in Subhash Ghai 's diasporic @-@ themed social drama Pardes , portraying Arjun , a musician facing a moral dilemma . India Today cites it as one of the first major Bollywood pictures to succeed in the United States . Khan 's final release of 1997 was a second collaboration with Yash Chopra in the popular musical romance Dil To Pagal Hai . He portrayed Rahul , a stage director caught in a love triangle between Madhuri Dixit and Karisma Kapoor . The film and his performance met with critical praise , winning Khan his third Best Actor Award at Filmfare . 
 Khan performed the lead role in three films and made one special appearance in 1998 . In his first release of the year , he played a double role opposite Juhi Chawla and Sonali Bendre in Mahesh Bhatt 's action comedy Duplicate , the first of his many collaborations with Yash Johar 's production company Dharma Productions . The film was not well received , but India Today lauded Khan for his energetic performance . The same year , Khan won critical praise for his performance as an All India Radio correspondent who develops an infatuation for a mysterious terrorist ( Manisha Koirala ) in Dil Se .. , the third instalment of Mani Ratnam 's trilogy of terror films . In his final release of the year , he portrayed a college student in Karan Johar 's romance Kuch Kuch Hota Hai , in which he was involved in a love triangle along with Kajol and Rani Mukerji . The writer <unk> <unk> Chandra has referred to the picture as the blockbuster of the 1990s , a " pot @-@ pourri of romance , comedy , and entertainment . " Khan won the Best Actor award at the Filmfare Awards ceremony for the second consecutive year , although he and several critics believed his performance to have been overshadowed by that of Kajol . 
 The roles in this phase of his career , and the series of romantic comedies and family dramas that followed , earned Khan widespread adulation from audiences , particularly teenagers , and according to author Anupama Chopra , established him as an icon of romance in India . He continued to have frequent professional associations with Yash Chopra , Aditya Chopra , and Karan Johar , who moulded his image and made him into a superstar . Khan became a romantic leading man without ever actually kissing any of his co @-@ stars , although he broke this rule in 2012 , after strong urging by Yash Chopra . 
 = = = 1999 – 2003 : Career challenges = = = 
 Khan 's only release in 1999 was Baadshah , in which he starred opposite Twinkle Khanna . Although the film underperformed at the box office , it earned him a Filmfare Award nomination for Best Performance in a Comic Role , which he lost to Govinda for <unk> Maan <unk> . Khan became a producer in 1999 in a collaboration with the actress Juhi Chawla and the director Aziz Mirza for a production company called Dreamz Unlimited . The company 's first production , Phir Bhi Dil Hai Hindustani ( 2000 ) , starring Khan and Chawla , was a commercial failure . It was released one week after Kaho Naa ... Pyaar Hai , starring Hrithik Roshan , then a newcomer , who critics believed overshadowed Khan . Swapna Mitter of Rediff.com spoke of Khan 's predictable mannerisms , saying " Frankly , it 's high time he innovated his act a little . " Khan made his debut in Tamil cinema with Hey Ram ( 2000 ) , where he played the role of archaeologist Amjad Khan . He performed free of charge as he wanted to work with Kamal Haasan . The film released to critical acclaim ; on Khan 's performance , T. <unk> Reddy of The Hindu wrote , " Shah Rukh Khan , as usual comes up with an impeccable performance . " 
 In 2001 , Dreamz Unlimited attempted a comeback with Khan portraying the title role in Santosh Sivan 's historical epic Aśoka , a partly fictionalised account of the life of emperor Ashoka . The film was screened at the Venice Film Festival and the 2001 Toronto International Film Festival to a positive response , but it performed poorly at Indian box offices . As losses continued to mount for the production company , Khan was forced to close <unk> , a company that he had started along with Dreamz Unlimited . In December 2001 , Khan suffered a spinal injury while performing an action sequence for a special appearance in Krishna Vamsi 's Shakti : The Power . He was subsequently diagnosed with a prolapsed disc , and attempted multiple alternative therapies . None of these provided a permanent solution to the injury , which caused him severe pain while shooting several of his films . By the beginning of 2003 , his condition had worsened to the point that he had to undergo anterior cervical <unk> and fusion surgery at Wellington Hospital , London . Khan resumed shooting in June 2003 , but he reduced his workload and the number of film roles he accepted annually . 
 Successes during this time included Aditya Chopra 's Mohabbatein ( 2000 ) , and Karan Johar 's family drama Kabhi Khushi Kabhie Gham ... ( 2001 ) , which Khan cites as a turning point in his career . Both films co @-@ starred Amitabh Bachchan as an authoritarian figure , and presented ideological struggles between the two men . Khan 's performances in the films were met with wide public appreciation , and he was awarded his second Filmfare Critics Award for Best Actor for Mohabbatein . Kabhi Khushi Kabhie Gham ... remained the top @-@ grossing Indian production of all time in the overseas market for the next five years . 
 In 2002 , Khan played the title role as a rebellious alcoholic opposite Aishwarya Rai in Sanjay Leela Bhansali 's period romance Devdas . At a cost of over ₹ 500 million ( US $ 7 @.@ 4 million ) , it was the most expensive Bollywood film ever made at the time , yet recovered its costs , earning ₹ 840 million ( US $ 12 million ) worldwide . The film earned numerous accolades including 10 Filmfare Awards , with Best Actor for Khan , and a BAFTA Award for Best Film Not in the English Language . Khan next starred in Kal Ho Naa Ho ( 2003 ) , a comedy @-@ drama written by Karan Johar and set in New York City , which became the second @-@ highest grossing film domestically and the top @-@ grossing Bollywood film in external markets that year . Co @-@ starring with Jaya Bachchan , Saif Ali Khan , and Preity Zinta , Khan received critical praise for his portrayal of Aman Mathur , a man with a fatal heart disease , with critics praising his emotional impact upon audiences . Conflict broke out between Khan and the other partners of Dreamz Unlimited over the failure to cast Juhi Chawla in their 2003 production of Aziz Mirza 's Chalte Chalte , and they parted ways , despite the film 's success . 
 = = = 2004 – 09 : Resurgence = = = 
 2004 was a critically and commercially successful year for Khan . He transformed Dreamz Unlimited into Red Chillies Entertainment , adding his wife Gauri as a producer . In the company 's first production , he starred in Farah Khan 's directorial debut , the action comedy masala film Main Hoon Na . A fictionalised account of India – Pakistan relations , it was viewed by some commentators as a conscious effort to move away from the stereotypical portrayal of Pakistan as the constant villain . Khan then played an Indian Air Force pilot who falls in love with a Pakistani woman ( Preity Zinta ) in Yash Chopra 's romance film Veer @-@ Zaara , which was screened at the 55th Berlin Film Festival to critical praise . It was the highest earning film of 2004 in India , with a worldwide gross of over ₹ 940 million ( US $ 14 million ) , and Main Hoon Na was the second @-@ highest earner with ₹ 680 million ( US $ 10 million ) . 
 In his final release of 2004 , Khan starred as a NASA scientist who patriotically returns to India to rekindle his roots in Ashutosh Gowariker 's social drama Swades ( meaning " Homeland " ) , which became the first Indian picture to be shot inside the NASA research centre at the Kennedy Space Center in Florida . Film scholar Stephen Teo refers to the picture as an example of " <unk> realism " , displaying a transcendence in conventional narrative and audience expectation in Hindi cinema . In December 2013 , The Times of India reported that Khan found filming the picture such an emotionally overwhelming and life @-@ changing experience that he had still not viewed the film . Derek Elley of Variety found Khan 's performance " unsettling " as " a self @-@ satisfied expatriate determined to bring Western values to poor Indian peasants " , but several film critics , including <unk> Pillai , believed it to have been his finest acting to date . He was nominated for the Filmfare Best Actor Award for all three of his 2004 releases and eventually won the award for Swades . Filmfare later included his performance in the 2010 issue of Bollywood 's " Top 80 Iconic Performances " . 
 In 2005 , Khan starred in Amol <unk> 's fantasy drama , Paheli . The film was India 's submission for the Best Foreign Language Film at the 79th Academy Awards . He later collaborated with Karan Johar for the third time in the musical romantic drama Kabhi Alvida Naa Kehna ( 2006 ) , the story of two unhappily married people in New York City who begin an extramarital affair . The film , which featured an ensemble cast including Amitabh Bachchan , Preity Zinta , Abhishek Bachchan , Rani Mukerji and Kirron Kher , emerged as India 's highest grossing film in the overseas market , earning more than ₹ 1 @.@ 13 billion ( US $ 17 million ) worldwide . Both his roles in Kabhi Alvida Naa Kehna and the action film Don , a remake of the 1978 film of the same name , earned Khan Best Actor nominations at the Filmfare Awards , despite his performance as the titular character in Don being negatively compared to that of Amitabh Bachchan in the original film . 
 In 2007 , Khan portrayed a disgraced hockey player who coaches the Indian women 's national hockey team to World Cup success in Yash Raj Films ' semi @-@ fictional Chak De ! India . <unk> Patel notes that Khan , who had a background in the sport playing for his university 's hockey team , essentially portrayed himself as a " cosmopolitan , liberal , Indian Muslim " . <unk> well in both India and abroad , Khan garnered another Filmfare Award for Best Actor for his performance , which Rajeev Masand of CNN @-@ IBN considers to have been " without any of his typical trappings , without any of his trademark quirks " , portraying Kabir Khan " like a real flesh @-@ and @-@ blood human being " . Filmfare included his performance in their 2010 issue of the " Top 80 Iconic Performances " . In the same year , Khan starred alongside Arjun Rampal , Deepika Padukone and Shreyas Talpade in Farah Khan 's reincarnation melodrama Om Shanti Om , portraying a 1970s junior artiste who is reborn as a 2000s era superstar . The film became the highest grossing Indian motion picture of 2007 , both domestically and abroad . Om Shanti Om earned Khan his second nomination of the year for Best Actor at Filmfare . Khalid Mohammed from Hindustan Times wrote , " the enterprise belongs to Shah Rukh Khan , who tackles comedy , high drama and action with his signature style — spontaneous and intuitively intelligent " . 
 Khan collaborated for the third time with Aditya Chopra on the romantic drama Rab Ne Bana Di Jodi ( 2008 ) opposite Anushka Sharma , at that time a newcomer . He played Surinder Sahni , a shy man with low self @-@ esteem , whose love for his young arranged wife ( Sharma ) causes him to transform himself into Raj , a boisterous alter @-@ ego . Rachel Saltz of The New York Times believed the dual role to have been " tailor @-@ made " for Khan , giving him the opportunity to display his talents , although Deep Contractor from Epilogue thought Khan displayed greater strength in the role of Surinder and weakness in the role of monologue @-@ prone Raj . In December 2008 , Khan suffered a shoulder injury while filming a small role in <unk> Aziz 's <unk> Mil Gaya . He underwent extensive physiotherapy sessions at the time but the pain left him almost immobile and he had arthroscopic surgery in February 2009 . He performed an extended , special appearance in the 2009 film Billu , playing Bollywood superstar Sahir Khan — a fictionalised version of himself , wherein he performed musical item numbers with actresses Kareena Kapoor , Priyanka Chopra , and Deepika Padukone . As head of the film 's production company , Red Chillies , Khan made the call to change the title of the film from Billu Barber to Billu after hairdressers across the country complained that the word " barber " was derogatory . The company covered up the offending word on billboards that had already been installed with the original title . 
 = = = 2010 – present : My Name Is Khan and beyond = = = 
 After refusing the role that subsequently went to Anil Kapoor in Danny Boyle 's Slumdog Millionaire ( 2008 ) , Khan began shooting My Name Is Khan ( 2010 ) , his fourth collaboration with director Karan Johar and his sixth with Kajol . The film is based on a true story and set against the backdrop of perceptions of Islam after the 11 September attacks . Khan plays Rizwan Khan , a Muslim suffering from mild Asperger syndrome who sets out on a journey across America to meet the country 's president , in a role that film scholar Stephen Teo sees as a " symbol of assertive rasa values " and another example of Khan representing NRI identity in global Bollywood . To provide an accurate portrayal of a sufferer without disparagement , Khan spent several months researching his role by reading books , watching videos and talking to people affected by the condition . Upon release , My Name is Khan became one of the highest grossing Bollywood films of all time outside India , and earned Khan his eighth Filmfare Award for Best Actor , equalling the record for the most wins in the category with actor Dilip Kumar . Jay <unk> from Variety noted how Khan portrayed the Asperger 's sufferer with " averted eyes , springy steps , [ and ] stuttered repetitions of memorized texts " , believing it to have been a " standout performance sure to receive the Autism Society 's gold seal of approval " . 
 In 2011 , Khan starred alongside Arjun Rampal and Kareena Kapoor in Anubhav Sinha 's science fiction superhero film Ra.One , his first work in this genre , as a favour to his children . The film follows the story of a London @-@ based videogame designer who creates a villainous character who escapes into the real world . It was billed as Bollywood 's most expensive production ; it had an estimated budget of ₹ 1 @.@ 25 billion ( US $ 19 million ) . Despite negative media coverage of the film 's box office performance , Ra.One was a financial success with a gross of ₹ 2 @.@ 4 billion ( US $ 36 million ) . The film , and Khan 's portrayal of a dual role , received mixed reviews ; while most critics praised his performance as the robotic superhero G.One , they criticised his portrayal of the videogame designer Shekhar . Khan 's second release of 2011 was Don 2 , a sequel to Don ( 2006 ) . To prepare for his role , Khan exercised extensively and performed most of the stunts himself . His performance earned him positive reviews from critics ; Nikhat Kazmi of The Times of India said , " Shah Rukh remains in command and never loses his foothold , neither through the dramatic sequences nor through the action cuts " . The year 's highest grossing Bollywood production abroad , it was showcased at the 62nd Berlin International Film Festival . 
 Khan 's only release in 2012 was Yash Chopra 's last picture , the drama Jab Tak Hai Jaan , which saw him once again in a romantic role , starring opposite Katrina Kaif and Anushka Sharma . CNN @-@ IBN considered the overall performance by Khan to have been one of his finest to date , but believed that Khan 's first screen kiss of his career with Katrina Kaif , twenty years his junior , was an awkward one . Jab Tak Hai Jaan became one of the highest grossing Bollywood films of all time , both in India and abroad , setting several records and earning over ₹ 2 @.@ 11 billion ( US $ 31 million ) worldwide . The film was showcased at the 2012 Marrakech International Film Festival in Morocco , along with Kabhi Khushi Kabhie Gham ... , Veer @-@ Zaara , and Don 2 . At the following Zee Cine Awards , Khan performed a tribute to the late Yash Chopra along with Kaif , Sharma , and several of Chopra 's other past heroines . 
 In 2013 , Khan starred in Rohit Shetty 's action comedy Chennai Express for Red Chillies Entertainment , a film which earned mixed critical reviews and a fair amount of criticism for its perceived disparagement of South Indian culture , although the film included a tribute to Tamil cinema star Rajinikanth . The critic Khalid Mohamed thought that Khan overacted in the film and criticised him for " re @-@ rendering every old trick in the acting book " . Despite the criticism , the film broke many box office records for Hindi films in both India and abroad , surpassing 3 Idiots to briefly become the highest grossing Bollywood film of all time , with a gross of almost ₹ 4 billion ( US $ 59 million ) in worldwide ticket sales . On 7 March 2013 — a day before International Women 's Day — The Times of India reported that Khan had requested a new convention with the name of his lead female co @-@ stars appearing above his own in the credits . He claimed that the women in his life , including his co @-@ stars , have been the reason for his success . In 2014 , the actor was featured in Farah Khan 's ensemble comedy Happy New Year , which co @-@ starred Deepika Padukone , Abhishek Bachchan and Boman Irani ; his third collaboration with the director . Although Khan 's <unk> character was criticised , the film became a major commercial success grossing ₹ 383 crore ( US $ 57 million ) worldwide . 
 Khan next appeared alongside Kajol , Varun Dhawan and Kriti Sanon in Rohit Shetty 's comedy @-@ drama Dilwale ( 2015 ) . The film garnered negative reviews , though was financially profitable with a gross of ₹ 394 crore ( US $ 59 million ) . Namrata Joshi of The Hindu commented , " With Dilwale , Rohit Shetty goes hopelessly wrong despite much that he had at his disposal , including a power @-@ packed cast and producer " . Joshi also felt that the attempt to repackage Khan and Kajol had backfired . He then took on dual parts of a superstar and his doppelganger fan in Maneesh Sharma 's thriller Fan ( 2016 ) . Peter Bradshaw of The Guardian considered the film to be " exhausting , bizarre yet watchable " and thought that Khan was aptly " creepy " as the obsessive admirer . The film underperformed at the box office , and trade journalists attributed this failure to the film 's non @-@ conformity to mainstream formula . 
 As of June 2016 , Khan has completed work on Rahul Dholakia 's crime @-@ drama <unk> , in which he plays a bootlegger in 1980s Gujarat . He has also finished filming the part of a therapist in Gauri Shinde 's Dear Zindagi starring Alia Bhatt . In addition , he has committed to star in projects directed by Imtiaz Ali and Anand L. Rai . 
 = = Other work = = 
 = = = Film production and television hosting = = = 
 Khan co @-@ produced three films from 1999 to 2003 as a founding member of the partnership Dreamz Unlimited . After the partnership was dissolved , he and Gauri restructured the company as Red Chillies Entertainment , which includes divisions dealing with film and television production , visual effects , and advertising . As of 2015 , the company has produced or co @-@ produced at least nine films . Either Khan or <unk> are usually given production credits , and he has appeared in most of the films , either in the lead role , or in a guest appearance . Khan was involved in several aspects of the making of Ra.One ( 2011 ) . Aside from acting , he produced the film , volunteered to write the console game script , dubbed for it , oversaw its technical development , and wrote the digital comics based on the film 's characters . Khan has occasionally done playback singing for his films . In Josh ( 2000 ) he sang the popular song " <unk> Bola Tu Meri Laila " . He also sang in Don ( 2006 ) and Jab Tak Hai Jaan ( 2012 ) . For Always Kabhi Kabhi ( 2011 ) , which was produced by Red Chillies , Khan participated in the lyrical composition . 
 In addition to his early television serial appearances , Khan has hosted numerous televised awards shows , including the Filmfare , Zee Cine , and Screen Awards . In 2007 , he replaced Amitabh Bachchan for one season as the host of Kaun Banega <unk> , the Indian version of Who Wants to Be a Millionaire ? , and a year later , Khan began hosting Kya Aap <unk> Pass Se <unk> Hain ? , the Indian version of Are You Smarter Than a 5th Grader ? . In 2011 , he returned to television , appearing on Imagine TV 's Zor Ka <unk> : Total Wipeout , the Indian version of Wipeout ; scenes featuring Khan were shot at the Yash Raj Studios in Mumbai . Contrary to his earlier television anchoring jobs , Zor Ka <unk> : Total Wipeout performed poorly . It aired for only one season and became the lowest rated show hosted by a Bollywood star . 
 = = = Stage performances = = = 
 Khan is a frequent stage performer and has participated in several world tours and concerts . In 1997 , he performed in Asha Bhosle 's Moments in Time concert in Malaysia , and returned the following year to perform with Karisma Kapoor for the Shahrukh – Karisma : Live in Malaysia concert . The same year , he participated in The Awesome Foursome world tour across the United Kingdom , Canada , and the United States along with Juhi Chawla , Akshay Kumar and Kajol , and resumed the tour in Malaysia the following year . In 2002 , Khan featured with Amitabh Bachchan , Aamir Khan , Preity Zinta , and Aishwarya Rai in the show From India With Love at Manchester 's Old Trafford and London 's Hyde Park ; the event was attended by more than 100 @,@ 000 people . Khan performed alongside Rani Mukherji , Arjun Rampal and <unk> Koppikar in a 2010 concert at the Army Stadium in Dhaka , Bangladesh . The next year he joined Shahid Kapoor and Priyanka Chopra in the Friendship Concert , celebrating 150 years of India – South Africa friendship in Durban , South Africa . 
 Khan started an association with the " Temptations " series of concert tours by singing , dancing , and performing skits alongside Arjun Rampal , Priyanka Chopra , and other Bollywood stars in Temptations 2004 , a stage show that toured 22 venues across the world . The show played to 15 @,@ 000 spectators at Dubai 's Festival City Arena . In 2008 , Khan set up Temptation Reloaded , a series of concerts that toured several countries , including the Netherlands . Another tour was held with Bipasha Basu and others in 2012 in Jakarta , and in 2013 another series of concerts visited Auckland , Perth and Sydney . In 2014 , Khan performed in SLAM ! The Tour in the US , Canada , and London , and also hosted the Indian premiere of the live talent show , Got Talent World Stage Live . 
 = = = Ownership of IPL cricket team = = = 
 In 2008 , Khan , in partnership with Juhi Chawla and her husband Jay Mehta , acquired ownership rights for the franchise representing Kolkata in the Twenty20 cricket tournament Indian Premier League ( IPL ) for US $ 75 @.@ 09 million , and named the team Kolkata Knight Riders ( KKR ) . As of 2009 , KKR was one of the richest teams in the IPL , with a brand value of US $ 42 @.@ 1 million . The team performed poorly on the field during the first three years . Their performance improved over time , and they became the champions in 2012 and 2014 . 
 Khan performed alongside Sunidhi Chauhan and Shriya Saran at the opening ceremony of the 2011 season , where they danced to Tamil songs . He appeared again in 2013 alongside Katrina Kaif , Deepika Padukone and Pitbull . In May 2012 , the Mumbai Cricket Association banned him from the Wankhede Stadium for five years for arguing with security guards and officials after a match between KKR and The Mumbai Indians . Khan later apologised to his fans after his team won the final match . 
 = = In the media = = 
 Shah Rukh Khan receives a considerable amount of media coverage in India , and is often referred to as " King Khan " , " The Baadshah of Bollywood " , or " The King of Bollywood " . Anupama Chopra cites him as an " ever present celebrity " , with two or three films a year , constantly running television ads , print ads and gigantic billboards lining the streets of Indian cities . He is the object of a sometimes fanatical following , with a fan base estimated to exceed one billion . In 2011 he was declared " the biggest movie star you 've never heard of ... perhaps the world 's biggest movie star , period " by Steven <unk> of the Los Angeles Times and has been called the world 's biggest movie star in other international media outlets . According to a popularity survey , 3 @.@ 2 billion people around the world know Shah Rukh Khan , more than who know Tom Cruise . Khan is one of the wealthiest celebrities in India , topping the Forbes India 's " Celebrity 100 list " in 2012 , 2013 and 2015 . He was named by Newsweek as one of their fifty most powerful people globally in 2008 , and his wealth has been estimated at US $ 400 – 600 million . Khan owns several properties in India and abroad , including a GB £ 20 million apartment in London , and a villa on the Palm Jumeirah in Dubai . 
 Khan frequently appears on listings of the most popular , stylish and influential people in India . He has regularly featured among the top ten on The Times of India 's list of the 50 most desirable men in India , and in a 2007 poll by the magazine Eastern Eye he was named the sexiest man in Asia . Khan is often referred to as " Brand SRK " by media organisations because of his many brand endorsement and entrepreneurship ventures . He is one of the highest paid Bollywood endorsers and one of the most visible celebrities in television advertising , with up to a six per cent share of the television advertisement market . Khan has endorsed brands including Pepsi , Nokia , Hyundai , Dish TV , D <unk> , <unk> and TAG Heuer . Books have been published about him , and his popularity has been documented in several non @-@ fiction films , including the two @-@ part documentary The Inner and Outer World of Shah Rukh Khan ( 2005 ) , and the Discovery Travel & Living channel 's ten @-@ part miniseries Living with a Superstar — Shah Rukh Khan ( 2010 ) . In 2007 , Khan became the third Indian actor to have his wax statue installed at London 's Madame Tussauds museum , after Aishwarya Rai and Amitabh Bachchan . Additional versions of the statue were installed at Madame Tussauds ' museums in Los Angeles , Hong Kong , New York and Washington . 
 Khan has been brand ambassador of various governmental campaigns , including Pulse Polio and National AIDS Control Organisation . He is a member of the board of directors of Make @-@ A @-@ Wish Foundation in India , and in 2011 he was appointed by <unk> as the first global ambassador of the Water Supply and Sanitation Collaborative Council . He has recorded a series of public service announcements championing good health and proper nutrition , and joined India 's Health Ministry and UNICEF in a nationwide child immunisation campaign . In 2011 , he received UNESCO 's Pyramide con Marni award for his charitable commitment to provide education for children , becoming the first Indian to win the accolade . In 2015 , Khan received a privileged degree from the University of Edinburgh , Scotland . 
 = = Awards = = 
 Khan is one of the most decorated Bollywood actors . He has received 14 Filmfare Awards from 30 nominations and special awards , including eight for Best Actor ; he is tied for the most in the category with Dilip Kumar . Khan has won the Filmfare Best Actor award for Baazigar ( 1993 ) , Dilwale Dulhania Le Jayenge ( 1995 ) , Dil To Pagal Hai ( 1997 ) , Kuch Kuch Hota Hai ( 1998 ) , Devdas ( 2002 ) , Swades ( 2004 ) , Chak De ! India ( 2007 ) and My Name Is Khan ( 2010 ) . At times , he has garnered as many as three of the five total Filmfare Best Actor nominations . Although he has never won a National Film Award , he was awarded the Padma Shri by the Government of India in 2005 . The Government of France has awarded him both the Ordre des Arts et des Lettres ( 2007 ) , and its highest civilian honour , the Légion d 'honneur ( 2014 ) . 
 = Guyball = 
 Guyball ( / <unk> / <unk> @-@ bawl ) is a fictional game featured in the British sitcom Green Wing . The rules of Guyball are never fully explained , and are designed to be as confusing and as difficult to understand as possible . However , Green Wing fans have attempted to create their own rules and Guyball societies . The first such society was created at King 's College London . 
 The most renowned player is the fictional half @-@ Swiss anaesthetist Dr Guy Secretan . Due to the similarity between his name and that of Guyball , and the fact that Guyball 's specialist terminology has a heavy Swiss influence , it seems likely that Guy invented it . He first played Guyball at <unk> ( / <unk> / " <unk> " ) , a public school he attended for twelve years ( 1977 – 90 ) . Guyball is first mentioned in the seventh episode of series one of Green Wing , " Tangled Webs " , as Guy prepares for a world championship semi @-@ final , having won his second @-@ round match in five straight clappers . Other noted players include Markus Geissler , " The Big Austrian " , who Guy walked over in the first round because he had shin splints . 
 The idea for Guyball was inspired by real @-@ life obscure sports played solely at particular real English public schools – such as the Eton Wall Game and Winchester College Football . It was created by Green Wing writer Richard <unk> , and it was later developed by the other writers . 
 = = Fictional History = = 
 = = = Basic rules = = = 
 The object of the game , according to Guy , is simply " to put the ball into the basket " . The basket in question is part of the toppmeiler , a special helmet worn by one or more of the players . This consists of a wicker basket ( fastened to the player 's head by a leather strap ) with an attached pair of flying goggles to protect the eyes . Whether or not a given player wears a toppmeiler , hurls balls at their opponents , or has balls hurled at them , seems to vary depending on circumstance . 
