 = = Concert synopsis = = 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 The show was designed for a revolving stage divided into four sets , with Arjona performing with seven musicians and a showgirl . Fifty people were needed to set up the 45 @-@ ton stage , which was transported on 17 trucks . One hundred fifty lights , ( seventy of which were mobile ) were used during each concert , in addition to ten tons of scenery . Each set related to the songs being performed . The first evoked a two @-@ floor apartment with books , tables and chairs . Here Arjona sang " Lo Que Está Bien Está Mal " , " Animal Nocturno " , " Hay Amores " , " Desnuda " and " El Amor " ( during the set change ) . The second set represented a bar , where the singer performed " Historia de Taxi " and " Como Duele " . He then interacted with the audience on " Pingüinos en La Cama " ; during some concerts Arjona sang to a fan 's phone , and invited an older woman onstage to accompany him on " Señora De Las Cuatro Décadas " . 
 The third set was a circus , usually changing while Arjona performed " Reconciliación " . Other songs performed on this set were " Tarde ( Sin Daños a Terceros ) " , " Fuiste Tú " ( with fellow Guatemalan singer Gaby Moreno ) , " Te Conozco " and " Si El Norte Fuera El Sur " . The fourth set was a theatre , similar to the first . Here the singer performed " El Problema " before leaving the stage , simulating the end of the concert . After a few minutes , Arjona returned to close the show with " Minutos " and " Mujeres " . 
 A large LCD screen was over the stage . At the beginning of the concert a fictional news program called Metamorfosis showed a series of images from Arjona 's life , ( while " Vida " played in the background ) with images of Salvador Allende , Frida Kahlo , Donald Trump , Barack Obama and others during other songs . In Santiago de Chile , the Chilean flag and peace symbols appeared on the screen . In Buenos Aires , the Argentine flag was shown . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The number of songs played during each concert varied from 19 to 23 ; seven were from Independiente . Gaby Moreno appeared during every concert to perform " Fuiste Tú " . The show began with a video presentation , with " Vida " from Poquita Ropa as background music . The video consisted of images ( including those of a young Arjona ) , movies and shows . Arjona then arrived to sing " Lo Que Está Bien Está Mal " , " Animal Nocturno " ( from the album of the same name ) , " Hay Amores " and " Desnuda " ( from the album Vivo ) . In some cities ( including Buenos Aires and Santiago de Chile ) , Arjona performed " <unk> A Estar Solo " before " El Amor " ; in Monterrey , " El Amor " was performed first . 
 At his concert in Mendoza , Arjona observed that " The day I chose this career was the day I realized that a spoken verse could earn you a slap , but a sung verse could give you sighs . " He then sang " Mi Novia Se Me Está Poniendo Vieja " , a song he wrote for his mother . " Dime Que No " and " Como Duele " followed ; in Santiago de Chile , " Dime Que No " was replaced by " Historia de Taxi " . After " Como Duele " in some shows , " Pingüinos En La Cama " was performed before " Señora De Las Cuatro Décadas " . " Reconciliación " was performed next , while the set changed to a circus . 
 In some concerts " Fuiste Tú " was played before the set changed to a circus , before " Reconciliación " . In Santiago de Chile and Buenos Aires , " Fuiste Tú " was performed after " Reconciliación " and " Tarde ( Sin Daños a Terceros ) " ; the latter was performed after " Fuiste Tú " on most dates . " Te Conozco " , " Te Quiero " and " Si El Norte Fuera El Sur " followed . Arjona then performed " El Problema " before leaving the stage , simulating the end of the concert . After a few minutes he returned , singing " Minutos " and " Mujeres " to close the show . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 The Metamorfosis World Tour was widely praised by critics and fans . Natalie Torres , of the newspaper Dia a Dia , said that " Arjona knows how to handle his ' girls ' , with a mix of attitudes from a ' rough ' male and seductive lyrics . " Jon Pareles of The New York Times reported , " Arjona is one of Latin pop 's finest lyricists : observant , nuanced , sometimes wry , sometimes melancholy and especially fond of the play of opposites ... unlike some of his fellow Latin pop stars , Mr. Arjona is no saccharine lover boy . " 
 <unk> <unk> of the Mexican newspaper La Vanguardia said after the show in Monterrey , " Arjona 's metamorphosis has been noticeable throughout the years . He 's not the same young man who sang in a bar accompanied only with a guitar . Today he 's surrounded by a great production . " She finally stated that " essentially he 's the same : the one who sings to love . " The Argentine newspaper Clarín praised Arjona 's rapport with his largely female audience after his two @-@ year absence from Argentina . The appearance of Gaby Moreno for " Fuiste Tú " was also praised by critics and fans , and was considered the highlight of the show . 
 = = = Records = = = 
 Between 31 March and 1 April 2012 , Arjona toured Guatemala , his native country . The two concerts he presented in the Mateo Flores stadium were both sold out performances , becoming the first artist in Guatemalan history to achieve this feat . As of 16 April 2012 , his Metamorfosis World Tour has reached more than 400 @,@ 000 fans , from which about 160 @,@ 000 were only from his Buenos Aires tour dates on 12 – 15 April . On 25 April , Arjona 's show on Mendoza , Argentina accumulated an attendance of 24 @,@ 000 people , breaking the record set by Luis Miguel 10 years prior , and thus becoming the highest @-@ grossing artist ever on that province . Hours before his performance on Mendoza , the Malvinas Argentinas stadium in which the concert was held , a fire burned close to one of the entries of the complex . 
 = = Set list = = 
 = = = Additional notes = = = 
 The order of the songs performed varied . 
 = = Tour dates = = 
 = = = Cancellations and rescheduled shows = = = 
 = = Attendance and box office = = 
 = Katherine Ann Power = 
 Katherine Ann Power ( born January 25 , 1949 ) is an American ex @-@ convict and long @-@ time fugitive , who along with her fellow student and accomplice Susan Edith Saxe , was placed on the Federal Bureau of Investigation 's Most Wanted Fugitives list in 1970 . The two participated in robberies at a Massachusetts National Guard armory and a bank in Brighton , Massachusetts where Boston police officer Walter Schroeder was shot and killed . Power remained at large for 23 years . 
 A native of Colorado , Power turned herself over to authorities in 1993 after starting a new life in Oregon . She pleaded guilty and was imprisoned in Massachusetts for six years before being released on 14 years ' probation . While in prison , Power completed her bachelor 's degree , and after her release , earned a master 's degree at Oregon State University . She resides in the Boston area . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Katherine Power grew up as the third of seven children in Denver , Colorado . Her parents , Winfield and Marjorie , raised their Irish Catholic middle @-@ class family on Winfield ’ s salary as a bank credit manager and Marjorie 's income as a registered nurse . She became a Girl Scout and won a scholarship to Marycrest Girls High School , a Catholic school in Colorado . While in high school , she won a Betty Crocker cooking award , wrote a regular column for the Denver Post , graduated as valedictorian and received a full scholarship to Brandeis University , a liberal arts school in Waltham , Massachusetts . 
 In 1967 , Power enrolled at Brandeis as a sociology major and honor student at a time of anti @-@ Vietnam War protests at the school . She became known for wandering the campus braless and barefoot in an orange @-@ colored smock , for her attendance at Students for a Democratic Society protest rallies and for her involvement in the Brandeis Strike Information Center . She and her room @-@ mate Susan Saxe worked to organize student protests for a committee known as the National Student Strike Force . The two also became acquainted with fellow organizer Stanley Ray Bond , an ex @-@ convict and soldier attending classes at the university on a special program . 
 = = Protest and murder = = 
 Through their association with Bond , Power and Saxe became involved in a plot to arm the Black Panthers as a response to United States involvement in the Vietnam War . Bond introduced them to former convicts William Gilday and Robert Valeri and together the group plotted to rob the State Street Bank & Trust . On September 20 , 1970 , the group robbed a National Guard armory in Newburyport , Massachusetts and took 400 rounds of ammunition . They also stole weapons and set fire to the facility , causing about $ 125 @,@ 000 in damage . 
 Three days later , on September 23 , 1970 , the group robbed a bank in Brighton , Massachusetts , carrying handguns , a shotgun and a submachine gun . The first police officer on the scene , Boston police officer Walter Schroeder , was shot in the back by Gilday when he attempted to stop the robbery . He subsequently died from his wounds . The group escaped with $ 26 @,@ 000 in cash that they planned to use to finance an overthrow of the federal government . Power was behind the wheel of one of the two getaway vehicles . 
 While raiding her apartment after the bank robbery , police found evidence tying Power to both robberies . This included weapons , ammunition and a telephone switchboard from the armory . Power 's attorneys would subsequently blame her involvement in the robberies as the result of manipulation by her partner Bond . 
 = = Fugitive = = 
 Gilday , Valeri and Bond were captured shortly after the Brighton robbery . Bond died in custody while making a bomb as part of an escape bid , while Valeri turned state 's evidence and testified against Gilday . Valeri received a jail term of 25 years for the robbery , while Gilday received a death sentence . Power and Saxe eluded capture . 
 In November 1970 , Power and Saxe became the sixteenth and seventeenth persons on the FBI 's Most Wanted Fugitives list . At first , Power and Saxe traveled together , escaping arrest by hiding out in women ’ s communes . For part of this time , the two went to ground in Connecticut and Power assumed the name Mae Kelly . Saxe was able to elude arrest until 1975 , when she was captured in Philadelphia . She then served five years in prison . 
 Prior to her surrender in 1993 , Power had last been seen in Kentucky in 1974 . In 1977 , she assumed the alias Alice Louise Metzinger , taking the name from the birth certificate of an infant that had died the year before her birth . In 1979 , she moved west to Oregon and gave birth to a son , Jamie , by an unknown father . 
 As time went by , authorities received few tips regarding Power 's location and she was eventually removed from the Most Wanted Fugitives list in 1984 . The following year , she settled in the city of Lebanon in Oregon 's Willamette Valley with her son Jamie and boyfriend Ron Duncan , a local meat cutter and bookkeeper . While living in Oregon , Power taught cooking classes at Linn @-@ Benton Community College in Albany and worked at restaurants in Corvallis and Eugene . She reached the shortlist for the post of food writer for the Corvallis Gazette @-@ Times and became part @-@ owner of Napoli Restaurant and Bakery in Eugene . 
 Power had suffered from clinical depression since childhood and confided her fugitive status to her therapist Linda Carroll . She developed the desire to stop living her life under her assumed name and , through therapy that included participation in the mock trial of a soldier charged with killing civilians during the Vietnam War , she began to prepare for her surrender to the authorities . This included her decision to marry Duncan in 1992 and reveal her background to her friends . 
 = = Surrender = = 
 In 1993 , Katherine Ann Power negotiated a surrender with authorities and ended 23 years of hiding . Negotiations were carried out through her attorneys Steven Black , a public defender , and Rikki Klieman , a prominent Boston lawyer . On September 15 , 1993 , she pleaded guilty to two counts of armed robbery and manslaughter in Boston . At the time , her son Jamie was 14 years old and a freshman in high school , while Power was 44 years old . Her husband , Ron Duncan , then adopted Jamie . 
 In court , Power made the following statement about officer Schroeder : 
 Power was sentenced to eight to twelve years in prison for the bank robbery , and five years and a $ 10 @,@ 000 fine for the National Guard armory crimes . Additionally , judge Robert Banks of Suffolk County Superior Court imposed a probation condition that Power could not profit from her crime . Banks remarked that the sentence negotiated was inadequate . The second five years were to be served concurrently with the eight- to twelve @-@ year sentence , with a possibility of parole after five years . This probation condition also precluded her ability to profit directly or indirectly from telling her story . Power appealed this portion of the sentence on First Amendment grounds , but the Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court rejected the argument and the U.S. Supreme Court denied certiorari . 
 In a 1993 public statement , Power said : 
 = = Prison and release = = 
 While in prison Power completed her college degree in liberal studies through Boston University . In March 1998 , Power was eligible for parole after receiving time off for good behavior , but withdrew her request after opposition from the victim ’ s family . On October 2 , 1999 , she was released from prison in Massachusetts and placed on fourteen years of probation after serving six years of her eight- to twelve @-@ year sentence . Fifty years old at the time of release , Power then returned to Oregon and the family she formed while a fugitive . Shortly after release she appeared at a public forum on peace at Willamette University in Salem , Oregon , where she questioned the “ violent posture ” of some people in the peace movement , including activist Philip Berrigan . 
 Later , Power enrolled in graduate studies at Oregon State University in Corvallis , where she worked on a master 's degree in interdisciplinary studies with focuses on writing , philosophy , and ethics . She also taught freshman composition for the English department . On May 10 , 2001 , she read a poem she wrote called " Falling from Darkness " in Corvallis ( this was also a poetry reading and did also include poems she did not write ) and graduated with her <unk> later that year . In September 2001 , Katherine Ann Power represented the Oregon State philosophy department in a biotech lecture series . As of 2008 , she worked for Cambridge Cares About AIDS in the Boston area . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 Since her surrender , Power and her story have been the basis for a variety of books and even a television episode of Law & Order . The episode , entitled White Rabbit , was loosely based on her case . In the show , her character is called Susan Forrest and she is found after money from the robbery turns up in a private safety deposit box after a robbery . William Kunstler appears in the episode playing himself as Forrest 's lawyer . The fifth season episode aired on October 19 , 1994 . Later her story was the basis for Dana <unk> ’ s novel Eat the Document ( 2006 ) . She also plays a part in David Racine 's novel Floating in a Most Peculiar Way ( 1999 ) . 
 = Jason Kipnis = 
 Jason Michael Kipnis ( born April 3 , 1987 ; nicknamed " Kip " ) is an American professional baseball second baseman for the Cleveland Indians of Major League Baseball ( MLB ) . He attended Glenbrook North High School in the suburbs of Chicago , where he earned three letters playing baseball for the Glenbrook North Spartans . He attended the University of Kentucky , but transferred to Arizona State University after two years . In college , Kipnis was an All American and the 2009 Pacific @-@ 10 Conference Player of the Year for the Sun Devils . 
 The Indians selected Kipnis in the second round of the 2009 Major League Baseball draft . In 2010 , he was named the Indians ' Minor League Player of the Year , and a Baseball America Minor League All Star . Prior to the 2011 season , Baseball Prospectus ranked him as the top Indians prospect and the 28th @-@ highest prospect in baseball . At mid @-@ season , Baseball America rated him as baseball 's 31st @-@ best prospect . He was called up from the minor leagues on July 22 , 2011 . In 2012 , he became the starting second baseman for the Indians . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Jason Michael Kipnis was born on April 3 , 1987 in Northbrook , Illinois , a suburb of Chicago . He was the fourth child born to Kay and Mark Kipnis . He has two older brothers , Blair and Todd . His older sister Amanda played softball at the University of Maryland . As a child , his father played an important role in his baseball life . He played Little League and American Legion Baseball . Though Kipnis played baseball , football and soccer while growing up , he said there was never any question that his goal was to become a professional baseball player . 
 = = High school = = 
 Kipnis attended Glenbrook North High School in Northbrook , graduating in 2005 . He earned three letters in baseball for the Glenbrook North Spartans and was selected as team captain twice . He played shortstop , center field and pitcher . As an all @-@ conference junior , Kipnis batted .455 with a school @-@ record 11 home runs . As a senior , Kipnis batted <unk> with a .690 on @-@ base percentage and 32 stolen bases in 32 attempts ; he was named first @-@ team all @-@ state and the Central Suburban League Most Valuable Player . He was named all @-@ conference in both his junior and senior seasons . 
 As a freshman at Glenbrook North , Kipnis played soccer , setting the school 's single @-@ season goal scoring record with 41 . He also played football there in 2003 and 2004 . An All @-@ Conference wide receiver , Kipnis set single @-@ season school records for receptions , yards , and touchdowns . He also established school records for career receptions and receiving yards . As a senior in 2004 , Kipnis had 49 pass receptions for 956 yards and 10 touchdowns . His 2004 totals remain Glenbrook North single @-@ season records for receptions , receiving yards , and receiving touchdowns . Kipnis still holds the school 's career record with 1 @,@ 247 receiving yards . In December 2004 , the Pioneer Press sports staff selected Kipnis as a member of its " 2004 North Stars " , the all @-@ star football team for the Central Suburban League 's North Division . In announcing its selection , the Pioneer Press noted : " Quite simply one of the top receivers in the state , a player who piled up impressive numbers despite the fact the Spartans averaged barely 15 passing attempts per game . " 
 = = College = = 
 After graduating from high school in 2005 , Kipnis attended the University of Kentucky and then Arizona State University . At the University of Kentucky , Kipnis red @-@ shirted during the 2006 baseball season . In the spring of 2007 , Kipnis began competing with the Kentucky Wildcats during baseball games , where he batted .337 with a .450 on @-@ base percentage as an outfielder while stealing 11 bases in 12 attempts in 34 games . In February of that year , Kipnis was awarded Southeastern Conference Freshman of the Week honors . In the summer before his sophomore year , Kipnis played for the Covington Lumberjacks of the Valley Baseball League , a National Collegiate Athletic Association @-@ sanctioned collegiate summer baseball league in the Shenandoah Valley region of Virginia . He batted .318 with a <unk> on @-@ base percentage and 24 stolen bases . 
 After two years at the University of Kentucky , Kipnis transferred to Arizona State University . He played baseball for the Sun Devils and double @-@ majored in psychology and sociology . In an interview , Kipnis stated that the University of Kentucky wasn 't the right fit for him and that ASU 's college baseball reputation would make it a better fit . 
 In 2008 , Kipnis batted .371 with 14 home runs and 73 runs batted in . He finished second in the league with 24 stolen bases in 28 attempts . Kipnis primarily played center field , but played all outfield positions and second base ; he batted leadoff part of the time . In 2008 , Kipnis became the second Arizona State player to win the American Baseball Coaches Association ( ABCA ) Pacific @-@ 10 Conference Newcomer of the Year . ( Teammate Ike Davis earned the award two years earlier . ) Kipnis was named second @-@ team All America by the ABCA and named third @-@ team All @-@ American outfielder by Baseball America . In May 2008 , he won the Pacific @-@ 10 Player of the Week award . In June , the San Diego Padres drafted Kipnis during the fourth round of the 2008 Major League Baseball draft . However , Kipnis opted to remain in college at Arizona State , becoming the seventh @-@ highest player in the draft who chose not to sign . He decided not to sign with the Padres because he felt he hadn 't fully matured and accomplished everything in college . Regarding Kipnis ' success , Arizona State coach Pat Murphy observed : " I love that kid . He 's tough as nails , and really hard on himself . " Moreover , Paul <unk> , San Diego Padres front office assistant and former Los Angeles Dodgers general manager , described him as " a pesky player who is a very tough out , hitting the ball to all fields and running the bases aggressively ... [ who ] plays very hard and is surprisingly strong . " In the summer of 2008 , Kipnis played for the <unk> <unk> in the Cape Cod League , a collegiate summer baseball league located on Cape Cod in Massachusetts . 
 In 2009 , Kipnis was the team 's leadoff hitter and batted .384 with a .500 on @-@ base percentage and a <unk> slugging percentage . He finished with 16 home runs , 71 RBIs , 27 steals in 33 attempts , 51 walks and 32 strikeouts . The National Collegiate Baseball Writers Association ( NCBWA ) , Baseball America , and Collegiate Baseball named Kipnis the Pac @-@ 10 Conference Player of the Year , a Pac @-@ 10 Conference All @-@ Star outfielder , and a First Team College All @-@ American outfielder . Rivals.com rated Kipnis the number one outfielder in the nation . 
 Over two seasons , Kipnis batted .378 with 30 home runs , 144 RBIs , 142 runs , 37 doubles , 10 triples , and 51 stolen bases in 474 at bats for the Sun Devils . 
 = = Minor leagues = = 
 = = = 2009 = = = 
 The Cleveland Indians drafted Kipnis in the second round ( 63rd overall ) of the 2009 Major League Baseball draft , and he received a signing bonus of $ 575 @,@ 000 . In 2009 , the first @-@ year minor leaguer batted .306 for the Mahoning Valley Scrappers of the Short @-@ Season A classification New York – Penn League , playing left and center field . While Kipnis appeared to be a good prospect as an outfielder , the Indians saw his potential as a second baseman . Kipnis felt he would have more success in the majors at second base , particularly because of Cleveland 's difficulties at that position in recent years . Baseball America ranked him the fifth @-@ best player in the league . During this time , Baseball Prospectus rated him the Indians ' eighth @-@ best prospect , describing Kipnis as " fitting great baseball intelligence , a lot of intensity , and surprising tools into a small package . He works the count extremely well and makes consistently hard contact , and he has some surprising pop for his size . " 
 = = = 2010 = = = 
 In 2010 , Kipnis batted .300 for the Kinston Indians of the Carolina League . Kipnis was promoted from Kinston to the Akron Aeros of the AA Eastern League on June 10 , 2010 . He hit .311 for the Aeros and won the Aeros Player of the Week Award twice . Baseball America ranked Kipnis the ninth @-@ best prospect in the Eastern League . At the same time , Kipnis made a successful conversion to second base . 
 He joined the AAA Columbus Clippers for their playoffs . Kipnis batted .455 in five games , and hit for the cycle on September 17 in the Clippers ’ victory that clinched the International League title . His big game was voted second in the 2010 Fans Choice " Best Game " Minor League Baseball Yearly Awards . Veteran catcher Luke Carlin said : 
 They bring up Kipnis from Akron , and we look at this little guy and say , ' Where did he come from , and what is he doing here ? ' We were teasing him , and all he does is go out and hit about a million . I mean , here 's this little infielder and they put him in the fifth spot ... What 's that about ? He goes out and hits for the cycle . 
 For 2010 , Kipnis led the Indians minor league system in hits ( 159 ) and runs ( 96 ) . He finished tied for third in triples ( 8 ) , fourth in doubles ( 32 ) , and tied for fifth in both home runs ( 16 ) and RBIs ( 74 ) . He batted a combined .313 . He was named the Indians ' 2010 Minor League Player of the Year ( the " Lou Boudreau Award " ) , and was named a 2010 Baseball America Minor League All @-@ Star . 
 After the 2010 season , Kipnis played for the Peoria Javelinas in the Arizona Fall League . He batted .296 and tied for fifth in the league in RBIs ( 19 ) . He was named to the Arizona Fall League Rising Stars Game , and he wrote a blog for MLB.com during his time in the league . Baseball Prospectus ranked him as Cleveland 's top prospect . 
 = = = 2011 = = = 
 Baseball Prospectus 2011 reported that Kipnis was " a compact athlete who works the count , and consistently barrels up balls with enough power for 15 – 20 home runs annually in the big leagues . " Indians Manager Manny Acta described him as : " a blue collar , dirt bag , run @-@ through @-@ a @-@ wall , relentless type of guy . " Writer John Sickels said Kipnis is " quite strong and has plenty of bat speed . His feel for the strike zone is impressive , and he has no problem generating power . He seems to handle both fastballs and breaking stuff well , makes adjustments , and can handle left @-@ handed pitching just fine . " 
 Baseball Prospectus ranked him as the 28th @-@ highest prospect in baseball ( " .300 hitter , with 12 – 18 home runs " ) and the best in the organization . Jim Bowden ranked him the 39th @-@ best prospect in baseball , saying , " He made great progress defensively this past year , and there is no doubt he should be a .300 , 15 HR , 70 RBI type offensive 2B in the future " . Baseball America initially ranked him as the 54th @-@ best prospect in baseball , the second @-@ best second base prospect and the second @-@ best prospect in the Indians organization . By midseason , the publication ranked him 31st @-@ best in the minors . 
 In 2011 , Kipnis was named the Indians Minor League Player of the Week for June 26 – July 2 , after batting .500 with two home runs and a <unk> on @-@ base percentage . At that point in the season , Kipnis was 11 @-@ for @-@ 11 in stolen base attempts and was leading the International League in runs scored ( 60 ) and triples ( 9 ) . At that time he was also second in OPS ( .914 ) , fourth in slugging percentage ( .525 ) , fifth in on @-@ base percentage ( .389 ) , tied for sixth in RBIs ( 50 ) , tied for seventh in hits ( 90 ) , twelfth in average ( .305 ) , tied for fifteenth in stolen bases ( 11 ) , and tied for nineteenth in HRs ( 11 ) . On July 4 , Kipnis was named the International League Player of the Week . 
 Kipnis represented the Cleveland Indians in the 2011 All @-@ Star Futures Game on July 10 , hitting a 95 @-@ mph fastball for a home run when he led off the bottom of the first inning for the United States . Kipnis also was named to the International League All @-@ Star team , and he doubled and walked in the game on July 13 . 
 On July 22 , 2011 , Kipnis was called up from the Clippers to the Cleveland Indians . At the time , he was leading the International league in triples ( 9 ) , was second in runs scored ( 64 ) , seventh in total bases ( 164 ) , tied for tenth in walks ( 44 ) , twelfth in RBIs ( 55 ) , and seventeenth in stolen bases ( 12 in 13 attempts ) . 
 = = Major leagues = = 
 = = = Cleveland Indians ( 2011 – present ) = = = 
 Kipnis made his major league debut on July 22 , 2011 , starting at second base against the Chicago White Sox . His first career hit came in his next game two days later – a game @-@ winning walk @-@ off single with the bases loaded and two outs in the ninth inning against the Los Angeles Angels of Anaheim . On August 3 , 2011 , Kipnis became the first Indians second baseman to hit a home run in four consecutive games , and the only Indian other than former Indians MVP Al Rosen to do so in his rookie year . It was the first time in major league history that a player had homered in four consecutive games within two weeks of his major league debut . On August 10 , Kipnis had a five @-@ hit , four @-@ run game , the first time a rookie had done so since Jim <unk> in 1952 . In 2011 , he played 36 games in the major leagues and batted .272 with seven home runs and 19 RBIs . 
 Jason Kipnis got the Opening Day starting job at second base for 2012 . On May 3 , 2012 , in a game against the Chicago White Sox , Kipnis had a triple , home run , and a career @-@ high four RBIs in a 7 – 5 Indians victory . On June 1 , Kipnis hit his first major league grand slam off Minnesota Twins ' starting pitcher Carl Pavano . Kipnis played 152 games in 2012 , batting .257 with 14 home runs and 76 RBIs , and finished tied for 6th in the American League in steals ( with 31 ) . 
 In the 2013 season Kipnis continued to improve over his 2012 performance , winning the Player of the Week honor twice in the month of June . Kipnis batted .419 in June , with an OPS of 1 @.@ 216 , in addition to stealing 9 bases in 10 attempts . He was also named the American League Player of the Month for June . Kipnis was later named a member of the 2013 American League All Star team . In 2013 , he finished among AL leaders in sacrifice flies ( tied for 2nd , with 10 ) , walks ( tied for 7th , with 76 ) , and steals ( tied for 9th , with 30 ) . 
 Kipnis signed a 6 @-@ year , $ 52 @.@ 5 million contract with the Indians on April 4 , 2014 . 
 In May 2015 Kipnis broke the Indians team record for the most hits in a single month with 51 total hits . He also ended the month with 30 runs which made him one of three people ever in the MLB to have 50 + hits and 30 + runs in the month of May . He was only behind Ty Cobb and Al Simmons . 
 On June 1 , Kipnis was voted the AL Player of the Month for May . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Kipnis is a practicing Roman Catholic , though he self @-@ identifies as Jewish due to his father 's Jewish ancestry . Kipnis has been nicknamed " Dirtbag " , since he is prone to get his uniform dirty during the course of a game . Former Indians manager Manny Acta affectionately used the term when speaking about Kipnis in public . 
 = Californication ( album ) = 
 Californication is the seventh studio album by American rock band Red Hot Chili Peppers . It was released on June 8 , 1999 , on Warner Bros. Records and was produced by Rick Rubin . Californication marked the return of John Frusciante , who had previously appeared on Mother 's Milk and Blood Sugar Sex Magik , to replace Dave Navarro as the band 's guitarist . Frusciante 's return was credited with changing the band 's sound altogether , producing a notable shift in style from the music recorded with Navarro . The album 's subject material incorporated various sexual innuendos commonly associated with the band , but also contained more varied themes than previous outings , including lust , death , contemplations of suicide , California , drugs , globalization , and travel . 
 Californication is the Chili Peppers ' most commercially successful studio release internationally , with over 15 million copies sold worldwide , and more than 5 million in the United States alone . As of 2002 , the album had sold over 4 million copies in Europe . The record produced several hits for the band , including " Otherside " , " Californication " and the Grammy Award @-@ winning " Scar Tissue " . Californication peaked at number three on the U.S. Billboard 200 . The record marked a significant change in style for the band : Rolling Stone 's Greg Tate noted that " while all previous Chili Peppers projects have been highly spirited , Californication dares to be spiritual and epiphanic " . 
 = = Background = = 
 Guitarist John Frusciante left the band in the middle of a 1992 tour that promoted their critically acclaimed album Blood Sugar Sex Magik . It took over a year for the band to find a new guitarist with whom to record officially . Dave Navarro , formerly of Jane 's Addiction , was invited to join the Chili Peppers after Arik Marshall , who had finished the remaining tour dates for Blood Sugar Sex Magik , was fired . Navarro influenced the band 's ensuing album , One Hot Minute , by incorporating various elements of heavy metal and psychedelic rock , which was something that the Chili Peppers had not previously been notable for . Compared to Blood Sugar Sex Magik , One Hot Minute was a commercial disappointment , selling only half of what Blood Sugar Sex Magik had originally sold . Critics dismissed the album , claiming it was weak and unfocused . Shortly after the release of One Hot Minute , Navarro was fired due to internal differences . 
 In the years following Frusciante 's departure from the Chili Peppers , he had developed a vicious addiction to both heroin and cocaine that left him in poverty and near death . Friends convinced him to enter drug rehabilitation in January 1998 . In April 1998 , following Frusciante 's three @-@ month completion , Flea visited his former band @-@ mate and openly invited him to re @-@ join the band , an invitation Frusciante readily accepted . Within the week , and for the first time in six years , the foursome gathered to play and jump @-@ started the newly reunited Red Hot Chili Peppers . 
 = = Writing and composition = = 
 Much of the album was written in the band members ' homes in the summer of 1998 . Kiedis and Frusciante often spent days together discussing song creation , guitar riffs and lyrical content . Bass and percussion aspects of the record were constructed through jam sessions and the individual work of Flea and Smith . 
 Californication 's lyrics were derived from Anthony Kiedis ' ideas , outlooks , and perceptions of life and its meaning . " Porcelain " resulted from Kiedis 's meeting with a young mother at the YMCA , who was attempting to battle her alcohol addiction while living with her infant daughter . Kiedis also had a love interest in <unk> Logan , a fashion designer whom Kiedis met while she was working in New York City . Kiedis involvement with Logan influenced his multiple examinations of love throughout Californication , in songs such as " Porcelain " and " This Velvet Glove . " <unk> was a concept that Kiedis had dealt with in the past , and he ultimately crafted a song around it . He was inspired by former band @-@ mate Dave Navarro , whom he considered to be the " King of <unk> " . Frusciante approached the guitar line present in " Scar Tissue " as an attempt to use two notes that are played far apart , but produce a " cool rhythm " . He had explored this technique on his first solo album , 1994 's Niandra Lades and Usually Just a T @-@ Shirt . Frusciante considers " Scar Tissue " to be a " very simple example of the technique , but I think it 's a style that sounds like me " . The guitarist made use of slide guitar @-@ playing for the solos in the song . The song " Emit <unk> " , which is " summer time " spelled backwards , was inspired by Anthony 's brief relationship with Melanie C of the Spice Girls . 
 " Get On Top " , a song which contains significant use of a wah pedal , was formed after a jam session conducted shortly after Frusciante had listened to Public Enemy : " I came up with [ the rhythm to the song ] on the way to rehearsal — just tapping it out with my foot . " The understated guitar solo played in the middle of the song was originally intended to be more noticeable , according to Frusciante , who was playing screaming guitar solos . He changed his thought process after listening to Steve Howe 's guitar solo on Yes ' " Siberian <unk> " : " the band sounded really big — and they 're playing really fast — and then this clean guitar solo comes out over on top . It 's really beautiful , like it 's on its own sort of shelf . For ' Get On Top ' I wanted to play something that contrasted between the solo and the background . " " Savior " , a song found towards the end of the album , features heavy effects , most notably an Electro @-@ Harmonix Micro Synth with 16 @-@ second delay . Frusciante notes that the sound is " directly inspired by Eric Clapton 's playing in Cream . If you listen to the actual notes , they 're like a Clapton solo — they just don 't sound like it because of the effects . " 
 The hit " Around the World " , which harkens back to the Chili Peppers ' funk @-@ influenced sound , was constructed by Frusciante at his home . The rhythm and beat , however , are intricate ; this required him to play the song with the rest of the band rather than alone for them to understand it . The bass lick was composed in " maybe 15 minutes , " according to Frusciante : " Flea is the best bass player in the world . His sense of timing and the way he thinks is so crazy . " The title track of the album was among the most difficult for the band to complete . Frusciante felt compelled to write an appropriate guitar ensemble that would appropriately complement the poignant lyrical content , but encountered difficulty . The song was barely making progress , and would have been scrapped had it not been for Kiedis ' urgency to include it on the album . Frusciante completed the final riff two days before recording , after drawing inspiration from The Cure 's soundtrack song to " Carnage <unk> " . The title track was intended to represent Californian lifestyles and , more specifically , the " fake " nature which is associated with much of Hollywood . It references Kurt Cobain of Nirvana and uses considerable imagery to capture the evocative nature of California . 
 The record was a change of style for the Chili Peppers , especially compared to their previous album , One Hot Minute , which combined various elements of heavy metal and psychedelic rock . Although Californication still contains some funk rock songs ( such as " Around the World " , " Get on Top " , " I Like Dirt " , " Purple Stain " and " Right on Time " ) , it leaned towards more melodic riffs ( for example , " Scar Tissue " and " Otherside " ) and focused on songs with implemented structure rather than jams . 
 = = Promotion and release = = 
 Rick Rubin had produced their two previous albums . However , the Chili Peppers decided to look for other producers for Californication . David Bowie had shown great interest in working with the band and asked to produce the album ; however , the Chili Peppers chose to remain with Rubin for Californication . Rubin had , in the past , granted the Chili Peppers creative freedom on their recording material ; this was something they thought necessary for the album to be unique , and could only occur with his return . Recording took place at Cello Studios in Los Angeles . In early 1999 , following the recording process , the band played " Scar Tissue " , " Otherside " , and " Californication " to their managers , and it was decided that " Scar Tissue " would be the lead single for the album . To support their reunited line @-@ up , the band played various proms across the country to promote Californication . It sprouted a competition , which called upon high school students to write essays on " how they could make their schools better , safer , happier , more rocking places , so that they didn 't have to go to school afraid . If you wrote the essay , you got a free ticket to the show . " 
 Californication was released on June 8 , 1999 , debuting at # 5 but peaking at # 3 on the Billboard 200 chart . In Europe , the album peaked at # 5 on the UK Top 40 , # 1 on the Finnish , Austrian , Swedish and New Zealand charts , and # 2 on the French Top 40 . It was certified gold just over a month later , on July 22 , 1999 , and its continuing sales have resulted in it being certified five @-@ times platinum . In March 2006 , the Red Hot Chili Peppers ' albums were made available to purchase on the iTunes Music Store . Albums bought there included new previously unreleased tracks ( " Fat Dance " , " Over Funk " , and " Quixoticelixer " ) . In Germany , it was the band 's best @-@ selling album , staying on the Media Control Charts for 114 weeks ( more than 2 years ) and selling more than 750 @,@ 000 copies , reaching 3 × Gold . 
 = = Critical reception and legacy = = 
 Californication received favorable reviews in contrast to its less popular predecessor , One Hot Minute , and it was a greater success worldwide . Rolling Stone credited Kiedis for his drastically improved vocals : " [ his ] vocal cords have apparently been down to some crossroads and over the rehab , and returned with heretofore unheard @-@ of range , body , pitch , soulfulness , and melodic sensibility . " Songs such as " Otherside " and " Porcelain " were called " Pumpkins @-@ esque " , while the album as a whole was " <unk> " and the " RHCP <unk> are now moving toward funk 's real Holy Grail : that salty marriage of esoteric mythology and insatiable musicality that salvages souls , binds communities and heals the sick . " Other critics credited the album 's success to the return of Frusciante . Allmusic 's Greg Prato said that the " obvious reason for [ the band 's ] rebirth is the reappearance of guitarist John Frusciante " , considering him to be the " quintessential RHCP guitarist " . The album as a whole was " a bona fide Chili Peppers classic " . Entertainment Weekly also credits Frusciante with transforming the band 's sound into a " more relaxed , less grating , and , in their own way , more introspective album than ever before " . Mark <unk> of Ray Gun commented that " ' This Velvet Glove ' strikes an intricate balance between a lush acoustic guitar foundation and anthemic rock , " <unk> continued " the disco intro to ' Parallel Universe ' gives way to a scorching Western giddy @-@ up motif in the chorus , and Frusciante 's Hendrix @-@ like excursions at the song 's close . " 
 While many critics found the band 's new sound refreshing , NME criticized the Chili Peppers for rarely using their trademark funk sound , asking : " Can we have our brain @-@ dead , half @-@ dressed funk @-@ hop rock animals back now , please ? All this false empathy is starting to make my removed rib tingle . " Pitchfork , while considering the album a triumph over One Hot Minute , felt Californication lacked the funk that was ever @-@ present in Blood Sugar Sex Magik . It went on to scrutinize some lyrics for being overly sexual , but also considered Frusciante to be " the best big @-@ time American rock guitarist going right now " . 
 Over the years , Californication has maintained its popularity . " Scar Tissue " won the Grammy Award for Best Rock Song in 2000 . The album was ranked number 399 on Rolling Stone magazine 's 2003 list of " The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time " and , in 2006 , the Chili Peppers recorded a five @-@ set playlist for AOL Sessions that included " Scar Tissue " and " Californication " . The album produced many staple hits for the Chili Peppers ; five of the sixteen songs on their Greatest Hits album were taken from Californication . 
 The album received criticism for what Tim Anderson of The Guardian called " excessive compression and distortion " in the process of digital mastering . Stylus Magazine labeled it as one of the victims of the loudness war and commented that it suffered from digital clipping so much that " even non @-@ audiophile consumers complained about it " . An early , alternately mastered version of the album with a different track listing and mixing , probably a pre @-@ release candidate , has been circulated on the internet . 
 = = Californication tour = = 
 Immediately following the release of Californication , the band embarked on a world tour to support the record , beginning in the United States . To culminate the US leg of their tour , the Chili Peppers were asked to close Woodstock ' 99 , which became infamous for the resulting violence . The band was informed minutes before arriving that the crowds and bonfires in the fields had gone out of control . When the Chili Peppers performed a tribute to Jimi Hendrix 's song " Fire " to finish their set as a favor to Hendrix 's sister , the disruption escalated into violence when several women , who had been crowd surfing and moshing , were raped and nearby property was looted and destroyed . Kiedis felt that " It was clear that this situation had nothing to do with Woodstock any more . It wasn 't symbolic of peace and love , but of greed and cashing in ... We woke up to papers and radio stations vilifying us for playing ' Fire ' . " 
 To kick off the band 's European tour , the band staged a free show in Moscow 's Red Square , on August 14 , 1999 , to a crowd of over 200 @,@ 000 . Kiedis recalled the situation : " Red Square was so filled with wall @-@ to @-@ wall Russians that we needed a police escort to get near the stage . " Following the European leg , the group did a show in New York City , at the Windows on the World , for KROQ radio contest @-@ winners , and then at the Big Day Out festival in Australia following several Japanese tour dates . Flea , however , began to feel the repercussions of touring causing the band to set up concerts that were less strenuous , and consequently less financially rewarding , for them . These shows would finish the remainder of the Californication tour . As one of the last shows before the release of their next album By the Way , the Chili Peppers played Rock in Rio 3 . 
 = = Accolades = = 
 The information regarding accolades attributed to Californication is adapted from AcclaimedMusic.net 
 ( * ) designates unordered lists . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written and composed by Red Hot Chili Peppers . 
 = = Album outtakes = = 
 The album featured a few outtakes that didn 't appear on the studio album . " Gong Li " and " Instrumental # 1 " were released on the " Scar Tissue " single . The instrumental " Teatro Jam " was released on the " Around the World " single while " How Strong " was featured on the " Otherside " single . " Instrumental # 2 " was released on a bonus disc for the album . In 2006 , iTunes exclusively released " Fat Dance , " " Over Funk " and " Quixoticelixer " along with the album for download . " Slowly , Deeply " an instrumental track , would later be released as a b @-@ side to the " Universally Speaking " single in 2003 , while " Bunker Hill " would be re @-@ worked on during the band 's Greatest Hits sessions in 2003 and released on the " Fortune Faded " single that same year . 
 In August and September 2014 , unreleased demos from 1998 were leaked to the internet . Many of the demos were of songs that made the final album or released as b @-@ sides , however some were different from the final album version with the most notable differences being a reggae influenced version of the title track with different lyrics and a very different vocal melody , a version " Scar Tissue " with a longer intro , a slower version of " Purple Stain " with added lyrics and different chorus , " Porcelain Alice " , the original version of " Porcelain " with different lyrics , an instrumental version of ' Quixoticelixer ' ( with the working title " New Wave Song " ) , " How Strong Is Your Love " , the original version of " How Strong " and the original demos for " Fat Dance " and " Bunker Hill " ( originally titled " These Are Not My Dreams of Bunker Hill " ) . The leaked demos also included never before heard songs such as " Plate of Brown " , " <unk> ' a Lie " , " <unk> " , " Andaman & Nicobar " , " Boatman " , " Sugar Sugar " and " Trouble in the Pub " . In February 2015 , a collection of rough mixes of outtakes from the Californication sessions was leaked . This group of songs , which were recorded on April 21 , 1999 at The Village Studio , contains a version of " Trouble in the Pub " with vocals along with " Blondie " , a song Frusciante mentioned in an interview as an album outtake however the song turns out only to be a rough mix of " Instrumental # 2 " . An unmastered mix of the album also exists that features alternate versions of some songs , such as extended endings ( " Easily " ) , extra verses ( " Savior " ) , alternate choruses ( " Around the World " ) and different guitar mixes ( " How Strong " ) . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Red Hot Chili Peppers 
 Anthony Kiedis – lead vocals 
 Flea – bass , backing vocals 
 John Frusciante – guitars , backing vocals , keyboard 
 Chad Smith – drums 
 Additional musicians 
 Greg Kurstin – keyboards 
 Patrick Warren – Chamberlin organ on " Road Trippin ' " 
 Recording personnel 
 Lindsay Chase – production coordinator 
 Mike Nicholson and Greg Collins – additional engineering 
 Greg Fidelman – additional engineering 
 Jennifer Hilliard – assistant engineer 
 Chris Holmes – mix engineer 
 Ok Hee Kim – assistant engineer 
 Vlado Meller – mastering 
 Rick Rubin – production 
 David Schiffman – additional engineering 
 Jim Scott – engineer , mixing 
 John Sorenson – additional engineering 
 Additional personnel 
 Lawrence Azerrad – art direction 
 Sonya Koskoff – photography 
 Red Hot Chili Peppers – art direction 
 Tony <unk> – photography 
 = = Charts , certifications and sales = = 
 = HMCS Integrity ( 1804 ) = 
 HMCS Integrity was a cutter built by the Colonial Government of New South Wales in 1804 . She was the first vessel ever launched from a New South Wales dockyard and carried goods between the colony 's coastal settlements of Norfolk Island , Newcastle , Van Diemen 's Land and Port Jackson . In 1804 she took part in a series of voyages to Van Diemen 's Land with the aim of founding a colony at Port Dalrymple , the site of the modern settlement of George Town , Tasmania . 
 In 1805 Integrity encountered and recaptured a Spanish brig which had been unlawfully seized by privateers and concealed in the Kent Group of islands in Bass Strait . Having returned the Spanish vessel to colonial control , Integrity was designated the task of sailing to Chile to negotiate its return to Spain . She set sail for Valparaíso , Chile in June 1805 , but was not seen again and is likely to have foundered during the voyage . 
 = = Construction = = 
 Integrity was laid down in September 1802 at the newly opened King 's Dockyard in the colony of New South Wales . Governor Philip Gidley King ordered that construction proceed as swiftly as possible , in order to test the Dockyard 's capacity . A team of two shipwrights , two apprentice shipwrights and two sawyers were assigned the task and delivered the finished cutter in thirteen months . During construction shipwright Thomas Moore tested that the hull was watertight by filling it with water from the inside , and repairing any visible leaks . Her hold also incorporated a partition that her crew could move to or away from the forecastle bulkhead to vary her cargo capacity . 
 Governor King 's direction had been for a vessel measuring around 46 tons burthen , but the final vessel was significantly larger at 59 3 ⁄ 4 tons . King was impressed with the work despite this variation from the original plans ; in a letter to Lord Hobart , Secretary of State for War and the Colonies , he praised the speed and quality of Integrity 's construction and described her as " extremely well put together and strong " . 
 The newly built vessel was launched on 13 January 1804 as " His Majesty 's Armed Colonial Cutter Integrity " under the command of Royal Navy Lieutenant John Houstoun and with a crew of eight men . She was the first seagoing vessel to be launched in the colony of New South Wales , all previous craft having been small enough to be floated off the shore . Throughout her active service she remained under the direct control of the colonial government of New South Wales , and was never formally commissioned into the Royal Navy . 
 = = Active service = = 
 = = = Early voyages = = = 
 Integrity 's first voyage was in February 1804 , heading south along the eastern coastline of Australia to transport settlers and supplies across Bass Strait to the colonial outpost in Van Diemen 's Land . The administrator of that outpost , Lieutenant John Bowen , had recently resigned his position and returned to Port Jackson . Governor King now directed that Bowen travel back to Van Diemen 's Land aboard Integrity in order to formalise the transfer of colonial authority to his successor . However Bowen refused to go aboard , and the cutter ultimately sailed without him . The voyage was a success other than a broken rudder fastener which was repaired when Integrity reached Van Diemen 's Land in early March . The cutter then completed the round trip back to Port Jackson , arriving safely at her home port on 24 April . 
 On 1 June Governor King issued directions for Integrity 's second voyage . With Lieutenant Houstoun again in command , the cutter was to transport Lieutenant @-@ Colonel William Paterson to the north of Van Diemen 's Land in order to found a new settlement at Port Dalrymple . To support the settlement , the cutter was also assigned to carry nineteen soldiers of the New South Wales Corps , a ship 's surgeon and ten convicts . A further fifteen soldiers and eleven convicts would accompany the expedition aboard a privately owned vessel , the Contest . Once Paterson had disembarked at Port Dalrymple , Integrity was to follow the coastline of Port Phillip Bay so that Houstoun could survey the shore and determine its suitability for future colonisation . The cutter would then proceed to Cape Barren Island , a remote location in Bass Strait , to investigate rumours that a group of American sailors were establishing an unlawful trade in seal skins . 
 Integrity set sail on 8 June , heading south along the New South Wales coast . A week later she encountered heavy storms and winds while passing Cape Howe and was unable to proceed . Houstoun ordered a return to Port Jackson , which was regained on 19 June . While in port , one of Integrity 's crew , a sailor named William <unk> , was removed from the ship and sent to prison for having refusing to carry out his duties while aboard . There was no sign of Contest and she was presumed lost at sea . 
 The voyage was re @-@ attempted on 3 July , but Integrity again ran into heavy weather off Cape Howe and was forced to turn towards the shore to seek shelter . The cutter entered what would later be known as Twofold Bay on the New South Wales South Coast , where to her crew 's surprise they discovered Contest , undamaged but unable to return to sea in the storm . 
 The passengers and crew of both vessels consulted on whether to continue southwards or turn back and await better weather . According to one source , missionary W.P. Crook aboard Integrity , there was unanimity for continuing the voyage except for Captain Houstoun , who wished to turn back . As Houstoun was the nominal commander of the voyage his view prevailed and Integrity and Contest returned to Port Jackson together , arriving on 13 July . 
 = = = Port Dalrymple flotilla = = = 
 Integrity 's repeated failure to reach Port Dalrymple convinced Governor King that larger vessels would be required to make the voyage . The East India Company was approached to provide either the Coromandel or the Experiment , both then in New South Wales waters , but the request was declined . In the interim Integrity was sent north with provisions for the colonial settlement at Norfolk Island , departing on 20 July and returning in early August . In September she sailed a round trip to the New South Wales colony of Newcastle to ship a cargo of cedar wood back to Port Jackson , followed by another brief voyage to Norfolk Island . 
 On 1 October Governor King issued orders for a flotilla to attempt the voyage . The expedition would be led by the 12 @-@ gun Royal Navy storeship HMS Buffalo and the 6 @-@ gun survey vessel HMS Lady Nelson . They would be accompanied by Integrity , and by the elderly colonial schooner Francis which had been in service since 1792 and was described by King as " much damaged " but still seaworthy . Lieutenant @-@ Colonel Paterson and the principal colonists would travel aboard Buffalo but transfer to Integrity if the Navy vessel was too large to enter the bay where the settlement was proposed to stand . 
 The flotilla departed Port Jackson on 15 October , proceeding southward down the New South Wales coastline towards Bass Strait . Cape Howe was passed without incident , though the schooner Francis struggled with the ocean swell and continually fell behind the larger vessels . The weather slowly worsened until on sunset of 18 October the flotilla encountered a heavy gale . Captain William Kent of Buffalo signaled for the flotilla to take in their sails and ride out the storm ; on the following morning the crew of Integrity discovered that they had lost sight of all three other vessels and were running dangerously close to a lee shore . Houstoun elected to continue southward close to land , preferring the risk of running aground to that of braving the gale in deeper water . There was a glimpse of Buffalo far to the east on the morning of 21 October , " laboring much and lurching very deep " among the waves . Other than this sighting Integrity continued her voyage alone through the storm , crossing Bass Strait into clearer weather on around 23 October . The cutter was brought into an uninhabited bay on the northeast coast of Van Diemen 's Land where she underwent basic repairs . 
 After ten days she was returned to sea and reached Port Dalrymple on the morning of 5 November . Buffalo had already arrived , but there was no sign of Lady Nelson or Francis . Houstoun 's achievement in navigating the storm was recognised through a transfer to Buffalo , a larger and more prestigious vessel than Integrity . His former colonial command was allocated to midshipman Charles Robbins , who was promoted Acting Lieutenant by virtue of his new role . The remaining vessels in the flotilla , Lady Nelson and Francis , arrived in Port Dalrymple on 21 November . Integrity departed a week later , Robbins having been ordered to explore the far western coastline of Van Diemen 's Land . 
 = = = Capture of Saint Francisco & Saint Paulo = = = 
 In April 1805 Integrity encountered the brig Saint Francisco & Saint Paulo off the Kent Group of islands in Bass Strait . The brig and another ship , the Extremeña , had been seized from the Chilean ports of Caldera and Coquimbo in September 1804 by Captain William Campbell of the privateer Harrington . The Spanish ships had then been sailed to Port Jackson while Governor King considered whether to return them to Chile . Unwilling to await King 's decision , Captain Campbell had ordered his crew to put to sea in Saint Francisco & Saint Paulo and conceal the vessel in an uninhabited location . Departing south from Port Jackson in early March , the brig ran into rough weather in Bass Strait and began to sink . When approached by Integrity , the Spanish ship was shipping 4 ft ( 1 @.@ 2 m ) of water over the lowest deck inside the hull . Integrity 's crew assisted in keeping the brig afloat and she was safely conveyed to Port Dalrymple , arriving on 17 May 1805 . 
 = = Fate = = 
 In June 1805 Governor King received legal advice from the British Government indicating that colonial retention of the Spanish vessels Extremeña and St Francisco & St Paulo could give rise to a charge of piracy . In these circumstances , King directed that Integrity should sail to Chile to offer the safe return of the Spanish ships . The cutter departed for Valparaíso , Chile on 20 June 1805 . For the voyage she was again under the command of Acting Lieutenant Robbins , with a crew of ten men and bearing a flag of truce " in case war should have taken place between England and Spain " before she reached her destination . She was not seen again . Historian Frank Bladen has conjectured that the cutter either foundered en route , or reached South America but was captured by an indigenous tribe . 
 A year after Integrity 's departure , on 20 July 1806 , King wrote to Viscount Castlereagh expressing concern at the cutter 's continued absence and hoping that she had simply been detained by Spanish authorities . She was last mentioned in a report on colonial shipping compiled by Governor King in August 1806 – fourteen months after her disappearance – with details of pay still owing to her crew and accompanied by the annotation " Gone to Valparaiso ... Not returned . " 
 = Extreme Spots = 
 " Extreme Spots " is the first episode of the ninth season and the 179th overall episode of the American animated television series SpongeBob SquarePants . The episode originally aired on Nickelodeon in the United States on July 21 , 2012 . The series follows the adventures and endeavors of the title character and his various friends in the underwater city of Bikini Bottom . In this episode , SpongeBob and Patrick try to do their best to join extreme sports team the Drasticals , no matter how extreme , dangerous , or ludicrous it gets . It will see the duo try their hand at sand motor biking , hang gliding , seashell surfing and even extreme bubble blowing . 
 The episode was written by Luke Brookshier , Marc Ceccarelli , and Derek Iversen , and was directed by Tom Yasumi . The episode features the guest appearance of Johnny Knoxville as the voice of Johnny Krill . Upon release , the episode drew 3 @.@ 7 million viewers , and was met with positive reviews . 
 = = Plot summary = = 
 SpongeBob and Patrick are at the Sand Mountain where they see the Drasticals , doing extreme sports . A British fancy fish tells them about the Drasticals , and because he spoke in lisp , they have mistaken for " extreme spots " . Covered with jellyfish sting " spots " , SpongeBob and Patrick stand in front of the team , wanting the Drasticals to join them because of their " extreme spots " . Johnny Krill , the leader of the Drasticals , corrects them for " sports " and lets them try to be Drasticals . Johnny gives SpongeBob and Patrick tasks to do to pass , including <unk> and surfing , but they ended up to be terrible at it . Johnny decides that his team 's activities are too " extreme " for SpongeBob and Patrick . Eventually , SpongeBob tells Johnny various activities they can do that are " extreme " . 
 SpongeBob and Patrick do ordinary activities , then the Drasticals make it " extreme " because Johnny was unimpressed . Johnny asks if SpongeBob and Patrick can do other activities and SpongeBob says there is one sport — <unk> . And while they are doing it , the Drasticals catch jellyfish extremely . Later , the team got injured and are covered in jellyfish stings saying that the " spots " are way " extreme " . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Extreme Spots " was written by Luke Brookshier , Marc Ceccarelli , and Derek Iversen , and was directed by Tom Yasumi . Brookshier and Ceccarelli also functioned as storyboard directors . The episode was the first regular @-@ length episode to be produced in high @-@ definition . It originally aired on Nickelodeon in the United States on July 21 , 2013 , with a TV @-@ Y7 parental rating . It was a part of the network 's " The Super Spongy Square Games " marathon which debuted sports @-@ themed episodes of the series . 
 In addition to the regular cast , American stunt performer and Jackass actor Johnny Knoxville guest starred in the episode as the voice of Johnny Krill , the leader of an extreme sports team called the Drasticals and a champion of undersea extreme sports . The writing staff wrote the episode specifically for Knoxville . Executive producer Paul Tibbitt said " [ Nickelodeon ] wanted to do a show about extreme sports and the first thing that came to mind was Johnny Knoxville , because there are few humans living that are as extreme as him . " Knoxville accepted the role because he is a fan of the show . Knoxville said " I got a lot of street cred in the office for doing SpongeBob . Everyone is psyched [ ... ] As soon as I was done recording this episode , I started begging them to let me come back and record another one . " Knoxville asked if he needed to come up with a funny voice for his character . However , the producers said " No , we want [ your voice ] . " Knoxville claimed that " it 's not easy " providing a vocal cameo . He added " It 's a different kind of work . " 
 Aside from providing vocal cameo , Knoxville also did a photo shoot with a SpongeBob plush toy for the episode . Knoxville said " They loaded me up with a bunch of <unk> ! Every toy they ever made — skateboards , wristbands , all kinds of great stuff . They just don 't quit with the perks . " He added " They [ the crews ] let me do my own stunts for this episode . It was amazing . " 
 On January 15 , 2013 , " Extreme Spots " became available on the DVD compilation SpongeBob SquarePants : Extreme Kah @-@ Rah @-@ Tay along with fellow eighth and ninth season episodes " Squid Defense " , " The Way of the Sponge " , " House Sittin ' For Sandy " , " The Krabby Patty That Ate Bikini Bottom " , " Squirrel Record " , " Face Freeze " , and " Demolition <unk> " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The premiere of " Extreme Spots " on July 21 , 2012 as part of " The Super Spongy Square Games " marathon scored 3 @.@ 7 million total viewers , ranking as the most watched kids program among total viewers for the entire week . The episode , alongside " Squirrel Record " , " Demolition <unk> " , and " Face Freeze ! " , posted a double @-@ digit increase with kid demographic , averaging 5 @.@ 57 million Kids 2 @-@ 11 ( + 50 % ) from 2011 . 
 " Extreme Spots " received positive reviews from critics . Paul Mavis of DVD Talk enjoyed the episode and said " ' Extreme Spots ' gets big laughs from some very funny bits . " He added that the " stereotypical Britisher fish , complete with monocle and bad teeth , is a scream . " In his review for the Inside Pulse , Joe Corey said that the episode is " equally dangerous " with the remaining episodes of the Extreme Kah @-@ Rah @-@ Tay DVD . 
 = Tales of Monkey Island = 
 Tales of Monkey Island is a 2009 graphic adventure video game developed by Telltale Games under license from LucasArts . It is the fifth game in the Monkey Island series , released nearly a decade after the previous installment , Escape from Monkey Island . Developed for Windows and the Wii console , the game was released in five episodic segments , between July and December 2009 . In contrast to Telltale 's previous episodic adventure games , whose chapters told discrete stories , each chapter of Tales of Monkey Island is part of an ongoing narrative . The game was digitally distributed through WiiWare and Telltale 's own website , and later through Steam and Amazon.com. Ports for OS X , the PlayStation Network , and iOS were released several months after the series ended . 
 Players assume the role of pirate Guybrush Threepwood , who — while attempting to destroy his nemesis , the undead pirate LeChuck — accidentally releases a voodoo pox across the Gulf of Melange . With the assistance of his wife , Elaine Marley – Threepwood , Guybrush seeks out a cure . The game was conceived in late 2008 , due to renewed interest in adventure game development within LucasArts . It was developed concurrently with LucasArts ' special edition of the 1990 title The Secret of Monkey Island ; LucasArts oversaw production of Tales of Monkey Island , and ensured that it matched the remake in certain areas , such as art direction . Production began in early 2009 ; franchise creator Ron Gilbert was involved in project planning , while development was led by Dave Grossman , who co @-@ designed the first two Monkey Island games . The game 's music was composed by Michael Land , and the core cast of The Curse of Monkey Island reprised their voice roles . 
 Tales of Monkey Island received generally positive reviews . Critics praised the game 's story , writing , humor , voice acting and characterization ; 1UP.com described Guybrush as Telltale 's strongest and most expressive character yet . The game 's music and graphics were also lauded . Complaints focused primarily on the perceived erratic quality of the game 's puzzle design , a weak supporting cast in the early chapters , and the game 's control system . Tales of Monkey Island garnered several industry awards , and was Telltale 's most commercially successful project until Back to the Future : The Game . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Like its predecessors , Tales of Monkey Island is a graphic adventure game ; the player assumes the role of the protagonist in an interactive story , which is driven by the exploration of the game 's three @-@ dimensional ( 3D ) environments and by solving puzzles . These puzzles are traditional adventure game conundrums that require the player to use the environment , or items that have been found and stored inside the game 's inventory , to accomplish goals . In keeping with previous Monkey Island games , Tales of Monkey Island allows players to combine certain items to create new items ; for instance , the player can combine a number of voodoo ingredients with a cutlass to produce a magical cutlass . 
 The game world is explored with a PC keyboard and mouse , or the Wii Nunchuk 's analog stick . Contrary to previous Telltale adventure games , the player holds and drags the mouse to move Guybrush , rather than point and clicking . The WASD keys or the arrow keys may instead be used to move Guybrush . Like other Monkey Island games , Tales of Monkey Island is designed to prevent the player from meeting a dead @-@ end , such as the death of the player character . Each of the game 's chapters is an estimated two to four hours in length , depending on the player 's ability to solve the puzzles . A hint system can assist struggling players . 
 The first chapter of the game includes a " treasure hunt " mode , where the player directs Guybrush through a maze @-@ like jungle in pursuit of hidden treasure . Found treasures translate into prizes and discounts on Telltale 's website . To access this mode , the player must locate maps on the Internet , hidden on the official Telltale website and three participating Monkey Island fansites . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 = = = Setting and characters = = = 
 Tales of Monkey Island is set several years after the events of Escape from Monkey Island . The designers discarded the Tri @-@ Island Area — the setting of the game 's predecessors — in favor of a new locale : the Gulf of Melange . The game follows Guybrush Threepwood ( voiced by Dominic Armato ) , a pirate who is naïve and hapless , yet successful . Before the game 's beginning , Guybrush spends years locating the elements needed to create the Cursed Cutlass of Kaflu , a voodoo weapon capable of destroying his nemesis , the demon pirate LeChuck ( voiced by Adam Harrington , Kevin Blackton and later Earl Boen ) . As with other Monkey Island games , LeChuck vies for the love of Elaine Marley @-@ Threepwood ( voiced by Alexandra Boyd ) , the wife of Guybrush Threepwood and former governor of the Tri @-@ Island Area . In the events immediately before the game , LeChuck kidnaps Elaine . Guybrush pursues LeChuck with the voodoo cutlass . 
 Several ancillary characters from earlier games in the series return in Tales of Monkey Island , including the Voodoo Lady ( voiced by Alison Ewing ) , an enigmatic voodoo priestess who advises Guybrush in his quests ; Stan ( voiced by Gavin Hammon ) , a stereotypical salesman and business opportunist ; and Murray ( voiced by Denny Delk ) , a talking skull with delusions of grandeur . The game introduces new characters to the series , such as Morgan LeFlay ( voiced by Nicki Rapp ) , a competent and athletic female bounty hunter who idolizes Guybrush . Other additions to the cast include Coronado DeCava , an explorer and former lover of the Voodoo Lady ( voiced by Andrew Chaikin ) , and the Marquis de Singe ( voiced by Jared Emerson @-@ Johnson ) , an antagonistic French nobleman and doctor . 
 = = = Plot = = = 
 Having acquired the components of the Cutlass of Kaflu , Guybrush races to the Rock of Gelato to save his wife from LeChuck ; however , he fails to properly create the sword . When Guybrush stabs LeChuck , the flawed cutlass transforms LeChuck into a human , and infects Guybrush 's hand with the " Pox of LeChuck " , which gives the hand a mind of its own . An explosion on the ship hurls Guybrush into the ocean , and he later washes up on Flotsam Island . There , Guybrush encounters the Voodoo Lady , who explains that the pox will ravage the Caribbean , unless it is absorbed by a voodoo sea sponge called " La Esponja Grande " ( The Big Sponge ) . Guybrush is advised to seek Coronado DeCava , a conquistador who is on an expedition to find La Esponja Grande ; however , to leave the island , Guybrush must neutralize a machine that is drawing the winds inward , and thereby preventing ships from leaving . It is revealed that the Marquis de Singe is using the machine to bring pirates to the island for his medical experiments . De Singe becomes obsessed with Guybrush 's hand , as he believes it to be key to eternal life . Guybrush reverts the wind patterns to normal — unwittingly causing the pox to spread across the sea — and departs in his newly acquired ship , the Screaming Narwhal . De Singe hires a pirate hunter by the name of Morgan LeFlay to capture Guybrush ; en route to the Jerkbait Islands , she boards the Screaming Narwhal and cuts off Guybrush 's pox @-@ infected hand in a duel . Afterwards , she returns it to de Singe . 
 On the Jerkbait Islands , Guybrush finds Elaine safe , and learns that the now @-@ human LeChuck is trying to make up for the evil deeds of his past . The three help to defend the resident merfolk city from pox @-@ infected pirates ; in return , the merfolk summon sea creatures to assist Guybrush in locating La Esponja Grande . Elaine stays behind to monitor LeChuck 's actions . As Guybrush follows the creatures on the Screaming Narwhal , Morgan again boards the ship ; de Singe had informed her that Guybrush 's entire body was needed . Distracted by their duel , neither can react in time when the Screaming Narwhal is swallowed whole by a giant manatee . Inside the manatee , Guybrush and LeFlay discover the crazed DeCava and his crew ; Guybrush heals the manatee 's injuries , and escapes with DeCava to the location of La Esponja Grande ( which turns out to be much smaller than advertised ) . After retrieving La Esponja Grande , Morgan knocks Guybrush unconscious and sets sail for Flotsam Island with her bounty . 
 As Morgan reluctantly delivers Guybrush to de Singe , Guybrush is seized by the townspeople and put on trial for multiple <unk> chief among them having released the pox across the Gulf of Melange . LeChuck <unk> Guybrush by implicating himself in the creation of the pox , and produces evidence that all previous confrontations between Guybrush and LeChuck had been orchestrated by the Voodoo Lady ; the two are imprisoned , and Guybrush is released . As Guybrush prepares to cure the pox with La Esponja Grande , he finds Morgan murdered in de Singe 's laboratory . At the wind machine , de Singe traps Guybrush and Elaine , and believes that his experiments with Guybrush 's hand are on the verge of granting him immortality . However , de Singe falls into the wind machine and is disintegrated ; Guybrush then uses La Esponja Grande to absorb the pox . LeChuck arrives to free the two , but as Guybrush thanks him , LeChuck impales him on the Cutlass of Kaflu , and uses La Esponja Grande to transfer the pox 's potency to himself . 
 Now deceased , Guybrush finds his spiritual self at the Crossroads : the place where the living and dead realms meet . With the assistance of Morgan 's spirit , he finds a spell that embodies courage , anchor , direction and sacrifice , and returns to the land of the living as a ghost . However , LeChuck absorbs the massive amount of energy generated by a dimensional rift Guybrush opens ; the pox was engineered by LeChuck to achieve this goal . Elaine , in an apparent act of betrayal , becomes LeChuck 's demon bride . Guybrush repossesses his dead body and shrinks La Esponja Grande , reversing LeChuck 's hold over Elaine . LeChuck attacks Guybrush , who lures the demon pirate into the rift . There , LeChuck is simultaneously stabbed by Elaine and Morgan , which destroys his physical and spiritual forms . Stranded alone at the crossroads , Guybrush realizes that he has one more item that meets the spell 's criteria for his return : Elaine 's wedding ring . He uses it to restore himself to life and return to his wife . The spirit of Morgan delivers a jar containing the essence of LeChuck to the Voodoo Lady , in exchange for her return to the land of the living . 
 = = Chapters = = 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Production = = = 
 Developed by Telltale Games , under license from LucasArts , Tales of Monkey Island marked a first collaboration between the two companies . Telltale Games had been founded by former LucasArts employees in the wake of the 2004 cancellation of Sam & Max : Freelance Police . Following that event , LucasArts appeared to have abandoned the adventure game genre . While Telltale Games had considered developing a Monkey Island game since their inception , the company 's design director , Dave Grossman , credited the greenlighting of Tales of Monkey Island to the correct alignment of interested parties . This included the then @-@ new president of LucasArts , Darrell Rodriguez , who helped push for adventure game development within his company . Mark Darin , co @-@ designer and writer for Tales of Monkey Island , attributed the revival of interest to the rise of digital distribution within the video game industry , which — by reducing financial risk — allowed companies such as Telltale to develop " something different from the endless clones of popular games " . Telltale started designing Tales of Monkey Island in late 2008 ; production commenced early in 2009 . 
 Following hints by Telltale Games that they would soon announce a major new series , Tales of Monkey Island was unveiled at the June 2009 Electronic Entertainment Expo . Its roughly 50 person development team was headed by Dave Grossman , who co @-@ designed the first two Monkey Island games . Escape from Monkey Island and Sam & Max Hit the Road co @-@ designer Michael Stemmle contributed design and story writing , in collaboration with Mark Darin and Sean <unk> . Series creator Ron Gilbert was involved in brainstorm sessions for the game , but did not have a large role in its development ; however , the development team asserted that Gilbert 's " <unk> are all over [ the game ] " . Tales of Monkey Island counterparts a LucasArts @-@ developed enhanced remake of The Secret of Monkey Island . On his blog , Gilbert wrote that he was " very excited " for both Telltale 's adaptation and LucasArts ' reimagining of the original game , and stated that " it 's strange and humbling to see something you created 20 years ago take on a life of its own " . 
 While Gilbert and Grossman were engaged in the development of Tales of Monkey Island , the third co @-@ designer of the original two games , Tim Schafer , was not associated with the project . Grossman said that Gilbert 's leadership role at Hothead Games had made procuring his assistance " legal wrangling " , and that including Schafer as well would have been too much trouble . Schafer later said that he was " really happy " for the new game , and that the project was in good hands under Grossman 's lead . The game 's limited @-@ edition slipcover artwork was painted by Sam & Max creator Steve Purcell , who was responsible for the box art of both The Secret of Monkey Island and Monkey Island 2 : LeChuck 's Revenge . Purcell created three different rough covers to present to Telltale Games , though the company valued Purcell 's own opinion on which was best . Having not been satisfied with Elaine 's appearance on the cover of The Secret of Monkey Island , Purcell was keen to have another attempt to portray the character in his artwork . The final artwork , showing Guybrush and Elaine brandishing cutlasses on a ship emerging from fog , was favored as Purcell felt it was appropriately eerie . 
 Grossman said that the game 's simultaneous release on Windows and WiiWare was due to Telltale 's business model ; the company alternates its game releases between WiiWare and Xbox Live Arcade , as they want to " give the Wii a little love as well " . The concurrent development of the Wii version created issues ; last minute changes to the PC version could put an episode over the size limit for WiiWare games . The first episode was released for Windows on July 7 , 2009 , with the Wii version following twenty days later . Telltale distributed the game through their own website , and later made it available for download from Steam and Amazon.com. Xbox Live was omitted from the initial release , as both Telltale 's Wallace & Gromit 's Grand Adventures , and LucasArts ' special edition of The Secret of Monkey Island , were debuting on the system . 
 While Telltale had not announced plans to port Tales of Monkey Island to Mac OS , they did so on February 11 , 2010 ; it was among the first games available for the newly released Mac OS Steam client . A PlayStation Network version was released in June 2010 , due to consumer demand generated by the game 's original announcement . A PlayStation 3 release had not been possible at launch , as Telltale 's game engine was not built to run on the platform . An iPad @-@ enhanced iOS port was being developed in 2010 ; the first episode was released on the App Store in December 2010 , and the rest of the episodes followed on June 23 , 2011 . As a bonus , players were offered the chance to download the first episode for free until July 22 , 2011 . Telltale Games has not ruled out the option of porting the game to Xbox Live and Linux . However , a port for the iPhone @-@ enhanced iOS version was developed , and the first episode was released in November 2011 , with the four remaining episodes that followed suit in a few months , ending with the release of Chapter 5 on February 23 , 2012 . 
 = = = Design = = = 
 As with Telltale 's other products , Tales of Monkey Island was developed and released in five episodic segments ; Grossman explained that Telltale prefers to tell stories this way , rather than as continuous narratives that are too long for people to play comfortably . However , unlike their previous games , each episode is not a standalone tale ; it is a single chapter in a larger plot . This allowed Telltale to advance the story like that of a television series , in which character relationships develop in the minds of the audience over several months . Each episode is designed to be gratifying on its own , with a satisfying conclusion ; however , it then provides a cliffhanger to " tantalize the player a little more " . According to Grossman , Tales of Monkey Island is set after an " imaginary " Monkey Island 5 , which he views as " a blockbuster , epic 40 @-@ hour gigantic experience like the earlier games " . Its story would have followed Guybrush 's actions in the time between Escape from Monkey Island and Tales of Monkey Island ; the beginning of Tales of Monkey Island would have marked its conclusion . Grossman maintained that both the story and gameplay of Tales of Monkey Island were designed to be accessible for newcomers to the series , and commented that " knowledge of the characters and their history will add a nostalgic layer to the sly references , but is by no means necessary " . 
 Stemmle likened the game 's episodic development to a relay race , and the development of a full game , such as Escape from Monkey Island , to a " marathon " . This production method meant that certain aspects , such as the game 's graphics , were worked on until the release deadline . Each episode took around four months to complete . Only a few environmental resources were reused between episodes ; while Telltale Games had built previous games such as Sam & Max Save the World and Wallace & Gromit 's Grand Adventures around one set of locations , using the protagonists ' homes and nearby streets consistently in each episode , the developers forwent such central hubs and " comfort zones " in Tales of Monkey Island , instead having each episode move off to a new primary location , only occasionally revisiting past locations . However , reusable skeletons and animations were developed for the supporting cast , including generic body types that could be visually altered to suit each character . While four of these were created , size constraints resulted in only two being included in the final game . By the game 's third episode , Telltale became unsatisfied with this system , and began diversifying facial features , and providing supporting characters with unique silhouettes and animations . 
 The game 's artistic direction was developed by former LucasArts members Derek Sakai and Dave Bogan ; both of them had worked on The Curse of Monkey Island , Escape from Monkey Island , and several earlier LucasArts adventure games . The game 's final art direction was an attempt to combine the realistic look of the first two Monkey Island games with the whimsical , stylized graphics of the third . While those games feature entirely two @-@ dimensional graphics , and their successor , Escape from Monkey Island , is largely pre @-@ rendered , Tales of Monkey Island is rendered in full 3D . Grossman explained that both Telltale 's art department and game engine are oriented toward 3D graphics development , and that the company enjoys the benefits 3D offers in the areas of animation and cinematography . Improved capacity for the latter resulted in the appointment of a " cinematic director " : someone to help the designers locate scenes needing more dramatic activity , and to assist the animators and choreographers in creating it . During development , the necessity of this position was highlighted by a ship battle scene in " Launch of the Screaming Narwhal " , which was initially static and unexciting . This was remedied by changing the time of day from dusk to night , adding rain and other weather effects , and using camera movement to simulate rough waters . 
 Regarding the puzzle design in Tales of Monkey Island , Stemmle said that he and his fellow designers — when they were younger — believed that they needed to " stump the player " ; however , Stemmle now considers it " a lot better to make the players feel smart " . Therefore , the designers included a hint system to prevent players from becoming stuck . Grossman explained that Telltale 's designers would bear in mind how players would mentally progress through the puzzles , and consider " what realisations we expected them to have and whether those expectations are realistic " . Due to a tight development schedule , puzzles in the first episode were not optimized for the game 's control system , which was re @-@ designed late in development . Initially , the game was to feature point @-@ and @-@ click controls , as had been used in the majority of Telltale 's previous games . However , a " direct control " method — similar to the one seen in Wallace & Gromit 's Grand Adventures — was decided upon after much of the first episode had been planned . As the direct control in that game had been designed for an Xbox controller , the developers reworked the idea into a " click @-@ and @-@ drag " mouse system for Tales of Monkey Island . Telltale believed that this control method made for a less passive and more engaging player experience , and provided more freedom for cinematic camera work than was possible with point @-@ and @-@ click . 
 Aside from providing the Monkey Island license to Telltale , LucasArts ' role in the game 's development involved collaboration and approval of the game 's script , character concept art and puzzle design . As the remake of The Secret of Monkey Island had begun development before Tales of Monkey Island , LucasArts shared their art style guide with Telltale , so that the two products ' art direction would be similar . In particular , LucasArts wished that the character of Guybrush would be comparable to the appearance of the character in the special edition . LucasArts largely based their vision for Guybrush 's new visuals in Tales of Monkey Island on how the character appeared in The Curse of Monkey Island , integrating various aspects from LeChuck 's Revenge that commonly resonated through fan art , such as the character 's blue coat and beard , in addition to using their own stylized art direction . Telltale concept artist Ryan Jones worked closely with LucasArts ' Jeff <unk> on developing the appearance of Guybrush and other characters , <unk> providing feedback and refinement in such areas as character silhouettes , facial features and clothing . <unk> noted that LucasArts was open to Telltale 's creative direction for the game , and did not " put their foot down " over any aspects of their vision . 
 = = = Audio = = = 
 Michael Land , the composer behind preceding Monkey Island games , returned to score Tales of Monkey Island . In @-@ house Telltale composer Jared Emerson @-@ Johnson said that his own role in the game 's music was " technical and administrative " , and that , while he had been willing to assist Land , " the sound of the Monkey Island universe is all about Mike ’ s vision , so he was left alone to ' do his thing ' as only he can " . The soundtrack was recorded in MIDI format to reduce the data size for the Wii version ; for the Windows version , the files were converted to WAV for increased quality . In each episode 's production , music was among the last elements to be finalized , as it could not be finished until all cutscenes were properly timed . 
 Dominic Armato , the voice actor of Guybrush from The Curse of Monkey Island onward , reprises his role as that character . LucasArts encouraged Telltale to retain as much of the original cast as possible — particularly Armato , who was described by LucasArts ' David Collins as " the ultimate Monkey Island fanboy " . Armato enjoyed his opportunity to voice Guybrush again ; he had believed that the series would never be continued , due to the length of time since Escape from Monkey Island 's release . Armato voiced the character in both Tales of Monkey Island and the special edition of The Secret of Monkey Island ; in the former game , he attempted to make Guybrush sound more mature and experienced than his younger incarnation in the latter . Because of Armato 's understanding of the character , the voice directors gave him considerable flexibility in his performance . 
 Elaine Marley 's voice actress in The Curse of Monkey Island , Alexandra Boyd , was also brought back for her role . Boyd was unable to travel to Telltale 's studio in California ; instead , she recorded her lines in London , while communicating with the voice director via Skype . However , Earl Boen — the original voice actor for LeChuck — had retired from acting , and was not initially available to reprise his role . The character was instead voiced by Adam Harrington in the first episode , and replaced by Kevin Blackton as the human LeChuck in chapters two to four . Boen returned to voice the demon LeChuck at the end of the fourth episode , and stayed on for the game 's fifth and final chapter . Telltale later had Boen re @-@ record the lines for LeChuck 's demon incarnation in the first episode for the DVD release . To make the actors ' portrayals more forceful , Telltale implemented a lip sync system capable of presenting a large range of facial expressions on character models . 
 = = = Marketing = = = 
 To promote Tales of Monkey Island , Telltale Games posted a series of fan @-@ made Flash short films on their website . Entitled I Wonder What Happens in Tales of Monkey Island , the series was created by German animator Marius <unk> , who co @-@ wrote it with Andrei Constantinescu . The series ' artwork was produced by Martin Koehler . Presented as a cartoon version of Tales of Monkey Island , the shorts speculated on the game 's story and content , and depicted hypothetical events for the upcoming chapters . The first episode debuted on July 5 , 2009 , two days before the release of " Launch of the Screaming Narwhal " . The second and third episodes followed on August 6 and September 16 , respectively ; the penultimate episode was released on October 22 . For the final installment , released on December 4 , <unk> recruited <unk> of the German hip hop band Die <unk> Vier to do a musical number . Emerson @-@ Johnson described the series as " absolutely fantastic " , and said that " it really seems like these games appeal to people in a way that spurs huge amounts of excellent creative energy " . He noted that Telltale " was passing [ the videos ] around for a good week " after they were posted . 
 A week after the release of the first episode , Telltale held a contest called " Game Designer for a Day " , which gave fans the opportunity to submit and vote for a line of dialog to be used as an accusation against Guybrush . The winning line , " He dug up my perfectly good X ! " , was submitted by Liz Johnston of Okanagan , British Columbia , Canada , and was subsequently added to the trial scene in the fourth chapter while Johnston 's name was included in the chapter 's credits . 
 Telltale produced Tales of Monkey Island merchandise , which they sold from their online store . These included a poster print of Steve Purcell 's cover artwork for the game , and a set of promotional badges ; the latter had previously been available at conventions , such as E3 . Further merchandise — including a tankard , a set of tarot cards , and a deluxe edition DVD — was made available in early March 2010 . For the September 19 , 2009 International Talk Like a Pirate Day , Telltale Games made the game 's first episode available for free on their website . Customers who had already purchased all five episodes were instead eligible for a free episode from one of Telltale 's other series . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Sales = = = 
 Tales of Monkey Island was a commercial success , and it exceeded Telltale 's sales projections . While no figures for the game have been released , the game was the company 's most successful project , until it was outstripped by Back to the Future : The Game , which was released a year and a half later . Telltale CEO Dan Conners noted that the game had been the top selling product on Steam for " a few days " . According to Telltale 's marketing department , the game was predominately purchased as a full season , rather than as individual episodes . This was attributed to the strong narrative between episodes , in contrast to Telltale 's previous work . 
 = = = Critical = = = 
 Critics believed that the first chapter , " Launch of the Screaming Narwhal " , was a respectable start to the game . Ryan Scott of GameSpy wrote that the puzzles " generally challenge [ the player ] just enough without becoming too frustrating " , while Eurogamer 's Kristan Reed stated that their quality was " bang @-@ on time after time " . However , criticism was directed toward certain puzzles ' designs — particularly toward that of one maze puzzle . The writing and story were lauded , with several reviews commending the dialogue 's humor . Adventure Gamers staff writer Evan Dickens felt that writing did not match up to the quality of LeChuck 's Revenge , however . Although the chapter 's supporting cast was considered weak , critics enjoyed the introduction of de Singe to the series . The voicework for the main characters was praised , as was Land 's soundtrack . Critics were mostly complimentary toward the episode 's graphics , with New Straits Times ' Bruno Chan and The Sunday Times ' David Phelan praising the updated interpretation of The Curse of Monkey Island 's art style while 1UP.com 's Bob Mackey called Guybrush " the most convincingly expressive Telltale character yet " ; however , concerns were voiced over erratic graphical quality between characters . The game 's controls were subject to reproof by a number of reviews ; several preferred the keyboard controls over Telltale 's new " click and drag " system . 
 Response to " The Siege of Spinner Cay " was similar to that of the preceding episode . Critics were divided over the quality of the chapter 's puzzles : Destructoid reviewer Brad Nicholson criticized their design as " tight and constricted " , and Dickens felt that they varied wildly in quality . In contrast , they were praised as " pleasantly non @-@ linear " by Reed , and called logical and sensible by PALGN 's Adam Ghiggino . The need for extended travel between locations , in order to complete mundane tasks , was criticized . The episode 's writing was lauded by reviewers ; particular praise was bestowed on the chapter 's opening scene , which introduces Morgan LeFlay . Nevertheless , the story was disparaged by Reuben Lees of the Herald Sun for feeling " more like a bridge to open up further plotlines in the later episodes " , a point echoed by other reviewers . While the supporting cast was again criticized , reviewers enjoyed the development of the main characters ' roles . Critics admired the chapter 's audio work , with Dickens calling Kevin Blackton 's rendition of the human LeChuck a " real standout " . Graphical tweaks over " The Launch of the Screaming Narwhal " were also appreciated . 
 Critics considered " Lair of the Leviathan " to be stronger than the previous chapters ; on the review aggregator sites GameRankings and Metacritic , its Windows version holds the highest rating out of all Tales of Monkey Island episodes . The episode 's puzzles were commended ; IGN 's Steve Butts opined that Telltale 's puzzle design had " moved forward quite a bit " , compared to both preceding chapters and their earlier Sam & Max games . One puzzle in particular , involving pirates holding a face @-@ pulling contest , was praised by reviewers . Dickens described the chapter 's story as " strong [ and ] advancing " , and Ghiggino felt that it " continued the fine Monkey Island tradition of being bizarre , hilarious and pretty interesting " . Several reviews drew comparisons to the 1883 book The Adventures of Pinocchio , due to the game 's setting inside a giant manatee . The episode 's writing received near unanimous praise , and response to the supporting cast was much improved over the preceding episodes ; praise centered particularly around Murray , a demonic , disembodied skull . Criticism of " Lair of the Leviathan " primarily focused on the chapter 's brevity and lack of varied locations . 
 Reviewers were more ambivalent toward the fourth episode , " The Trial and Execution of Guybrush Threepwood " . Reception of its puzzles was mixed ; Ghiggino described many as " frustrating for the wrong reasons " , and Dickens , while praising several as " challenging and creative " , believed that there were " definite misfires " . Butts criticized the " arbitrary design " of several puzzles , but noted that they were " exactly what we 've come to expect from the series " . Nevertheless , the episode 's titular trial sequence was lauded . Reaction to the chapter 's plot was mostly positive , with Eduardo Reboucas of Game Revolution commenting that it " moves along at a steady pace , and ends with a dramatic bang " , and The Sun 's Nick Francis praising the " emotional storylines weaving between some of the characters " . Several reviews praised the twists in the story , although Adventure Classic Gaming 's Mark <unk> opined that the darker turn late in the episode was detrimental to the otherwise light @-@ hearted series . The episode 's writing was praised , as was the use of returning Monkey Island character Stan as the trial 's prosecutor . Critics were divided over the effectiveness of reusing the setting of " Launch of the Screaming Narwhal " . 
 The final episode , " Rise of the Pirate God " , was thought by critics to be a fitting end to the series . Response to the chapter 's puzzles was mostly positive , though several reviewers maintained reservations about the difficulty and innovation of many of them . The level design , which requires players to backtrack between locations , was not well received . The chapter 's climactic battle was thought to be sufficient , though timing issues caused GameCritics ' Tera Kirk to describe it as " almost as frustrating as it is clever " . Nevertheless , the story received strong praise , particularly for the role reversal between Guybrush and LeChuck ; Destructoid 's Anthony Burch noted that the chapter " completely and intentionally inverts [ Monkey Island 's ] own cliches " . Similarly , the writing and dialogue were commended , as was the voice acting , with critics praising Earl Boen 's reprisal of the demon LeChuck and Armato 's work as Guybrush . Reviewers complimented the graphics for both the ghostly " Crossroads " and the fire @-@ ravaged real world ; Butts expressed that " the levels all benefit from great color choices and fantastic lighting effects that really support the mood " . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 Tales of Monkey Island received awards and award nominations from video game industry publications . Following the game 's announcement at E3 2009 , IGN named it the " Biggest Surprise " for the PC at the convention , and it was a finalist for GameSpot 's Best Adventure Game of E3 award . IGN later nominated the first and third chapters as the best Wii and PC adventure games of the year , respectively . Gamasutra gave the game an honorable mention on its list of the year 's best PC games ; on their list of the top developers of the year , the site also presented Telltale Games with an honorable mention . Nintendo Power nominated Tales of Monkey Island for their awards for overall game of the year , best WiiWare game and best adventure game ; the publication gave Morgan LeFlay the award for the year 's best character . Listing the best and worst video games of 2009 , OC Weekly named Tales of Monkey Island the " Best Series Revival " of the year . About.com considered the game to be the second best Wii game of the year , and PC Gamer US awarded it " Adventure Game of the Year " . 
 = Delaware Route 42 = 
 Delaware Route 42 ( DE 42 ) is a state highway in Kent County , Delaware . It runs from DE 6 in Blackiston east to DE 9 in Leipsic . DE 42 passes through rural areas along with the towns of Kenton and Cheswold . The route intersects DE 300 in Kenton , DE 15 between Seven Hickories and Moores Corner , and U.S. Route 13 ( US 13 ) in Cheswold . The road was built as a state highway during the 1920s and 1930s . DE 42 was designated by 1936 between Kenton and Leipsic and extended to Blackiston by 1966 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 DE 42 begins at an intersection with DE 6 in Blackiston . Northwest of DE 6 , the road becomes Longridge Road , which changes names to Delaney Maryland Line Road and Clayton Delaney Road before it reaches the Maryland border and becomes Maryland Route 330 ( MD 330 ) . MD 330 heads west into Kent County , Maryland and , by way of MD 313 , provides access to US 301 . From the western terminus , DE 42 heads southeast on two @-@ lane undivided Blackiston Road . The route runs through agricultural areas with some woods and homes . The road reaches Kenton , where it becomes Commerce Street . In Kenton , the route crosses an abandoned railroad line and passes residences , intersecting with DE 300 in the center of town . 
 Past Kenton , DE 42 heads to the east @-@ southeast on Seven Hickories Road into farmland with woods and residences . In Seven Hickories , the route intersects DE 15 and the two routes head east for a concurrency . In Moores Corner , DE 15 splits from DE 42 by turning southeast on Kenton Road . DE 42 continues east @-@ northeast to the south of Delaware Airpark . The route enters Cheswold , where it becomes Main Street . The road passes homes and some businesses in the town , crossing Norfolk Southern 's Delmarva Secondary railroad line . DE 42 reaches an intersection with US 13 on the eastern edge of Cheswold at Bishops Corner . 
 After the US 13 intersection , the route heads northeast on Fast Landing Road . DE 42 passes over the DE 1 toll road , where it has ramps for emergency vehicles but no public access . The road runs through farmland with some woodland and homes , curving to the east . Farther east , the route turns southeast into marshland adjacent to the Leipsic River . DE 42 enters the town of Leipsic where it heads east into residential areas and ends at DE 9 . Past the eastern terminus , the road continues east as Second Street . 
 DE 42 has an annual average daily traffic count ranging from a high of 8 @,@ 800 vehicles at the Commerce Street intersection in Cheswold to a low of 516 vehicles at the eastern terminus at DE 9 . None of DE 42 is part of the National Highway System . 
 = = History = = 
 By 1920 , what is now DE 42 existed as an unimproved county road . The road was completed as a state highway between Kenton and <unk> four years later . The route was under construction as a state highway between Blackiston and Kenton by 1932 . By 1936 , DE 42 was assigned to its current alignment between DE 300 in Kenton and DE 9 in Leipsic and the state highway between Blackiston and Kenton was completed . By 1966 , the route was extended to Blackiston . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in Kent County . 
 = Willard Hershberger = 
 Willard McKee Hershberger ( May 28 , 1910 – August 3 , 1940 ) was an American baseball catcher for the Cincinnati Reds of Major League Baseball ( MLB ) from 1938 to 1940 . In 160 career games , Hershberger recorded a batting average of .316 and accumulated 5 triples and 41 runs . He is the only major league player to date to commit suicide during the season . 
 Born and raised in California , Hershberger attended Fullerton Union High School where he was a baseball standout . He was signed by the New York Yankees and was part of their minor league system for eight years . He was traded after the 1937 season to the Cincinnati Reds , where he found a place on the major league roster as a backup behind Ernie Lombardi . For three seasons , Hershberger played in relief of Lombardi , stepping in if he needed a day off or was injured . After a slump in late July and early August , Hershberger committed suicide on August 3 , 1940 in his hotel room ; the Reds retired his jersey number and went on to win the 1940 World Series in his honor . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Willard Hershberger was born in Lemon Cove , California . His family moved to Fullerton , California , when his father , Claude , got a job working in the city 's oil fields . He lived in Fullerton with his father , his mother Maude , and his sister Lois . Hershberger attended Fullerton Union High School , where he distinguished himself on both the baseball and football teams , playing alongside Arky Vaughan and future President Richard Nixon . The 1926 baseball team won the California Interscholastic Federation championship , and in 2003 , he was named to the school 's All @-@ Time baseball team . 
 Claude , Willard 's father , was depressed over financial problems , and on November 21 , 1928 , he fatally shot himself with a shotgun in the family home 's bathroom ; Willard , then 18 , discovered the body . Hershberger graduated high school in 1929 ; the high school yearbook called Hershberger " the boy with the golden toe " due to his status as the football team 's placekicker and " the greatest little catcher to ever put on the Fullerton uniform . " In 1930 , scouts Bill Essick of the New York Yankees and Art Griggs of the Pittsburgh Pirates came to Fullerton to watch Vaughan and Hershberger play , respectively . Essick took a detour and Griggs ended up signing Vaughan instead , while Essick signed Hershberger to a contract to play in the Yankees organization . 
 = = Minor league career = = 
 Hershberger made his professional debut with the El Paso Texans of the Arizona – Texas League , playing for them in 1930 and 1931 ; in 1931 he had a batting average of .356 . He spent the 1932 season with three minor league teams , and mostly played for the Erie Sailors of the Central League where he hit .339 in 94 games . The following year , Hershberger was promoted to the Binghamton Triplets of the New York – Pennsylvania League ( NYPL ) . For the season , he had a .306 batting average , was named to the NYPL All @-@ Star Team , and helped the Triplets win the NYPL title . In 1934 , he was promoted to the Hollywood Stars of the Pacific Coast League ( PCL ) , and had a .307 batting average and 18 doubles in 114 games . Hershberger was promoted to the Newark Bears of the International League in 1935 , and had a batting average of .310 . The following year , he split time with the Bears and the Oakland Oaks of the PCL . At one point in the season , he was batting .313 , and was noted as a player who should have a shot at the major leagues . By the end of the season , his average went down to .263 over 89 games . 
 The 1937 season started off poorly for Hershberger . While he remained with the Newark Bears , the Yankees released him from his contract , and partly due to the success of catcher Bill Dickey , the Yankees no longer had an interest in Hershberger . He spent the full season with the Bears , splitting time with Buddy <unk> at catcher . The team ended up with a 109 – 43 record and the International League title ; the Bears have been called the third greatest minor league team in history by Minor League Baseball . Hershberger hit 15 doubles and had a .325 average in 96 games , and hit .364 in the Junior Series against the Columbus Red Birds . As a result , Yankees owner Jacob Ruppert noted that he would spend the offseason working to get the players on major league rosters . On December 3 , 1937 , Hershberger was traded to the Cincinnati Reds for shortstop Eddie Miller and $ 40 @,@ 000 , ending his tenure in the Yankees organization . 
 = = Cincinnati Reds = = 
 Reds manager Bill McKechnie noted that Hershberger was playing so well in spring training that there was the possibility of him beating out Ernie Lombardi for the starting catcher job in 1938 . He made the roster and served as the backup to Lombardi that season , and played in 49 games and had a .276 batting average . He earned the nickname of " Little Slug " due to his pinch hitting , and as a contrast to Lombardi 's nickname of " Big Slug " . In 1939 , Hershberger gained extra playing time due to a Lombardi injury in June ; during that stretch , Hershberger had eight hits and five runs batted in in five games . For the season , he hit .345 in 63 games , and played in two games of the 1939 World Series against the Yankees . In the series , he had one hit in two at @-@ bats as the Reds lost in four games . His one hit in the World Series brought in the tying run in game four , but the Yankees fought back to win the game and the series . 
 Hershberger spent the 1940 Cincinnati Reds season as the backup to Lombardi , as had been the case the previous two seasons . He had been hitting well in relief of Lombardi , and had a batting average of .429 at the end of May and .345 at the end of June . In July , Lombardi suffered an injured finger , and Hershberger 's playing time increased that month as a result . Lombardi then sprained his ankle on July 26 , putting Hershberger in the starting role indefinitely ; at the time his batting average was .354 . However , in a game against the New York Giants at the Polo Grounds on July 31 , the Reds blew a 4 – 1 late @-@ game lead and lost the game 5 – 4 . Three days later , the Reds lost both games of a doubleheader to the Boston Bees 10 – 3 and 4 – 3 , respectively . He failed to hit in any of the games , and his average dipped to .309 as a result . 
 = = Death = = 
 Hershberger blamed himself for the losses to the Giants and Bees , telling third baseman Billy Werber that " If Ernie had been catching , we wouldn 't have lost those ball games . " At one point in the second game against the Bees , Hershberger failed to field a bunt , and after the game alluded to his father 's suicide to McKechnie in private , saying " My father killed himself , and I 'm gonna do it too . " However , after about an hour , Hershberger had calmed down considerably , and McKechnie believed he would be fine . 
 The following afternoon , Reds publicist and traveling secretary Gabe Paul called Hershberger 's room at the Copley Plaza Hotel after Hershberger missed batting practice . He said that he wasn 't going to play that afternoon because he wasn 't feeling well ; McKechnie , worried , wanted him there in street clothes , and Hershberger agreed . After he missed the first game of another doubleheader against the Bees , McKechnie had Dan Cohen , a friend of Hershberger 's , head to the hotel to check up on him . He found the door locked , and asked an employee to open the door . Inside , Cohen found Hershberger 's body by the bathtub with his throat slit . After the second game , McKechnie had coach Hank Gowdy bring all the players together in the locker room , stating , " I want to tell you something . Willard Hershberger has just destroyed himself . " 
 After giving his team the news , McKechnie had the Reds dedicate themselves to winning the World Series " for <unk> " . His number was retired for the season by the team as a tribute . McKechnie never publicly revealed what Willard Hershberger said to him during their meeting the day before : " It had nothing to do with anybody on the team " , he told reporters . " He told it to me in confidence , and I will not utter it to anyone " . The Cincinnati Reds would go on to defeat the American League champion Detroit Tigers in seven games to win the 1940 World Series . Reds players decided to share a portion of their championship money , totaling $ 5 @,@ 803 , with Hershberger 's mother , Maude . Hershberger was buried at Visalia Public Cemetery in Visalia , California . 
 = Myco @-@ heterotrophy = 
 Myco @-@ heterotrophy ( Greek : <unk> <unk> , " fungus " , <unk> <unk> 
 = " another " , " different " and <unk> <unk> = 
 " nutrition " ) is a symbiotic relationship between certain kinds of plants and fungi , in which the plant gets all or part of its food from parasitism upon fungi rather than from photosynthesis . A myco @-@ <unk> is the parasitic plant partner in this relationship . Myco @-@ heterotrophy is considered a kind of cheating relationship and myco @-@ heterotrophs are sometimes informally referred to as " mycorrhizal cheaters " . This relationship is sometimes referred to as <unk> , though this term is also used for plants that engage in mutualistic mycorrhizal relationships . 
 = = Relationship between myco @-@ heterotrophs and host fungi = = 
 Full ( or obligate ) myco @-@ heterotrophy exists when a non @-@ photosynthetic plant ( a plant largely lacking in chlorophyll or otherwise lacking a functional photosystem ) gets all of its food from the fungi that it parasitizes . Partial ( or facultative ) myco @-@ heterotrophy exists when a plant is capable of photosynthesis , but parasitizes fungi as a supplementary food supply . There are also plants , such as some orchid species , that are non @-@ photosynthetic and obligately myco @-@ heterotrophic for part of their life cycle , and photosynthetic and facultatively myco @-@ heterotrophic or non @-@ myco @-@ heterotrophic for the rest of their life cycle . Not all non @-@ photosynthetic or " <unk> " plants are myco @-@ heterotrophic – some non @-@ photosynthetic plants like <unk> directly parasitize the vascular tissue of other plants . 
 In the past , non @-@ photosynthetic plants were mistakenly thought to get food by breaking down organic matter in a manner similar to saprotrophic fungi . Such plants were therefore called " <unk> " . It is now known that no plant is physiologically capable of direct breakdown of organic matter and that in order to get food , non @-@ photosynthetic plants must engage in parasitism , either through myco @-@ heterotrophy or direct parasitism of other plants . 
 The interface between the plant and fungal partners in this association is between the roots of the plant and the mycelium of the fungus . Myco @-@ heterotrophy therefore closely resembles mycorrhiza ( and indeed is thought to have evolved from mycorrhiza ) , except that in myco @-@ heterotrophy , the flow of carbon is from the fungus to the plant , rather than vice versa . 
 Most myco @-@ heterotrophs can therefore be seen as ultimately being <unk> , since they take energy from fungi that in turn get their energy from vascular plants . Indeed , much myco @-@ heterotrophy takes place in the context of common mycorrhizal networks , in which plants use mycorrhizal fungi to exchange carbon and nutrients with other plants . In these systems , myco @-@ heterotrophs play the role of " mycorrhizal cheaters " , taking carbon from the common network , with no known reward . 
 In congruence with older reports , it has been recently shown that some myco @-@ heterotrophic orchids can be supported by saprotrophic fungi , exploiting <unk> or wood @-@ decaying fungi . In addition , several green plants ( evolutionarily close to myco @-@ heterotrophic species ) have been shown to engage in partial myco @-@ heterotrophy , that is , they are able to take carbon from mycorrhizal fungi , in addition to their photosynthetic intake . 
 = = Species diversity of myco @-@ heterotrophs and host fungi = = 
 Myco @-@ heterotrophs are found among a number of plant groups . All <unk> and non @-@ photosynthetic orchids are full myco @-@ heterotrophs , as is the non @-@ photosynthetic liverwort <unk> . Partial myco @-@ heterotrophy is common in the Gentian family , with a few genera such as <unk> being fully myco @-@ heterotrophic ; in photosynthetic orchids ; and in a number of other plant groups . Some ferns and clubmosses have myco @-@ heterotrophic gametophyte stages . The fungi that are parasitized by myco @-@ heterotrophs are typically fungi with large energy reserves to draw on , usually mycorrhizal fungi , though there is some evidence that they may also parasitize parasitic fungi that form extensive mycelial networks , such as Armillaria . Examples of fungi parasitized by myco @-@ heterotrophic plants can be found among the ectomycorrhizal , arbuscular mycorrhizal , and orchid mycorrhizal fungi . The great diversity in unrelated plant families with myco @-@ heterotrophic members , as well as the diversity of fungi targeted by myco @-@ heterotrophs , suggests multiple parallel evolution of myco @-@ heterotrophs from mycorrhizal ancestors . 
 = Abelisauridae = 
 Abelisauridae ( meaning " Abel 's lizards " ) is a family ( or clade ) of ceratosaurian theropod dinosaurs . Abelisaurids thrived during the Cretaceous Period , on the ancient southern supercontinent of Gondwana , and today their fossil remains are found on the modern continents of Africa and South America , as well as on the Indian subcontinent and the island of Madagascar . Reports based on isolated teeth show the occurrence in the Late Jurassic of Portugal , and the confirmed existence of European Abelisaurids comes from the Late Cretaceous of France with Arcovenator . Abelisaurids first appear in the fossil record of the early middle Jurassic period , and at least one species ( Majungasaurus ) survived until the end of the Mesozoic era 66 million years ago . 
 Like most theropods , abelisaurids were carnivorous bipeds . They were characterized by stocky hindlimbs and extensive ornamentation of the skull bones , with grooves and pits . In many abelisaurids , like Carnotaurus , the forelimbs are vestigial , the skull is shorter and bony crests grows above the eyes . Most of the known abelisaurids would have been between 5 and 9 meters ( 17 to 30 ft ) in length , from snout to tip of tail , with a new and as yet unnamed specimen from northwestern Turkana in Kenya , Africa reaching a possible length of 11 – 12 meters ( 36 to 39 feet ) . Before becoming well known , fragmentary abelisaurid remains were occasionally misidentified as possible South American tyrannosaurids . 
 = = Description = = 
 Abelisaurid hindlimbs were more typical of ceratosaurs , with the astragalus and calcaneum ( upper ankle bones ) fused to each other and to the tibia , forming a tibiotarsus . The tibia was shorter than the femur , giving the hindlimb stocky proportions . There were three functional digits on the foot ( the second , third , and fourth ) , while the first digit , or hallux , did not contact the ground . 
 = = = Skull = = = 
 Although skull proportions varied , abelisaurid skulls were generally very tall and very short in length . In Carnotaurus , for example , the skull was nearly as tall as it was long . The premaxilla in abelisaurids was very tall , so the front of the snout was blunt , not tapered as seen in many other theropods . 
 Two skull bones , the lacrimal and postorbital bones , projected into the eye socket from the front and back , nearly dividing it into two compartments . The eye would have been located in the upper compartment , which was tilted slightly outwards in Carnotaurus , perhaps providing some degree of binocular vision . The lacrimal and postorbital also met above the eye socket , to form a ridge or brow above the eye . 
 <unk> is seen on many of the skull bones , in the form of long grooves , pits and protrusions . Like other ceratosaurs , the frontal bones of the skull roof were fused together . <unk> commonly had bony projections from the skull . Carnotaurus had two pronounced horns , projecting outward above the eyes , while its close relative Aucasaurus had smaller projections in the same area . Majungasaurus and Rajasaurus had a single bony horn or dome , projecting upwards from the skull . These projections , like the horns of many modern animals , might have been displayed for species recognition or intimidation . In Arcovenator , the dorsal margin of the postorbital ( and probably also the lacrimal ) is thickened <unk> , forming a strong and rugose bony brow ridge rising above the level of the skull roof . Maybe this rugose brow ridge supported a keratinous or scaly structure for displays . 
 = = = <unk> and hands = = = 
 Data for the abelisaurid forelimbs are known from Eoabelisaurus and the carnotaurines Aucasaurus , Carnotaurus and Majungasaurus . All had small forelimbs which seem to have been vestigial . The bones of the forearm ( radius and ulna ) were extremely short , only 25 % of the length of the upper arm ( humerus ) in Carnotaurus and 33 % in Aucasaurus . The entire arm was held straight , and the elbow joint was immobile . 
 As is typical for ceratosaurs , the abelisaurid hand had four basic digits . However , it is there that any similarity ends . No wrist bones existed , with the four palm bones ( metacarpals ) attaching directly to the forearm . There were no finger bones on the first or fourth digits , only one on the second digit and two on the third digit . These two external fingers were extremely short and immobile . Manual claws were very small in Eoabelisaurus , and totally absent in carnotaurines . 
 More primitive relatives such as Noasaurus and Ceratosaurus had longer , mobile arms with fingers and claws . <unk> Alexander O. Vargas have suggested a major reason for the evolution towards vestigial forelimbs in the group was because of a genetic defect ; the loss of function in <unk> and <unk> , two genes which regulate the forelimbs ' development . 
 = = Distribution = = 
 <unk> are typically regarded as a Cretaceous group , though the earliest abelisaurid remains are known from the Middle Jurassic of Argentina ( classified as the species Eoabelisaurus <unk> ) and possibly Madagascar ( fragmentary remains of an unnamed species ) ; a possible abelisaurid remains ( an isolated left tibia , right femur and right tibia ) were also discovered in Late Jurassic Tendaguru Beds in Tanzania . Abelisaurid remains are mainly known in the southern continents , which once made up the supercontinent of Gondwana . When first described in 1985 , only Carnotaurus and Abelisaurus were known , both from the Late Cretaceous of South America . Abelisaurids were then located in Late Cretaceous India ( <unk> and Rajasaurus ) and Madagascar ( Majungasaurus ) , which were closely connected for much of the Cretaceous . It was thought that the absence of abelisaurids from continental Africa indicated that the group evolved after the separation of Africa from Gondwana , around 100 million years ago . However , the discovery of Rugops and other abelisaurid material from the middle of the Cretaceous in northern Africa disproved this hypothesis . Mid @-@ Cretaceous abelisaurids are now known from South America as well , showing that the group existed prior to the breakup of Gondwana . In 2014 , the description of Arcovenator <unk> from southern France provided the first indisputable evidence of the presence of Abelisaurids in Europe . Arcovenator presents strong similarities with the Madagascan Majungasaurus and Indian abelisaurids , but not with the South American forms . Arcovenator , Majungasaurus and Indian forms are united in the new clade Majungasaurinae . 
 = = Classification = = 
 Paleontologists Jose Bonaparte and Fernando Novas coined the name Abelisauridae in 1985 when they described the eponymous Abelisaurus . The name is formed from the family name of Roberto Abel , who discovered Abelisaurus , as well as from the Greek word σαυρος / sauros meaning ' lizard ' . The very common suffix -idae is usually applied to zoological family names and is derived from the Greek suffix <unk> / <unk> , which indicates a plural noun . 
 Abelisauridae is a family in rank @-@ based Linnaean taxonomy , within the infraorder Ceratosauria and the superfamily Abelisauroidea , which also contains the family Noasauridae . It has had several definitions in phylogenetic taxonomy . It was originally defined as a node @-@ based taxon including Abelisaurus , Carnotaurus , their common ancestor and all of its descendants . 
 Later it was redefined as a stem @-@ based taxon , including all animals more closely related to Abelisaurus ( or the more complete Carnotaurus ) than to Noasaurus . The node @-@ based definition would not include animals like Rugops or Ilokelesia , which are thought to be more basal than Abelisaurus and would be included by a stem @-@ based definition . Within Abelisauridae is the subgroup Carnotaurinae , and among carnotaurines , Aucasaurus and Carnotaurus are united in Carnotaurini . 
 = = = Shared characteristics = = = 
 Complete skeletons have been described only for the most advanced abelisaurids ( such as Carnotaurus and Aucasaurus ) , making it difficult to establish defining features of the skeleton for the family as a whole . However , most are known from at least some skull bones , so known shared features come mainly from the skull . 
 Many abelisaurid skull features are shared with carcharodontosaurids . These shared features , along with the fact that abelisaurids seem to have replaced carcharodontosaurids in South America , have led to suggestions that the two groups were related . However , no cladistic analysis has ever found such a relationship and , aside from the skull , abelisaurids and carcharodontosaurids are very different , more similar to ceratosaurs and allosauroids , respectively . 
 = = = Phylogeny = = = 
 Below is a cladogram generated by Tortosa et al . ( 2013 ) in the description of Arcovenator and creation of a new subfamily Majungasaurinae . 
 Ilokelesia was originally described as a sister group to Abelisauroidea . However , Sereno tentatively places it closer to Abelisaurus than to <unk> , a result which agrees with several other recent analyses . If a stem @-@ based definition is used , Ilokelesia and Rugops are therefore basal abelisaurids . However , as they are more basal than Abelisaurus , they are outside of Abelisauridae if the node @-@ based definition is adopted . Ekrixinatosaurus was also published in 2004 , so it was not included in Sereno 's analysis . However , an independent analysis , performed by Jorge Calvo and colleagues , shows it to be an abelisaurid . 
 Some scientists include <unk> from Argentina and <unk> from India as basal abelisaurids , while others consider them to be outside Abelisauroidea . The French <unk> and <unk> have also been called abelisaurids but both are fragmentary and may be more basal <unk> . 
 With the description of <unk> in 2008 , Canale et al. published another phylogenetic analysis focusing on the South American abelisaurids . In their results , they found that all South American forms , including Ilokelesia ( except Abelisaurus ) , grouped together as a sub @-@ clade of carnotaurines , which they named <unk> . In the same year Matthew T. Carrano and Scott D. Sampson published new large phylogenetic analysis of ceratosaurian . With the description of Eoabelisaurus , Diego Pol and Oliver W. M. Rauhut ( 2012 ) combined these analyses and added ten new characters . The following cladogram follows their analysis . 
 = The Exaltation of the Flower = 
 The Exaltation of the Flower ( L <unk> de la Fleur ) is the modern title given to an early Classical Greek marble fragment of a funerary stele from the 5th century BC . It was discovered in 1863 by Léon Heuzey and Henri <unk> at a church in Farsala , Thessaly , Greece . Carved in bas @-@ relief in the Severe style , the extant upper fragment of the marble relief stele depicts two women holding what appear to be flowers or fungi and another object in their hands . The work is held by the Louvre museum in the Department of Greek , Etruscan , and Roman Antiquities . 
 = = Background = = 
 French archaeologist and historian Léon Heuzey began working with the French School at Athens in Greece at the age of 20 in 1851 . He made his most famous discovery of that period in the town of Farsala , a city in southern Thessaly . In antiquity , the area was named Pharsalos , and became known for the Battle of Pharsalus in 48 BCE , where Julius Caesar defeated Pompey during the Great Roman Civil War . 
 Heuzey and the architect Henri <unk> were involved in an official mission to collect objects related to Caesar 's campaigns ; they also were interested in other artifacts unrelated to their work . In 1863 , they found this marble bas @-@ relief embedded in the walls of a church in the neighborhood of Paleo @-@ <unk> in Farsala and named it The Exaltation of the Flower . Heuzey was informed that the stone was originally discovered in a garden , close to another stone that was not recovered . Heuzey purchased the stone and had it sent to the Louvre in Paris . Back in France , <unk> would become curator of the Louvre , where he would retire in 1908 . 
 = = Description = = 
 A precise description and interpretation of the work has remained elusive since its initial discovery in the 19th century . Scholars agree on some aspects and disagree on others . British Greek art scholar Martin Robertson notes that both women can be seen wearing the tubular peplos garment common to the Classical period . According to the descriptive text found in the Atlas database of the exhibited works of art at the Louvre , the women also are wearing a <unk> , a hairnet in the Greco @-@ Roman hairstyle , and appear to hold a type of flower , perhaps poppy or pomegranate . One of the women in the stele carries what resembles a bag , presumed to be carrying seeds in the interpretation . 
 = = Analysis = = 
 In his 1868 paper , Heuzey argued that the images in the stele suggested the goddesses Persephone ( Kore ) and Demeter , referring to the cult of Kore and the legend of Demeter found in the Homeric Hymns . French archaeologist and art historian Maxime Collignon explained , " Heuzey believes that this monument refers to the cultus of Core , daughter of Demeter , a divinity suggesting in Greek legend the ephemeral but incessantly recurring bloom of nature . " French archaeologist Olivier Rayet ( 1847 – 1887 ) disagreed with the interpretation <unk> offered . While Heuzey 's perspective still has adherents , it has largely fallen out of favor among art historians . According to the Perseus Project at Tufts University , " It is now generally agreed ... that the figures represented are mortals rather than goddesses . " 
 German archaeologist Heinrich Brunn believed the decorative qualities of the Pharsalos stele originated in Asia Minor . Following this line of reasoning , Scottish archaeologist Alexander Stuart Murray compared the facial features of the stele , such as the eyes , lips , and nose , to similar facial features found in the Harpy Tomb relief from Xanthos in Lycia . American curator Edward Robinson notes the influence of the Ionic schools on this and other artwork from ancient Aeolia , now known as Thessaly : " It is now a question whether these works were done by local artists under this influence , or by Ionic artists who may have established themselves in Thessaly , as they did in other parts of Greece . " The Ionian style 's influence also may be seen in the depiction of the hair @-@ net worn by the women in the relief . 
 French scholar Charles Picard ( 1883 – 1965 ) argued that if the stele fragments were reconstructed , the bottom missing fragment would have showed the figure on the left standing and the one on the right seated : 
 Neither can the oblique trend of the drapery , belt @-@ high in the silhouette ( in profile ) of the elder , be explained … without accepting that she was seated , her left forearm resting on her thigh . Only thus could the dice be handled . Only thus , moreover , can so extreme a slope in the pleats coming away from the shoulder , pleats that would have to fall vertically in a non @-@ seated figure , become understandable . On the right , let it not be readily forgotten that all the pleats turn strongly forward , so that they pass the centerline of the stele , marked by the high , triumphant flower and the mingled group of hands . For the maiden on the left , although the cascade of pleats is generally much more direct — as appropriate to a standing posture — some of them , curiously arched , turn forward as well , for example at the left armhole . They can scarcely be understood without again invoking the supporting effect produced by the leg of the seated woman . The folds of Kore ’ s sleeve , which in 1939 I drew a little too short in the descent , carry on to Demeter ’ s lap , where they spread out . 
 German classical archaeologist Roland Hampe ( 1908 – 1981 ) disagreed with Picard 's hypothesis , saying that the size of the stele should demonstrate that both women were standing , not sitting . 
 = = Flowers , fungi , or bones = = 
 It is generally agreed that the plants depicted in the stele fragment are either poppies or pomegranate flowers , however , classical archaeologists and historians of ancient Greek art discuss different species in the literature : German scholar Ernst <unk> ( 1895 – 1978 ) thought that the women were holding a type of rose ; Picard recognizes the symbolism of Demeter and Kore and identifies the flowers as a species of poppy , possibly the opium poppy , the Oriental poppy , or the Iranian poppy . Careful examination of the thick ' stems ' fails to resemble that of the flowers . German scholar Eugen Petersen ( 1837 – 1919 ) proposed that the figures were holding knucklebones ( talus bones from goats or sheep used to play the game of jacks ) in their left hand and roses in the right hand ; Hampe argues that the stele depicts only knucklebones , not flowers . 
 In 1911 , Greek scholar and archaeologist Rufus B. Richardson , formerly of the American School of Classical Studies at Athens , observed that what was being described as flowers in the relief , looked similar to mushrooms . English classicist Robert Graves and Italian ethnobotanist Giorgio <unk> both have referred to the fragment as evidence for the entheogen hypothesis , speculating that the significant items depicted in the work are a type of psychoactive mushroom that was used in the Eleusinian Mysteries . Graves even featured the image as the cover of one edition of The Greek Myths , noting that although it might be depicted in artwork , it would remain unnamed in texts because of its sacredness . American classicist Carl A. P. Ruck has made similar arguments . Although the entheogen hypothesis is controversial and generally rejected by mainstream scholarship , in a review of Hampe 's Die Stele aus Pharsalos im Louvre ( 1951 ) , Picard notes that " one may be increasingly reminded that Pharsalos was indeed an Eleusinian center " . 
 = = Alternate titles = = 
 The work is referred to by many different titles in contemporary literature . These include : 
 = Superpower ( song ) = 
 " Superpower " is a song recorded by American recording artist Beyoncé featuring Frank Ocean from her fifth studio album , Beyoncé ( 2013 ) . It was written by Beyoncé and Ocean along with Boots ( credited under his real name Jordan Asher ) and Pharrell Williams who also served as its producer . " Superpower " is a slow @-@ tempo R & B and doo @-@ wop ballad which features both singers singing with a low vocal register over a multi @-@ layered track . Lyrically , it talks about the power of love and unity and the empowering effects of a long @-@ lasting relationship . It was well received by music critics who praised the singers ' vocals and its musical production characteristic of Williams . 
 The music video for the song was directed by Jonas Åkerlund and released on the album on December 13 , 2013 . It features the singer leading a protesting group in which numerous celebrities make cameo appearances , most notably the singer 's former Destiny 's Child group band mates Kelly Rowland and Michelle Williams . The video does not feature lip syncing like the singer 's other works and it is shot in slow motion . It received mostly positive reviews from critics who felt that it was a fit for the minimalistic track and an artistic statement . The song was not performed by Beyoncé but was used as a snippet in interludes during various performances . 
 = = Background = = 
 " Superpower " was written by Beyoncé , Frank Ocean , Boots and Pharrell Williams with the latter also handling its production . The vocals in the track were produced by Beyoncé while additional production was finished by producer Boots . It was recorded in three studios : Jungle City Studios , Oven Studios and Mirrorbal Studios . Kelly Rowland and Michelle Williams , Beyoncé 's former bandmates from the group Destiny 's Child provided background vocals along with Stefan Skarbek and Boots . The audio mixing of " Superpower " was completed by Tony Maserati at Mirrorbal Studios and <unk> Studios and the track was eventually mastered by Tom Coyne and Aya Merrill at Sterling Sound . Beyoncé explained on her iTunes Radio channel that she considered " Superpower " to be a " powerful " song with strong vocals ; she went on saying , " [ T ] he lyrics that Frank Ocean wrote ... it 's like he thought of one thing and the thought just keeps going and going ... Basically the message is love is the most powerful thing we have and it doesn 't matter if a war , if a riot is going on . When you are with the person you love , you can survive any and everything . " 
 = = Composition = = 
 According to the sheet music published on the website Musicnotes.com , " Superpower " was composed using common time in the key of C Major with a slow tempo of 63 beats per minute . Musically , " Superpower " is a ballad with musical elements of contemporary and alternative R & B as well as doo @-@ wop . Jon Pareles of The New York Times commented that the song " gives doo @-@ wop a futuristic sheen " . Similarly , The Quietus writer Mof Gimmers described it as a " 2013 take on doo @-@ wop " . Mike Wass of the website Idolator compared the song with material from Ocean 's album Channel Orange ( 2012 ) . Beyoncé sings with her lower register and is later accompanied by multi @-@ tracked harmonies which Neil McCormick of The Daily Telegraph compared with Destiny 's Child . The instrumentation consists of " soft " strings and orchestral drum rolls , which <unk> of The Daily Telegraph compared to materials by Phil Spector " through a digital future prism " . Ocean appears later on in the song ; his vocals were described as sounding " mumbly " and deep on the track , complementary to Beyoncé 's . He is heard singing his lines with lower , higher and same vocal register as her . Ocean was noted for singing several confessions during his part , including the lines " I thought the world wouldn 't revolve without us " . The Irish Times editor Una Mullally compared his singing style with Prince 's on " Superpower " . 
 In the lyrics , the protagonist sings about a " vow of lasting ' tough love ' " . She describes the superpower of love and experiencing her own full potential in a relationship , evident through the lyrics " And when I 'm standing in this mirror after all these years / What I 'm viewing is a little different / From what your eyes show you / I guess I didn ’ t see myself before you " . Bradley Stern from the website MuuMuse analyzed how the lines " The laws of the world never stopped us once ' cause together we got plenty of superpower " were backed by the fact the singer was part of the world 's most famous supercouples . Clash writer Mike Diver opined that the song was an " anthem to blissful monogamy " . Similarly , Cosmopolitan reviewer Alex Rees felt the lyrics analyzed the " power " of a firm relationship and its outcomes on a person 's self @-@ worth . <unk> <unk> of Irish Examiner deemed " Superpower " to be the singer 's most political song , challenging the notions of " current social practices " . She elaborated , 
 Beyoncé eschews the patriarchy complicit shades of ' girl power ' , with its false dawn of nihilistic , individual empowerment without consideration for context . Instead , she chooses ' Superpower ' to talk about the ' laws of the world ... a subtle power ' ( read ' current social practices ' here ) where the revolution will be based on human connectedness , honesty and fragility : ' Just like you I can be scared , just like you I hope I 'm sparred , it 's tough <unk> 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 The song received mostly favorable reviews from music critics . Andrew Hampp and Erika Ramirez of Billboard described " Superpower " as " a cinematic gift " and " [ a ] sweet duet of an imaginable force " adding that it showcased Williams 's musical capabilities . The Daily Telegraph journalist Neil McCormick deemed it " outstanding " and praised the harmonies similar to Destiny 's Child used in it . He also deemed it to be a " stand @-@ out track " which " never quite takes off , as if restraint was the watchword " . Greg Kot , writing for the Chicago Tribune felt that in the " marvelously understated duet " , the singer " positively smolders " while showcasing strength due to a union . In a review for Idolator , Mike Wass described it as a " meandering alt @-@ R & B experiment " noting that it was a " grower " that required more listens due to its " multi @-@ layered treat that unfolds with each listen " . In a review of Beyoncé , Chris Kelly of Fact concluded that it " closes strongly and subtly " with the ballads " Superpower " , " Heaven " and " Blue " . Rob Sheffield of Rolling Stone felt that " Superpower " was one of the " nasty highs " the singer managed to hit on the album . Mof Gimmers of The Quietus noted that the singer 's " trademark head @-@ spinning harmonies " were present in the song . 
 Entertainment Weekly writer Nick Catucci observed that the song " treat [ s ] relationships with the same raw instinct that suffuses her sex songs " on the album . MuuMuse 's Bradley Stern described it as a " pensive , slow @-@ strutting contemplation " . Alex Rees , writing for the Cosmopolitan 's felt that Beyoncé 's " superpower " in the song was her voice and deemed it a " very empowering " number . Chris Bosman from Consequence of Sound wrote that " Frank Ocean cedes superhuman soul duties to Queen Bey " . Latifah Muhammad from the BET called the ballad a " dilapidated union so formidable its deemed a ' Superpower , ' " calling it " another shining moment for Bey " . Jody Rosen writing for New York was more critical towards the track , saying that although there was " nice singing " , it appeared " [ a ] bit wan " . In another review , however , he called it " incandescent " . Ryan B. Patrick in a review for Exclaim ! was negative towards " Superpower " , opining that it sounded like a leftover track from Channel Orange with " Beyoncé not quite owning it " . In 2013 , the song was included at number 228 on the annual Pazz & Jop poll complied by The Village Voice . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The music video for " Superpower " was directed by Jonas Åkerlund . It was filmed in Los Angeles in a former shopping mall which was converted to a film set . The singer was spotted by media on November 12 , 2013 on the location set wearing a Louis Vuitton ski mask while filming the video . Beyoncé does not lip @-@ sync or dance during the video . During an interview , she explained that " Superpower " was a song which " you can just put on repeat and put you in this trance , which is why I didn 't want to perform it in the video " . With that being said , she wanted to focus on slow motion shots of " really powerful imagery " . It features former Destiny 's Child members Kelly Rowland and Michelle Williams as well as Pharrell Williams , Luke James and Les Twins . The director said that it was a " spontaneous decision " to include them in the video ; Frank Ocean was also originally planned to appear . Åkerlund elaborated on the video : 
 It 's a very untraditional way of doing music videos , to not have her lip @-@ synch . For Beyoncé , who 's a dancer , it 's very unusual to have a video without a dance part . I felt part of this idea for " Superpower " was to have stuff be in contrast to each other , so this song is very soft and very slow , but the action you see is aggressive and very big . We discussed it many times to see if we 'd have the performance in the video or not . We decided no , and I think it works really , really well . It 's kind of like a brave move , if you think about it . Most artists can act and have all these different things , but they 'll still fall back on the performance . 
 A music video for " Superpower " was released on December 13 , 2013 through the iTunes Store , in addition to a clip for every other track on the parent album . On November 24 , 2014 the clip was also uploaded to the singer 's Vevo account . A behind @-@ the @-@ scenes video was also released online on December 2 , 2014 , featuring commentary by director Åkerlund . The concept behind the video for " Superpower " revolves around Beyoncé leading a revolution . The video begins with quick shots of a desolate parking lot . Beyoncé then appears with a balaclava which she uses to cover her face up to the eyes . She is seen walking slowly towards the camera , as other people start joining her with flags and bats in their hands . Later in the video , she takes the mask off and the people surrounding her set various objects on fire using Molotov cocktails , write graffiti on walls , and break a car . Beyoncé is later seen holding a man with a mask who is laying on the ground . The end of the video sees the protesting group facing a line of SWAT policemen . They start running towards them and as the video comes to its end Beyoncé holds hands with the person next to her which is the same man she hugged on the ground in the previous scene . For the look in the video , she donned a cropped T @-@ shirt , pants designed by Åkerlund , a green scarf by Michael Schmidt , shoes by Rodarte and rings by Lynn Ban . 
 Sam Lansky of the website Idolator , noted how the video was a " high @-@ concept " one further " balancing out the low @-@ level minimalism of the ... track with arresting visuals and a star @-@ studded cast " . Mike Wass of the same website deemed it a recreation of the riot scene of the singer 's own " Run the World ( Girls ) " ( 2011 ) . He further described Destiny 's Child reunion as " heartwarming " . Michelle Collins , a journalist of Vanity Fair echoed his statements , noting how the band reunion was the video 's key moment . Although Anupa Mistry of Spin felt that the video for " Superpower " was one of the " relatively mundane " on the visual album , it was a feat of " production value and styling " . Kathy Iandoli from Vice , praised the singer 's overall look in the clip . MuuMuse 's Bradley Stern felt the clip was one of the singer 's " most artistic moment " , praising her " ridiculously sexy stealth superhero outfit " . He interpreted the wall of police officers as critics , political statements and life obstacles and concluded that the last image where the singer is seen holding hands with the man next to her is a " lasting " one . The Fader writer Michael Zelenko said that the clip resembled a short movie with Beyoncé as " an Occupy @-@ style protest heroine leading a ragtag gang " . Listing it as the fifth best video on the album , Melinda Newman of HitFix elaborated how the video managed to transform the " simple love ballad into a political statement " , furthering how it added meaning to its <unk> rent DiCrescenzo of the magazine Time Out named it the sixth best on the album . Trent Wolbe of The Verge criticized Åkerlund 's work on the album , feeling that his contributions " feel like boring opulence porn " , something he found on " Superpower " . 
 = = Live performance and usage in media = = 
 On June 14 , Frank Ocean performed his verses of " Superpower " during his appearance at the 2014 Bonnaroo Music Festival . During the 2014 MTV Video Music Awards , a short instrumental snippet of the song was played over a portion of Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie 's TED talk " We Should All Be Feminists " was heard before Beyoncé started her performance of " Flawless " . In 2016 , " Superpower " was used as an interlude to " Mine " during The Formation World Tour . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from the album 's liner notes and the singer 's official website . 
 Song credits 
 Video credits 
 = Sif = 
 In Norse mythology , Sif is a goddess associated with earth . Sif is attested in the Poetic Edda , compiled in the 13th century from earlier traditional sources , and the Prose Edda , written in the 13th century by Snorri Sturluson , and in the poetry of skalds . In both the Poetic Edda and the Prose Edda , Sif is the wife of the thunder god Thor and is known for her golden hair . 
 In the Prose Edda , Sif is named as the mother of the goddess Þrúðr by Thor and of Ullr with a father whose name is not recorded . The Prose Edda also recounts that Sif once had her hair shorn by Loki , and that Thor forced Loki to have a golden headpiece made for Sif , resulting in not only Sif 's golden tresses but also five other objects for other gods . 
 Scholars have proposed that Sif 's hair may represent fields of golden wheat , that she may be associated with fertility , family , wedlock or that she is connected to rowan , and that there may be an allusion to her role or possibly her name in the Old English poem Beowulf . Sif 's name means " relation by marriage " . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 The name Sif is the singular form of the plural Old Norse word sifjar . Sifjar only appears in singular form when referring to the goddess as a proper noun . Sifjar is cognate to the Old English sib ( meaning " affinity , connection , by marriage " ) and in other Germanic languages : Gothic language <unk> , Old High German <unk> , and German <unk> . Sifjar appears not only in ancient poetry and records of law , but also in compounds ( <unk> sifjar means " to marry " ) . Using this etymology , scholar John Lindow gives the meanings " in @-@ law @-@ relationship " , scholar Andy Orchard provides " relation " , and scholar Rudolf Simek gives " relation by marriage " . 
 = = Attestations = = 
 = = = Poetic Edda = = = 
 In stanza 48 of the Poetic Edda poem Hárbarðsljóð , Hárbarðr ( Odin , father of Thor , in disguise ) meets Thor at an inlet of a gulf . The two engage in flyting , and Hárbarðr refuses to ferry Thor across the bay . Among numerous other insults , Hárbarðr claims that Sif has a lover at home . In response , Thor says that Hárbarðr is speaking carelessly " of what seems worst to me " and also lying . 
 In stanzas 53 and 54 of the poem Lokasenna , after pouring Loki a crystal cup of mead during his series of insults towards the gods , Sif states that there is nothing Loki can say only in regard to her . In response , Loki claims that Sif has had an affair with him : 
 Then Sif went forward and poured out mead for Loki into a crystal cup and said : 
 Welcome now , Loki , and take the crystal cup 
 full of ancient mead , 
 you should admit , that of the children of the Æsir , 
 that I alone am blameless . 
 He took the horn and drank it down : 
 That indeed you would be , if you were so , 
 if you were shy and fierce towards men ; 
 I alone know , as I think I do now , 
 your lover beside Thor , 
 and that was the wicked Loki . 
 Sif does not respond , and the exchange turns to Beyla . Sif is additionally mentioned in two kennings found in poems collected in the Poetic Edda ; Hymiskviða ( where Thor is referred to as the " Husband of Sif " thrice ) , and Þrymskviða ( where Thor is once referred to as " Husband of Sif " ) . 
 = = = Prose Edda = = = 
 In the Prose Edda , Sif is mentioned once in the Prologue , in chapter 31 of Gylfaginning , and in Skáldskaparmál as a guest at Ægir 's feast , the subject of a jötunn 's desire , as having her hair shorn by Loki , and in various kennings . 
 Sif is introduced in chapter three of the Prologue section of the Prose Edda ; Snorri 's euhemerized account of the origins of Viking mythology . Snorri states that Thor married Sif , and that she is known as " a prophetess called Sibyl , though we know her as Sif " . Sif is further described as " the most loveliest of women " and with hair of gold . Although he lists her own ancestors as unknown , Snorri writes that Thor and Sif produced a son by the name of <unk> , who " took after his father " . <unk> is attributed an extended genealogical list of descendants , including figures such as <unk> and Odin ( though outside of this continuity Odin is described as the father of Thor ) . 
 In chapter 31 of the Prose Edda book Gylfaginning , Ullr is referred to as a son of Sif and a stepson of Thor ( though his father is not mentioned ) : 
 Ull is the name of one . The son of Sif , he is the stepson of Thor . He is so skillful a bowman and skier that no one can compete with him . He is beautiful to look at , and is an accomplished warrior . He is also a good person to pray to when in single combat . 
 As reported in the Prose Edda book Skáldskaparmál , Thor once engages in a duel with Hrungnir , there described as the strongest of the jötnar . Prior to this , Hrungnir had been drunkenly boasting of his desire to , amongst other things , kill all of the gods except Freyja and Sif , whom he wanted to take home with him . However , at the duel , Hrungnir is quickly killed by the enraged Thor . 
 Further in Skáldskaparmál , Snorri relates a story where Loki cuts off Sif 's hair as a prank . When Thor discovers this , he grabs hold of Loki , resulting in Loki swearing to have a headpiece made of gold to replace Sif 's locks . Loki fulfills this promise by having a headpiece made by dwarfs , the Sons of Ivaldi . Along with the headpiece , the dwarfs produced Odin 's spear , Gungnir . As the story progresses , the incident leads to the creation of the ship <unk> and the boar <unk> for Freyr , the multiplying ring <unk> for Odin , and the mighty hammer Mjöllnir for Thor . 
 Sif also appears in Skáldskaparmál listed as a <unk> for " earth " , appears in a kenning for a gold @-@ keeping woman , and once for Hildr . Poetic means of referring to Sif calling her " wife of Thor " , " mother of Ullr " , " the fair @-@ haired deity " , " rival of Járnsaxa " , and as " mother of Þrúðr " . 
 = = = Swedish folklore = = = 
 19th @-@ century scholar Jacob Grimm records that in his time residents of Värmland , Sweden " call [ ed ] Thor 's wife <unk> , good mother . " 
 = = Theories = = 
 = = = Beowulf = = = 
 In Old English , sib ( " family " cf . " sibling " ) is cognate with Old Norse Sif and <unk> . In the Old English poem Beowulf ( lines 2016 to 2018 ) , <unk> 's wife , <unk> , moves through the hall serving mead to the warriors and defusing conflict . Various scholars beginning with Magnus Olsen have pointed to the similarity with what Sif does at the feast described in Lokasenna . Richard North further notes that unusually , sib is personified here and in lines <unk> to <unk> , and suggests they may be references to Sif in Danish religion : " Both instances may indicate that the poet of Beowulf was in a position to imagine a sixth @-@ century Scandinavia on the basis of his knowledge of contemporary Danish legends . " 
 = = = Hair as wheat and potential cognates = = = 
 19th @-@ century scholar Jacob Grimm proposes a reconstruction of a Germanic deity cognate to Sif in other Germanic cultures , and proposes a similar nature to that of the goddesses Frigg and Freyja : 
 The <unk> <unk> , <unk> <unk> , <unk> , <unk> sib gen. <unk> , denote peace , friendship , kindred ; from these I infer a divinity <unk> , <unk> , Sib , corresponding to ON . Sif gen . Sifjar , the wife of <unk> , for the <unk> too has a pl. sifjar meaning <unk> , <unk> amicus ( <unk> <unk> , <unk> ) , sift genus , <unk> . By this sense of the word , Sif would appear to be , like Frigg and Freyja , a goddess of loveliness and love ; as attributes of Oðinn and <unk> agree , their wives Frigg and Sif have also a common signification . 
 Grimm connects Eddic references to Sif 's golden hair ( gold is referred to as Sifjar <unk> ; Sif 's hair ) with the herb name <unk> Sifjar ( <unk> aureum ) . Grimm says that " <unk> see in this the golden fruits of the Earth burnt up by fire and growing again , they liken Sif to Ceres " , and Grimm says that " with it agrees the fact that O. Slav . Siva is a gloss on ' Ceres dea <unk> ' " but cites etymological problems between the potential cognate . Grimm says that Thor 's mother was the earth , and not his wife , yet " we do find the simple Sif standing for earth . " Grimm adds that he is inconclusive regarding Sif and that , " we ought to have fuller details about Sif , and these are wholly wanting in our mythology . Nowhere amongst us is the mystic relation of the seed @-@ corn of Demeter , whose poignant grief for her daughter threatens to bring famine on mankind ( Hymn to Cer . 305 – 306 ) , nor anything like it , recorded . " 
 Citing the etymology of her name , 19th century scholar Guðbrandur Vigfússon theorizes that Sif " betokens mother earth with her golden sheaves of grain ; she was the goddess of the sanctity of the family and wedlock " . 
 Scholar Rudolf Simek theorizes that Sif likely originated as a compliment to Thor through his fertility associations , and that the name Sif ( Simek provides the etymology " relation by marriage " ) may have originally simply meant " the wife ( of Thor ) " . Simek rejects notions of a " vegetation cult " venerating Sif , says that Sif does not appear to have a function , dismisses theories proposing connections between Sif 's hair and grain as " over @-@ zealous interpretation [ s ] " , and theorizes that Snorri invented the story of Sif 's shorn locks in attempt to explain the attributes of various gods . 
 Scholar H. R. Ellis Davidson states that Sif may have been an ancient fertility goddess , agreeing with a link between her lustrous hair and fields of golden wheat . Regarding Sif , Thor , and fertility , Davidson says : 
 The cult of Thor was linked up with men 's habitation and possessions , and with well @-@ being of the family and community . This included the fruitfulness of the fields , and Thor , although pictured primarily as a storm god in the myths , was also concerned with the fertility and preservation of the seasonal round . In our own times , little stone axes from the distant past have been used as fertility symbols and placed by the farmer in the holes made by the drill to receive the first seed of spring . Thor 's marriage with Sif of the golden hair , about which we hear little in the myths , seems to be a memory of the ancient symbol of divine marriage between sky god and earth goddess , when he comes to earth in the thunderstorm and the storm brings the rain which makes the fields fertile . In this way Thor , as well as Odin , may be seen to continue the cult of the sky god which was known in the Bronze Age . 
 Scholar John Lindow proposes that a potentially understated mythological importance of Sif 's role in the story of her sheared hair exists ; her headpiece is created along with the most important and powerful items in Norse mythology . Lindow further states that it may be easy to lose sight of the central role Sif plays in the creation of these objects . 
 = = = Rowan = = = 
 Sif has been linked with Ravdna , the consort of the Sami thunder @-@ god <unk> . Red berries of rowan were holy to Ravdna , and the name Ravdna resembles the North @-@ Germanic words for the tree ( for example , Old Norse <unk> ) . According to Skáldskaparmál the rowan is called " the salvation of Thor " because Thor once saved himself by clinging to it . It has been theorized that Sif was once conceived in the form of a rowan to which Thor clung . 
 = = = Lokasenna accusations = = = 
 Regarding the accusations that Loki makes to Sif in Lokasenna , Carolyne Larrington says that Sif is not elsewhere attested as unfaithful , though notes that Odin makes a similar accusation in Hárbarðsljóð , and theorizes a potential connection between the story of Loki cutting off Sif 's hair with these references . Larrington says " how he got close enough to carry this out might be explained by this verse . " Although most sources say Loki used magic to make her fall asleep . 
 = = Modern influence = = 
 Sif has inspired the name of a volcano on the planet Venus ( Sif Mons ) . Sif 's characterization in modern media tends to be much more martial than in original sources . The Marvel Comics character , Sif , is based on the Sif of Norse myth and is portrayed by Jaimie Alexander in the Marvel Studios film Thor , its sequel , and the Marvel 's Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D television series . 
 = 1991 Pacific hurricane season = 
 The 1991 Pacific hurricane season was a near @-@ average Pacific hurricane season . The worst storm this year was Tropical Depression Five @-@ E , which killed one person in Mexico . Elsewhere , Tropical Storm Ignacio injured forty people in Mexico , and Hurricane Fefa caused flooding in Hawaii . Hurricane Kevin was the strongest system of the season and became resulted the then longest @-@ lasting hurricane in the eastern north Pacific basin . Hurricane Nora was the strongest November storm at that time . 
 The season officially started on May 15 , 1991 in the eastern Pacific , and on June 1 , 1991 in the central Pacific . It lasted until November 30 , 1991 in both basins . These dates conventionally delimit the period of each year when most tropical cyclones form in the northeastern Pacific Ocean . 
 = = Season summary = = 
 During the season , a total of sixteen tropical cyclones developed , featuring ten hurricanes , four tropical storms and two tropical depressions . These totals are close to the climatological averages established since 1966 , when satellite surveillance began . However , the season was less active than 1990 , which had a record <unk> ( more than 1991 ) . On the other hand , it ended late with the first November hurricane since 1966 . On the other hand , the months of July and August , often the most active ones in this basin , only produced two tropical cyclones each . The activity in July is four systems below the average of six at that time due to unusual circulation patterns aloft over the tropical Pacific . A shorter gap from late August to early September was attributed to anomalous flow patterns near the Baja California Peninsula . 
 None of the tropical storms or hurricanes made landfall . One of the two tropical depressions of the season , Five @-@ E , came ashore near Salina Cruz , Mexico , on the last day of June . The depression caused the only fatality of the season , injured five hundred , with two people missing . Delores , Ignacio and Marty threatened the coast of Mexico , coming close enough to require tropical cyclone watches and warnings . Of these , Ignacio was also responsible for 40 injuries as the system passed just offshore of Lázaro Cárdenas . Public advisories were issued for four other systems due to the threat of heavy rain along the coast . 
 Several tropical cyclones grew into specially long @-@ lived and intense systems . For example , Hurricane Kevin endured as a hurricane for 12 ½ days to the east of 140 ° W , establishing a new record for longevity in the eastern Pacific . 
 Tropical cyclone data was gathered at 6 hour intervals throughout the season . Even though most intensity assessments were estimates via the Dvorak Technique , there was a large research mission for Tropical cyclogenesis in the Pacific . A NOAA research mission investigated Hurricane Jimena and gathered a few surface observations . Track forecasts were slightly more accurate than the past three years ; intensity forecasts were comparable to the previous three seasons . 
 The season began with the formation of Tropical Depression One @-@ E on May 16 and ended with the dissipation of Tropical Depression Nora on November 12 . One named storm formed in May , three in June , two in July , two in August , three in September , two in October , and one in November . 
 Plus , Dolores was spelled Delores 
 = = Storms = = 
 = = = Tropical Storm Andres = = = 
 On May 16 , the first tropical depression of the season formed to the southwest of Baja California , out of a tropical disturbance that had developed during May 5 within the vicinity of Panama . During May 16 the depression gradually developed , before early the next day the National Hurricane Centre declared it a tropical storm and named it Andres . The newly named tropical cyclone reached its peak intensity of 60 mph ( 95 km / h ) , later that day . After maintaining its peak intensity for 24 hours , Andres started to gradually weaken as upper level windshear over the system increased before it dissipated during May 20 . Throughout its life as a tropical cyclone , Andres moved very little and slowly executed a cyclonic loop , while remaining well away from any land . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Blanca = = = 
 A well organized tropical wave over northern Africa entered the Atlantic Ocean on May 31 . The wave never showed signs of organization while crossing the Atlantic . It emerged into the eastern north Pacific on June 10 . It was not until June 13 when the convection associated with the wave became better organized . On June 14 , Tropical Depression Two @-@ E formed at a location about 515 @.@ 7 miles ( 830 km ) from Acapulco , Mexico . 
 For the next 48 hours , the depression moved toward the west and then northwest in response to a weakening ridge to the northwest . On June 17 , the strong shear relaxed somewhat and the exposed center moved under the deep convection again . Thus , the depression strengthened into a tropical storm about 723 @.@ 9 miles ( 1 @,@ 165 km ) south of the southern tip of Baja California . Tropical Storm Blanca experienced limited development , reaching its peak windspeed of 60 mph ( 95 km / h ) early on June 20 . Then , the center of Blanca became exposed again and weakened into a tropical depression on June 21 . Finally , it dissipated on June 22 over colder waters about 1285 @.@ 9 miles ( 2 @,@ 380 km ) southwest of the southern tip of Baja California . There were no casualties or damages attributed to this tropical cyclone . 
 = = = Hurricane Carlos = = = 
 A tropical wave left the African coast on June 4 showing some cyclonic curvature in the low clouds . It passed Barbados six days later , where a low @-@ to @-@ mid wind shift was detected . The wave was followed by a low level wind surge which was observed in Curaçao on June 12 . Most of the shower activity associated with the wave moved westward over South America , and then over Panama on June 14 . The convection became organized and developed into Tropical Depression Three @-@ E on June 16 while it was located 348 miles ( 560 km ) south of Salina Cruz . It became a tropical storm one day later . Carlos reached minimal hurricane strength on June 18 . Two days later , Carlos was briefly downgraded to tropical storm status . A strong high pressure system forced Carlos to move over warmer waters and Carlos began to reintensify . Carlos regained hurricane status and developed a well @-@ defined eye and excellent upper level outflow . On June 24 , Carlos peaked at 955 mbar ( 28 @.@ 2 inHg ) central pressure and 115 mph ( 185 km / h ) maximum sustained winds . The hurricane then weakened when it moved west over colder waters and encountered upper level shear . Carlos dissipated on June 27 . The National Hurricane Center received no reports of impact due to this tropical cyclone . 
 = = = Hurricane Delores = = = 
 Delores developed from a tropical wave which moved from Africa to the Atlantic on June 7 . And it was not until June 22 when it gained organization and was identified as an area of disturbed weather south of Mexico . 
 The system immediately showed signs of rotation and it was designated Tropical Depression Four @-@ E the same day . It was centered about 516 miles ( 830 km ) south @-@ southeast of Manzanillo , Mexico . Then , the depression reached storm strength , and was named Delores on June 24 while 143 miles ( 230 km ) from the coast of Mexico . It rapidly intensified to a hurricane on June 25 as it approached to the coast . However it rapidly weakened and on June 27 it was downgraded to tropical storm status as it was moving over colder waters . Its deep convection gradually diminished and its west @-@ northwestward motion abruptly halted as the system was being sheared . It weakened to a depression on June 28 near Socorro Island and it dissipated on June 29 . 
 In response to Delores ' approach , the Mexican government issued a tropical storm warning and a hurricane watch from Ixtapa to Manzanillo on June 24 . The watch and the warning were dropped the next day . The cyclone remained far away enough that no reports of high winds were received . Satellite observations indicated that heavy rains fell in affected areas from June 23 to 26 . However , no damages or casualties were reported . 
 = = = Tropical Depression Five @-@ E = = = 
 A tropical disturbance south of the Gulf of Tehuantepec became better organized on June 29 and became a tropical depression . Strengthening was very limited as the depression was approaching to land . It made landfall later that day very near of Salina Cruz , Oaxaca . As it continued its west @-@ northwest track , it dissipated inland after bringing torrential rains . 
 Five @-@ E caused the year 's lone fatality and caused the most significant damage . Five @-@ E destroyed up to 118 homes , injured 500 , and also caused two people to go missing . Rainfall totals as high as 9 @.@ 2 inches ( 230 mm ) in 24 hours accompanied the depression over Mexico . 
 = = = Hurricane Enrique = = = 
 Enrique formed from a westward @-@ moving tropical wave that crossed the Atlantic from June 30 to July 8 . A short @-@ lived cyclonic circulation center within the wave was detected on satellite imagery when the system was over the eastern Atlantic . However , persistent deep convection did not occur until the wave neared the Gulf of Tehuantepec in the eastern Pacific Ocean on July 11 . On July 12 , the convection became more concentrated about 500 nautical miles ( 930 km ) south of Acapulco , near a mid @-@ level vortex within the wave ; however , it had diminished the next day . On July 14 it became better organized . Based on reports from satellite imagery the low had developed into the seasons season 's sixth tropical depression on July 15 . The depression intensified further and was upgraded to Tropical Storm Enrique the next day as it became better organized . 
 Enrique steadily intensified and by early on July 16 , the National Hurricane Center was anticipating for the system to reach hurricane intensity . Continuing to strengthen , it reached hurricane status On July 17 . However , this was for a short period of time as it developed an eye . Due to uncertainty in the storm 's intensity that day , it is possible that it could have been a hurricane earlier than originally estimated . Wind shear associated with a trough and passage over cooler waters caused Enrique to begin weakening and the cyclone center soon became exposed . Enrique was downgraded to a depression on July 19 and the weakening cyclone crossed into the central Pacific on July 20 . Enrique dissipated shortly thereafter . Enrique 's remnants managed to maintain a very weak center as it passed well to the north of the Hawaiian Islands and then passed near Midway Island . As the storm approached the International Dateline , the system started to redevelop . Shortly after crossing the dateline , Enrique became a tropical storm again on August 1 . It lasted for less than 24 hours before it lost its convection and thus the cyclone began to dissipate . No damages or casualties were caused by Enrique . 
 = = = Hurricane Fefa = = = 
 A tropical wave became better organized and it developed into Tropical Depression Seven @-@ E while 976 miles ( 1570 km ) south @-@ southeast of Cabo San Lucas on July 29 . The depression intensified quickly and became Tropical Storm Fefa the same day . Fefa continued to strengthen over the warm Pacific water and reached hurricane status on July 31 . Satellite imagery showed the appearance of an eye on August 1 . Fefa peaked on August 2 with a central pressure of 959 mbar ( 28 @.@ 3 inHg ) and winds of 120 mph ( 195 km / h ) , making it a Category 3 hurricane in the Saffir @-@ Simpson Hurricane Scale . Fefa crossed into the north central Pacific basin on August 5 . As it crossed , wind shear increased and Fefa began to weaken as it approached the Hawaiian Islands as a tropical storm on August 7 . Fefa passed over the Big Island and rapidly weakened back to a tropical depression later that day . It finally dissipated on August 9 when northwest Kauai . 
 The remnants of Fefa caused heavy rains and strong winds in the counties of Hawaii and Kauai . Flash flooding was reported in the Kohala and Hamakua districts . Lightning injured two persons on the Big Island . 
 = = = Hurricane Guillermo = = = 
 A significant tropical wave with very little deep convection left Africa on July 22 . It crossed the Atlantic , with convection associated with its southern part passing over the Windward Islands on July 28 and crossing Central America on July 31 . 
 Signs of organization were evident late on August 2 when the wave was south of the Gulf of Tehuantepec . Then , on August 4 , Tropical Depression Eight @-@ E was formed while centered 348 miles ( 560 km ) south @-@ southeast of Acapulco . Despite the presence of easterly shear , the depression gradually intensified as the center moved toward the west @-@ northwest , paralleling the coast of Mexico . Then , it reached tropical storm strength the same day . At that time , it was centered south @-@ southwest of Acapulco . It peaked on August 5 with a central pressure of 993 mbar ( 29 @.@ 3 inHg ) and maximum sustained winds of 75 mph ( 121 km / h ) while 255 miles ( 410 km ) of Manzanillo , Colima . After its peak , Guillermo weakened to tropical storm status as it began losing convection . It subsequently weakened to a tropical depression and dissipated after that on August 10 . There were no damages or casualties associated with this tropical cyclone . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Hilda = = = 
 Satellite imagery showed a convective area with some cyclonic turning in connection with a tropical wave over Africa on July 22 . The convection gradually diminished as the system moved west @-@ southwest into the Atlantic . On July 31 , the wave passed south of Trinidad , where a low @-@ level wind shift was detected . For the next couple of days , this system passed over Venezuela and Colombia . Then it crossed into the Pacific basin . It was not until August 6 , while it was south of Guatemala , when the convection became organized . Then , the wave strengthened into a tropical depression about 230 miles ( 370 km / h ) south @-@ southwest of Acapulco , on August 8 . The system intensified further and became Tropical Storm Hilda August 9 . The storm reached its peak intensity on August 11 with estimated 60 mph ( 100 km / h ) maximum winds and a pressure of 993 hectopascals ( 29 @.@ 3 inHg ) . The tropical storm moved on a general west @-@ northwest track for the next couple of days and then turned toward the north on August 13 as it was under the influence of an upper level trough . Later on that day , tropical storm force winds were reported on Guadalupe Island as the center of Hilda was located about 150 nautical miles ( 280 km ) from the island . 
 Hilda gradually weakened over cool waters but maintained a rather large level of circulation . This caused its dissipation to be slower than normal . Tropical Depression Hilda dissipated on August 14 . It large remnant circulation continued northwards and eventually passed over California . There were no casualties or damages attributed to this tropical cyclone . Hilda 's remnants caused rain as far north as San Francisco . 
 = = = Tropical Depression Ten @-@ E = = = 
 A tropical disturbance southwest of Manzanillo , Colima became a tropical depression on September 12 when its convection became persistent around a newly formed center of circulation . Conditions were not favorable for development because of strong wind shear environment caused by a trough . The depression took a northward track and dissipates on September 13 as it was being sheared just south of the Gulf of California . 
 Tropical Depression Ten @-@ E brought heavy showers to parts of Mexico . There were no reported deaths or damages . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Ignacio = = = 
 On September 11 , a tropical wave entered the eastern Pacific . An area of convection developed when it was 286 miles ( 460 km ) west of the southern tip of Baja California Peninsula . A trough axis extended southward from the low to the west of the convection . By September 15 , the area of disturbed weather included some convective bands . The organization of the convection improved and the cloud system became Tropical Depression Eleven @-@ E the next day . The trough that was near the depression moved the cyclone to the north @-@ northwest and during that period it strengthened and became Tropical Storm Ignacio , all on the same day . With time , the influence of the trough over Tropical Storm Ignacio diminished . The track of the tropical storm transcribed a small clockwise loop , and Ignacio reached the northernmost point of the loop on September 17 . The storm was centered about 28 miles ( 45 km ) offshore and was near its peak intensity , 60 mph ( 100 km / h ) . Further intensification was precluded by the storm 's proximity to land and by shear associated with the upper level low near the Baja California peninsula . As Ignacio turned toward the east , its forward motion slowed . When the storm began moving to the south , it lost its identity very rapidly . Ignacio weakened to depression status and dissipated six hours later . The remnants of Ignacio moved toward the west @-@ southwest over the next two days . 
 When Ignacio was closely approaching the coast of Mexico , a tropical storm warning was issued from <unk> to <unk> on September 16 . When Ignacio was forecast to move up the coast , the warnings were extended to Cabo Corrientes on September 17 . The warnings were dropped when the cyclone dissipated . Ignacio caused street flooding in Acapulco . Forty people were injured , but no further casualties or damage were reported . Rain fell over a large area of Mexico . The highest amount recorded was 15 @.@ 43 inches ( 392 mm ) at Pasa de San Antonio . 
 = = = Hurricane Jimena = = = 
 Part of the same tropical wave that formed Tropical Storm Danny in the Atlantic crossed over the Isthmus of Panama and became a disturbance in the Intertropical Convergence Zone during mid to late September . On September 20 the cloud pattern had increased in organization and the system was designated a tropical depression . 
 Continuing to strengthen , the depression became a tropical storm on September 21 . The tropical storm then headed towards the northwest . Development was rapid , especially after September 22 as a banding type eye was forming . Further rapid development took place by the following day and the maximum sustained winds increased to near 130 mph ( 210 km / h ) by the afternoon of September 23 . Later , on September 24 , Jimena reached its peak with maximum winds of 140 mph ( 230 km / h ) and a minimum central pressure of 945 hectopascals ( 27 @.@ 9 inHg ) . Jimena maintained itself as a powerful hurricane for three days , moving west until September 26 , when it turned toward the west @-@ northwest . Jimena began to weaken on September 27 . A northwestward movement commenced on September 29 in response to a large upper level trough which developed in its northwest . It continued to weaken and on September 30 it regained tropical storm intensity before becoming downgraded to a depression . On October 2 , Jimena dissipated as a tropical cyclone . Hurricane Jimena caused no reported damage or casualties . 
 = = = Hurricane Kevin = = = 
 Kevin formed from a westward @-@ moving tropical wave which emerged from the northwest coast of Africa on September 11 . The wave crossed into the Pacific basin on September 21 with no signs of development . Cloudiness and convection became better organized on the first hours of September 24 , becoming Tropical Depression Thirteen @-@ E the next day as it was located about 404 miles ( 650 km ) southeast of Acapulco . Then the depression moved toward the west . The banding pattern became more pronounced and the depression was upgraded to Tropical Storm Kevin later that day , being centered about 316 miles ( 509 km ) south @-@ southeast of Acapulco . The convective banding increased for the next 24 hours and Kevin strengthened to hurricane status on September 26 , while 230 miles ( 370 km ) south @-@ southwest of Acapulco . Kevin continued to strengthen and an eye intermittently appeared on September 27 and 28 . 
 By September 29 , Kevin had a well @-@ defined eye and this feature persisted for several days . The hurricane continued to strengthen and on October 1 reached its peak intensity while centered 404 miles ( 650 km ) south @-@ southwest of the southern tip of Baja California , with estimated 145 mph ( 233 km / h ) maximum winds and a minimum pressure of 935 mbar ( 27 @.@ 6 inHg ) . Kevin was moving toward the west at this time . It turned toward the west @-@ southwest due to a strong high pressure system located northwest of the hurricane . Then , Kevin began to weaken gradually and its eye became poorly defined on October 4 . It weakened on October 6 as the hurricane began turning toward the northwest and continued this general motion for the next few days . 
 However , a well @-@ defined eye reappeared in the system and Kevin re @-@ intensified to a low @-@ end Category 3 hurricane with maximum winds of 115 mph ( 185 km / h ) and a minimum pressure of 960 hectopascals ( 28 inHg ) on October 7 . But this was short @-@ lived and on October 8 the hurricane began to weaken again and on October 9 it had entered into the Central Pacific basin as a waning Category 1 hurricane . After this crossing , it was subsequently downgraded to storm strength the same day and on October 11 , to a depression . It dissipated as a tropical cyclone that same day . The remnant circulation did persist a while longer as it slowly drifted north to finally lose its identity late on October 14 . Despite its long life , Hurricane Kevin caused no damage or casualties . Because Kevin passed north of Hawaii , its only effect on land was increased trade winds . 
 = = = Hurricane Linda = = = 
 The tropical wave that ultimately produced Hurricane Linda emerged from the northwest coast of Africa on September 16 and tracked westward across the tropical Atlantic . The convection increased markedly upon approaching the Lesser Antilles on September 21 . The tropical wave 's northern portion split off to the north and caused showers in Jamaica , the Bahamas and Cuba while the southern part continued and crossed Panama into the Pacific basin on September 25 as a group of disorganized cloud clusters . It took many days to organize and it was not until October 3 when organization improved and the wave became Tropical Depression Fourteen @-@ E. 
 The tropical depression moved toward the northwest while strengthening and became Tropical Storm Linda within 12 hours . As Linda then drifted to the north it was upgraded to a hurricane on October 5 . Then , the hurricane reached its estimated peak intensity of 120 mph ( 190 km / h ) and a minimum central pressure of 957 hectopascals ( 28 @.@ 3 inHg ) that same day . Linda began to weaken as it was following Kevin 's track and entered to colder waters . Linda turned the west @-@ northwest and passed 50 nautical miles ( 90 km ) from Socorro Island , where it caused 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) sustained winds on October 7 . Later that day , Linda weakened to a tropical storm . On October 9 , as Linda was following Kevin 's track , the cyclone continued to weaken and was downgraded to a depression , although deep convection continued to intermittently appear . Finally , on early October 14 , Linda dissipated . There were no reported casualties or damages from Linda . 
 = = = Hurricane Marty = = = 
 On October 5 , a tropical wave crossed Central America and it began to organize the next day . Based on satellite classifications , the weather system was upgraded to tropical depression status about 273 miles ( 440 km ) south of the Gulf of Tehuantepec on October 7 . It became a tropical storm on October 8 and was named Marty . It reached hurricane status early on October 10 while moving parallel to the coast of Mexico . There were several occasions when an eye was becoming apparent in satellite imagery but it never fully developed . An upper trough over the Western United States forced Marty to moved toward the northwest and north for a while , bringing the hurricane to waters previously cooled by hurricanes Kevin and Linda . Then , Marty disorganized and weakened into a tropical storm . Also , the trough which forced Marty northward moved out of the area , which made that Marty turned sharply to the west , then west @-@ southwest around a high pressure system . Marty weakened further and remained as a tropical depression . It finally dissipated on October 18 . 
 On October 8 , Marty was threatening enough to prompt the Mexican government to issue a tropical storm watch from Manzanillo to Acapulco . The warning was dropped on October 9 when Marty moved away . There were no associated casualties or damages with this tropical cyclone . 
 = = = Hurricane Nora = = = 
 On November 7 , an area of convection associated with a tropical wave developed into a tropical depression , while located about 560 mi ( 900 km ) to the southeast of Acapulco , Mexico . During that day the depression moved towards the northwest , intensified into a tropical storm and was named Nora later that day . During the next day , the storm gradually intensified further while temporarily moving towards the west , due to the flow field around a strengthening high pressure system located to the north of Nora . During November 9 , the NHC noted that Nora had developed an eye , before reporting that the system had developed into a category one hurricane . 
 On November 9 , Nora . It peaked as a Category 2 hurricane on November 10 . A large trough moved in from the west and formed a low . Shear increased and disrupted Nora 's convection . The low also caused an abrupt change of course to the northeast . Nora weakened to a depression on November 11 and dissipated the next day . Nora 's remnants continued to the northeast , showing brief flare @-@ ups of convection . No deaths or damage were reported to have occurred in association with Nora , despite probable rainfall totals of around 3 in ( 76 mm ) within the Mexican states of Sinaloa and Nayarit . 
 = = Storm names = = 
 The following names were used for named storms that formed in the eastern Pacific in 1991 . Names that were not assigned are marked in gray . The names not retired from this list were used again in the 1997 season . This is the same list used for the 1985 season . Also , the name " Dolores " was misspelled " Delores " in this season ; however in subsequent seasons , the typo was corrected . 
 † – The initial spelling is Dolores , however the name Delores was used this season . 
 For storms that form in the Central Pacific Hurricane Center 's area of responsibility , encompassing the area between 140 degrees west and the International Date Line , all names are used in a series of four rotating lists . The next four names that were slated for use in 1991 are shown below , however none of them were used . 
 = = = Retirement = = = 
 The World Meteorological Organization retired one name in the spring of 1992 : Fefa . It was replaced in the 1997 season by Felicia . 
 = = Seasonal effects = = 
 = Ontario Highway 85 = 
 King 's Highway 85 , commonly referred to as Highway 85 , is a provincially maintained highway in the Canadian province of Ontario , connecting Highway 7 to immediately north of the Waterloo city limits . The 10 @-@ kilometre ( 6 @.@ 2 mi ) highway , which is mostly controlled @-@ access , travels through the Regional Municipality of Waterloo along the Conestoga Parkway from its interchange with Highway 7 , which continues south along the parkway , to an interchange with Regional Road 15 ( King Street ) , where it continues as Regional Road 85 to St. Jacobs . 
 Prior to completion of the Conestoga Parkway through Waterloo , Highway 85 followed King Street north of Ottawa Street through Kitchener and Waterloo . Within the City of Waterloo , this former alignment is now maintained by the region as Regional Road 15 . Within the city of Kitchener , the road is simply known as King Street . The parkway was constructed between 1968 and 1977 . By 1980 , Highway 85 was renumbered as Highway 86 , to improve the continuity of provincial route numbers . However , when the majority of Highway 86 was decommissioned in 1998 , the remaining portion was soon renumbered as Highway 85 in 2003 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 Highway 85 begins in Kitchener at an interchange between the Conestoga Parkway and Victoria Street . At that interchange , Highway 7 exits the parkway and travels east on Victoria Street towards Guelph . The divided freeway continues north , swerving left and right through suburban Kitchener . It first crosses a Via Rail line and interchanges with Wellington Street , after which it passes alongside the Grand River . After entering the neighbourhood of Bridgeport , which it divides in two , the route curves west , interchanges with Lancaster Street and crosses into Waterloo . 
 The highway begins to curve north , interchanging with Bridgeport Road . The highway crosses the Conestoga Creek as it interchanges with University Avenue , then gradually curves to the west . After an interchange with King Street , once the original routing of Highway 85 , the route curves back to the north and interchanges with Northfield Drive . As it approaches the rural – urban fringe of the tri @-@ city area , the freeway interchanges with King Street a second time . Highway 85 ends at the north end of the ramps from King Street , as does the Conestoga Parkway . The divided freeway ends and the route become Waterloo Regional Road 85 , which continues north to St. Jacobs and Elmira . 
 = = History = = 
 Highway 85 was originally assumed by the Department of Highways ( DHO ) , the predecessor to today 's Ministry of Transportation of Ontario ( MTO ) , during the mid @-@ 1930s . The existing Kitchener – Elmira Road was designated as Highway 85 on March 28 , 1934 . Initially , the route began at the intersection of Queen Street and King Street in downtown Kitchener , and proceeded north along King Street through Waterloo and St. Jacobs . North of St. Jacobs , the highway followed the same route as modern Waterloo Regional Road 85 to Elmira , ending at Church Street . Church Street itself would become Highway 86 several years later , on August 25 , 1937 , connecting Elmira and Amberley , and creating a short @-@ lived common terminus between the two highways ; Highway 86 was extended to Highway 7 near Guelph on April 13 , 1938 . 
 Highway 85 remained unchanged for several decades until the Conestoga Parkway was constructed during the late @-@ 1960s and early 1970s . Construction of the new expressway began in February 1965 along King Street ; however , construction of the section that is now Highway 85 did not begin until September 1968 , when a C $ 5 million contract for the section between Frederick Street and Bridgeport Road was awarded . Soon thereafter , a second contract for the section between Bridgeport Road and King Street was awarded . 
 On April 16 , 1970 , the Highway 85 designation was moved from King Street to the new Conestoga Parkway ; King Street was consequently transferred to local jurisdiction . Towards the end of the 1970s , construction began on a northward extension of the Conestoga Parkway from King Street to Northfield Drive ; this was completed by 1977 . By then , construction was underway on a two lane bypass of St. Jacobs east of the original route , connecting with the Conestoga Parkway at Northfield Drive , then an at @-@ grade intersection . By the end of 1977 , this bypass was completed . 
 In 1975 , the eastern section of Highway 86 , from Elmira to Guelph , was decommissioned , truncating the eastern terminus of it to the western terminus of Highway 85 . To provide a more direct routing between the two highways , a bypass of Elmira was constructed along what is now Listowel Road . By the end of 1979 , Highway 86 was rerouted along this bypass , and the northern section of Highway 85 was decommissioned . In 1980 or 1981 , Highway 85 was renumbered as Highway 86 , eliminating the designation temporarily and creating one continuous highway between Kitchener and Amberley , on the shores of Lake Huron . 
 On November 30 , 1990 , the Northfield Drive interchange was fully opened to traffic , eliminating a traffic signal from the northern end of the Conestoga Parkway . The speed limit on the parkway was lowered from 100 km / h ( 62 mph ) to 90 km / h ( 56 mph ) on January 10 , 1994 following numerous cross @-@ median collisions . In 1998 , during the mass downloading of provincial highways to lower levels of government , the majority of Highway 86 , from the Northfield Drive interchange to Amberley , was decommissioned . The Regional Municipality of Waterloo subsequently designated the section north from Waterloo to Elmira as Regional Road 85 . Consequently , the remaining section of Highway 86 , which exclusively followed the Conestoga Parkway , was renumbered as Highway 85 during the spring of 2003 to align the numbers and aid navigation . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The following table lists the major junctions along Highway 85 , as noted by the Ministry of Transportation of Ontario . The entire route is located in the Regional Municipality of Waterloo . 
 = Signalling theory = 
 Within evolutionary biology , signalling theory is a body of theoretical work examining communication between individuals , both within species and across species . The central question is when organisms with conflicting interests , such as in sexual selection , should be expected to provide honest signals ( no presumption being made of conscious intention ) rather than cheating . Mathematical models in which organisms advertise their condition to other individuals as part of an evolutionarily stable strategy are important for research in this field . 
 Signals are given in contexts such as mate selection by females , which subjects the males ' signals to selective pressure . Signals thus evolve because they modify the behaviour of the receiver to benefit the signaller . Signals may be honest , conveying information which usefully increases the fitness of the receiver , or dishonest . An individual can cheat by giving a dishonest signal , which might briefly benefit that signaller , at the risk of undermining the signalling system for the whole population . 
 The question of whether selection of signals works at the level of the individual organism or gene , or at the level of the group , has been debated by biologists such as Richard Dawkins , arguing that individuals evolve to signal and to receive signals better , including resisting manipulation . Amotz Zahavi suggested that cheating could be controlled by the handicap principle , where the best horse in a handicap race is the one carrying the largest handicap weight . According to Zahavi 's theory , signallers such as male peacocks have ' tails ' that are genuinely handicaps , being costly to produce . The system is evolutionarily stable as the large showy tails are honest signals . Biologists have attempted to verify the handicap principle , but with inconsistent results . The mathematical biologist Ronald Fisher analysed the contribution that having two copies of each gene ( <unk> ) would make to honest signalling , demonstrating that a runaway effect could occur in sexual selection , depending sensitively on the balance of costs and benefits . 
 The same mechanisms can be expected in humans , where researchers have studied behaviours including risk taking by young men , hunting of large game animals , and costly religious rituals , finding that these appear to qualify as costly honest signals . 
 = = Sexual selection = = 
 When animals choose mates , traits such as signalling are subject to evolutionary pressure . For example , the male gray tree frog , Hyla versicolor , produces a call to attract females . Once a female chooses a mate , this selects for a specific style of male calling , thus propagating a specific signalling ability . The signal can be the call itself , the intensity of a call , its variation style , its repetition rate , and so on . Various hypotheses seek to explain why females would select for one call over the other . The sensory exploitation hypothesis proposes that pre @-@ existing preferences in female receivers can drive the evolution of signal innovation in male senders , in a similar way to the hidden preference hypothesis which proposes that successful calls are better able to match some ' hidden preference ' in the female . Signallers have sometimes evolved multiple sexual ornaments , though the reasons for the apparent redundancy are disputed . 
 = = Honest signals = = 
 In biology , signals are traits , including structures and behaviours , that have evolved specifically because they change the behaviour of receivers in ways that benefit the signaller . Traits or actions that benefit the receiver exclusively are called cues . When an alert bird deliberately gives a warning call to a stalking predator and the predator gives up the hunt , the sound is a signal . When a foraging bird inadvertently makes a rustling sound in the leaves that attracts predators and increases the risk of predation , the sound is a ' cue ' . 
 Signalling systems are shaped by mutual interests between signallers and receivers . An alert bird such as a Eurasian jay warning off a stalking predator is communicating something useful to the predator : that it has been detected by the prey ; it might as well quit wasting its time stalking this alerted prey , which it is unlikely to catch . When the predator gives up , the signaller can get back to other tasks such as feeding . Once the stalking predator is detected , the signalling prey and receiving predator thus have a mutual interest in terminating the hunt . 
 Within species , mutual interests increase with kinship . Kinship is central to models of signalling between relatives , for instance when broods of nestling birds beg and compete for food from their parents . 
 The concept of honesty in animal communication is controversial because it is difficult to determine intent and use that as a criterion to discriminate deception from honesty , as we do in human interactions . Biologists use the phrase " honest signals " in a statistical sense . Biological signals , like warning calls or resplendent tail feathers , are honest if they are correlated with something useful to the receiver , that is , the signal trait is correlated with the unobservable thing of value to the receiver . Honest biological signals do not need to be perfectly informative , reducing uncertainty to zero ; all they need to be useful is to be correct " on average " . Ultimately the value of the signalled information depends on the extent to which it allows the receiver to increase its fitness . Hence , " honest " signals are evolutionarily stable . 
 One class of honest signal is the warning signal ( aposematism ) , generally visual , given by poisonous or dangerous animals such as the yellow @-@ banded and other poison dart frogs . Warning signals are honest indications of noxious prey , because conspicuousness evolves in tandem with noxiousness . Thus , the brighter and more conspicuous the organism , the more toxic it usually is . The most common and effective colours are red , yellow , black and white . 
 = = <unk> signals = = 
 Because there are both mutual and conflicting interests in most animal signalling systems , a central problem in signalling theory is dishonesty or cheating . For example , if foraging birds are safer when they give a warning call , cheats could give false alarms at random , just in case a predator is nearby . But too much cheating could cause the signalling system to collapse . Every dishonest signal weakens the integrity of the signalling system , and so reduces the fitness of the group . An example of dishonest signalling comes from Fiddler crabs such as Uca lactea <unk> , which have been shown to bluff ( no conscious intention being implied ) about their fighting ability . When a claw is lost , a crab occasionally regrows a weaker claw that nevertheless intimidates crabs with smaller but stronger claws . The proportion of dishonest signals is low enough for it not to be worthwhile for crabs to test the honesty of every signal through combat . 
 Richard Dawkins and John Krebs in 1978 considered whether individuals of the same species would act as if attempting to deceive each other . They applied a " selfish gene " view of evolution to animals ' threat displays to see if it would be in their genes ' interests to give dishonest signals . They criticised previous ethologists , such as Nikolaas Tinbergen and Desmond Morris for suggesting that such displays were " for the good of the species " . They argued that such communication ought to be viewed as an evolutionary arms race in which signallers evolve to become better at manipulating receivers , while receivers evolve to become more resistant to manipulation . The game theoretical model of the war of attrition similarly suggests that threat displays ought not to convey any reliable information about intentions . 
 = = The sports handicapping metaphor = = 
 In 1975 , Amotz Zahavi proposed a verbal model for how signal costs could constrain cheating and stabilize an " honest " correlation between observed signals and unobservable qualities , based on an analogy to sports handicapping systems . He called this idea the handicap principle . The purpose of a sports handicapping system is to reduce disparities in performance , making the contest more competitive . In a handicap race , intrinsically faster horses are given heavier weights to carry under their saddles . Similarly , in amateur golf , better golfers have fewer strokes subtracted from their raw scores . This creates correlations between the handicap and <unk> performance , and if the handicaps work as they are supposed to , between the handicap and handicapped performance . If you knew nothing about two race horses or two amateur golfers except their handicaps , you could infer which is most likely to win : the horse with the bigger weight handicap , and the golfer with the smaller stroke handicap . By analogy , if peacock ' tails ' ( large tail covert feathers ) act as a handicapping system , and a peahen knew nothing about two peacocks but the sizes of their tails , she could " infer " that the peacock with the bigger tail has greater unobservable intrinsic quality . Display costs can include extrinsic social costs , in the form of testing and punishment by rivals , as well as intrinsic production costs . Another example given in textbooks is the extinct Irish elk , Megaloceros giganteus . The male Irish elk 's enormous antlers could perhaps have evolved as displays of ability to overcome handicap , though biologists point out that if the handicap is inherited , its genes ought to be selected against . 
 The essential idea here is intuitive and probably qualifies as folk wisdom . It was articulated by Kurt Vonnegut in his 1961 short story Harrison Bergeron . In Vonnegut ’ s futuristic dystopia , the Handicapper General uses a variety of handicapping mechanisms to reduce inequalities in performance . A spectator at a ballet comments : " it was easy to see that she was the strongest and most graceful of all dancers , for her handicap bags were as big as those worn by two hundred pound men . " Zahavi interpreted this analogy to mean that higher quality peacocks with bigger tails are signalling their ability to " waste " more of some resource by trading it off for a bigger tail . This resonates with Thorstein Veblen 's idea that conspicuous consumption and extravagant status symbols can signal wealth . 
 Zahavi ’ s conclusions rest on his verbal interpretation of a metaphor , and initially the handicap principle was not well received by evolutionary biologists . However , in 1984 , Nur and Hasson used life history theory to show how differences in signalling costs , in the form of survival @-@ reproduction tradeoffs , could stabilize a signalling system roughly as Zahavi imagined . Genetic models also suggested this was possible . In 1990 Alan Grafen showed that a handicap @-@ like signalling system was evolutionarily stable if higher quality signallers paid lower marginal survival costs for their signals . 
 In 1982 , W.D. Hamilton proposed a specific but widely applicable handicap mechanism , parasite @-@ mediated sexual selection . He argued that in the never @-@ ending co @-@ evolutionary race between hosts and their parasites , sexually selected signals indicate health . This idea was tested in 1994 in barn swallows , a species where males have long tail streamers . Møller found that the males with longer tails , and their offspring , did have fewer bloodsucking mites , whereas fostered young did not . The effect was therefore genetic , confirming Hamilton 's theory . 
 Another example is Lozano 's hypothesis that carotenoids have dual but mutually incompatible roles in immune function and signalling . Given that animals cannot synthesize carotenoids de novo , these must be obtained from food . The hypothesis states that animals with carotenoid @-@ depended sexual signals are demonstrating their ability to " waste " carotenoids on sexual signals at the expense of their immune system . 
 The handicap principle has proven hard to test empirically , partly because of inconsistent interpretations of Zahavi ’ s metaphor and Grafen ’ s marginal fitness model , and partly because of conflicting empirical results : in some studies individuals with bigger signals seem to pay higher costs , in other studies they seem to be paying lower costs . A possible explanation for the inconsistent empirical results is given in a series of papers by Getty , who shows that Grafen ’ s proof of the handicap principle is based on the critical simplifying assumption that signallers trade off costs for benefits in an additive fashion , the way humans invest money to increase income in the same currency . But the assumption that costs and benefits trade off in an additive fashion is not valid for the survival cost – reproduction benefit tradeoff that is assumed to mediate the evolution of sexually selected signals . Fitness depends on producing offspring , which is a multiplicative function of reproductive success given an individual is still alive times the probability of still being alive , given investment in signals . 
 = = Costly signalling and Fisherian diploid dynamics = = 
 The effort to discover how costs can constrain an " honest " correlation between observable signals and unobservable qualities within signallers is built on strategic models of signalling games , with many simplifying assumptions . These models are most often applied to sexually selected signalling in diploid animals , but they rarely incorporate a fact about diploid sexual reproduction noted by the mathematical biologist Ronald Fisher in the early 20th century : if there are " preference genes " correlated with <unk> in females as well as " signal genes " correlated with display traits in males , choosier females should tend to mate with showier males . Over generations , showier sons should also carry genes associated with choosier daughters , and choosier daughters should also carry genes associated with showier sons . This can cause the evolutionary dynamic known as Fisherian runaway , in which males become ever showier . Russell Lande explored this with a quantitative genetic model , showing that Fisherian diploid dynamics are sensitive to signalling and search costs . Other models incorporate both costly signalling and Fisherian runaway . These models show that if fitness depends on both survival and reproduction , having sexy sons and <unk> daughters ( in the stereotypical model ) can be adaptive , increasing fitness just as much as having healthy sons and daughters . 
 = = Examples = = 
 Sam Brown and W. D. Hamilton and Marco <unk> proposed that autumn leaf colour is a signal from trees to aphids and other pest species that migrate in autumn to the trees . In their theory , bright autumn coloration with pinks and yellows is costly to trees because pigments require energy to synthesize , but the investment may help them to reduce their parasite load . 
 <unk> , for example in Thomson 's Gazelle , is cited as an example of signalling : the gazelles jump close to a predator instead of escaping , in what could be a signal of strength . 
 = = Human honest signals = = 
 Human behaviour may also provide examples of costly signals . In general , these signals provide information about a person ’ s phenotypic quality or cooperative tendencies . Evidence for costly signalling has been found in many areas of human interaction including risk taking , hunting , and religion . 
 = = = Costly signalling in hunting = = = 
 Large game hunting has been studied extensively as a signal of men ’ s willingness to take physical risks , as well as showcase strength and coordination . Costly signalling theory is a useful tool for understanding food sharing among hunter gatherers because it can be applied to situations in which delayed reciprocity is not a viable explanation . Instances that are particularly inconsistent with the delayed reciprocity hypothesis are those in which a hunter shares his kill indiscriminately with all members of a large group . In these situations , the individuals sharing meat have no control over whether or not their generosity will be reciprocated , and free riding becomes an attractive strategy for those receiving meat . Free riders are people who reap the benefits of group @-@ living without contributing to its maintenance . Fortunately , costly signalling theory can fill some of the gaps left by the delayed reciprocity hypothesis . Hawkes has suggested that men target large game and publicly share meat to draw social attention or to show off . Such display and the resulting favorable attention can improve a hunter ’ s reputation by providing information about his phenotypic quality . High quality signallers are more successful in acquiring mates and allies . Thus , costly signalling theory can explain apparently wasteful and altruistic behaviour . 
 In order to be effective , costly signals must fulfill specific criteria . Firstly , signallers must incur different levels of cost and benefit for signalling behaviour . Secondly , costs and benefits must reflect the signallers ’ phenotypic quality . Thirdly , the information provided by a signal should be directed at and accessible to an audience . A receiver can be anyone who stands to benefit from information the signaller is sending , such as potential mates , allies , or competitors . Honesty is guaranteed when only individuals of high quality can pay the ( high ) costs of signalling . Hence , honest signalling make it impossible for low @-@ quality individuals to fake a signal and fool a receiver . 
 <unk> Bird et al. observed turtle hunting and spear fishing patterns in a Meriam community in the Torres Strait of Australia , publishing their findings in 2001 . Here , only some Meriam men were able to accumulate high caloric gains for the amount of time spent turtle hunting or spear fishing ( reaching a threshold measured in kcal / h ) . Since a daily catch of fish is carried home by hand and turtles are frequently served at large feasts , members of the community know which men most reliably brought them turtle meat and fish . Thus , turtle hunting qualifies as a costly signal . Furthermore , turtle hunting and spear fishing are actually less productive ( in kcal / h ) than foraging for shellfish , where success depends only on the amount of time dedicated to searching , so shellfish foraging is a poor signal of skill or strength . This suggests that energetic gains are not the primary reason men take part in turtle hunting and spear fishing . A follow @-@ up study found that successful Meriam hunters do experience greater social benefits and reproductive success than less skilled hunters . 
 The Hadza people of Tanzania also share food , possibly to gain in reputation . Hunters cannot be sharing meat mainly to provision their families or to gain reciprocal benefits , as teenage boys often give away their meat even though they do not yet have wives or children , so costly signalling of their qualities is the likely explanation . These qualities include good eyesight , coordination , strength , knowledge , endurance , or bravery . Hadza hunters more often pair with highly fertile , hard @-@ working wives than non @-@ hunters . A woman benefits from mating with a man who possesses such qualities as her children will most likely inherit qualities that increase fitness and survivorship . She may also benefit from her husband ’ s high social status . Thus , hunting is an honest and costly signal of phenotypic quality . 
 Among the men of Ifaluk atoll , costly signalling theory can also explain why men torch fish . Torch fishing is a ritualized method of fishing on Ifaluk whereby men use torches made from dried coconut fronds to catch large dog @-@ toothed tuna . Preparation for torch fishing requires significant time investments and involves a great deal of organization . Due to the time and energetic costs of preparation , torch fishing results in net caloric losses for fishers . Therefore , torch fishing is a handicap that serves to signal men ’ s productivity . Torch fishing is the most advertised fishing occupation on Ifaluk . Women and others usually spend time observing the canoes as they sail beyond the reef . Also , local rituals help to broadcast information about which fishers are successful and enhance fishers ’ reputations during the torch fishing season . Several ritual behavioural and dietary constraints clearly distinguish torch fishers from other men . First , males are only permitted to torch fish if they participated on the first day of the fishing season . The community is well informed as to who participates on this day , and can easily identify the torch fishers . Second , torch fishers receive all of their meals at the canoe house and are prohibited from eating certain foods . People frequently discuss the qualities of torch fishermen . On Ifaluk , women claim that they are looking for hard @-@ working mates . With the distinct sexual division of labor on Ifaluk , industriousness is a highly valued characteristic in males . Torch fishing thus provides women with reliable information on the work ethic of prospective mates , which makes it an honest costly signal . 
 In many human cases , a strong reputation built through costly signalling enhances a man ’ s social status over the statuses of men who signal less successfully . Among northern Kalahari foraging groups , traditional hunters usually capture a maximum of two or three antelopes per year . It was said of a particularly successful hunter : 
 " It was said of him that he never returned from a hunt without having killed at least a wildebeest , if not something larger . Hence the people connected with him ate a great deal of meat and his popularity grew . " 
 Although this hunter was sharing meat , he was not doing so in the framework of reciprocity . The general model of costly signalling is not reciprocal ; rather , individuals who share acquire more mates and allies . Costly signalling applies to situations in Kalahari foraging groups where giving often goes to recipients who have little to offer in return . A young hunter is motivated to impress community members with daughters so that he can obtain his first wife . Older hunters may wish to attract women interested in an extramarital relationship , or to be a co @-@ wife . In these northern Kalahari groups , the killing of a large animal indicates a man who has mastered the art of hunting and can support a family . Generally , many women seek a man who is a good hunter , has an agreeable character , is generous , and has advantageous social ties . Since hunting ability is a prerequisite for marriage , men who are good hunters enter the marriage market earliest . Costly signalling theory explains seemingly wasteful foraging displays . 
 = = = Physical risks as a costly signal = = = 
 Costly signalling can be applied to situations involving physical strain and risk of physical injury or death . Research on physical risk taking is important because information regarding why people , especially young men , take part in high risk activities can help in the development of prevention programs . Reckless driving is a lethal problem among young men in western societies . A male who takes a physical risk is sending the message that he has enough strength and skill to survive extremely dangerous activities . This signal is directed at peers and potential mates . 
 In a study of risk taking , some types of risk , such as physical or heroic risk for others ' benefit , are viewed more favorably than other types of risk , such as taking drugs . Males and females valued different degrees of heroic risk for mates and same @-@ sex friends . Males valued heroic risk taking by male friends , but preferred less of it in female mates . Females valued heroic risk taking in male mates and less of it in female friends . Females may be attracted to males inclined to physically defend them and their children . Males may prefer heroic risk taking by male friends as they could be good allies . 
 In western societies , voluntary blood donation is a common , yet less extreme , form of risk taking . Costs associated with these donations include pain and risk of infection . If blood donation is an opportunity to send costly signals , then donors will be perceived by others as generous and physically healthy . In a survey , both donors and non @-@ donors expressed perceptions of the health , generosity , and ability of blood donors to operate in stressful situations . 
 = = = Religion as a costly signal = = = 
 Costly religious rituals such as male circumcision , food and water deprivation , and snake handling look paradoxical in evolutionary terms . Devout religious beliefs wherein such traditions are practiced therefore appear maladaptive . Religion may have arisen to increase and maintain intragroup cooperation . Cooperation leads to altruistic behaviour , and costly signalling could explain this . All religions may involve costly and elaborate rituals , performed publicly , to demonstrate loyalty to the religious group . In this way , group members increase their allegiance to the group by signalling their investment in group interests . However , as group size increases among humans , the threat of free riders grows . Costly signalling theory accounts for this by proposing that these religious rituals are costly enough to deter free riders . 
 Irons proposed that costly signalling theory could explain costly religious behaviour . He argued that hard @-@ to @-@ fake religious displays enhanced trust and solidarity in a community , producing emotional and economic benefits . He showed that display signals among the <unk> Turkmen of northern Iran helped to secure trade agreements . These " ostentatious " displays signalled commitment to Islam to strangers and group members . <unk> demonstrated that people in religious communities are four times more likely to live longer than their secular counterparts , and that these longer lifespans were positively correlated with the number of costly requirements demanded from religious community members . However , confounding variables may not have been excluded . <unk> studied the effects of costly signals on religious communities . In a self @-@ reported survey , as the strictness of a church increased , the attendance and contributions to that church increased proportionally . In effect , people were more willing to participate in a church that has more stringent demands on its members . 
 Despite the experimental support for this hypothesis , it remains controversial . A common critique is that <unk> is easy to fake , such as simply by attending a religious service . However , the hypothesis predicts that people are more likely to join and contribute to a religious group when its rituals are costly . Another critique specifically asks : why religion ? There is no evolutionary advantage to evolving religion over other signals of commitment such as nationality , as Irons admits . However , the reinforcement of religious rites as well as the intrinsic reward and punishment system found in religion makes it an ideal candidate for increasing intragroup cooperation . Finally , there is insufficient evidence for increase in fitness as a result of religious cooperation . However , <unk> argues for benefits from religion itself , such as increased longevity , improved health , assistance during crises , and greater psychological well being . 
 = Jeff Banister = 
 Jeffery Todd Banister ( born January 15 , 1964 ) is an American retired professional baseball player and current manager of the Texas Rangers of Major League Baseball . Before joining the Rangers , Banister spent 29 years within the organization of the Pittsburgh Pirates as a player and coach in both the Pirates ' major and minor league system . 
 Banister played baseball at La Marque High School in La Marque , Texas . He developed bone cancer in his sophomore year , which almost necessitated the amputation of his leg . While playing college baseball for Lee College , he suffered a home plate collision that broke three vertebrae in his neck , leaving him paralyzed for ten days . After rehabilitating , he was named a Junior College All @-@ American the next season , and received a scholarship to the University of Houston , to play for the Houston Cougars baseball team . He was then drafted by the Pirates in 1986 . After playing in Minor League Baseball , he appeared in a major league game on July 23 , 1991 , recording a hit in his only plate appearance . He did not appear in another major league game , and ended his playing career after the 1993 season . 
 Following his playing career , Banister remained with the Pirates . He served as a manager for their Minor League Baseball affiliates from 1994 through 1998 , and then as a minor league and major league field coordinator until 2010 . The Pirates considered him for their managerial vacancy before the 2011 season , but hired him as their bench coach . He served in the role through the 2014 season . The Rangers hired Banister as their manager during the 2014 – 15 offseason , and he was named the American League Manager of the Year for 2015 . 
 = = Playing career = = 
 = = = Amateur career = = = 
 Banister attended La Marque High School in La Marque , Texas . At La Marque , Banister played for the school 's baseball , basketball , and American football teams . During his sophomore year of high school , Banister injured his right ankle while playing baseball . During an examination of his ankle , which was slow to heal , he was diagnosed with bone cancer . He had developed cysts that required skin grafting to treat . An infection in his leg led to the development of osteomyelitis , which spread from his right ankle to just below his knee . Doctors recommended amputation in order to save the rest of his leg , but Banister refused , as he hoped he would be able to continue his baseball career . Doctors performed seven operations on his leg , which saved it from being amputated . In his senior year , Banister suffered a knee injury playing American football , which nearly led to him being cut from the baseball team due to his decreased mobility . His father suggested he change positions and become a catcher , which allowed him to remain on the baseball team . 
 At a tryout conducted by professional scouts , Banister was noticed by the coaches at Lee College , a junior college in Baytown , Texas . They recruited Banister to play college baseball at Lee . While catching in a 1983 game , he suffered a collision at home plate , where the baserunner attempted to jump over him , and hit Banister in the head with his knee . The collision broke three of the vertebrae in his neck . Banister was not originally scheduled to play in that game ; a scout for the New York Yankees of Major League Baseball ( MLB ) told Lee 's coach that he hoped to see Banister catch , which resulted in Banister being added to the starting lineup in a last @-@ minute change . As a result of the collision , Banister was paralyzed from the neck down for ten days . Doctors initially warned him that he may never walk again . He had another three operations performed on his back and learned how to walk again during the 1984 season . Entering the hospital weighing 225 pounds ( 102 kg ) , he weighed 139 pounds ( 63 kg ) when he was discharged . Banister recovered and played another season for Lee in 1985 , and was named a Junior College All @-@ American . He transferred to University of Houston after the season to play for the Houston Cougars baseball team on a scholarship in 1986 . 
 = = = Professional career = = = 
 The Pittsburgh Pirates selected Banister in the 25th round of the 1986 Major League Baseball Draft ; he was the <unk> player chosen in the draft . Playing in Minor League Baseball , Banister made his professional debut as a member of the Watertown Pirates of the Class A @-@ Short Season New York – Penn League in 1986 . He had a <unk> batting average in 46 games played . In 1987 , he played for the Macon Pirates of the Class A South Atlantic League , and batted .254 in 101 games . Banister then played 71 games for the Harrisburg Senators of the Class AA Eastern League in 1988 , batting .259 . He returned to Harrisburg in 1989 , when he batted .238 in 102 games . He was named an Eastern League All @-@ Star in 1989 . He returned to Harrisburg for the 1990 season , and recorded a .269 batting average in 101 games . During the 1990 season , he received a promotion to the Buffalo Bisons of the Class AAA American Association . In 12 games for the Bisons , Banister batted .320 . 
 Banister began the 1991 season with Buffalo . The Pirates promoted Banister from the minor leagues on July 23 , 1991 , when catcher Don <unk> was injured and placed on the disabled list . Manager Jim Leyland used Banister as a pinch hitter for pitcher Doug Drabek in the eighth inning of that day 's game against the Atlanta Braves at Three Rivers Stadium . Using Cecil Espy 's bat , Banister hit a ball from Dan Petry and just beat shortstop Jeff Blauser 's throw to first base . Banister is one of only 15 batters ( excluding pitchers ) in baseball history to record a hit in his only major league plate appearance . 
 Banister was sent back to Buffalo without playing in another game for Pittsburgh . He finished the Class AAA season with a .244 average in 79 games . He missed the 1992 season when he suffered a right elbow injury that required surgery . Banister served as a player @-@ coach for the Carolina Mudcats of the Class AA Southern League in 1993 . Playing in only eight games , he had a .333 batting average . After the season , he ended his playing career . He retired with a career .247 batting average in 515 minor league games played . 
 = = Coaching / managing career = = 
 = = = Overview = = = 
 After retiring as a player , Banister remained with the Pirates ' organization . From 1994 through 1998 , Banister served as a manager in the Pirates ' minor league system . He served as the manager of the Welland Pirates of the New York – Penn League in 1994 . A year later , he managed the Augusta GreenJackets of the South Atlantic League , and led them to win the league 's championship . Banister managed in the Hawaiian Winter League in the 1995 and 1996 offseasons . From 1996 through 1997 , he was the manager of the Lynchburg Hillcats of the Class A @-@ Advanced Carolina League . Midway through the 1997 season , he was named the manager of the Carolina Mudcats , a position he held through the 1998 season . Banister had a 299 – 330 win @-@ loss record ( a .475 winning percentage ) as a manager from 1994 through 1998 . 
 From 1999 through 2002 , Banister worked as Pittsburgh 's Major League Field Coordinator on the coaching staffs of managers Gene Lamont and Lloyd McClendon . He was then assigned the job of Minor League Field Coordinator , and served in that role from 2003 through 2010 . In 2004 , he served as the interim manager of Lynchburg when Jay <unk> resigned from the position due to personal reasons . Banister became the interim pitching coach for Lynchburg in 2008 when Bob <unk> resigned from the position . Mike Steele then took the job from Banister in 2009 . Banister managed the Scottsdale Scorpions of the Arizona Fall League ( AFL ) in 2009 . 
 On August 8 , 2010 , Banister was named the Pirates ' interim bench coach after Gary <unk> was fired by the organization . At the end of the 2010 season , the Pirates fired manager John Russell . Banister and Clint Hurdle were the two finalists for the position . The Pirates named Hurdle as their manager , and Banister was named their full @-@ time bench coach . As the Pirates bench coach , Banister learned about sabermetrics from a quantitative analyst who traveled with the team . Banister learned to use quantitative data to inform his decisions on when the Pirates should employ defensive shifts in the field . He was initially chosen to manage Scottsdale in the AFL after the 2014 season , but he was replaced by Pirates ' special assistant Frank Kremblas due to the possibility of the Pirates reaching the MLB postseason . 
 After the 2014 season , Banister interviewed with the Houston Astros as a candidate to fill their managing vacancy , following the firing of Bo Porter . The Astros instead hired A. J. Hinch . He also interviewed with the Texas Rangers , and was a finalist for the position along with Rangers ' interim manager Tim Bogar and pitching coach Mike Maddux . On October 16 , 2014 , the Rangers named Banister their new manager . He signed a three @-@ year contract with an option for a fourth season . Jon Daniels , the Rangers ' general manager , indicated that Banister will help the Rangers to incorporate analytics into their baseball decisions . 
 As Banister and Daniels began to discuss the coaching staff for the 2015 season , it was decided that Bogar , who had a 14 – 8 record ( .636 winning percentage ) after Ron Washington 's resignation , would not return to the Rangers under Banister . Banister retained Maddux and hitting coach Dave Magadan on his coaching staff , but third base coach Gary Pettis left for the Astros and first base coach Bengie Molina did not return to the team in that role . Banister guided the Rangers to the American League West division championship with a record of 88 wins and 74 losses . The Rangers would end up losing to the Toronto Blue Jays in the American League Division Series . Banister was named the American League Manager of the Year after the season . 
 During the 2015 – 16 offseason , the Rangers extended Banister 's contract through the 2018 season , with an option for the 2019 season , while also releasing pitching coach Mike Maddux and hitting coach Dave Magadan . Bannister later hired former Texas Ranger , Doug <unk> as the new pitching coach and Anthony <unk> as the new hitting coach . 
 = = = Managerial record = = = 
 As of July 11 , 2016 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Banister was born on January 15 , 1964 . He is originally from Weatherford , Oklahoma . At the age of six , the Banisters moved from Weatherford to La Marque . His father , Bob , coached Jeff at La Marque High School on both the American football and basketball teams . His mother , Verda , was an algebra teacher at La Marque . He has a sister , Carey . In 1988 , his father died at the age of 48 due to a heart attack . His grandfather died of a heart attack three weeks later . 
 Banister met his wife , Karen , while they were students at the University of Houston . Karen worked as a teacher at Clear Lake High School in Houston . The Banisters have two children : Alexandra and Jacob . Alexandra is a college volleyball player . The Banisters reside in Arlington , Texas . 
 Banister won the inaugural Gilda Radner Courage Award . In 2011 , Banister won the " Pride of the Pirates " award for demonstrating his " sportsmanship , dedication and outstanding character " . 
 = HMS Triumph ( 1903 ) = 
 HMS Triumph , originally known as Libertad , was the second of the two Swiftsure @-@ class pre @-@ dreadnought battleships of the Royal Navy . The ship was ordered by the Chilean Navy , but she was purchased by the United Kingdom as part of ending the Argentine – Chilean naval arms race . Triumph was initially assigned to the Home Fleet and Channel Fleets before being transferred to the Mediterranean Fleet in 1909 . The ship briefly rejoined the Home Fleet in 1912 before she was transferred abroad to the China Station in 1913 . Triumph participated in the hunt for the German East Asia Squadron of Maximilian Graf von Spee and in the campaign against the German colony at Tsingtao , China early in World War I. The ship was transferred to the Mediterranean in early 1915 to participate in the Dardanelles Campaign against the Ottoman Empire . She was torpedoed and sunk off Gaba Tepe by the German submarine U @-@ 21 on 25 May 1915 . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 Triumph was ordered by Chile , with the name of Libertad , in response to the Argentine purchase of two armoured cruisers from Italy during a time of heightened tensions with Argentina . After the crisis subsided , financial problems forced Chile to put the ship up for sale in early 1903 ; concerned that Russia might buy them , the United Kingdom stepped in and with financing via merchant bank Antony Gibbs & Sons purchased the still @-@ incomplete ships from Chile on 3 December 1903 for £ 2 @,@ 432 @,@ 000 . The ship was designed to Chilean specifications , particularly the requirement to fit in the graving dock at Talcahuano , and was regarded by the British as a second @-@ class battleship . 
 = = = General characteristics = = = 
 Triumph had an overall length of 475 feet 3 inches ( 144 @.@ 9 m ) , a beam of 71 feet 1 inch ( 21 @.@ 7 m ) , and a draught of 28 feet 6 inches ( 8 @.@ 7 m ) at deep load . She displaced 12 @,@ 175 long tons ( 12 @,@ 370 t ) at standard load and 13 @,@ 840 long tons ( 14 @,@ 060 t ) at deep load . At deep load she had a metacentric height of 4 @.@ 01 feet ( 1 @.@ 22 m ) . In 1906 , the crew numbered 729 officers and enlisted men . 
 = = = Propulsion = = = 
 The ship was powered by two four @-@ cylinder inverted vertical triple @-@ expansion steam engines , each driving one propeller . A dozen Yarrow water @-@ tube boilers provided steam to the engines which produced a total of 12 @,@ 500 indicated horsepower ( 9 @,@ 300 kW ) which was intended to allow them to reach a speed of 19 @.@ 5 knots ( 36 @.@ 1 km / h ; 22 @.@ 4 mph ) . The engines proved to be more powerful than anticipated and Triumph exceeded 20 knots ( 37 km / h ; 23 mph ) during sea trials . She carried a maximum of 2 @,@ 048 long tons ( 2 @,@ 081 t ) of coal , enough to steam 6 @,@ 210 nautical miles ( 11 @,@ 500 km ; 7 @,@ 150 mi ) at 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . In service she and her sister proved to be more economical than first thought with an estimated range of 12 @,@ 000 nautical miles ( 22 @,@ 000 km ; 14 @,@ 000 mi ) at 10 knots . 
 = = = Armament = = = 
 The ship was armed with four 45 @-@ calibre BL 10 @-@ inch Mk VII guns in two twin gun turrets , one each fore and aft of the superstructure . The guns fired 500 @-@ pound ( 227 kg ) projectiles at a muzzle velocity of 2 @,@ 656 ft / s ( 810 m / s ) ; this provided a maximum range of 14 @,@ 800 yards ( 13 @,@ 500 m ) at the gun 's maximum elevation of 13 @.@ 5 ° . The firing cycle of the Mk VII guns was claimed to be 20 – 25 seconds ; each gun was provided with 90 shells . 
 Triumph 's secondary armament consisted of fourteen 50 @-@ calibre 7 @.@ 5 @-@ inch Mk IV guns . Ten of the guns were mounted in a central battery on the main deck ; the other four were in casemates abreast the fore- and mainmasts on the upper deck . A major problem with the guns on the main deck was that they were mounted low in the ship — only about 10 feet ( 3 m ) above water at deep load — and were unusable at high speed or in heavy weather as they dipped their muzzles in the sea when rolling more than 14 ° . The guns fired 200 @-@ pound ( 91 kg ) projectiles at a muzzle velocity of 2 @,@ 781 ft / s ( 848 m / s ) at a rate of four rounds per minutes . At their maximum elevation of 15 ° they had a maximum range of about 14 @,@ 000 yards ( 13 @,@ 000 m ) . The ship carried 150 rounds per gun . 
 Defence against torpedo boats was provided by fourteen QF 14 @-@ pounder Mk II guns , but the guns were modified in British service to use the standard 12 @.@ 5 @-@ pound ( 5 @.@ 7 kg ) shell used by the QF 12 pounder 18 cwt gun in British service . They fired 3 @-@ inch ( 76 mm ) , 12 @.@ 5 @-@ lb projectiles at a muzzle velocity of 2 @,@ 548 ft / s ( 777 m / s ) . Their maximum range and rate of fire is unknown . 200 rounds per gun was carried by Triumph . The ship also mounted four QF 6 @-@ pounder Hotchkiss guns in the fighting tops , although these were removed in 1906 – 08 . 
 The ship was also armed with a pair of 17 @.@ 7 @-@ inch ( 450 mm ) submerged torpedo tubes , one on each broadside , for which she carried nine torpedoes . 
 = = = Armour = = = 
 The Swiftsures ' armour scheme was roughly comparable to that of the Duncan class . The waterline main belt was composed of Krupp cemented armour ( KCA ) 7 inches ( 178 mm ) thick . It was 8 feet ( 2 @.@ 4 m ) high of which 5 feet 3 inches ( 1 @.@ 6 m ) was below the waterline at normal load . Fore and aft of the 2 – 6 @-@ inch ( 51 – 152 mm ) oblique bulkheads that connected the belt armour to the barbettes , the belt continued , but was reduced in thickness . It was six inches thick abreast the barbettes , but was reduced to two inches fore and aft of the barbettes . It continued forward to the bow and supported the ship 's spur @-@ type ram . It continued aft to the steering gear compartment and terminated in a 3 @-@ inch ( 76 mm ) transverse bulkhead . The upper strake of 7 @-@ inch armour covered the ship 's side between the rear of the barbettes up to the level of the upper deck . The upper deck casemates were also protected by 7 @-@ inch faces and sides , but were enclosed by rear 3 @-@ inch plates . The 7 @.@ 5 @-@ inch guns on the main deck were separated by 1 @-@ inch ( 25 mm ) screens with .5 inches ( 12 @.@ 7 mm ) plating protecting the funnel uptakes to their rear . A longitudinal 1 @-@ inch bulkhead divided the battery down its centreline . 
 The turret faces were 9 inches ( 229 mm ) thick and their sides and rear were 8 inches ( 203 mm ) thick . Their roofs were two inches thick and the sighting hood protecting the gunners was 1 @.@ 5 inches ( 38 mm ) thick . Above the upper deck the barbettes were 10 inches ( 254 mm ) thick on their faces and eight inches on the rear . Below this level they thinned to three and two inches respectively . The conning tower was protected by 11 inches ( 279 mm ) of armour on its face and eight inches on its rear . The deck armour inside the central citadel ranged from 1 to 1 @.@ 5 inches in thickness . Outside the citadel , the lower deck was three inches thick and sloped to meet the lower side of the belt armour . 
 = = Construction and service = = 
 = = = Pre @-@ World War I = = = 
 HMS Triumph was ordered by Chile as Libertad and laid down by Vickers , Sons & Maxim at Barrow @-@ in @-@ Furness on 26 February 1902 and launched on 15 January 1903 . She was completed in June 1904 and commissioned at Chatham Dockyard on 21 June 1904 for service in the Home Fleet . On 17 September 1904 the ship was struck by SS Siren off Pembroke Dock and was only slightly damaged . Under a fleet reorganization in January 1905 , the Home Fleet became the Channel Fleet . She collided with her sister ship Swiftsure on 3 June 1905 and suffered damage to her bow . Triumph received a brief refit at Chatham Dockyard in October 1908 and was transferred to the Mediterranean Fleet on 26 April 1909 . The ship returned to the Home Fleet in May 1912 . She was transferred to the China Station on 28 August 1913 and was placed in reserve at Hong Kong until mobilized in August 1914 at the beginning of World War I. 
 = = = World War I = = = 
 Triumph was recommissioned using the crews of demobilised river gunboats , supplemented with two officers , 100 enlisted men , and six signallers from the Duke of Cornwall 's Light Infantry , and was ready for sea on 6 August 1914 . Triumph took part in operations off the German colony of Tsingtao , China in early August 1914 , with the intention of stopping German shipping entering or returning to the port . Triumph , together with the French cruiser Dupleix , captured the German merchant ship Senegambia , laden with coal and cattle , on the morning of 21 August , with <unk> then chasing and eventually capturing a second merchant ship , the C. Ferd <unk> . On the evening of 21 August , Triumph captured the German merchant ship Frisia , also carrying coal and cattle . On 23 August 1914 , she was attached to the Imperial Japanese Navy 's Second Fleet , and after disembarking her Army volunteers at Wei @-@ hai @-@ wei , participated in the campaign against the German colony at Tsingtao . In September , Triumph , together with the destroyer Usk , escorted a convoy carrying British troops for operations against Tsingtao , with Triumph taking part in several bombardments of German positions until the capture of Tsingtao by the Japanese . Triumph was hit by a German shell during a bombardment on 14 October , damaging a mast , and killing one crewman and wounding two more . With Tsingtao in Japanese hands , Triumph returned to Hong Kong for a refit in November 1914 . 
 Upon completion of her refit in January 1915 , Triumph was transferred to the Dardanelles for service in the Dardanelles Campaign . The ship departed Hong Kong on 12 January and stopped at Suez from 7 February to 12 February before moving on to join the Dardanelles Squadron . Triumph took part in the opening attack on the entrance forts on 18 February and 19 February , and joined the predreadnoughts Albion and Cornwallis in using her secondary battery to silence the fort at Sedd el Bahr on 25 February . She , Albion , and Majestic were the first Allied battleships to enter the Turkish Straits during the campaign when they carried out the initial attack on the inner forts on 26 February . She also took part in the attack on Fort Dardanos on 2 March 1915 . She and Swiftsure were detached from the Dardanelles on 5 March for operations against forts at Smyrna , returning to the Dardanelles on 9 March . 
 Triumph participated in the main attack on the Narrows forts on 18 March , and fired on Ottoman trenches at Achi Baba on 15 April . On 18 April , one of her picket boats and one from Majestic torpedoed and sank the British submarine E15 , which had run aground near Fort Dardanos and was in danger of being captured by Ottoman forces . Triumph supported the main landing by the Anzac forces at Gaba Tepe on 25 April , and continued to support them through May . On 25 May , the ship was underway off Gaba Tepe , firing on Ottoman positions , with torpedo nets out and most watertight doors shut , when she sighted a submarine periscope 300 to 400 yards ( 270 to 370 m ) off her starboard beam at about 1230 hours . It belonged to the U @-@ boat U @-@ 21 under the command of Lieutenant Otto <unk> opened fire on the periscope , but was almost immediately struck by a torpedo , which easily cut through her torpedo net , on her starboard side . A tremendous explosion resulted , and Triumph took on a list 10 ° to starboard . She held that list for about five minutes , then it increased to 30 ° . The destroyer <unk> evacuated most of her crew before she capsized ten minutes later . She remained afloat upside down for about 30 minutes , then began to sink slowly in about 180 feet ( 55 m ) of water . Three officers and 75 enlisted men died in her sinking . 
 = 2012 Chevrolet Detroit Belle Isle Grand Prix = 
 The 2012 Chevrolet Detroit Belle Isle Grand Prix presented by <unk> was an IZOD IndyCar Series race that was held on June 3 , 2012 on The Raceway on Belle Isle in Detroit , Michigan . It was the sixth race of the 2012 IZOD IndyCar Series season . Originally scheduled to run over 90 laps , it was shortened to 60 laps . The race was won by Scott Dixon for the Chip Ganassi Racing team . Dario Franchitti finished second , and Simon Pagenaud clinched third . 
 Preparations for the race were overshadowed by speculation over IndyCar CEO Randy Bernard 's job , after he tweeted that some team owners were trying to get him fired . Dixon claimed pole position for the race , the first IndyCar event in Detroit since 2008 , and maintained his lead throughout the race . After 38 laps , James Hinchcliffe hit a dislodged piece of the track and continued straight into the tire wall . Further investigation discovered that the track was disintegrating in various places , and the event was red flagged . After a two @-@ hour break , in which track officials ripped out the damaged sections of track and filled the holes with concrete , the race was restarted , shortened to 60 laps . Rain also started to fall lightly , and shortly after the restart a caution was issued when Helio Castroneves spun . Dario Franchitti gained four places after the red flag , benefiting from his softer red tires , to finish second behind his team @-@ mate . 
 There were four cautions , totalling 12 laps during the race . It was Dixon 's first win of the season and the 28th of his career , which moved him up to second in the drivers ' standings . Of the 25 drivers that started , 19 completed the race , two retired after contact and four retired due to mechanical issues . Justin Wilson recorded the fastest lap of the race , completing a circuit in 1 : 12 @.@ 0651 . 
 = = Report = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 The IndyCar series had not visited Detroit since 2008 , when Justin Wilson won the race after taking the lead in the last 20 laps when Helio Castroneves was penalized for blocking him . The following year 's scheduled race was cancelled due to lack of funding , and the failure to secure sponsorship for the event . In September 2011 , the Detroit City Council approved plans for the race to be held on the weekend of June 1 – 3 , 2012 . A month later , it was confirmed that the race would be run in 2012 , sponsored by the Chevrolet arm of Detroit @-@ based manufacturer General Motors . 
 Roger Penske was one of the main advocates of the series returning to Detroit , and his company provided $ 6 million to improve the course on Belle Isle Park . Over 600 @,@ 000 square feet ( 56 @,@ 000 m2 ) of concrete was laid down across the paddock and the race course , and the lighting and drainage were both repaired in the lead up to the event . The race was scheduled for the weekend after the Indianapolis 500 , a slot that had previously been held by the Firestone 550 at the Texas Motor Speedway . The move created tension with Eddie Gossage , the track director in Texas . 
 Prior to the race , Will Power was the points leader , with 200 points , while Castroneves and James Hinchcliffe each had 164 points to place second and third respectively . The configuration was the 2 @.@ 07 miles ( 3 @.@ 33 km ) long track used in 2007 and 2008 . It is a tight street course on which overtaking is difficult , and previewing the race , Tony <unk> claimed it had " often been a mundane race . " Four racers participating in the 2012 event were previous winners on the course : Castroneves , Dario Franchitti , Tony Kanaan and Wilson . In contrast , 11 of the 25 drivers have not participated in an IndyCar race at Belle Isle , and four of the drivers had only competed once : in the 2008 race . 
 The previous weekend 's Indianapolis 500 had , according to an agency report , been " a breathtaking event , the kind that ’ s certain to be talked about through the years " , and provided a boost to the series , with the race receiving its highest Nielsen rating since 2008 . The series hoped to maintain that momentum into the Detroit race , but instead focus shifted to off @-@ track issues when the series ' CEO , Randy Bernard posted a message on Twitter claiming that some of the team owners were trying to oust him . The coup was based upon the owners ' disgruntlement with the increasing cost of the Dallara DW12 chassis , and fines given out for the use of <unk> parts in races earlier in the season . Bernard spoke to the team owners on the Saturday prior to the Detroit race , and reported that the matter was settled , in an attempt to place attention back on the race , but by that stage , the media had spent Friday and Saturday investigating the coup , rather than previewing the race and the track . 
 = = = Practice and qualifying = = = 
 Two practice sessions were held on the Friday before the race : each lasted for an hour . A third session , also an hour long , took place on the Saturday morning prior to qualifying . The first session provided limited opportunities to the drivers due to heavy rain and standing water on the course . As a result , only 11 of the 25 entrants participated in the session , of which Takuma Sato set the fastest time . Conditions improved during the second practice , and all 25 drivers set times . Will Power was quickest ; marginally over a tenth of a second faster than Wilson . Ryan Briscoe , Simon Pagenaud and Tony Kanaan completed the top five , all recording times within half a second of Power . In the third practice , Scott Dixon recorded the fastest time , trailed by Power and Ryan Hunter @-@ Reay . Briscoe and Wilson also lapped the track in under 72 seconds to finish among the five quickest drivers . 
 Qualifying took place over three rounds : the drivers were split into two groups for the first round , in which the top six from each group progressed to the next round . Dixon was the fastest from the first group , followed by Pagenaud and Hunter @-@ Reay within half a second of his time . Wilson , Sébastien Bourdais and Sato were the other drivers to advance to the second round . In the second group , Power set the fastest overall time in the first round , and Alex Tagliani was close behind him , also setting a faster time than Dixon . Graham Rahal , E.J. Viso , Helio Castroneves and Briscoe also qualified for the next stage . Power was once again the fastest driver in the second round , leading Dixon and Tagliani . The top @-@ three drivers were separated by less than a tenth of a second . The other three drivers to continue to the third round , the " Firestone Fast Six " , were Pagenaud , Viso and Hunter @-@ Reay . Rahal , who finished in seventh was just four thousandths of a second behind Hunter @-@ Reay . 
 The top six drivers were split evenly by engine ; half running Honda engines , and the other half Chevrolet . It was also the first time in the 2012 season that six different teams were represented in the third qualifying round . Hunter @-@ Reay and Power traded fastest times early in the session before Pagenaud and Viso went quicker . Power and Dixon then set times under 71 seconds , and then improved upon their own laps to finish as the top @-@ two . Dixon set the fastest time ; 1 : 10 @.@ <unk> : just four thousandths of a second quicker than Power . Tagliani was third , joined on the second row by Pagenaud , while Viso and Hunter @-@ Reay qualified on the third row of the grid . Rahal and Simona de Silvestro were both subject to ten @-@ place grid penalties for engine changes made in mid @-@ May , dropping them to 17th and 25th on the grid respectively . Rubens Barrichello was also given a ten @-@ place penalty for changing his chassis between qualifying and the race , placing him 24th . 
 = = = Race = = = 
 The race , the sixth of the season , began at 3 : 30 p.m. EST , and was televised live in the United States on ABC . Scott Dixon held his lead from pole position , with Will Power behind him . Justin Wilson made light contact with a wall during the first lap of the race , and pitted shortly after due to a flat right @-@ rear tire . The team discovered additional damage to the suspension that required lengthy repairs , but he was able to return to the race . During the fifth lap , some teams reported that parts of the track were deteriorating , but it was not felt that any action needed to be taken . Three laps later , Rubens Barrichello , who had gained four places started suffering mechanical problems , which forced him to retire from the race after eleven laps . Wilson set the fastest lap of the race during the ninth lap , completing a circuit in 1 minute 12 @.@ 0651 seconds . On lap 10 , Ryan Hunter @-@ Reay blocked Ryan Briscoe from passing him , drawing a warning from race director Beaux <unk> . Sébastien Bourdais , who , along with Alex Tagliani and Oriol Servia , was running his first street race of the season without a Lotus engine , had made it to seventh before suffering mechanical problems which curtailed his race after 24 laps . James Jakes , who was suffering from problems with his brakes throughout the early part of the race eventually retired on lap 36 , having spent ten laps in the pits earlier trying to resolve the issue . 
 On lap 39 , James Hinchcliffe fell victim to the deteriorating track . Going through turn six , he struck a large piece of asphalt that had lifted from the track . After hitting his front wing , it then went under the car and propelled it into the air . With no traction , Hinchcliffe was unable to control his car and was sent into the tire wall . Hinchcliffe was angry after the race , and claimed that the track should have been fixed earlier : " The fact that ( race control ) let it go as far as they did , essentially waiting for someone to crash as a result of it before they did something , is very unsafe . " He said that the track had lifted much earlier in the race , but that the drivers had been forced to keep avoiding the debris , which was on the racing line . On the same lap , Takuma Sato clipped the curb going into turn 12 and lost control of his car before hitting the wall , forcing his retirement . The two crashes drew a full track caution , and the cars drove behind the safety car for six laps before a red flag was given on lap 45 . 
 The track had been patched up prior to the weekend 's racing using a synthetic rubber compound , and it had remained secure throughout the practice and qualifying sessions , as well as the Grand @-@ Am and Indy Lights races . However , the Dallara DW12 's aerodynamic ground force effects acted to pull the compound out . After assessing the track conditions , the decision was made to attempt to repair the track and restart the race . Marshalls and track workers started to pull the loose strips up from the track , and a quick drying concrete was used to fill the troughs . The repairs were held up for a short time when a crew was despatched to collect more of the concrete , as the on @-@ site resources had been used up , but eventually the race director was happy the race could restart . Kanaan and Power drove around to survey the repairs , acting as driver representatives , and although Kanaan particularly did not sound confident that they would hold up , they agreed to try and continue racing . There was some confusion about the rules of the restart ; no repairs were allowed , and the teams could change tires , but had to remain on the same compound . This led to J.R. Hildebrand suffering a one lap penalty as his car required repair work , and a number of drivers being angered at having to stay on the harder tires , which were the slower compound . 
 After a two @-@ hour delay , the race was restarted . Rahal suffered clutch problems on the restart , which placed him two laps down , while the other drivers ran behind the safety car , during which the marshalls showed the areas in which repair work had been conducted . Just prior to the restart , there was a short rain shower which made the track slightly slippy . Power lost one position on the restart , dropping to third . Franchitti , who was the closest driver to the front to have the softer compound red tires fitted gained two positions on the restart , moving up to fourth . The restart only lasted for six corners , before Castroneves spun in the wet conditions , and was then struck by Ed Carpenter . On the next corner , Josef <unk> had slid into the wall and stalled , and a full @-@ track caution was again called . The race was restarted with nine laps remaining , and Franchitti once more gained a position , passing Pagenaud to gain second . However , the race was almost immediately under a yellow flag again as E.J. Viso was spun by Marco Andretti , and stalled in the middle of turn four . From the ensuing restart , Dixon managed to maintain the lead from Franchitti , and the two Chip Ganassi Racing drivers completed a second successive one @-@ two finish . 
 = = = Post @-@ race = = = 
 The race , which was moved from ABC to <unk> because of the red flag delay , averaged 843 @,@ 189 viewers , earning a 0 @.@ 6 Nielsen rating . The final ten laps were significantly lower , averaging just 157 @,@ 137 viewers . Bud Denker , the chairman of the Detroit Grand Prix Association announced shortly after the race that the track would be improved and lengthened for 2013 . He suggested that most of the track around turn ten would be removed and relaid , and significant work would be carried out in turns five , six , seven , eleven and twelve . The track would be extended between turns two and five , using a long straight which would allow cars to reach 175 – 180 miles per hour . The result of the alterations would be an additional 0 @.@ 4 miles ( 0 @.@ 64 km ) of track , creating a 2 @.@ 5 miles ( 4 @.@ 0 km ) circuit . 
 = = Classification = = 
 = = = Qualifying = = = 
 = = = Race results = = = 
 Notes : 1 Points include 1 point for pole position and 2 points for most laps led . 
 = = Standings after the race = = 
 = Mariano Rivera = 
 Mariano Rivera ( born November 29 , 1969 ) is a Panamanian former professional baseball pitcher who played 19 seasons in Major League Baseball ( MLB ) for the New York Yankees , from 1995 to 2013 . Nicknamed " Mo " and " Sandman " , Rivera spent most of his career as a relief pitcher and served as the Yankees ' closer for 17 seasons . A thirteen @-@ time All @-@ Star and five @-@ time World Series champion , he is MLB 's career leader in saves ( 652 ) and games finished ( 952 ) . Rivera won five American League ( AL ) Rolaids Relief Man Awards and three Delivery Man of the Year Awards , and he finished in the top three in voting for the AL Cy Young Award four times . 
 Rivera was signed by the Yankees organization in Panama in 1990 , and he debuted in the major leagues in 1995 . Initially a starting pitcher , he was converted to a relief pitcher late in his rookie year . After a breakthrough season in 1996 as a setup man , he became the Yankees ' closer in 1997 . In the following seasons , he established himself as one of baseball 's top relievers , leading the major leagues in saves in 1999 , 2001 , and 2004 . Rivera primarily threw a sharp @-@ moving , mid @-@ 90s mile @-@ per @-@ hour cut fastball that frequently broke hitters ' bats and earned a reputation as one of the league 's toughest pitches to hit . With his presence at the end of games , signaled by his foreboding entrance song " Enter Sandman " , Rivera was a key contributor to the Yankees ' success in the late 1990s and early 2000s . An accomplished postseason performer , he was named the 1999 World Series Most Valuable Player ( MVP ) and the 2003 AL Championship Series MVP , and he holds several postseason records , including lowest earned run average ( ERA ) ( 0 @.@ 70 ) and most saves ( 42 ) . 
 Rivera is regarded within baseball as one of the most dominant relievers in major league history . Pitching with a longevity and consistency uncommon to the closer role , he saved at least 25 games in 15 consecutive seasons and posted an ERA under 2 @.@ 00 in 11 seasons , both of which are records . His career 2 @.@ 21 ERA and 1 @.@ 00 WHIP are the lowest in the live @-@ ball era among qualified pitchers . Fellow players credit him with popularizing the cut fastball across the major leagues . Along with his signature pitch , Rivera was known for his precise control , smooth pitching motion , and for his composure and reserved demeanor on the field . In 2013 , the Yankees retired his uniform number 42 ; he was the last major league player to wear the number full @-@ time , following its league @-@ wide retirement in honor of Jackie Robinson . Rivera has been involved in philanthropic causes and the Christian community through the Mariano Rivera Foundation . He is considered to be a strong candidate for the Baseball Hall of Fame once he is eligible . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Mariano Rivera was born in Panama City , Panama , on November 29 , 1969 , to Mariano Rivera Palacios and Delia <unk> . The couple 's second child , Rivera has one older sister , Delia , and two younger brothers , Alvaro and Giraldo . Supported by Mariano , Sr. ' s job as captain of a fishing boat , the family lived in Puerto Caimito , a Panamanian fishing village that Rivera described as " poor " . As a young man , Rivera played soccer and baseball with his friends on the beach during low tide . Soccer was his favorite sport , while his favorite athlete was Pelé . For baseball games , they substituted cardboard milk cartons for gloves and tree branches for bats , and they fashioned balls by taping worn @-@ out baseballs and wads of shredded fishing nets . Rivera used this makeshift equipment until his father bought him his first leather glove when he was 12 years old . Speaking about his youth , Rivera said that although he stayed out of trouble , he " was hanging with the wrong people " . 
 Rivera attended Escuela Victoriano Chacón for elementary school and La Escuela <unk> Pedro Pablo Sanchez for his secondary education , but he dropped out in ninth grade . At age 16 , he began working six @-@ day weeks on a commercial boat captained by his father , catching sardines . The job was " extremely hard " for Rivera , who was more interested in becoming a mechanic . He decided to give up fishing as a career after abandoning a capsizing 120 @-@ short @-@ ton ( 110 t ) commercial boat as a 19 @-@ year @-@ old , and after his uncle died from injuries suffered on a fishing boat . Rivera continued to play sports during his teenage years but eventually quit soccer after a series of ankle and knee injuries around age 17 . Consequently , he shifted his attention to baseball but considered it just a hobby rather than a possible profession . 
 In 1988 , Rivera joined Panamá Oeste , a local amateur baseball team , as their shortstop . Scout Herb Raybourn watched him play in a baseball tournament but did not project him to be a major league shortstop . A year later , Panamá Oeste 's pitcher performed so poorly in a playoff game that Rivera was asked to replace him , and despite no experience at the position , he pitched well . Teammates <unk> Hernández and Emilio <unk> consequently contacted Chico Heron , a scout for the New York Yankees . Two weeks after his pitching debut , Rivera was invited to a Yankees tryout camp run by Heron in Panama City . Raybourn , who had returned to Panama to scout as the Yankees ' director of Latin American operations , received a tip about Rivera . Raybourn was surprised to hear he had switched positions but decided to watch him throw . Although Rivera had no formal pitching training , weighed just 155 pounds ( 70 kg ) , and threw only 85 – 87 miles per hour ( 137 – 140 kilometres per hour ) , Raybourn was impressed by his athleticism and smooth , effortless pitching motion . Viewing Rivera as a raw talent , Raybourn signed the amateur free agent to a contract with the Yankees organization on February 17 , 1990 ; the contract included a signing bonus of US $ 2 @,@ 500 ( $ 4 @,@ 528 today ) , according to Major League Baseball ( MLB ) records . 
 = = Professional baseball career = = 
 = = = Minor leagues ( 1990 – 1995 ) = = = 
 After signing his contract , Rivera — who spoke no English and had never left home — flew to the United States and reported to the Gulf Coast League ( GCL ) Yankees , a Rookie level minor league affiliate of the New York Yankees . Feeling lonely and homesick , he wrote home to his parents often , as they did not have access to telephones in Puerto Caimito . At that point in his career , scouts considered Rivera to be a " fringe prospect " at best , but he made progress with a strong 1990 season for the GCL Yankees . Pitching mostly in relief , he allowed only 24 baserunners and one earned run in 52 innings pitched — a 0 @.@ 17 earned run average ( ERA ) . The team permitted Rivera to start the season 's final game in order for him to accumulate enough innings pitched to qualify for the league 's ERA title ( which carried a $ 500 bonus ) ; his subsequent seven @-@ inning no @-@ hitter " put him on the map with the organization " , according to manager Glenn Sherlock . In the offseason , Rivera returned to Panama , where a tip from him to Raybourn led to the Yankees signing a promising local 16 @-@ year @-@ old player , Rivera 's cousin Rubén . In 1991 , Mariano was promoted to the Class A level Greensboro Hornets of the South Atlantic League , where he started 15 of the 29 games he pitched in . Despite a 4 – 9 win – loss record , he recorded a 2 @.@ 75 ERA in 114 2 ⁄ 3 innings pitched and struck out 123 batters while walking 36 batters . New York Yankees manager Buck Showalter took notice of Rivera 's strong strikeout @-@ to @-@ walk ratio , calling it " impressive in any league " and saying , " This guy is going to make it . " 
 In 1992 , Rivera was promoted to the Class A @-@ Advanced level Fort Lauderdale Yankees of the Florida State League ( FSL ) . He started 10 games for Fort Lauderdale , compiling a 5 – 3 win – loss record and a 2 @.@ 28 ERA . He attempted to improve the movement on his slider pitch by snapping his wrist during his throwing motion , but he inadvertently caused damage to the ulnar collateral ligament ( UCL ) in his right elbow . Rivera underwent surgery in August 1992 to repair the damage , ending his season and interrupting his minor league career . Contrary to popular belief , he did not have Tommy John surgery ; his surgeon , Dr. Frank Jobe , determined that ligament replacement was not necessary and was instead able to repair the frayed UCL . Rivera 's rehabilitation coincided with MLB 's 1992 expansion draft to fill the rosters for two expansion teams , the Florida Marlins and Colorado Rockies . Rivera was left unprotected by the Yankees but was not drafted . He successfully rehabilitated his arm in early 1993 and resumed pitching that year . He first joined the Rookie level Yankees to make two abbreviated starts , before returning to the Class A level Hornets to start ten more games . Witnessing him rehabilitate , the Hornets ' official scorer Ogi Overman was not optimistic about Rivera 's future , saying , " I thought [ he ] was on a one @-@ way trip to nowhere . " 
 In 1994 , he was promoted from the Class A @-@ Advanced level Tampa Yankees of the FSL to the Double @-@ A level Albany @-@ Colonie Yankees of the Eastern League , and then to the Triple @-@ A level Columbus Clippers of the International League . Rivera finished the year with a 10 – 2 record in 22 starts , although he struggled for Columbus , recording a 5 @.@ 81 ERA in six starts . Beginning the 1995 season with Columbus , he was ranked by sports magazine Baseball America as the ninth @-@ best prospect in the Yankees organization ; by contrast , the publication ranked Rivera 's highly touted cousin Rubén as the second @-@ best prospect in baseball . Mariano 's pitching repertoire primarily consisted of fastballs at the time , although he threw a slider and changeup as secondary pitches . 
 = = = Major leagues ( 1995 – 2013 ) = = = 
 = = = = 1995 – 1997 = = = = 
 After being called up to the major leagues on May 16 , 1995 , Rivera made his debut for the New York Yankees on May 23 against the California Angels . Starting in place of injured pitcher Jimmy Key , Rivera allowed five earned runs in 3 1 ⁄ 3 innings pitched in a 10 – 0 loss . He struggled through his first four major league starts , posting a 10 @.@ 20 ERA , and as a result , he was demoted to Columbus on June 11 . As a 25 @-@ year @-@ old rookie just three years removed from major arm surgery , his spot on the team was not guaranteed ; management considered trading him to the Detroit Tigers for starter David Wells . While recovering from a sore shoulder in the minor leagues , Rivera pitched a no @-@ hit shutout in a rain @-@ shortened five @-@ inning start . Reports from the game indicated that his pitches had reached 95 – 96 mph ( 153 – 154 km / h ) , about 6 mph ( 9 @.@ 7 km / h ) faster than his previous average velocity ; Rivera attributes his inexplicable improvement to God . Yankees general manager Gene Michael was skeptical of the reports until verifying that Columbus ' radar gun was not faulty and that another team 's scout had taken the same measurements . Afterwards , he ended any trade negotiations involving Rivera . On July 4 , in his first start back in the major leagues , Rivera pitched eight scoreless innings against the Chicago White Sox , allowing just two hits while striking out 11 batters . In five subsequent starts , he was unable to match his success from that game ; after a brief demotion to Columbus in August , Rivera made one last start in the major leagues in September before he was moved to the Yankees ' bullpen . Overall , he finished his first major league season with a 5 – 3 record and a 5 @.@ 51 ERA in ten starts and nine relief outings . His performance in the 1995 American League Division Series , in which he pitched 5 1 ⁄ 3 scoreless innings of relief , convinced Yankees management to keep him and convert him to a relief pitcher the following season . 
 In 1996 , Rivera served primarily as a setup pitcher , typically pitching in the seventh and eighth innings of games before closer John Wetteland pitched in the ninth . Their effectiveness as a tandem helped the Yankees win 70 of 73 games when leading after six innings that season . Over a stretch of games between April 19 and May 21 , Rivera pitched 26 consecutive scoreless innings , including 15 consecutive hitless innings . During the streak , he recorded his first career save in a May 17 game against the Angels . Rivera finished the regular season with a 2 @.@ 09 ERA in 107 2 ⁄ 3 innings pitched and set a Yankees single @-@ season record for strikeouts by a reliever ( 130 ) . In the postseason , he allowed just one earned run in 14 1 ⁄ 3 innings pitched , helping the Yankees advance to and win the 1996 World Series against the Atlanta Braves ; it was the franchise 's first World Series championship since 1978 . In MLB 's annual awards voting by the Baseball Writers ' Association of America , Rivera finished in twelfth place for the American League ( AL ) Most Valuable Player ( MVP ) Award and third for the AL Cy Young Award , which is given to the league 's best pitcher . Commentator and former player Tim McCarver wrote that the Yankees " revolutionized baseball " that year with Rivera , " a middle reliever who should have been on the All @-@ Star team and who was a legitimate MVP candidate . " 
 Impressed by Rivera 's pitching , Yankees management chose not to re @-@ sign Wetteland in the offseason , opting instead to replace him as closer with Rivera . In April 1997 , MLB retired the uniform number 42 league @-@ wide to honor Jackie Robinson for breaking the baseball color line , although Rivera was among a dozen players allowed to continue wearing the number per a grandfather clause . Rivera 's transition from setup man to closer in 1997 was not seamless ; he blew three of his first six save opportunities and indicated that he was initially uncomfortable in the role . With reassurance from manager Joe Torre , Rivera settled into the ninth @-@ inning role , and he earned his first All @-@ Star selection with 27 saves and a 1 @.@ 96 ERA at the midseason break . In the 1997 All @-@ Star Game , he pitched a perfect ninth inning to collect his first save in an All @-@ Star Game . That summer , he added a cut fastball to his pitching repertoire after accidentally discovering how to throw the pitch . Rivera finished the regular season with 43 saves in 52 opportunities with a 1 @.@ 88 ERA . His first year as closer ended with a blown save in Game 4 of the 1997 AL Division Series against the Cleveland Indians ; with the Yankees four outs from advancing to the next round of the postseason , Rivera allowed a game @-@ tying home run to Sandy Alomar , Jr . The Yankees eventually lost that game and the next , eliminating them from the postseason . 
 = = = = 1998 – 2001 = = = = 
 After spending two weeks on the disabled list with a groin strain during the opening month of the 1998 season , Rivera continued to establish himself as one of the major leagues ' best closers . Moreover , he became the central figure of a Yankees bullpen that , supported by middle relievers Jeff Nelson and Mike Stanton , contributed to the team 's late @-@ 1990s dynasty . That year , Rivera made the cutter one of his primary pitches , and it quickly became his signature , earning a reputation for breaking hitters ' bats with its sharp lateral movement . He saved 36 games in 41 opportunities in the regular season and finished with a 1 @.@ 91 ERA . In the 1998 postseason , he pitched 13 1 ⁄ 3 scoreless innings and saved six games , three of which came in the 1998 World Series against the San Diego Padres . Rivera 's save in Game 4 of the series clinched the Yankees ' championship , capping off a season in which they won an MLB @-@ record 125 games combined in the regular season and the postseason . By season 's end , Rivera had allowed only two earned runs in 35 career postseason innings pitched — a 0 @.@ 51 ERA — and by passing 30 innings pitched , he qualified for the major league record for lowest postseason career ERA ; it is a record he still holds through 141 innings pitched . 
 In 1999 , Rivera was selected for the All @-@ Star team for a second time with 23 saves and a 2 @.@ 29 ERA in the first half of the season . That summer , the Yankee Stadium scoreboard production staff began playing the song " Enter Sandman " by heavy metal band Metallica as Rivera 's entrance music . Staff members selected the song after witnessing in the previous year 's World Series how enthusiastically San Diego fans reacted to closer Trevor Hoffman entering games accompanied by AC / DC 's " Hells Bells " . Although Rivera was indifferent about his entrance music , " Enter Sandman " soon became as much a part of his identity as a closer as his cutter did . After recording three blown saves and a 7 @.@ 84 ERA in July , he allowed just one earned run over his last 30 appearances . He finished the season with a 1 @.@ 83 ERA and 45 saves in 49 opportunities , his first time leading the major leagues in saves . He received his first AL Rolaids Relief Man Award , an annual award for the league 's best closer based on their statistics . In the 1999 World Series against the Braves , Rivera recorded a win and two saves , the second of which clinched the Yankees ' championship title , his third overall . For his performance against Atlanta , he received the World Series MVP Award . Rivera finished 1999 by pitching 43 consecutive scoreless innings in the regular season and postseason combined , and he placed third in voting for the AL Cy Young Award . After the season , he revealed tentative plans to retire and become a minister after playing four more seasons , though he backed off these plans the following year . 
 In the offseason , Rivera lost his arbitration case , in which he requested an annual salary of $ 9 @.@ 25 million , but the $ 7 @.@ 25 million salary that the arbitrators awarded him instead set a baseball record for the highest arbitration award . In the 2000 season , Rivera was selected as an All @-@ Star for the third time . On July 8 , he saved two games played in two different ballparks as part of a day @-@ night doubleheader against the New York Mets at Shea Stadium and Yankee Stadium . He ended the season with 36 saves in 41 opportunities and a 2 @.@ 85 ERA . In the postseason , Rivera saved six games , allowed three earned runs in 15 2 ⁄ 3 innings pitched , and broke two major league records : he eclipsed Dennis Eckersley 's record for postseason saves with the 16th of his career ; he also broke Whitey Ford 's record for consecutive scoreless innings pitched in postseason play , a streak that ended shortly thereafter at 33 1 ⁄ 3 innings . In the 2000 World Series against the Mets , Rivera clinched a championship for his team for the third consecutive year . It was his fourth World Series title overall . By this point , he had established a reputation as an exceptional postseason performer — journalist Jack Curry called him the " infallible weapon " and " the greatest reason the Yankees [ were ] three @-@ time champions " . 
 With Rivera 's contract set to expire after 2001 , the Yankees signed him to a four @-@ year , $ 39 @.@ 99 million deal prior to the season , marking the first long @-@ term contract of his career . In 2001 , he was selected for the All @-@ Star team for a third consecutive year . His final numbers included a 2 @.@ 34 ERA , a closer career @-@ high 80 2 ⁄ 3 innings pitched , and an MLB @-@ leading 50 saves in 57 opportunities — the second time he led the majors in saves . This earned him his second AL Rolaids Relief Man Award . Despite having what sportswriters deemed an " aura of invincibility " in the postseason , Rivera failed to close out the decisive Game 7 of the 2001 World Series against the Arizona Diamondbacks . In one of his most infamous moments , he blew a save in the bottom of the ninth inning , in part due to his own throwing error , and he lost the Series later in the inning by allowing Luis Gonzalez 's bloop single with the bases loaded to score the winning run . It was Rivera 's first and only loss of his postseason career , and it snapped his record streak of 23 consecutive postseason saves converted . 
 = = = = 2002 – 2005 = = = = 
