 Banksia brownii was first collected near King George Sound in 1829 by William Baxter , who named it in honour of botanist Robert Brown . A formal description was published by Brown in his 1830 Supplementum Primum Prodromi Florae Novae Hollandiae ; thus the full botanic name of the species is Banksia brownii Baxter ex R.Br. Under Brown 's taxonomic arrangement , B. brownii was placed in subgenus Banksia verae , the " true banksias " , because its inflorescence is a typical Banksia flower spike . Banksia verae was renamed Eubanksia by Stephan Endlicher in 1847 . 
 Carl Meissner demoted Eubanksia to sectional rank in his 1856 classification , and divided it into four series , with B. brownii placed in series Dryandroideae . When George Bentham published his 1870 arrangement in Flora Australiensis , he discarded Meissner 's series , placing all the species with hooked styles together in a section that he named Oncostylis . This arrangement would stand for over a century . 
 In 1891 , Otto Kuntze challenged the generic name Banksia L.f. , on the grounds that the name Banksia had previously been published in 1775 as Banksia J.R.Forst & G.Forst , referring to the genus now known as Pimelea . Kuntze proposed Sirmuellera as an alternative , republishing B. brownii as " Sirmuellera <unk> ( Baxter ) " [ sic ] . The challenge failed , Banksia L.f. was formally conserved , and Sirmuellera brownii ( Baxter ex R.Br. ) Kuntze " is now a nomenclatural synonym of B. brownii . 
 Alex George published a new taxonomic arrangement of Banksia in his landmark 1981 monograph The genus Banksia L.f. ( Proteaceae ) . Endlicher 's Eubanksia became B. subg . Banksia , and was divided into three sections , one of which was Oncostylis . Oncostylis was further divided into four series , with B. brownii placed in series Spicigerae because its inflorescences are cylindrical . 
 In 1996 , Kevin Thiele and Pauline Ladiges published a new arrangement for the genus , after cladistic analyses yielded a cladogram significantly different from George 's arrangement . Thiele and Ladiges ' arrangement retained B. brownii in series Spicigerae , placing it in B. subser . Occidentales along with B. occidentalis ( red swamp banksia ) , B. seminuda ( river banksia ) , B. verticillata ( granite banksia ) and B. littoralis ( swamp banksia ) . This arrangement stood until 1999 , when George effectively reverted to his 1981 arrangement in his monograph for the Flora of Australia series . 
 Under George 's taxonomic arrangement of Banksia , B. brownii 's taxonomic placement may be summarised as follows : 
 Genus Banksia 
 Subgenus Banksia 
 Section Banksia 
 Section Coccinea 
 Section Oncostylis 
 Series Spicigerae 
 B. spinulosa - B. ericifolia - B. verticillata - B. seminuda - B. littoralis - B. occidentalis - B. brownii 
 Series Tricuspidae 
 Series Dryandroidae 
 Series Abietinae 
 Subgenus Isostylis 
 B. brownii 's closest relative is held to be B. occidentalis , which differs from B. brownii in having smaller , deep red flowers and narrow , sparsely serrate leaves . 
 Since 1998 , Austin Mast has been publishing results of ongoing cladistic analyses of DNA sequence data for the subtribe Banksiinae , which comprises Banksia and Dryandra . With respect to B. brownii , Mast 's results are somewhat at odds with those of both George and Thiele and Ladiges , finding it to be more closely related to B. nutans ( nodding banksia ) and B. <unk> ( oak @-@ leaved banksia ) than to many of the Spicigerae . Overall , the inferred phylogeny is very greatly different from George 's arrangement , and provides compelling evidence for the paraphyly of Banksia with respect to Dryandra . Early in 2007 , Mast and Thiele initiated a rearrangement of Banksia by transferring Dryandra into it , and publishing B. subg . Spathulatae for the species having spoon @-@ shaped cotyledons . They foreshadowed publishing a full arrangement once DNA sampling of Dryandra was complete ; in the meantime , if Mast and Thiele 's nomenclatural changes are taken as an interim arrangement , then B. brownii is placed in B. subg . Spathulatae . 
 Three genetically distinct forms of B. brownii are recognised : the better known forms are a " mountain form " with a shrubby habit , short thin hard leaves , and a squat inflorescence ; and a " Millbrook Road form " , with a tree habit and longer , wider , soft leaves . Some horticulturists also recognise an intermediate form . Recent genetic testing has confirmed the existence of three distinct forms , but currently these have no taxonomic status . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 B. brownii occurs between Albany ( 35 ° S ) and the Stirling Range ( 34 ° <unk> ) in the southwest of Western Australia , at the juncture of the Esperance Plains , Warren and Jarrah Forest biogeographic regions . This is the taxonomically richest area for Banksia , with 19 species , of which six are endemic , including B. brownii itself . It is cool and wet , with temperatures between four and 30 ° C ( 39 – 86 ° F ) and rainfall of around 800 millimetres ( 31 in ) . The species occurs there in two distinct population clusters : southern populations occur among low woodland of Eucalyptus marginata ( jarrah ) in shallow , nutrient @-@ poor white or grey sand over laterite ; Stirling Range populations occur at altitudes of between 500 and 1100 metres ( 1640 – <unk> ft ) , among heath on rocky mountain slopes and tops , and in shale in gullies . 
 There are 27 known populations within this region , but only nine of these populations contain more than 10 individual plants , and only five populations have more than 100 . Ten populations are now presumed extinct . The total number of plants is estimated at around 1000 . 
 = = Ecology = = 
 Coastal plants begin to flower at around five years from seed , but plants in the Stirling Range take much longer to mature . In one Stirling Range population , only 15 % of plants had flowered after eight years . Flowering time is highly variable , but in general it occurs between March and August , with a peak around June . More flowers open during the day than at night . 
 As with other Banksia species , B. brownii is a heavy producer of nectar , and serves as a food source for a range of <unk> birds , mammals and insects . Honeyeaters such as Phylidonyris novaehollandiae ( New Holland honeyeater ) , Acanthorhynchus superciliosus ( western spinebill ) and Anthochaera carunculata ( red wattlebird ) are frequent visitors that often carry heavy pollen loads , making them important pollinators . Nocturnal mammals such as Rattus fuscipes ( bush rat ) and Tarsipes rostratus ( honey possum ) also carry heavy pollen loads , but the foraging behaviour of bush rats suggests that these may transfer pollen only over very short distances . Invertebrate visitors include the introduced Apis mellifera ( western honeybee ) , native bees , flies and ants ; bees appear to be effective pollinators , but ants and flies forage only at the base of flowers and do not come in contact with plant pollen . 
 The species is partly self @-@ compatible , as some seed is set when pollinators are excluded . Selection against self @-@ pollinated seed has been observed , but the species has nonetheless been shown to have one of the lowest outcrossing rates of any Banksia . This is probably caused by the small population sizes , which increase the probability of self @-@ fertilisation , and may discourage visits by pollinators . 
 It has a low rate of fruiting , with less than 1 % of flowers developing into follicles , and more than half of the inflorescences failing to form any follicles at all . Seed survival rates are similarly low . More than half of a plant 's seed crop may be lost to the larvae of moths and weevils , which burrow into the cobs to eat the seeds and pupate in the follicles ; and further seed losses are caused by granivorous birds such as cockatoos , which break off the cobs to eat both the seeds and the insect larvae . 
 A small proportion of follicles open and release their seed spontaneously , but most remain closed until stimulated to open by bushfire . Bushfire kills the maternal plant , which has neither thick bark nor lignotubers , but the subsequent shedding of seed allows the population to regenerate . Seed predation continues after its release : in one study , B. brownii seeds were placed on the ground in both burnt and unburnt sides ; almost all were eaten by parrots within four weeks . 
 = = Conservation = = 
 Threats to B. brownii include loss of habitat due to land clearing , commercial exploitation , disease , and changes to the fire regime . The fragmentation of populations is also of concern , as it causes the genetic diversity of the species to decline , potentially reducing vigour . Climate change is also of concern : depending on the severity of change , the range of this species is predicted to contract by 30 % to 50 % by 2080 . 
 B. brownii has been assessed as having a very high risk of extinction . It is estimated that without protective measures in place , it would be extinct within a decade ; and that extinction would be " not only a tragedy in itself but may have unforeseen , and potentially disastrous , consequences for the functioning of the vegetation communities of which feather @-@ leaved banksia is an integral part . " The species has not yet been formally assessed for the IUCN Red List , but warrants a " Critically Endangered ( CR ) " ranking because populations are projected to decline by more than 80 % within the next three generations . It is currently listed as " Endangered " under Australia 's Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999 ( EPBC Act ) , and " Rare " under Western Australia 's Wildlife Conservation Act 1950 . These acts provide legislative protection against a range of potential threats , including commercial harvesting of flowers and land clearing . Further statutory protection is afforded by the fact that populations occur within the Eastern Stirling Range Montane Heath and Thicket threatened ecological community , which is listed as " Endangered " under the EPBC Act , and the Montane Mallee Thicket of the Stirling Range threatened ecology community , which has been assessed as " Endangered " by the Western Australian government ; and by the presence of northern population within the Stirling Range National Park . 
 A five @-@ year interim management plan was put in place by the Western Australia 's Department of Environment and Conservation in October 2005 . Actions under that plan include regular monitoring of populations , management of the threats of fire and P. cinnamomi , and the cold storage of seed . As of December 2009 a recovery plan is being developed . There is also a translocation project underway . 
 = = = Disease = = = 
 The main threat to B. brownii is dieback caused by the introduced plant pathogen P. cinnamomi , a soil @-@ borne water mould that causes root rot . Studies of the effect of P. cinnamomi on B. brownii have found it to be " highly susceptible " to dieback , with specimens " frequently and consistently killed in the wild " . As of 2007 , all major populations of B. brownii , and all but one minor population , are suffering from dieback . Moreover , all populations are in an area vulnerable to dieback , so even the uninfected population is considered under threat . According to Byron Lamont , " the demise of this species in the wild appears imminent . " 
 A number of protective measures have been implemented , including site access restrictions , the collection and cold @-@ storage of seed , and the treatment of plants with phosphite . Phosphite boosts the resistance of both infected and uninfected plants , and also acts as a direct fungicide . Aerial spraying of phosphite boosts plant survival and slows the spread of infection , but must be carefully managed as studies have shown that foliar spraying of phosphite adversely affects root and shoot growth . Direct injection of phosphite into the stem of each tree appears to lack this disadvantage , but is costly to administer and restricted to known plants . 
 Other diseases to which B. brownii is vulnerable include the parasitic fungus Armillaria luteobubalina and the aerial canker fungus Zythiostroma . 
 = = = Fire regime = = = 
 Because B. brownii releases its seed in response to bushfire , it is important that fires occur at intervals that allow the plants to generate plenty of viable seed . The optimum fire interval is around 18 years . If fire occurs too frequently , plants are burned before reaching maturity or before they have produced sufficient seed to ensure regeneration of the population . This may cause populations to decline , or even local extinction . Too @-@ infrequent fire also causes population decline , as more plants die of natural attrition without releasing their seed , resulting in seed wastage . 
 = = = Ex situ conservation measures = = = 
 Because of the difficulty of conserving B. brownii in its present disease @-@ exposed locations , it is an especially suitable candidate for ex situ conservation measures , such as the cold @-@ storage of seed , and the translocation of plants to disease @-@ free locations . Seed of B. brownii has been collected by Western Australia 's Threatened Flora Seed Centre , and placed in cold @-@ storage both in Perth and at Kew 's Millennium Seed Bank . This includes seed collected from populations that have since become extinct . In 2008 , some of this seed was germinated , and seedlings were planted at a location near Albany . Genetic analysis of the seedlings revealed some genetic diversity that was not present in any extant population . The conservation of these seeds had thus preserved some of the species ' genetic diversity that would otherwise have been lost through population extinction , providing a powerful example of the importance of seed banking to conservation efforts . A seed orchard was planted in 2007 , and by 2010 this had yielded over 400 disease @-@ free , healthy plants , some of which had grown more than three times the rate of those in the wild . A 2007 seedling flowered for the first time at Wakehurst Place in February 2011 . 
 = = Cultivation = = 
 With large metallic red inflorescences and attractive feathery leaves that are perhaps the softest of all Banksia species , B. brownii is highly valued by Australia 's horticultural and cut flower industries . Seeds and plants are readily available in Australian nurseries , and it is widely cultivated in areas not exposed to dieback . Seeds do not require any treatment , and take 20 to 50 days to germinate . The plant prefers a sheltered position in soil with good drainage , and must be provided with moisture over summer . It grows quickly , but takes several years to flower . Once established , it is frost @-@ tolerant and tolerates light pruning not below the green foliage . The flowers are attractive in late bud , but lose their colour as soon as they open . Because they are usually surrounded by branchlets , they may be partly hidden by foliage . 
 The main obstacle to cultivation is the species ' extreme sensitivity to dieback , which is widespread in suburban gardens . However , the species has been successfully grafted onto a rootstock of B. integrifolia ( coast banksia ) , which renders it hardy on a range of soils . 
 = The BLT Cookbook = 
 The BLT Cookbook is a cookbook about the preparation of bacon , lettuce , and tomato ( BLT ) sandwiches . It was written by Michele Anna Jordan and was published by William Morrow Cookbooks in the United States in June 2003 . Jordan is a food writer and has written for The Press Democrat ; The BLT Cookbook is her 14th published book . She researched the book for ten years and in the process she taste @-@ tested hundreds of variations on the sandwich , describing it as America 's most beloved sandwich . She instructs the reader on how to acquire and prepare the best ingredients for the sandwich . The book includes recipes with varying ingredients , though each recipe includes tomatoes . Many recipes in the book are not sandwiches , and include appetizers , soups , salads , and desserts . Jordan also suggests wines to accompany the sandwich . 
 The book was positively received , and the National Pork Board highly recommended it . A review in The Detroit News said that the book includes " mouthwatering recipes " , and the San Francisco Chronicle called it a " neat little book " on the subject . The food editor for the Daily Herald wrote that the book 's recipes " will surely shake up your next toasted meal " . The Anchorage Daily News called it the " definitive book " on the BLT sandwich . 
 = = Content summary = = 
 The BLT Cookbook discusses the author 's love of the BLT sandwich , which according to Jordan is " America 's favorite sandwich " . The author wrote , " There are times when the BLT just tastes right , primal and true , the best thing you could ever eat . The play of the salt and acid , the silk of the tomato against the salt crunch of the bacon ... It is sheer delight . " She discusses ways the combination can be used in soups , appetizers , and salads . Recipes are provided for multiple versions of the BLT sandwich . Jordan writes that to make the best sandwich , one should select the finest ingredients . She recommends shopping at farmers ' markets for fresh tomatoes , a butcher for choice bacon , and a bakery for fresh bread . The author recommends mayonnaise brands Hellmann 's and Best Foods , and <unk> bacon from California . Jordan writes , " For lettuce , remove the first outer leaf and then use only the next three layers . Further in , iceberg lettuce gets a little <unk> . " 
 The BLT Cookbook begins with a recipe for a mini @-@ cocktail selection of the BLT , followed by a larger version that the author recommends for large gatherings such as picnics . Non @-@ traditional presentations of the BLT combination include " Tomatoes Stuffed with Bacon Risotto " , " Potato Soup with Tomatoes and Bacon " and " Tomato Bread Pudding " . The author presents varieties of the BLT that omit one ingredient . " The Fisherman 's BLT " — which uses seafood — is an alternative to the standard sandwich and the " <unk> " comprises zucchini , lettuce and tomato . Jordan was inspired by a salmon sandwich she bought at Pike Place Market in Seattle to create a BLT sandwich with salmon . The " Bacon , Leek and Tomato <unk> " is a dish that does not use bread . All recipes presented in The BLT Cookbook include tomatoes . Towards the end of the book , recipes for bread pudding , strudel and tomato pie are included . Selected wines that Jordan recommends to accompany her dishes include a Rhone @-@ style red , <unk> , or pinot noir . 
 = = Background = = 
 Food writer Michele Anna Jordan has contributed columns published in the food and wine section of The Press <unk> and restaurant reviews for the San Francisco Chronicle . The BLT Cookbook is Jordan 's 14th book . She decided to write about the BLT sandwich after discovering it was a good remedy for morning sickness , and that others who frequented a food website shared her love of the BLT . Jordan spent ten years researching for the book , and spent a winter writing it . During her research , Jordan taste @-@ tested hundreds of variations on the BLT sandwich . In 2003 the author hosted two radio programs on <unk> @-@ FM , " <unk> with Michele Anna Jordan " and " Red Shoes Rodeo " . The year the book was published , Jordan crafted a 1 @,@ 248 @-@ square @-@ foot ( 115 @.@ 9 m2 ) BLT sandwich at the Kendall @-@ Jackson Tomato Festival . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The BLT Cookbook is " highly recommended " by the National Pork Board . Kate Lawson of The Detroit News wrote that the book offers " mouthwatering recipes ranging from variations on the classic sandwich to soups , salads and pastas . " <unk> <unk> of the San Francisco Chronicle wrote , " Recipes for recommended basics like aioli and tomato <unk> round out the neat little book . " Food editor of the Daily Herald Deborah Pankey wrote in her review of the book , " While giving the titled trio its due respect , author Michele Anna Jordan introduces a host of other ingredients that will surely shake up your next toasted meal ( yes , she favors toast to help maintain the sandwich 's structure . ) " 
 The Cincinnati Post said , " [ Jordan 's ] book presents practically all the possibilities for BLT combinations as she leaves the two slices of white toast far behind " . Staff writer for ANG Newspapers Jolene <unk> wrote , " Not simply a cookbook , the little handbook is a discourse on the sandwich that is elegant enough to coax even the most virtuous eaters to gobble pork fat and mayonnaise with abandon . " T.C. Mitchell of the Anchorage Daily News said The BLT Cookbook is the " definitive book " on the sandwich . 
 = Squall line = 
 A squall line is a line of thunderstorms that can form along or ahead of a cold front . In the early 20th century , the term was used as a synonym for cold front . It contains heavy precipitation , hail , frequent lightning , strong straight @-@ line winds , and possibly tornadoes and waterspouts . Strong straight @-@ line winds can occur where the squall line is in the shape of a bow echo . Tornadoes can occur along waves within a line echo wave pattern ( LEWP ) , where mesoscale low pressure areas are present . Some bow echoes which develop within the summer season are known as derechos , and they move quite fast through large sections of territory . On the back edge of the rain shield associated with mature squall lines , a wake low can be present , sometimes associated with a heat burst . 
 = = Theory = = 
 Polar front theory was developed by Jacob Bjerknes , derived from a dense network of observation sites in Scandinavia during World War I. This theory proposed that the main inflow into a cyclone was concentrated along two lines of convergence , one ahead of the low and another trailing behind the low . The trailing convergence zone was referred to as the squall line or cold front . Areas of clouds and rainfall appeared to be focused along this convergence zone . The concept of frontal zones led to the concept of air masses . The nature of the three @-@ dimensional structure of the cyclone was conceptualized after the development of the upper air network during the 1940s . 
 = = = Life cycle = = = 
 Organized areas of thunderstorms activity reinforce pre @-@ existing frontal zones , and they can outrun cold fronts . This outrunning occurs within the westerlies in a pattern where the upper level jet splits into two streams . The resultant mesoscale convective system ( MCS ) forms at the point of the upper level split in the wind pattern in the area of best low level inflow . 
 The convection then moves east and toward the equator into the warm sector , parallel to low @-@ level thickness lines . When the convection is strong linear or curved , the MCS is called a squall line , with the feature placed at the leading edge of the significant wind shift and pressure rise . This feature is commonly depicted in the warm season across the United States on surface analyses , as they lie within sharp surface troughs . 
 If squall lines form over arid regions , a <unk> known as a haboob may result from the high winds in their wake picking up dust from the desert floor . Well behind mature squall lines , a wake low can develop on the back edge of the rain shield , which can lead to a heat burst due to the warming up of the descending air mass which is no longer being rain @-@ cooled . 
 Smaller cumulus or stratocumulus clouds , along with cirrus , and , sometimes , altocumulus or cirrocumulus , can be found ahead of the squall line . These clouds are the result of former cumulonimbus clouds having disintegrated , or an area of only minor instability ahead of the main squall line . 
 As supercells and multi @-@ cell thunderstorms dissipate due to a weak shear force or poor lifting mechanisms , ( e.g. considerable terrain or lack of daytime heating ) the gust front associated with them may outrun the squall line itself and the synoptic scale area of low pressure may then infill , leading to a weakening of the cold front ; essentially , the thunderstorm has exhausted its updrafts , becoming purely a downdraft dominated system . The areas of dissipating squall line thunderstorms may be regions of low CAPE , low humidity , insufficient wind shear , or poor synoptic dynamics ( e.g. an upper level low filling ) leading to <unk> . 
 From here , a general thinning of a squall line will occur : with winds decaying over time , outflow boundaries weakening updrafts substantially and clouds losing their thickness . 
 = = = Characteristics = = = 
 = = = = <unk> = = = = 
 The leading area of a squall line is composed primarily of multiple updrafts , or singular regions of an updraft , rising from ground level to the highest extensions of the troposphere , condensing water and building a dark , ominous cloud to one with a noticeable overshooting top and anvil ( thanks to synoptic scale winds ) . Because of the chaotic nature of updrafts and downdrafts , pressure perturbations are important . 
 = = = = Pressure perturbations = = = = 
 Pressure perturbations around thunderstorms are noteworthy . With buoyancy rapid within the lower and mid @-@ levels of a mature thunderstorm , updraft and downdraft create distinct <unk> of pressure . As thunderstorms organized in squall lines , the northern end of the squall line is commonly referred to as the cyclonic end , with the southern side rotating anticyclonically ( in Northern hemisphere ) . Because of the coriolis force , the northern end may evolve further , creating a " comma shaped " wake low , or may continue in a squall @-@ like pattern . The updraft ahead of the line create a <unk> too while the downdraft just behind the line will produce a mesohigh . 
 = = = = Wind shear = = = = 
 Wind shear is an important aspect of a squall line . In low to medium shear environments , mature thunderstorms will contribute modest amounts of downdrafts , enough to help create a leading edge lifting mechanism – the gust front . In high shear environments created by opposing low level jet winds and synoptic winds , updrafts and consequential downdrafts can be much more intense ( common in supercell mesocyclones ) . The cold air outflow leaves the trailing area of the squall line to the mid @-@ level jet , which aids in downdraft processes . 
 = = = Severe weather indicators = = = 
 Severe squall lines typically bow out due to the formation of a stronger mesoscale high pressure system ( a mesohigh ) within the convective area due to strong descending motion behind the squall line , and could come in the form of a downburst . The pressure difference between the mesoscale high and the lower pressures ahead of the squall line cause high winds , which are strongest where the line is most bowed out . 
 Another indication of the presence of severe weather along a squall line is its morphing into a line echo wave pattern , or LEWP . A LEWP is a special configuration in a line of convective storms that indicates the presence of a low pressure area and the possibility of damaging winds , large hail , and tornadoes . At each kink along the LEWP is a mesoscale low pressure area , which could contain a tornado . In response to very strong outflow southwest of the mesoscale low , a portion of the line bulges outward forming a bow echo . Behind this bulge lies the mesoscale high pressure area . 
 = = = Depiction on maps = = = 
 Squall lines are depicted on National Weather Service surface analyses as an alternating pattern of two red dots and a dash labelled " SQLN " or " SQUALL LINE " . 
 = = Variations = = 
 = = = Derecho = = = 
 A derecho ( from Spanish : " derecho " meaning " straight " ) is a widespread and long @-@ lived , violent convectively induced straight @-@ line windstorm that is associated with a fast @-@ moving band of severe thunderstorms usually taking the form of a bow echo . Derechos blow in the direction of movement of their associated storms , similar to a gust front , except that the wind is sustained and generally increases in strength behind the " gust " front . A warm weather phenomenon , derechos occur mostly in summer , between May and August in the Northern hemisphere . They can occur at any time of the year and occur as frequently at night as in the daylight hours . 
 The traditional criteria that distinguish a derecho from a severe thunderstorm are sustained winds of 58 miles per hour ( 93 km / h ) during the storm as opposed to gusts , high or rapidly increasing forward speed , and geographic extent ( typically 250 nautical miles ( 460 km ; 290 mi ) in length . ) In addition , they have a distinctive appearance on radar ( bow echo ) ; several unique features , such as the rear inflow notch and bookend vortex , and usually manifest two or more downbursts . Although these storms most commonly occur in North America , derechos occur elsewhere in the world . Outside North America they may be called by different names . For example , in Bangladesh and adjacent portions of India , a type of storm known as a " Nor <unk> " may be a progressive derecho . 
 = Foundation for Economic Education = 
 The Foundation for Economic Education ( FEE ) " is a non @-@ political , non @-@ profit , tax @-@ exempt educational foundation " dedicated to the " economic , ethical and legal principles of a free society . " FEE publishes books , the magazine The Freeman , hosts seminars , and lectures . 
 = = History = = 
 Founded in 1946 by Leonard E. Read , Henry Hazlitt , David Goodrich , Donaldson Brown , Leo Wolman , Fred R. Fairchild , Claude E. Robinson , and Jasper Crane , the foundation is the oldest free @-@ market think tank in the United States . Read served as president from 1946 until his death in 1983 . 
 Perry E. Gresham followed his friend Read as president in 1983 . The presidency of FEE from 1983 to 1984 was held by John Sparks Sr. , from 1984 to 1985 by Bob Love , from 1985 to 1988 by a series of acting presidents , then from 1988 to 1992 by Bruce Evans . After retiring from Grove City College where he taught economics , Hans Sennholz served as president from 1992 to 1997 . Donald J. Boudreaux served as president from 1997 to 2001 , before moving on to chair the Department of Economics at George Mason University . Economist , investment analyst , professor and author Mark Skousen served as president from 2001 to 2002 . Author and professor Richard Ebeling served as president from 2003 to 2008 . The current president is economist , author , and professor Lawrence W. Reed , since 2008 . 
 = = Significance = = 
 During his extended graduate studies at Columbia University , Murray Rothbard was influenced by FEE economist Baldy Harper . So it makes sense that Rothbard credited FEE with creating a " crucial open center " for a libertarian movement . Friedrich Hayek saw FEE as part of the inspiration for the formation of the Mont Pelerin Society in 1947 . Beyond inspiration , FEE provided a financial subsidy to the Mont Pelerin Society . Hayek encouraged Anthony Fisher to found the Institute of Economic Affairs after visiting FEE in 1952 . Ludwig von Mises had a " long @-@ term association with the Foundation for Economic Education . " According to the 2014 Global Go To Think Tank Index Report FEE is number 47 out of 60 in the " Top Think Tanks in the United States " . 
 = = Location = = 
 FEE first occupied two rooms on the 30th floor of the Equitable Building in Manhattan in 1946 . Still in 1946 , the organization moved to the Hillside mansion in Irvington , New York , where FEE would remain for 68 years . In 2014 , FEE sold its Irvington headquarters as a part of the transfer of operations to Atlanta , Georgia . 
 = = Programs = = 
 FEE describes its mission as to " inspire , educate and connect future leaders with the economic , ethical and legal principles of a free society . " FEE offers a variety of programs for high school students , undergraduates , and graduate students . Since 1946 FEE has sponsored lectures by Ludwig von Mises , F.A. Hayek , Henry Hazlitt , Milton Friedman , James M. Buchanan , Vernon Smith , Walter Williams , F.A. " Baldy " Harper , William F. Buckley Jr. and others . 
 = = Publications = = 
 In 1945 du Pont executive Jasper Crane , along with Alfred Kohlberg , started a capital campaign for the organization . After contributions from J. Howard Pew , Inland Steel , Quaker Oats , and Sears enough funding was available for FEE to purchase and take up publishing The Freeman in 1950 . FEE publishes books , articles , and pamphlets both on paper and digitally that the foundation considers classic works on liberty . These include the notable publications I , Pencil : My Family Tree by Read , The Law by Bastiat , Anything That 's Peaceful by Read , Planned Chaos by Mises , Industry @-@ Wide Bargaining by Wolman , Up from Poverty : Reflections on the <unk> of Public Assistance by Sennholz , and The Virtue of Liberty by Machan . 
 = Powerless ( Heroes ) = 
 " Powerless " is the 11th and final episode of the second season of the NBC science fiction drama series Heroes and thirty @-@ fourth episode overall . It was written by co @-@ executive producer Jeph Loeb and directed by executive producer Allan Arkush . The episode aired on December 3 , 2007 as the conclusion of the " Volume 2 : Generations " storyline . It is also the final episode of Heroes that was ready for broadcast prior to the 2007 – 2008 Writers Guild of America strike , and acted as the season finale pending the resolution of the dispute . 
 The episode 's main storylines revolve around Peter Petrelli ( Milo Ventimiglia ) and Hiro Nakamura 's ( Masi Oka ) quest to stop the release of the Shanti virus , and Sylar 's ( Zachary Quinto ) attempt to regain his powers . The end of the episode features a brief prologue of the third volume , " Villains " , which features Sylar regaining his powers . Originally , the virus was going to be released , and Tim Kring said that it was to play a big role in Volume 3 . Kring stated that the ending had to be rewritten because they did not know when the show would return to air , and they wanted to make sure that they tied up all the loose ends . " Powerless " was watched by eleven million Americans and received mainly positive reviews from critics , with many saying that it was a positive end to a lackluster season . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Peter Petrelli ( Milo Ventimiglia ) and Adam Monroe ( David Anders ) break into the Primatech compound in Odessa to destroy the Shanti virus , a life @-@ threatening disease that prevents evolved humans from using their abilities , ultimately ending in their death . Nathan Petrelli ( Adrian <unk> ) and Matt Parkman ( Greg Grunberg ) learn the virus 's location from Angela Petrelli ( Cristine Rose ) . Peter uses his powers to pry the vault open by force , and is confronted by Hiro Nakamura ( Masi Oka ) and Matt . Nathan appears and convinces Peter that Adam is trying to release the virus , not destroy it . Adam , already in possession of the virus , lets it fall just before Hiro teleports them both away . Peter enters the vault just in time to telekinetically grab the virus and vaporize it in his hands . Hiro has placed Adam where he " can never hurt anyone ever again " , in a casket buried in a Japanese cemetery . 
 After Monica Dawson ( Dana Davis ) is captured by a street gang , Micah Sanders ( Noah Gray @-@ <unk> ) turns to his mother Niki ( Ali Larter ) for help . Despite the fact that Niki no longer has her powers due to the virus , she agrees to help . They follow a GPS signal emitted by Monica 's cell phone and find her in an abandoned warehouse . She is tied up and the warehouse is burning around her . Using what remains of her superhuman strength , Niki manages to help Monica escape , but her strength eventually fails and she ends up trapped inside the building as it explodes . 
 Bob Bishop confronts Noah Bennet ( Jack Coleman ) , telling him that his daughter Claire Bennet ( Hayden Panettiere ) is trying to expose The Company and that they will have to take drastic measures . Claire is packing up her father 's files , when her boyfriend West Rosen arrives to try and stop her from revealing his secret . Angered , she gives him his file and breaks up with him . Noah returns home and tells Claire not to expose The Company , informing her that he has made a deal . He will work for them and in exchange his family will be left alone to lead normal lives . 
 Sylar reveals his true nature to Maya Herrera ( Dania Ramirez ) after he kidnaps Molly Walker ( Adair Tishler ) and Mohinder Suresh ( Sendhil Ramamurthy ) . While searching her father Bob 's office , Elle Bishop ( Kristen Bell ) discovers a video surveillance feed showing Sylar in Mohinder 's lab . She decides to play the hero in order to get back into her father 's good graces . When Sylar forces Mohinder to restore his powers , Maya learns from Molly that her brother was killed by Sylar himself . When Maya confronts him about this , he shoots her in the chest . Sylar has Mohinder test Claire 's restorative blood by reviving Maya . As she returns to life , Elle enters the laboratory and attacks Sylar . He escapes , but takes the blood with him . 
 Nathan calls a press meeting after deciding to expose the nature of the heroes and The Company . As he is about to announce his ability to fly , he is shot in the chest by an unknown assailant . Angela Petrelli watches a television news report about her son 's attack as she speaks to an unidentified person on the phone . She calmly and firmly states that she understands the reason for the attack on Nathan , but that the assassination attempt has " opened Pandora 's box " . 
 = = = Volume Three : Villains = = = 
 Following the end of Volume Two , the third volume , " Villains " , begins with a brief prologue . Sylar , bloodied and hurt from Elle 's attack , injects himself with the supply of Claire 's blood that he took from Mohinder . His wounds heal immediately , and he is able to use his telekinetic abilities . The scene ends with Sylar stating with an evil grin , " I 'm back " . 
 = = Production = = 
 The episode was originally conceived to be the conclusion of " Generations " , the second volume in the series , as Kring wanted to have shorter volumes than in season one . As such , " Powerless " was timed to coincide with the Heroes winter hiatus . With the interruption in production as a result of the Writers ' Strike , Kring re @-@ wrote elements of the episode to act as " a de facto season finale " if there were no additional episodes the second season . 
 Allan Arkush and Kring revealed in an interview on The Post Show that many parts of the finale were re @-@ shot due to the Writers ' Strike . Kring and Arkush commented that they re @-@ shot the scene in which Peter <unk> caught the virus . In the original cut , the virus was to shatter and be released . Kring admitted that the virus being released was to play a huge role in Volume 3 , however , they decided to go into a different direction and re @-@ shoot the ending , allowing Peter to catch the virus and destroy it . Kring also commented that the scenes where Matt , Peter and Nathan were talking in the vault were rewritten in and added later , as well as the Press Conference scene and the scene with Angela Petrelli talking on the cell phone . Kring and Arkush stated that the ending had to be rewritten and re @-@ shot because they did not know when the show would return to air , due to the Writer 's Strike , and they wanted to make sure that they tied up all the loose ends . 
 As of the end of this episode , the status of three main characters remained undetermined . Niki Sanders was last seen inside a burning building which subsequently exploded , and Nathan Petrelli was shot while attempting to speak out against the Company . Their fates were left intentionally ambiguous because the writers were unsure of whether they wanted to proceed with Niki and Nathan 's characters ; decisions were made following the Writers ' Strike resolution . As for the fate of Adam Monroe , Kring was more direct , saying " we 've given the audience no reason to believe that Adam can figure a way to get out of there . The fact that he can live forever makes this the most gruesome of internments . If this happened to any of us , at least we 'd know we 'd soon have the mercy of death . Not here . " Two of the series ' villains also saw changes . Elle 's decision to take on Sylar gave her a chance to use her abilities to help rather than to hurt people . Kring says " she 's been given an opportunity to use her powers in a good way . And she absolutely likes the sound of that word ' hero ' . " Sylar 's use of the stolen sample of Claire Bennet 's blood led to the restoration of his abilities . According to Kring , " Sylar getting his power back does not bode well for our heroes . " Originally , Sylar was not supposed to get his abilities back due to Zachary Quinto 's commitment to the new Star Trek film . However , due to the Writers ' Strike , Quinto completed his role in the film by the time Heroes returned to production . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Powerless " was viewed live or recorded and watched within six hours of broadcast by 11 @.@ 06 million Americans , ranking seventeenth in the weekly charts . 
 Robert Canning of IGN felt that this episode was " exciting [ and ] pulse @-@ pounding " , being " the best episode of the season " . He continued by saying that it " almost made you forget the sub @-@ par episodes [ you ] had to sit through to get [ there ] " , and hoped it would be a set @-@ up for a " powerful , more consistent Volume Three " . He ended his review by giving the episode 9 @.@ 5 out of 10 , the highest rating he had given for the second season . Stephen Lackey of Mania gave the episode an " A " grading , though he felt it was " rushed overall " and thought the virus story was not as powerful as the explosion story in season one . Jason Hughes of TV Squad also felt that the stage was set for a good third volume , which he hoped would " get even darker and more dangerous " . Sean Elliott of If gave the episode a " B " grading , saying it was an " anti @-@ climactic ending to an uninspired second season " . He liked Kristen Bell 's character Elle , saying she was " interesting " , and " worth exploring and developing " . He said that his favourite part of the episode was that the " season [ was ] finally over " , and that it was " time to clean the slate and start with something better " . Robin Brownfield of SyFy Portal called it a " great finale " and said that " there were lots of twists [ she ] did not see coming " . Sean O 'Neal of The A.V. Club gave the episode a A- . 
 = Howard Hille Johnson = 
 Howard Hille Johnson ( February 19 , 1846 – February 8 , 1913 ) was a blind American educator and writer in the states of Virginia and West Virginia . Johnson was instrumental in the establishment of the West Virginia Schools for the Deaf and Blind in 1870 , after which he taught blind students at the institution 's School for the Blind for 43 years . 
 Johnson was born in 1846 near Franklin in Pendleton County , Virginia ( now West Virginia ) to the affluent and prominent Johnson family . His father , Colonel Jacob F. Johnson , represented Pendleton County in the West Virginia Legislature and his grandfather , James Johnson , represented the county in the Virginia General Assembly . Like his elder brother James , Johnson was born with severe visual impairment which became total blindness a few years after his birth . He and his brother received their early education at home from a governess . Johnson furthered his education at the Virginia School for the Deaf and the Blind , a common school in Franklin during the American Civil War , and at a classical school in New Market . During his studies at New Market , Johnson made considerable progress in mathematics , literature , science and foreign languages . 
 In 1865 he returned to Franklin , where he and his brother conducted a private classical school . Johnson undertook advanced studies at the Virginia School for the Deaf and the Blind for his profession as a teacher from 1866 to 1867 . He returned to Franklin , establishing a public school under the free education system , and in 1868 accepted a teaching position at a Moorefield public school . 
 In early 1869 , Johnson identified the need for a school for the blind in the new state of West Virginia ; with statehood , deaf and blind West Virginia children attended schools for the deaf and blind in neighboring states ( with West Virginia paying their tuition ) . Johnson began corresponding with West Virginia Governor William E. Stevenson , canvassing across the state to arouse public sentiment in support of a school for the blind . Despite rebukes from prominent West Virginian politicians , Johnson became the leading advocate for a state institution for the blind . He and other educated blind people staged an exhibition in the legislative chamber of the West Virginia House of Delegates , which was praised by the legislators . 
 The bill establishing the school was presented to the West Virginia House of Delegates for a vote , and before it became state law the words " deaf and dumb " were inserted before " blind " throughout its text . The final version of the bill establishing the West Virginia Institution for the Deaf , Dumb and Blind became state law on March 3 , 1870 . At the time of the institution 's establishment Johnson was only 24 years old , and is credited by West Virginia historians as the founder of the West Virginia Schools for the Deaf and Blind . Serving on the school 's inaugural Board of Regents , he was later selected as its principal teacher . The school began its first academic session on September 29 , 1870 . Johnson taught in its blind department continuously for 43 years , until his death in 1913 . In addition to his educational work , Johnson wrote prose and poetry and was a member of the Romney Literary Society . 
 = = Early life and family = = 
 Johnson was born on February 19 , 1846 at his family 's home on Friend 's Run , near Franklin in Pendleton County , Virginia ( now West Virginia ) . His father , Colonel Jacob F. Johnson , was a prominent citizen of the county and served in the West Virginia Legislature from 1872 to 1873 . Johnson 's grandfather , James Johnson , represented Pendleton County in the Virginia General Assembly and was a member of the 1829 Virginia Constitutional Convention . Like his elder brother James , Johnson was born with severe visual impairment which became total blindness several years after his birth . His affluent parents were determined to prepare Johnson and his brother for the challenges of life by providing them with the opportunities afforded to sighted children , arranging for their sons to receive a good education and " proper instruction " and teaching them self @-@ sufficiency . Johnson 's father employed a governess to instruct him and his brother at home , and James was taught to read from books using braille . 
 = = Education = = 
 James ( Howard 's brother ) enrolled at the Virginia School for the Deaf and the Blind in Staunton in 1848 at age ten , completing his coursework there in 1855 . After his graduation Johnson 's father urged James to become a teacher , and at age 17 he taught a summer school on the South Fork South Branch Potomac River . James was also Howard 's primary instructor , preparing him for higher education . Johnson followed in his brother 's footsteps two years later , enrolling at the Virginia School for the Deaf and the Blind at age eleven . Although he studied there for four years , the school closed after the 1861 outbreak of the American Civil War and he was unable to complete his education there . At Staunton , teachers and acquaintances acknowledged Johnson 's " remarkably rapid " progress in his studies . His studies were otherwise uninterrupted during the war ; he attended a common school in Franklin , and was taught by James with sighted children . Johnson could not read text , and his lessons were read to him by his classmates . 
 In 1863 James encouraged him to further his education at a classical school in New Market , since Johnson had completed the coursework at the Franklin common school . The New Market school was taught by Joseph Salyards ( or <unk> ) , a professor and writer described as one of " the most learned men of the age " and " a most remarkable scholar in many respects . " Johnson was accompanied to New Market by a young man with the surname of Clark , who read him his lessons ; he tutored Clark in several subjects , including French . At New Market , Johnson made so much progress in mathematics , literature , science and foreign languages with his sighted classmates that he returned to Franklin after two years . In 1866 the Virginia School for the Deaf and the Blind in Staunton offered him the opportunity to advance his professional studies in education , and he completed one term in 1867 . 
 After Johnson 's departure the New Market school became known as the New Market Polytechnic Institute , with Salyards remaining on its faculty . The institute , through Salyards ' efforts , conferred on him a " most gratefully appreciated " Master of Arts degree in 1877 . 
 = = Early teaching career = = 
 When Johnson returned to Franklin from New Market he was reunited with James , and they founded a private classical school where he taught during the winter of 1865 – 66 . The Johnsons ' school offered an opportunity for young men in Franklin whose studies were interrupted by the war to complete their education . 
 After Johnson finished his term at the Virginia School for the Deaf and the Blind , he returned to Franklin and founded a public school in September 1867 operating under the free education system recently authorized in Pendleton County . The following year he accepted a teaching position in Moorefield , teaching with " great acceptance " for three successive terms at a public school . 
 = = Campaign for a West Virginia school for the blind = = 
 = = = Search for public support = = = 
 While Johnson was teaching at Moorefield in early 1869 , he decided to establish a state school for the education of the blind ; no provision for such a school had been made in the new state 's public @-@ school system since its creation six years earlier . Before West Virginia statehood , deaf and blind youth in western Virginia attended the Virginia School for the Deaf and the Blind in Staunton ( as Johnson had ) . After statehood , deaf and blind West Virginia children attended schools for the deaf and blind in neighboring states ; West Virginia paid their tuition . Hoping to expedite the foundation of a state school for the blind , Johnson began a correspondence with newly @-@ inaugurated Governor William E. Stevenson ( who assured Johnson of his " sympathy and support " for the school ) . In addition to lobbying the governor , Johnson began canvassing the state to arouse public support for the proposed school . 
 = = = Search for legislative support = = = 
 Due to Johnson 's campaign , which gained wide public support for the school , the West Virginia Legislature convened a session in Wheeling ( then the state 's capital ) on January 18 , 1870 and proposed legislation establishing a school for the blind that year . After drafting the bill , Johnson traveled to Wheeling ; en route , at Fairmont , he met former Union Governor of Virginia Francis Harrison Pierpont . Although Johnson tried to enlist Pierpont 's support in formally presenting the proposed legislation to the legislature , Pierpont said that he " could not afford to connect his name with an enterprise so sure to fail " . Pierpont was not the only state legislator to decline Johnson 's request ; Joseph S. Wheat , member of the West Virginia House of Delegates representing Morgan County , believed that the proposed bill would fail because he felt that the state could not establish any more public institutions . 
 Undaunted by these rebukes from prominent West Virginian politicians , Johnson remained the leading advocate for a state institution for the blind . With help from friends and other educated blind people , he was granted the use of the legislative chamber of the West Virginia House of Delegates to present an exhibition of " music , [ scholarly ] recitation , and class drill " with a delegation including his brother James and blind educator Susan Ridenour . Johnson 's exhibition attracted a large audience , and after the performance he delivered an impassioned plea to West Virginia lawmakers to establish a state school for West Virginia 's blind youth . The exhibition and Johnson 's speech were praised by the legislators , most notably Joseph Wheat ( who had previously rebuffed his proposal ) . The day before Johnson 's presentation , Wheat declared his opposition to the bill and advocated its defeat ; after Johnson 's speech he " pressed up to [ Johnson ] and grasping his hand , said earnestly , ' Johnson , I 'll vote for your bill if it costs a hundred thousand dollars ' " . 
 The bill for the school was presented to the House of Delegates by John James Davis , representing Harrison County . When it was introduced it outlined the establishment of a school only for the blind , not the deaf . The approved bill progressed through the necessary steps , and shortly before it became state law it was amended by House Delegate James Monroe Jackson of Wood County ; Johnson advocated the insertion of " deaf and dumb " before " blind " in every instance in its text as a " humane and economic " measure . Jackson 's amendment was accepted , and the bill establishing the West Virginia Institution for the Deaf , Dumb and Blind became state law on March 3 , 1870 . Although Johnson had campaigned for a state school for the blind , it was common practice during the 19th century to combine schools for the deaf and blind as one institution . At the time of the institution 's founding he was 24 years old , and is credited by West Virginia historians as the founder of the West Virginia Schools for the Deaf and Blind . In Johnson 's bill , the legislature agreed that " all deaf and dumb and blind youth , residents of the state of West Virginia , between the ages of six and twenty @-@ five years , shall be admitted to pupilage in the institution on application to the principal until the institution is filled . " 
 = = = Institution site selection = = = 
 After the bill 's passage Johnson was appointed by Governor Stevenson to the institution 's inaugural Board of Regents , which convened in Wheeling on April 20 , 1870 . Johnson and his fellow board members began a competition among West Virginia municipalities for the location of the new institution for the deaf and blind ; the three finalists were Wheeling , Parkersburg and Romney . The board selected Wheeling , which offered its Female College campus . However , after the board 's adjournment Female College supporters , unwilling to see the school closed , pressured city authorities to rescind their offer . At the board 's June 23 , 1870 meeting , Johnson and his colleagues unanimously selected Romney 's proposal offering the Romney Classical Institute campus and an adjoining 15 acres ( 6 @.@ 1 ha ) of property on behalf of the Romney Literary Society . When the institution 's site was finalized , the board reconvened on July 20 , 1870 in Romney at the old Romney Classical Institute campus and selected its academic faculty and personnel . H. H. Hollister of the Ohio Institution for the Deaf and Blind was chosen as the school 's first principal , and Johnson was appointed principal teacher of its School for the Blind . 
 = = Career at the school = = 
 The West Virginia Schools for the Deaf and Blind began their first academic session on September 29 , 1870 with an enrollment of thirty students : twenty @-@ five were deaf and five blind . After the school 's first academic year , Board of Regents secretary Robert White wrote in his report to Governor Stevenson : " Professor Johnson , in the instruction of the blind , has displayed a marked ability which is showing , and will show , good results in the department . " Johnson represented the new school in 1871 at the inaugural convention of the American Association for Instructors of the Blind , and in 1876 he provided large maps used to teach his blind students as part of West Virginia 's exhibit at the Centennial Exposition in Philadelphia . The exposition was the first world 's fair hosted in the United States , and the first since West Virginia became a state in 1863 . 
 During Johnson 's twenty @-@ seventh year of teaching at the West Virginia Schools for the Deaf and Blind , he framed a bill for the West Virginia Legislature which would separate the institution into two schools : one for the deaf and one for the blind . It read in part : " Be it enacted , That the West Virginia schools for the deaf and the blind , located at Romney , in the county of Hampshire , shall , after the expiration of the present term , that is to say after the 15th day June , 1897 , cease to be a school for the education of deaf and blind youth , and shall thereafter be a school for the education of deaf youth only " , and would provide a separate school for the blind . Despite Johnson 's active support for the bill , it failed to pass . In 1892 he wrote an article which was published in the Perkins Institute for the Blind publication The Mentor , " Keep the Schools Out of Politics " , decrying the appointment of school administrators , educators and trustees on the institute 's Board of Regents based on affiliation with the West Virginia Democratic Party instead of qualifications . 
 Johnson taught in the school 's blind department continuously for 43 years , until his death in 1913 . He was the subject of an April 1899 article in The West Virginia School Journal , where he was described as " still in sound health and vigor " and " cheerful and patient " after 29 years of teaching . Despite his efforts to establish the West Virginia Schools for the Deaf and Blind and his long tenure , Johnson earned a minimal salary which enabled him to " eke out a bare living . " During his career , he acquired a " working knowledge of several languages , a wide range of scientific knowledge , and of mathematics . " In the 1897 History of Hampshire County , West Virginia : From Its Earliest Settlement to the Present , Hu Maxwell and Howard Llewellyn Swisher wrote about Johnson : 
 = = Writing = = 
 In addition to his career as an academic and educator , Johnson was a prolific writer of prose and verse . He was elected to the Romney Literary Society , which donated its buildings and the grounds of the Romney Classical Institute to the West Virginia Schools for the Deaf and Blind after its establishment in 1870 . 
 His poems include : 
 " A Question " 
 " Blindness " 
 " Intuitive Love " 
 " Hymn to Spring " 
 = = Personal life = = 
 In 1868 Johnson married Ms. Barbee of Virginia , and they had three children : Leila B. Johnson , William T. Johnson and H. Guy ( or Howard H. ) Johnson . His wife died in 1880 , and his children from his first marriage were raised by their grandparents in Bridgewater , Virginia . In 1882 Johnson married Elizabeth Neale , the daughter of Hamlet V. Neale of Keyser . He and Elizabeth had two children : George N. Johnson and Lucy N. Johnson . Johnson died as a result of paralysis on February 8 , 1913 in Romney , and is buried in its Indian Mound Cemetery . 
 = Nothomyrmecia = 
 Nothomyrmecia , also known as the dinosaur ant or dawn ant , is a rare genus of ants consisting of a single species , Nothomyrmecia macrops . It lives in South Australia , nesting in old @-@ growth mallee woodland and Eucalyptus woodland . The full distribution of Nothomyrmecia has never been assessed , and it is unknown how widespread it really is ; its potential range may be wider if it does favour old @-@ growth mallee woodland . Possible threats to its survival include habitat destruction and climate change . Nothomyrmecia is most active when it is cold because workers encounter fewer competitors and predators such as Camponotus and Iridomyrmex , and it also increases hunting success . Thus , the increase of temperature may prevent them from foraging and very few areas would be suitable for the ant to live in . As a result , the IUCN lists the ant as Critically Endangered . 
 A medium @-@ sized ant , Nothomyrmecia measures 9 @.@ 7 – 11 mm ( 0 @.@ 38 – 0 @.@ 43 in ) . Workers are monomorphic , showing little morphological differentiation among one another . Mature colonies are very small , with only 50 to 100 individuals in each nest . Workers are strictly nocturnal ( active mainly at night ) and are solitary foragers , collecting arthropod prey and sweet substances such as honeydew from scale insects and other Hemiptera . They rely on their vision to navigate and there is no evidence to suggest that the species use chemicals to communicate when foraging , but they do use chemical alarm signals . A queen ant will mate with one or more males and , during colony foundation , she will hunt for food until the brood have fully developed . Queens are univoltine ( i.e. they produce just one generation of ants each year ) . Two queens may establish a colony together , but only one will remain once the first generation of workers has been reared . 
 Nothomyrmecia was first described by Australian entomologist John S. Clark in 1934 from two specimens of worker ants . These were reportedly collected in 1931 near the Russell Range , inland from Israelite Bay in Western Australia . After its initial discovery , the ant was not seen again for four decades until a group of entomologists rediscovered it in 1977 , 1 @,@ 300 km ( 810 mi ) away from the original reported site . Dubbed as the ' Holy Grail ' of myrmecology , the ant was subject to great scientific interest after its rediscovery , attracting scientists from around the world . In Poochera ( the rediscovery site ) , pictures of the ant are stenciled on the streets , and it is perhaps the only town in the world that thrives off ant @-@ based tourism . Some entomologists have suggested a relationship to the Baltic Eocene fossil ant genus Prionomyrmex based on morphological similarities , but this interpretation is not widely accepted by the entomological community . Owing to its body structure , Nothomyrmecia is regarded to be the most primitive ant alive and a ' living fossil ' , stimulating studies on its morphology , behaviour , ecology , and chromosomes . 
 = = Description = = 
 Nothomyrmecia is a medium @-@ sized ant , measuring 9 @.@ 7 – 11 mm ( 0 @.@ 38 – 0 @.@ 43 in ) in length . Workers are monomorphic , meaning that there is little morphological differentiation among one another . The mandibles , clypeus ( one of the sclerites that make up the " face " of an arthropod or insect ) , antennae and legs are pale yellow . The hairs on the body are yellow , erect and long and abundant , but on the antennae and legs they are shorter and suberect ( standing almost in an erect position ) . Though it shows similar characteristics to Myrmecia , Nothomyrmecia somewhat resembles Oecophylla , commonly known as weaver ants . Workers are strictly nocturnal ( active mainly at night ) but navigate by vision , relying on large compound eyes . The mandibles are shorter than the head . They have 10 to 12 teeth and are less specialised than those of Myrmecia and Prionomyrmex , being elongate and triangular . The head is longer than it is wide and broader towards the back . The sides of the head are convex around the eyes . The long antennal scapes ( the base of the antenna ) extend beyond the occipital border , and the second segment of the funiculus ( a series of segments between the base and club ) is slightly longer than the first , third and fourth segment . The node , pronotum , epinotum and thorax are longer than broad , and the mesonotum is just as long as it is wide . The first segment of the gaster ( the bulbous posterior portion of the metasoma ) is broader than long by a third and broader at the back than the front with strongly convex sides . 
 A long and retractable stinger is present at the rear of the abdomen . It has been described as " prominent and effective " and is capable of inflicting a painful sting to humans . A ' sting bulb gland ' is also present in Nothomyrmecia ; this is a small exocrine gland of unknown function , first discovered and named in 1990 . It is situated in the basal part of the insect 's sting , and is located between the two ducts of the venom gland and the Dufour 's gland . Despite its many primitive features , the sting apparatus of Nothomyrmecia is considered less primitive than those found in other ants such as Amblyopone pallipes . It is the only known species of ant that contains both a sting and a ' waist ' ( i.e. it has no postpetiole between the first and second gastral segments ) . 
 Queens look similar to workers , but several morphological features distinguish the two castes from each other . Although their body structure is similar to that of workers , the queens are usually larger . Ocelli are highly developed , but the eyes on the queen are not enlarged . The structure of the <unk> ( the wing @-@ bearing area of the thorax ) is consistent with other reproductive ants , although it does not occupy as much of its <unk> bulk . The wings of the queens are reduced to the point that they are not functional ( they are brachypterous ) . Their wings are noticeably rudimentary and stubby , barely overlapping the first gastral segment . Males resemble those of Myrmecia , but Nothomyrmecia males bear a single waist node . The wings on the male ant are not stubby like a queen 's ; rather they are long and fully developed , exhibiting a primitive <unk> complement , They have a jugal anal lobe ( a portion of the hindwing ) , a feature found in many primitive ants , and basal hamuli ( hook @-@ like projections that link the forewings and hindwings ) . Most male specimens collected have two tibial spurs ( spines located on the distal end of the tibia ) ; the first spur is a long calcar while the second spur is short and thick . Adults have a stridulatory organ on the ventral side of the abdomen – unlike all other hymenopterans in which such organs are located dorsally . 
 In all castes , these ants have six maxillary palps ( palps that serve as organs of touch and taste in feeding ) and four labial palps ( sensory structures on the labium ) , a highly primitive feature . The females have a 12 @-@ segmented antenna , whereas males have 13 segments . Other features include paired <unk> found on both the hind and middle tibiae , and the claws have a median tooth . The unspecialised nature of the cuticle ( outer exoskeleton of the body ) is similar to Pseudomyrmex , a member of the subfamily <unk> . Many of the features known in Nothomyrmecia are found in Ponerinae and <unk> . 
 The eggs of Nothomyrmecia are similar to those of Myrmecia , being <unk> and non @-@ adhesive . The larvae bear a primitive body structure with no specialised tubercles , sharing similar characteristics with the subfamily Ponerinae , but the sensilla are more abundant on the mouthparts . The larvae are characterised into three stages : very young , young , and mature , measuring 2 @.@ 8 mm ( 0 @.@ 1 in ) , 6 @.@ 3 mm ( 0 @.@ 2 in ) and 11 mm ( 0 @.@ 4 in ) , respectively . The cocoons have thin walls and produce meconium ( a metabolic waste product expelled through the anal opening after an insect emerges from its pupal stage ) . The cuticular hydrocarbons have internally branched alkenes , a feature rarely found in ants and most insects . 
 In general , the body structure of all Nothomyrmecia castes demonstrates the primitive nature of the species . Notable derived features include <unk> ocelli on workers , brachypterous queens , and the <unk> structure on males . The morphology of the abdomen , mandibles , <unk> ( a sclerite , serving as the base of the ovipositors sheath ) and basal hamuli show it is more primitive than Myrmecia . The structure of the abdominal region can separate it from other Myrmeciinae relatives ( the fourth abdominal segment of Myrmecia is <unk> , whereas Nothomyrmecia has a non @-@ <unk> abdominal segment ) . The appearance of the fourth abdominal segment is consistent with almost all aculeate insects , and possibly Sphecomyrma . 
 The feature of non @-@ functional , vestigial wings may have evolved in this species relatively recently , as wings might otherwise have long @-@ since disappeared completely had they no function for dispersal . Wing @-@ reduction could somehow relate to population structure or some other specialised ecological pressure . Equally , wing @-@ reduction might be a feature that only forms in drought @-@ stressed colonies , as has been observed in several <unk> ant species found throughout semi @-@ arid regions of Australia . As yet , scientists do not fully understand how the feature of non @-@ functional , vestigial wings arose in Nothomyrmecia macrops . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 = = = Discovery = = = 
 The first collection of Nothomyrmecia was made in December 1931 by amateur entomologist , Amy Crocker , whose colleagues had collected a range of insect samples for her during a field excursion , including specimens of two worker ants , reportedly near the Russell Range , inland from Israelite Bay in Western Australia . Crocker then passed the ants to Australian entomologist John S. Clark . Recognised shortly afterwards as a new species , these specimens became the syntypes . Entomologist Robert W. Taylor subsequently expressed doubt about the accuracy of recording of the original discovery site , stating the specimens were probably collected from the western end of the Great Australian Bight , south from Balladonia . The discovery of Nothomyrmecia and the appearance of its unique body structure led scientists in 1951 to initiate a series of searches to find the ant in Western Australia . Over three decades , teams of Australian and American collectors failed to re @-@ find it ; entomologists such as E. O. Wilson and William Brown , Jr . , made attempts to search for it , but neither was successful . Then , in 1977 , Taylor and his party of entomologists from Canberra serendipitously discovered a solitary worker ant at Poochera , southeast of Ceduna , some 1 @,@ 300 km ( 810 mi ) from the reported site of the 1931 discovery . In 2012 , a report discussing the possible presence of Nothomyrmecia in Western Australia did not confirm any sighting of the ant between Balladonia and the Western Australian coastal regions . After 46 years of searching for it , entomologists have dubbed the ant the ' Holy Grail ' of myrmecology . 
 = = = Naming = = = 
 In 1934 entomologist John S. Clark published a formal description of Nothomyrmecia macrops as a new species and within a completely new genus and tribe ( <unk> ) of the Ponerinae . He did so because the two specimens ( which then became the syntypes ) bore no resemblance to any ant species he knew of , although they did share similar morphological characteristics with the extinct genus Prionomyrmex . Clark notes that the head and mandibles of Nothomyrmecia and Prionomyrmex are somewhat similar , but the two can be distinguished by the appearance of the node ( a segment between the mesosoma and gaster ) . In 1951 , Clark proposed the new ant subfamily <unk> for his Nothomyrmecia , based on morphological differences with other ponerine ants . This proposal was rejected by American entomologist William Brown Jr . , who would place it into the subfamily Myrmeciinae with Myrmecia and Prionomyrmex , under the tribe <unk> . Its distant relationship with extant ants was confirmed after its rediscovery , and its placement within the Formicidae was accepted by most scientists until the late 1980s . The single waist node led scientists to believe that Nothomyrmecia should be separate from Myrmecia and retained Clark 's original proposal . This proposal would place the ant into its own subfamily , despite many familiar morphological characteristics between the two genera . This separation from Myrmecia was retained until 2000 . 
 In 2000 , entomologist Cesare Baroni Urbani described a new Baltic fossil Prionomyrmex species ( P. janzeni ) . After examining specimens of Nothomyrmecia , Baroni Urbani stated that his new species and N. macrops were so morphologically similar that they belonged to the same genus . He proposed that the name Prionomyrmex should replace the name Nothomyrmecia ( which would then be just a synonym ) , and also that the subfamily <unk> should be called <unk> . 
 In 2003 , Russian palaeoentomologists G. M. Dlussky and E. B. Perfilieva separated Nothomyrmecia from Prionomyrmex on the basis of the fusion of an abdominal segment . In the same year , American entomologists P. S. Ward and S. G. Brady reached the same conclusion as Dlussky and Perfilieva and provided strong support for the monophyly of Prionomyrmex . Ward and Brady also transferred both taxa as distinct genera in the older subfamily Myrmeciinae under the tribe Prionomyrmecini . In 2005 and 2008 , Baroni Urbani suggested further evidence in favour of his former interpretation as opposed to Ward and Brady 's . This view is not supported in subsequent relevant papers , which continue to use the classification of Ward and Brady , rejecting that of Baroni Urbani . 
 The ant is commonly known as the dinosaur ant , dawn ant , or living fossil ant because of its primitive body structure . The generic name Nothomyrmecia means " false bulldog ant " . Its specific epithet , macrops ( " big eyes " ) , is derived from the Greek words makros , meaning " long " , or " large " , and ops , meaning " eyes " . 
 = = = Genetics and phylogeny = = = 
 Studies show that all hymenopteran insects that have a diploid ( 2n ) chromosome count above 52 are themselves all ants ; Nothomyrmecia and another Ponerinae ant , Platythyrea <unk> , share the highest number of chromosomes within all the Hymenoptera , having a diploid chromosome number of 92 – 94 . 
 Genetic evidence suggests that the age of the most recent common ancestor for Nothomyrmecia and Myrmecia is approximately 74 million years old , giving a likely origin in the Cretaceous . There are two hypotheses of the internal phylogeny of Nothomyrmecia : subfamily Formicinae is more closely related to Nothomyrmecia than it is to Myrmecia , evolving from Nothomyrmecia @-@ like ancestors . Alternatively , Nothomyrmecia and <unk> may have shared a common ancestor ; the two most likely separated from each other , and the first <unk> evolved from the <unk> instead . Currently , scientists agree that Nothomyrmecia most likely evolved from ancestors to the Ponerinae . Nothomyrmecia and other primitive ant genera such as Amblyopone and Myrmecia exhibit behaviour similar to a clade of soil @-@ dwelling families of vespoid wasps . The following cladogram generated by Canadian entomologist S. B. Archibald and his colleagues shows the possible phylogenetic position of Nothomyrmecia among some ants of the subfamily Myrmeciinae . They suggest that Nothomyrmecia may be closely related to extinct Myrmeciinae ants such as Avitomyrmex , Macabeemyrma , Prionomyrmex , and Ypresiomyrma . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 Nothomyrmecia is present in the cool regions of South Australia within mallee woodland and especially old @-@ growth areas populated with various Eucalyptus species , including Eucalyptus <unk> , E. gracilis and E. oleosa . It is possible that it also occurs in Western Australia , from where it was first collected . The full distribution of Nothomyrmecia has never been assessed , and it is unknown how widespread it really is . If it does favour old @-@ growth mallee woodland , it could have the potential for a wider range than is currently known from surveys and museum specimens . In 1998 , Nothomyrmecia colonies were located in 18 areas along the Eyre Peninsula by a team of entomologists , a stretch of 400 km ( 250 mi ) . 
 Nests are found in degraded limestone soil with Callitris trees present . Colony construction only occurs when the soil is moist . Nest entrance holes are difficult to detect as they are only 4 – 6 mm ( 0 @.@ 16 – 0 @.@ 24 in ) in width , and are located under shallow leaf litter with no mounds or soil deposits present , although guards are regularly seen . A single gallery , 4 – 5 mm ( 0 @.@ 16 – 0 @.@ 20 in ) in diameter , forms inside a Nothomyrmecia colony . This gallery descends steeply into the ground towards a somewhat elliptical and horizontal chamber that is 3 – 5 cm ( 1 @.@ 2 – 2 @.@ 0 in ) in diameter and 5 – 10 mm ( 0 @.@ 20 – 0 @.@ 39 in ) in height . This chamber is typically 18 to 43 cm ( 7 @.@ 1 to 16 @.@ 9 in ) below the soil 's surface . 
 = = Behaviour and ecology = = 
 = = = Foraging , diet and predators = = = 
 Workers are nectarivores and can be found foraging on top of Eucalyptus trees , where they search for food and prey for the larvae . However , workers are known to drink hemolymph from the insects they capture , and a queen in a captive colony was observed consuming a fly . Captured prey items are given to larvae , which are carnivorous . The workers search for prey in piles of leaves , killing small arthropods including Drosophila flies , <unk> and spiderlings . Prey items are usually less than 4 mm ( 0 @.@ 2 in ) in size , and workers grab them using their mandibles and forelegs , then kill them with their sting . Workers also feed on sweet substances such as honeydew secreted by scale insects and other Hemiptera ; one worker alone may feed on these sources for 30 minutes . Pupae may be given to the larvae if a colony has a shortage of food . Workers are able to lay unfertilised eggs specifically to feed the larvae ; these are known as trophic eggs . Sometimes the adults , including the queen and other sexually active ants , consume these eggs . Workers transfer food to other nestmates , including winged adults and larvae ; the anal droplets are exuded by the larvae , which are taken up by the workers . 
 Age caste <unk> does not occur in Nothomyrmecia , where the younger workers act as nurses and tend to the brood and the older workers go out and forage . The only ant known other than Nothomyrmecia which does not exhibit age caste <unk> is <unk> pallipes . Workers are strictly nocturnal , and only emerge from their nests on cold nights . They are most active at temperatures of 5 – 10 ° C ( 41 – 50 ° F ) , and are much more difficult to locate on warmer nights . Workers are possibly most active when it is cold because at these times they encounter fewer and less aggressive competitors , including other more dominant diurnal ant species that are sometimes found foraging during warm nights . Cold temperatures may also hamper the escape of prey items , so increasing the ants ' hunting success . Unless a forager has captured prey , workers stay on trees for the remainder of the night until dawn , possibly relying on sunlight to navigate back to their nest . There is no evidence that they use chemical trails when foraging ; instead , workers rely on visual cues to navigate around . However , chemical markers may play an important role in recognising nest entrances . The ants are solitary foragers . Waste material , such as dead nestmates , cocoon shells , and food remnants , are disposed of far away from the nest . 
 Workers from different Nothomyrmecia colonies are not antagonistic towards one another , so they can forage together on a single tree , although they do attack if an outsider tries to enter an underground colony . Ants such as Camponotus and Iridomyrmex may pose a threat to foragers or to a colony if they try to enter ; foraging workers that encounter Iridomyrmex ants are vigorously attacked and killed . Nothomyrmecia workers counter this by secreting alarm pheromones from the mandibular gland and Dufour 's gland . Foraging workers also engage in alternative methods to protect themselves from predators . Adopting a posture by opening the jaws in a threatening stance or deliberately falling onto the ground and remaining motionless until the threat subsides are two known methods . With that said , Nothomyrmecia is a timid and shy species that retreats if exposed . 
 = = = Life cycle and reproduction = = = 
 Nuptial flight ( meaning that virgin queens and males emerge to mate ) does not occur in Nothomyrmecia . Instead , they engage in long @-@ range dispersal ( they walk away from the colony for some distance and mate ) which presumably begins by late summer or autumn , with the winged adults emerging around March and April , but sometimes a colony may overwinter ( a process by which an organism waits out the winter season ) . These winged adults , born around January , are usually quite young when they begin to mate . Queens are seen around vegetation trying to flutter their vestigial wings – a behaviour seen in some brachypterous Myrmecia queens . Due to the queen 's brachypterous wings , it is likely that the winged adults mate near their parent nest and release sex pheromones , or instead climb on vegetation far away from their nests and attract fully winged males . Nothomyrmecia is a polyandrous ant , in which queens mate with one or more males . In one study of 32 colonies , it was found that queens mated with an average of 1 @.@ 37 males . After mating , new colonies can be founded by one or more queens , though a colony with two queens reduces to a single queen when the nest is mature , forming colonies that are termed monogynous . The queens will compete for dominance , and the subordinate queen is later expelled by workers who drag her outside the nest . An existing nest with no queen may adopt a foraging queen looking for an area to begin her colony , as well as workers . Queens are semi @-@ claustral , meaning that during the initial establishment of the new colony the queen will forage among the worker ants so that she can ensure sufficient food to raise her brood . Sometimes a queen will leave her nest at night with the sole purpose of finding food or water for herself . 
 Eggs are not seen in nests from April to September . They are laid by late December and develop into adults by mid @-@ February , although pupation does not occur until March . However , Nothomyrmecia is univoltine , meaning that the queen produces a single generation of eggs per season , and it sometimes may take as many as 12 months for an egg to develop into an adult . Adults are defined as either juveniles or post @-@ juveniles : juveniles are too young ( perhaps several months old ) to have experienced overwintering whereas post @-@ juveniles have . The pupae generally overwinter and begin to hatch by the time a new generation of eggs is laid . Workers are capable of laying reproductive eggs , although it is not known if these develop into males , females or both . This uncertainty results from the suggestion that , because some colonies have been shown to have high levels of genetic diversity , worker ants could be inseminated by males and act as supplementary reproductives . Eggs are scattered among the nest , whereas the larvae and pupae are set apart from each other in groups . The larvae are capable of crawling around the nest . When the larvae are ready to spin their cocoons , they swell up and are later buried by workers in the ground to allow cocoon formation . Small non @-@ aggressive workers that act as nurses provide assistance for newborns to hatch from their cocoons . At maturity , a nest may only contain 50 to 100 adults . In some nests , colony founding can occur within a colony itself : when a queen dies , the colony may be taken over by one of her daughters , or it may adopt a newly mated queen , restricting reproduction among workers ; this method of founding extends the lifespan of the colony almost indefinitely . 
 = = Relationship with humans = = 
 = = = Conservation = = = 
 Before its rediscovery in 1977 , entomologists feared that Nothomyrmecia had already become extinct . The ant was listed as a protected species under the Western Australian Wildlife Conservation Act 1950 . In 1996 , the International Union for Conservation of Nature listed Nothomyrmecia as Critically Endangered , stating that only a few small colonies were known . However , the Threatened Species Scientific Committee states that the species is ineligible for listing under the Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999 . This is because there is insufficient evidence to demonstrate that populations are declining . Colonies are also naturally <unk> ( lacking in numbers of ants ) , and their distribution is potentially quite extensive across southern Australia , due to the ants ' preference for old @-@ growth mallee woodland . With 18 sites known for this species , and the potential for many more being discovered , there seems little immediate possibility of extinction . With this said , it is unknown how widespread it actually is , and scientists are not yet clear what , if any , threats are impacting on it . 
 Although threats are not known for certain , suspected anthropogenic threats that can significantly impact Nothomyrmecia include habitat destruction and fragmentation by railway lines , roads and wheat fields . In the town of Ceduna , west of Poochera , local populations of the ant were almost eliminated after the area was bulldozed and burned during the installation of an underground telephone line , although nearby sites had larger populations than those found in the destroyed site . Colonies may not survive tree @-@ clearing , as they depend on overhead canopies to navigate . Bushfires are another major threat to the survival of Nothomyrmecia , potentially destroying valuable food sources , including the trees they forage on , and reducing the population of a colony . Although these ants may have recovered from previous bushfires , larger , more frequent fires may devastate the population . However , Nothomyrmecia ants can be safe from fires if they remain inside their nests . Climate change could be a threat to their survival , as they depend on cold temperatures to forage and collect food . An increase in the temperature will prevent workers from foraging , and very few areas would be suitable for the species to live in . The cold winds blowing off the Southern Ocean allow Nothomyrmecia to benefit from the cool temperatures they need for night @-@ time foraging , so an increase in sea temperature could also potentially threaten it . 
 Conservationists suggest that conducting surveys , maintaining known populations through habitat protection and fighting climate change may ensure the survival of Nothomyrmecia . They also advocate protection of remaining mallee habitat from degradation , and for management actions to improve tree and understorey structure . Because most known populations are found outside protected areas in vegetation alongside roads , a species management plan is required to identify other key actions , including making local councils aware of the presence , conservation status and habitat requirement of Nothomyrmecia . This could result in future land use and management being decided more appropriately at the local level . Not all colonies are found in unprotected areas ; some have been discovered in the Lake Gilles Conservation Park and the <unk> Conservation Reserve . More research is needed to know the true extent of the ant 's geographical distribution . 
 = = = Significance = = = 
 Nothomyrmecia macrops is widely regarded as the most primitive living ant and , as such , has aroused considerable interest among the entomological community . Following its rediscovery it was the subject of a prolonged and rigorous series of studies involving Australian , American and European ant specialists and it soon became one of the most studied ant species on the planet . Nothomyrmecia can be cultured with ease , and could potentially prove a useful subject for research into learning in insects as well as the physiology of nocturnal vision . Since its chance discovery at Poochera , the town has became of international interest to <unk> , and it is possibly the only town in the world with ant @-@ based tourism . Promoting it as a tourist attraction , Nothomyrmecia has been adopted as the emblem of the Poochera community . Pictures of the ant have been stencilled onto the pavements , and a large sculpture of Nothomyrmecia has been erected in the town . 
 = = = Cited literature = = = 
 Hölldobler , B. ; Wilson , E.O. ( 1990 ) . The Ants . Cambridge , Massachusetts : Belknap Press of Harvard University Press . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 674 @-@ <unk> @-@ 5 . 
 = Bart 's Dog Gets an " F " = 
 " Bart 's Dog Gets an " F " " is the sixteenth episode of The Simpsons ' second season . It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on March 7 , 1991 . In this episode , the Simpson family 's dog , Santa 's Little Helper , manages to infuriate Homer and Marge by destroying Homer 's new shoes , ruining a family heirloom , and devouring Homer 's cookie . As a result Homer considers giving him away while Bart is forced to train Santa 's Little Helper at an obedience school so that the family will not have to give him away . At first , the dog is extremely disobedient , but , at the last minute , passes the test . 
 The episode was written by Jon Vitti and directed by Jim Reardon . Tracey Ullman guest starred as Emily Winthrop , the instructor at the obedience school and as neighbour Mrs. Winfield . The animal noises for the episode were performed by Frank Welker . " Bart 's Dog Gets an " F " " features cultural references to films such as Predator , Jaws , E.T. the Extra @-@ Terrestrial , and National Lampoon 's Animal House . Since airing , the episode has received mostly positive reviews from television critics . It acquired a Nielsen rating of 13 @.@ 8 , and was the highest @-@ rated show on the Fox network the week it aired . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Lisa has the mumps and has to spend a few days home from school . While Marge teaches Lisa sewing , Homer goes to the mall to buy some magazines for her . There he sees and purchases some $ 125 shoes known as the Assassins , which he saw his neighbor Ned Flanders wear earlier . However , Santa 's Little Helper promptly destroys the shoes , angering Homer . Marge shows Lisa a patchwork quilt , which is a family heirloom . Lisa makes her own contribution to it , but then Santa 's Little Helper rips it up . When Homer discovers that Santa 's Little Helper has also eaten his cookie , which Homer had bought earlier , he demands that the family get rid of the dog and laughs at the kids when Marge agrees with him , but the kids , terrified that Homer will take away their pet , promise their dad that they will train their dog to prevent future circumstances . 
 Santa 's Little Helper does not do well at the obedience school as Bart is reluctant to use a choke chain suggested by the school 's instructor Emily Winthrop . The night before the final exam , Bart and Santa 's Little Helper play , thinking it will be their last few hours together . This bonding breaks down the communication barrier , meaning Santa 's Little Helper can understand Bart 's commands , and much to Homer 's chagrin , passes obedience school . Lisa marks the occasions by starting a new quilt to replace the one destroyed . 
 = = Production = = 
 The episode was written by Jon Vitti and directed by Jim Reardon . Tracey Ullman guest starred as Emily Winthrop , the instructor at the obedience school , a parody of Margaret Thatcher in her mannerisms . The Simpsons began as a series of one @-@ minute shorts that aired on Ullman 's variety show , The Tracey Ullman Show , for three seasons during 1987 – 89 . Due to the success of the shorts , the characters spun off into their own half @-@ hour prime @-@ time show on the Fox network named The Simpsons . Matt Groening , the series ' creator , wanted Ullman to make a guest appearance in one of the shorts , but was told that she was too busy with the rest of The Tracey Ullman Show . When her show was canceled in 1990 , Ullman agreed to do a guest appearance on The Simpsons after being asked by Groening once again . The animal noises for the episode , including those by Santa 's Little Helper , were performed by Frank Welker . It was the first The Simpsons episode Welker worked on and he became a recurring voice actor on the show , before leaving in 2002 . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 Dr. Hibbert 's home and family resemble that of the The Cosby Show , a program that at the time competed with The Simpsons for the Thursday 8 : 00 p.m. time slot . The high tech and expensive sneakers Assassins are reference to the Nike Air Jordan , an athletic shoe brand which was expensive in the early 1990s , and was expected to sell on the basis of brand loyalty and celebrity endorsements . When Lisa shows Marge her sewing finger , the music from the film E.T. the Extra @-@ Terrestrial plays . Lisa touching Marge 's finger is reference to the final scene of that film . The second frame in the Bouvier family patchwork quilt depicts a poster for one of Buffalo Bill 's Wild West Shows . In addition , the photograph The Falling Soldier by Robert Capa is the third frame in the quilt . When the scene changes to Santa 's Little Helper 's point of view , a small explosion sound is heard ; this sound is used in the film Predator , when the camera switches to Predator 's point of view . The dramatic music from the film Jaws is used just before Santa 's Little Helper attacks something . The dog obedience school has different categories named after famous dogs , which are Rin Tin Tin , Benji , Toto and the one in which Santa 's Little Helper attends , Cujo . Winthrop is based on British dog trainer and author Barbara Woodhouse . Winthrop exclaims " Heavens to Murgatroyd ! " , a catchphrase spoken by Bert Lahr in Meet the People and popularised by the cartoon character <unk> . One of the dogs seen in the graduation ceremony is named after Lao Tzu , an ancient philosopher of China . At the end of the episode , the eventual fate of the various dogs in the class are captioned at the bottom of the screen , a reference to the ending of the film National Lampoon 's Animal House . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original broadcast , " Bart 's Dog Gets an " F " " finished thirtieth in the ratings for the week of March 4 – 10 , 1991 , with a Nielsen rating of 13 @.@ 8 , equivalent to approximately thirteen million viewing households . It was the highest @-@ rated show on the Fox network that week . Since airing , the episode has received mostly positive reviews from television critics . The authors of the book I Can 't Believe It 's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide , Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood , wrote that it was an " enjoyable episode heightened by both Tracey Ullman 's Miss <unk> and Frank Welker 's muted dog noises . " DVD Movie Guide 's Colin Jacobson said the episode " presented an odd viewpoint , since [ Santa 's Little Helper ] never behaved this badly in prior episodes , but consistency never exactly was the hallmark of the series . " He also commented that Tracey Ullman " offered a great performance as obedience school owner Emily Winthrop , " and concluded by saying that the episode overall " provided yet another consistently fine show . " In a review of the second season , Bryce Wilson of Cinema Blend thought " Bart 's Dog Gets an " F " " felt " a bit flat " , but " even in [ its ] lowest points , humor is easy to find . " Doug Pratt , a DVD reviewer and Rolling Stone contributor , was also positive about the episode : " The viewer is treated to an inspired dog 's prospective of the world , in very grayish tones , with the humans speaking gibberish ; another poignant character effort . " Jacobson 's favorite line of the episode was Homer 's ad about Santa 's Little Helper : " Free to loving home . World ’ s most brilliant dog . Says ‘ I love you ’ on command . " Reviewing for The DVD Journal , Dawn Taylor thought the most memorable line was Flanders 's description of the Assassins sneakers : " They 've got Velcro straps , a water pump in the tongue , a built @-@ in <unk> , reflective sidewalls and little vanity plates . " 
 In promotion of The Simpsons Sing the Blues , the music video for the album 's second single , " Deep , Deep Trouble " premiered shortly after this episode 's first broadcast . 
 = Noel Lee ( executive ) = 
 Noel Lee ( born December 25 , 1948 ) is the current CEO of Monster Inc . Lee graduated from California Polytechnic State University with a bachelor 's degree in mechanical engineering , before doing work in laser fusion for the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory . He quit his engineering job in 1974 to play drums for a country rock band . After the band separated , he founded Monster Cable Products in 1979 based on loudspeaker cables he invented and manufactured in his garage . 
 Lee 's audio cables met resistance at first , because most audio cabling at the time was zip cord provided by audio vendors for free . Sales improved as retailers witnessed audio demonstrations and saw that his Monster @-@ branded cables offered better profit margins than other electronics products . Lee is credited with building the Monster business and shaping today ’ s audio components market . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Noel Lee was born in San Francisco , California on December 25 , 1948 to <unk> @-@ San and Sarah Lee . His parents named him " Noel " because he was born on Christmas Day . His father worked for China 's Central News Agency and Lee had four sisters . Lee 's parents moved to San Francisco around the same time the Communist party took power . 
 Lee took an interest in music as a child ; he described himself as having a more diverse taste in music than other kids his age . Lee 's senior project was an effort to improve the quality of audio from electronics . According to Lee , his High School experiences were " rough " due to the level of discrimination against Asian @-@ Americans at the time . Lee attended San Francisco City College , then California Polytechnic State University , where he earned a degree in mechanical engineering in 1971 . 
 = = Engineer and drummer = = 
 Noel Lee 's first job out of college was as a laser fusion design engineer at a government @-@ run nuclear research center called the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory . On nights and weekends he played drums for an Asian country rock cover band called Asian Wood and worked on his home audio equipment . 
 In 1974 , Asian Wood was given an opportunity to go on a world tour . Lee quit his job as an engineer in order to be the band 's drummer . Asian Wood 's members moved to Hawaii to start their tour , but it was cancelled two weeks later . The promoter wanted a straight rock band without country influences . This left Lee and his family stranded in Hawaii until they could earn money for travel back home . The band reinvented itself , covering Top 40 popular songs in order to attract work . Asian Wood took on other gigs around Hawaii for 18 months before breaking up . Lee continued doing solo gigs for six months after that , before returning to the Bay Area for an engineering job with Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory . He also worked as an independent salesperson for several small speaker companies in San Francisco . 
 = = Monster = = 
 Noel Lee is credited with turning the audio cable market into a " profitable cottage industry " and with changing the consumer mindset to see audio cables as a way to improve sound quality . He was awarded the Plus X Lifetime Achievement Award for his role in shaping a market and was named Northern California Entrepreneur of the Year by Ernst & Young . The company he founded became a household name and market @-@ share leader . Monster does not disclose its financials , but industry analysts estimate the company is " hugely profitable . " Lee calls himself the " Head Monster " and calls the company culture the " Monster Attitude . " The company , while still best known for audio wiring , now carries 6 @,@ 000 different products , such as headphones and home theater components . Its products are sold in more than 15 @,@ 000 stores and it owns over 375 patents . Monster became one of the largest employers in the Bay Area . 
 = = = Origins = = = 
 In the late 1970s , Noel Lee wanted to improve the sound quality from his home audio equipment . He didn 't have very much money , so Lee experimented with ways to create a better sound by improving inexpensive cabling . At first he worked out of his family 's apartment and later in his in @-@ laws ' garage , which they rented from family after moving to the Richmond district in 1978 . Lee experimented with different widths , winding methods , and qualities of copper and insulation in audio cables to find an alternative to the zip cord audio vendors gave out for free . He compared different wire constructs , while listening to Tchaikovsky 's 1812 Overture . 
 Lee called the 12 @-@ gauge audio cable he created " Monster " due to its size . According to Vision Magazine , the first Monster cable was " a low @-@ resistance twin @-@ axial stranded design . " Lee manufactured the cable by hand on a ping pong table and sold it door @-@ to @-@ door . According to Lee , Pacific Stereo was the first electronics retailer to give him a chance to sell Monster cables in their store . 
 Lee spent $ 50 @,@ 000 in personal savings to demonstrate the cables at the Consumer Electronics Show ( CES ) in Chicago in 1979 , using a borrowed portion of someone else 's exhibit area . Lee received a positive response at the event and founded Monster , Inc . ( formerly known as Monster Cable Products ) later that year . Lee received an order from a Canadian distributor for 30 @,@ 000 cables . The distributor wouldn 't pay until the products were shipped , so Lee took out a $ 250 @,@ 000 bank loan to pay for the production of the cables . According to Lee , he started the company without business experience or a strategy . 
 Lee was met with resistance , because the audio industry at the time didn 't believe cables made an audible difference in the sound and wire was something that was normally provided for free . Lee did demonstrations at retailers comparing Monster cables to zip cord to convince consumers that expensive equipment was wasted on cheap wiring . Sales picked up as retailers saw the wiring as an opportunity for higher profit margins . This led Lee to provide incentives to retail salespeople to sell the cabling , rather than spend money on advertising . This led to criticisms that his business model creates aggressive salespeople . 
 = = = Establishment and diversification = = = 
 Within six years from when it was founded , Monster had $ 50 million in annual revenues and 400 employees . The company 's growth was primarily due to Monster training sales staff at electronics stores to bundle the cables with other electronics purchases , an effort the company spent 15 percent of its revenues on by 1998 . Lee kept the company private and grew the business , despite pressure to go public . 
 In connection with his background as a musician , Lee founded the record label Monster Music in 1999 , signing Van Morrison 's daughter Shana . Monster created numerous divisions as it diversified into other products , such as Monster Performance Car , Monster Game , Monster Photo and Monster Computer . By 2003 , Monster produced more than 1 @,@ 000 products , including power cords , gaming accessories and cooling products . According to a 2005 USA Today article , Lee and his company were developing furniture with high @-@ end electronics built @-@ in , wireless products to replace audio cords and a user interface to consolidate the consumer 's control of their electronics . Lee and his son worked with Dr. Dre to collaborate on the Beats brand of headphones , which was later acquired by Apple for $ 3 billion in 2014 . According to Business Insider , Beats Electronics denies that Monster had a role in the design of the headphones . Lee said Beats had no engineers on staff and it spent millions in research and development to get the product started , but that their contract was poorly constructed , giving all the intellectual property to Beats when it wasn 't renewed . 
 In 2004 , Lee bought the rights to the San Francisco 49ers football stadium , which was renamed to Monster Park . Citizens and local government protested that a public facility adopted a corporate name and a local ballot was passed to revert the stadium name after the four @-@ year deal with Monster expired . The sponsorship was partially contentious due to a recent layoff of 120 local employees . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Noel Lee is married with two children and two step @-@ children . His son Kevin Lee , sometimes referred to as " Little Monster " , started working for the company and developed the M @-@ Design product line of high @-@ tech furniture . Lee 's son later quit Monster and started his own audio company Sol Republic in 2010 . At the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory , Lee was exposed to toxic doses of radiation , which caused a degenerative nerve disorder that prevents him from walking without a wheelchair or Segway . 
 Lee enjoys collecting gadgets and has a collection of old sports cars . He enjoys socialising with musicians and counts Carlos Santana and George Benson among his friends . He is a member of the Asian Business League of San Francisco . He donated $ 75 @,@ 000 worth of audio cables to the Los Angeles Unified School District . Lee describes his business ethic as " 24 / 7 ; sleep when you 're dead . " He lives in Hillsborough , California . Lee is also known for throwing large parties at the Consumer Electronics Show and spending time with celebrities at the event . 
 = Raasay = 
 Raasay ( Scottish Gaelic : <unk> ) is an island between the Isle of Skye and the mainland of Scotland . It is separated from Skye by the Sound of Raasay and from Applecross by the Inner Sound . It is most famous for being the birthplace of the poet Sorley MacLean , an important figure in the Scottish literary renaissance . 
 Traditionally the home of Clan MacSween , the island was ruled by the MacLeods from the 15th to the 19th century . Subsequently a series of private landlords held title to the island , which is now largely in public ownership . Raasay House , which was visited by James Boswell and Samuel Johnson in 1773 , is now an outdoor activity centre . Raasay means " Isle of the Roe Deer " and is home to an endemic subspecies of Bank <unk> . 
 = = Geology and geography = = 
 About 14 miles ( 23 km ) north to south and 3 miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) east to west ( at its widest ) , Raasay 's terrain is varied . The highest point at 443 metres ( 1 @,@ 453 ft ) is Dùn Caan , an unusual , flat @-@ topped peak . The island of Rona lies just off the north coast and the tidal islets of Eilean <unk> and Eilean Tigh are to the northwest . Other smaller surrounding islands are Eilean Aird nan <unk> , Eilean an <unk> , Holoman Island , Manish Island , Fraoch Eilean , Glas Eilean , <unk> @-@ <unk> and Eilean an <unk> . The main village of Inverarish is near the southwest coast . 
 Geologically interesting , the island is visited by many students engaged in mapping projects . The south is mainly Torridonian sandstone and shale ; the north is grey @-@ banded Archaean Lewisian gneiss and <unk> . There are also smaller outcrops of Jurassic shales and sandstones occasionally interspersed with limestone . The related ironstone beds contain low grade oolitic siderite and <unk> ores which were worked commercially in the early 20th century . Remaining reserves are estimated at 10 million tonnes . The seas to the east and west are very deep , large troughs having been created by the Skye icecap in the Pleistocene . 
 = = Economy and culture = = 
 The primary employment is in tourism , working for the ferry company , crofting and fishing , or commuting to work on Skye . There is a primary school , but older students go to Portree via ferry and bus . A twenty @-@ five @-@ minute ferry ride connects the island with Sconser on Skye . 
 Sites of interest include the remains of a broch , the ruins of Brochel Castle , inscribed stones , abandoned crofting communities , and many walking paths . 
 There is a shop / post office located in Inverarish . Accommodation is available in the old manor of Raasay House , and at various B & Bs . There are significant numbers of incomers and holiday homes especially in the south of the island . This has helped to arrest the population decline from over 900 in 1803 to 194 in 2001 . Some inhabitants belong to the Free Presbyterian Church of Scotland , which strictly observes the Sabbath . On Sundays there are no public services , the playground is closed and , until 2004 , the ferry did not run . 
 In early 2007 the Raasay Community Association signed a contract with a number of building contractors to construct a community centre , which hosted its first <unk> on 29 May 2010 . In 2008 construction began on a new £ 12 million ferry terminal at <unk> Bay , which was officially opened on 17 August 2010 . Following the community buyout of Raasay House a £ 3 @.@ 5 million refurbishment was undertaken , leading to the temporary closure of the outdoor centre . However , in the early hours of 18 January 2009 the building was severely damaged by fire . Restoration work commenced in August 2010 but was suspended in November when the main contractor , ROK , went into administration . Work restarted with a new contractor , Mansell , in late 2011 . Raasay House was officially handed over to the community in March 2013 and in addition to the 4 star accommodation it provides it is also now an outdoor activity centre with a restaurant , bar and cafe . 
 = = Flora and fauna = = 
 Raasay is home to the Raasay vole ( <unk> <unk> <unk> ) , a subspecies of bank vole , which is darker and heavier than the mainland variety and found nowhere else in the world . It is possibly a survivor of a Scandinavian race . Murray ( 1973 ) states that a single specimen of a pine marten , otherwise missing from the Hebrides , was found on the island in 1971 . No other records for this species exist . Raasay is one of only four of the Inner Hebrides where mountain hares breed . Raasay is regularly visited by white @-@ tailed sea eagles and golden eagles and there are populations of otter , red deer and European rabbit ( which were thoughtlessly introduced by the island 's proprietor in the 19th century ) . <unk> and weasel are found in small numbers as are water shrew . It also supports a rich variety of plants , including red broomrape , dark red helleborine , mountain avens and numerous other <unk> , orchids , <unk> and ferns . The carline thistle ( <unk> vulgaris ) was apparently extant in the 1970s , but a recent survey found no evidence of its continued existence . There are several stands of mixed woodland . 
 = = History = = 
 The spread of Scots culture from Dalriada north of Ardnamurchan is poorly understood and little is recorded of Raasay 's early Christian period . The placename <unk> suggests the presence of St Moluag in the late sixth century . 
 Following Viking expeditions to the islands they called the Suðreyjar in the eighth century , Raasay became part of the Norse Kingdom of the Isles and for much of the period religious observance came under the jurisdiction of the Bishopric of the Isles . The Hebrides were yielded to the Kingdom of Scotland as a result of the 1266 Treaty of Perth , after which time control of the islands north of Ardnamurchan was in the hands of the Earls of Ross . In addition to the name " Raasay " itself , placenames such as Arnish ( eagle headland ) , <unk> ( seething headland ) and Eyre ( beach or sand spit ) are a legacy of the Norse presence . 
 = = = 15th to 17th century = = = 
 Tradition has it that Clan MacSween originally held title to Raasay but there is no written record of this . It is known that the island was ruled by the MacLeods from 1518 when Calum Garbh , younger son of the MacLeod Chief of Lewis was granted title . Martin Martin visited towards the end of the 17th century and noted : 
 it has some wood on all the quarters of it , the whole is fitter for pasturage than cultivation , the ground being generally very unequal , but very well watered with rivulets and springs . There is a spring running down the face of a high rock on the east side of the isle ; it petrifies into a white substance , of which very fine lime is made , and there is a great quantity of it . There is a quarry of good stone on the same side of the isle ; there is abundance of caves on the west side , which serve to lodge several families , who for their convenience in grazing , fishing , & c . , resort thither in the summer . On the west side , particularly near to the village Clachan , the shore abounds with smooth stones of different sizes , variegated all over . The same cattle , fowl , and fish are produced here that are found in the isle of Skye . There is a law observed by the natives that all their fishing lines must be of equal length , for the longest is always supposed to have best access to the fish , which would prove a disadvantage to such as might have shorter ones . 
 There are some forts in this isle , the highest is in the south end ; it is a natural strength , and in form like the crown of a hat ; it is called Dun @-@ Cann , which the natives will needs have to be from one <unk> , cousin to the king of Denmark . The other lies on the side , is an artificial fort , three stories high , and is called Castle <unk> . 
 Brochel Castle , as it is more commonly known , was built by the MacSweens in the 15th century on the north @-@ east coast of Raasay . Latterly , it became a base for the MacLeod of Lewis 's pirating activities prior to Calum Garbh 's investiture there . The castle was inhabited until the death by drowning of the Chief Iain Garbh in 1671 and is now a ruin sitting atop a pinnacle . In the meantime the Macleods moved their seat to Raasay House at the south end of the island . 
 = = = 18th century = = = 
 Although Protestant , the MacLeods of Raasay supported Bonnie Prince Charlie in 1745 . After the defeat at the Battle of Culloden , the Prince spent 2 days hiding from the British troops on Raasay and as a consequence of the island 's support for the Jacobite cause the original Raasay House and many dwellings were burnt down by government troops . In conversation with Malcolm MacLeod of Raasay during his short stay on the island the Prince confided that although his life on the run was hard , he would rather live that way for ten years than be captured as he feared assassination . He seemed less aware of the risks his supporters ran . The atrocities perpetrated in the aftermath of Culloden were a shock to him . Of Cumberland he said : " Surely that man who calls himself a duke and pretends to be so great a general cannot be guilty of such cruelties . I cannot believe it . " 
 In 1773 James Boswell and Samuel Johnson arrived on the island during their Hebridean tour . They visited Raasay House and Johnson wrote : 
 Our reception exceeded our expectations . We found nothing but civility , elegance , and plenty . After the usual refreshments , and the usual conversation , the evening came upon us . The carpet was then rolled off the floor ; the musician was called , and the whole company was invited to dance , nor did ever fairies trip with greater alacrity . The general air of festivity , which predominated in this place , so far remote from all those regions which the mind has been used to contemplate as the mansions of pleasure , struck the imagination with a delightful surprise , analogous to that which is felt at an unexpected <unk> from darkness into light . 
 When it was time to <unk> , the dance ceased , and six and thirty persons sat down to two tables in the same room . After supper the ladies sung <unk> songs , to which I listened as an English audience to an Italian opera , delighted with the sound of words which I did not understand . 
 Boswell went exploring and described the island as follows : 
 Having resolved to explore the island of Rasay , which could be done only on foot , I last night obtained my fellow @-@ traveller ’ s permission to leave him for a day , he being unable to take so hardy a walk . Old Mr Malcolm M ’ <unk> , who had obligingly promised to accompany me , was at my bedside between five and six . I sprang up immediately , and he and I , attended by two other gentlemen , traversed the country during the whole of this day . Though we had passed over not less than four @-@ and @-@ twenty miles of very rugged ground , and had a Highland dance on the top of Dùn Can , the highest mountain in the island , we returned in the evening not at all fatigued , and piqued ourselves at not being outdone at the nightly ball by our less active friends , who had remained at home . 
 My survey of Rasay did not furnish much which can interest my readers ; I shall therefore put into as short a compass as I can , the observations upon it , which I find registered in my journal . It is about fifteen English miles long , and four broad . On the south side is the laird ’ s family seat , situated on a pleasing low spot . The old tower of three stories , mentioned by Martin , was taken down soon after 1746 , and a modern house supplies its place . There are very good grass @-@ fields and corn @-@ lands about it , well dressed . I observed , however , hardly any inclosures , except a good garden plentifully stocked with vegetables , and strawberries , raspberries , currants , & c . 
 = = = 19th and 20th centuries = = = 
 In 1843 the last laird , John Macleod , was deep in debt and chose to emigrate to Tasmania having sold Raasay for 35 @,@ 000 guineas to George Rainy . After the failure of the potato harvests in the 1840s the new owner decided to convert as much arable land as possible to sheep farming . This required the removal of the islanders and his solution was to ban marriage . Several townships were cleared including Hallaig and <unk> . Two boat loads of emigrants left for Australia in 1852 as a result and another 165 left for the same destination in 1865 . The estate was then sold to Edward Wood and conflicts between the laird and the islanders grew as he decided to turn the island over to sporting purposes . On 20 September 1862 the steamship Irishman ran aground on " <unk> Rock " between Raasay and Scalpay . A 9 @.@ 2 metres ( 30 ft ) vessel <unk> is also recorded as having become jammed under the ferry pier at the sound end of the island and broken in two by the rising tide at an unspecified date . 
 William Baird and Company signed a deed to purchase the estate of the Island of Raasay on 28 December 1910 . The sale completed on 15 May 1911 . The island was purchased by the government in 1922 after the mine closed . In 1949 The Forestry Commission was granted land bringing much @-@ needed employment , and 1956 The North of Scotland Hydro @-@ Electric Board delivered mains electricity to the island . In the 1960s Raasay House and various other properties were purchased by Dr John Green , a resident of Sussex who visited the island only once and whose lack of interest in it earned him the sobriquet " Dr No " . Having purchased the property for £ 8 @,@ 000 he finally sold it to the Highlands and Islands Development Board in 1979 for £ 135 @,@ 000 . 
 = = = The Iron Mine = = = 
 Nicholson reported an early bloomery on the island . The next record of ironstone on Raasay was by HB Woodward in 1893 . Stead investigated the outcrop in 1909 and the subsequent analysis by Tatlock convinced Baird 's to buy the island the following year ( with completion in 1912 ) . 
 Baird 's original plan was for a railway from the outcrop site down to just south of <unk> point with the erection of five kilns . Objections led to the plan being revised for two kilns further south , where the current pier is . This pier was a public pier with landing charges regulated by government order . By the outbreak of war Baird 's had completed the pier ( constructed by Robert McAlpine & Sons ) , kilns , railway and " other works " . 
 To house the workforce Baird 's planned the village of Inverarish Houses , today known as Inverarish Terrace . The village consists of two facing rows of houses , each row being two terraces of 16 houses each . Between the terraces is a broad open area . Numbers 1 — 32 are the western row , 33 — 64 the eastern . The lower , southern terraces were built first ( 1 — 16 and 33 — 48 ) between 1912 and 1913 . The first terraces were stone built and by 1914 — 15 were about half occupied . By the time of the 1915 — 16 valuation some of numbers 1 @-@ 16 were unoccupied , just over half of numbers 33 — 48 were occupied and the newly built brick terrace of numbers 17 — 32 were also vacant . The unoccupied houses were caused by many of the labour force being called to the colours . 
 With the introduction of unrestricted submarine warfare in 1916 the Ministry of Munitions became concerned about the availability of foreign iron ore . Baird 's were one company amongst others which opened up domestic mines in order to supply the war effort . In May 1916 Baird 's signed an agreement to run the mine on behalf of the Ministry , although there was a minor skirmish over the amount of processing to be done on the island . The first prisoners were on the island by June and were housed in the upper part of the village , numbers 17 — 32 and the now completed 49 — 64 . This northern part of the village was converted into a prisoner @-@ of @-@ war camp by the simple expedient of building a barbed wire fence around it and erecting sentry boxes and arc lamps at the corners . 
 = = Population = = 
 In 2001 Raasay had the lowest percentage of children of any populated Scottish island and the island 's population fell by over 16 % since that time to the date of the 2011 census During the same period Scottish island populations as a whole grew by 4 % to 103 @,@ 702 . With 36 % in the 2001 census there was still a relatively high density of Gaelic speakers ( down from over 75 % in 1901 and 1921 ) . 
 = = Culture and the arts = = 
 = = = Piping tradition = = = 
 John McKay , born on Raasay in 1767 , was supported by the MacLeod Chief as the foremost island piper of his day and an inheritor of the <unk> tradition . His son Angus published a pibroch collection and was the first piper to Queen Victoria . The subsequent family members have emigrated from the island , and their direct descendent lives in Inveraray . 
 = = = Sorley MacLean = = = 
 The poet Sorley MacLean was born in <unk> , a small crofting community on the west coast of the island ; perhaps his most famous poem is about Hallaig , an abandoned community on the east coast . MacLean 's writings often combine an ancient traditional awareness , with a modernist political outlook , in which Raasay , and the areas adjacent to it are frequently referenced . But while MacLean 's work dwells on the brutality of war , of the Highland Clearances and modern exploitation , he also writes about nature . Thus , although the Clearances leave an empty landscape populated only by the ghosts of those evicted or forced to emigrate , " Time , the deer , is in the Wood of Hallaig " . 
 MacLean lived much of his life off the island , but some of his time was spent in nearby Sleat on Skye and <unk> on the neighbouring mainland . 
 = = = Calum 's Road = = = 
 The two miles ( 3 km ) of road between Brochel Castle and Arnish were built using hand @-@ tools by Calum MacLeod BEM over ten years . Only when complete was the road surfaced by the local council ; by then Calum and his wife were the last inhabitants of Arnish . Calum 's Road has been commemorated in song by <unk> on their 1988 album The Blood is Strong and in a book by Roger Hutchinson . The BBC Radio 4 drama Calum 's Road , based on Hutchinson 's book and dramatised by Colin MacDonald , was first broadcast on 5 October 2013 starring Ian McDiarmid as Calum MacLeod . 
 = = = Harrison Birtwistle = = = 
 The composer Sir Harrison Birtwistle lived on Raasay from 1975 to 1983 . His Duets for <unk> , takes its name from <unk> , a Viking prince who was shipwrecked and sought refuge on Raasay . Birtwistle ’ s string quartet , The Tree of Strings , written in 2007 , takes its title from a poem by Sorley MacLean . 
 = Crossroads ( 2002 film ) = 
 Crossroads is a 2002 American comedy @-@ drama road film set in Georgia . Directed by Tamra Davis and written by Shonda Rhimes , the film stars pop singer Britney Spears , Anson Mount , Zoe Saldana , Taryn Manning , Kim Cattrall and Dan Aykroyd . The film was produced by MTV Films and released on February 15 , 2002 , in North America by Paramount Pictures . The plot centers on three teenage girls as they take a cross @-@ country road trip , finding themselves and their friendship in the process . 
 Development on the film began in 2001 , when Spears created a concept that was later expanded by Rhimes . Principal filming began on March 2001 , and encompassed over a period of six months . Critics gave negative reviews to Crossroads ; however , they considered it a better effort when compared to Mariah Carey 's 2001 film Glitter . Despite the movie 's response from critics , it was a box office success , grossing over $ 61 @.@ 1 million worldwide in three months . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Lucy , Kit , and Mimi are three friends who live in a small Georgia town . While as young children , they bury a " wish box " and vow to dig it up on the night of their high school graduation , also pledging to stay best friends forever . However , as they grow up , their friendship fades due to their different approaches of high school : Lucy becomes the valedictorian , Kit becomes the most popular girl in school , and Mimi faces teenage pregnancy . On the night of their graduation , they keep their promise and get together to open the " wish box " . As they start talking again , they remember their old wishes while burying the box : Mimi wanted to travel to California , Lucy wanted to see her mother again , and Kit wanted to get married . Mimi brings up the topic of going to Los Angeles for a record contract audition . Kit and Lucy try to convince Mimi to not go all the way to Los Angeles due to the fact that she 's pregnant and anything dangerous can happen . However the next morning they decide to go together but each doing something separate ; Mimi going to the audition , Kit visiting her fiancé and Lucy to see her mother in Tucson , Arizona . 
 They set out on the road with little money in a yellow 1973 Buick Skylark convertible with a guy named Ben . Lucy , however , leaves without the permission of her father Pete , who wakes up the next day to find his daughter is gone . Shortly into their journey , the car breaks down . They realise that they don 't have enough money between them for the travel nor the repair costs . Mimi then suggests that she sing karaoke at a local bar , where good singers are tipped well by the customers . While at the bar , the girls dress up and go the stage to perform . However , when the song starts Mimi develops stage fright , being unable to sing . Seeing that they needed the money , Lucy takes her place , and quickly becomes a hit with the crowd . They make enough money to fix the car and continue on their way . 
 Shortly after the group checks into a motel , Kit tells the girls that she heard a rumor about Ben , commenting that he had recently been released from jail , after killing someone . The girls then spend most of the journey feeling uneasy around him , until they confront him . Ben reveals that he was in jail for driving his step @-@ sister across state borders without parental consent , after his father was abusing her . Having established that Ben was not the assassin they imagined him to be , Lucy and Ben grow closer . The girls talk properly to each other for the first time since they were kids . Lucy reveals that her mother abandoned her and her father when she was three . Kit , who was overweight as a child , has an overbearing mother who sent her to " fat camp " but now cannot stand that her daughter is more beautiful than her . Mimi reveals that the baby 's father was not her boyfriend , but a guy who raped her after she got drunk at a party . 
 After they arrive in Arizona , Lucy finally meets her mother Caroline after eighteen years ; however , Caroline reveals that she has remarried , and that she now has two sons ages seven and ten . She reveals to Lucy that she was an unintended pregnancy , and Lucy leaves the house heartbroken . Promptly arriving at the motel , Ben comforts her . The following day , Lucy rejoins the others and goes on to Los Angeles . When they arrive , Kit brings Mimi along to surprise her fiance , Dylan . While alone in the hotel , Lucy gives her virginity to Ben and they fall in love with each other . When Kit and Mimi arrive to Dylan 's place , it is revealed that he is cheating on Kit after they see another girl in his apartment . Already upset , Kit suddenly realizes that it was Dylan who raped Mimi and got her pregnant , and she punches him . Scared , Mimi runs away , and falls down the stairs . Consequently , she loses her baby . Because of this , Lucy decides to call her father to take her and the girls back home . However her father is still wanting Lucy to be just like her mother . After the entire journey she realizes that everything she 's done has been to please her father instead of herself . Lucy runs after Ben and they give each other a kiss . She and the girls decide to stay with Ben and go to the audition . They receive a standing ovation after their performance of Lucy 's poem ; I 'm Not a Girl , Not Yet a Woman . " This time we didn 't make any wishes for the future ... We said goodbye to our past . Now , none of us have any idea where life 's gonna take us . ' Cause what we have is now , and right now ... we have Each Other . " 
 = = Cast = = 
 Britney Spears as Lucy Wagner 
 Anson Mount as Ben 
 Zoe Saldana as Kit 
 Taryn Manning as Mimi 
 Kim Cattrall as Caroline Wagner 
 Dan Aykroyd as Pete Wagner 
 Justin Long as Henry 
 Beverly Johnson as Kit 's Mother 
 Kool Moe Dee as Bar Owner 
 Richard Voll as Dylan 
 Katherine <unk> as Dylan 's Other Girl 
 David ' Gruber ' Allen as Bar Patron 
 Kyle Davis as High School Burnout 
 Bowling For Soup as Graduation Band 
 Jesse Camp as Audition Applicant 
 Jamie Lynn Spears as Young Lucy Wagner 
 = = Production = = 
 In early 2001 , Spears said that she had plans to make her film debut . She and her team then created a concept for it , which was later developed by Grey 's Anatomy creator Shonda Rimes . Spears commented that she " talked to [ Rimes ] and told her what I wanted the movie to be about and she elaborated on it . It was my little project . When you do a movie , I think you have to be really passionate about it . I was having a lot of offers , but this is something my heart was into . " A press conference was held during the Marché International du Disque et de l <unk> Musicale ( <unk> ) in Cannes , France , on January 19 , 2002 , where Spears also premiered the film . 
 Filming for Crossroads initiated in March 2001 in Baton Rouge and Hammond , Louisiana , near Spears ' hometown . Due to the fact that Spears was also recording her third studio album along with the film 's production , filming only wrapped up after six months . Additional scenes were filmed in Los Angeles , California . Crossroads had a total budget of $ 10 million ; a relatively low budget by industry standards . According to the Louisiana Film and Video Commission , the film was originally titled What Friends are For . Spears described it as a teen movie that deals with real issues that normal teenagers live on a daily basis . She continued to explain the film 's content , saying that it " is about this journey that the three of us best friends take , finding ourselves and what we want out of life and getting our friendship back . Friends are all you have at the end of the day . When your boyfriend breaks up with you , who do you call ? Your girlfriend . I just love that message . " 
 Justin Long , who plays one of Lucy 's best friends from high school , thought that Crossroads is " like a road trip buddy movie for girls . " Long also said that he was impressed by Spears ' work ethic , commenting that " she could not have been more down to earth . She 's the sweetest girl . After 10 minutes , I forgot she was a big pop star . " Anson Mount , who plays Ben , revealed that actor Robert De Niro ran a few of Spears ' lines with him while rehearsing for the film . Mount revealed that De Niro called the singer " a sweet girl " and convinced him to do Crossroads . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 Crossroads was released in the United States on February 15 , 2002 . On its opening day , the film grossed an estimated $ 5 @.@ 2 million in 2 @,@ 380 theaters , becoming the second highest @-@ grossing film of the day . On the first weekend of its release , Crossroads placed second , grossing an estimate of $ 14 @,@ 527 @,@ 187 . By the second week , the film dropped a 52 % on tickets sales , ranking at number 5 on the Box Office . Crossroads was a moderate financial success , grossing a total $ 37 @,@ 191 @,@ 304 in the United States . Worldwide , the film grossed a total of $ 61 @,@ 141 @,@ 030 until its close day , on May 9 , 2002 . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Crossroads received mostly negative reviews . The film has a 14 % approval rating on the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes , based on 103 reviews with an average rating of 3 @.@ 9 / 10 , with the consensus : " A cliched and silly pop star vanity project , Crossroads is strictly for Britney fans only . " Metacritic , which assigns a weighted average score , gave the film a 27 out of 100 based on 31 reviews from critics . 
 Robert K. Elder of the Chicago Tribune said " Spears delivers a performance with the same sincerity she invests into a Pepsi commercial , only this film contains twice the sugary calories " , while New York Daily News writer Elizabeth <unk> noted , " Here 's what Crossroads does not have : Cohesive direction from Tamra Davis , intelligent dialogue , a comprehensible plot " . Maitland McDonagh of TV Guide commented that " the film 's mealy @-@ mouthed messages about feminine empowerment will almost certainly fall on deaf ears , since even 11 @-@ year @-@ olds know Spears 's power resides largely in her taut torso " . Claudia Puig of USA Today considered it " less a movie than a mind @-@ numbingly dull road trip " , while The Washington Post reporter Ann Hornaday said , " not a music video , not yet a movie , but more like an extended @-@ play advertisement for the Product that is Britney " . Jane Dark of Village Voice compared Crossroads to Mariah Carey 's Glitter , saying , " you spend a lot of time wondering , ' Better or worse than Glitter ? ' You think if the projectionist cranked the volume a little you could actually sort of get into this " . 
 John Anderson of Los Angeles Times commented " Spears acquits herself as well as anyone might , in a movie as contrived and lazy as this one " . Chris Kaltenbach of Baltimore Sun said , " go see Crossroads if you want to hear Britney sing or see her wear next @-@ to @-@ nothing . But otherwise , avoid this train wreck at all costs " . Lisa Schwarzbaum of Entertainment Weekly , however , gave the movie a positive review , commenting Crossroads " not only makes excellent use of the singer 's sweetly <unk> acting abilities , but it also promotes a standardized set of sturdy values with none of Mariah Carey 's desperate Glitter , or any of Mandy Moore 's gummy pap in A Walk to Remember " . Bret Fetzer of Amazon.com also gave a positive review , noting that the movie " could have been trite schmaltz , but the script has some grit and the direction is fresh and <unk> , most significantly , Spears is far more sympathetic and engaging than you might expect " . Jane Crowther of BBC applauded Cattrall and Aykroyd 's interactions with the characters , and said that " Spears manages to come across on film as natural , endearing , and extremely likable " . Time named it one of the top 10 worst chick flicks . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 = = Soundtrack = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Spears had initially recorded " Overprotected " and " I 'm Not a Girl , Not Yet a Woman " for Crossroads ; the songs were later included on the singer 's third studio album , Britney ( 2001 ) . The soundtrack album features six tracks by Spears , Mystikal , Matthew Sweet , Jars of Clay and Bowling for Soup . Music from the Major Motion Picture Crossroads was released by Zomba Records on February 2 , 2002 , and was produced by Rodney Jerkins , The Neptunes , Fred Maher , Matthew Sweet , Dennis Herring , Jaret Reddick , Max Martin , and Rami Yacoub . " Overprotected " was remixed by JS16 for the soundtrack album . 
 = = = Track listing = = = 
 = = = Credits and personnel = = = 
 Performers – Britney Spears , Mystikal , Matthew Sweet , Jars of Clay , Bowling for Soup 
 Songwriters – Alan Merrill , Jake Hooker , Michael Tyler , Pharrell Williams , Chad Hugo , Matthew Sweet , Jars of Clay , Jaret Reddick , Max Martin , Rami Yacoub 
 Producers – Rodney Jerkins , The Neptunes , Fred Maher , Matthew Sweet , Dennis Herring , Jaret Reddick , Max Martin , Rami Yacoub 
 Remixer – JS16 
 Audio mastering – Tom Coyne 
 Source : 
 = SMS Emden ( 1916 ) = 
 SMS Emden ( " His Majesty 's Ship Emden " ) was a German light cruiser belonging to the Königsberg class , built during the First World War . Emden served in the German Imperial Navy until the end of the war , at which point she was ceded to France . The ship was named after the previous Emden , which had been destroyed at the Battle of Cocos earlier in the war . She mounted an Iron Cross on her stem @-@ head in honor of the earlier Emden . The new cruiser was laid down in 1914 at the AG Weser shipyard in Bremen , launched in February 1916 , and commissioned into the High Seas Fleet in December 1916 . Armed with eight 15 cm SK L / 45 guns , the ship had a top speed of 27 @.@ 5 kn ( 50 @.@ 9 km / h ; 31 @.@ 6 mph ) . 
 After her commissioning , she was assigned to serve as a flotilla leader for torpedo boats . She participated in only one major action , Operation Albion , in October 1917 . There , she shelled Russian gun batteries and troop positions and engaged Russian destroyers and gunboats . The ship also led a successful , albeit minor , operation against British shipping in the North Sea in December 1917 . After the end of the war , she was interned with the rest of the German fleet in Scapa Flow . On 21 June 1919 , the interned fleet scuttled itself , though Emden was run aground by British ships before she could sink completely . Ceded to France in the Treaty of Versailles , she was too badly damaged by the attempted scuttling and beaching to see service with the French Navy , so was instead used as a target after 1922 , and broken up for scrap in 1926 . 
 = = Construction and specifications = = 
 Emden was ordered under the contract name " Ersatz Nymphe " and was laid down at the AG Weser shipyard in Bremen in 1914 . She was launched on 1 February 1916 , after which fitting @-@ out work commenced . She was commissioned into the High Seas Fleet on 16 December 1916 . The ship was 151 @.@ 4 meters ( 497 ft ) long overall and had a beam of 14 @.@ 2 m ( 47 ft ) and a draft of 5 @.@ 96 m ( 19 @.@ 6 ft ) forward . She displaced 7 @,@ 125 t ( 7 @,@ 012 long tons ; 7 @,@ 854 short tons ) at full combat load . Her propulsion system consisted of two sets of steam turbines powered by ten coal @-@ fired and two oil @-@ fired Marine @-@ type boilers . These provided a top speed of 27 @.@ 5 kn ( 50 @.@ 9 km / h ; 31 @.@ 6 mph ) and a range of 4 @,@ 850 nautical miles ( 8 @,@ 980 km ; 5 @,@ 580 mi ) at 12 kn ( 22 km / h ; 14 mph ) . 
 The ship was armed with eight 15 cm SK L / 45 guns in single pedestal mounts . Two were placed side by side forward on the forecastle , four were located amidships , two on either side , and two were arranged in a super firing pair aft . They were supplied with 1 @,@ 040 rounds of ammunition , for 130 shells per gun . Königsberg also carried two 8 @.@ 8 cm ( 3 @.@ 5 in ) L / 45 anti @-@ aircraft guns mounted on the centerline astern of the funnels . She was also equipped with a pair of 60 cm ( 24 in ) torpedo tubes with eight torpedoes in deck @-@ mounted swivel launchers amidships . She also carried 200 mines . The ship was protected by a waterline armored belt that was 60 mm ( 2 @.@ 4 in ) thick amidships . The conning tower had 100 mm ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) thick sides , and the deck was covered with 60 mm thick armor plate . 
 = = Service history = = 
 In October 1917 , Emden was serving as the flagship of Commodore Paul Heinrich , the commander of torpedo @-@ boats assigned to Operation Albion . For the initial assault on 12 October , Emden was tasked with bombarding a Russian gun emplacement at Pamerort ; Heinrich was given command of the landings there . At 06 : 08 , Emden opened fire on the gun battery . Her first two salvos fell short , but the third hit and disabled the telephone wires and speaking tubes , which rendered central control of the Russian guns impossible . By 07 : 00 , the Russian guns were silenced and German troops began to go ashore unopposed . Two and a half hours later , a pair of Russian destroyers attempted to intervene , but Emden engaged them and drove them off . 
 The next morning , a group of eight Russian destroyers made an attack on the German fleet . Emden moved forward at around 07 : 45 to support the German screen , and at 07 : 56 , she opened fire on the three leading destroyers at a range of 13 @,@ 800 meters ( 45 @,@ 300 ft ) . Emden 's salvos straddled the destroyers several times , raining shell splinters down on the Russians . They suffered no casualties , but the wireless equipment for the destroyer Grom was disabled . At 09 : 30 , another pair of destroyers briefly engaged Emden . The weather had by then become poor , but the Germans had erected a signal station at Pamerort to assist Emden in directing her fire . At around 12 : 20 , the Russian gunboat <unk> arrived with a pair of destroyers ; she was intended to use her long @-@ range guns to drive off Emden . She arrived at 13 : 00 and briefly engaged Emden . Neither ship was hit , though Emden straddled the gunboat several times before <unk> retreated . 
 On 14 October , Emden participated in an operation to clear the Kassar Wiek — the body of water between the islands of Dagö and Ösel — of Russian naval forces . She and the battleship Kaiser were to steam to the entrance to <unk> Sound , where they could support the force of torpedo @-@ boats tasked with sweeping the Kassar Wiek . Four Russian destroyers approached Emden , but kept out of range of her guns . Kaiser , however , was in range , and at approximately 11 : 50 , she opened fire . She quickly scored a hit on the destroyer Grom . The round failed to explode and passed through Grom , causing the ship to begin sinking . The other destroyers subsequently steamed off at high speed . Emden remained in her position outside <unk> Sound after the sweep was completed , through the next day . The following day , Emden initiated the bombardment of Dagö , starting at 15 : 00 . On the morning of the 18th , Emden bombarded Russian positions on Dagö again ; she fired 170 shells and forced the Russians to retreat . By 20 October , the islands were under German control and the Russian naval forces had either been destroyed or forced to withdraw . The Admiralstab ordered the naval component to return to the North Sea . 
 In December 1917 , Emden led a raid on British shipping in the North Sea . Early on the 11th , Emden and the II Flotilla left port ; the torpedo @-@ boat flotilla split in half off the Dogger Bank to search for the British convoy , while Emden stood by in support at the Dogger Bank . The torpedo boats sank four of six steamers located and did not encounter any British warships . The torpedo @-@ boats rejoined Emden late on the 12th and returned to port . 
 In October 1918 Emden was to have taken part in the final fleet action against the British Fleet , but the operation was aborted after the outbreak of mutiny in the German Fleet . 
 = = = Fate = = = 
 After the Armistice with Germany in November 1918 most of the High Seas Fleet 's ships , under the command of Rear Admiral Ludwig von Reuter , were interned at the British naval base at Scapa Flow . Emden was among them . While at Scapa Flow , the crew of the battleship Friedrich der Grosse harassed Reuter incessantly , until the British allowed him to transfer his flag to Emden , where he remained for the remainder of the internment . 
 The fleet remained interned during the negotiations that ultimately produced the Versailles Treaty . Reuter believed the British intended to seize his fleet on 21 June 1919 , which was the deadline for Germany to sign the peace treaty . Unaware that the deadline had been extended to the 23rd , Reuter ordered the ships to be scuttled at the next opportunity . On the morning of 21 June the British fleet left Scapa Flow to conduct training maneuvers , and at 11 : 20 Reuter transmitted the order to his ships . Emden , however , did not sink ; British ships towed her close to shore where she was beached and later re @-@ floated . Emden was awarded to the French Navy on 11 March 1920 , but unlike their other war prize cruisers she was so badly damaged by flooding and beaching that the French could not put her into service . Instead she was used as an explosives testing target and ultimately broken up for scrap in Caen in 1926 . 
 = American Graffiti = 
 American Graffiti is a 1973 American coming @-@ of @-@ age comedy @-@ drama film directed and co @-@ written by George Lucas starring Richard Dreyfuss , Ron Howard , Paul Le Mat , Harrison Ford , Charles Martin Smith , Cindy Williams , Candy Clark , Mackenzie Phillips and Wolfman Jack . Suzanne Somers has a cameo . Set in Modesto , California in 1962 , the film is a study of the cruising and rock and roll cultures popular among the post – World War II baby boom generation . The film is told in a series of vignettes , telling the story of a group of teenagers and their adventures over a single evening . 
 The genesis of American Graffiti was in Lucas ' own teenage years in early 1960s Modesto . He was unsuccessful in pitching the concept to financiers and distributors but found favor at Universal Pictures after United Artists , 20th Century Fox , Columbia Pictures , Metro @-@ Goldwyn @-@ Mayer , Warner Bros. , and Paramount Pictures turned him down . Filming was initially set to take place in San Rafael , California , but the production crew was denied permission to shoot beyond a second day . 
 American Graffiti premiered on August 2 , 1973 at the Locarno International Film Festival in Switzerland and was released on August 11 , 1973 in the United States . The film received widespread critical acclaim and was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Picture . Produced on a $ 777 @,@ 000 budget , it has become one of the most profitable films of all time . Since its initial release , American Graffiti has garnered an estimated return of well over $ 200 million in box office gross and home video sales , not including merchandising . In 1995 , the United States Library of Congress deemed the film " culturally , historically , or aesthetically significant " and selected it for preservation in the National Film Registry . 
 A sequel , More American Graffiti , was released in 1979 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In early September 1962 at the tail end of summer vacation , recent high school graduates and longtime friends , Curt Henderson and Steve Bolander , meet John Milner and Terry " The Toad " Fields at the local Mel 's Drive @-@ In parking lot . Despite receiving a $ 2 @,@ 000 scholarship from the local Moose lodge , Curt is undecided if he wants to leave the next morning with Steve to go to the northeastern United States to begin college . Steve lets Toad borrow his 1958 Chevrolet Impala for the evening and while he 's away at college until Christmas . Steve 's girlfriend , Laurie , who also is Curt 's sister , is unsure of Steve 's leaving , to which he suggests — to Laurie 's surprise — they see other people while he is away to " strengthen " their relationship . She is not happy with his proposal . 
 Curt , Steve , and Laurie go to the local back to school sock hop , while Toad and John begin cruising . En route to the dance , at a stoplight , Curt sees a beautiful blonde girl in a white 1956 Ford Thunderbird . She says , " I love you " before disappearing around the corner . After leaving the hop , Curt is desperate to find the mysterious blonde , but is coerced by a group of greasers ( " The Pharaohs " ) to participate in an initiation rite that involves hooking a chain to a police car and ripping out its back axle . Curt is told rumors that " The Blonde " is either a trophy wife or prostitute , which he refuses to believe . 
 Following a series of arguments , Steve and Laurie split , and John inadvertently picks up Carol , an annoying teenybopper who seems fond of him . Toad , who is normally socially inept with girls , successfully picks up a flirtatious , and somewhat rebellious , girl named Debbie . Meanwhile , Curt learns that the DJ Wolfman Jack broadcasts from just outside Modesto . Inside the radio station , Curt encounters a bearded man he assumes to be the manager . Curt hands the man a message for " The Blonde " to call or meet him . As he walks away , Curt hears the voice of The Wolfman , and , having just seen The Wolfman broadcasting , he realizes he had been speaking with The Wolfman himself . 
 The other story lines intertwine until Toad and Steve end up on " Paradise Road " to watch John race his yellow deuce coupe against the handsome , but arrogant , Bob Falfa . Earlier , Bob had picked up Laurie , who is now sitting shotgun in his black ' 55 Chevy . Within seconds of the finish , Bob loses control of his car after blowing a front tire , plunges into a ditch and rolls his car . Steve and John run to the wreck , and a dazed Bob and Laurie stagger out of the car before it explodes . Distraught , Laurie grips Steve tightly and tells him not to leave her . He assures her that he has decided not to leave Modesto after all . The next morning Curt is awakened by the sound of a phone ringing in a telephone booth , which turns out to be " The Blonde " . She tells him she might see him cruising tonight , but Curt replies that is not possible , because he will be leaving . At the airfield he says goodbye to his parents , his sister , and friends . As the plane takes off , Curt , gazing out of the window , sees the white Ford Thunderbird belonging to the mysterious blonde . 
 Prior to the end credits , an on @-@ screen epilogue reveals that John was killed by a drunk driver in December 1964 , Toad was reported missing in action near An Lộc in December 1965 , Steve is an insurance agent in Modesto , California , and Curt is a writer living in Canada ( implying that he may be there as a draft dodger ) . 
 = = Cast = = 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Inspiration = = = 
 During the production of THX 1138 ( 1971 ) , producer Francis Ford Coppola challenged co @-@ writer / director George Lucas to write a script that would appeal to mainstream audiences . Lucas embraced the idea , using his early 1960s teenage experiences cruising in Modesto , California . " Cruising was gone , and I felt compelled to document the whole experience and what my generation used as a way of meeting girls , " Lucas explained . As he developed the story in his mind , Lucas included his fascination with Wolfman Jack . Lucas had considered doing a documentary about the Wolfman when he attended the USC School of Cinematic Arts , but dropped the idea . 
 Adding in semi @-@ autobiographical connotations , Lucas set the story in his hometown of 1962 Modesto . The characters Curt Henderson , John Milner and Terry " The Toad " Fields also represent different stages from his younger life . Curt is modeled after Lucas 's personality during USC , while Milner is based on Lucas 's teenage street racing and junior college years , and hot rod enthusiasts he had known from the Kustom Kulture in Modesto . Toad represents Lucas 's nerd years as a freshman in high school , specifically his " bad luck " with dating . The filmmaker was also inspired by Federico Fellini 's I Vitelloni ( 1953 ) . 
 After the financial failure of THX 1138 , Lucas wanted the film to act as a release for a world @-@ weary audience : 
 [ THX ] was about real things that were going on and the problems we 're faced with . I realized after making THX that those problems are so real that most of us have to face those things every day , so we 're in a constant state of frustration . That just makes us more depressed than we were before . So I made a film where , essentially , we can get rid of some of those frustrations , the feeling that everything seems futile . 
 = = = United Artists = = = 
 After Warner Bros. abandoned Lucas 's early version of Apocalypse Now ( 1979 ) ( during the post @-@ production of THX 1138 ) , the filmmaker decided to continue developing Another Quiet Night in Modesto , eventually changing its title to American Graffiti . To co @-@ write a fifteen @-@ page film treatment , Lucas hired Willard Huyck and Gloria Katz , who also added semi @-@ autobiographical material to the story . Lucas and producer Gary Kurtz began pitching the American Graffiti treatment to various Hollywood studios and production companies in an attempt to secure the financing needed to expand it into a screenplay , but they were unsuccessful . The potential financiers were concerned that music licensing costs would cause the film to go way over budget . Along with Easy Rider ( 1969 ) , American Graffiti was one of the first films to eschew a traditional film score and successfully rely instead on synchronizing a series of popular hit songs with individual scenes . 
 THX 1138 was released in March 1971 and Lucas was offered opportunities to direct Lady Ice ( 1973 ) , Tommy ( 1975 ) or Hair ( 1979 ) . He turned down those offers , determined to pursue his own projects despite his urgent desire to find another film to direct . During this time , Lucas conceived the idea for a space opera ( as yet untitled ) which later became the basis for his Star Wars franchise . At the May 1971 Cannes Film Festival , THX was chosen for the Directors ' Fortnight competition . There , Lucas met David Picker , then president of United Artists , who was intrigued by American Graffiti and Lucas 's space opera . Picker decided to give Lucas $ 10 @,@ 000 to develop Graffiti as a screenplay . 
 Lucas planned to spend another five weeks in Europe , and hoped that Huyck and Katz would agree to finish the screenplay by the time he returned , but they were about to start on their own film , Messiah of Evil ( 1972 ) , so Lucas hired Richard Walter , a colleague from the USC School of Cinematic Arts for the job . Walter was flattered , but initially tried to sell Lucas on a different screenplay called Barry and the Persuasions , a story of East Coast teenagers in the late 1950s . Lucas held firm — his was a story about West Coast teenagers in the early 1960s . Walter was paid the $ 10 @,@ 000 , and he began to expand the Lucas / Huyck / Katz treatment into a screenplay . 
 Lucas was dismayed when he returned to America in June 1971 and read Walter 's script , which was written in the style and tone of an exploitation film , similar to 1967 's Hot Rods to Hell . " It was overtly sexual and very fantasy @-@ like , with playing chicken and things that kids didn 't really do , " Lucas explained . " I wanted something that was more like the way I grew up . " Walter 's script also had Steve and Laurie going to Nevada to get married without their parents ' permission . Walter rewrote the screenplay , but Lucas nevertheless fired him due to their creative differences . 
 After paying Walter , Lucas had exhausted his development fund from United Artists . He began writing a script , completing his first draft in just three weeks . Drawing upon his large collection of vintage records , Lucas wrote each scene with a particular song in mind as its musical backdrop . The cost of licensing the 75 songs Lucas wanted was one factor in United Artists ' ultimate decision to reject the script ; the studio also felt it was too experimental — " a musical montage with no characters " . United Artists also passed on Star Wars , which Lucas shelved for the time being . 
 = = = Universal Pictures = = = 
 Lucas spent the rest of 1971 and early 1972 trying to raise financing for the American Graffiti script . During this time , Metro @-@ Goldwyn @-@ Mayer , Paramount Pictures , 20th Century Fox and Columbia Pictures all turned down the opportunity to co @-@ finance and distribute the film . Lucas , Huyck and Katz rewrote the second draft together , which , in addition to Modesto , was also set in Mill Valley and Los Angeles . Lucas also intended to end American Graffiti showing a title card detailing the fate of the characters , including the death of Milner and the disappearance of Toad in Vietnam . Huyck and Katz found the ending depressing and were incredulous that Lucas planned to include only the male characters . Lucas argued that mentioning the girls meant adding another title card , which he felt would prolong the ending . Because of this , Pauline Kael later accused Lucas of chauvinism . 
 Lucas and producer Gary Kurtz took the script to American International Pictures , who expressed interest , but ultimately believed American Graffiti was not violent or sexual enough for the studio 's standards . Lucas and Kurtz eventually found favor at Universal Pictures , who allowed Lucas total artistic control and the right of final cut privilege on the condition that he make American Graffiti on a strict , low budget . This forced Lucas to drop the opening scene , in which the Blonde Angel , Curt 's image of the perfect woman , drives through an empty drive @-@ in cinema in her Ford Thunderbird , her transparency revealing she does not exist . 
 Universal initially projected a $ 600 @,@ 000 budget , but added an additional $ 175 @,@ 000 once producer Francis Ford Coppola signed on . This would allow the studio to advertise American Graffiti as " from the Man who Gave you The Godfather ( 1972 ) " . However , Lucas was forced to concede final cut privilege . The proposition also gave Universal first look deals on Lucas 's next two planned projects , Star Wars ( 1977 ) and Radioland Murders ( 1994 ) . As he continued to work on the script , Lucas encountered difficulties on the Steve and Laurie storyline . Lucas , Katz and Huyck worked on the third draft together , specifically on the scenes featuring Steve and Laurie . 
 Production proceeded with virtually no input or interference from Universal . American Graffiti was a low @-@ budget film , and executive Ned Tanen had only modest expectations of its commercial success . However , Universal did object to the film 's title , not knowing what " American Graffiti " meant ; Lucas was dismayed when some executives assumed he was making an Italian movie about feet . The studio therefore submitted a long list of over 60 alternative titles , with their favorite being Another Slow Night in Modesto and Coppola 's Rock Around the Block . They pushed hard to get Lucas to adopt any of the titles , but he was displeased with all the alternatives and persuaded Tanen to keep American Graffiti . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 The film 's lengthy casting process was overseen by Fred Roos , who worked with producer Francis Ford Coppola on The Godfather . Because American Graffiti 's main cast was associated with younger actors , the casting call and notices went through numerous high school drama groups and community theaters in the San Francisco Bay Area . Among the actors was Mark Hamill , the future Luke Skywalker in Lucas ' Star Wars trilogy . 
 Over 100 unknown actors auditioned for Steve Bolander before Ron Howard was cast . George Lucas was impressed with Howard 's thoughtful analysis of the role , and , as a result , offered the actor his choice of Steve or Terry " The Toad " Fields . Roos , a former casting director on The Andy Griffith Show , suggested Richard Dreyfuss for Curt Henderson . Dreyfuss accepted the role to break out of the mold of his career as a child actor . Howard would later appear in the very similar role of Richie Cunningham on the Happy Days sitcom . Bob Balaban turned down The Toad out of fear of typecasting , a decision which he later regretted . Charles Martin Smith , who , in his first year as a professional actor , had already appeared in two feature films including 20th Century Fox 's The Culpepper Cattle Co. and four TV episodes , was eventually cast in the role . 
 Although Cindy Williams was cast as Laurie Henderson , the actress hoped she would get the part of Debbie Dunham , which ended up going to Candy Clark . Mackenzie Phillips , who portrays Carol , was only 12 years old , and under California law , producer Gary Kurtz had to become her legal guardian for the duration of filming . As Bob Falfa , Roos cast Harrison Ford , who was then concentrating on a carpentry career . Ford agreed to take the role on the condition that he would not have to cut his hair . The character has a flattop haircut in the script , but a compromise was eventually reached whereby Ford wore a stetson to cover his hair . Producer Francis Ford Coppola encouraged Lucas to cast Wolfman Jack as himself in a cameo appearance . " George Lucas and I went through thousands of Wolfman Jack phone calls that were taped with the public , " Jack reflected . " The telephone calls [ heard on the broadcasts ] in the motion picture and on the soundtrack were actual calls with real people . " 
 Charles Martin Smith ( 18 ) and Ron Howard ( 18 ) were the only two real teenage principal actors of the film . Most of the remaining principal cast members were in their 20s with the exceptions of the 12 @-@ year @-@ old Mackenzie Phillips , and Harrison Ford , who turned 30 during filming . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Although American Graffiti is set in 1962 Modesto , California , Lucas believed the city had changed too much in 10 years and initially chose San Rafael as the primary shooting location . Filming began on June 26 , 1972 . However , Lucas soon became frustrated at the time it was taking to fix camera mounts to the cars . A key member of the production had also been arrested for growing marijuana , and , in addition to already running behind the shooting schedule , the San Rafael City Council immediately became concerned about the disruption that filming caused for local businesses and therefore withdrew permission to shoot beyond a second day . 
 Petaluma , a similarly small town approximately 20 miles north of San Rafael , became more cooperative and American Graffiti moved there without the loss of a single day of shooting . Lucas convinced the San Rafael City Council to allow two further nights of filming for general cruising shots , which he used to evoke as much of the intended location as possible in the finished film . Shooting in Petaluma began on June 28 and proceeded at a quick pace . Lucas mimicked the filmmaking style of B movie producer Sam Katzman in attempting to save money and authenticated low @-@ budget filming methods . 
 In addition to Petaluma , other locations included Mel 's Drive @-@ In in San Francisco , Sonoma , Richmond , Novato , and the Buchanan Field Airport in Concord . The freshman hop dance was filmed in the Gus Gymnasium , previously known as the Boys Gym , at Tamalpais High School in Mill Valley . 
 More problems ensued during filming : Paul Le Mat was sent to the hospital after an allergic reaction to walnuts . Le Mat , Harrison Ford and Bo Hopkins were claimed ( according to a biography on Lucas with no source citations ) to be drunk most nights and every weekend , and had conducted climbing competitions to the top of the local Holiday Inn sign . One actor set fire to Lucas 's motel room . Another night , Le Mat threw Richard Dreyfuss into a swimming pool , gashing Dreyfuss ' forehead on the day before he was due to have his close @-@ ups filmed . Dreyfuss also complained over the wardrobe that Lucas had chosen for the character . Ford was kicked out of his motel room at the Holiday Inn . In addition , two camera operators were nearly killed when filming the climactic race scene on Frates Road outside Petaluma . Principal photography ended on August 4 , 1972 . 
 The final scenes in the film , shot at Buchanan Field , feature a Douglas DC @-@ 7C airliner of Magic Carpet Airlines which had previously been leased from owner Club America Incorporated by the rock band Grand Funk Railroad from March 1971 to June 1971 . 
 = = = Cinematography = = = 
 Lucas considered covering duties as the sole cinematographer , but dropped the idea . Instead , he elected to shoot American Graffiti using two cinematographers ( as he had done in THX 1138 ) and no formal director of photography . Two cameras were used simultaneously in scenes involving conversations between actors in different cars , which resulted in significant production time savings . After CinemaScope proved to be too expensive , Lucas decided that American Graffiti should have a documentary @-@ like feel , and shot the film using Techniscope cameras . He believed that Techniscope , an inexpensive way of shooting on 35 mm film and utilizing only half of the film 's frame , would give a perfect widescreen format resembling 16 mm . Adding to the documentary feel was Lucas 's openness for the cast to improvise scenes . He also used goofs for the final cut , notably Charles Martin Smith 's arriving on his scooter to meet Steve outside Mel 's Drive @-@ In . Jan D 'Alquen and Ron <unk> were hired as the cinematographers , but filming with Techniscope cameras brought lighting problems . As a result , Lucas commissioned help from friend Haskell Wexler , who was credited as the " visual consultant " . 
 = = = Editing = = = 
 Lucas had wanted his wife , Marcia , to edit American Graffiti , but Universal executive Ned Tanen insisted on hiring Verna Fields , who had just finished editing Steven Spielberg 's The Sugarland Express ( 1974 ) . Fields worked on the first rough cut of the film before she left to resume work on What 's Up , Doc ? ( 1972 ) . After Fields 's departure , Lucas struggled with editing the film 's story structure . He had originally written the script so that the four ( Curt , Steve , John and Toad ) storylines were always presented in the same sequence ( an " ABCD " plot structure ) . But the first cut of American Graffiti was three @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half hours long , and in order to whittle the film down to a more manageable two hours , so many scenes had to be cut , shortened , or combined that the film 's structure became increasingly loose , and no longer adhered to Lucas 's original " ABCD " presentation . Lucas completed his final cut of American Graffiti , which ran 112 minutes , in December 1972 . Walter Murch assisted Lucas in post @-@ production for audio mixing and sound design purposes . Murch suggested making Wolfman Jack 's radio show the " backbone " of the film . " The Wolfman was an ethereal presence in the lives of young people , " said producer Gary Kurtz , " and it was that quality we wanted and obtained in the picture . " 
 = = Soundtrack = = 
 Lucas 's choice of background music was crucial to the mood of each scene , but he was realistic about the complexities of copyright clearances and suggested a number of alternative tracks . Universal wanted Lucas and producer Gary Kurtz to hire an orchestra for sound @-@ alikes . The studio eventually proposed a flat deal that offered every music publisher the same amount of money . This was acceptable to most of the companies representing Lucas 's first choices , but not to RCA — with the consequence that Elvis Presley is conspicuous by his absence from the soundtrack . Clearing the music licensing rights had cost approximately $ 90 @,@ 000 , and as a result there was no money left for a traditional film score . " I used the absence of music , and sound effects , to create the drama , " Lucas later explained . 
 A soundtrack album for the film , 41 Original Hits from the Soundtrack of American Graffiti , was issued by MCA Records . The album contains all the songs used in the film ( with the exception of " Gee " by the Crows , which was subsequently included on a second soundtrack album ) , presented in the order in which they appeared in the film . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Release = = = 
 Despite unanimous praise at a January 1973 test screening attended by Universal executive Ned Tanen , the studio told Lucas they wanted to re @-@ edit his original cut of American Graffiti . Producer Coppola sided with Lucas against Tanen and Universal , offering to " buy the film " from the studio and reimburse it for the $ 775 @,@ 000 ( equivalent to $ 4 @,@ 384 @,@ 268 in 2015 ) it had cost to make it . 20th Century Fox and Paramount Pictures made similar offers to the studio . Universal refused these offers and told Lucas they planned to have William Hornbeck re @-@ edit the film . 
 When Coppola 's The Godfather ( 1972 ) won the Academy Award for Best Picture in March 1973 , Universal relented , and agreed to cut only three scenes ( about four minutes ) from Lucas 's cut — an encounter between Toad and a fast @-@ talking car salesman , an argument between Steve and his former teacher Mr. <unk> at the sock hop , and an effort by Bob Falfa to serenade Laurie with " Some Enchanted Evening " — but decided that the film was fit for release only as a television movie . 
 However , various studio employees who had seen the film began talking it up , and its reputation grew through word of mouth . The studio dropped the TV movie idea and began arranging for a limited release in selected theaters in Los Angeles and New York . Universal presidents Sidney Sheinberg and Lew Wasserman heard about the praise the film had been garnering in LA and New York , and the marketing department amped up its promotion strategy for it , investing an additional $ 500 @,@ 000 ( equivalent to $ 2 @,@ 665 @,@ 292 in 2015 ) in marketing and promotion . The film was released in the United States on August 11 , 1973 to sleeper hit reception . The film had cost only $ 1 @.@ 27 million ( equivalent to $ 7 @,@ 184 @,@ 543 in 2015 ) to produce and market , but yielded worldwide box office gross revenues of more than $ 55 million ( equivalent to $ 293 @,@ 182 @,@ 159 in 2015 ) . It had only modest success outside the United States , but became a cult film in France . 
 Universal reissued Graffiti in 1978 and earned an additional $ 63 million ( equivalent to $ 228 @,@ 567 @,@ 857 in 2015 ) , which brought the total revenue for the two releases to $ 118 million ( equivalent to $ 428 @,@ 111 @,@ 224 in 2015 ) . The reissue included stereophonic sound , and the additional four minutes that the studio had removed from Lucas 's original cut . All home video releases also included these scenes . Also , the date of John Milner 's death was changed from June 1964 to December 1964 to fit the narrative structure of the upcoming sequel More American Graffiti . At the end of its theatrical run , American Graffiti had one of the greatest cost @-@ to @-@ profit ratios of a motion picture ever . Producer Francis Ford Coppola regretted having not financed the film himself . Lucas recalled , " He would have made $ 30 million ( equivalent to $ 159 @,@ 917 @,@ 541 in 2015 ) on the deal . He never got over it and he still kicks himself . " It was the 13th @-@ highest grossing film of all time in 1977 , and , adjusted for inflation , is currently the 43rd highest . By the 1990s , American Graffiti had earned more than $ 200 million ( equivalent to $ 362 @,@ 251 @,@ 656 in 2015 ) in box office gross and home video sales . In December 1997 Variety reported that the film had earned an additional $ 55 @.@ 13 million in rental revenue ( equivalent to $ 81 @,@ 266 @,@ 466 in 2015 ) . 
 Universal Studios Home Entertainment first released the film on DVD in September 1998 , and once more as a double feature with More American Graffiti ( 1979 ) in January 2004 . Aside from the four minutes originally deleted from Lucas ' original cut retained , the only major change in the DVD version is the main title sequence , particularly the sky background to Mel 's Drive @-@ In , which was redone by ILM . Universal released the film on Blu @-@ ray on May 31 , 2011 . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 American Graffiti received widespread critical acclaim . Based on 43 reviews collected by Rotten Tomatoes , 95 % of the critics enjoyed the film with an average score of 8 @.@ 4 / 10 . The consensus reads : " One of the most influential of all teen films , American Graffiti is a funny , nostalgic , and bittersweet look at a group of recent high school grads ' last days of innocence . " Roger Ebert gave the film a full four stars and praised it for being " not only a great movie but a brilliant work of historical fiction ; no sociological treatise could duplicate the movie 's success in remembering exactly how it was to be alive at that cultural instant " . 
 Jay Cocks of Time magazine wrote that American Graffiti " reveals a new and welcome depth of feeling . Few films have shown quite so well the eagerness , the sadness , the ambitions and small defeats of a generation of young Americans . " A.D. Murphy from Variety felt American Graffiti was a vivid " recall of teenage attitudes and morals , told with outstanding empathy and compassion through an exceptionally talented cast of unknown actors " . Dave Kehr , writing in the Chicago Reader , called the film a brilliant work of popular art that redefined nostalgia as a marketable commodity , while establishing a new narrative style . 
 = = = Themes = = = 
 American Graffiti depicts multiple characters going through a coming of age , such as the decisions to attend college or reside in a small town . The 1962 setting represents nearing an end of an era in American society and pop culture . The musical backdrop also links between the early years of rock and roll in the mid @-@ late 1950s ( i.e. Bill Haley & His Comets , Elvis Presley and Buddy Holly ) and the early 1960s British Invasion , which Don McLean 's " American Pie " and the 1972 revival of 1950s acts and oldies paralleled during the conception and filming . The setting is also before the outbreaks of the Vietnam War and the John F. Kennedy assassination and before the peak years of the counterculture movement . American Graffiti evokes mankind 's relationship with machines , notably the elaborate number of hot rods — having been called a " classic car flick " , representative of the motor car 's importance to American culture at the time it was made . Another theme is teenagers ' obsession with radio , especially with the inclusion of Wolfman Jack and his mysterious and mythological faceless ( to most ) voice . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 American Graffiti was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Picture but lost to The Sting ( 1973 ) . Further nominations at the 46th Academy Awards included Best Director ( George Lucas ) , Best Original Screenplay ( Lucas , Willard Huyck and Gloria Katz ) , Best Supporting Actress ( Candy Clark ) and Best Film Editing ( Verna Fields and Marcia Lucas ) . The film won Best Motion Picture ( Musical or Comedy ) at the 31st Golden Globe Awards , while Paul Le Mat won Most Promising Newcomer . Lucas was nominated for Best Director and Richard Dreyfuss was nominated for Best Actor in a Comedy or Musical . More nominations included Cindy Williams by the British Academy of Film and Television Arts for Best Actress in a Supporting Role , Lucas for the Directors Guild of America Award for Outstanding Directing , and Lucas , Huyck and Katz by the Writers Guild of America for Best Original Comedy . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Internet reviewer MaryAnn Johanson acknowledged that American Graffiti rekindled public and entertainment interest in the 1950s and 1960s , and influenced other films such as The Lords of Flatbush ( 1974 ) and Cooley High ( 1975 ) and the TV series Happy Days . Alongside other films from the New Hollywood era , American Graffiti is often cited for helping give birth to the summer blockbuster . The film 's box office success made George Lucas an instant millionaire . He gave an amount of the film 's profits to Haskell Wexler for his visual consulting help during filming , and to Wolfman Jack for " inspiration " . Lucas 's net worth was now $ 4 million , and he set aside a $ 300 @,@ 000 independent fund for his long cherished space opera project , which would eventually become the basis for Star Wars ( 1977 ) . 
 The financial success of Graffiti also gave Lucas opportunities to establish more elaborate development for Lucasfilm , Skywalker Sound , and Industrial Light & Magic . Based on the success of the 1977 reissue , Universal began production for the sequel More American Graffiti ( 1979 ) . Lucas and writers Willard Huyck and Gloria Katz later collaborated on Radioland Murders ( 1994 ) , also released by Universal Pictures , for which Lucas acted as executive producer . The film features characters intended to be Curt and Laurie Henderson 's parents , Roger and Penny Henderson . In 1995 American Graffiti was deemed culturally , historically , or aesthetically significant by the United States Library of Congress and selected for preservation in the National Film Registry . In 1997 the city of Modesto , California , honored Lucas with a statue dedication of American Graffiti at George Lucas Plaza . 
 In 1998 the American Film Institute ( AFI ) ranked it as the 77th greatest film ever in the 100 Years ... 100 Movies list . When the 10th Anniversary Edition came in June 2007 , AFI moved American Graffiti to the sixty @-@ second greatest film . The movie was also listed as the forty @-@ third funniest . The song " Smoke Gets in Your Eyes " was nominated for AFI 's 100 Years ... 100 Songs . Director David Fincher credited American Graffiti as a visual influence for Fight Club ( 1999 ) . Lucas 's Star Wars : Episode II – Attack of the Clones ( 2002 ) features references to the film . The yellow <unk> that Anakin Skywalker and Obi @-@ Wan Kenobi use to pursue the bounty hunter , Zam Wesell , is based on John Milner 's yellow deuce coupe , while Dex 's Diner is reminiscent of Mel 's Drive @-@ In . Adam Savage and Jamie Hyneman of MythBusters conducted the " rear axle " experiment on the January 11 , 2004 , episode . 
 Given the popularity of the film 's cars with <unk> and hot rodders in the years since its release , their fate immediately after the film is ironic . All were offered for sale in San Francisco newspaper ads ; only the ' 58 Impala ( driven by Ron Howard ) attracted a buyer , selling for only a few hundred dollars . The yellow Deuce and the white T @-@ bird went unsold , despite being priced as low as US $ 3 @,@ 000 . The registration plate on Milner 's yellow deuce coupe is THX 138 on a yellow , California license plate , slightly altered , reflecting Lucas 's earlier science fiction film . 
 = Icehouse ( band ) = 
 Icehouse are an Australian rock band , formed as Flowers in Sydney in 1977 . Initially known in Australia for their pub rock style , they later achieved mainstream success playing new wave and synthpop music and attained Top 10 singles chart success in both Europe and the U.S. The mainstay of both Flowers and Icehouse has been Iva Davies ( singer @-@ songwriter , record producer , guitar , bass , keyboards , oboe ) supplying additional musicians as required . The name Icehouse , which was adopted in 1981 , comes from an old , cold flat Davies lived in and the strange building across the road populated by itinerant people . 
 Davies and Icehouse extended the use of synthesizers particularly the Sequential Circuits Prophet @-@ 5 ( " Love in Motion " , 1981 ) , Linn drum machine ( " Hey Little Girl " , 1982 ) and Fairlight CMI ( Razorback trailer , 1983 ) in Australian popular music . Their best known singles on the Australian charts were " Great Southern Land " , " Hey Little Girl " , " Crazy " , " Electric Blue " and " My Obsession " ; with Top Three albums being Icehouse ( 1980 , as Flowers ) , Primitive Man ( 1982 ) and Man of Colours ( 1987 ) . 
 Icehouse 's iconic status was acknowledged when they were inducted into the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) Hall of Fame on 16 August 2006 . ARIA described Icehouse as " one of the most successful Australian bands of the eighties and nineties ... With an uncompromising approach to music production they created songs that ranged from pure pop escapism to edgy , lavish synthesised pieces ... " Icehouse has produced eight Top Ten albums and twenty Top Forty singles in Australia , multiple top ten hits in Europe and North America and album sales of over 28 times Platinum in Australasia alone . As of 2006 , Man of Colours was still the highest selling album in Australia by an Australian band . 
 = = 1977 – 1981 : Flowers = = 
 Flowers were formed in Sydney in 1977 by Iva Davies ( vocals , guitar , bass guitar , keyboards , oboe ) , a classically trained musician , and their main creative force ; with bass player Keith Welsh . Davies was working as a part @-@ time cleaner at a squash court managed by Welsh 's mother , they lived nearby and were both interested in forming a band . Additional musicians used by Flowers in 1978 were Michael Hoste on keyboards and Don Brown on drums . The band built up a strong following as a live act around the pub circuit , providing distinctive cover versions of songs by Roxy Music , David Bowie , Lou Reed , T @-@ Rex , Ultravox and Brian Eno . By the middle of 1979 John Lloyd ( ex @-@ Paul Kelly and the Dots ) replaced Don Brown on drums , with Anthony Smith ( who was sometimes called Adam Hall ) , on keyboards , replacing Michael Hoste who remained associated with the band and later rejoined . After signing to the independent Regular Records label , distributed by Festival , Flowers released their debut single in May 1980 , " Can 't Help Myself " ( written by Davies ) , which hit the Australian Top 10 in June 1980 . This was followed by their debut album Icehouse , which reached No. 4 on the National albums chart and became one of the year 's biggest selling albums in Australia . The album , co @-@ produced by Cameron Allan ( Mental As Anything 's producer ) and Davies , made use of synthesisers , including the Minimoog , Solina Strings and Oberheim OB @-@ 1 . Hoste co @-@ wrote four tracks with Davies and played additional keyboards , with Smith continuing to provide the main keyboards . Further singles " We Can Get Together " and " Walls " from Icehouse also hit the Top 20 . 
 Flowers ' popularity was recognised when they were awarded the 1980 TV Week / Countdown Rock Awards ' Johnny O 'Keefe New Talent Award ' ahead of The <unk> , INXS and Karen Knowles . They were also nominated for ' Best Album ' and ' Best Album Cover ' for Icehouse but lost on both to Cold Chisel 's East , Iva Davies was nominated as ' Best Songwriter ' but lost to Cold Chisel 's Don Walker . At the award ceremony , Flowers performed " Icehouse " with Davies framed within a cube of white neon tubing . In early 1981 , Flowers signed to Chrysalis Records for European , Japanese , UK and U.S. releases ; they had to change their name due to legal restrictions and to prevent confusion with a Scottish group The Flowers . Their last performance under the name Flowers was on 27 June 1981 at the Capitol Theatre in Sydney , they chose the name of their album to become known as Icehouse . 
 = = 1981 – 1989 : Icehouse = = 
 As Icehouse , the band spent the second half of 1981 touring the UK , Canada and the U.S. , whilst Chrysalis released most of their Flowers material under the name Icehouse . The single " Icehouse " was released in Europe and created some interest in the UK , partly because of a video directed by Russell Mulcahy , while in the U.S. the song peaked at No. 28 on the Billboard Top Tracks chart in 1981 . " Icehouse " had been written by Davies when he lived at 18 Tryon Road , Lindfield in an old , cold flat of a two @-@ storey mansion - across the street was a dishevelled house which had its lights on all night peopled by short @-@ term residents . Davies later learned it was a half @-@ way house for psychiatric and drug rehab patients . The first U.S. single " We Can Get Together " peaked at No. 62 on the Billboard Hot 100 . A single @-@ only release , " Love in Motion " , was recorded by Davies using the Sequential Circuits Prophet 5 , and became the first new recording credited to Icehouse ; it hit the Australian Top 10 in November 1981 . Icehouse split up late in 1981 , Keith Welsh later becoming manager of Australian bands Do @-@ Ré @-@ Mi and Boom Crash Opera . 
 = = = 1981 – 1983 : Primitive Man , Fresco EP = = = 
 In January 1982 Davies recorded Primitive Man essentially as a solo project , it was co @-@ produced with Keith Forsey who had worked with Giorgio Moroder and later worked with Simple Minds . Forsey supplied additional percussion ; Davies supplied vocals , guitars , keyboards ( Prophet 5 ) , bass and programmed the Linn drum machine . Released in August 1982 as an Icehouse album , Primitive Man reached No. 3 on the National album charts and provided their international breakthrough single , " Hey Little Girl " which peaked at No. 7 in Australia , No. 2 in Switzerland , No. 5 in Germany and top 20 in UK , Sweden and Netherlands . The album was less successful in the U.S where it peaked at number 129 on the Billboard 200 and the song " Hey Little Girl " appeared on the Billboard Top Tracks chart for one week at number 31 . Another single " Great Southern Land " made the Australian Top 5 , it was later featured in the 1988 Yahoo Serious film Young Einstein , and remains their most popular song according to listeners of Triple M in 2007 . To promote Primitive Man on tour , Davies re @-@ assembled Icehouse with Hoste and Lloyd , and new members : Robert Kretschmer ( guitar , backing vocals ) , Guy Pratt ( bass guitar , backing vocals ) and Andy Qunta ( keyboards , backing vocals ) . Fresco was a five @-@ track EP released in 1983 by this line @-@ up , they supported David Bowie on the European section of his Serious Moonlight tour . Love in Motion was released in 1983 by Chrysalis for the UK market , it was the Primitive Man album with " Love in Motion " replacing album track " Break These Chains " . Back in 1982 , Russell Mulcahy had directed two of their video clips : " Hey Little Girl " and " Street Cafe " ( released February 1983 ) , after these Mulcahy asked Davies to record the score for his film Razorback , it was entirely instrumental , and featured Davies ' first recorded use of the Australian designed Fairlight Music Computer , the trailer for the movie was released in 1983 , the film itself in April 1984 . 
 I use the Fairlight mostly , but I like the <unk> for harmonies . I use the Fairlight as a sort of sketchpad for arranging and editing ... I 've been working with a Fairlight for two and a half years now . They 're built not very far away from where I live , so when they need to test out some software , I have a look at it ... The first time I used a Fairlight was to do the soundtrack to Russell Mulcahy 's first feature film Razorback , which is about a huge killer pig . 
 = = = 1984 – 1986 : Sidewalk , Boxes , and Measure for Measure = = = 
 Icehouse 's next album Sidewalk was released in 1984 and peaked at No. 4 on the National albums chart with singles " Taking the Town " peaked at No. 22 in May , " Don 't Believe Anymore " peaked at No. 22 August and " Dusty Pages " in November . Davies used the Fairlight CMI digital sampling synthesizer exclusively on this more sombre and reflective album . Davies was commissioned to compose and record the score for the Sydney Dance Company production of Graeme Murphy 's work Boxes , from Icehouse Davies only used Kretschmer , percussion was supplied by Masaki <unk> and Boxes was first performed live at the Sydney Opera House on 7 November 1985 . After the Boxes project , Icehouse was Davies , Kretschmer , Pratt and Qunta with Simon Lloyd ( sax , trumpet , keyboards ) and Steve Jensen ( drums , percussion ) . 
 Their 1986 release Measure for Measure featured Brian Eno as an additional performer ; it provided the Australian singles of " No Promises " No. 19 , " Baby , You 're So Strange " No. 12 , " Mr. Big " No. 14 and " Cross the Border " . Further inroads into the U.S. market occurred with " No Promises " peaking at No. 9 on Billboard Mainstream Rock chart and " Cross the Border " reaching No. 19 . On tour for Measure for Measure , Icehouse were Davies , Kretschmer , Lloyd and Qunta with Glenn Krawczyk on bass ( replacing new member Vito <unk> after nine shows ) and Paul Wheeler on drums . On 14 August 1986 their performance at New York City 's Ritz Hotel was recorded as Icehouse : Live at the Ritz , directed by John Jopson and broadcast on U.S. TV on 9 September 1987 and on Australian TV on 15 November 1987 it was released on VHS and NTSC formats . Jopson was subsequently used to direct four music videos for Icehouse . Stephen Morgan replaced Krawczyk on bass during 1987 . 
 = = = 1987 – 1989 : Man of Colours and Great Southern Land = = = 
 Their best @-@ selling album is 1987 's Man of Colours , which contained the Australian hit singles " Crazy " which peaked at No. 3 in July , " Electric Blue " , co @-@ written by Davies and John Oates of U.S. band Hall & Oates , peaked at No. 1 in October , " My Obsession " No. 5 in December , " Man of Colours " No. 28 in February 1988 and " Nothing Too Serious " No. 29 in May 1988 . It was the first Australian album to have five singles charting in the top 30 , it remained at No. 1 on the Australian album charts for eleven weeks and has sold over 700 @,@ 000 copies . With U.S. chart success for " Crazy " , which reached No. 14 on the Billboard Hot 100 and No. 10 on its Mainstream Rock chart , and " Electric Blue " peaked at No. 7 Hot 100 and No. 10 Mainstream , the band had reached their zenith of popularity , the album Man of Colours reached No. 43 on the Billboard 200 . Man of Colours was lauded in Australia during 1988 , it won two ARIA Awards , ' Album of the Year ' and ' Highest Selling Album ' ; the associated song " Electric Blue " won ' Most Performed Australasian Popular Work ' at the Australasian Performing Right Association ( APRA ) Music Awards for its writers Davies and Oates . The cover artwork ( see image at right ) , designed by Davies and Kretschmer , depicts a human figure holding three different coloured flowers . 
 The only Icehouse releases for 1989 were a single " Touch the Fire " which reached No. 13 in Australia in November and a compilation double album / video collection Great Southern Land . December 1989 saw the release of " Jimmy Dean " as a single which reached No. 47 on the ARIA singles charts . 
 = = 1990 – present : Iva Davies and Icehouse = = 
 = = = 1990 – 1992 : Code Blue , Masterfile = = = 
 Qunta left at about this time with Icehouse recording their next album , Code Blue released in October , it was a more ambitious but flawed work . Singles released from the album were " Big Fun " which peaked at No. 47 on the ARIA singles charts in August , " Miss Divine " at No. 16 in October and " Anything is Possible " at No. 49 in January 1991 . For Code Blue recording , Icehouse were Davies , Lloyd , Morgan and Wheeler , for touring they added guitarist Paul Gildea and keyboardist Roger Mason ( ex @-@ Models ) . In 1992 , EMI released a compilation , Masterfile containing a new version of " Love in Motion " also released as a single featuring Davies in a duet with Christina Amphlett of Divinyls . 
 = = = 1993 – 1995 : Full Circle , Big Wheel , and Berlin = = = 
 Full Circle , an entire album of remixes was recorded during 1993 , it included the track " Shakin ' the Cage " which was released on the Spin One EP in early 1993 and was followed by the album Big Wheel in November , which contained the singles " Satellite " in October and " Big Wheel " in March 1994 , while the Full Circle album itself was not released until December 1994 ; neither albums nor singles had any Top 40 chart success . 
 By 1995 , Davies was again involved with the Sydney Dance Company , this time with their production of Berlin . The musical score was a collection of cover versions of songs by David Bowie , Brian Eno , Simple Minds , The Psychedelic Furs , Frank Sinatra , Lou Reed , Roxy Music , XTC , Talking Heads , The Velvet Underground , PiL , The Cure and Killing Joke , which saw Davies collaborating with pianist Max Lambert in the development of the music . Sessions were released as The Berlin Tapes under the name Iva Davies and Icehouse in 1995 on DIVA ( Iva Davies own label ) / Massive Records for Australian release and Warner Records for international release in 2002 . As well as recording the ballet score , Davies and Icehouse performed live at each performance , Berlin ran for two seasons . During 1999 Davies , together with Richard <unk> and Christopher Gordon , composed The Ghost of Time as an expansion of " Great Southern Land " into a forty @-@ minute performance for Sydney 's part of the worldwide millennial celebrations . On New Year 's Eve in 1999 , Davies ( vocals , guitar ) , <unk> ( violin ) , Guy Pratt ( bass ) , Krawczyk ( drums ) ROM = Pari ( Taiko - Japanese drums ) and Sydney Symphony Orchestra performed The Ghost of Time on the northern forecourt of Sydney Opera House alongside Sydney Harbour and was televised around the world on CNN and other news networks . Davies had released the solo album , The Ghost of Time earlier in December 1999 . 
 = = = 2001 – 2010 : Bipolar Poems , remasters = = = 
 Davies had been working in 2001 , on a proposed Icehouse album to be titled Bi @-@ Polar Poems with tracks available since 2004 from the Official Iva Davies - Icehouse website including " Your God Not Mine " . As of February 2009 , the album was still unreleased . In 2002 , The Whitlams covered " Don 't Believe Anymore " from Sidewalk for their album Torch The Moon , which enjoyed moderate radio success . During 2002 , Davies digitally remastered all of Flowers / Icehouse studio albums adding bonus tracks to each - they were released by Warner Music Australia . In 2003 Iva Davies contributed " Ghost of Time " and other music to the film score of the Russell Crowe epic Master and Commander : The Far Side of the World . In 2004 , Heroes , which was The Berlin Tapes repackaged from the Australian and Japanese versions , was released . On 16 August 2006 , Icehouse were inducted into the ARIA Hall of Fame alongside Midnight Oil , Divinyls and Rose Tattoo . Icehouse performed on 21 September 2007 with the line @-@ up : Davies , Paul Gildea ( guitars ) , Steve Morgan ( bass ) , Peter Maslen ( drums ) and Glen <unk> ( keyboards , saxophone ) . 
 Icehouse / Flowers featured on Triple M 's 2007 Essential Countdown with 14 songs including : " Great Southern Land " at No. 13 , " Don 't Believe Any More " No. 78 , " Street Cafe " No. 187 , " Love in Motion " No. 327 , " We Can Get Together " No. 428 , and " Electric Blue " No. 454 . 
 From 15 June 2008 , Davies was a judge on Seven Network TV series Battle of the Choirs . Davies commented on the status of Icehouse : 
 " Last year and January this year we did a couple of private , corporate shows ... but as far as live touring in front of the public , we haven 't done that for a very long time ... It 's an extremely difficult thing to have to sing for two hours and in sheer practical terms I 'd have to be a lot fitter than I am now ... I wrote and recorded an album a while ago . That song [ " Your God Not Mine " ] was written in 1998 ... The album [ Bi @-@ Polar Poems ] is in various states of unfinished , but I keep getting projects which interrupt me working on it ... " 
 The grand final show of Battle of the Choirs , broadcast on 3 August 2008 , had Icehouse provide a rare live performance of " Great Southern Land " . For the performance , Icehouse were Iva Davies ( vocals , guitar ) , Paul Wheeler ( drums , <unk> ) , Paul Gildea ( guitar ) , David Chapman ( guitar ) , Steve Bull ( bass guitar ) ; they were supported by the three grand finalist choirs . 
 On 14 March 2009 Icehouse reformed for Sound Relief benefit concert at the Sydney Cricket Ground . Sound Relief is a benefit concert for victims of the Victorian Bushfire Crisis and the Queensland Floods . Appearing with Icehouse at the Sydney concert were , Coldplay , Eskimo Joe , Hoodoo Gurus , Jet , Josh Pyke , Little Birdy , The Presets , Wolfmother , You Am I and additional artists . 
 4 June 2009 : Icehouse performed at the Sacred Heart Mission 's " Heart of St Kilda Concert " The concert featured some of Australia 's finest performers - Kate Ceberano , Joe <unk> , Dave Hughes , Icehouse , Mark Seymour , Mick Molloy , Tex Perkins , Tim Rogers , Corinne Grant , Ash Grunwald , Greg Fleet , Blue King Brown , Dan Sultan , Scott Wilson , Brian <unk> , Julia Zemiro , Tom Gleeson , Scared Weird Little Guys , Sean <unk> and Celia <unk> . On stage with Iva were Paul Gildea ( guitar ) , Paul Wheeler ( drums ) , Steve Morgan ( bass ) , Glen <unk> ( sax / keys ) . 
 = = = 2011 – present : Icehouse 30th anniversary , White Heat : 30 Hits and <unk> Live = = = 
 On 6 April 2011 , Icehouse and Universal Music Australia publicly announced a new partnership for sales and distribution of the band 's material . Accompanying this were details of the planned issue of a 30th anniversary edition of the band 's debut album Icehouse . This release marks the first time any of the band 's catalogue has been available for commercial download . The album was released on 20 May 2011 digitally and as a multi @-@ disc set . 
 On 7 July 2011 , the band issued a press release about the forthcoming release of a new greatest hits compilation , titled White Heat : 30 Hits . The album was released on 26 August 2011 . 
 Icehouse have started to play live gigs around Australia . One of the most recent was at 3 December Homebake 2011 concert , performing under the moniker of " Icehouse Plays Flowers " , where they played songs from their first two albums ( both released singles and unreleased songs ) — " Icehouse " , " We Can Get Together " , " Skin " , " Boulevard " , " Great Southern Land " and " Sister . " Keith Welsh joined them on stage , playing bass @-@ guitar . Black @-@ and @-@ white original PR photos from the early 1980s were flashed as a backdrop behind the band as they played . 
 On 12 July 2012 , the entire Icehouse studio catalogue was reissued . Primitive Man and Man of Colours also received a bonus DVD to celebrate their 30th and 25th anniversaries respectively . The band will be promoting the two anniversary albums with the " Primitive Colours " tour . 
 On 4 and 7 December , Icehouse performed two shows at the Esplanade Hotel in Melbourne and the Oxford Art Factory in Sydney , respectively , under the moniker of " <unk> performing reggae @-@ styled versions of classic Icehouse songs and old reggae favourites " . These concerts spawned the release of a live album released in January 2014 . 
 = = Members = = 
 Current 
 = Wyndham Robertson = 
 Wyndham Robertson ( January 26 , 1803 – February 11 , 1888 ) was the Acting Governor of the U.S. state of Virginia from 1836 to 1837 . He also served twice in the Virginia House of Delegates , the second time during the American Civil War . 
 Robertson was a Whig , and was an advocate for Union during the secession crisis that precipitated the Civil War . However , after Lincoln 's call for troops , he advocated secession . After the war , he was a member of the Committee of Nine that helped usher Virginia back into the Union . Robertson , a descendant of Pocahontas , published a book near the end of his life in her defense , and tracing her ancestry and descendants . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early life and family = = = 
 Robertson was born near Manchester , in Chesterfield County , Virginia , the son of William Robertson and Elizabeth Bolling , a descendant of Pocahontas and John Rolfe . His father was a member of the Virginia Council of State . Robertson attended private schools in Richmond and graduated from The College of William and Mary in 1821 . He then married Mary Trigg Smith , daughter of Captain Francis Smith . Robertson 's brothers were Thomas B. Robertson , a Governor of Louisiana , and John Robertson , a U.S. Congressman . Robertson studied law and was admitted to the bar in 1824 . In 1827 , he made a short trip to Paris and London , and in 1830 he was made Councillor of State . 
 = = = Career = = = 
 Robertson was re @-@ elected to the Council of State in 1833 , and on March 31 , 1836 , he became the senior member of this body , and therefore Lieutenant @-@ Governor of Virginia . When Governor Littleton Waller Tazewell resigned that same day , Robertson became Governor . Since the Virginia Legislature , which elected the Governor , was Democratic , and he , being a Whig , was not , Robertson was not elected when his term was up in 1837 , and he was replaced by David Campbell . Robertson was then elected to the Virginia House of Delegates for the 1838 session . He was re @-@ elected for three successive sessions , ending his service in 1841 . 
 He moved to his wife 's home south of Abingdon , in southwest Virginia in 1841 . He was made a Justice of Washington County on July 25 , 1842 , and was appointed a trustee of Abingdon Academy in 1843 . In 1850 , he leased the King <unk> for five years . In 1858 , he returned to Richmond . In 1859 , he was elected to the Virginia House of Delegates for the 1859 @-@ 1861 session . When Virginia was struggling with the idea of seceding from the United States , Robertson was a staunch Unionist and tried to prevent its secession . He later wrote of himself as a " friend to peace and the Union " and that he had actively opposed South Carolina 's call for a Southern Convention in 1859 . In fact , he was present at the Henry Clay banquet in April 1860 , at which former President John Tyler was present , and Robertson was called on to give " The Union " toast , which he did , followed by a short speech . He then proposed the following toast : 
 " The Constitutional Union of the States " - The Union of the States is the harmony of the spheres . While obedient to the laws of their creation , they sing ever as they go ' glad tidings of great joy ' to all the world . <unk> against them , light and joy are swallowed up in darkness , and order falls back into primordial chaos . 
 After South Carolina and several other states started seceding in the winter of 1860 @-@ 61 , he still advocated that Virginia not follow suit . On January 7 , 1861 , he presented a resolution known as the Anti @-@ Coercion Resolution , which rejected secession , but stated that if the Federal government used coercion toward the seceded states , Virginia would fight , which was duly adopted . However , when President Abraham Lincoln made his call for troops on April 15 , 1861 , he was " from that time forth zealously active in all measures for the defence of his State . " The call for troops was precisely the scenario detailed in their Anti @-@ Coercion Resolution and Virginia seceded . 
 Robertson was re @-@ elected to the House of Delegates for the next two sessions , ending in 1865 . In 1863 , he opposed and helped to defeat a bill to fix the prices of food , which he believed was " fraught with the <unk> mischief " . When a committee of citizens presented a resolution asking their representatives to support a similar bill or resign , Robertson refused . When he found that his colleagues had already acquiesced , he resigned so as not to misrepresent his constituents . The House , however , requested that his resignation be withdrawn until the wishes of his constituents could be determined . A formal poll was held and it was determined that a majority did not support the bill and Robertson retained his seat . 
 After the war , he moved back to Abingdon . During Reconstruction , Robertson was a member of the Committee of Nine , led by Alexander H. H. Stuart , that sought Virginia 's readmission to the Union . At issue was the new state constitution , which included disenfranchisement of many white males . The committee successfully negotiated with the Federal government to have that clause voted on separately , so that Virginians would accept and ratify the new constitution and so rejoin the Union . He died on February 11 , 1888 , and was buried at Cobbs , Chesterfield County . 
 = = Legacy and writings = = 
 Robertson was an early donor to Emory and Henry College , which later endowed the Robertson prize medal for " encouraging oratory " . 
 After the American Civil War , Northern writers began questioning the validity of the rescue story of Captain John Smith and Pocahontas , attacking the accounts of the historical role played by both , as well as that of her husband John Rolfe . The movement was led by Henry Adams , a descendant of John Adams whose rival was John Randolph of Roanoke , a descendant of Pocahontas . Several Virginians replied , one of whom was Robertson . " Northern attacks disturbed him so much that he prepared a detailed study " and wrote Pocahontas alias <unk> and Her Descendants through Her Marriage with John Rolfe . He traced her descendants , who included the <unk> , Branches , Lewises , <unk> , and Pages , as well as his own family . His thesis was that because her descendants were notable , so was she . " History , poetry , and art , " wrote Robertson , " have vied with one another in investing her name from that day to the present with a halo of surpassing brightness . " 
 The Wyndham Robertson Library at Hollins University is dedicated to Robertson . 
 = Harry S. Truman = 
 Harry S. Truman ( May 8 , 1884 – December 26 , 1972 ) was the 33rd President of the United States ( 1945 – 53 ) , an American politician of the Democratic Party . He served as a United States Senator from Missouri ( 1935 – 45 ) and briefly as Vice President ( 1945 ) before he succeeded to the presidency on April 12 , 1945 upon the death of Franklin D. Roosevelt . He was president during the final months of World War II , making the decision to drop the atomic bomb on Hiroshima and Nagasaki . Truman was elected in his own right in 1948 . He presided over an uncertain domestic scene as America sought its path after the war and tensions with the Soviet Union increased , marking the start of the Cold War . 
 Truman was born in Lamar , Missouri and spent most of his youth on his family 's farm near Independence . In the last months of World War I , he served in combat in France as an artillery officer with his National Guard unit . After the war , he briefly owned a haberdashery in Kansas City , Missouri , and joined the Democratic Party and the political machine of Tom Pendergast . Truman was first elected to public office as a county official in 1922 , and then as a U.S. Senator in 1934 . He gained national prominence as chairman of the Truman Committee , formed in March 1941 , which exposed waste , fraud , and corruption in Federal Government wartime contracts . 
 Nazi Germany surrendered on Truman 's birthday ( May 8 ) just a few weeks after he assumed the presidency , but the war with Imperial Japan raged on and was expected to last at least another year . Truman approved the use of atomic weapons to end the fighting and to spare the thousands of American lives that would inevitably be lost in the planned invasion of Japan and Japanese @-@ held islands in the Pacific . This decision remains controversial to this day . It is thought to be one of the principal factors that forced Japan 's immediate and unconditional surrender . 
 Truman 's presidency was a turning point in foreign affairs , as the United States engaged in an internationalist foreign policy and renounced isolationism . Truman helped found the United Nations in 1945 , issued the Truman Doctrine in 1947 to contain Communism , and got the $ 13 billion Marshall Plan enacted to rebuild Western Europe . The Soviet Union , a wartime ally , became a peacetime enemy in the Cold War . Truman oversaw the Berlin Airlift of 1948 and the creation of NATO in 1949 . He was unable to stop Communists from taking over China . When communist North Korea invaded South Korea in 1950 , he sent in U.S. troops and gained UN approval for the Korean War . After initial successes in Korea , however , the UN forces were thrown back by Chinese intervention , and the conflict was stalemated throughout the final years of Truman 's presidency . 
 On domestic issues , bills endorsed by Truman often faced opposition from a conservative Congress dominated by the Southern legislators , but his administration was able to successfully guide the American economy through the post @-@ war economic challenges . Truman maintained that civil rights were a moral priority , and in 1948 submitted the first comprehensive civil rights legislation and issued Executive Orders to start racial integration in the military and federal agencies . Allegations were raised of corruption in the Truman administration , linked to certain cabinet members and senior White House staff , and this became a central campaign issue in the 1952 presidential election and may have contributed to Adlai Stevenson 's ( Truman 's successor as Democratic nominee ) loss to Republican nominee Dwight D. Eisenhower . Popular and scholarly assessments of Truman 's presidency initially were unfavorable but became more positive over time following his retirement from politics . Truman 's 1948 election upset to win a full term as president has often been invoked by later ' underdog ' presidential candidates . 
 = = Early life and career = = 
 Harry S. Truman was born on May 8 , 1884 , in Lamar , Missouri , the oldest child of John Anderson Truman ( 1851 – 1914 ) and Martha Ellen Young Truman ( 1852 – 1947 ) . His parents chose the name Harry after his mother 's brother , Harrison " Harry " Young ( 1846 – 1916 ) . They chose " S " as his middle initial to please both of his grandfathers , Anderson Shipp Truman and Solomon Young . The " S " did not stand for anything in particular , but was regularly written followed by a period . A brother , John Vivian ( 1886 – 1965 ) , was born soon after Harry , followed by sister Mary Jane ( 1889 – 1978 ) . 
 John Truman was a farmer and livestock dealer . The family lived in Lamar until Harry was ten months old , when they moved to a farm near <unk> . The family next moved to Belton , and in 1887 to his grandparents ' 600 @-@ acre ( 240 @-@ ha ) farm in Grandview . When Truman was six , his parents moved to Independence , so he could attend the Presbyterian Church Sunday School . Truman did not attend a traditional school until he was eight . While living in Independence , he served as the Shabbos <unk> for his Jewish neighbors , doing tasks for them on Shabbos which they were prevented from doing because of rules against work . 
 As a boy , Truman was interested in music , reading , and history , all encouraged by his mother , with whom he was very close . As president , he solicited political as well as personal advice from her . He got up at five every morning to practice the piano , which he studied twice a week until he was fifteen . Truman worked as a page at the 1900 Democratic National Convention at Convention Hall in Kansas City ; his father had many friends who were active in the Democratic Party and helped young Harry to gain his first political position . 
 After graduating from Independence High School ( now William Chrisman High School ) in 1901 , Truman enrolled in Spalding 's Commercial College , a Kansas City business school , but left after one semester . He then worked as a timekeeper on the Atchison , Topeka & Santa Fe Railway , sleeping in hobo camps near the rail lines . He worked at a series of clerical jobs , and was employed briefly in the mailroom of the Kansas City Star . Truman and his brother Vivian later worked as clerks at the National Bank of Commerce in Kansas City ; one of their coworkers , who also lived at the same rooming house , was Arthur Eisenhower , the brother of Dwight and Milton . He returned to the Grandview farm in 1906 , where he lived until entering the army in 1917 after the beginning of the Great War . During this period , he courted Bess Wallace ; he proposed in 1911 , but she turned him down . Truman later said that he intended to propose again , but when he did he wanted to be earning more money than a farmer did . 
 Truman is the most recent president who did not earn a college degree . In addition to having briefly attended business college , from 1923 – 25 he took night courses toward an LL.B. at the Kansas City Law School ( now the University of Missouri – Kansas City School of Law ) , but dropped out after losing reelection as county judge . He was informed by attorneys in the Kansas City area that his education and experience were probably sufficient to receive a license to practice law , but didn 't pursue it because he won election as presiding judge . While serving as president in 1947 , Truman applied for a license to practice law . A friend who was an attorney began working out the arrangements , and informed Truman that his application needed to be notarized . By the time Truman received this information he had changed his mind , so he never followed up . After rediscovery of Truman 's application , in 1996 the Missouri Supreme Court issued Truman a posthumous honorary law license . 
 = = = World War I = = = 
 Truman had dreamed of going to the United States Military Academy at West Point , but he was refused an appointment because of poor eyesight . He enlisted in the Missouri Army National Guard in 1905 , serving until 1911 in a Kansas City @-@ based artillery battery and attaining the rank of corporal . At his induction , his eyesight had been an unacceptable 20 / 50 in the right eye and 20 / 400 in the left ( past the standard for legal blindness ) . The second time he took the test , he passed by secretly memorizing the eye chart . 
 When the United States entered World War I , Truman rejoined the National Guard ; he helped recruit new soldiers as his unit expanded , and his success led the men of his battery to elect him as their first lieutenant . Before deployment to France , Truman was sent for training to Camp Doniphan , Fort Sill , near Lawton , Oklahoma . He ran the camp canteen with Edward Jacobson , a clothing store clerk he knew from Kansas City . Unlike most canteens funded by unit members , which usually lost money , the canteen operated by Truman and Jacobson turned a profit , returning each soldier 's initial $ 2 investment and $ 10 @,@ 000 in dividends in six months . At Fort Sill , Truman met Lieutenant James M. Pendergast , nephew of Thomas Joseph ( Tom ) Pendergast , a Kansas City political boss , and this connection had a profound influence on Truman 's later life . 
 In mid @-@ 1918 , about one million soldiers of the American Expeditionary Forces were in France . Truman was promoted to captain in July 1918 and became commander of Battery D , 129th Field Artillery , 60th Brigade , 35th Infantry Division . It was known for its discipline problems , and Truman was initially unpopular . Despite initial efforts by the men to intimidate him into quitting , Truman succeeded by making his corporals and sergeants accountable for discipline ; he promised to back them up if they performed capably , and reduce them to private and return them to the ranks if they didn 't . In an event memorialized in battery lore as the " Battle of Who Run " , his soldiers began to flee during a sudden attack by the Germans in the Vosges Mountains ; Truman succeeded at ordering his men to stay and fight , using profanity that he had first heard while working on the Santa Fe railroad . The men were so surprised to hear Truman use such language that they immediately obeyed . 
 Truman 's unit joined in a massive pre @-@ arranged assault barrage on September 26 , 1918 at the opening of the Meuse @-@ Argonne Offensive . They advanced with difficulty over pitted terrain to follow the infantry , and they set up an observation post west of Cheppy . On September 27 , Truman saw an enemy artillery battery through his binoculars setting up across a river in a position allowing them to fire upon the neighboring 28th Division . Truman 's orders limited him to targets facing the 35th Division , but he ignored this and patiently waited until the Germans had walked their horses well away from their guns , ensuring that they couldn 't retreat . He then ordered his men to open fire , and destroyed the enemy . Truman was given a dressing down by his commander , Colonel Karl D. Klemm , but he was not court @-@ martialed ; his decision probably saved the lives of 28th Division soldiers who otherwise would have come under fire from the Germans Truman 's battery destroyed . 
 In other action during the Meuse @-@ Argonne fighting , Truman 's battery provided support for George S. Patton 's tank brigade , and his battery fired some of the last shots of the war on November 11 , 1918 . Battery D did not lose a single man while under Truman 's command in France , and his men presented him with a large loving cup upon their return to the United States after the war . 
 The war was a transformative experience for Truman that brought out his leadership qualities . He had entered the service in 1917 as a family farmer who had worked in clerical jobs that did not require leadership skills , but during the war he gained leadership experience and a record of success that greatly enhanced and supported his post @-@ war political career in Missouri . 
 Truman was brought up in the Presbyterian and Baptist churches ; he avoided revivals and sometimes ridiculed revivalist preachers . He rarely spoke about religion , which to him primarily meant ethical behavior along traditional Protestant lines . Most of the soldiers that he commanded in the war were Catholics , and he got along well with them , as he did with Christians of other denominations and the unit 's Jewish members . 
 = = = Continued military service = = = 
 Truman was discharged from the Army as a major in May 1919 . In 1920 he was appointed a major in the Reserve Officer Corps ; he became a lieutenant colonel in 1925 and a colonel in 1932 . In the 1920s and 1930s Truman commanded 1st Battalion , 379th Field Artillery Regiment , a unit of the 102nd Infantry Division . After promotion to colonel , Truman advanced to command of the regiment . 
 After his election to the U.S. Senate , Truman was transferred to the General Assignments Group , a holding unit for less active officers ; he had not been consulted or notified in advance . Truman protested his reassignment , which led to his resumption of regimental command . He remained an active reservist until the early 1940s . Truman volunteered for active military service during World War II , but was not accepted , partly because of age , and partly because President Franklin D. Roosevelt desired Senators and Congressman who belonged to the military reserves to support the war effort by remaining in Congress , or by ending their active duty service and resuming their Congressional seats . He was an inactive reservist from the early 1940s until retiring on January 20 , 1953 . 
 = = Politics = = 
 = = = As Jackson County judge = = = 
 After his wartime service , Truman returned to Independence , where he married Bess Wallace on June 28 , 1919 . The couple had one child , Mary Margaret Truman . 
 Shortly before the wedding , Truman and Jacobson opened a haberdashery together at 104 West 12th Street in downtown Kansas City . After brief initial success , the store went bankrupt during the recession of 1921 . Truman did not pay off the last of the debts from that venture until 1934 , when he did so with the aid of a political supporter . Jacobson and Truman remained close friends , and Jacobson 's advice to Truman on Zionism later played a role in the U.S. government 's decision to recognize Israel . 
 With the help of the Kansas City Democratic machine led by Tom Pendergast , Truman was elected in 1922 as County Court judge of Jackson County 's eastern district — this was an administrative rather than judicial position , somewhat similar to county commissioners elsewhere . ( At the time Jackson County elected a judge from the western district ( Kansas City ) , one from the eastern district ( Jackson County outside Kansas City ) , and a presiding judge elected countywide . ) Truman was not re @-@ elected in 1924 , losing in a Republican wave led by President Calvin Coolidge 's landslide election to a full term . Two years selling automobile club memberships convinced him that a public service career was safer for a family man approaching middle age . 
 In 1926 , Truman was elected presiding judge with the support of the Pendergast machine , and he was re @-@ elected in 1930 . Truman helped coordinate the " Ten Year Plan " , which transformed Jackson County and the Kansas City skyline with new public works projects , including an extensive series of roads and construction of a new Wight and Wight @-@ designed County Court building . Also in 1926 , he became president of the National Old Trails Road Association ( <unk> ) . He oversaw the dedication in the late 1920s of a series of 12 Madonna of the Trail monuments honoring pioneer women , which were installed along the trail . 
 In 1933 , Truman was named Missouri 's director for the Federal Re @-@ Employment program ( part of the Civil Works Administration ) at the request of Postmaster General James Farley . This was payback to Pendergast for delivering the Kansas City vote to Franklin D. Roosevelt in the 1932 presidential election . The appointment confirmed Pendergast 's control over federal patronage jobs in Missouri and marked the zenith of his power . It also created a relationship between Truman and Roosevelt aide Harry Hopkins and assured Truman 's avid support for the New Deal . 
 = = = As U.S. Senator from Missouri = = = 
 After serving as a county judge , Truman wanted to run for Governor or Congress , but Pendergast rejected these ideas . Truman thought that he might serve out his career in some well @-@ paying county sinecure , but circumstances changed when Pendergast reluctantly backed Truman as a Democratic candidate in the 1934 U.S. Senate election after four other potential candidates turned him down . In the Democratic primary , Truman defeated Congressmen John J. Cochran and Jacob L. Milligan , with the solid support of Jackson County , which was crucial to his candidacy , as were the contacts that he had made statewide as a county official . In the general election , Truman defeated incumbent Republican Roscoe C. Patterson by nearly 20 percentage points . 
 Truman assumed office with a reputation as " the senator from Pendergast . " He turned over patronage decisions to Pendergast , though Truman always maintained that he voted his conscience . He later defended the patronage decisions by saying that " by offering a little to the machine , [ he ] saved a lot " . In his first term , Truman spoke out against corporate greed and the dangers of Wall Street speculators and other moneyed special interests attaining too much influence in national affairs . He was largely ignored by Democratic President Roosevelt and had trouble getting calls returned from the White House . 
 During the US Senate election in 1940 , United States Attorney Maurice Milligan ( Jacob Milligan 's brother ) and former governor Lloyd Stark both challenged Truman in the Democratic primary . Truman was politically weakened by Pendergast 's imprisonment for income tax evasion the previous year ; the senator had remained loyal , having claimed that Republican judges ( not the Roosevelt administration ) were responsible for the boss ' downfall . St. Louis party leader Robert E. Hannegan 's support of Truman proved crucial ; he later brokered the deal that put Truman on the national ticket . In the end , Stark and Milligan both split up the anti @-@ Pendergast vote in the Senate Democratic primary and Truman won by a total of 8 @,@ 000 votes . In the November election , Truman defeated Republican Manvel H. Davis by 51 – 49 percent . 
 In late @-@ 1940 , Truman traveled to various military bases . The waste and profiteering which he saw led him to use his subcommittee chairmanship in the Committee on Military Affairs to begin investigations into abuses while the nation prepared for war . A separate committee was set up under Truman to conduct a formal investigation ; the Roosevelt administration supported this plan rather than weather a more hostile probe by the House of Representatives . Chairmanship of what came to be known as the Truman Committee made him a national figure . Activities of the Truman Committee ranged from criticizing the " dollar @-@ a @-@ year men " hired by the government , many of whom proved ineffective , to investigating a shoddily built New Jersey housing project for war workers . The committee is reported to have saved as much as $ 15 billion ; its activities put Truman on the cover of Time magazine . According to the Senate 's historical minutes , in leading the committee , " Truman erased his earlier public image as an errand @-@ runner for Kansas City politicos " and " no senator ever gained greater political benefits from chairing a special investigating committee than did Missouri 's Harry S. Truman . " 
 If we see that Germany is winning we ought to help Russia , and if Russia is winning we ought to help Germany , and that way let them kill as many as possible although I don 't want to see Hitler victorious under any circumstances . 
 = = Vice presidency = = 
 Vice President Henry Wallace was popular among Democratic voters , but he was viewed as too far to the left and too friendly to labor for some of Roosevelt 's advisers . The President and several of his confidantes wanted to replace Wallace , knowing that Roosevelt might not live out a fourth term . Outgoing Democratic National Committee chairman Frank C. Walker , incoming chairman Hannegan , party treasurer Edwin W. Pauley , strategist Ed Flynn , Chicago Mayor Edward Joseph Kelly , and lobbyist George E. Allen all wanted to keep Wallace off the ticket . Roosevelt told party leaders that he would accept either Truman or Supreme Court Justice William O. Douglas . State and city party leaders strongly preferred Truman , and Roosevelt agreed . Truman did not campaign for the Vice @-@ Presidential spot , though he welcomed the attention as evidence that he had become more than the " Senator from Pendergast " . 
 Truman 's nomination was dubbed the " Second Missouri Compromise " and was well received . The Roosevelt – Truman ticket achieved a 432 – 99 electoral @-@ vote victory in the election , defeating the Republican ticket of Governor Thomas E. Dewey of New York and running mate Governor John Bricker of Ohio . Truman was sworn in as vice president on January 20 , 1945 . 
 Truman 's brief vice @-@ presidency was relatively uneventful . He cast his tie @-@ breaking vote as President of the Senate to confirm former Vice @-@ President Henry Wallace as Secretary of Commerce . Roosevelt rarely contacted him , even to inform him of major decisions ; the President and Vice President met alone together only twice during their time in office . In one of his first acts as vice president , Truman created some controversy when he attended the disgraced Pendergast 's funeral . He brushed aside the criticism , saying simply , " He was always my friend and I have always been his . " He had rarely discussed world affairs or domestic politics with Roosevelt ; he was uninformed about major initiatives relating to the war and the top @-@ secret Manhattan Project , which was about to test the world 's first atomic bomb . He was also photographed with actress Lauren Bacall sitting atop the piano at the National Press Club as he played for soldiers . 
 Truman had been vice president for 82 days when President Roosevelt died on April 12 , 1945 . That afternoon , Truman presided over the Senate as usual . He had just adjourned the session for the day and was preparing to have a drink in House Speaker Sam Rayburn 's office when he received an urgent message to go immediately to the White House . Truman assumed that President Roosevelt wanted to meet with him , but Eleanor Roosevelt informed him that her husband had died after suffering a massive cerebral hemorrhage . Truman 's first concern was for Mrs. Roosevelt . He asked if there was anything that he could do for her , to which she replied , " Is there anything we can do for you ? You are the one in trouble now ! " 
 = = Presidency = = 
 = = = First term ( 1945 – 49 ) = = = 
 = = = = Assuming office and the atomic bomb = = = = 
 Shortly after taking the oath of office , Truman spoke to reporters : " Boys , if you ever pray , pray for me now . I don 't know if you fellas ever had a load of hay fall on you , but when they told me what happened yesterday , I felt like the moon , the stars , and all the planets had fallen on me . " 
 Upon assuming the presidency , Truman asked all the members of FDR 's cabinet to remain in place , and told them that he was open to their advice . He emphasized a central principle of his administration : he would be the one making decisions , and they were to support him . Although Truman was told briefly on the afternoon of April 12 that the Allies had a new , highly destructive weapon , it was not until April 25 that Secretary of War Henry Stimson told him the details . Truman benefited from a honeymoon period after Roosevelt 's death , and from the Allies ' success in Europe , wrapping up the war there . Truman was pleased to issue the proclamation of V @-@ E Day on May 8 , 1945 , his 61st birthday . 
 We have discovered the most terrible bomb in the history of the world . It may be the fire destruction prophesied in the Euphrates Valley Era , after Noah and his fabulous Ark . 
 In the wake of Allied victory , Truman journeyed to Europe for the Potsdam Conference . He was there when he learned that the Trinity test of the first atomic bomb on July 16 had been successful . He hinted to Joseph Stalin that the U.S. was about to use a new kind of weapon against the Japanese . Though this was the first time the Soviets had been officially given information about the atomic bomb , Stalin was already aware of the bomb project , having learned about it ( through espionage ) long before Truman did . 
 In August , the Japanese government refused surrender demands as specifically outlined in the Potsdam Declaration and with the invasion of mainland Japan imminent , Truman approved the schedule for dropping the two available bombs . Truman always said that attacking Japan with atomic bombs saved many lives on both sides ; military estimates for the invasion of mainland Japan were that it could take a year and result in 250 @,@ 000 to 500 @,@ 000 American casualties . Hiroshima was bombed on August 6 , and Nagasaki three days later leaving 129 @,@ 000 – 246 @,@ 000 dead . Japan agreed to surrender the following day . 
 Supporters of Truman 's decision argue that , given the tenacious Japanese defense of the outlying islands , the bombings saved hundreds of thousands of lives that would have been lost invading mainland Japan . Critics have argued that the use of nuclear weapons was inherently immoral . Truman strongly defended himself in his memoirs in 1955 – 56 , stating that many lives could have been lost had the U.S. invaded mainland Japan . In 1963 he stood by his decision , telling a journalist " it was done to save 125 @,@ 000 youngsters on the American side and 125 @,@ 000 on the Japanese side from getting killed and that is what it did . It probably also saved a half million youngsters on both sides from being maimed for life . " 
 = = = = Strikes and economic upheaval = = = = 
 The end of World War II was followed by an uneasy transition from war to a peacetime economy . The costs of the war effort were enormous , and Truman was intent on decreasing government expenditures on the military as quickly as possible . <unk> the military and reducing the size of the various services was a cost @-@ saving priority . The effect of demobilization on the economy was unknown , but fears existed that the nation would slide back into a depression . A great deal of work had to be done to plan how best to transition to peacetime production of goods while avoiding mass unemployment for returning veterans . Government officials did not have consensus as to what economic course the postwar U.S. should steer . In addition , Roosevelt had not paid attention to Congress in his final years , and Truman faced a body where a combination of Republicans and conservative southern Democrats formed a powerful voting bloc . 
 The president was faced with the reawakening of labor @-@ management conflicts that had lain dormant during the war years , severe shortages in housing and consumer products , and widespread dissatisfaction with inflation , which at one point hit 6 % in a single month . Added to this polarized environment was a wave of destabilizing strikes in major industries . Truman 's response to them was generally seen as ineffective . A rapid increase in costs was fueled by the release of price controls on most items , and labor sought wage increases . A serious steel strike in January 1946 involving 800 @,@ 000 workers — the largest in the nation 's history — was followed by a coal strike in April and a rail strike in May . The public was angry , with a majority in polls favoring a ban on strikes by public service workers and a year 's moratorium on labor actions . Truman proposed legislation to draft striking workers into the Armed Forces , and in a dramatic personal appearance before Congress , was able to announce settlement of the rail strike . His proposal passed the House of Representatives , but failed in the Senate . For commodities where price controls remained , producers were often unwilling to sell at artificially low prices : farmers refused to sell grain for months in 1945 and 1946 until payments were significantly increased , even though grain was desperately needed , not only for domestic use , but to stave off starvation in Europe . 
 Although labor strife was muted after the settlement of the railway strike , it continued through Truman 's presidency . The President 's approval rating dropped from 82 % in the polls in January 1946 to 52 % by June . This dissatisfaction with the Truman administration 's policies led to large Democratic losses in the 1946 midterm elections , when Republicans took control of Congress for the first time since 1930 . The 80th Congress included Republican freshmen who would become prominent in the years to come , including Wisconsin Senator Joe McCarthy and California Congressman Richard Nixon . When Truman dropped to 32 % in the polls , Democratic Arkansas Senator William Fulbright suggested that Truman resign ; the President said that he did not care what Senator " <unk> " said . 
 Truman cooperated closely with the Republican leaders on foreign policy , though he fought them bitterly on domestic issues . The power of the labor unions was significantly curtailed by the Taft – Hartley Act , which was enacted over Truman 's veto . Truman twice vetoed bills to lower income tax rates in 1947 . Although the initial vetoes were sustained , Congress overrode his veto of a tax cut bill in 1948 . The parties did cooperate on some issues ; Congress passed the Presidential Succession Act of 1947 , making the Speaker of the House rather than the Secretary of State next in line to the presidency after the vice president . 
 As he readied for the 1948 election , Truman made clear his identity as a Democrat in the New Deal tradition , advocating national health insurance , the repeal of the Taft – Hartley Act . He broke with the New Deal by initiating an aggressive civil rights program , which he termed a moral priority . Taken together , it constituted a broad legislative agenda that came to be called the " Fair Deal . " Truman 's proposals were not well received by Congress , even with renewed Democratic majorities in Congress after 1948 . The Solid South rejected civil rights , as those states still enforced segregation . Only one of the major Fair Deal bills , the Housing Act of 1949 , was ever enacted . On the other hand , the major New Deal programs still in operation were not repealed , and there were minor improvements and extensions in many of them . 
 = = = = Creation of United Nations , Marshall Plan , start of Cold War = = = = 
 As a Wilsonian internationalist , Truman strongly supported the creation of the United Nations , and included Eleanor Roosevelt on the delegation to the UN 's first General Assembly . With the Soviet Union expanding its sphere of influence through Eastern Europe , Truman and his foreign policy advisors took a hard line against the USSR . In this , he matched American public opinion , which quickly came to view the Soviets as intent upon world domination . 
 Although he claimed no personal expertise on foreign matters , Truman won bipartisan support for both the Truman Doctrine , which formalized a policy of Soviet containment , and the Marshall Plan , which aimed to help rebuild postwar Europe . To get Congress to spend the vast sums necessary to restart the moribund European economy , Truman used an ideological argument , arguing that Communism flourishes in economically deprived areas . As part of the U.S. Cold War strategy , Truman signed the National Security Act of 1947 and reorganized military forces by merging the Department of War and the Department of the Navy into the National Military Establishment ( later the Department of Defense ) and creating the U.S. Air Force . The act also created the CIA and the National Security Council . In 1952 , Truman secretly consolidated and empowered the cryptologic elements of the United States by creating the National Security Agency ( NSA ) . 
 = = = = Berlin airlift = = = = 
 On June 24 , 1948 , the Soviet Union blocked access to the three Western @-@ held sectors of Berlin . The Allies had never negotiated a deal to guarantee supply of the sectors deep within the Soviet @-@ occupied zone . The commander of the American occupation zone in Germany , General Lucius D. Clay , proposed sending a large armored column across the Soviet zone to West Berlin with instructions to defend itself if it were stopped or attacked . Truman believed this would entail an unacceptable risk of war . He approved Ernest Bevin 's plan to supply the blockaded city by air . On June 25 , the Allies initiated the Berlin Airlift , a campaign that delivered food and other supplies , such as coal , using military aircraft on a massive scale . Nothing like it had ever been attempted before , and no single nation had the capability , either logistically or materially , to have accomplished it . The airlift worked ; ground access was again granted on May 11 , 1949 . Nevertheless , the airlift continued for several months after that . The Berlin Airlift was one of Truman 's great foreign policy successes ; it significantly aided his election campaign in 1948 . 
 = = = = Recognition of Israel = = = = 
 Truman had long taken an interest in the history of the Middle East , and was sympathetic to Jews who sought a homeland in Mandatory Palestine . As a senator , he announced support for Zionism ; in 1943 he called for a homeland for those Jews who survived the Nazi regime . However , State Department officials were reluctant to offend the Arabs , who were opposed to the establishment of a Jewish state in the large region long populated and dominated culturally by Arabs . Secretary of Defense James Forrestal warned Truman of the importance of Saudi Arabian oil in another war ; Truman replied that he would decide his policy on the basis of justice , not oil . American diplomats with experience in the region were opposed , but Truman told them he had few Arabs among his constituents . 
 Palestine was secondary to the goal of protecting the " Northern Tier " of Greece , Turkey , and Iran from Communism , as promised by the Truman Doctrine . Weary of both the convoluted politics of the Middle East and pressures by Jewish leaders , Truman was undecided on his policy . He later cited as decisive in his recognition of the Jewish state the advice of his former business partner , Eddie Jacobson , a non @-@ religious Jew whom Truman absolutely trusted . Truman decided to recognize Israel over the objections of Secretary of State George Marshall , who feared it would hurt relations with the populous Arab states . Marshall believed the paramount threat to the U.S. was the Soviet Union and feared that Arab oil would be lost to the United States in the event of war ; he warned Truman that U.S. was " playing with fire with nothing to put it out " . Truman recognized the State of Israel on May 14 , 1948 , eleven minutes after it declared itself a nation . Of his decision to recognize the Israeli state , Truman wrote in his memoirs : " Hitler had been murdering Jews right and left . I saw it , and I dream about it even to this day . The Jews needed some place where they could go . It is my attitude that the American government couldn 't stand idly by while the victims [ of ] Hitler 's madness are not allowed to build new lives . " 
 = = = 1948 election = = = 
 The 1948 presidential election is remembered for Truman 's stunning come @-@ from @-@ behind victory . In the spring of 1948 , Truman 's public approval rating stood at 36 % , and the president was nearly universally regarded as incapable of winning the general election . The " New Deal " operatives within the party — including FDR 's son James — tried to swing the Democratic nomination to General Dwight D. Eisenhower , a highly popular figure whose political views and party affiliation were totally unknown . Eisenhower emphatically refused to accept , and Truman outflanked opponents to his nomination . 
 At the 1948 Democratic National Convention , Truman attempted to unify the party with a vague civil rights plank in the party platform . His intention was to assuage the internal conflicts between the northern and southern wings of his party . Events overtook his efforts . A sharp address given by Mayor Hubert Humphrey of Minneapolis — as well as the local political interests of a number of urban bosses — convinced the Convention to adopt a stronger civil rights plank , which Truman approved wholeheartedly . All of Alabama 's delegates , and a portion of Mississippi 's , walked out of the convention in protest . Unfazed , Truman delivered an aggressive acceptance speech attacking the 80th Congress , which Truman called the " Do Nothing Congress , " and promising to win the election and " make these Republicans like it . " 
 Within two weeks of the convention , in 1948 Truman issued Executive Order 9981 , racially integrating the U.S. Armed Services and Executive Order <unk> to integrate federal agencies . Truman took a considerable political risk in backing civil rights , and many seasoned Democrats were concerned that the loss of Dixiecrat support might destroy the Democratic Party . South Carolina Governor Strom Thurmond , a segregationist , declared his candidacy for the presidency on a Dixiecrat ticket and led a full @-@ scale revolt of Southern " states ' rights " proponents . This rebellion on the right was matched by one on the left , led by Wallace on the Progressive Party ticket . Immediately after its first post @-@ FDR convention , the Democratic Party seemed to be disintegrating . Victory in November seemed unlikely as the party was not simply split but divided three ways . For his running mate , Truman accepted Kentucky Senator Alben W. Barkley , though he really wanted Justice William O. Douglas , who turned down the nomination . 
 Truman 's political advisors described the political scene as " one unholy , confusing cacophony . " They told Truman to speak directly to the people , in a personal way . Campaign manager William J. Bray said Truman took this advice , and spoke personally and passionately , sometimes even setting aside his notes to talk to Americans " of everything that is in my heart and soul . " 
 The campaign was a 21 @,@ 928 @-@ mile ( 35 @,@ 290 km ) presidential odyssey . In a personal appeal to the nation , Truman crisscrossed the U.S. by train ; his " whistle stop " speeches from the rear platform of the observation car , Ferdinand Magellan , came to represent his campaign . His combative appearances , such as those at the town square of Harrisburg , Illinois , captured the popular imagination and drew huge crowds . Six stops in Michigan drew a combined half @-@ million people ; a full million turned out for a New York City ticker @-@ tape parade . 
 The large , mostly spontaneous gatherings at Truman 's whistle @-@ stop events were an important sign of a change in momentum in the campaign , but this shift went virtually unnoticed by the national press corps . It continued reporting Republican Thomas Dewey 's apparent impending victory as a certainty . One reason for the press ' inaccurate projection was that polls were conducted primarily by telephone , but many people , including much of Truman 's populist base , did not yet own a telephone . This skewed the data to indicate a stronger support base for Dewey than existed . An unintended and undetected projection error may have contributed to the perception of Truman 's bleak chances . The three major polling organizations stopped polling well before the November 2 election date — Roper in September , and Crossley and Gallup in October — thus failing to measure the period when Truman appears to have surged past Dewey . 
 In the end , Truman held his progressive Midwestern base , won most of the Southern states despite the civil rights plank , and squeaked through with narrow victories in a few critical states , notably Ohio , California , and Illinois . The final tally showed that the president had secured 303 electoral votes , Dewey 189 , and Thurmond only 39 . Henry Wallace got none . The defining image of the campaign came after Election Day , when an ecstatic Truman held aloft the erroneous front page of the Chicago Tribune with a huge headline proclaiming " Dewey Defeats Truman . " 
 = = = Second term ( 1949 – 53 ) = = = 
 Truman 's second inauguration was the first ever televised nationally . His second term was grueling , as his opponents controlled Congress and his policy of rollback in Korea failed . The Soviet Union 's atomic bomb project progressed much faster than had been expected , and they detonated their first bomb on August 29 , 1949 . In response , on January 7 , 1953 , Truman announced the detonation of the first U.S. hydrogen bomb , which was much more powerful than what the Soviets had . 
 = = = = Korean War = = = = 
 On June 25 , 1950 , Kim Il @-@ sung 's Korean People 's Army invaded South Korea , starting the Korean War . In the early weeks of the war , the North Koreans easily pushed back their southern counterparts . Truman called for a naval blockade of Korea , only to learn that due to budget cutbacks , the U.S. Navy could not enforce such a measure . Truman promptly urged the United Nations to intervene ; it did , authorizing troops under the UN flag led by U.S. General Douglas MacArthur . 
 Truman decided that he did not need formal authorization from Congress , believing that most legislators supported his position ; this would come back to haunt him later , when the stalemated conflict was dubbed " Mr. Truman 's War " by legislators . However , on July 3 , 1950 , Truman did give Senate Majority Leader Scott W. Lucas a draft resolution titled " Joint Resolution Expressing Approval of the Action Taken in Korea " . Lucas said Congress supported the use of force , that the formal resolution would pass but was unnecessary , and that the consensus in Congress was to acquiesce . Truman responded that he did not want " to appear to be trying to get around Congress and use extra @-@ Constitutional powers , " and added that it was " up to Congress whether such a resolution should be introduced . " 
 By August 1950 , U.S. troops pouring into South Korea under UN auspices were able to stabilize the situation . Responding to criticism over readiness , Truman fired his Secretary of Defense , Louis A. Johnson , replacing him with the retired General Marshall . With UN approval , Truman decided on a " rollback " policy — conquest of North Korea . UN forces led by General Douglas MacArthur led the counterattack , scoring a stunning surprise victory with an amphibious landing at the Battle of Inchon that nearly trapped the invaders . UN forces marched north , toward the Yalu River boundary with China , with the goal of reuniting Korea under UN auspices . 
 However , China surprised the UN forces with a large @-@ scale invasion in November . The UN forces were forced back to below the 38th parallel , then recovered . By early 1951 the war became a fierce stalemate at about the 38th parallel where it had begun . Truman rejected MacArthur 's request to attack Chinese supply bases north of the Yalu , but MacArthur promoted his plan to Republican House leader Joseph Martin , who leaked it to the press . Truman was gravely concerned that further escalation of the war might lead to open conflict with the Soviet Union , which was already supplying weapons and providing warplanes ( with Korean markings and Soviet aircrew ) . Therefore , on April 11 , 1951 , Truman fired MacArthur from his commands . 
 The dismissal of General Douglas MacArthur was among the least politically popular decisions in presidential history . Truman 's approval ratings plummeted , and he faced calls for his impeachment from , among others , Senator Robert A. Taft . Fierce criticism from virtually all quarters accused Truman of refusing to shoulder the blame for a war gone sour and blaming his generals instead . Others , including Eleanor Roosevelt , supported and applauded Truman 's decision . MacArthur meanwhile returned to the U.S. to a hero 's welcome , and addressed a joint session of Congress , a speech which the President called " a bunch of damn bullshit . " 
 The war remained a frustrating stalemate for two years , with over 30 @,@ 000 Americans killed , until an armistice ended the fighting in 1953 . In February 1952 , Truman 's approval mark stood at 22 % according to Gallup polls , which was , until George W. Bush in 2008 , the all @-@ time lowest approval mark for an active American president . 
 = = = = Worldwide defense = = = = 
 The escalation of the Cold War was highlighted by Truman 's approval of NSC @-@ 68 , a secret statement of foreign policy . It called for tripling the defense budget , and the globalization and militarization of containment policy whereby the U.S. and its NATO allies would respond militarily to actual Soviet expansion . The document was drafted by Paul Nitze , who consulted State and Defense officials ; it was formally approved by President Truman as official national strategy after the war began in Korea . It called for partial mobilization of the U.S. economy to build armaments faster than the Soviets . The plan called for strengthening Europe , weakening the Soviet Union , and for building up the U.S. both militarily and economically . 
 Early in Truman 's second term , his former Secretary of Defense Forrestal died soon after his retirement . Forrestal had become exhausted through years of hard labor during and after the war , and began to suffer depression . He retired in March 1949 ; soon after , he was hospitalized but he committed suicide in May . 
 Truman was a strong supporter of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization ( NATO ) , which established a formal peacetime military alliance with Canada and democratic European nations that had not fallen under Soviet control following World War II . The treaty establishing it was widely popular and easily passed the Senate in 1949 ; Truman appointed General Eisenhower as commander . NATO 's goals were to contain Soviet expansion in Europe and to send a clear message to communist leaders that the world 's democracies were willing and able to build new security structures in support of democratic ideals . The U.S. , Britain , France , Italy , the Netherlands , Belgium , Luxembourg , Norway , Denmark , Portugal , Iceland , and Canada were the original treaty signatories . The alliance resulted in the Soviets establishing a similar alliance , called the Warsaw Pact . 
 General Marshall was Truman 's principal adviser on foreign policy matters , influencing such decisions as the U.S. choice against offering direct military aid to Chiang Kai @-@ shek and his Nationalist Chinese forces in the Chinese Civil War with their communist opponents . Marshall 's opinion was contrary to the counsel of almost all of Truman 's other advisers — he thought that even propping up Chiang 's forces would drain U.S. resources in Europe needed to deter the Soviets . When the communists took control of the mainland , driving the Nationalists to Taiwan and establishing the People 's Republic of China , Truman would have been willing to maintain some relationship between the U.S. and the new government , but Mao was unwilling . On June 27 , 1950 , after the outbreak of fighting in Korea , Truman ordered the U.S. Navy 's Seventh Fleet into the Taiwan Strait to prevent further conflict between the communist government on the China mainland and the Republic of China ( ROC ) on Taiwan . 
 = = = = Soviet espionage and McCarthyism = = = = 
 In August 1948 , Whittaker Chambers , a former spy for the Soviets and a senior editor at Time magazine , testified before the House Un @-@ American Activities Committee ( HUAC ) . He said that an underground communist network had been working within the U.S. government since the 1930s , of which Chambers had been a member , along with Alger Hiss , until recently a senior State Department official . Although Hiss denied the allegations , he was convicted in January 1950 for perjury for his denials under oath . The Soviet Union 's success in exploding an atomic weapon in 1949 and the fall of the nationalist Chinese the same year led many Americans to conclude that subversion by Soviet spies was responsible , and to demand that communists be rooted out from the government and other places of influence . However , Truman did not fully share such opinions . He famously called the Hiss trial a " red herring , " and the Justice Department was moving to indict Chambers instead of Hiss for perjury . 
 Following Hiss ' conviction , Secretary of State Dean Acheson announced that he stood by him . This and other events , such as the revelation that British atomic bomb scientist Klaus Fuchs was a spy , led current and former members of HUAC , including Congressman Nixon of California and Karl Mundt of South Dakota , to decry Truman and his administration , especially the State Department , as soft on communism . Wisconsin Senator McCarthy used a Lincoln Day speech in Wheeling , West Virginia to accuse the State Department of harboring communists , and rode the controversy to political fame . In the following years , Republicans used Hiss ' conviction to castigate the Democrats for harboring communists in government ; Congressman Nixon gained election to the Senate in 1950 on an anti @-@ communist platform , defeating the liberal Helen Gahagan Douglas , whom he called " the Pink Lady . " 
 Charges that Soviet agents had infiltrated the government were believed by 78 % of the people in 1946 , and became a major campaign issue for Eisenhower in 1952 . Truman was reluctant to take a more radical stance because he feared that the full disclosure of the extent of the communist infiltration would reflect badly on the Democratic Party . It was a time of the Red Scare . In a 1956 interview , Truman denied that Alger Hiss had ever been a communist , a full six years after Hiss ' conviction for perjury on this topic . In 1949 Truman described American communist leaders , whom his administration was prosecuting , as " traitors , " but in 1950 he vetoed the McCarran Internal Security Act . It was passed over his veto . Truman would later state in private conversations with friends that his creation of a loyalty program had been a " terrible " mistake . 
 = = = = White House renovations ; assassination attempt = = = = 
 In 1948 , Truman ordered an addition to the exterior of the White House : a second @-@ floor balcony in the south portico , which came to be known as the " Truman Balcony . " The addition was unpopular ; some said it spoiled the appearance of the south facade , but it gave the First Family more living space . The work uncovered structural faults which led engineering experts to conclude that the building , much of it over 130 years old , was in a dangerously dilapidated condition . That August , a section of floor collapsed , and Truman 's bedroom and bathroom were closed as unsafe . No public announcement about the serious structural problems of the White House was made until after the 1948 election had been won . By then Truman had been informed that his new balcony was the only part of the building that was sound . 
 The Truman family moved into nearby Blair House during the renovations . As the newer West Wing , including the Oval Office , remained open , Truman walked to and from his work across the street each morning and afternoon . In due course , the decision was made to demolish and rebuild the whole interior of the main White House , as well as excavate new basement levels and underpin the foundations . The famous exterior of the structure was buttressed and retained while the extensive renovations proceeded inside . The work lasted from December 1949 until March 1952 . 
 On November 1 , 1950 , Puerto Rican nationalists Griselio Torresola and Oscar Collazo attempted to assassinate Truman at Blair House . The attack drew new attention to security concerns surrounding Truman 's residence at Blair House . He had jumped up from a nap , and was watching the gunfight from his open bedroom window until Secret Service agents shouted at him to take cover . On the street outside the residence , Torresola mortally wounded a White House policeman , Leslie Coffelt . Before he died , the officer shot and killed Torresola . Collazo was wounded , stopped before he entered the house . He was found guilty of murder and sentenced to death in 1952 . Truman commuted his sentence to life in prison . To try to settle the question of Puerto Rican independence , Truman allowed a plebiscite in Puerto Rico in 1952 to determine the status of its relationship to the U.S. Nearly 82 % of the people voted in favor of a new constitution for the Estado Libre Associado , a continued ' associated free <unk> 
 = = = = Steel and coal strikes = = = = 
 In response to a labor / management impasse arising from bitter disagreements over wage and price controls , Truman instructed his Secretary of Commerce , Charles W. Sawyer , to take control of a number of the nation 's steel mills in April 1952 . Truman cited his authority as Commander in Chief and the need to maintain an uninterrupted supply of steel for munitions to be used in the war in Korea . The Supreme Court found Truman 's actions unconstitutional , however , and reversed the order in a major separation @-@ of @-@ powers decision , Youngstown Sheet & Tube Co. v. Sawyer ( 1952 ) . The 6 – 3 decision , which held that Truman 's assertion of authority was too vague and was not rooted in any legislative action by Congress , was delivered by a Court composed entirely of Justices appointed by either Truman or Roosevelt . The high court 's reversal of Truman 's order was one of the notable defeats of his presidency . 
 = = = = Scandals and controversies = = = = 
 In 1950 , the Senate , led by Estes Kefauver , investigated numerous charges of corruption among senior administration officials , some of whom received fur coats and deep freezers in exchange for favors . A large number of employees of the Internal Revenue Bureau ( today the IRS ) were accepting bribes ; 166 employees either resigned or were fired in 1950 , with many soon facing indictment . When Attorney General J. Howard McGrath fired the special prosecutor in early 1952 for being too zealous , Truman fired McGrath . Truman submitted a reorganization plan to reform the IRB ; Congress passed it , but the corruption was a major issue in the 1952 presidential election . 
 On December 6 , 1950 , Washington Post music critic Paul Hume wrote a critical review of a concert by the president 's daughter Margaret Truman : 
 Miss Truman is a unique American phenomenon with a pleasant voice of little size and fair quality ... [ she ] cannot sing very well ... is flat a good deal of the time — more last night than at any time we have heard her in past years ... has not improved in the years we have heard her ... [ and ] still cannot sing with anything approaching professional finish . 
 Harry Truman wrote a scathing response : 
 I 've just read your lousy review of Margaret 's concert . I 've come to the conclusion that you are an ' eight ulcer man on four ulcer pay . ' It seems to me that you are a frustrated old man who wishes he could have been successful . When you write such poppy @-@ cock as was in the back section of the paper you work for it shows conclusively that you 're off the beam and at least four of your ulcers are at work . Some day I hope to meet you . When that happens you 'll need a new nose , a lot of beefsteak for black eyes , and perhaps a supporter below ! Pegler , a gutter snipe , is a gentleman alongside you . I hope you 'll accept that statement as a worse insult than a reflection on your ancestry . 
 Truman was criticized by many for the letter . However , he pointed out that he wrote it as a loving father and not as the president . 
 In 1951 , William M. Boyle , Truman 's long @-@ time friend and chairman of the Democratic National Committee , was forced to resign after being charged with financial corruption . 
 = = = Civil rights = = = 
 A 1947 report by the Truman administration titled To Secure These Rights presented a detailed ten @-@ point agenda of civil rights reforms . In February 1948 , the president submitted a civil rights agenda to Congress that proposed creating several federal offices devoted to issues such as voting rights and fair employment practices . This provoked a storm of criticism from Southern Democrats in the runup to the national nominating convention , but Truman refused to compromise , saying : " My forebears were Confederates ... but my very stomach turned over when I had learned that Negro soldiers , just back from overseas , were being dumped out of Army trucks in Mississippi and beaten . " Tales of the abuse , violence , and persecution suffered by many African American veterans upon their return from World War II infuriated Truman , and were a major factor in his decision to issue Executive Order 9981 , in July 1948 , desegregating and requiring equal opportunity in the Armed Forces . After several years of planning , recommendations and revisions between Truman , the Committee on Equality of Treatment and Opportunity and the various branches of the military , Army units became racially integrated . 
 Another executive order , also in 1948 , made it illegal to discriminate against persons applying for civil service positions based on race . A third , in 1951 , established the Committee on Government Contract Compliance ( <unk> ) . This committee ensured that defense contractors did not discriminate because of race . 
 = = = Administration and cabinet = = = 
 All of the cabinet members when Truman became president in 1945 had been appointed by Franklin D. Roosevelt . 
 = = = Judicial appointments = = = 
 = = = = Supreme Court = = = = 
 Truman appointed the following Justices to the Supreme Court : 
 Harold Hitz Burton – 1945 
 Fred M. Vinson ( Chief Justice ) – 1946 
 Tom C. Clark – 1949 
 Sherman Minton – 1949 
 Truman 's judicial appointments have been called by critics " inexcusable . " A former Truman aide confided that it was the weakest aspect of Truman 's presidency . The New York Times condemned the appointments of Tom C. Clark and Sherman Minton in particular as examples of cronyism and favoritism for unqualified candidates . 
 The four justices appointed by Truman joined with Justices Felix Frankfurter , Robert H. Jackson , and Stanley Reed to create a substantial seven @-@ member conservative bloc on the Supreme Court . This returned the court for a time to the conservatism of the 1920s . 
 = = = = Other courts = = = = 
 In addition to his four Supreme Court appointments , Truman appointed 27 judges to the courts of appeals , and 101 judges to federal district courts . 
 = = = International trips = = = 
 Truman made five international trips during his presidency : 
 Three months after ascending to the presidency , he made his only trans @-@ Atlantic trip as president to participate in the Potsdam Conference with British Prime Ministers Churchill and Attlee and Soviet Premier Stalin to discuss how to administer the defeated Nazi Germany . 
 In August 1946 he travelled to Hamilton , Bermuda , where he met with Governor General Ralph <unk> and inspected U.S. military facilities on the island . 
 In March 1947 he made a state visit to Mexico City , Mexico , where he met with President Miguel Alemán Valdés . 
 In June 1947 he travelled to Ottawa , Ontario , Canada for an official Visit with Governor General Harold Alexander and Prime Minister Mackenzie King . 
 In September 1947 he made a state visit to Rio de Janeiro , Brazil , where he addressed Inter @-@ American Conference for the Maintenance of Continental Peace and Security and the Brazilian Congress . 
 He only left the continental United States on two other occasions ( to Puerto Rico , the Virgin Islands , Guantanamo Bay Naval Base , Cuba , February 20 – March 5 , 1948 ; and to Wake Island , October 11 – 18 , 1950 ) during his nearly eight years in office . 
 = = = 1952 election = = = 
 In 1951 , the U.S. ratified the 22nd Amendment , making a president ineligible for election to a third term or for election to a second full term after serving more than two remaining years of a term of a previously elected president . The latter clause would have applied to Truman 's situation in 1952 except that a grandfather clause in the amendment explicitly excluded the amendment from applying to the incumbent president . 
 At the time of the 1952 New Hampshire primary , no candidate had won Truman 's backing . His first choice , Chief Justice Fred M. Vinson , had declined to run ; Illinois Governor Adlai Stevenson had also turned Truman down , Vice President Barkley was considered too old , and Truman distrusted and disliked Senator Kefauver , who had made a name for himself by his investigations of the Truman administration scandals . Truman had hoped to recruit General Eisenhower as a Democratic candidate , but found him more interested in seeking the Republican nomination . Accordingly , Truman let his name be entered in the New Hampshire primary by supporters . The highly unpopular Truman was handily defeated by Kefauver ; 18 days later the president announced he would not seek a second full term . Truman was eventually able to persuade Stevenson to run , and the governor gained the nomination at the 1952 Democratic National Convention . 
 Eisenhower gained the Republican nomination , with Senator Nixon as his running mate , and campaigned against what he denounced as Truman 's failures : " Korea , Communism and Corruption " . He pledged to clean up the " mess in Washington , " and promised to " go to Korea . " Eisenhower defeated Stevenson decisively in the general election , ending 20 years of Democratic presidents . While Truman and Eisenhower had previously been good friends , Truman felt betrayed that Eisenhower did not denounce Joseph McCarthy during the campaign . Similarly , Eisenhower was outraged when Truman , who made a <unk> tour in support of Stevenson , accused the former general of disregarding " sinister forces ... Anti @-@ Semitism , anti @-@ Catholicism , and anti @-@ <unk> " within the Republican Party . Eisenhower was so outraged he threatened not to make the customary ride down Pennsylvania Avenue with the departing president before the inauguration , but to meet Truman at the steps to the Capitol , where the swearing @-@ in takes place . 
 = = Post @-@ presidency = = 
 Upon leaving the presidency , Truman returned to Independence , Missouri , to live at the Wallace home he and Bess had shared for years with her mother . Once out of office , Truman quickly decided that he did not wish to be on any corporate payroll , believing that taking advantage of such financial opportunities would diminish the integrity of the nation 's highest office . He also turned down numerous offers for commercial endorsements . Since his earlier business ventures had proved unsuccessful , he had no personal savings . As a result , he faced financial challenges . Once Truman left the White House , his only income was his old army pension : $ 112 @.@ 56 per month . Former members of Congress and the federal courts received a federal retirement package ; President Truman himself ensured that former servants of the executive branch of government received similar support . In 1953 , however , there was no such benefit package for former presidents , and he received no pension for his Senate service . 
 Truman took out a personal loan from a Missouri bank shortly after leaving office , and then set about establishing another precedent for future former chief executives : a book deal for his memoirs of his time in office . Ulysses S. Grant had overcome similar financial issues with his own memoirs , but the book had been published posthumously , and he had declined to write about life in the White House in any detail . For the memoirs , Truman received only a flat payment of $ 670 @,@ 000 , and had to pay two @-@ thirds of that in tax ; he calculated he got $ 37 @,@ 000 after he paid his assistants . However , the memoirs were a commercial and critical success ; they were published in two volumes in 1955 and 1956 by Doubleday ( Garden City , N.Y ) and Hodder & Stoughton ( London ) : Memoirs by Harry S. Truman : Year of Decisions and Memoirs by Harry S. Truman : Years of Trial and Hope . 
 The former president was quoted in 1957 as saying to then @-@ House Majority Leader John McCormack , " Had it not been for the fact that I was able to sell some property that my brother , sister , and I inherited from our mother , I would practically be on relief , but with the sale of that property I am not financially embarrassed . " The following year , Congress passed the Former Presidents Act , offering a $ 25 @,@ 000 yearly pension to each former president , and it is likely that Truman 's financial status played a role in the law 's enactment . The one other living former president at the time , Herbert Hoover , also took the pension , even though he did not need the money ; reportedly , he did so to avoid embarrassing Truman . 
 Truman 's predecessor , Franklin D. Roosevelt , had organized his own presidential library , but legislation to enable future presidents to do something similar had not been enacted . Truman worked to garner private donations to build a presidential library , which he donated to the federal government to maintain and operate — a practice adopted by his successors . He testified before Congress to have money appropriated to have presidential papers copied and organized , and was proud of the bill 's passage in 1957 . Max Skidmore , in his book on the life of former presidents , noted that Truman was a well @-@ read man , especially in history . Skidmore added that the presidential papers legislation and the founding of his library " was the culmination of his interest in history . Together they constitute an enormous contribution to the United States — one of the greatest of any former president . " 
 Truman supported Adlai Stevenson 's second bid for the White House in 1956 , although he had initially favored Democratic Governor W. Averell Harriman of New York . He continued to campaign for Democratic senatorial candidates for many years . Upon turning 80 in 1964 , Truman was feted in Washington , and addressed the Senate , availing himself of a new rule that allowed former presidents to be granted privilege of the floor . After a fall in his home in late 1964 , his physical condition declined . In 1965 , President Lyndon B. Johnson signed the Medicare bill at the Harry S. Truman Presidential Library and Museum and gave the first two Medicare cards to Truman and his wife Bess to honor the former president 's fight for government health care while in office . 
 = = Death = = 
 On December 5 , 1972 , Truman was admitted to Kansas City 's Research Hospital and Medical Center with lung congestion from pneumonia . He developed multiple organ failure and died at 7 : 50 am on December 26 at the age of 88 . Bess Truman opted for a simple private service at the library for her husband rather than a state funeral in Washington . A week after the funeral , foreign dignitaries and Washington officials attended a memorial service at Washington National Cathedral . Bess died in 1982 ; they both are buried at the Harry S. Truman Library & Museum in Independence . 
 = = Tributes and legacy = = 
 = = = Legacy = = = 
 Citing continuing divisions within the Democratic Party , the ongoing Cold War , and the boom and bust cycle , an American Political Science Association prize @-@ winning 1952 book stated that " after seven years of Truman 's hectic , even furious , activity the nation seemed to be about on the same general spot as when he first came to office ... Nowhere in the whole Truman record can one point to a single , decisive break @-@ through ... All his skills and energies — and he was among our hardest @-@ working Presidents — were directed to standing still " . When he left office in 1953 , Truman was one of the most unpopular chief executives in history . His job approval rating of 22 % in the Gallup Poll of February 1952 was lower than Richard Nixon 's 24 % in August 1974 , the month that Nixon resigned . 
 American public feeling towards Truman grew steadily warmer with the passing years ; as early as 1962 , a poll of 75 historians conducted by Arthur M. Schlesinger , Sr. ranked Truman among the " near great " presidents . The period following his death consolidated a partial rehabilitation of his legacy among both historians and members of the public . Truman died when the nation was consumed with crises in Vietnam and Watergate , and his death brought a new wave of attention to his political career . In the early and mid @-@ 1970s , Truman captured the popular imagination much as he had in 1948 , this time emerging as a kind of political folk hero , a president who was thought to exemplify an integrity and accountability many observers felt was lacking in the Nixon White House . This public reassessment of Truman was aided by the popularity of a book of reminiscences which Truman had told to journalist Merle Miller beginning in 1961 , with the agreement that they would not be published until after Truman 's death . 
 Truman had his latter @-@ day critics as well . After a review of information available to Truman about the presence of espionage activities in the U.S. government , Democratic Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan concluded that Truman was " almost willfully obtuse " concerning the danger of American communism . In 2010 , historian Alonzo Hamby concluded that " Harry Truman remains a controversial president . " However , since leaving office , Truman has fared well in polls ranking the presidents . He has never been listed lower than ninth , and was ranked fifth in a C @-@ SPAN poll in 2009 . 
 The fall of the Soviet Union in 1991 caused Truman advocates to claim vindication for Truman 's decisions in the postwar period . According to Truman biographer Robert <unk> , " His contribution to victory in the cold war without a devastating nuclear conflict elevated him to the stature of a great or near @-@ great president . " The 1992 publication of David McCullough 's favorable biography of Truman further cemented the view of Truman as a highly regarded Chief Executive . According to historian Daniel R. McCoy in his book on the Truman presidency , 
 Harry Truman himself gave a strong and far @-@ from @-@ incorrect impression of being a tough , concerned and direct leader . He was occasionally vulgar , often partisan , and usually nationalistic ... On his own terms , Truman can be seen as having prevented the coming of a third world war and having preserved from Communist oppression much of what he called the free world . Yet clearly he largely failed to achieve his Wilsonian aim of securing perpetual peace , making the world safe for democracy , and advancing opportunities for individual development internationally . 
 = = = Sites and honors = = = 
 In 1956 , Truman traveled to Europe with his wife . In England , he met with Churchill and received an honorary Doctor of Civil Law degree from Oxford University . Across Britain he was hailed ; London 's Daily Telegraph characterized Truman as the " Living and kicking symbol of everything that everybody likes best about the United States . " In 1959 , he was given a 50 @-@ year award by the Masons , recognizing his longstanding involvement : he was initiated on February 9 , 1909 into the Belton Masonic Lodge in Missouri . In 1911 , he helped establish the Grandview Lodge , and he served as its first Worshipful Master . In September 1940 , during his Senate re @-@ election campaign , Truman was elected Grand Master of the Missouri Grand Lodge of Freemasonry ; Truman said later that the Masonic election assured his victory in the general election . In 1945 , he was made a 33 ° Sovereign Grand Inspector General and an Honorary Member of the supreme council at the Supreme Council <unk> Southern Jurisdiction Headquarters in Washington D.C. Truman was also a member of Sons of the American Revolution ( SAR ) and a card @-@ carrying member of the Sons of Confederate Veterans . Two of his relatives were Confederate soldiers . 
 In 1975 , the Truman Scholarship was created as a federal program to honor U.S. college students who exemplified dedication to public service and leadership in public policy . In 2004 , the President Harry S. Truman Fellowship in National Security Science and Engineering was created as a distinguished postdoctoral three @-@ year appointment at Sandia National Laboratories . In 2001 , the University of Missouri established the Harry S. Truman School of Public Affairs to advance the study and practice of governance . The University of Missouri 's Missouri Tigers athletic programs have an official mascot named Truman the Tiger . On July 1 , 1996 , Northeast Missouri State University became Truman State University — to mark its transformation from a teachers ' college to a highly selective liberal arts university and to honor the only Missourian to become president . A member institution of the City Colleges of Chicago , Harry S Truman College in Chicago , Illinois , is named in his honor for his dedication to public colleges and universities . In 2000 , the headquarters for the State Department , built in the 1930s but never officially named , was dedicated as the Harry S Truman Building . 
 Despite Truman 's attempt to curtail the naval carrier arm , which led to the 1949 Revolt of the Admirals , an aircraft carrier is named after him . The USS Harry S. Truman ( CVN @-@ 75 ) was christened on September 7 , 1996 . The 129th Field Artillery Regiment is designated " Truman 's Own " in recognition of Truman 's service as commander of its D Battery during World War I. 
 In 1984 , Truman was posthumously awarded the United States Congressional Gold Medal . In 1991 , he was inducted into the Hall of Famous Missourians , and a bronze bust depicting him is on permanent display in the rotunda of the Missouri State Capitol . In 2006 , Thomas Daniel , grandson of the <unk> , accepted a star on the Missouri Walk of Fame to honor his late grandfather . In 2007 , John Truman , a nephew , accepted a star for Bess Truman . The Walk of Fame is in Marshfield , Missouri , a city Truman visited in 1948 . Other sites associated with Truman include : 
 Harry S. Truman National Historic Site includes the Wallace House at 219 N. Delaware in Independence and the family farmhouse at Grandview , Missouri ( Truman sold most of the farm for Kansas City suburban development including the Truman Corners Shopping Center ) . 
 Harry S Truman Birthplace State Historic Site is the house where Truman was born and spent 11 months in Lamar , Missouri . 
 Harry S. Truman Presidential Library and Museum – The Presidential library in Independence 
 Harry S. Truman Little White House – Truman 's winter getaway at Key West , Florida 
 = = = Books = = = 
 Ambrose , Stephen E. ( 1983 ) . Eisenhower : 1890 – 1952 . New York : Simon & Schuster . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 671 @-@ <unk> @-@ 5 . 
 <unk> , William C. ; <unk> , Larry E. ; <unk> , Paul A. ( 1999 ) . Encyclopedia of American Parties , Campaigns , and Elections . Westport , CT : Greenwood . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 8131 @-@ 1755 @-@ 3 . 
 Burnes , Brian ( 2003 ) . Harry S. Truman : His Life and Times . Kansas City , MS : Kansas City Star Books . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 3 @-@ 0 . 
 Chambers II , John W. ( 1999 ) . The Oxford Companion to American Military History . Oxford : Oxford University Press . ISBN 0 @-@ 19 @-@ <unk> @-@ 0 . 
 Cohen , Eliot A. ; Gooch , John ( 2006 ) . Military Misfortunes : The Anatomy of Failure in War . New York : Free Press . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 7432 @-@ <unk> @-@ 2 . 
 <unk> , Robert ( 2008 ) . Harry S. Truman . New York : Times Books . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 8050 @-@ 6938 @-@ 9 . 
 Daniels , Jonathan ( 1998 ) . The Man of Independence . University of Missouri Press . ISBN 0 @-@ 8262 @-@ 1190 @-@ 9 . 
 Donovan , Robert J. ( 1983 ) . <unk> Years : 1949 – 1953 . New York : W. W. Norton . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 393 @-@ <unk> @-@ 2 . 
 Eakin , Joanne C. ; Hale , Donald R. , eds . ( 1995 ) . Branded as Rebels . Madison , WI : University of Wisconsin Press . ASIN <unk> . 
 Eisler , Kim Isaac ( 1993 ) . A Justice for All : William J. Brennan , Jr . , and the Decisions that Transformed America . New York : Simon & Schuster . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 671 @-@ <unk> @-@ 7 . 
 Evans , M Stanton , Blacklisted by History . 
 Ferrell , Robert Hugh ( 1994 ) . Harry S. Truman : A Life . Columbia , Missouri : University of Missouri Press . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 8262 @-@ 1050 @-@ 0 . 
 Freeland , Richard M. ( 1970 ) . The Truman Doctrine and the Origins of McCarthyism . New York : Alfred A. Knopf . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 8147 @-@ 2576 @-@ 4 . 
 Giglio , James N. ( 2001 ) . Truman in cartoon and caricature . Kirksville , MI : Truman State University Press . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 1806 @-@ 1 . 
 Goodwin , Doris Kearns ( 1994 ) . No Ordinary Time : Franklin and Eleanor Roosevelt : The Home Front in World War II . New York : Simon & Schuster . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 671 @-@ <unk> @-@ 2 . 
 Hamby , Alonzo L. , ed . ( 1974 ) . Harry S. Truman and the Fair Deal . Lexington , MA : D. C. Heath & Co . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 669 @-@ <unk> @-@ 0 . 
 — — — ( 1995 ) . Man of the People : A Life of Harry S. Truman . Oxford : Oxford University Press . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 19 @-@ <unk> @-@ 8 . 
 Hamilton , Lee H. ( 2009 ) . " Relations between the President and Congress in Wartime " . In James A. Thurber . Rivals for Power : Presidential – Congressional Relations . Rowman & Littlefield . ISBN 0 @-@ 7425 @-@ <unk> @-@ 9 . 
