 Ardhanarishvara symbolizes that the male and female principles are inseparable . The composite form conveys the unity of opposites ( <unk> oppositorum ) in the universe . The male half of Ardhanarishvara stands for Purusha and female half is Prakriti . Purusha is the male principle and passive force of the universe , while Prakriti is the female active force ; both are " constantly drawn to embrace and fuse with each other , though ... separated by the intervening axis " . The union of Purusha ( Shiva ) and <unk> ( Shiva 's energy , Shakti ) generates the universe , an idea also manifested in the union of the Linga of Shiva and Yoni of Devi creating the cosmos . The Mahabharata lauds this form as the source of creation . Ardhanarishvara also suggests the element of Kama or Lust , which leads to creation . 
 Ardhanarishvara signifies " totality that lies beyond duality " , " bi @-@ unity of male and female in God " and " the bisexuality and therefore the non @-@ duality " of the Supreme Being . It conveys that God is both Shiva and Parvati , " both male and female , both father and mother , both aloof and active , both fearsome and gentle , both destructive and constructive " and unifies all other dichotomies of the universe . While Shiva 's rosary in the Ardhanarishvara iconography associates him with asceticism and spirituality , Parvati 's mirror associates her to the material illusory world . Ardhanarishvara reconciles and harmonizes the two conflicting ways of life : the spiritual way of the ascetic as represented by Shiva , and the materialistic way of the householder as symbolized by Parvati , whose raison d ’ être in Hindu mythology is to lure the ascetic Shiva into marriage and the wider circle of worldly affairs . The interdependence of Shiva on his power ( Shakti ) as embodied in Parvati is also manifested in this form . Ardhanarishvara conveys that Shiva and Shakti are one and the same , an interpretation also declared in inscriptions found along with Ardhanarishvara images in Java and the eastern Malay Archipelago . The Vishnudharmottara Purana also emphasizes the identity and sameness of the male Purusha and female Prakriti , manifested in the image of Ardhanarishvara . According to Shaiva guru <unk> <unk> ( 1927 – 2001 ) , Ardhanarishvara signifies that the great Shiva is " All , inseparable from His energy " ( i.e. his Shakti ) and is beyond gender . 
 Across cultures , hermaphrodite figures like Ardhanarishvara have traditionally been associated with fertility and abundant growth . In this form , Shiva in his eternal embrace with Prakriti represents the eternal reproductive power of Nature , whom he regenerates after she loses her fertility . " It is a duality in unity , the underlying principle being a sexual dualism " . Art historian <unk> calls it " a unique connection of the closely knit ideal of man and woman rising above the craving of the flesh and serving as a symbol of hospitality and parenthood " . The dual unity of Ardhanarishvara is considered " a model of conjugal inseparability " . Padma Upadhyaya comments , " The idea of ... Ardhanārīśvara is to locate the man in the woman as also the woman in the man and to create perfect homogeneity in domestic affairs " . 
 Often , the right half of Ardhanarishvara is male and the left is female . The left side is the location of the heart and is associated with feminine characteristics like intuition and creativity , while the right is associated with the brain and masculine traits – logic , valour and systematic thought . The female is often not equal in the Ardhanarishvara , the male god who is half female ; she remains a dependent entity . Ardhanarishvara " is in essence Shiva , not Parvati " . This is also reflected in mythology , where Parvati becomes a part of Shiva . It is likewise reflected in iconography : Shiva often has two supernatural arms and Parvati has just one earthly arm , and his bull vahana – not her lion vahana – typically accompanies them . 
 = = Worship and adoration = = 
 Ardhanarishvara is one of the most popular iconographic forms of Shiva . It is found in more or less all temples and shrines dedicated to Shiva all over India and South @-@ east Asia . There is ample evidence from texts and the multiple depictions of the Ardhanarishvara in stone to suggest that a cult centred around the deity may have existed . The cult may have had occasional followers , but was never aligned to any sect . This cult focusing on the joint worship of Shiva and the Goddess may even have had a high position in Hinduism , but when and how it faded away remains a mystery . Though a popular iconographic form , temples dedicated to the deity are few . A popular one is located in <unk> , while five others are located in <unk> taluk , all of them in the Indian state of Tamil Nadu . 
 The Linga Purana advocates the worship of Ardhanarishvara by devotees to attain union with Shiva upon dissolution of the world and thus attain salvation . The <unk> Stotra is a popular hymn dedicated to the deity . The Nayanar saints of Tamil Nadu <unk> the deity in hymns . While the 8th @-@ century Nayanar saint Cuntarar says that Shiva is always inseparable from the Mother Goddess , another 7th @-@ century Nayanar saint Campantar describes how the " eternal feminine " is not only his consort , but she is also part of him . The renowned Sanskrit writer Kalidasa ( c . 4th – 5th century ) alludes Ardhanarishvara in invocations of his Raghuvamsa and <unk> , and says that Shiva and Shakti are as inseparable as word and meaning . The 9th @-@ century Nayanar saint <unk> casts Parvati in the role of the supreme devotee of Shiva in his hymns . He alludes to Ardhanarishvara several times and regards it the ultimate goal of a devotee to be united with Shiva as Parvati is in the Ardhanarishvara form . 
 = Wynnea americana = 
 Wynnea americana , commonly known as moose antlers or rabbit ears , is a species of fungus in the family Sarcoscyphaceae . This uncommon inedible species is recognizable by its spoon @-@ shaped or rabbit @-@ ear shaped fruit bodies that may reach up to 13 cm ( 5 @.@ 1 in ) tall . It has dark brown and warty outer surfaces , while the fertile spore @-@ bearing inner surface is orange to pinkish to reddish @-@ brown . The fruit bodies grow clustered together from large underground masses of compacted mycelia known as sclerotia . In eastern North America , where it is typically found growing in the soil underneath hardwood trees , it is found from New York to Michigan south to Mexico . The species has also been collected from Costa Rica , India , and Japan . 
 Wynnea americana is distinguished from other species in the genus Wynnea by the pustules ( small bumps ) on the outer surface , and microscopically by the large asymmetrical longitudinally ribbed spores with a sharply pointed tip . The spores are made in structures called asci , which have thickened rings at one end that are capped by a hinged structure known as the operculum — a lid that is opened when spores are to be released from the ascus . 
 = = History and taxonomy = = 
 Wynnea americana was first described in 1905 by American mycologist Roland Thaxter . Thaxter found several clusters of fruit bodies in Burbank , Tennessee in 1888 , and believed the fungus to be Wynnea macrotis , one of the first identified species of genus Wynnea . An 1896 visit to the same location as well as Cranberry , North Carolina yielded further specimens . This time , however , Thaxter noticed that the fruit bodies were not attached to humus , as expected , but rather to " a large , irregularly lobed , brown , firm , tuber @-@ like body buried a few inches deep in the humus . " Microscopic examination of this structure and other tissue of the fruit body convinced Thaxter the material was sufficiently different from known Wynnea species to justify the creation of a new species . Both the Tennessee and the North Carolina specimens were used as syntypes to describe the taxon ; the Tennessee specimen has since been designated the lectotype ( the name @-@ bearing type specimen ) . In 1946 , French mycologist Marcelle Louise Fernande Le Gal determined that the ascus in W. americana was similar in structure to those species he placed in the <unk> series . 
 The common names for W. americana are " moose antlers " , or " rabbit ears " . 
 = = Description = = 
 The fruit bodies ( technically called apothecia ) of W. americana are erect and spoon- or ear @-@ shaped , and may reach up to 13 cm ( 5 @.@ 1 in ) tall by 6 cm ( 2 @.@ 4 in ) wide with the edges usually rolled inward . The outside surface is dark brown , while the inner surface — the spore @-@ bearing hymenium — is pinkish orange to dull purplish red or brown at maturity . The outer surface may develop wrinkles in maturity . The apothecia , which occur singly or in groups of up to about 25 , arise from a short stalk . The stalk is variable in length and solid , dark outside , white within . The stalks originate from a sclerotium , a compact mass of hardened mycelium . The sclerotium has an almost gelatinous consistency with irregularly shaped lobes and internal chambers , and may reach a diameter of 4 to 6 cm ( 1 @.@ 6 to 2 @.@ 4 in ) . The sclerotium 's function is thought to supply moisture and nutrients , or to serve as a resistant structure capable of sustaining the fungus through times of stress . W. macrotis is the only other species in the genus to bear a sclerotium . 
 Wynnea americana has no discernible odor , and its taste is unknown . It has been described as inedible due to its toughness . 
 = = = Microscopic characteristics = = = 
 With many cup fungi , microscopic analysis of the anatomy and structure of the apothecium is necessary for accurate identification of species , or to help distinguish between related species that have a similar external appearance . In W. americana , the ectal excipulum ( the outer layer of tissue comprising the apothecia ) is 125 µm thick , and composed of dark angular to roughly spherical cells that are 40 – 70 µm in diameter . The angular cells form pyramidal warts on the outer surface . The medullary excipulum ( the inner fleshy layer of tissue underneath the ectal excipulum ) is almost gelatinous , composed of interwoven hyphae 10 µm in diameter . 
 Several structural components are involved in spore discharge in W. americana , such as the ascus , the operculum , the <unk> . The spore @-@ bearing cells , the asci , are 330 – 400 µm long by 16 – 20 µm wide . The ascus has a thickened apical ring that is capped by a hinged operculum , a lid that is opened when spores are to be released from the ascus . The presence of the apical ring beneath the operculum and the slanted opening that results is a condition known as " <unk> " , and is shared with <unk> tricholoma and <unk> domingensis , also in the family Sarcoscyphaceae . 
 The spores are scaphoid ( boat @-@ shaped ) , and have dimensions of 35 – 38 by 12 – 14 µm . They are marked with prominent longitudinal grooves , and when mature , are apiculate ( ending abruptly in a short point ) . The spores typically contain several oil droplets . The paraphyses ( sterile cells interspersed among the asci ) are 8 – 9 µm long and have internal partitions called septa . The structure of the septa has been investigated using transmission electron microscopy , which has revealed that W. americana has a single pore plugged by a " fan @-@ shaped matrix " — an electron @-@ dense region with a torus @-@ shaped ring of translucent tissue wrapped around it . The pore plug resembles those found in the Sarcoscyphaceae species Sarcoscypha occidentalis and <unk> domingensis . 
 = = = Similar species = = = 
 The closely related Wynnea <unk> , known in the vernacular as the " stalked cauliflower fungus " , has a fruit body resembling a yellow @-@ brown cauliflower atop a long brown stem . In comparison to W. americana , W. gigantea has apothecia that are smaller , more rounded at the tips , more numerous in a single specimen , and paler in color . Donald H. Pfister , in his 1979 monograph on the genus Wynnea , suggests that the <unk> appearance of the outer surface clearly distinguishes W. americana from the other species in the genus . 
 = = Habitat and distribution = = 
 The fruit bodies of Wynnea americana grow solitarily or in clusters on the ground in deciduous forests , and prefer moist , organic soils . In both Asia and North America , fruit bodies are most often produced during August and September . The single Central American collection , from Costa Rica , was made in early November . 
 In North America , Wynnea americana has been collected from several locations , including Tennessee , New York , West Virginia , North Carolina , Ohio , and Pennsylvania . It has also been collected in Costa Rica , India , Mexico , and Japan . 
 = Angels Brought Me Here = 
 " Angels Brought Me Here " ( aka " Faith Has Brought Me Here " ) is a pop song performed by Australian singer Guy Sebastian . It was released in Australia on 24 November 2003 as the lead single from his debut album Just as I Am ( 2003 ) . The song was written by Jörgen Elofsson and John Reid for Network Ten 's TV talent competition , Australian Idol 's inaugural season . Recorded versions were made for both grand finalists , Sebastian and Shannon Noll , with only Sebastian 's version officially released by BMG . On 22 November the promotional video had premiered on the same network 's Video Hits – produced by Australian Idol 's Stephen Tate and directed by its musical director , John Foreman . 
 " Angels Brought Me Here " peaked at number @-@ one on the ARIA Singles Chart . It was the first of 12 top ten and six number @-@ one singles for Sebastian in Australia . " Angels Brought Me Here " ' s first week sales were at the time the highest one week 's sales on record for both an Australian artist and a debut artist . It currently still has the second highest one week sales for an Australian artist single . The song was certified as four times platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) and sold in excess of 303 @,@ 000 units . In January 2010 " Angels Brought Me Here " was announced as the highest selling single of the decade ( 2000 – 2009 ) . Until 2011 the song held the record as the highest selling Australian artist single in Australian chart history . " Angels Brought Me Here " was also popular in New Zealand , topping the RIANZ Singles Chart and achieving platinum certification . In October 2004 , Lisa B. Bermingham published Sebastian 's official biography , Angels Brought Me Here . 
 = = Background = = 
 " Angels Brought Me Here " was performed on 9 November 2003 by the final two contestants , Guy Sebastian and Shannon Noll , during the penultimate episode of Network Ten 's TV talent competition , Australian Idol ( 2003 ) . Both contestants were recorded and had their versions pressed by BMG , ready for the winner 's version to be released immediately after the competition . Sebastian 's winning performance was watched by an Australian record audience – for a non @-@ sporting event – of 3 @.@ 65 million . On 19 November he did an encore performance of the song and the single was issued in Australia on 24 November by BMG . 
 Sebastian referred to " Angels Brought Me Here " , his winning moment on Australian Idol and his progress through the competition : 
 I reckon it really sums up just what I felt as far as the competition goes . It 's a very overwhelming process to go through and you really do feel that there 's something else that got you there . Especially with how I didn 't feel confident before and then something just clicked and I could look people in the eyes and really try and deliver a song . 
 Sebastian believes it is " a great , inspirational song " that summarises how any Australian Idol winner would have felt . Noll , however , felt that the song was too difficult for him to sing . Sebastian 's version was produced by Bryon Jones ( member of <unk> ) and Adam Reilly ( who was also the programmer ) . The B @-@ side , " When I Get You Alone " – a cover version of Robin Thicke 's 2002 single – was recorded live on Australian Idol episode " Up Close & Personal " in October 2003 . Sebastian 's second single , " All I Need Is You " , followed in February 2004 and also debuted at number @-@ one . In September , his third number @-@ one single in a row , " Out with My Baby " , was issued from his second album , Beautiful Life ( 2004 ) . He has since achieved three further number @-@ one singles in Australia , " Like It Like That " in 2009 , " Who 's That Girl " in 2010 , and " Battle Scars " in 2012 . 
 Lisa B. Bermingham 's official biography of Sebastian is titled , Angels Brought Me Here ( October 2004 ) ( aka Guy Sebastian : Angels Brought Me Here : The Official Biography ) . In November 2010 , two versions of " Angels Brought Me Here " appeared on Sebastian 's 2 × CD compilation album , Twenty Ten : both the original and a newly recorded acoustic version . For the acoustic version , Sebastian also plays piano and is the co @-@ producer with Carl <unk> . 
 = = Musical structure = = 
 " Angels Brought Me Here " is an R & B , pop ballad which was composed and written before the Australian Idol finalists were decided . The song 's writers are Jörgen Elofsson and John Reid – it is also called " Faith Has Brought Me Here " . Both Sebastian 's and Noll 's recorded versions were performed with the same musical structure . The song is composed in common time . The song 's tempo is adagio , performed at 65 beats per minute . Its structure is in verse @-@ chorus form , with a bridge following after two verses . The verses are in the key of E @-@ flat minor , while the chorus changes key to F @-@ sharp major , with higher dynamics . The last chorus following the br ] ] . At the end of the chorus , the lead singer sings the highest note of the song , holding for four bars , while the backing vocals repeat the chorus . The last line of the chorus is performed slightly off @-@ beat , with the last notes held longer before the song ends . The vocals of the song range from C4 ( middle C ) to C5 . 
 = = Music video = = 
 A music video was issued in November 2003 to promote the single . The video shows Sebastian on a TV set as it is being prepared for a show . He is dressed casually in jeans and <unk> . He sits on boxes as he begins to sing with a camera crew starting to film him . An image of a young woman is shown as he continues . Various personnel walk around him and adjust the set . Sebastian stands and the image of the female is seen again , she wears white feathers . Later , Sebastian is dressed more formally in a white suit as he performs the song . On this set are plasma screens depicting the same young woman . The video ends with Sebastian in his casual gear again , sitting on the boxes . The video was produced by Australian Idol 's Stephen Tate and directed by the show 's musical director , John Foreman . On 22 November , the clip was premiered on Network Ten 's Video Hits – which had Tate as executive producer . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 " Angels Brought Me Here " debuted on the Australian ARIA Singles Chart on 1 December 2003 at number @-@ one , the first of 12 top ten and six number @-@ one singles that Sebastian has achieved during his career . Sebastian is the only Australian male artist in Australian chart history to achieve six number @-@ one singles , and is third overall for all Australian acts . Only Delta Goodrem and Kylie Minogue have achieved more . " Angels Brought Me Here " sold 128 @,@ 679 copies in its first week , setting an Australian record at the time for the highest first week single sales by both a debut artist and an Australian artist . It also had the second highest first week single sales from any artist , behind Elton John 's tribute to Princess Diana , " Candle in the Wind " . This record was eclipsed in late 2004 by Anthony Callea 's debut single " The Prayer " . Sebastian still has the second highest one week sales for an Australian artist single . " Angels Brought Me Here " remained at the top spot for three consecutive weeks , dropping to number three in its fourth week . The single spent a total of five weeks in the top ten and twelve weeks in the top fifty . Despite being released near the end of 2003 , its strong sales placed " Angels Brought Me Here " at number @-@ one on the End of Year Top 100 ARIA Singles Chart of 2003 . 
 At the ARIA Music Awards of 2004 , Sebastian earned the award for ' Highest Selling Single ' , and was also nominated for ' Highest Selling Album ' for Just as I Am . In January 2010 ARIA announced that " Angels Brought Me Here " was the highest selling single of the previous decade , with Anthony Callea 's " The Prayer " ranked second . It was certified four times platinum and sold in excess of 303 @,@ 000 copies . At the time this was the highest sales ever recorded for an Australian artist single , a record Sebastian held until 2011 . In 2011 the sales of " Angels Brought Me Here " were surpassed by Gotye 's " Somebody That I Used to Know " which has now been certified 11 × platinum . Since then several other Australian artist songs have also reached higher sales than " Angels Brought Me Here " , including Sebastian 's own song " Battle Scars " which has been certified 9 × platinum . 
 Sebastian reflected on his song 's popularity , " I guess its success is due to it being a well @-@ written pop ballad , coupled with the fact that it 's perfectly suited to my voice , and also my back @-@ story ... It doesn 't take a genius to realise that the show was mostly responsible for the songs enormity but still , I 'm glad I was the guy standing there at the end singing it " . In a review for Sebastian 's fifth number one single " Who 's That Girl " in 2010 The Vine 's Tim Byron said " Angels Brought Me Here " was " heavily associated with the climax of the show , and thus [ has ] pre @-@ packaged meanings and associations that other songs will not ... something of the joy of music , of its eternal mystery , gets leached out in the process " . Byron felt there was considerable " controversy over whether to give ARIA awards to people like Guy Sebastian " due to concerns about the artist 's credibility . Byron added " But it 's hard to argue that Guy Sebastian 's continued success , seven years later , has much to do with Australian Idol ..... even his ' brand recognition ' will have faded by now ..... If he is still successful , it 's more and more because of his musical talent . " 
 " Angels Brought Me Here " was also released in New Zealand , and debuted at number @-@ one on 1 December 2003 on the RIANZ Singles Chart , retaining the position for three weeks . It spent eleven non @-@ consecutive weeks in the top ten and twenty @-@ two weeks in the top forty and achieved platinum accreditation . 
 = = Notable performances and cover versions = = 
 In January – February 2004 Sebastian and other Australian Idol finalists toured around Australia on the Australian Idol Concert Tour , which was promoted by Michael <unk> and Amanda <unk> . Sebastian also performed his own gigs including the Australian Gospel Music Festival in April . Sebastian appeared at the Asian MTV Awards , was a guest judge on New Zealand Idol and performed on Indonesian Idol . After a promotional trip to Malaysia in April he travelled to Europe and the US . In May Sebastian made a special guest appearance on American Idol , performing " Angels Brought Me Here " in the Top 3 verdict show . Sebastian was also a guest performer in the verdict show on Asian Idol in 2007 , performing the song as duet with 2005 Indonesian Idol winner , Mike <unk> . In 2005 , it was also performed by the fourth American Idol winner , Carrie Underwood , in the last performance show for the season . In April 2008 , on the United Kingdom TV drama series Rock Rivals , which depicts a fictional talent show set in London , the song was performed by Bethany Hopkins ( portrayed by Holly Quin @-@ <unk> ) as her winner 's single . Cover versions of the song have been performed by Australian singer Hayley Legg and by French electro artist Sebastian <unk> . In 2009 Philippine female trio , La Diva , released " Angels Brought Me Here " as a single and included two versions of the song on their debut album , La Diva . La Diva had recorded the song as the theme for South Korean TV drama series , Queen Seondeok ( May – December 2009 ) . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 " Angels Brought Me Here " – 3 : 59 
 " When I Get You Alone " ( live from Australian Idol : Up Close & Personal ) – 2 : 21 
 " Angels Brought Me Here " ( Midnite disco mix ) – 7 : 32 
 " Angels Brought Me Here " ( DB 's Idol edit ) – 5 : 10 
 " Angels Brought Me Here " ( Starr mix ) – 6 : 42 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Musicians 
 Guy Sebastian – lead vocals , background vocals 
 Peter Northgate – guitars 
 Bruce Heald – string arrangements 
 Production details 
 Producer – Bryon Jones , Adam Reily 
 Programmer – Adam Reily 
 Engineer – Craig <unk> at <unk> Studios , Sydney 
 Mixer – Steve MacMillan 
 Mastering – Oscar Gaona at Studios 301 , Sydney 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = Alan Dale = 
 Alan Hugh Dale ( born 6 May 1947 ) is a New Zealand actor . As a child , Dale developed a love of theatre and also became a rugby player . After retiring from the sport he took on a number of professions to support his family , before deciding to become a professional actor at the age of 27 . With work limited in New Zealand , Dale moved to Australia , where he played Dr. John Forrest in The Young Doctors from 1979 to 1982 . He later appeared as Jim Robinson in Neighbours , a part he played from 1985 until 1993 . He left the series when he fell out with the producers over the pay he and the rest of the cast received . 
 After leaving Neighbours , Dale found that he had become typecast as Robinson in Australia and struggled to find work . His career was revitalised after he relocated to the United States in 2000 . Since then he has had roles in many American series including prominent parts in The O.C. ( as Caleb Nichol ) and Ugly Betty ( as Bradford Meade ) , as well as recurring and guest roles in Lost , 24 , NCIS , ER , The West Wing , The X @-@ Files , Entourage and Once Upon a Time . Dale has also appeared in minor roles in films such as Star Trek Nemesis , Hollywood Homicide , Indiana Jones and the Kingdom of the Crystal Skull and The Girl with the Dragon Tattoo , as well as the London West End production of Spamalot . Dale has been married to former Miss Australia Tracey Pearson since 1990 and has four children . 
 = = Early life and work = = 
 Dale was born on 6 May 1947 in Dunedin , Otago , New Zealand . One of four children , Dale enjoyed his childhood , but his family was relatively poor . Although he was a gentle child , Dale was bullied so he learned to defend and stand up for himself . 
 Growing up in New Zealand without television until the 1960s , Dale developed a love of theatre and amateur dramatics . His first performance was for a school concert , at the age of 13 , doing an impression of comedian Shelley Berman . His parents became founding members of an amateur theatre in Auckland called " The Little Dolphin Theatre " . Dale often operated the stage equipment used to produce weather effects , and whenever he was on stage he loved the applause . Although a skilled rugby player , Dale opted to move into drama instead because " the acting fraternity didn 't like footballers and the footballers didn 't like actors . [ ... ] Acting gave me the same buzz and there was the chance of a longer career . " He gave up rugby at the age of 21 because it was not considered a workable career at the time , and he had to support his family . Acting roles were limited in New Zealand so Dale worked in multiple jobs , including as a male model , a car salesman and a realtor . While working as a milkman he heard the disc jockey at his local radio station resign during a broadcast . Dale went over to the station and told the managers he could do a better job . They gave him a trial and then signed him up for the afternoon show , which led to him landing his first TV role , and at the age of 27 he decided to become a professional actor . 
 = = Acting career = = 
 = = = Early roles and Neighbours = = = 
 Dale 's first professional acting job was playing an Indian in a production of The Royal Hunt of the Sun at the Grafton Theatre in Auckland . His first on @-@ screen role came in the New Zealand television drama Radio Waves , which although not successful , he described as " nine months of solid work and great fun . " In the late 1970s , Dale moved to Australia at the age of 32 , due to the limited acting work in New Zealand . He applied to the National Institute of Dramatic Art in Sydney , but was rejected because he " was a lot older than anybody else on the course . " He was soon cast as Dr. John Forrest in the Australian soap opera The Young Doctors , where he remained for three @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half years . 
 In 1985 , Dale was cast in the continuing role of Jim Robinson in the Australian soap opera Neighbours , earning him acclaim across the world , including the United Kingdom . He appeared on the show from the first episode and stayed for eight years before his character was killed off in 1993 . He found working on Neighbours " exciting " and it enabled him to provide for his sons , but he noted : " You were a totally replaceable commodity ; [ the production company ] didn 't put any value on any of the people appearing in the show . " He expanded : " I didn 't like it there , they were not nice people . When we decided that we hated each other , the company and me , one of the things the company did was to market everything they could out of us and pay us nothing . " Dale and the company ( Grundy Television ) parted on " bad terms " . 
 After Neighbours , Dale struggled to find work in Australia because he was typecast as Jim Robinson . His only regular sources of income were voice @-@ overs , and publishing magazines about his former show which he " made quite a lot of money out of " . He lost most of his profits investing in a failed children 's magazine . In 1999 , he was cast in the American TV film First Daughter , which was filmed in Australia . After discovering he could perform a convincing American accent , Dale attended the film 's premiere , finally moving with his family to the United States permanently in January 2000 . Dale , his second wife Tracey , and their then two @-@ year @-@ old son Nick moved into an " awful little flat " in Los Angeles and found an agent . Dale recalled telling his wife in Melbourne that " there 's no way this is going to work . But if it does , it proves you can do anything . " 
 = = = Wider success = = = 
 At the age of 52 , he began to revive his career and started taking acting classes , something he had not thought about after being cast in Neighbours . He described his age , unknown status and willingness to work for a relatively low fee as being his main assets for getting work in America . His drama teacher , who he has remained with ever since , told him " that you might want to play great roles , but truth is you will get cast as a specific type . Just work out your type . The others in the class said I was a bit Anthony Hopkins and a bit Sean Connery and that went into my head . I thought if I go for roles those guys would go for I 'm more likely to get them . " The first role he was offered was a part in a series called Sign of Life , a show about a rock band , which eventually fell through . Dale only received a couple of auditions during his first year in America , but his break came when he was cast as the South African Al Patterson in four episodes of ER . Since then , Dale has been " busier than ever " . He has appeared in many television series including guest appearances on The West Wing , Torchwood , The Lone Gunmen , Californication , and The Practice . Many of these have been recurring roles , such as the part of Tom Morrow in JAG and its spin @-@ off NCIS , as well as appearing in three episodes , including the series finale , of The X @-@ Files , playing the " Toothpick Man " . He played the recurring role of Vice President of the United States Jim Prescott for seven episodes of the second season of 24 , a part which was originally supposed to be a single scene . Dale had recurring roles in the serial Midnight Man and the Australian series Sea Patrol in 2008 . He also had recurring parts on <unk> , Entourage as John Ellis , the fictional owner of Warner Bros. , and the British series Moving Wallpaper as a fictional version of himself . He had a recurring role as King George in the series Once Upon a Time , and Emmett in Hot in Cleveland , before joining the main cast of Dominion in 2014 , playing General Edward Riesen . 
 From 2003 to 2010 , Dale appeared in his longest running American roles . He starred in the Fox TV series , The O.C. playing Caleb Nichol , a wealthy tycoon . The producers saw that the character had further potential , and made his initially recurring role a regular character in the series . After 35 appearances , Caleb was killed off in the second season episode " The <unk> " in 2005 . Dale was disappointed that Caleb was written out and described it as a mistake by the production staff . In 2006 , Dale was cast in the starring role of Bradford Meade , the owner of Meade Publications in the ABC show Ugly Betty . Although he impressed the producers in his audition , he initially lost the role to a " bigger star " . After said star began " causing trouble " and was fired , Dale was given the part . Bradford was killed off during the show 's second season . Dale appeared in the second season finale of Lost , " Live Together , Die Alone " , as Charles Widmore , a businessman and leader of the Others . Dale 's publicist was initially worried that Widmore ( who was an integral part of the show 's mystery ) would become a starring role , meaning it would be hard for Dale to appear in both Lost and Ugly Betty at the same time . The part became a recurring role , with Dale appearing numerous times between seasons two ( 2006 ) and six ( 2010 ) . He enjoyed the role but often found it difficult due to his character 's unclear motivation . 
 In March 2008 , Dale replaced Peter Davison in the lead role of King Arthur in the London West End production of Monty Python 's Spamalot at the Palace Theatre . He accepted the role because he was a fan of Monty Python and considered that " life 's too short " for him to have turned down a West End part . Although he has seen all of the shows and the other films , Dale had never seen Monty Python and the Holy Grail ( from which Spamalot is " lovingly ripped off " ) and had to buy a copy to prepare for the role . It was not his first experience in musical theatre because he appeared in a 1984 Australian production of Applause , but Dale found the comic timing of the part to be the hardest task . " On stage , the battle is to find all of the humorous moments and not skip over them . [ ... ] There 's an art to Python humour and I 'm aiming to try and get every single joke just right . " He was succeeded in the role by Sanjeev Bhaskar on 23 June 2008 . 
 Dale has also made several film appearances . He appeared as the Romulan Praetor <unk> in Star Trek Nemesis , a part he got after the actor originally cast fell ill , and had small parts in films such as Hollywood Homicide , After the Sunset , and the minor part of General Ross in Indiana Jones and the Kingdom of the Crystal Skull . Dale said his script for Kingdom of the Crystal Skull was printed on tin foil so it was impossible to replicate , in order to keep the film 's plot a secret . He appeared in four films released in 2011 : A Little Bit of Heaven , Priest , Don 't Be Afraid of the Dark , and The Girl with the Dragon Tattoo , having joined late in the film 's production . 
 = = Popularity and style = = 
 Despite his mainstream success since his move to America , Dale is still primarily known for his role as Jim Robinson in Neighbours in the United Kingdom and Australia . This was spoofed in a promotional ident for the UK 's Channel 4 in 2007 which sees Dale taking part in a mock interview about the sudden upturn in his career , before being accosted by an Australian fan , who recognises him as Jim Robinson . Discussing this association after Ugly Betty 's 2007 Golden Globe win , Dale noted : " Every article I read I 'm always , ' Ex @-@ soap star Jim Robinson ' . Maybe now people will just get to know me as actor Alan Dale . " In 2007 , Amazon.co.uk reported that they had sold more DVDs of films and television shows featuring Dale than any featuring other ex @-@ Neighbours cast members . 
 Dale 's characters on most of the American television shows he has appeared on have shared similar character traits , which Dale describes as the " go @-@ to powerful guy " role . Following his appearance as Senator Eaton in The Killing in 2011 , reviewers commented on his tendency to play powerful , wealthy and mysterious characters in many shows . Maureen Ryan of TV Squad wrote that it was " lovely to see Alan Dale playing a typically Alan Dale @-@ ian character . He 's always so great at playing That Sketchy Wealthy Guy With a Hidden Agenda , which he has now played on , I believe , 87 different shows . And he always does it well . " Coincidentally , Dale 's characters in Neighbours , The O.C. and Ugly Betty have all been killed off by a fatal heart attack . Christopher Rosen of The New York Observer wrote in 2008 that " with his square jaw and seemingly no nonsense attitude , Mr. Dale is the go @-@ to actor when casting directors need a conservative @-@ looking authoritarian . When he comes onto the screen , audiences immediately take him seriously , since he radiates rich , smug and serious . He demands your respect . " Rosen says that Dale is " not even ... a particularly good actor " but is " fine enough " and " bring [ s ] a no frills , no gimmicks style to his roles , " and " manages to give a consistent performance in every show he appears on . " 
 Jayne Nelson , writing in magazine SFX , named Dale the second most " serial " science @-@ fiction guest star after Mark Sheppard . She wrote : " The thing is , soap @-@ opera origins aside , Dale is always good . Which is why he keeps getting so much work .... Dale never lets you down , always ( well , usually ) summoning up a pitch @-@ perfect accent , too . There 's something comforting about his presence on a show , as though the fact he 's in it has leant it some weight . " In a profile of his work on " cult shows " , Ben Rawson @-@ Jones of Digital Spy called Dale an " institution " . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 In 1968 , Dale married his girlfriend , Claire . The couple had two children , Simon and Matthew , both of whom are involved in the entertainment industry , Simon as a radio announcer at Kiss 100 and Matthew as a writer , film maker and actor . The marriage ended in divorce in 1979 . At the time , Dale lived in Auckland but after the divorce he moved to Sydney with his sons . On 8 April 1990 , he married Tracey Pearson , the 1986 Miss Australia , whom he met at the 1986 Australian Grand Prix , when she was 21 and he was 39 . Dale described it as " the most appropriate relationship I 've ever had . " Dale also has two children from this marriage , Daniel and Nick , who " keep him young " . 
 He and his family now live in Manhattan Beach , Los Angeles , California and also own property in Australia . Dale sold his holiday home in New Zealand in 2011 for $ <unk> Both of Dale 's parents died in 2007 , and he regrets not spending enough time with them . Dale describes his life philosophy as being Winston Churchill 's quote " Never , never , never give up " , and counts Gene Hackman as his " big acting hero " . 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = = = Films = = = 
 = = = Television = = = 
 = = = Video games = = = 
 = = = Theatre = = = 
 Spamalot ( 2008 ) – King Arthur 
 = Super Columbine Massacre RPG ! = 
 Super Columbine Massacre RPG ! , abbreviated <unk> ! , is a role @-@ playing video game created by Danny Ledonne and released in April 2005 . The game recreates the 1999 Columbine High School shootings near Littleton , Colorado . Players assume the roles of gunmen Eric Harris and Dylan Klebold and act out the massacre , with flashbacks relating parts of Harris and Klebold 's past experiences . The game begins on the day of the shootings and follows Harris and Klebold after their suicides to fictional adventures in perdition . 
 Ledonne had spent many years conceptualizing games , but never created one due to his lack of game design and programming knowledge . He was inspired to create a video game about Columbine by his own experience being bullied and the effect the shooting had on his life . The game represents a critique of how traditional media sensationalized the shooting ( in particular the role of video games ) , as well as parodying video games themselves . Super Columbine Massacre was created with ASCII 's game development program RPG Maker 2000 and took approximately six months to complete . Ledonne initially published the game anonymously , releasing an artist 's statement about the work after his identity was revealed . Super Columbine Massacre was released for free online and attracted little attention until 2006 , when widespread media coverage fueled hundreds of thousands of downloads . 
 Reaction to Super Columbine Massacre was enormously negative ; the title was criticized as trivializing the actions of two murderers and the lives of the innocent . The game 's cartoon presentation and the side @-@ plot into hell were considered by critics as obscuring the game 's message , but it received minor note as a game that transcended the stereotypical associations of the medium as entertainment for children . Super Columbine Massacre 's themes and content led to it being included in discussions as to whether video games cause violence ; the title was later listed as one of the possible motivating factors of the shooter after the 2006 Dawson College shootings . The game has been described as an art game , and Ledonne has become a spokesperson for video games as an emerging art form , producing a documentary in 2008 called Playing Columbine about his game and its impact . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Super Columbine Massacre RPG ! is a role @-@ playing video game . Players control the actions of teenagers Eric Harris and Dylan Klebold ; the pair entered Colorado 's Columbine High School on April 20 , 1999 and killed 13 people before turning their guns on themselves in a library . Much of the game takes place in a third @-@ person view , with players controlling Harris and Klebold from an overhead perspective . The graphics and characters are deliberately reminiscent of a 16 @-@ bit @-@ era video game ; while the content is violent , the violence is not graphically rendered . 
 When players engage in battle , the screen changes to a first @-@ person view of the enemy ; enemies are named by stereotypes or occupations , such as " <unk> girl " , " Janitor " , " Math teacher " and " Jock Type " . Combat has two options : " auto play " , where the game chooses the weapon to use , or " manual play " , in which the player decides to use a hand @-@ to @-@ hand weapon , explosive , gun , or defensive maneuver against foes . Once a battle starts , it is impossible to avoid or escape ; the player must kill the enemy or die . Text narrates battle events and actions such as finding a bag or gaining a weapon . 
 As the game proceeds , flashbacks occur showing events in Harris and Klebold 's lives which may have caused them to commit murder ; real life events are compressed into the game 's timeframe for narrative purposes . Much of the plot is constructed around the events precisely as they are believed to have occurred ; lines of the gunmen 's dialogue are often lifted verbatim from their writings or from their own home videos of each other . In contrast to the 16 @-@ bit graphics are digitized photographs from the shooting or full voice samples from news reports ; photos of the school are used as backdrops during battle scenes . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The game begins as Eric Harris ' mother wakes him on April 20 , 1999 . Harris phones Dylan Klebold , and the pair meet in Harris ' basement to plot a series of bombings that will precede their planned shooting . The two reminisce about the bullying they experienced at Columbine High and express rage at those they perceive to be their tormentors . Harris and Klebold make a video , apologizing to their parents and asking them not to blame themselves for what will follow . The two boys collect their guns and bombs , pack a duffel bag with weapons , and leave home . 
 In the next scene Harris and Klebold are standing outside their high school . The player guides them to the cafeteria to plant their timed propane bombs without being detected by security cameras or hall monitors . After the explosives are set , the two stop for a moment on a hill outside the school , discussing their alienation and hostility . After the bombs fail to explode as planned , Harris and Klebold decide to enter the school and murder as many people as they can ; the final number killed is up to the player . After roaming around the school shooting innocents , Harris and Klebold commit suicide . A montage of clips showing Harris and Klebold 's corpses , students comforting each other , and childhood photos of the gunmen plays . 
 The game 's second half finds Klebold alone in Hell . After combating demons and monsters from the video game Doom , Klebold reunites with Harris , and they profess their enthusiasm for the opportunity to live out their favorite video game . The pair find themselves at the " Isle of Lost Souls " , where they meet fictional characters such as Pikachu , Bart Simpson , Mega Man , Mario and real personalities including J. Robert Oppenheimer , JonBenét Ramsey , Malcolm X , Ronald Reagan , Freddie Mercury , Roger Taylor , Brian May , John Deacon , and John Lennon . Next , they deliver a copy of Ecce Homo to Friedrich Nietzsche before fighting the South Park design of Satan . Upon their victory , Satan congratulates them for their deeds . 
 The game returns to Columbine High School , where a press conference addresses the murders . Some of the dialogue appears precisely as it was spoken after the actual event , while other lines caricature the political forces at work in the aftermath of the murders . The conference references gun control advocacy , religious fundamentalism , and the media 's implication of Marilyn Manson and video games as culpable in the shooting . 
 = = Development = = 
 Super Columbine Massacre was created by Danny Ledonne of Alamosa , Colorado , then a student and independent filmmaker . As a high school student , the Columbine shootings resonated with Ledonne , who said that he himself had once been " a loner " , " a misfit " and " a bullied kid " in high school like the shooters . " I was an easy target to be picked on , and that started in kindergarten , " he said . " It was the kind of bullying that most kids who were bullied experienced [ ... ] When you get pushed every day , and when you are ostracized not once , not twice , but years in and out , your perception of reality is distorted [ ... ] These things really do warp your understanding and your perception of humanity in some almost irrevocable way , " he said . 
 In 1999 , director Stanley Kubrick 's death and the Columbine High School massacre occurred within months of each other ; Ledonne credited the two events with changing his life . After seeing A Clockwork Orange , Ledonne discovered that film could comment on culture ; after the Columbine shootings , he realized he was headed down the same path as the shooters . " It was a bit scary , once I learned more about these boys , because it was like I was looking in the mirror and I didn 't want the same fate for myself , " Ledonne said . He began taking martial arts , studying film , and saw a therapist . By the time he graduated from Alamosa High School , Ledonne had a 4 @.@ 0 grade point average and was voted " most likely to succeed " by his peers . He studied film at Emerson College and moved back to Colorado to form his own production company , <unk> Productions , which mostly edits wedding videos . 
 In November 2004 , Ledonne discovered a program called RPG Maker , which allows a developer to add images , text , story and objectives to design a game ; RPG Maker creates the necessary programming automatically . Ledonne had always conceptualized video games throughout his childhood but never produced one due to his lack of technical knowledge ; with RPG Maker he was able to fulfill his ambition . Ledonne decided to make a game that would explore why the Columbine shootings occurred , as well as refuting pervasive myths about the shooters and the alleged role video games played in the massacre . 
 The researching , planning , design and programming of the game took about six months and between 200 and 300 hours of work . All the footage and pictures in the game were taken from the internet . Final Fantasy VI influenced the sprite @-@ based design . Many of the songs in the game are MIDI versions of 1990s grunge and alternative bands such as Radiohead , Nirvana and Smashing Pumpkins . Ledonne paid meticulous attention to detail , including giving players access to the exact inventory the gunmen used on their rampage . He watched videos , read newspaper articles and pored over 11 @,@ 000 pages of documents released by the county government regarding the massacre and the killers . 
 Ledonne added elements to the game to criticize subjects varying from public reaction to the disaster , to stereotypical role @-@ playing game conventions . Every victory in battle displays the message " another victory for the <unk> Mafia " , in reference to the gang that Harris and Klebold were mistakenly affiliated with by the media . Ledonne added the hell segment and populated it with characters from the video game Doom , explaining that " [ having the shooters ] battle these monsters in an eternal recreation of their favorite videogame was a statement in and of itself . " Super Columbine Massacre is the only video game Ledonne has created , and he has no future plans to create another . 
 = = = Release = = = 
 The game was made available for download on April 20 , 2005 , the sixth anniversary of the Columbine massacre . Ledonne sought to remain anonymous at the game 's debut to avoid any possible controversy , which he would later regret as it created the impression he had something to hide . Under the alias " <unk> " , Ledonne regularly engaged gamers and critics alike on a message board he established to discuss the game 's depiction of the shooting and the broader implications of the shooting . Ledonne 's identity was revealed by Roger Kovacs , a friend of one of the Columbine victims , Rachel Scott . Kovacs found out Ledonne 's name by donating to the site via <unk> ; after his name and address were posted online , Ledonne stepped forward and was greeted with requests for interviews . " That 's when I decided that I had to grow a backbone and stand up for my creation , " Ledonne said . 
 The game is distributed as freeware , with donations in the amount of $ 1 requested to defray bandwidth costs . Initially , the game attracted little attention , and was downloaded 10 @,@ 000 times in its first year . In April 2006 Patrick Dugan of web site Gamasutra wrote about the game after meeting its host at Game Developers Conference . Impressed , Dugan sent an email to Georgia Institute of Technology professor Ian Bogost , who blogged about the game . Brian Crecente of gaming news site Kotaku and the Rocky Mountain News subsequently interviewed Bogost , and the Associated Press and mainstream media picked up the story . The increased visibility resulted in increased coverage , controversy , and downloads ; in the first half of May 2006 the game was downloaded more than 30 @,@ 000 times . Ledonne announced in September 2006 that the game was no longer available for download directly through its website ( instead providing download links ) , as the title 's popularity cost too much to sustain ; in a single day in September , he reported 8 @,@ 000 downloads . By March 2007 , the game had been downloaded more than 400 @,@ 000 times . 
 = = Reaction = = 
 Reception of Super Columbine Massacre has been extremely negative amongst the mainstream media and those personally affected by the shootings . Upon revealing Columbine 's identity as Ledonne , Kovacs said " One of the girls who died [ in the shootings ] was a friend of mine , Rachel . We were in the same church group . Anyone playing this game can kill Rachel over and over again . " The father of one victim remarked to the press that the game " disgusts me . You trivialize the actions of two murderers and the lives of the innocent . " One victim of the shooting played the game and voiced reserved support , remarking that " It probably sounds a bit odd for someone like me to say , but I appreciate the fact at least to some degree that something like this was made . " While he took issue with what he saw as glamorization of the shooters , he also believed it would help open a dialogue about the shooting . 
 Super Columbine Massacre was largely condemned by the press . Betty Nguyen of CNN labeled the game as an example of a subculture that worships terrorists . Newspapers called the game " exploitive " and a " monstrosity " . PC World declared the game # 2 on its list of " The 10 Worst Games of All Time . " Even critics who were supportive of Ledonne 's intent found the game hard to play ; Ben Kuchera of Ars Technica said that he left the game " shaken " , but that as an easily misunderstood game " the people who are most likely to gain anything from it will never play it . " Crecente felt that the message of the game was obscured by the cartoon graphics of the medium . Reviewers for web site <unk> felt that while the hell segment was a well @-@ executed parody , it did not further the game 's message among those who were quick to judge the game . Ledonne has refused to alter the game as it represents his thoughts on the subject at a particular point in time , but has encouraged others to rework the game themselves . 
 The most positive reviews of Super Columbine Massacre came from critics who accepted Ledonne 's intended message . Wired magazine writer Clive Thompson appreciated the game 's attention to narrative detail , writing that " the upshot [ of the game ] is that Ledonne has done a surprisingly good job of painting the emotional landscape of [ the gunmen ] — <unk> from self @-@ pity to pompous grandiosity and blinding rage , then back again . " Thompson called the game subtle , including jabs at the participants and gaming culture by using the language of games as a way to think about the killings . Paul <unk> 's advice to those who found the game controversial and in bad taste was to " lighten up " . Bogost summed up his review of the game by writing " this game is not fun , it is challenging , and difficult to play — not technically difficult , but conceptually difficult . We need more of that . " David <unk> , a professor at Emerson College , agreed with Bogost and commented that " the controversy should be that there aren 't more games like Super Columbine Massacre RPG ! that are as demanding and as artistically innovative . " Dugan responded to common criticisms of the game , including that the game was made in bad taste , by writing a rebuttal on his blog : 
 I think everyone who disses the Columbine RPG is gutless . Most haven 't played the game , or have played it with such preconceptions that they 're blinded to the <unk> [ sic ] , the honesty , the beauty of its social commentary . Super Columbine Massacre RPG is riddled with design flaws and has mediocre graphics by 1995 , the maker of the game admits this , but it regardless is a work of art . It puts you in the mindset of the killers and provides a very clear suggestion of why they did what they did ; they were enacting an ideological demonstration through a terrorist act , and the game shines light on this as an indictment of the American dream and way of life painfully close to the main nerve . 
 After the Dawson College shooting in September 2006 , when gunman Kimveer Gill killed Anastasia De Sousa and injured 19 students , the Toronto Sun wrote that Kimveer had self @-@ reported playing Columbine Massacre on a web site . The story was picked up by media and reported widely . Upon hearing media reports of a link to the game one of the shooting victims at Dawson College contacted Ledonne and told him that " I just suffered multiple gunshot wounds and I think you should take this game down . " Ledonne expressed his reaction to the shooting and renewed media attention towards his game in an interview a week later : 
 If one is interested in making something for the public to view — be it a painting , a book , an album , a film , or a video game , should the <unk> harm that may come out of this work be grounds for its suppression from society ? This is , in a sense , pre @-@ crime . If you believe in what you 're doing and you want to express yourself , the expression should be primary and any interpretations that come after must always remain of secondary importance to the creation of the work itself . On another level , the entire correlation between the Dawson College shooting and my game is unfounded . [ ... ] What else did Kimveer like ? Black clothes ? Goth music ? Pizza ? [ ... ] If anything , the Dawson College shooting is proof positive that games like [ Super Columbine Massacre ] should be made ; until video games are no longer among the " usual suspects " for homicidal rampages , the public needs to more carefully consider why interactive electronic media is somehow the manufacturer of Manchurian Candidates . 
 Developer Ryan Lambourn created a flash game called V @-@ Tech Rampage in 2007 , which allows players to control the actions of gunman Seung @-@ Hui Cho in the Virginia Tech massacre . Lambourn professed empathy for Cho , and said that he was a target of bullying in high school . " No one listens to you unless you 've got something sensational to do . And that 's why I feel sympathy for Cho Seung @-@ Hui . He had to go that far , " Lambourn stated . On the V @-@ Tech Rampage site , Lambourn posted a statement that he would take the game off of Newgrounds if donations reached $ 1000 ; at $ 2000 in donations he would take the game down from the main site and for another $ 1000 he would apologize for creating it . Ledonne posted a comment on Lambourn 's website after V @-@ Tech Rampage drew comparisons to Super Columbine Massacre , calling Lambourn 's statement tantamount to a " hostage note " , and asking bloggers to consider " not whether a game about the Virginia Tech shooting <unk> be made but how we might go about making a game that accomplishes more than V @-@ Tech Rampage does with the subject matter . " Ledonne stated that he emailed Lambourn sympathetically , but that the creator responded to his emails with profanity ; he reiterated that the two games had different motivations and were not easily comparable in content . 
 = = = Slamgate and legacy = = = 
 In October 2006 , Sam Roberts , the Guerilla <unk> Competition director of the Slamdance festival , emailed Ledonne encouraging him to submit the game to the contest . Ledonne looked at the selection of the game as one of the competition 's finalists in December as evidence that " all forms of art can be valid tools for societal exploration ( even painful topics like school shootings ) " . The event 's organizer , Peter Baxter , announced the removal of the game from the festival 's " Guerrilla <unk> Competition " after its selection as a finalist . Several reasons for the change of mind were given , including threatened sponsor withdrawal , possible lawsuits , and " moral grounds " ; Baxter denied that sponsor pressure caused the drop , instead affirming that " the shootings are still a very touchy subject , and rightly so . We have to be sensitive to [ victims and their families ' ] feelings . " An additional consideration reported was that unnamed parties might sue for copyright violations in the game itself . The announcement marked the first time the festival had pulled jury @-@ selected content from the contest ; the incident was dubbed " Slamgate " by the gaming press . 
 Following the announcement , USC Interactive Media Division withdrew its sponsorship of the festival . Seven of the fourteen finalist games were removed from the contest by their developers in protest : Braid , flOw , Once Upon A Time , <unk> , Everyday Shooter , Book and Volume and Castle Crashers ( <unk> was later reinstated by the DigiPen Institute of Technology , who owns the rights to the game ) . Developer Jonathan Blow of Braid stated : " [ Super Columbine Massacre ] lacks compassion , and I find the Artist 's Statement disingenuous . But despite this , the game does have redeeming value . It does provoke important thoughts , and it does push the boundaries of what games are about . It is composed with more of an eye toward art than most games . Clearly , it belongs at the festival . " Blow and the other developers sent an open letter to the festival , encouraging the reinstatement of the game as keeping with the festival 's " trailblazing " efforts . Despite protests , Baxter refused to change his mind , citing consideration for the shooting 's victims and their families . Ledonne told the other finalists that he planned to go to the festival anyway and distribute copies of the game . Acknowledging that the withdrawal of six finalists compromised the competition , Roberts let the attendees vote on whether any prizes would be awarded ; they decided not to . 
 Brian Flemming , director of The God Who Wasn 't There , saw Ledonne 's demo of Super Columbine Massacre outside the festival , and convinced two fellow Slamdance film jurors to award the game a " Special Jury Prize " for Best Documentary , an unofficial award not endorsed by Slamdance itself . The jurors intended to present the special prize alongside the award for best documentary . Shortly before the ceremony , Baxter informed Flemming that he couldn 't present the award due to " music clearance issues " , and refused to allow it despite Flemming 's protests . According to Ledonne , Flemming tried to hold his ground , but eventually gave in to Baxter 's request . 
 Ledonne produced a documentary film based on his experiences after the release of Super Columbine Massacre . Titled Playing Columbine , the documentary uses the controversy surrounding the game to investigate the large issues facing video games as a medium for artistic expression . The film premiered at AFI Fest in Los Angeles , California on November 7 , 2008 . Thirteen minutes of preview footage were released online , and a limited edition DVD is posted for sale on the web . 
 As a result of the controversy of his game , Ledonne became an unwitting spokesman for the games industry , facing the medium 's opponents in debates and forums . The furor resulting from Slamgate was called out by Ledonne and others in the media as a sign that video games had not yet outgrown the traditional stereotype of children 's games . Keith Stuart of The Guardian wrote that despite being confused and tawdry , Super Columbine Massacre " symbolizes a growing understanding that videogames have more to say than ' shoot the enemies and pick up health . ' " Authors Andreas Jahn @-@ <unk> and Ralf Stockmann consider controversial video games such as Super Columbine Massacre and the Grand Theft Auto " Hot coffee mod " evidence of sociopolitical tensions present between gamers and older generations . The game and others like it continue to be at the center of the video games as art debate , and Gamasutra credited Super Columbine Massacre and Slamgate as having two highly positive and far @-@ reaching effects ; first , forcing print game journalism to focus on the issue ; and second , the " evangelization of the notion that games can be as meaningful and important as other media , even if the example is offensive to the sensibilities of most Americans [ ... ] To win is to lose , but to play is to experience an enrichment that cannot be scored . " 
 = Takalik Abaj = 
 Tak 'alik Ab 'aj ( / <unk> <unk> / ; Mayan pronunciation : [ <unk> <unk> <unk> ] ; Spanish : [ <unk> <unk> ] ) is a pre @-@ Columbian archaeological site in Guatemala . It was formerly known as Abaj Takalik ; its ancient name may have been Kooja . It is one of several Mesoamerican sites with both Olmec and Maya features . The site flourished in the Preclassic and Classic periods , from the 9th century BC through to at least the 10th century AD , and was an important centre of commerce , trading with Kaminaljuyu and Chocolá . Investigations have revealed that it is one of the largest sites with sculptured monuments on the Pacific coastal plain . Olmec @-@ style sculptures include a possible colossal head , petroglyphs and others . The site has one of the greatest concentrations of Olmec @-@ style sculpture outside of the Gulf of Mexico . 
 Takalik Abaj is representative of the first blossoming of Maya culture that had occurred by about 400 BC . The site includes a Maya royal tomb and examples of Maya hieroglyphic inscriptions that are among the earliest from the Maya region . Excavation is continuing at the site ; the monumental architecture and persistent tradition of sculpture in a variety of styles suggest the site was of some importance . 
 Finds from the site indicate contact with the distant metropolis of Teotihuacan in the Valley of Mexico and imply that Takalik Abaj was conquered by it or its allies . Takalik Abaj was linked to long @-@ distance Maya trade routes that shifted over time but allowed the city to participate in a trade network that included the Guatemalan highlands and the Pacific coastal plain from Mexico to El Salvador . 
 Takalik Abaj was a sizeable city with the principal architecture clustered into four main groups spread across nine terraces . While some of these were natural features , others were artificial constructions requiring an enormous investment in labour and materials . The site featured a sophisticated water drainage system and a wealth of sculptured monuments . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 Tak 'alik Ab 'aj ' means " standing stone " in the local K 'iche ' Maya language , combining the adjective tak 'alik meaning " standing " , and the noun <unk> meaning " stone " or " rock " . It was initially named Abaj Takalik by the American archaeologist Suzanna Miles , using Spanish word order . This was grammatically incorrect in K 'iche ' ; the Guatemalan government has now officially corrected this to Tak 'alik Ab 'aj ' . Anthropologist Ruud Van <unk> has proposed that the ancient name of the city was Kooja , the name of one of the highest @-@ ranking elite lineages of the Mam Maya ; Kooja means " Moon halo " . 
 = = Location = = 
 The site lies in the southwest of Guatemala , about 45 km ( 28 mi ) from the border with the Mexican state of Chiapas and 40 km ( 25 mi ) from the Pacific Ocean . 
 Takalik Abaj is located in the north of the municipality of El Asintal , in the extreme north of Retalhuleu department , some 120 miles ( 190 km ) from Guatemala City . The site lies among five coffee plantations in the lower foothills of the Sierra Madre mountains ; the Santa Margarita , San Isidro Piedra Parada , Buenos Aires , San Elías and Dolores plantations . Takalik Abaj sits upon a ridge running north – south , descending in a southwards direction . This ridge is bordered on the west by the <unk> River and on the east by the Ixchayá River , both flowing down from the Guatemalan Highlands . The Ixchayá flows in a deep ravine but a suitable crossing point is located near to the site . The situation of Takalik Abaj at this crossing point was probably important in the founding of the city , since this channeled important trade routes through the site and controlled access to them . 
 Takalik Abaj sits at an altitude of approximately 600 metres ( 2 @,@ 000 ft ) above sea level in an ecoregion classed as subtropical moist forest . The temperature normally varies between 21 and 25 ° C ( 70 and 77 ° F ) and the potential evapotranspiration ratio averages 0 @.@ 45 . The area receives high annual rainfall , varying between 2 @,@ 136 and 4 @,@ 372 millimetres ( 84 and 172 in ) , with an average annual rainfall of 3 @,@ 284 millimetres ( 129 in ) . Local vegetation includes the Pascua de Montaña ( <unk> speciosus ) , <unk> ( <unk> <unk> ) , <unk> ( <unk> speciosa ) , <unk> or West Indian Elm ( <unk> <unk> ) , <unk> ( <unk> <unk> ) , Mexican Cedar ( <unk> odorata ) , <unk> ( Brosimum alicastrum ) , Tamarind ( Tamarindus indica ) and <unk> ( <unk> montana ) . 
 A road , denominated <unk> , passes the site running 30 kilometres ( 19 mi ) from the town of Retalhuleu to Colomba Costa Cuca in the department of Quetzaltenango . 
 Takalik Abaj is located at an approximate distance of 100 kilometres ( 62 mi ) from the contemporary archaeological site of Monte Alto , 130 km ( 81 mi ) from Kaminaljuyu and 60 kilometres ( 37 mi ) from Izapa in Mexico . 
 = = Ethnicity = = 
 The changing styles of architecture and iconography at Takalik Abaj suggest that the site has been occupied by changing ethnic groups . The archaeological finds of the Middle Preclassic period suggest that the population of Takalik Abaj may have been affiliated with the Olmec culture of the Gulf Coast lowlands region who are thought to have been speakers of a Mixe – Zoquean language . In the Late Preclassic period , Olmec art styles were exchanged for Maya styles and presumably this shift was accompanied by an influx of ethnic Maya , speaking a Mayan language . There are some hints from the indigenous chronicles that the inhabitants of the site may have been the <unk> <unk> , a branch of the Mam Maya . The Kooja lineage of the Mam , an ancient noble line , may have had a Classic Period origin in Takalik Abaj . 
 = = Economy and trade = = 
 Takalik Abaj was one of a series of early sites on or near the Pacific coastal plain that were important commercial , ceremonial and political centres . It is apparent that it prospered from the production of cacao and from the trade routes that crossed the region . At the time of the Spanish Conquest in the 16th century the area was still important for its cacao production . 
 Study of obsidian recovered at Takalik Abaj indicates that the majority originated from the El <unk> and San Martín Jilotepeque sources in the Guatemalan highlands . Lesser quantities of obsidian originated from other sources such as Tajumulco , <unk> and Pachuca . Obsidian is a natural volcanic glass that was used across Mesoamerica to make durable tools and weapons including knives , spearheads , arrowheads , <unk> for ritual <unk> , prismatic blades for woodwork and many other day @-@ to @-@ day tools . The use of obsidian by the Maya has been likened to steel use in the modern world and it was widely traded throughout the Maya region and beyond . The proportion of obsidian from different sources varied over time : 
 = = History = = 
 The site had a long and continuous settlement history , with the period of principal occupation stretching from the Middle Preclassic down to the Postclassic . The earliest known occupation at Takalik Abaj dates towards the end of the Early Preclassic , ca . 1000 BC . However , it was not until the Middle to Late Preclassic that its first real florescence began with a noted surge in architectural constructions . From this period onwards a continuity of culture and population settlement is in evidence , as represented by the persistence of a local ceramic style ( called Ocosito ) that remained in use until the Late Classic . The Ocosito style was typically made with red paste and pumice and extended westwards at least as far as Coatepeque , southwards to the Ocosito River and eastwards to the Samalá River . By the Terminal Classic , pottery associated with a highland K 'iche ' ceramic style had begun to appear intermixed with Ocosito ceramic complex deposits . Ocosito ceramics were replaced entirely by the K 'iche ' ceramic tradition by the Early Postclassic period . 
 = = = Early Preclassic = = = 
 Takalik Abaj was first occupied at the end of the Early Preclassic period . The remains of an Early Preclassic residential area have been found to the west of the Central Group , on the bank of the El <unk> stream . These first houses were built with floors made from river cobbles and reed @-@ thatched roofs supported on timber poles . Pollen analysis has revealed that the first inhabitants entered the area when it was still thick forest , which they began to clear in order to cultivate maize and other plants . Over 150 pieces of obsidian have been recovered from this area , known as El <unk> , mostly originating from the San Martín Jilotepeque and El <unk> sources . 
 = = = Middle Preclassic = = = 
 Takalik Abaj was reoccupied at the beginning of the Middle Preclassic . This was probably by Mixe – Zoquean inhabitants , as evidenced by the plentiful Olmec @-@ style sculpture at the site dating to this period . The construction of public architecture had probably begun by the Middle Preclassic ; the earliest structures were made of clay , which was sometimes partially burned in order to harden it . Ceramics from this period belonged to the local Ocosito tradition . This ceramic tradition , although it was local , showed strong affinities with the ceramics of the coastal plain and foothills of the Escuintla region . 
 The Pink Structure ( <unk> Rosada in Spanish ) was built as a low platform during the first part of the Middle Preclassic , at a time when the city was producing Olmec @-@ style sculpture and La Venta was flourishing on the Gulf coast of Mexico ( <unk> – 700 BC ) . During the latter part of the Middle Preclassic ( <unk> – 400 BC ) , the Pink Structure was buried under the first version of the enormous Structure 7 . It was at this time that the use of Olmec ceremonial structures was discontinued and Olmec sculpture was destroyed , signalling an intermediate period prior to the beginning of the city 's Early Maya phase . The transition between the two phases was a gradual one , without abrupt changes . 
 = = = Late Preclassic = = = 
 During the Late Preclassic ( 300 BC – AD 200 ) various sites in the Pacific coastal region developed into true cities ; Takalik Abaj was one of these , with an area greater than 4 square kilometres ( 1 @.@ 5 sq mi ) . The cessation of Olmec influence upon the Pacific coastal zone occurred at the beginning of the Late Preclassic . At this time Takalik Abaj emerged as an important centre with an apparently local style of art and architecture ; the inhabitants began to make boulder sculptures and to erect stelae and associated altars . At this time , between 200 BC and 150 AD , Structure 7 reached its maximum dimensions . Monuments were erected with both political and religious significance , some of which bore Maya @-@ style dates and depictions of rulers . These early Maya monuments are carved with what may be among the earliest Maya hieroglyphic inscriptions and use of the Mesoamerican Long Count calendar . The early dates on Stelae 2 and 5 allow this style of sculpture to be more securely fixed in time within the late 1st century to the early 2nd century AD . The so @-@ called potbelly style of sculpture also appeared at this time . The appearance of Maya sculpture and the cessation of Olmec @-@ style sculpture may represent a Maya intrusion into the area previously occupied by Mixe – Zoquean inhabitants . One possibility holds that Maya elites entered the area in order to take control of the cacao trade . However , given the evident continuity in local ceramic styles from the Middle to Late Preclassic , the change in attributes from Olmec to Maya may have been more an ideological than a physical transition . If they had arrived from elsewhere , the finds of Maya stelae and a Maya royal tomb suggest that the Maya were in a dominant position , whether they arrived as traders or conquerors . 
 There is evidence of increasing contact with Kaminaljuyu , which emerged as a principal centre at this time , linking the Pacific coastal trade routes with the Motagua River route , as well as increased contact with other sites along the Pacific coast . Within this extended trade route , Takalik Abaj and Kaminaljuyu appear to have been the two principal foci . The early Maya style of sculpture spread throughout this network . 
 During the Late Preclassic structures were built using volcanic stone held together with clay , as in the Middle Preclassic . However , they evolved to include stepped structures with indented corners and stairways dressed with rounded pebbles . At the same time , old Olmec @-@ style sculptures were moved from their original positions and placed in front of the new @-@ style buildings , sometimes reusing sculpture fragments in the stone facing . 
 Although the Ocosito ceramic tradition continued in use , the Late Preclassic ceramics in Takalik Abaj were strongly related to the Miraflores Ceramic Sphere that included Escuintla , the Valley of Guatemala and western El Salvador . This ceramic tradition consists of fine red wares that are particularly associated with Kaminaljuyu and are found throughout the southeastern Guatemalan highlands and the adjacent Pacific slope . 
 = = = Early Classic = = = 
 In the Early Classic , from around the 2nd century AD , the stela style that developed at Takalik Abaj and was associated with the portrayal of historic figures was adopted across the Maya lowlands , particularly in the Petén Basin . During this period some of the pre @-@ existing monuments were deliberately destroyed . 
 In this period , the ceramics showed a change with the entry of the highland Solano style , This ceramic tradition is most associated with the Solano site in the southeastern Valley of Guatemala and the most characteristic type is a brick @-@ red ware covered with a bright orange micaceous slip , sometimes painted with pink or purple decoration . This style of ceramics has been associated with the highland K 'iche ' Maya . These new ceramics did not replace the pre @-@ existing Ocosito complex but rather became mingled with them . 
 Archaeological investigations have shown that the destruction of monuments and interruption of new construction at the site occurred simultaneously with the arrival of so @-@ called Naranjo style ceramics , which appear to be linked to styles from the great metropolis of Teotihuacan in the distant Valley of Mexico . The Naranjo ceramic tradition is particularly characteristic of the western Pacific coast of Guatemala between the <unk> and <unk> rivers . The most common forms are pitchers and bowls with a surface that has been smoothed with a cloth , leaving parallel marks , and usually coated with a white or yellow wash . At the same time , the use of local Ocosito ceramics waned . This Teotihuacan influence places the destruction of monuments in the second half of the Early Classic . The presence of the conquerors linked to the Naranjo @-@ style ceramics was not of long duration and suggests that the conquerors exerted long @-@ distance control of the site , replacing the local rulers with their own governors while leaving the local population intact . 
 The conquest of Takalik Abaj broke the ancient trade routes running along the Pacific coast from Mexico to El Salvador , these were replaced by a new route running up the Sierra Madre and into the northwestern Guatemalan highlands . 
 = = = Late Classic = = = 
 In the Late Classic the site appears to have recovered from its earlier defeat . Naranjo @-@ style ceramics diminished greatly in quantity and there was a surge in new large @-@ scale construction . Many monuments broken by the conquerors were re @-@ erected at this time . 
 = = = Postclassic = = = 
 Although use of the local Ocosito @-@ style ceramics continued , there was a marked intrusion of K 'iche ' ceramics from the highlands in the Postclassic period , concentrated particularly in the northern part of the site but extending to cover the whole . The indigenous accounts of the K 'iche ' themselves claim that they conquered this region of the Pacific coast , suggesting that the presence of their ceramics is associated with their conquest of Takalik Abaj . 
 The K 'iche ' conquest appears to have taken place around AD 1000 , some four centuries earlier than had been supposed using calculations based on the indigenous accounts . After the initial arrival of the K 'iche ' activity continued at the site without pause , and the local styles were simply replaced by styles associated with the conquerors . This suggests that the original inhabitants abandoned the city they had occupied for almost two millennia . 
 = = = Modern history = = = 
 The first published account appeared in 1888 , written by Gustav <unk> . The German ethnologist and naturalist Karl Sapper described Stela 1 in 1894 after he saw it beside the road he was travelling . Max <unk> , a German artist , drew Stela 1 and noted some other monuments , which attracted the interest of Walter Lehmann . 
 In 1902 the eruption of the nearby <unk> volcano covered the site in a layer of volcanic ash that varies between 40 and 50 centimetres ( 16 and 20 in ) thick . 
 Walter Lehmann began the study of the sculptures of Takalik Abaj in the 1920s . In January 1942 J. Eric S. Thompson visited the site with Ralph L. <unk> and William Webb on behalf of the Carnegie Institution while undertaking a study of the Pacific Coast , publishing his accounts in 1943 . Further investigations were undertaken by Suzanna Miles , Lee Parsons and Edwin M. Shook . Miles bestowed the name Abaj Takalik to the site , which appeared in her contributed chapter in volume 2 of the Handbook of Middle American Indians published 1965 . Previously it had been known by various names , including San Isidro Piedra Parada and Santa Margarita , after the names of the plantations in which the site lies , and also by the name of Colomba , a village to the north in the department of Quetzaltenango . 
 Excavations at the site in the 1970s were sponsored by the University of California , Berkeley . They began in 1976 and were undertaken by John A. Graham , Robert F. Heizer and Edwin M. Shook . This first season uncovered 40 new monuments , including Stela 5 , to add to the dozen or so already known . Excavations by the University of California at Berkeley continued until 1981 and uncovered even more monuments in that time . From 1987 excavations have been continued by the Guatemalan Instituto de Antropología e Historia ( IDAEH ) under the direction of Miguel Orrego and Christa Schieber , and new monuments continue to be uncovered . The site has been declared a national park . 
 In 2002 Takalik Abaj was entered on the UNESCO World Heritage Tentative Lists , under the heading of " The Mayan @-@ <unk> Encounter " . 
 = = Site description and layout = = 
 The core of the site covers about 6 @.@ 5 square kilometres ( 2 @.@ 5 sq mi ) and includes remains of some 70 monumental structures positioned around a dozen plazas . Takalik Abaj has 2 ballcourts and over 239 known stone monuments , including impressive stelae and altars . The granite used to make monuments in Olmec and early Maya styles is much different from the soft limestone used in the Petén cities . The site is also noted for its hydraulic systems , including a <unk> or sauna bath with a subterranean drainage , and Preclassic tombs found in excavations from the late 1990s onwards by Drs. Marion <unk> de Hatch , Christa Schieber de <unk> and Miguel Orrego , from the Ministerio de Cultura y Deportes . 
 The structures at Takalik Abaj are spread among four groups ; the Central , North and West Groups are clustered together but the South Group is located about 5 km ( 3 @.@ 1 mi ) to the south . The site is naturally defensible , being bordered by steep ravines . The site is spread over a series of nine terraces , which vary in width from 140 to 220 metres ( 460 to 720 ft ) and have faces varying in height from 4 @.@ 6 to 9 @.@ 4 metres ( 15 to 31 ft ) . These terraces are not uniformly oriented , instead the direction of their retaining faces depends upon the lie of the local terrain . The three main terraces supporting the city are artificial , with over 10 metres ( 33 ft ) of fill being used in places . 
 When Takalik Abaj was at its greatest extent , major architecture in the city covered an area of approximately 2 by 4 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 2 by 2 @.@ 5 mi ) , although the area occupied by residential construction has not been determined . 
 The Central Group occupies Terraces 1 to 5 , which were artificially levelled . The group contains 39 structures arranged around plazas that are open on the north and south sides . The Central Group was first occupied in the Middle Preclassic and contains a concentration of more than 100 stone monuments . 
 The West Group consists of 21 structures on Terrace 6 , which was also artificially levelled . The structures are arranged around plazas that were left open on the east side . Seven monuments have been found in this group . The West Group is bordered by the rivers Nima on the west and the San Isidro on the east . A notable find in the West Group was the discovery of some jade masks there . The West Group was occupied from the Late Preclassic through to at least the Late Classic . 
 The North Group was occupied from the Terminal Classic through to the Postclassic . This group 's structures were built using a different method from those in the Central Group , and were made out of compacted clay without stone construction or facing . The group occupies Terraces 7 through 9 , which follow the contours of the natural terracing present and show no evidence of significant artificial levelling . In combination with a noted absence of sculptured monuments , the different construction methods and ceramic assemblages associated with this group imply an occupation of the North Group by a new settlement community who arrived in the Late Classic period , most probably K 'iche ' Maya from the highlands . 
 The South Group is located outside the site core , some 0 @.@ 5 kilometres ( 0 @.@ 31 mi ) south of the Central Group , about 2 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 2 mi ) west of El Asintal , it consists of 13 structure mounds forming a dispersed group . 
 = = = Water control = = = 
 The hydraulic system included stone canals , which were not used for irrigation but rather to channel runoff and maintain the structural integrity of the principal architecture . These channels were also used to carry water to the residential areas of the city , and it is possible that the channels also served a ritual purpose linked to the rain god . So far , the remains of 25 channels have been found at the site . The larger channels measure 0 @.@ 25 metres ( 10 in ) wide by 0 @.@ 30 metres ( 12 in ) high , secondary channels measure about half that . 
 There are two methods of construction used for the water channels . Clay channels date from the Middle Preclassic while stone @-@ lined channels date from the Late Preclassic through to the Classic , with stone @-@ lined channels from the Late Classic being the largest channels built at the site . It is presumed that the clay channels were not sufficiently effective , thus leading to the switch in construction materials and the implementation of stone @-@ lined channels . In the Late Classic pieces of broken stone monuments were reused in the construction of the water channels . 
 = = = Terraces = = = 
 Terrace 2 is in the Central Group . Structures on this terrace date as far back as the Middle Preclassic and include an early example of a ballcourt . 
 Terrace 3 is in the Central Group . The facade represented a major construction project and dates to the Late Preclassic . The southeastern portion of Terrace 3 is believed to have been the most sacred plaza in the city , based on its concentration of sculpture and especially upon the presence of Structure 7 on the east side of the plaza . This area of the ancient city has been called <unk> T <unk> ( " Heart of the People " in Mam Maya ) by the mayor of El Asintal . A north @-@ south row of 5 monuments was erected at the base of Structure 8 , on the southwest side of the plaza , and another row of 5 sculptures runs east @-@ west parallel to the southern edge of the terrace , with an additional 2 sculptures slightly south of them . 
 Terrace 5 is on the eastern side of the site immediately to the north of the Central Group . It measures 200 metres ( 660 ft ) east to west and 300 metres ( 980 ft ) north to south . Terrace 5 is on the San Isidro Piedra Parada plantation and is currently used for the cultivation of coffee . The retaining face of the terrace was built of compacted clay during the Late Preclassic and represented an enormous inversion of labour . This terrace continued in use until the Postclassic . 
 Terrace 6 supports the 16 structures of the West Group . It measures 150 metres ( 490 ft ) from east to west and 140 metres ( 460 ft ) from north to south . The terrace shows various phases of construction , it overlies a substructure built from large worked blocks of basalt , which dates to the Late Preclassic , later phases of construction date to the Late Classic and the terrace has traces of the Postclassic K 'iche ' occupation of the site . The terrace lies within the San Isidro Piedra Parada and Buenos Aires plantations and the land is currently dedicated to the cultivation of rubber and coffee . A modern road cuts the eastern corner of Terrace 6 . 
 Terrace 7 is a natural terrace that supports a part of the North Group . It runs east – west and is 475 metres ( 1 @,@ 558 ft ) long . It supports 15 structures dating from the Terminal Classic through to the Postclassic and associated with the K 'iche ' occupation of the site . This terrace lies between the Buenos Aires and San Elías plantations and the eastern part has been cut by a modern road . 
 Terrace 8 is another natural terrace in the North Group . It also runs east west and is 400 metres ( 1 @,@ 300 ft ) long . A modern road has cut the eastern part of the terrace and the western side of Structure 46 upon its edge . The terrace supports only this structure and one other to the north ( Structure 54 ) . The terrace was probably a residential area with cultivated land associated with the North Group . This terrace is associated with the K 'iche ' occupation of the site from the Terminal Classic through to the Postclassic . 
 Terrace 9 is the largest terrace at Takalik Abaj and supports part of the North Group . It is approximately 400 metres ( 1 @,@ 300 ft ) running east – west and 300 metres ( 980 ft ) from north to south . The retaining face of the terrace runs immediately to the north of the main North Group complex on the western half of Terrace 7 for 200 metres ( 660 ft ) , at the eastern extreme of this section it turns north above Terrace 8 for 300 metres ( 980 ft ) before changing to run another 200 metres ( 660 ft ) east , limiting Terrace 8 on its west and north sides . Terrace 9 supports only two major structures ( Structures 66 and 67 ) . A modern road cuts the eastern side of the Terrace 9 , excavations where the road has cut the terrace have revealed the possible remains of a ballcourt . 
 = = = Structures = = = 
 The Ballcourt is located in the southwest of Terrace 2 and dates to the Middle Preclassic . It has a north – south alignment with the sides of the 4 @.@ 6 @-@ metre ( 15 ft ) wide playing area formed by Structures Sub @-@ 2 and Sub @-@ 4 . The ballcourt is just over 22 metres ( 72 ft ) long with a playing area of 105 square metres ( 1 @,@ 130 sq ft ) . The southern limit of the ballcourt is formed by Structure Sub @-@ 1 , just over 11 metres ( 36 ft ) to the south of Structures Sub @-@ 2 and Sub @-@ 4 , creating a southern end @-@ zone that runs east – west and measures 23 by 11 metres ( 75 by 36 ft ) with a surface area of 264 square metres ( 2 @,@ 840 sq ft ) . 
 Structure 5 is a large pyramid on the west side of Terrace 3 . It was largely built during the Middle Preclassic . It forms the western end of an alignment of three structures , the others being Structures 6 and 7 . 
 Structure 6 is a stepped rectangular platform forming the middle of the alignment on Terrace 3 . It was first built in the Middle Preclassic but reached is greatest extent during the Late Preclassic and the beginning of the Early Classic . It is one of the most important ceremonial structures in the Central Group . 
 Structure 7 is a large platform located to the east of the plaza on Terrace 3 in the Central Group and is considered to have been one of the most sacred buildings at Takalik Abaj due to a series of important finds associated with it . Structure 7 measures 79 by 112 metres ( 259 by 367 ft ) and dates to the Middle Preclassic , although it did not attain its final form until the latter part of the Late Preclassic . Built upon the northern part of Structure 7 are two smaller structures , designated as Structures 7A and 7B . In the Late Classic , Structures 7 , 7A and 7B were all refaced with stone . Structure 7 supports three rows of monuments aligned north – south that may have served as an astronomical observatory . One of these rows was aligned with the constellation Ursa Major in the Middle Preclassic , another aligned with Draco in the Late Preclassic , while the middle row was aligned with Structure 7A . Another important find in Structure 7 was a Late Classic cylindrical <unk> given the name " La Niña " by archaeologists due to its prominent female appliqué figure . It dates to the earliest levels of K 'iche ' occupation of the site and is 50 centimetres ( 20 in ) high and 30 centimetres ( 12 in ) wide at the base . It was found together with a large quantity of other offerings including further ceramics and fragments of broken sculptures . 
 The Pink Structure ( <unk> Rosada ) was a small ceremonial platform built upon the central axis of Structure 7 before the latter was erected over it . It is believed that this substructure was in use at the same time as Olmec sculpture was being produced both at Takalik Abaj and at La Venta in the Olmec heartland of Veracruz in Mexico . 
 Structure 7A is a small structure sitting on top of the northern part of Structure 7 . It dates to the Middle Preclassic and has been excavated . The Late Preclassic royal tomb known as Burial 1 was found in its centre . A large offering of hundreds of ceramic vessels was found in the base of the structure and is associated with the burial . Structure 7A underwent substantial rebuilding in the Early Classic and was again modified in the Late Classic . Structure 7A measures 13 by 23 metres ( 43 by 75 ft ) and stands almost 1 metre ( 3 @.@ 3 ft ) high . Its four sides were dressed with standing stones surrounded by a pavement . 
 Structure 7B is a small structure situated on the eastern side of Structure 7 . Like Structure 7A , the four sides were dressed with standing stones and were surrounded by a pavement . 
 Structure 8 is located to the southwest of the plaza on Terrace 3 , immediately to the west of the access stairway . Five sculpted monuments were erected in a row at the base of the east side of the building ; the four that have been excavated are Monument 30 , Stela 34 , Stela 35 and Altar 18 . 
 Structure 11 has been excavated . It was covered with rounded boulders held together with clay . It is located to the west of the plaza in the southern area of the Central Group . 
 Structure 12 lies to the east of Structure 11 . It has also been excavated and , like Structure 11 , it is covered with rounded boulders held together with clay . It lies to the east of the plaza in the southern area of the Central Group . The structure is a three @-@ tiered platform with stairways on the east and west sides . The visible remains date to the Early Classic but they overlie Late Preclassic construction . A row of sculptures lines the west side of the structure , including six monuments , a stela and an altar . Further monuments line the east side , one of which may be the head of a crocodilian , the others are plain . Sculpture 69 is located on the south side of the structure . 
 Structure 17 is located in the South Group , on the Santa Margarita plantation . It contained a Late Preclassic cache of 13 prismatic obsidian blades . 
 Structure 32 is located near the western edge of the West Group . 
 Structure 34 is in the West Group , at the eastern corner of Terrace 6 . 
 Structures 38 , 39 , 42 and 43 are joined by low platforms on the east side of a plaza on Terrace 7 , aligned north – south . Structures 40 , 47 and 48 are on south , west and north sides of this plaza . Structures 49 , 50 , 51 , 52 and 53 form a small group on the west side of the terrace , bordered on the north by Terrace 9 . Structure 42 is the tallest structure in the North Group , measuring about 11 @.@ 5 metres ( 38 ft ) high . All of these structures are mounds . 
 Structure 46 is a mound at the edge of Terrace 8 in the North Group and dates from the Terminal Classic through to the Postclassic . The west side of the structure has been cut by a modern road . 
 Structure 54 is built upon Terrace 8 , to the north of Structure 46 , in the North Group . It is surrounded by an open area without mounds that was probably a mixed residential and agricultural area . It dates from the Terminal Classic through to the Postclassic . 
 Structure 57 is a large mound at the southern limit of the Central Group with an excellent view across the coastal plain . The structure was built in the Late Preclassic and underwent a second phase of construction in the Late Classic . It may have served as a look @-@ out point . 
 Structure 61 , Mound 61A and Mound 61B are all on the east side of Terrace 5 , on the San Isidro plantation . Structure 61 was built during the Early Classic and is dressed with stone , it was built upon an earlier construction dating to the Late Preclassic . Stela 68 was found at the base of Mound 61A near to a broken altar . Structure 61 and its associated mounds may have been used to control access to the city during the height of its power , Mound 61A was reused during the Postclassic occupation of the site . Early Classic finds from Mound 61A include four ceramic vessels and four obsidian prismatic blades . 
 Structure 66 is located on Terrace 9 , at the northern extreme of the North Group . It had an excellent view across the entire city and may have served as a sentry post controlling access to the site . It dates from the Terminal Classic through to the Postclassic . 
 Structure 67 is a large platform on Terrace 9 that may have been associated with a possible residential area upon that terrace and located to the north of the North Group . 
 Structure 68 is in the West Group . A part of the western side of the structure has been cut by a modern road . This has revealed a sequence of superimposed clay substructures dating to the Late Preclassic , the structure was then dressed with stone in the Early Classic . 
 Structure 86 is to the west of Structure 32 , at the western edge of the West Group . The first phase of construction dates to the Early Classic , between 150 and 300 AD , when it took the form of a sunken patio , with stairways descending in the middle of its perimeter walls . At the centre of the patio were placed a clay altar and a stone , around which and across the rest of the patio were deposited an enormous number of offerings consisting of ceramic vessels , mostly from the Solano tradition . 
 North Ballcourt . The possible remains of a second ballcourt were found to the north of the North Group and may have been associated with the occupation of that group from the Terminal Classic through to the Postclassic . It was built from compacted clay and runs east – west , the North Structure was 2 metres ( 6 @.@ 6 ft ) tall and the South Structure had a height of 1 metre ( 3 @.@ 3 ft ) , the playing area was 10 metres ( 33 ft ) wide . 
 = = = Stone monuments = = = 
 As of 2006 , 304 stone monuments have been found at Takalik Abaj , mostly carved from local andesite boulders . Of these monuments 124 are carved with the remainder being plain ; they are mostly found in the Central and Western Groups . The worked monuments can be divided into four broad classifications : Olmec @-@ style sculptures , which represent 21 % of the total , Maya @-@ style sculptures representing 42 % of the monuments , potbelly monuments ( 14 % of the total ) and the local style of sculpture represented by <unk> ( 23 % of the total ) . 
 Most of the monuments at Takalik Abaj are not in their original positions but rather have been moved and reset at a later date , therefore the dating of monuments at the site often depends upon stylistic comparisons . An example is a series of four monuments found in a plaza in front of a Classic period platform , with at least two of the four ( Altar 12 and Monument 23 ) dating to the Preclassic . 
 There are several stelae sculpted in the early Maya style that bear hieroglyphic texts with Long Count dates that place them in the Late Preclassic . This style of sculpture is ancestral to the Classic style of the Maya lowlands . 
 Takalik Abaj has various so @-@ called Potbelly monuments representing obese human figures sculpted from large boulders , of a type found throughout the Pacific lowlands , extending from Izapa in Mexico to El Salvador . Their precise function is unknown but they appear to date from the Late Preclassic . 
 = = = = Olmec style sculptures = = = = 
 The many Olmec @-@ style sculptures , including Monument 23 , a colossal head that was recarved into a niche figure , seem to indicate a physical Olmec presence and control , possibly under an Olmec governor . Archaeologist John Graham states that : 
 Olmec sculpture at Abaj Takalik such as Monument 23 clearly reflects the presence of Olmec sculptors who are working for Olmec patrons and creating Olmec art with Olmec content in the context of Olmec ritual . 
 Others are less sure : the Olmec @-@ style sculptures may simply imply a common iconography of power on the Pacific and Gulf coasts . In any case , Takalik Abaj was certainly a place of importance for Olmecs . The Olmec @-@ style sculptures at Takalik Abaj all date to the Middle Preclassic . Except for Monuments 1 and 64 , the majority were not found in their original locations . 
 = = = = Maya style sculptures = = = = 
 There are more than 30 monuments in the early Maya style , which dates to the Late Preclassic , making it the most common style represented at Takalik Abaj . The great quantity of early Maya sculpture and the presence of early examples of Maya hieroglyphic writing suggest that the site played an important part in the development of Maya ideology . The origins of the Maya sculptural style may have developed in the Preclassic on the Pacific coast and Takalik Abaj 's position at the nexus of key trade routes could have been important in the dissemination of the style across the Maya area . The early Maya style of monument at Takalik Abaj is closely linked to the style of monument at Kaminaljuyu , showing mutual influence . This interlinked style spread to other sites that formed part of the extended trade network of which these two cities were the twin foci . 
 = = = = Potbelly style sculptures = = = = 
 Sculptures of the Potbelly style are found all along the Pacific Coast from southern Mexico to El Salvador , as well as further afield at sites in the Maya lowlands . Although some investigators have suggested that this style is pre @-@ Olmec , archaeological excavations on the Pacific Coast , including those at Takalik Abaj , have shown that this style began to be used at the end of the Middle Preclassic and reached its height during the Late Preclassic . The potbelly sculptures at Takalik Abaj all date to the Late Preclassic and are very similar to those at Monte Alto in Escuintla and Kaminaljuyu in the Valley of Guatemala . Potbelly sculptures are generally rough sculptures that show considerable variation in size and the position of the limbs . They depict obese human figures , usually sat cross @-@ legged with their arms upon their stomach . They have puffed out or hanging cheeks , closed eyes and are of indeterminate gender . 
 = = = = Local style sculptures = = = = 
 Local style sculptures are generally boulders carved into zoomorphic shapes , including three @-@ dimensional representations of frogs , toads and crocodilians . 
 = = = = Olmec @-@ Maya transition : El Cargador del Ancestro = = = = 
 The Cargador del Ancestro ( " Ancestor Carrier " ) consists of four fragments of sculpture that had been reused in the facades of four different buildings during the latter part of the Late Preclassic . Monuments 215 and 217 were discovered in 2008 during excavations of Structure 7A , while Stela Fragments 53 and 61 had been unearthed in previous excavations . Archaeologists discovered that although Monuments 215 and 217 possessed different themes and were executed in differing styles , they in fact fitted together perfectly to form part of a single sculpture that was still incomplete . This prompted a revision of previously found sculpture fragments and resulted in the discovery of two further pieces , originally found in Structures 12 and 74 . 
 The four pieces were found to make up a single monumental 2 @.@ 3 @-@ metre ( 7 @.@ 5 ft ) high column with an unusual combination of sculptural characteristics . The extreme upper and lower portions are damaged and incomplete and the sculpture comprises three sections . The lowest section is a rectangular column with an early hieroglyphic text on both faces and a richly dressed Early Maya figure on the front . The figure is wearing a headdress in the form of a crocodile or crocodile @-@ feline hybrid with the jaws agape and the face of an ancestor emerging . The lower portion of this section is damaged and a part of both the text and the figure is missing . 
 The middle section of the column , forming a type of capital , is a high @-@ relief sculpture of the head of a bat executed in the curved lines of the Maya style , with small eyes and eyebrows formed by two small volutes . The leaf @-@ shaped nose is characteristic of the Common Vampire Bat ( Desmodus rotundus ) . The mouth is open , exposing the partly preserved fangs , and a prominent tongue extends downwards . A band of double triangles runs around the sculpture with a carved cord or rope and may symbolise the bat 's wings . 
 The upper section of the column is the sculpted figure of a squat , bare @-@ footed individual standing upon the bat 's head . The figure wears a loincloth bound by a belt and decorated with a large U symbol . An elaborately carved chest ornament with interlace pattern descends from the neck across the waste . The style is somewhat rigid and is reminiscent of formal <unk> sculpture , and various costume elements resemble those found on Olmec sculptures from the Gulf Coast of Mexico . The figure has oval eyes and large earspools , the nose and mouth of the figure are damaged . It wears two bands that cross on the back and are joined to the belt and the shoulders , they support a small human figure facing backwards . The position and characteristics of this smaller figure are very similar to those of Olmec sculptures of infants , although the face is elderly . This secondary figure is wearing a type of long skirt or train that is almost identical to one worn by an Olmec @-@ style dancing jaguar figure found at Tuxtla Chico in Chiapas , Mexico . This train extends down into the middle section of the column , continuing halfway down the back of the bat 's head . The position of the shoulders and the face of the principal figure are not anatomically correct , leading the archaeologists to conclude that the " face " is actually a chest ornament and that the actual head of the main figure is missing . Although the upper section of the column contains many Olmec elements , it also lacks some distinctive features that are found in true Olmec art , such as the feline expression that is often depicted . 
 The sculpture predates 300 BC , based on the style of the hieroglyphic text , and is thought to be an Early Maya monument that was intended to represent an Early Maya ruler ( at the base ) who carried the underworld ( i.e. the bat ) and his ancestors ( the main figure above carrying a smaller figure on its back ) . The Maya sculptor used half @-@ remembered Olmec stylistic elements upon the ancestor figure in a form of Maya @-@ Olmec syncretism , producing a hybrid sculpture . As such it represents the transition from one cultural phase to the next , at a point where the earlier Olmec inhabitants had not yet been forgotten and were viewed as powerful ancestors . 
 = = = = Inventory of altars = = = = 
 Altar 1 is found at the base of Stela 1 . It is rectangular in shape with carved molding on its side . 
 Altar 2 is of unknown provenance , having been moved to outside the administrator 's house on the San Isidro Piedra Parada plantation . It is 1 @.@ 59 metres ( 63 in ) long , about 0 @.@ 9 metres ( 35 in ) wide and about 0 @.@ 5 metres ( 20 in ) high . It represents an animal variously identified as a toad and a jaguar . The body of the animal was sculptured to form a hollow 85 centimetres ( 33 in ) across and 26 centimetres ( 10 in ) deep . The sculpture was broken into three pieces . 
 Altar 3 is a roughly worked flat , circular altar about 1 metre ( 39 in ) across and 0 @.@ 3 metres ( 12 in ) high . It was probably associated originally with a stela but its original location is unknown , it was moved near to the manager 's house on the San Isidro Piedra Parada plantation . 
 Altar 5 is a damaged plain circular altar associated with Stela 2 . 
 Altar 7 is near the southern edge of the plaza on Terrace 3 , where it is one of five monuments in a line running east @-@ west . 
 Altar 8 is a plain monument associated with Stela 5 , positioned on the west side of Structure 12 . 
 Altar 9 is a low four @-@ legged throne placed in front of Structure 11 . 
 Altar 10 was associated with Stela 13 and was found on top of the large offering of ceramics associated with that stela and the royal tomb in Structure 7A . The monument was originally a throne with cylindrical supports that was reused as an altar in the Classic period . 
 Altar 12 is carved in the early Maya style and archaeologists consider it to be an especially early example dating to the first part of the Late Preclassic . Because of the carvings on the upper face of the altar , it is supposed that the monument was originally erected as a vertical stela in the Late Preclassic , and was reused as a horizontal altar in the Classic . At this time 16 hieroglyphs were carved around the outer rim of the altar . The carving on the upper face of the altar represents a standing human figure portrayed in profile , facing left . The figure is flanked by two vertical series of four glyphs . A smaller profile figure is depicted facing the first figure , separated from it by one of the series of glyphs . The central figure is depicted standing upon a horizontal band representing the earth , the band is flanked by two earth monsters . Above the figure is a celestial band with part of the head of a sacred bird visible in the centre . The 16 glyphs on the rim of the monument are formed by anthropomorphic figures mixed with other elements . 
 Altar 13 is another early Maya monument dating to the Late Preclassic . Like Altar 12 it was probably originally erected as a vertical stela . At some point it was deliberately broken , with severe damage inflicted upon the main portion of the sculpture , obliterating the central and lower portions . At a later date it was reused as a horizontal altar . The remains of two figures can be seen flanking the damage lower portion of the monument and the large head of the sacred bird survives above the area of damage . The right hand figure is wearing an interwoven skirt and is probably female . 
 Altar 18 was one of five monuments forming a north @-@ south row at the base of Structure 8 on Terrace 3 . 
 Altar 28 is located near Structure 10 in the Central Group . It is a circular basalt altar just over 2 metres ( 79 in ) in diameter and 0 @.@ 5 metres ( 20 in ) thick . On the front rim of the altar is a carving of a skull . On the upper surface are two relief carvings of human feet . 
 Altar 30 is embedded in the fourth step of the access stairway to Terrace 3 in the Central Group . It has four low legs supporting it and is similar to Altar 9 . 
 Altar 48 is a very early example of the Early Maya style of sculpture , dating to the first part of the Late Preclassic , between 400 and 200 BC . Altar 48 is fashioned from andesite and measures 1 @.@ 43 by 1 @.@ 26 metres ( 4 @.@ 7 by 4 @.@ 1 ft ) and is 0 @.@ 53 metres ( 1 @.@ 7 ft ) thick . It is located near the southern extreme of Terrace 3 , where it is one of a row of 5 monuments running east @-@ west . It is carved on its upper face and upon all four sides . The upper surface bears the intricate design of a crocodile with its body in the form of a symbol representing a cave and containing the figure of a seated Maya wearing a loincloth . The sides of the monument are carved with an early form of Maya hieroglyphs , the text appears to refer directly to the person depicted on the upper surface . Altar 48 had been carefully covered by Stela 14 . The emergence of a Maya ruler from the body of the crocodile parallels the myth of the birth of the Maya maize god , who emerges from the shell of a turtle . As such , Altar 48 may be one of the earliest depictions of Maya mythology used for political ends . 
 = = = = Inventory of monuments = = = = 
 Monument 1 is a volcanic boulder with the bas @-@ relief sculpture of a ballplayer , probably representing a local ruler . This figure is facing to the right , kneeling on one knee with both hands raised . The sculpture was found near the riverbank at a crossing point of the river Ixchayá , some 300 metres ( 980 ft ) to the west of the Central Group . It measures about 1 @.@ 5 metres ( 59 in ) in height . Monument 1 dates to the Middle Preclassic and is distinctively Olmec in style . 
 Monument 2 is a potbelly sculpture found 12 metres ( 39 ft ) from the road running between the San Isidro and Buenos Aires plantations . It is about 1 @.@ 4 metres ( 55 in ) high and 0 @.@ 75 metres ( 30 in ) in diameter . The head is badly eroded and inclined slightly forwards , its arms are slightly bent with the hands doubled downwards and the fingers marked . Monument 2 dates to the Late Preclassic . 
 Monument 3 also dates to the Late Preclassic . It was relocated in modern times to the coffee @-@ drying area of the Santa Margarita plantation . It is not known where it was originally found . It is a potbelly figure with a large head ; it wears a necklace or pendant that hangs to its chest . It is about 0 @.@ 96 metres ( 38 in ) high and 0 @.@ 78 metres ( 31 in ) wide at the shoulders . The monument is damaged and missing the lower part . 
 Monument 4 appears to be a sculpture of a captive , leaning slightly forward and with the hands tied behind its back . It was found on the lands of the San Isidro plantation but it is not known exactly where . It was moved to the Museo Nacional de Arqueología y Etnología in Guatemala City . This monument probably dates to the Late Preclassic . It is 0 @.@ 87 metres ( 34 in ) high and about 0 @.@ 4 metres ( 16 in ) wide . 
 Monument 5 was moved to the administrator 's house of the San Isidro Piedra Parada plantation ; the place where it was originally found is unknown . It measures 1 @.@ 53 metres ( 60 in ) in height and is 0 @.@ 53 metres ( 21 in ) wide at the widest point . It is a sculpture of a captive with the arms bound with a strip of cloth that falls across the hips . 
 Monument 6 is a zoomorph sculpture discovered during the construction of the road that passes the site . It was moved to the Museo Nacional de Arqueología y Etnología in Guatemala City . The sculpture is just over 1 metre ( 39 in ) in height and is 1 @.@ 5 metres ( 59 in ) wide . It is a boulder carved into the form of an animal head , probably that of a toad , and is likely to date to the Late Preclassic . 
 Monument 7 is a damaged sculpture in the form of a giant head . It stands 0 @.@ 58 metres ( 23 in ) and was found in the first half of the 20th century on the site of the electricity generator of the Santa Margarita plantation and moved close to the administration office . The sculpture has a large , flat face with prominent eyebrows . Its style is very similar to that of a monument found at Kaminaljuyu in the highlands . 
 Monument 8 is found on the west side of Structure 12 . It is a zoomorphic sculpture of a monster with feline characteristics disgorging a small anthropomorphic figure from its mouth . 
 Monument 9 is a local style sculpture representing an owl . 
 Monument 10 is another monument that was moved from its original location ; it was moved to the estate of the Santa Margarita plantation and the place where it was originally found is unknown . It is about 0 @.@ 5 metres ( 20 in ) high and 0 @.@ 4 metres ( 16 in ) wide . This is a damaged sculpture representing a kneeling captive with the arms tied . 
 Monument 11 is located in the southwestern area of Terrace 3 , to the east of Structure 8 . It is a natural boulder carved with a vertical series of five hieroglyphs . Further left is a single hieroglyph and the glyphs for the number 11 . This sculpture is considered to be in an especially early Maya style and dates to the first part of the Late Preclassic . It is one of a row of 5 monuments running east @-@ west along the southern edge of Terrace 3 . 
 Monument 14 is an eroded Olmec @-@ style sculpture dating to the Middle Preclassic . It represents a squatting human figure , possibly female , wearing a headdress and earspools . Under one arm it grips a jaguar cub , under the other it carries a fawn . 
 Monument 15 is a large boulder with an Olmec @-@ style relief sculpture of the head , shoulders and arms of an anthropomorphic figure emerging from a shallow niche , the arms bent inwards at the elbow . The back of the boulder is carved with the hindquarters of a feline , probably a jaguar . 
 Monument 16 and Monument 17 are two parts of the same broken sculpture . This sculpture is classically Olmec in style and is heavily eroded but represents a human head wearing a headdress in the form of a secondary face wearing a helmet . 
 Monument 23 dates to the Middle Preclassic period . It appears that it was an Olmec @-@ style colossal head that was recarved into a niche figure sculpture . If this was originally a colossal head then it would be the only example known from outside the Olmec heartland . Monument 23 is sculpted from andesite and falls in the middle of the size range for confirmed Olmec colossal heads . It stands 1 @.@ 84 metres ( 6 @.@ 0 ft ) high and measures 1 @.@ 2 metres ( 3 @.@ 9 ft ) wide by 1 @.@ 56 metres ( 5 @.@ 1 ft ) deep . Like the examples from the Olmec heartland , the monument features a flat back . Lee Parsons contested John Graham 's identification of Monument 23 as a recarved colossal head ; he viewed the side ornaments that Graham identified as ears as instead being the scrolled eyes of an open @-@ jawed monster gazing upwards . Countering this , James Porter has claimed that the <unk> of the face of a colossal head into a niche figure is clearly evident . Monument 23 was damaged in the mid @-@ 20th century by a local mason who attempted to break its exposed upper portion using a steel chisel . As a result , the top is fragmented , although the broken pieces were recovered by archaeologists and have been put back into place . 
 Monument 25 is a heavily eroded relief sculpture of a figure seated in a niche . 
 Monument 27 is located near the southern edge of Terrace 3 , just south of a row of 5 sculptures running east @-@ west . 
 Monument 28 is situated near Monument 27 at the southern edge of Terrace 3 . 
 Monument 30 is located on Terrace 3 , in a row of 5 monuments at the base Structure 8 . 
 Monument 35 is a plain monument on Terrace 6 , it dates to the Late Preclassic . 
 Monument 40 is a potbelly monument dating to the Late Preclassic . 
 Monument 44 is a sculpture of a captive . 
 Monument 47 is a local style monument representing a frog or toad . 
 Monument 55 is an Olmec @-@ style sculpture of a human head . It was moved to the Museo Nacional de Arqueología y Etnología ( National Museum of Archaeology and Ethnology ) . 
 Monument 64 is an Olmec @-@ style bas @-@ relief carved onto the south side of a natural andesite rock and stylistically dates to the Middle Preclassic , although it was found in a Late Preclassic archaeological context . It was found in @-@ situ on the eastern bank of the El <unk> stream , some 300 metres ( 980 ft ) to the west of the South @-@ Central Group . It represents an anthropomorphic figure with some feline characteristics . The figure is portrayed in profile and is wearing a belt . It holds a zigzag staff in its extended left hand . 
 Monument 65 is a badly damaged depiction of a human head in Olmec style , dating to the Middle Preclassic . Its eyes are closed and the mouth and nose are completely destroyed . It is wearing a helmet . It is located to the west of Structure 12 . 
 Monument 66 is a local style sculpture of a crocodilian head that may date to the Middle Preclassic . It is located to the west of Structure 12 . 
 Monument 67 is a badly eroded Olmec @-@ style sculpture showing a figure emerging from the mouth of a jaguar , with one hand raised and gripping a staff . Traces of a helmet are visible . It is located to the west of Structure 12 and dates to the Middle Preclassic . 
 Monument 68 is a local style sculpture of a toad located on the west side of Structure 12 . It is believed to date to the Middle Preclassic . 
 Monument 69 is a potbelly monument dating to the Late Preclassic . 
 Monument 70 is a local style sculpture of a frog or toad . 
 Monument 93 is a rough Olmec @-@ style sculpture dating from the Middle Preclassic . It represents a seated anthropomorphic jaguar with a human head . 
 Monument 99 is a colossal head in potbelly style , dating to the Late Preclassic . 
 Monument 100 , Monument 107 and Monument 109 are small potbelly monuments dating to the Late Preclassic . They are all near the access stairway to Terrace 3 in the Central Group . 
 Monument 108 is an altar placed in front of the main stairway giving access to Terrace 3 , in the Central Group . 
 Monument 113 is located outside of the site core , some 0 @.@ 5 kilometres ( 0 @.@ 31 mi ) south of the Central Group , about 2 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 2 mi ) west of El Asintal , in a secondary site known as the South Group , which consists of six structure mounds . It is carved from an andesite boulder and bears a relief carving of a jaguar lying on its left side . Its eyes and mouth are open and various jaguar <unk> are carved upon the body of the animal . 
 Monument 126 is a large basalt rock bearing bas @-@ relief carvings of life @-@ size human hands . It is found upon the bank of a small stream near the Central Group . 
 Monument 140 is a Late Preclassic sculpture of a toad , it is located in the West Group , on Terrace 6 . 
 Monument 141 is a rectangular altar dating to the Late Preclassic . It is located in the West Group on Terrace 6 . 
 Monuments 142 , 143 , 145 , 146 , 147 , 148 , 149 and 156 are among 19 natural stone monuments that line the course of the Nima stream , some 200 metres ( 660 ft ) west of the West Group , within the Buenos Aires and San Isidro plantations . They are basalt and andesite boulders that have deep circular depressions with polished sides that are perhaps the result of some kind of working activity . 
 Monument 154 is a large basalt rock , it bears two petroglyphs representing childlike faces . It is located on the west side of the Nima stream , on the Buenos Aires plantation . 
 Monument 157 is a large andesite rock on the west side of the Nima stream , on the San Isidro plantation . It bears the petroglyph of a face with eyes and eyebrows , nose and mouth . 
 Monument 161 lies within the North Group , on the San Elías plantation . It is a basalt outcrop measuring 1 @.@ 18 metres ( 46 in ) high by 1 @.@ 14 metres ( 45 in ) wide on the side of the Ixchayá ravine . It bears a petroglyph of a face carved onto the upper part of the rock , looking upwards . The face has cheekbones , a prominent chin and a slightly open mouth . It has some stylistic similarity to Early Classic jade masks , although it lacks certain features associated with these . 
 Monument 163 dates from the Late Preclassic . It was found reused in the construction of a Late Classic water channel beside Structure 7 . It represents a seated figure with prominent male genitals and is badly damaged , with the head and shoulders missing . 
 Monument 215 is a part of the Cargador del Ancestro sculpture . It was found embedded in the east face of Structure 7A , where it was carefully placed at the same time as the royal burial was interred in the centre of the structure . 
 Monument 217 is another part of the Cargador del Ancestro sculpture . It was embedded in the east face of Structure 7A in the same manner , and at the same time , as Monument 215 . 
 = = = = Inventory of stelae = = = = 
 Stelae are carved stone shafts , often sculpted with figures and hieroglyphs . A selection of the most notable stelae at Takalik Abaj follows : 
 Stela 1 was found near to Stela 2 and moved near to the administrator 's house of the San Isidro Piedra Parada plantation . It is 1 @.@ 36 metres ( 54 in ) high , 0 @.@ 72 metres ( 28 in ) wide and 0 @.@ 45 metres ( 18 in ) thick . It bears the sculpture of a standing figure facing to the left , holding a sceptre in the form of a serpent with a dragon mask at the lower end ; a feline is on top of the serpent 's body . It is similar in style to Stela 1 at El Baúl . A badly eroded hieroglyphic text is to the left of the figure 's face , which is now completely illegible . This stela is early Maya in style , dating to the Late Preclassic . 
 Stela 2 is a monument in the early Maya style that is inscribed with a damaged Long Count date . Due to its only partial preservation , this date has at least three possible readings , the latest of which would place it in the 1st century BC . Flanking the text are two standing figures facing each other , the sculpture probably represents one ruler receiving power from his predecessor . Above the figures and the text is an ornate figure depicted in profile looking down at the left @-@ hand figure below . Stela 2 is located in front of the retaining wall of Terrace 5 . 
 Stela 3 is badly damaged , being broken into three pieces . It was found somewhere on the San Isidro Piedra Parada plantation although its exact original location is not known . It was moved to a museum in Guatemala City . The lower portion of the stela depicts two legs facing to the left standing upon a horizontal band divided into three sections , each section containing a symbol or glyph . 
 Stela 4 was uncovered in 1969 and moved near to the administrator 's house on the San Isidro Piedra Parada plantation . It is of a style very similar to the stelae at Izapa and stands 1 @.@ 37 metres ( 54 in ) high . The stela bears a complex design representing an undulating vision serpent rising toward the sky from the water flowing from two earth monsters , the jaws of the serpent are open wide towards the sky and from them emerges a characteristically Maya face . Several glyphs appear among the imagery . This stela is early Maya in style and dates to the Late Preclassic . 
 Stela 5 is reasonably well preserved and is inscribed with two Long Count dates flanked by representations of two standing figures portraying rulers . The latest of these two dates is AD 126 . The right @-@ hand figure is holding a snake , while the left @-@ hand figure is holding what is probably a jaguar . This monument probably represents one ruler passing power to the next . A small seated figure is carved onto each of the sides of this stela along with a badly eroded hieroglyphic inscription . The style is early Maya and has affinities with sculptures at Izapa . 
 Stela 12 is located near Structure 11 . It is badly damaged , having been broken into fragments , of which two remain . The largest fragment is from the lower portion of the stela and depicts the legs and feet of a figure , both facing in the same direction . They stand upon a panel divided into geometric sections , each containing a further design . In front of the legs are the remains of a glyph that appears to be a number in the bar @-@ and @-@ dot format . A smaller fragment lies nearby . 
 Stela 13 dates to the Late Preclassic . It is badly damaged , having been broken in two parts . It is carved in early Maya style and bears a design representing a stylised serpentine head , very similar to a monument found at Kaminaljuyu . Stela 13 was erected at the base of the south side of Structure 7A . At the base of the stela was found a massive offering of more than 600 ceramic vessels , 33 prismatic obsidian blades , as well as other artifacts . The stela and the offering are associated with the Late Preclassic royal tomb known as Burial 1 . 
 Stela 14 is on the southern edge of Terrace 3 , in the Central Group , where it is one of 5 monuments in an east @-@ west row . It is fashioned from andesite and has 26 cup @-@ like depressions upon the upper surface . It is one of the few such monuments found within the ceremonial centre of the city . Altar 48 was found underneath Stela 14 in 2008 , having been carefully covered by it in antiquity . Stela 14 measures 2 @.@ 25 by 1 @.@ 4 metres ( 7 @.@ 4 by 4 @.@ 6 ft ) by 0 @.@ 75 metres ( 2 @.@ 5 ft ) thick and weighs more than 6 tonnes ( 6 @.@ 6 short tons ) . The lower surface of the stela had been sculpted completely flat with 6 small <unk> and a series of marks forming a design reminiscent of the discarded skin of a snake or of a vertebral column . 
 Stela 15 is another monument on the southern edge of Terrace 3 , one of a row of five . 
 Stela 29 is a smooth andesite monument at the southeast corner of Structure 11 with seven steps carved into its upper portion . 
 Stela 34 was found at the base of Structure 8 , where it was one of a row of five monuments . 
 Stela 35 was another of the five monuments found at the base of Structure 8 . 
 Stela 53 is a fragment of sculpture that was found in the latter Early Preclassic phase of Structure 12 , directly behind Stela 5 . Stela 53 forms a part of the Cargador del Ancestro sculpture . Stela 5 was placed at the same time that Stela 53 was embedded in Structure 12 , and the long count date on the former also allows the placing of Stela 53 to be fixed in time at Late Preclassic – Early Classic transition . 
 Stela 61 is a part of the Cargador del Ancestro sculpture . In the Late Preclassic – Early Classic transition it had been embedded in the east access stairway to Terrace 3 . 
 Stela 66 is a plain stela dating to the Late Preclassic . It is found in the West Group , on Terrace 6 . 
 Stela 68 was found at the southeast corner of Mound 61A on Terrace 5 . This stela was broken in two and the remaining fragments appear to belong to two separate monuments . The stela , or stelae , once bore early Maya sculpture but this appears to have been deliberately destroyed , leaving only a few sculptured symbols . 
 Stela 71 is an early Maya carved fragment reused in the construction of a water channel by Structure 7 . 
 Stela 74 is a fragment of Olmec @-@ style sculpture that was found in the Middle Preclassic fill of Structure 7 , where it was placed when that structure replaced the Pink Structure . It bears a foliated maize design topped with a U @-@ symbol within a cartouche and has other , smaller , U @-@ symbols at its base . It is very similar to a design found on Monument 25 / 26 from La Venta . 
 = = = Royal burials = = = 
 A Late Preclassic tomb has been excavated , believed to be a royal burial . This tomb has been designated Burial 1 ; it was found during excavations of Structure 7A and was inserted into the centre of this Middle Preclassic structure . The burial is also associated with Stela 13 and with a massive offering of more than 600 ceramic vessels and other artifacts found at the base of Structure 7A . These ceramics date the offering to the end of the Late Preclassic . No human remains have been recovered but the find is assumed to be a burial due to the associated artifacts . The body is believed to have been interred upon a litter measuring 1 by 2 metres ( 3 @.@ 3 by 6 @.@ 6 ft ) , which was probably made of wood and coated in red cinnabar dust . Grave goods include an 18 @-@ piece jade necklace , two earspools coated in cinnabar , various mosaic mirrors made from iron pyrite , one consisting of more than 800 pieces , a jade mosaic mask , two prismatic obsidian blades , a finely carved greenstone fish , various beads that presumably formed jewellery such as bracelets and a selection of ceramics that date the tomb to AD 100 – 200 . 
 In October 2012 , a tomb carbon @-@ dated between 700 BC and 400 BC was reported to have been found in Takalik Abaj of a ruler nicknamed K <unk> <unk> ( " Grandfather Vulture " in Mam ) by archaeologists , a sacred king or " big chief " who " bridged the gap between the Olmec and Mayan cultures in Central America , " according to Miguel Orrego . The tomb is suggested to be the oldest Maya royal burial to have been discovered so far . 
 = Sixto Escobar = 
 Sixto Escobar ( March 23 , 1913 – November 17 , 1979 ) was a Puerto Rican professional boxer . Competing in the bantamweight division , he became Puerto Rico 's first world champion . 
 Escobar was born in Barceloneta and raised in San Juan . There he received his primary education and took interest in boxing . After gathering a record of 21 @-@ 1 @-@ 1 as an amateur , Escobar debuted as a professional in 1931 defeating Luis " Kid Dominican " Pérez by knockout . Early in his career , he moved to Venezuela due to the lack of opponents in his division . There he received an opportunity for the Venezuelan Bantamweight championship , but lost by points . Subsequently he moved to New York and began boxing in other states , eventually capturing the Montreal Athletic Commission World Bantamweight Title . In 1936 , he defeated Tony Marino to unify this championship with the one recognized by the International Boxing Union , in the process becoming the third Latin American undisputed world boxing champion . After retiring , he worked as a spokesperson for beer companies in New York , before returning to Puerto Rico in the 1960s , where he resided until his death . He received several posthumous recognitions and his name was used in several sports venues and buildings . In 2002 , Escobar was inducted into the International Boxing Hall of Fame . 
 = = Early Life and amateur career = = 
 Escobar was born in Barrio Palmas Altas , a sector of Barceloneta , Puerto Rico , to Jacinto Escobar and Adela Vargas . Early in his life , he moved to Tras <unk> in Santurce , a subsection of San Juan , Puerto Rico . There he received his elementary and secondary education , up until the seventh grade , when he decided to dedicate himself full @-@ time to his sports career . In Tras <unk> , he began developing an interest in boxing and received instruction in said discipline . Although at this time , boxing was illegal in Puerto Rico ; remote places such as a house ’ s backyard or rooftops were used to organize clandestine fights without attracting attention from the local police . In 1928 , a Puerto Rican boxer named Ángel " <unk> " Soto moved from New York to a house near the Escobar family ’ s residence and established a gym in his backyard . There he gave boxing classes to Escobar and several other young athletes . After several months of instruction , Soto prepared a boxing card with included three @-@ round fights , in which each round lasted two minutes . In this event , Escobar earned his first victory , defeating a pugilist identified as " <unk> " by knockout in the first round . After this match , Escobar continued fighting in clandestine gyms . He met and was received by Ignacio <unk> , the owner of Victoria Gym . Escobar received his boxing license through <unk> . On February 16 , 1927 , governor Horace Mann Towner legalized boxing and allowed the establishment of organized boxing matches . Professionals would fight Fridays , Saturdays and Sundays which , were considered the best days of the week , while amateurs could compete the remaining days of the week without limitations . As an amateur , he fought in 23 combats , gathering a record of 21 wins , one loss and a draw . His draw was against Ramón Rodríguez of San Lorenzo and his only loss was in the hands of Pedro Montañez from Cayey , in a fight that took place in March 1930 . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 Escobar turned professional on September 1 , 1930 , in a fight card organized at the Victory Garden gym in San Juan . In this event , he defeated Luis " Kid Dominican " Pérez , who entered the fight as the Dominican Republic 's champion , by knockout in the third round . In Puerto Rico , Escobar fought in 15 contests , before moving to Venezuela after the popularity of professional boxing declined in his home country . This move was motivated by Roberto Andrade , who provided transportation to the country . In Venezuela , he fought in Caracas , competing against José Lugo , <unk> Díaz , Rafael " <unk> " Morales , Pica Pica and Simón Chávez among others . On November 11 , 1931 , Escobar competed against Enrique <unk> for the Venezuelan Bantamweight Title , but lost by decision . After 17 fights , he returned to Puerto Rico and competed in five cards . But professional boxing suffered another decline in interest , which forced Escobar to work as an <unk> in baseball games three days of the week , generally on weekends . In the meanwhile , Tony Rojas , a friend of his managers Gustavo Jiménez and Arturo Gigante , convinced them to release Escobar of the contract which bound them . Since Escobar turned professional while he was still legally a minor , his father had to sign the unbinding agreement . After succeeding in this task , Rojas presented Escobar with a steam boat ticket to New York , which covered his food , clothes and hotel expenses . Escobar reached New York in early 1934 , intending to " obtain fame and honor " for " [ his ] motherland " , there he was received by Rojas and professional trainer Whitey <unk> . His first fight in the United States took place in Holyoke , Massachusetts on May 7 , 1934 . In this contest he was paired against Canadian bantamweight titleholder Bobby Leitham , defeating him by technical knockout in the seventh round . 
 Escobar 's manager , Lou Brix and his trainer recognized that Escobar could be close to a championship fight once the incumbent , <unk> Alfonso Teófilo Brown , refused to defend the championship against the first contender , which led to it being stripped by the National Boxing Association ( NBA ) . A rematch was then organized against Leitham . This was an <unk> card organized by the Montreal Athletic Commission , which was to determine a contender for their vacant Bantamweight World Championship , against first contender Baby Casanova , who attended the card . After scoring three knockdowns in the fourth round , Escobar connected another punch that injured Leitham , after which Leitham 's manager surrendered the fight . This marked Leitham 's last fight . Following this result , the NBA immediately called for a fight between Escobar and Casanova . By this time he had gained a reputation as a quick and technical boxer , capable of gathering quick knockouts with body punches if confronted by an unprepared opponent . The fight took place on June 26 , 1934 , and it was organized in Montreal , Canada . Escobar scored a knockdown in the third round ; the fight concluded in the ninth round when Casanova lost by knockout . With this win , Escobar won the Montreal Athletic Commission World Bantamweight Title , thus becoming the first Puerto Rican to win a world boxing championship title . This had a significant impact on Puerto Rico , where it was constantly discussed by the general public . Songs , <unk> and poetry were written about this accomplishment . However , the New York State Athletic Commission ( NYSAC ) and International Boxing Union ( IBU ) of France didn 't recognize the outcome of this fight , conserving Tony Marino and Brown as their recognized champions . 
 = = = Undisputed world bantamweight title = = = 
 On August 8 , 1934 , he defeated Eugene Hart by points in a non @-@ title match organized in Canada . This was the first time in his career that Escobar completed a 15 @-@ round contest . After this event , he stayed in Montreal expecting to fight against the winner of a matchup between Louis Salica and Bobby Quintana , which was scheduled to take place on December of that year . However , Escobar was forced to cancel his plans after suffering a heel injury when he was hit by a car . He spent a month in inactivity while recovering , and in the winter he returned to Puerto Rico . The governor ordered to have all government buildings closed so that public employees could attend a welcoming ceremony . The event , which took place in Old San Juan 's dock , was followed by a parade . Upon arriving in Barceloneta , Escobar was recognized as a " <unk> son " of that municipality by the city 's mayor , which was followed by a week of festivities in his name . Escobar pursued a fight with Brown , but his offers were refused while the Panamanian pugilist promoted a campaign protesting the removal of his recognition as champion , demanding to be reinstated . 
 On August 7 , 1935 , Escobar defeated Peter <unk> , who was considered Canada 's best <unk> and held the Canadian Boxing Federation & Montreal Athletic Commission ( MAC ) world titles , by unanimous decision in 12 rounds . However , Escobar still wasn 't considered the division 's Undisputed Champion because Baltazar <unk> had defeated Panama Al Brown and was recognized by the IBU . Due to this , <unk> sent a letter to the NYSAC noting that the fight was of <unk> nature , even though it was recognized as a titular contest by the NBA and MAC . Wanting to be recognized as such , Escobar pursued a title unification fight against Tony Marino , who had defeated <unk> by knockout in his previous fight . He won the fight by knockout in the tenth round , receiving the " undisputed world champion " distinction . On November 13 , 1935 , Escobar became the first Puerto Rican to win a title fight in the first round , defeating " Indian " Quintana by knockout . 
 This outcome made it possible to organize a fight against Louis Salica , it was the first time that Escobar fought a title fight in Puerto Rico . The card was promoted by Arturo Gigante and Gustavo Jiménez <unk> . Escobar won the fight by unanimous decision , while Jack Dempsey served as referee . He participated in Mike Jacobs 's " Carnival of Champions " on September 23 , 1937 and lost the title to Harry Jeffra by unanimous decision . Shortly after , he recovered from this loss and he returned to the gym ; he defeated Johnny Defoe in a preparatory contest . On February 20 , 1938 , Escobar faced Jeffra in a rematch organized at the El <unk> baseball park in Puerta de Tierra . He won the contest by unanimous decision , scoring three knockdowns . This became an early example of fights that attracted the attention and criticism of boxing analysts , particularly those in New York . On April 2 , 1939 , Escobar defeated Kayo Morgan before a sold @-@ out crowd of 15 @,@ 000 at the Estadio Sixto Escobar , which had been inaugurated three years earlier . After this fight , he received The Ring Bantamweight Championship , which was presented by the magazine 's editor , Nat Fleischer . Later in 1939 , Escobar received a draft notice from the United States Army , ordering him to take a physical exam for possible military service . He and his manager presented the issue to the Puerto Rico Boxing Commission , managing to receive a postponement of two months before surrendering his title . On April 6 , 1940 , Escobar fought Simón Chávez for ten rounds in what ended as a draw . Escobar then fought some short non @-@ title fights , of which he lost four , all by points . On December 2 , 1940 , Escobar participated in his last professional fight , losing to a ten round decision to Harry Jeffra . Throughout his career Escobar avoided being knocked down or out in any fight , all of his losses being by decision . In April 1941 , he was drafted by the Army and participated in World War II . 
 = = Retirement , death and legacy = = 
 After his military service , Escobar confronted problems to meet the bantamweight 's limit and retired . He became a spokesman for a liquor brand and relocated to New York temporally , with his family . Subsequently he returned to Puerto Rico where he worked selling liquor in bars . In May 1947 , Escobar and Jiménez <unk> co @-@ promoted a fight with the intention of bringing fans back to boxing . In the main event , Diego Sosa was matched against Francisco Colón García . Escobar was inducted into the Madison Square Garden 's Boxing Hall of Fame in 1950 . Escobar continued in his job as a liquor salesperson , during which it was common for liquor salesmen to drink a little bit of the product which they sold in front of potential customers . This contributed to the development of Escobar 's alcoholic tendencies . His alcoholism would later combine with his diabetes and contribute to his death when he was 66 years old . Weeks before his death , Escobar participated in his last ceremony , where Diego Suárez , president of V. Suárez & Company. gave him a recognition . 
 After his death , the town of Barceloneta honored his memory by a statue . His remains are interred in Barceloneta , according to a memorial written to honor his life . Escobar became the first world boxing champion in history to have a statue in his honor . On June 9 , 2002 , Escobar was inducted into the International Boxing Hall of Fame . He became the fourth Puerto Rican to receive this distinction and the first to be included in the " Old Timers " section . In March 2005 , a second statue of <unk> was unveiled at the Estadio Sixto Escobar in San Juan . Among the celebrities that attended the ceremony were former boxing world champions Julian Solís and Alfredo Escalera . This statue 's location served as a remembrance tribute during the 94th anniversary of Escobar 's birth , when a flower crown was placed at its feet . During this date , an activity was presented by Puerto Rico 's House of Boxing in the library of the <unk> de la Fama del <unk> Puertorriqueño . Among those who attended the ceremony were Solís , Escalera and Iván Calderón . On this date , People Inc. presented a documentary covering his life , which was donated to the venue . Several buildings and streets were named after Escobar posthumously , including the Auditorio Sixto Escobar . The house where he lived was later turned into a library and museum bearing his name . 
 = = Professional championships = = 
 = Indicates the person is no longer alive 
 = 201 ( South Park ) = 
 " 201 " is the sixth episode of the fourteenth season of South Park , and the 201st overall episode of the series . It originally aired on Comedy Central in the United States on April 21 , 2010 . The episode continued multiple storylines from the previous episode , " 200 " , in which a group of angry celebrities demand South Park produce the Muslim prophet Muhammad . In " 201 " , a superhero @-@ like group of religious figures team up to save South Park from the celebrities and their monster Mecha @-@ Streisand , while Eric Cartman learns the true identity of his father . 
 The episode was written and directed by series co @-@ creator Trey Parker . Like " 200 " , it alludes to several past storylines and controversies from previous South Park episodes , especially Comedy Central 's refusal to show images of Muhammad on the network following controversies in 2005 and 2007 when cartoons depicting Muhammad ran in European newspapers , resulting in riots and threats . Prior to the broadcast of " 201 " , the radical Muslim organization Revolution Muslim posted a warning on their website that Parker and Stone risked being murdered for their depiction of Muhammad . Comedy Central modified Parker and Stone 's version of the episode , obscuring all images and bleeping all references to Muhammad — to the effect of disruptively obscuring the entire two @-@ minute moral conclusion of the story . Nevertheless , both " 200 " and " 201 " were nominated for the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Animated Program in 2010 . 
 The censorship drew strong criticism of Comedy Central . Critics said that the network 's action would encourage further threats from radical groups . " 201 " was not shown in repeats , has not been made available on the South Park website , and has not been shown in Sweden , Hungary , Australia or the Netherlands . In most places the episode " Sexual Healing " was shown instead of episode 201 . In the United Kingdom , some parts were removed , and a short on @-@ screen message appears , stating the outline of the removed parts and " MTV ( on Viva ) " or " Comedy Central " " ... has refused to air an image of Muhammad on their network " . According to Nielsen Media Research , the episode was seen by 3 @.@ 5 million viewers , making it the most watched cable television program of the night . 
 On January 31 , 2014 , the original uncensored version was leaked when it was pulled from the South Park Studios servers and was posted online in its entirety without approval by Comedy Central . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The episode opens with Cartman , as his hand @-@ puppet persona Mitch Connor , narrating a flashback to Connor 's 1972 medical discharge from his Vietnam War tour of duty in a parody of a scene from the film Apocalypse Now as the song " Time of the Season " by the Zombies plays in the background . Back in the present , Mr. Garrison refuses to reveal the identity of Cartman 's father , and instead sends Cartman to Dr. Mephisto . Meanwhile , the Ginger Separatist Movement and the townsfolk are negotiating the handover of Muhammad when Mecha @-@ Streisand begins to attack South Park . Muhammad , who is visually obscured throughout the entire episode by a black box superimposed with the word " CENSORED " , is taken by Stan , Kyle , and Kenny to Dr. Mephisto 's lab . The Gingers arrive and take Muhammad and Cartman captive . The Super Best Friends are called to South Park to help ; after their powers fail to subdue Mecha @-@ Streisand , they pacify her by having Krishna adopt the form of Neil Diamond and providing her the opportunity to perform a duet with him . 
 The Gingers contact the celebrities and offer to share Muhammad in exchange for access to the celebrities ' " goo transfer machine " , which transfers Muhammad 's power to remain free from ridicule to a target individual . Cruise is the first subjected to the process , gaining a " CENSORED " box identical to Muhammad 's , but further transfers are interrupted when the Super Best Friends arrive to free their comrade Muhammad . Meanwhile , Cartman is taken to the Ginger lair to meet Scott Tenorman , the Head Ginger . Depicted as a melodramatic madman , Scott has decorated his lair to represent the Chili Con @-@ Carnival in which Cartman gained his revenge on Scott by tricking him into eating his own parents . He reveals to Cartman that they share the same father , former Denver Broncos player Jack Tenorman , meaning that by his act of revenge against Scott , Cartman had killed his own father and fed him to his half @-@ brother . 
 The fight between the Super Best Friends , celebrities , and Gingers spills over into the Ginger lair , and Tenorman escapes in the confusion . During the fight , Seaman leaps upon Cruise 's back , leading Stan to observe , " Tom Cruise has Seaman on his back . " The " CENSORED " box over Cruise disappears , and all present continue to make jokes based on the fact that the words " Seaman " and " semen " sound the same . Cruise questions why they are able to do this , which leads to a monologue from Kyle , Jesus Christ , and Santa Claus explaining that the goo does not exist , and that threatening people with violence is the only true answer ( which is completely obscured by a continuous audio bleep ) . 
 As the town begins to rebuild following the Mecha @-@ Streisand attack ( " for the 39th time " , according to Mayor McDaniels ) , Stan , Kyle , and Kenny find Cartman crying – not because he learned that he murdered his father , but because he is " half @-@ ginger " . Mitch Connor reminds Cartman that he is " half @-@ Bronco " as well and tells him that makes him " pretty cool " and departs . The boys find Cruise crying for a place in which he can live without fear of mockery . Stan , Kenny and Kyle promise to help Cruise get to such a place . The episode 's closing shot is of Cruise 's corpse lying on the Moon 's surface alongside the corpse of the orca featured in " Free <unk> " . 
 = = Production = = 
 Written and directed by series co @-@ founder Trey Parker , " 201 " was rated TV @-@ MA L in the United States . It originally aired on Comedy Central in the United States on April 21 , 2010 . The episode continued multiple storylines from the previous episode " 200 " , the 200th entry of the series . Parker and fellow co @-@ creator Matt Stone decided to celebrate their 200th episode by revisiting several subplots that had been featured throughout the show 's 14 seasons . Multiple celebrities have been lampooned throughout the series ' history , inspiring Parker and Stone to have all the past celebrities join in a class action lawsuit against the town of South Park . The ginger kids — children with fair skin , freckles and red hair — have been featured in several past episodes , where they were ridiculed by Cartman , who views them with prejudice . Cartman uses a hand @-@ puppet con @-@ artist named Mitch Connor who originally appeared in the seventh season episode " Fat Butt and Pancake Head " , in which Cartman pretends his hand is Jennifer Lopez and uses many Hispanic stereotypes in his portrayal of her . Cartman regards Connor as a separate entity and has conversations with him , while Stan and Kyle do not accept this idea at all . 
 " 201 " also included several characters and subplots that were not featured in " 200 " , such as the return of Dr. Alphonse Mephisto and Kevin , characters that had not been featured on South Park for about 10 years . Other previously recurring characters made appearances in " 201 " , including Mr. Hankey , Big Gay Al , Mr. Slave and Pip <unk> . Scott Tenorman , and the references to Cartman 's murder of Scott 's parents , were from the fifth season episode " Scott Tenorman Must Die " . At the end of " 201 " , the dead body of Tom Cruise lies alongside the corpse of a killer whale , a reference to the ninth season episode " Free <unk> " , in which the South Park boys help an orca escape a marine amusement park and flee to the moon , believing it to be a paradise . 
 = = = Muhammad storyline = = = 
 One of the most prominent storylines from " 200 " , which continued into " 201 " , was the characters ' efforts to bring Muhammad into public view . This is based on two past controversies in 2005 ( Jyllands @-@ Posten Muhammad cartoons controversy ) and 2007 ( Lars Vilks Muhammad drawings controversy ) , when European newspapers published cartoons of Muhammad , resulting in riots , global protests , and death threats toward the artists . As a result of those incidents , many publications and television studios have refused to broadcast images of Muhammad in any form , which was the inspiration behind Tom Cruise 's efforts to harvest Muhammad 's apparent immunity to satire and ridicule . Parker and Stone have previously voiced dissatisfaction that images of Muhammad had been censored on the show despite the fact that his image was shown during the 2001 episode " Super Best Friends " , without any censorship , before the cartoon controversies began . " 201 " continues the theme from " 200 " that argues against fear and censorship , and calls for support of free speech , both of Muhammad 's image and any subject considered taboo . 
 = = Threats and censorship = = 
 In the week between the broadcasts of " 200 " and " 201 " , the website for the New York @-@ based radical Muslim organization Revolution Muslim posted an entry that included a warning to creators Parker and Stone that they risked violent retribution for their depictions of Muhammad . The entry stated that they " will probably wind up like Theo van Gogh for airing this show . " Van Gogh was a filmmaker who was murdered by a man named Mohammed <unk> in 2004 for making a short documentary on violence against women in some Islamic societies . The posting provided the addresses to Comedy Central in New York and the production company in Los Angeles . The author of the post , Zachary Adam Chesser , said it was meant to serve as a warning to Parker and Stone , not a threat , and that providing the addresses was meant to give people the opportunity to protest . 
 The entry included audio clips of a sermon by al @-@ Qaeda imam Anwar al @-@ Awlaki calling for the assassination of anyone who has defamed Muhammad , saying , " <unk> Allah and his messenger is a reason to encourage Muslims to kill whoever does that . " Subsequently , the website for the organization was hacked , temporarily redirecting web traffic to images of Prophet Muhammad with a bomb on his head and an older Muslim man kissing a young boy passionately . 
 Before " 201 " aired , the New York City Police Department increased security at the Comedy Central headquarters in direct response to the threats . Law enforcement officials said Revolution Muslim itself was " all talk " and had never engaged in any actual violence but they were concerned that the website post could inspire violence from others . 
 During the original broadcast of " 201 " on April 21 , 2010 , all references to Muhammad 's name were obscured by audio bleeps . Several other portions of dialogue were also censored , including almost the entirety of three consecutive monologues spoken by Kyle , Jesus and Santa Claus at the end regarding the moral of the episode . Muhammad 's name appeared in the previous episode , " 200 " , without any such censorship . Both episodes obscured all images of what was apparently Muhammad with a black " CENSORED " box . Immediately after the episode " 201 " aired , the series website South Park Studios posted a notice that said Comedy Central had inserted " numerous additional bleeps throughout the episode " after Parker and Stone submitted their final cut to the network . The network later confirmed they were responsible for the audio censorship . 
 On April 22 , 2010 , South Park Studios released a brief statement : 
 " In the 14 years we 've been doing South Park we have never done a show that we couldn 't stand behind . We delivered our version of the show to Comedy Central and they made a determination to alter the episode . It wasn 't some meta @-@ joke on our part . Comedy Central added the bleeps . In fact , Kyle 's customary final speech was about intimidation and fear . It didn 't mention Muhammad at all but it got bleeped too . We 'll be back next week with a whole new show about something completely different and we 'll see what happens to it . " 
 Some of these developments had been anticipated in the 2006 South Park episodes " Cartoon Wars Part I " and " Cartoon Wars Part II " . These episodes showed South Park 's reaction to a controversy regarding censorship of Muhammad depictions on two ( fictional ) episodes of Family Guy . 
 In the United States " 201 " has never re @-@ aired following its original debut as South Park would usually repeat during the week , and episodes from earlier in the season were shown instead . Although South Park Studios generally makes unexpurgated versions of their episodes immediately available to view , the notice indicated Parker and Stone did not have network approval to show their original version , and thus no version of " 201 " could be seen on the website . 
 The Canadian Comedy Network aired " 201 " on April 25 , 2010 , though the episode was censored as the American broadcast was , breaking the network 's multi @-@ year practice of airing South Park completely uncensored . Neither " 200 " nor " 201 " were shown in the version of Comedy Central in the Netherlands , and neither episode is available on the Dutch South Park Studios website . The Swedish affiliate of Comedy Central also refused to broadcast " 200 " and " 201 " in Sweden , claiming : 
 " Comedy Central has decided not to air these two episodes of South Park . It is a decision we 've made with great reluctance . Comedy Central believes strongly in creative freedom of expression ; when unique and deeply insightful creative talents like those behind South Park are able to express themselves freely , we all benefit . However , the safety of our employees is our unquestioned number one priority , and therefore we have decided to take these precautionary measures . " 
 " Super Best Friends " was also pulled from the South Park Studios site following the increased media attention from " 201 " . Episodes " 200 " and " 201 " are also unavailable on Hulu , the iTunes Store , and other streaming and download services . This , along with " 200 " and " Super best friends " , are banned in Comedy Central . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 During Mitch Connor 's flashback of the Vietnam War at the beginning of the episode , " Time of the Season " by English rock group the Zombies plays in the background . The scenes between Cartman and Scott Tenorman closely mirror a scene from the 1988 graphic novel Batman : The Killing Joke where the Joker tortures and taunts Commissioner Gordon . Mecha @-@ Streisand is defeated by her inability to resist performing duets with Neil Diamond , a pop singer @-@ songwriter . During one scene , Mecha @-@ Streisand crushes a building and someone screams , " The Casa Bonita is gone ! " This is the name of a real @-@ life restaurant that had been seen in the episode " Casa Bonita " , and after which Parker and Stone 's production facility was named . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 In its original American broadcast on April 21 , 2010 , " 201 " was watched by 3 @.@ 5 million viewers , according to Nielsen Media Research , making it the most watched cable television show of the night . It outperformed the previous week 's episode , " 200 " , which was seen by 3 @.@ 33 million viewers . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 The A.V. Club writer Sean O 'Neal said " 201 " was an improvement over " 200 " , but nevertheless felt " 201 " was " less a cohesive episode than a grab bag of balls @-@ out crazy scenes and cameos only loyal fans would really appreciate . " However , he also said , " it 's sure to become one of , if not the most talked @-@ about episode of South Park ever . " Even after Comedy Central announced they were responsible for the censorship in " 201 " , he speculated as to whether it was possibly a publicity stunt by Parker and Stone to create controversy and increase viewership . Ramsey Isler of IGN said the episode built on the events of " 200 " and delivered a strong payoff , particularly with the subplot about Cartman 's father and the way it tied back to " Scott Tenorman Must Die " . Isler said the bleeps added by Comedy Central provided some unintentional laughs and underscored the episode 's underlying theme opposing censorship . 
 = = = Response to censorship = = = 
 According to a Zogby International survey conducted after " 201 " aired , a majority of Americans opposed Comedy Central 's censorship of the episode . 71 % disagreed with the network 's decision to censor " 201 " , with only 19 % agreeing with the decision . 47 % of those who disagreed with the censorship said they disagreed strongly , with only 5 % who agreed claiming they felt strongly . Some commentators suggested because Comedy Central responded to Revolution Muslim 's warnings by censoring depictions of Muhammad , the Muslim extremists scored a significant public victory . 
 Michael Cavna of The Washington Post wrote , " To invoke the <unk> phrase : The terrorists win . " Toronto Sun columnist Mike Strobel pointed out Revolution Muslim is a relatively small group of " a half @-@ dozen wannabe <unk> , " but said because of Comedy Central 's response , " The <unk> and terrorists win one . No doubt , they 'll try this stunt again . " Likewise , Jean Marbella of The Baltimore Sun said , " It 's not even that the terrorists have won , it 's that wannabe terrorists have won . " Margaret Wente of The Globe and Mail said the censorship of " 201 " could be " the lowest point in the history of American TV , " and that it represented a gravitation toward fear in a post @-@ September 11 attacks world . Los Angeles Times columnist Patrick Goldstein said there were " no easy answers " and that he was not surprised Comedy Central took the threat seriously , but added , " in a democracy , artists and political satirists should be allowed to say what they believe , even if it offends some of its audience . " Roger Catlin of the Hartford Courant suggested Comedy Central actually drew more attention to the Muhammad controversy , not less , by censoring the episode . UCLA School of Law Professor Eugene Volokh said Comedy Central 's actions risk empowering other extremists : 
 " The consequence of this position is that the thugs win and people have more incentive to be thugs . There are lots of people out there who would very much like to get certain kind of material removed , whether religious or political . The more they see others winning , the more they will be likely to do the same . Behavior that gets rewarded gets repeated . " 
 Seventeen Pulitzer Prize @-@ winning cartoonists protested the threats in a petition released April 27 , 2010 . Among the signatures were those of Garry Trudeau , Mark Fiore , Tony Auth , David Horsey and Paul <unk> . The petition stated : 
 We , the undersigned , condemn the recent threats against the creators of South Park , Matt Stone and Trey Parker , by the extremist organization , Muslim Revolution . Freedom of expression is a universal right and we reject any group that seeks to silence people by violence or intimidation . In the United States we have a proud tradition of political satire and believe in the right to speak or draw freely without censorship . 
 During the April 22 broadcast of Comedy Central 's The Daily Show , host Jon Stewart responded to the censorship of " 201 " with a ten @-@ minute monologue about the death threats , expressing disgust toward Revolution Muslim , culminating with a song telling Revolution Muslim to " go fuck [ themselves ] " . Stewart criticized Comedy Central 's decision to alter the episode , while simultaneously acknowledging they likely did so to protect their employees from " possible harmful repercussions " . Bill Maher , host of the HBO talk show Real Time with Bill Maher , said the threats against " 201 " demonstrated the importance of the First Amendment and other American civil liberties , and said , " When South Park got threatened last week by Islamists incensed at their depiction of Muhammad , it served — or should serve — as a reminder that our culture isn 't just different than one that makes death threats to cartoonists . It 's better . " He added jokingly , " If you don 't get that , and you still want to kill someone over a stupid cartoon , please make it Garfield . " 
 As a result of Revolution Muslim 's statement , Seattle cartoonist Molly Norris suggested that many people draw and publish pictures of Muhammad on May 20 , 2010 , which she dubbed the " first annual Everybody Draw Mohammed Day " . However , very few cartoonists actually joined her in criticizing Islam or depicting the prophet Muhammed ; instead , much like Maher and Stewart , they merely praised her for her efforts and condemned the idea of censorship . Norris herself went into hiding , shortly thereafter , on the advice of the FBI . Animated comedy series Family Guy creator Seth MacFarlane voiced this ambivalence on the part of the creative community , saying " No one is a bigger critic of organized religion than I am , " but nevertheless added , " It 's tricky . You pick your battles . You have to judge how real the threat is against how funny the joke is . How much do I care about the joke ? " And The Simpsons also addressed the apparent hypocrisy of those who claimed to stand with South Park in a chalkboard gag during the opening sequence of the April 25 , 2010 episode " The Squirt and the Whale " , with Bart Simpson writing " South Park — We 'd Stand Beside You If We Weren 't So Scared . " 
 = = = Sri Lanka ban = = = 
 The depiction of Buddha snorting cocaine in " 200 " and " 201 " prompted the government of Sri Lanka to ban the entire series outright . 
 = = Home release = = 
 The fourteenth season of South Park was released April 26 , 2011 to DVD and Blu @-@ ray , including the episode " 201 " . When playing the episode , prior to the theme playing , a text card appears saying : " The following episode appears as it originally aired on April 21 , 2010 . After it aired Matt Stone and Trey Parker released the following statement " and then shows the original message that was released after the episode aired . Consequently , Muhammad , his name , and the speeches made by Kyle , Jesus , and Santa are still censored as in the broadcast version . Although the end speeches are still censored , the bleeps are accompanied with music on DVD , unlike the April 21 , 2010 airing , which featured a raw audio bleep . 
 In the episode 's audio commentary , Parker only comments on the opening scene , noting that they did the episode as intended and sent it in . He and Stone comment that they are not supposed to talk about it . For the next several moments , a large audio beep obscures the commentary before Stone says " Yeah , that 's pretty much it . " During the commentary in both " 201 " and " 200 " Parker and Stone never mention Muhammad directly , referring to him only as " the prophet of the Muslim faith " . Despite the package claiming otherwise , both " 200 " and " 201 " were omitted from the Region 4 release and have been completely omitted from the Region 2 ( which contains the predominantly Islamic Middle East and North Africa ) release as well . 
 = = Online leak of uncensored version = = 
 On January 31 , 2014 , the original uncensored version of this episode was illegally leaked and distributed online without any approval of Comedy Central after a user on 4chan realized that the episode existed on the official website 's web server and could be downloaded using <unk> . 
 Despite having been leaked uncensored , " 201 " as well as " Super Best Friends " and " 200 " have still not aired in reruns and are still only legally available on DVD . 
 = Paterson 's worms = 
 Paterson 's worms are a family of cellular automata devised in 1971 by Mike Paterson and John Horton Conway to model the behaviour and feeding patterns of certain prehistoric worms . In the model , a worm moves between points on a triangular grid along line segments , representing food . Its turnings are determined by the configuration of eaten and uneaten line segments adjacent to the point at which the worm currently is . Despite being governed by simple rules the behaviour of the worms can be extremely complex , and the ultimate fate of one variant is still unknown . 
 The worms were studied in the early 1970s by Paterson , Conway and Michael Beeler , described by Beeler in June 1973 , and presented in November 1973 in Martin Gardner 's " Mathematical Games " column in Scientific American . 
 Electronic Arts ' game Worms ? [ which see ] is an interactive implementation of Patterson 's worms , where each time a worm has to turn in a way that it lacks a rule for , it stops and lets the user chooses a direction , which sets that rule for that worm . 
 = = History = = 
 Paterson 's worms are an attempt to simulate the behaviour of prehistoric worms . These creatures fed upon sediment at the bottom of ponds and avoided retracing paths they had already travelled because food would be scarce there but , because food occurred in patches , it was in the worm 's interest to stay near previous trails . Different species of worm had different innate rules regarding how close to travelled paths to stay , when to turn , and how sharp a turn to make . In 1969 Raup and Seilacher created computer simulations of the fossilized worm trails , and these simulations inspired Paterson and Conway to develop a simple set of rules to study idealized worms on regular grids . 
 Conway 's original model was a worm on an orthogonal grid but this produced only three different species of worm , all with rather uninteresting behaviour . Paterson considered worms on a triangular grid . Paterson 's worms were described by Beeler in a Massachusetts Institute of Technology AI Memo ( # 290 ) and were presented in November 1973 in Martin Gardner 's " Mathematical Games " column in Scientific American , and later reprinted in Gardner 1986 . These simulations differed in approach from other cellular automata developed around the same time , which focused on cells and the relationships between them . Simple computer models such as these are too abstract to accurately describe the behaviour of the real creatures , but they do demonstrate that even very simple rules can give rise to patterns resembling their tracks . 
 = = Rules = = 
 The worm starts at some point of an infinite triangular grid . It starts moving along one of the six gridlines that meet at each point and , once it has travelled one unit of distance , it arrives at a new point . The worm then decides , based on the distribution of traversed and untraversed gridlines , what direction it will take . The directions are relative to the worm 's point of view . If the worm has not encountered this exact distribution before it may leave along any untraversed gridline . From then on , if it encounters that distribution again , it must move in the same way . If there are no untraversed gridlines available , the worm dies and the simulation ends . 
 = = Discussion = = 
 There are many different types of worm depending on which direction they turn when encountering a new type of intersection . The different varieties of worm can be classified systematically by assigning every direction a number and listing the choice made every time a new type of intersection is encountered . 
 The six directions are numbered as follows : 
 So direction 0 indicates the worm continues to travel straight ahead , direction 1 indicates the worm will make a right turn of 60 ° and similarly for the other directions . The worm cannot travel in direction 3 because that is the gridline it has just traversed . Thus a worm with rule { 1 @,@ 0 @,@ 5 @,@ 1 } decides to travel in direction 1 the first time it has to make a choice , in direction 0 the next time it has to make a choice and so on . If there is only one available gridline , the worm has no choice but to take it and this is usually not explicitly listed . 
 A worm whose ruleset begins with 0 continues in a straight line forever . This is a trivial case , so it is usually stipulated that the worm must turn when it encounters a point with only uneaten gridlines . Furthermore , to avoid mirror @-@ image symmetrical duplicates , the worm 's first turn must be a right hand turn . A worm dies if it returns to its origin a third time , because there are then no untraversed edges available . Only the origin can be lethal to the worm . 
 There are 1 @,@ 296 possible combinations of worm rules . This can be seen by the following argument : 
 If the worm encounters a node with no eaten segments , other than the one it has just eaten , it can either make a sharp turn or a gentle one . This is the situation shown in the figure above . 
 If it encounters a node with one eaten segment , it can leave along any of the remaining four . Only the worm 's first return to the origin has this character . 
 For two eaten segments , the location of the eaten segments is important . There are four distinct combinations of eaten segments and approach directions , each of which offer a choice of three departure directions , making 81 different alternatives . 
 If the worm encounters three eaten segments , it must choose between the two remaining uneaten ones regardless of their distribution . 
 For four eaten segments , there is only one uneaten segment left and the worm must take it . 
 There are therefore 2 × 4 × 81 × 2 = 1 @,@ 296 different combinations of rules . 
 Many of these are mirror @-@ image duplicates of others , and others die before having to make all the choices in their ruleset , leaving 411 distinct species ( 412 if the infinite straight @-@ line worm is included ) . 336 of these species eventually die . 73 patterns exhibit infinite behaviour , that is , they settle into a repeating pattern that does not return to the origin . A further two are strongly believed to be infinite and one remains unsolved . Eleven of the rules exhibit complicated behaviour . They do not die even after many billions of iterations , nor do they adopt an obviously infinite pattern . Their ultimate fate was unknown until 2003 when Benjamin Chaffin developed new methods of solving them . After many hours of computer time , nine of the eleven rules were solved , leaving the worms with rules { 1 @,@ 0 @,@ 4 @,@ 2 @,@ 0 @,@ 2 @,@ 0 } and { 1 @,@ 0 @,@ 4 @,@ 2 @,@ 0 @,@ 1 @,@ 5 } . The first of these was solved by Tomas <unk> , who determined that it halts after 57 trillion timesteps , leaving only { 1 @,@ 0 @,@ 4 @,@ 2 @,@ 0 @,@ 1 @,@ 5 } unsolved . According to <unk> , the worm is still active after 5 @.@ 2 × 1019 timesteps . He used an algorithm based on Bill <unk> 's <unk> to simulate the worms at extraordinary speeds . This behaviour is considerably more complex than the related rectangular grid worm , which has a longest path of only 16 segments . 
 It is possible for two different species of worm to produce the same path , though they do not necessarily traverse it in the same order . The most common path is also the shortest : the seven point " radioactivity symbol " . One example of this path is shown in the animated figure above . In total there are 299 different paths , and 209 of these are produced by just one species . 
 = Æthelwig = 
 Æthelwig ( c . 1013 – 16 February in either 1077 or 1078 ) was an Abbot of Evesham before and during the Norman Conquest of England . Born sometime around 1010 or 1015 , he was elected abbot in 1058 . Known for his legal expertise , he administered estates for Ealdred , the Bishop of Worcester prior to his election as abbot . After his election , he appears to have acted as Ealdred 's deputy , and was considered as a possible successor when Ealdred was elected Archbishop of York . Æthelwig worked during his abbacy to recover estates that had been lost to Evesham , as well as acquiring more estates . 
 After the Norman Conquest , in 1066 , Æthelwig was one of the few Englishmen trusted by the new King William the Conqueror , and was given authority over parts of western England . As part of his duties , he was a royal judge and held important prisoners . During the Harrying of the North in 1069 – 1070 , Æthelwig gave aid to refugees from the north of England . He also helped the king in the rebellion of 1075 , preventing one of the rebels from joining the others . Æthelwig died on 16 February in either 1077 or 1078 , and was memorialised in a work on his life that was later incorporated in the Chronicon Abbatiae de Evesham , a 13th @-@ century history of the abbey and its abbots . 
 = = Early life and election as abbot = = 
 Æthelwig was probably born about 1010 to 1015 , and inherited a large amount of land from his family . He served as an administrator of the estates of Ealdred , the Bishop of Worcester , as well as those of Evesham Abbey . Æthelwig was also known as a legal expert . He was elected abbot in 1058 , and was blessed on 23 April 1058 , by Ealdred , who was the diocesan bishop for Evesham . He replaced the previous abbot , <unk> , who had become paralysed . One story has it that Ealdred asked King Edward the Confessor to give the abbacy to Æthelwig , another , in the Chronicon de Abbatiae Evesham , a history of Evesham Abbey , states that it was <unk> who asked the king to make the appointment . The Chronicon also states that the blessing took place at Gloucester , and that Ealdred was Archbishop at the time , although Ealdred did not become Archbishop of York until 1060 . 
 During Æthelwig 's abbacy , he appears to have acted as the deputy for Ealdred , as bishop of Worcester . In 1062 , he was one of the candidates to succeed Ealdred as bishop , when Ealdred was promoted to Archbishop of York , but Wulfstan was chosen instead . Æthelwig also served as a judge for King Edward the Confessor , at one point hearing a case at the royal court along with Wulfstan and Regenbald , the chancellor . The abbot also led military forces in battle , and served King Edward as an advisor . 
 Æthelwig 's relationship with Wulfstan , when Wulfstan was acting as the abbot 's diocesan bishop , appears to have been tense , for on the only recorded visitation by Wulfstan to Evesham during Æthelwig 's abbacy , Æthelwig was not there . Although in legal matters Wulfstan and Æthelwig were in conflict , personally , Æthelwig is said to have regarded Wulfstan as a father figure , and as the abbot 's confessor . The fact that the Evesham 's house chronicle appears to have been reworked after 1100 to gloss over embarrassing incidents of the abbots submitting to the bishops of Worcester makes evaluation of Æthelwig 's relations with his episcopal superiors more difficult . 
 During Edward 's reign , Æthelwig worked to recover some of the abbey 's estates that had been granted to others in the past but had not been returned to the abbey 's custody . He managed to restore the abbey 's possession of a number of these lost estates . A large section of the description of the abbot 's life in the Chronicon is concerned with a listing of estates that Æthelwig acquired or recovered . The estates listed were in the counties of Worcestershire , Warwickshire , and Gloucestershire . 
 = = After the Conquest = = 
 After the Norman Conquest , Æthelwig was trusted by the new king , William the Conqueror , and given some administrative duties . Æthelwig was one of a very small number of native Englishmen trusted by the king , which group included Ealdred and Wulfstan . Probably in 1069 , Æthelwig was given authority in the former lands of the Mercian kingdom . After the deposition of Godric , the abbot of Winchcombe Abbey in 1070 , Æthelwig served as his jailor . In 1072 , Æthelwig was acting as a royal judge in the western part of England . During the rebellion of 1075 , Æthelwig kept Roger de Breteuil , the Earl of Hereford , one of the rebels , from joining up with the other rebels . In this action , Æthelwig was assisted by Wulfstan , as well as the sheriff of Worcestershire , Urse d 'Abetot . Æthelwig also took the opportunity after the Norman Conquest to acquire more lands , obtaining 36 estates by redeeming loans . Æthelwig used his knowledge of English law not only on his own account , but to aid the new Norman <unk> , such as Lanfranc , the Archbishop of Canterbury , and Serlo , the Abbot of Gloucester . A number of English landowners commended themselves into Æthelwig 's care after the Conquest , and this led to conflicts over who owned the lands after Æthelwig 's death . 
 Although Æthelwig was known for his loyalty to King William , he had an uncle who held land at Witton who died fighting for King Harold Godwinson , probably at the Battle of Stamford Bridge . While abbot , even after the Conquest , Æthelwig continued to build and ornament his abbey in the Anglo @-@ Saxon style , not the Norman Romanesque which was being used in many of the other churches and abbeys . Besides his administrative and legal duties , Æthelwig was known for his care for the sick and the poor , as well as lepers . After the Harrying of the North by King William in 1069 – 1070 , Æthelwig offered shelter to refugees from the ravaged areas . The Chronicon states that Æthelwig offered aid to the refugees because of his charitable nature , but it is possible that it was also part of his royal duties in western England . 
 Æthelwig also administered Winchcombe Abbey for a number of years , at first from 1066 to 1069 when a Norman monk was appointed abbot , and then again from 1075 until Æthelwig 's death . Hemming , a medieval monastic writer from Worcester Priory , wrote of Æthelwig that he " surpassed everyone by his intelligence , his shrewdness and his knowledge of worldly law " . The Chronicon reports that Æthelwig suffered from gout , and states that it was the cause of his death . 
 Æthelwig died in either 1077 or 1078 . The Chronicon gives his death date as 16 February 1077 , but it is unclear if the Chronicon began its years on 1 January or in March , so the date could be 1077 or 1078 . 
 = = Writing about Æthelwig = = 
 A near @-@ contemporary account of Æthelwig 's life , or Vita , is included in the Chronicon Abbatiae de Evesham , the monastic chronicle for Evesham Abbey . This was a 13th @-@ century work by Thomas of Marlborough , which was written to bolster the Evesham 's case for exemption from the jurisdiction of the Bishops of Worcester , in whose diocese <unk> was . In order to do this , Thomas incorporated earlier works dealing with Evesham 's history , including the work on Æthelwig . However , because of Thomas ' purpose in composing the Chronicon , he probably altered some of the texts he included , and it appears that the life of Æthelwig was first incorporated into a complete history of the abbey and then that <unk> work was adapted by Thomas into his Chronicon . The main evidence for this is internal stylistic evidence , where the Æthelwig material is stylistic uniform with other material dating to prior to 1077 , with information after 1077 forming a separate writing style . 
 The historian R. R. Darlington argued that the Vita was written right after Æthelwig 's death , but another historian , David Knowles , wrote that it probably was written about 1110 , possibly by the prior of Evesham , Dominic . Antonia Gransden , another historian , agrees with Darlington , and finds it more likely to have been written shortly after Æthelwig 's death . The work itself is not a hagiography , in that it doesn 't attribute any miracles to Æthelwig , and instead is a mix of charters and narratives . Nor does it give any details on Æthelwig 's early life or his selection as abbot . A large portion of the work is a detailed list of lands acquired by Æthelwig for the abbey , and concludes with a short description of the <unk> 's death . 
 = Ryan Braun = 
 Ryan Joseph Braun ( born November 17 , 1983 ) is an American baseball left fielder for the Milwaukee Brewers of Major League Baseball ( MLB ) . While currently the starting left fielder for the Brewers , Braun has also played right field during his career and was also a third baseman during his rookie season . 
 Braun was a two @-@ time All @-@ American at the University of Miami , where he was named " National Freshman of the Year " by Baseball America in 2003 . The Brewers drafted him in the first round ( fifth overall ) in the 2005 MLB draft . He was the team 's Minor League Player of the Year in 2006 . 
 Braun is considered a five @-@ tool player for his ability to hit for power and average , his baserunning speed , and his excellent fielding and arm strength . He was ranked number seven by the Sporting News in its 2012 list of the 50 greatest current players in baseball . He was awarded the National League 's Rookie of the Year in 2007 , has won five Silver Slugger awards ( 2008 – 12 ) , and won the National League ( NL ) Most Valuable Player ( MVP ) in 2011 . He was named to five straight All @-@ Star games ( 2008 – 12 ) , and then a team @-@ high sixth game in 2015 . Braun has led the NL three times in slugging percentage ( in 2007 , while setting the major league rookie record , 2011 , and 2012 ) , three times in extra @-@ base hits ( 2008 , 2011 – 12 ) , and once each in hits ( 2009 ) , home runs ( 2012 ) , and runs ( 2012 ) . On defense , he led all major league outfielders in fielding percentage in 2008 , led NL left fielders in fielding percentage twice ( 2009 and 2011 ) , and led NL left fielders in range factor in 2009 and 2012 . His 128 home runs through 2010 were the 8th @-@ most by any major leaguer ever through their first four seasons . Through 2015 , he was sixth among all active ballplayers in career slugging percentage , and third among active left fielders in career fielding percentage . 
 Braun came under scrutiny for a testosterone test that he failed in 2011 , and then for his connection in 2012 to the Biogenesis of America clinic that provided performance @-@ enhancing drugs to professional baseball players . After MLB 's investigation following the Biogenesis scandal , on July 22 , 2013 , Braun was suspended without pay for the remainder of the 2013 season and playoffs ( totaling 65 regular season games ) for violating the league 's drug policy . The two seasons following Braun 's return from the suspension have seen his career @-@ lows for full seasons in the major leagues in terms of hits , batting average , RBI and home runs . 
 = = Amateur career = = 
 Ryan Braun was born on November 17 , 1983 to Joe and Diane Braun . He and his younger brother Steve were raised in Los Angeles . Ryan began playing tee @-@ ball around the age of four , on a team coached by his father . PONY League teammates included Jack and Matt Cassel , Jason and <unk> Collins , as well as Jon Garland . Braun later picked up basketball , which became his favorite sport , and soccer , in which he played forward . By the time he entered high school , Braun chose to focus solely on baseball . 
 Braun attended Granada Hills High School in Granada Hills , Los Angeles , California . He was a four @-@ year letterman on the school 's baseball team , and three @-@ year team captain and Most Valuable Player ( MVP ) . He played shortstop , and pitched through his junior year . As a sophomore in 2000 , he recorded the highest batting average of his prep career ( .456 ) , while posting a .654 on @-@ base percentage ( OBP ) . During his junior year , he hit .421 , with a <unk> OBP . Braun capped off his high school career by batting <unk> as a senior , with an OBP of <unk> , and breaking the school record for career home runs with 25 . 
 He was a two @-@ time all @-@ area selection by the Los Angeles Times , and a three @-@ time choice by the Los Angeles Daily News . As a senior , Braun was rated the sixth @-@ best shortstop prospect in the country by Team One Baseball , and among the top 100 overall prospects by Baseball America . He graduated in 2002 , but went undrafted as he told teams that he intended to attend college . 
 Braun excelled academically as well — his worst grade was one B , in Advanced Placement Chemistry . 
 = = College career = = 
 Offered baseball scholarships by Stanford University and the University of California , Berkeley , he instead attended the University of Miami on an academic scholarship , due to his excellent high school grades . He chose Miami for its academics , its athletics , and its social scene , noting : " I think the girls were the deal closer on the recruiting trip . " 
 There , Braun was named " National Freshman of the Year " , and a first @-@ team " Freshman All @-@ American " , by Baseball America in 2003 , as well as first team All American by the Jewish Sports Review . He was also named first @-@ team All @-@ American by Collegiate Baseball . 
 During his junior year , his final and most successful at Miami , Braun batted .396 with 18 home runs , a <unk> slugging percentage , 76 RBIs and 23 stolen bases . He was ninth in slugging and 10th in RBIs in NCAA Division I , and was named to Baseball America 's 2005 College All @-@ American Team as the DH . He moved from shortstop to third base during the year . His performance earned Braun the Atlantic Coast Conference Baseball Player of the Year award , and a spot as one of the finalists for the Golden Spikes Award , the most prestigious individual award in college baseball . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 = = = Draft and minor leagues = = = 
 The Milwaukee Brewers drafted Braun in the first round ( fifth overall ) in the 2005 major league draft as a third baseman , and he signed for $ 2 @.@ 45 million . 
 Assigned to the Helena Brewers in the Advanced Rookie Pioneer League in 2005 , Braun batted .341 / .383 / .585 in 10 games . He was then promoted to the West Virginia Power in the Class A South Atlantic League , where he hit .355 / .396 / <unk> , and was rated the fifth @-@ best prospect in the league . His most memorable moment there was when he hit a walk @-@ off grand slam to lead the Power into the playoffs . 
 Braun began 2006 playing for the A @-@ Advanced Brevard County Manatees . He earned a spot in the Florida State League All @-@ Star game , and played in the All @-@ Star Futures Game . He was rated the top third base prospect in the FSL , and Baseball America rated him the best batting prospect in the league . On June 21 , Braun was promoted to the Class AA Huntsville Stars ( Alabama ) of the Southern League . In July he was voted the Brewers ' Organizational Player of the Month , and at the end of the season he was voted the sixth @-@ best prospect in the Southern League . Collectively between Class A and Class AA , Braun finished with a .289 average , 22 home runs , 77 RBIs , and 26 stolen bases . He received the 2006 Robin Yount Performance Award as the Milwaukee Brewers Minor League Player of the Year . 
 Later in 2006 , in the Arizona Fall League he hit .326 / .396 / <unk> in 92 at bats for the Scottsdale Scorpions . He led the AFL with 16 extra @-@ base hits , tied for tops with 9 doubles , ranked second in slugging percentage and HR / AB ratio ( 1 / 15 ) , tied for second in home runs ( 6 ) , and tied for third in RBIs ( 25 ) . He was rated one of the top three prospects in the league , and was voted to the AFL All @-@ Prospects Team . 
 Baseball America rated Braun the Brewers ' # 2 prospect for 2007 . He began the year with the Nashville Sounds of the AAA Pacific Coast League . Before being called up to the majors in late May , in 113 at bats he led the PCL with a <unk> slugging percentage while batting .354 ( 6th ) , with 10 home runs ( T @-@ 2nd ) and a .426 on @-@ base percentage ( 5th ) . 
 = = = Milwaukee Brewers ( 2007 – present ) = = = 
 = = = = 2007 : Rookie of the Year = = = = 
 The Brewers brought Braun to spring training in 2007 . Their regular third baseman Corey <unk> was suffering from post @-@ concussion syndrome , and missed the entire year . In 11 spring training games , Braun tied for 10th in the majors in home runs ( 5 ) , and second in RBIs ( 15 ) . 
 In 2007 , Braun had what some sportswriters called one of the most dominant rookie seasons in baseball history . Called up on May 24 by the Brewers , he hit his first major league home run two nights later . Braun was voted the National League ( NL ) Rookie of the Month for June , ranking first in RBIs ( 21 ) and tied for first in home runs ( 6 ) among NL rookies that month . He also recorded a <unk> slugging percentage and a .435 OBP . In July , Braun became the fastest in Brewer history to hit 10 major league home runs , doing so in his 38th game . He hit his 15th home run in the 50th game of his career , and his 20th in his 64th game , making him the fastest to those milestones since Albert Pujols in 2001 . He was also the fastest to 20 homers in Brewers history . At month 's end , he received his second consecutive NL Rookie of the Month Award , as well as his first NL Player of the Month Award ( making him the first player to have won both awards in the same month ) . He hit a league @-@ leading 11 home runs , with 25 RBIs , while batting .345 . 
 In mid @-@ August , Yost moved Braun from third in the batting order to cleanup , switching him with Prince Fielder . The move was expected to allow Braun to steal more , as batting before Fielder was not conducive to him risking being thrown out on steal attempts . Additionally , successfully stealing a base would hypothetically allow opponents to intentionally walk Fielder and avoid pitching to him . At the end of the month , however , Yost reverted to his previous batting order . On August 26 , Braun hit his 25th home run in his 82nd game , quicker than any major leaguer since Mark McGwire in 1987 . 
 On September 9 , the Brewers became the third team in major league history to start a game with three straight home runs , as Rickie Weeks , J. J. Hardy , and Braun homered in consecutive at bats . Braun said , " That was pretty cool . I was never part of something like that before . " Braun 's home run in that game also broke the Brewers rookie record for home runs ( 28 ) . Braun hit his 30th homer in his 94th game , a pace no player had set to start a career since McGwire hit 30 in 84 games during 1986 and 1987 . 
 Braun finished with an NL @-@ leading <unk> slugging percentage , a mark that set new all @-@ time rookie and Brewers records . He was fifth in the league in at bats per home run ( 13 @.@ 3 ) and OPS ( 1 @.@ 004 ) , tied for fifth in home runs ( 34 ) , and eighth in batting average ( .324 ) among hitters with at least 490 plate appearances . He led the Brewers in batting average and slugging percentage , and was second behind Fielder in home runs , runs ( 91 ) , and RBIs ( 97 ) , tied for second in triples ( 6 ) , and third in OBP ( .370 ) and steals ( 15 ) , despite not having played in the first 48 games of the season . Braun obliterated the club rookie records of 28 home runs and 81 RBIs , set by Fielder in 2006 . 
 Braun had considerable success against left @-@ handed pitchers . He had the best batting average ( .450 ) , OBP ( .516 ) , and slugging percentage ( .964 ) of any major league hitter with at least 125 plate appearances against lefties , and was tied for second in the majors in home runs ( 15 ) . Braun credits his father with his success against lefties . " My dad is left @-@ handed , so growing up , the majority of time , I took batting practice off of him . " 
 Braun collected several awards at season 's end . He won the 2007 NL Rookie of the Year Award in a vote by 32 members of the Baseball Writers ' Association of America . He beat out Troy Tulowitzki by 2 points in the closest NL vote since the system was revised in 1980 . Of all prior NL Rookies of the Year , only Pujols and Willie McCovey hit for higher batting averages in their rookie year . Braun was voted the 2007 NL Sporting News Rookie of the Year by 488 major league players and 30 managers . Braun also received the 2007 Players Choice NL Most Outstanding Rookie in a vote by his fellow major league players . " When your peers recognize you with an award , that 's great " , he said . " Those are the guys out there on the field with you , competing against you . Their opinion counts the most , for a player . " In voting for the NL Most Valuable Player ( MVP ) Award , Braun received two 10th @-@ place votes and finished 24th overall . 
 = = = = 2008 : All @-@ Star and Silver Slugger = = = = 
 In March 2008 , the Brewers renewed Braun 's contract for $ 455 @,@ 000 , a $ 75 @,@ 000 increase . Braun then signed an 8 @-@ year , $ 45 – $ 51 million contract extension ( the total depending on his " Super 2 " service @-@ time ranking after the 2009 season ) on May 15 , 2008 . The contract is through the year 2015 . The deal included Braun 's $ 455 @,@ 000 salary for 2008 , and a $ 2 @.@ 3 million bonus in 2008 . It could increase to $ 51 million through incentives . Braun also has a no @-@ trade clause for the first four years , and then a limited no @-@ trade clause allowing him to block deals to 12 teams from 2012 to 2013 , and 6 teams from 2014 to 2015 . The contract will keep Braun locked up through his age @-@ 31 season . It was the largest contract in Brewers ' history , surpassing Jeff Suppan 's . It was also the largest contract in baseball history given to a player with less than three years ' experience . Braun 's agent , Nez <unk> , crunched enough numbers to show him what he potentially could have made over the life of this contract if he had chosen not to sign it . " But the question I ultimately asked myself was , <unk> can 't I buy with that amount of money ? " ' Braun said . 
 Braun drove in 134 runs in his first 162 games in the majors , more RBIs than any active player . He reached the 150 @-@ RBI milestone faster than any major leaguer since Boston 's Walt Dropo needed only 155 games , in 1949 – 51 . On June 17 , 2008 , he drove in his 152nd career RBI , in his 182nd game . 
 Braun was named the NL 's Player of the Month , after batting .366 in July ( 6th in the NL ) with 9 home runs ( 3rd ) , and 23 RBIs ( 7th ) . He also led the league with 76 total bases and 18 extra base hits , and was among NL leaders with 37 hits ( 2nd ) , 3 triples ( 2nd ) , and a 1 @.@ 163 OPS ( 3rd ) . He had back @-@ to @-@ back 4 @-@ hit games , just the 5th player in team history to accomplish that feat . " It 's a huge honor " , Braun said . " The way I look at it , you 're the MVP of the National League for that month . It 's definitely a big accomplishment . 
 As of August 8 , Braun 's major league career start was one of the best ever . In 227 games to start a career , he was first with 558 total bases and 133 extra base hits , second with 64 home runs , and tied for second with 181 RBIs . 
 On August 9 , Braun strained the intercostal muscles around his oblique ribcage . That led to him missing a number of games , and shortening his swing for a few weeks . After returning , on September 25 he hit his first grand slam in " grand " fashion . With the bases loaded , he delivered a 2 @-@ out , 2 – 2 pitch from the Pirates ' Jesse Chavez into the left field bleachers of Miller Park in the bottom of the 10th inning , winning the game 5 – 1 , and keeping the Brewers ' 2008 postseason hopes alive . Three days later , Braun helped put the Brewers into the postseason for the first time since 1982 , by hitting a go @-@ ahead 2 @-@ run homer in the bottom of the 8th against the Chicago Cubs . The homer was the difference in the game , which gave the Brewers a one @-@ game lead over the New York Mets for the NL wild card . 
 Braun was a starting outfielder for the NL in the 2008 All Star Game . He finished first in fan voting among NL outfielders , and second among all NL players , with 3 @,@ 835 @,@ 840 votes , behind only Chase Utley of the Phillies ( 3 @,@ 889 @,@ 602 ) . He also finished first in player voting . Braun was the first Brewers outfielder voted to start an All Star game . He was one of seven first @-@ time starters in the game , and – along with Kosuke Fukudome and Josh Hamilton – one of only three who had not reached the major leagues until 2007 or 2008 . 
 Braun came in third in the Home Run Derby at Yankee Stadium . " It 's something you dream about " , Braun said . " That 's as big a stage as you can get on .... it 's going to be a lot of fun . " He had his friend and agent , Nez <unk> , a former minor league infielder , pitch to him . Braun 's longest homer was estimated at 448 feet . He hit seven home runs in each of the first and second rounds , finishing with 14 ( three behind finalist Justin Morneau , who hit five in the final round to win the Derby ) . 
 On June 3 , Braun became the third @-@ fastest major leaguer to reach 50 career home runs . He did so in 171 career games ; the only players to reach that plateau sooner were Rudy York and Mark McGwire . On July 8 , Braun hit his 56th home run in his 200th game , the third @-@ highest total ever in a major leaguer 's initial 200 games , behind McGwire ( 59 ) and York ( 59 ) . 
 In early August , Braun hit his 30th home run , becoming just the second player in MLB history to hit 30 or more homers in each of his first two seasons . Braun hit 71 home runs in his first two seasons , tying him with Pujols for fourth all @-@ time . Joe DiMaggio tops the list with 75 home runs , followed by Ralph Kiner ( 74 ) and Eddie Mathews ( 72 ) . 
 In 2008 , in 151 games Braun hit 37 home runs ( tied for 4th in the NL , behind Ryan Howard , Adam Dunn , and Carlos Delgado ) , with 106 RBIs ( 9th ) , and batted .285 with a .553 slugging percentage ( 5th ) . He also led the league with 83 extra base hits , and had 338 total bases ( 2nd in the NL ) , 7 triples ( 6th ) , 16 @.@ 5 at @-@ bats @-@ per @-@ home @-@ run ( 10th ) , and 611 at bats ( 10th ) . 12 @.@ 5 % of his plate appearances were extra base hits ( 3rd in the NL ; behind Ryan Ludwick and Pujols ) , he had 29 infield hits ( 7th ) , and he stole third base 6 times ( 9th ) . 
 Against starting pitchers , Braun hit .244 the first time he faced them in a game , .331 the second time , and .328 with a <unk> slugging percentage the third time . Braun led the Brewers in batting average , slugging percentage , triples , home runs , RBIs , extra base hits , total bases , at @-@ bats @-@ per @-@ home run , OPS ( <unk> ) , runs ( 92 ) , and hits ( 174 ) . 
 Braun hit .313 in October against the Phillies in his first postseason series , which the Brewers lost 3 – 1 . 
 Braun was voted to the 2008 NL Sporting News All Star Team , by a panel of 41 major league general managers and assistant general managers . He also won the 2008 NL Outfielder Silver Slugger Award , in a vote by major league coaches and managers who select the top offensive performer at each position in both leagues . The award , sponsored by Louisville Slugger , is based on a combination of statistics , including batting average , on @-@ base percentage , and slugging percentage , as well as the coaches ' and managers ' general impressions of a player 's overall offensive value . In voting for the 2008 NL MVP award , Braun was third ( with 139 points ) , behind Pujols and Ryan Howard . 
 = = = = 2009 : All Star , Silver Slugger , and Team USA = = = = 
 In 2009 , Braun was named to Sporting News ' list of the 50 greatest current players in baseball , ranking No. 32 . A panel of 100 baseball people , many of them members of the Hall of Fame and winners of major baseball awards , were polled to arrive at the list . 
 Braun was invited to play for Team USA in 2009 in the second World Baseball Classic . " I 'm really excited to get to represent my country " , he said . " It 's an honor just to get invited for the event . " He batted .381 as the team 's starting left fielder , helping it reach the semi @-@ finals . 
 Braun was named NL Player of the Week for May 4 – 10 , after leading the NL with 12 RBIs for the week while hitting .458 / .567 / .958 with 3 home runs . He hit the second grand slam of his career and recorded a career @-@ high six RBIs on May 6 , and on May 9 he reached base in all five of his plate appearances . 
 Braun led all NL outfielders in fan voting for the All Star Game for the second year in a row , with 4 @.@ 1 million votes , ahead of Raúl Ibáñez and Carlos Beltrán . He was third among all NL vote @-@ getters , trailing Pujols and Chase Utley . He was the first Brewer to be voted in as a starter in consecutive years since Robin Yount ( in 1982 and 1983 ) , and the third Brewer position player voted to start twice , along with Yount and Paul Molitor ( 1980 and 1988 ) . Braun started in right field , the first time he had ever played the position , and batted cleanup , going 0 – 2 . 
 Braun was second all @-@ time , with 79 home runs over his first two calendar years in the major leagues , to Phillies Hall of Famer Chuck Klein ( 83 ) ; ahead of third @-@ place Joe DiMaggio and Mark McGwire ( 77 ) . If Braun continues to hit home runs at the rate he had hit them through July 1 , 2009 , he will reach 600 home runs in his 15th major league season . In September , Braun became the second @-@ fastest active player to hit 100 home runs ( behind only Ryan Howard ) , as he hit his 100th homer in his 400th major league game . Later in the month , he became the second player in major league history to hit 30 or more home runs in each of his first three seasons . Braun 's 103 home runs in his first three Major League seasons are sixth @-@ most in baseball history , behind Pujols ( 114 ) , Mark Teixeira ( 107 ) , and three Hall of Famers — Kiner ( 114 ) , Matthews ( 112 ) , and Joe DiMaggio ( 107 ) . 
 As in 2007 , in 2009 Braun had even greater success against left @-@ handed pitchers . Against them he had the second @-@ best OBP ( .475 ) , slugging percentage ( <unk> ) , and OPS ( 1 @.@ 198 ) , and third @-@ best batting average ( .395 ) , of all NL hitters with at least 125 plate appearances . 
 He finished the season with an NL @-@ leading 203 hits , becoming the first Brewer to lead his league in hits since Molitor topped the AL in 1991 . Braun became the fourth Brewer in team history to collect 200 or more hits in a season , and the first in 18 years . His .320 batting average at the end of the season was the highest by a Brewer since Jeff <unk> hit .326 in 1999 . 
 In 2009 , in addition to leading the NL in hits , Braun was 2nd in runs ( 113 ) , 4th in RBIs ( 114 ) , total bases ( 350 ) , extra base hits ( 77 ) , and hit by pitch ( 13 ) , 7th in batting average ( .320 ) and power @-@ speed number ( 24 @.@ 6 ) , 8th in OPS ( .937 ) , 9th in slugging percentage ( <unk> ) and doubles ( 39 ) , tied for 10th in triples ( 6 ) , and tied for 11th in home runs ( 32 ) . He was also 4th in the league in infield hits ( 25 ) . 
 He became only the second Brewer ever to hit 30 home runs and steal 20 bases in the same season . Braun also became the eighth player in major league history with at least 100 runs , 100 RBIs , 200 hits , 30 homers , 20 stolen bases , and a .300 average in the same season . 
 Braun was voted to the NL Sporting News All Star Team in 2009 , making it for the second year in a row . He received votes from all 14 voting NL team executives ( as did Pujols and Utley ; Mauer was named on all AL ballots ) . Braun was awarded the 2009 NL Outfielder Silver Slugger Award , winning it for the second year in a row . He became the first Brewer since Molitor , more than two decades prior , to win a Silver Slugger Award in consecutive years . Cecil Cooper is the only other Brewer to have done it . 
 = = = = 2010 : All Star and Silver Slugger = = = = 
 Braun was named to Sporting News ' 2010 list of the 50 greatest current players in baseball , ranking No. 22 . 
 He was elected a starting NL All Star outfielder for the third year in a row , in 2010 . Braun led all major league outfielders in All Star votes for the third straight year , with 2 @,@ 972 @,@ 525 , despite Milwaukee being the smallest media market in the majors . As in 2009 , he received more votes than any NL players other than Pujols and Utley . He became the first Brewer to be a three @-@ time All Star starter , passing Yount and Molitor . 
 Braun was named NL Player of the Week for August 1 – 8 , after leading the majors with a .538 batting average , 14 hits , and 8 runs scored , and notching a career @-@ best five @-@ hit performance in one game . 
 For the season , Braun was second in the NL in hits ( 188 ) and doubles ( 45 ) , 5th in total bases ( 310 ) , 6th in runs ( 101 ) , 7th in RBIs ( 103 ) and extra base hits ( 71 ) , and 9th in batting average ( .304 ) . 
 Braun hit the eighth @-@ most home runs by any major leaguer through his first four seasons ( 128 ) . He also became the fifth player in major league history to hit at least 125 homers with a .300 average over his first four seasons . His 94 home runs in 2008 – 10 were the most by any right @-@ handed outfielder . 
 He was the first player in Brewers history to hit 20 or more home runs in each of his first four seasons , and the third Brewer to have 100 or more RBIs in three consecutive seasons . He also became the second player in Brewers history to have consecutive 100 @-@ RBI , 100 @-@ run seasons . 
 Braun was awarded the 2010 NL Outfielder Silver Slugger Award , winning it for the third year in a row . He became the second Brewer to win a Silver Slugger Award in three consecutive years . Robin Yount is the only other Brewer to have won the award three times ( 1980 , 1982 , and 1989 ) . Braun was also voted to the 2010 NL Sporting News All Star Team , making the team for the third year in a row . 
 = = = = 2011 : NL MVP , All Star , Silver Slugger , and 30 – 30 club = = = = 
 In 2011 , Braun was again named to Sporting News ' list of the 50 greatest current players in baseball , ranking No. 16 . A panel of 21 MLB executives was polled to arrive at the list . 
 He was named NL Player of the Month for April , after tying for the NL lead in home runs ( 10 ) and runs scored ( 24 ) , while setting a new team record by reaching base in 28 consecutive games to start a season ( erasing Yount 's record of 23 games , set in 1983 ) . He was also named NL Player of the Week , for the week ended April 25 . 
 He led all National League players in All Star balloting , with an NL @-@ record 5 @.@ 93 million votes , as he garnered more votes than any other NL outfielder for the fourth year in a row . He was voted an NL All Star starter for a franchise record fourth time . Braun had a 23 @-@ game hitting streak , the third @-@ longest in team history . 
 On August 31 , he hit a ball deep to left @-@ center field and tried for an inside @-@ the @-@ park home run , but fell on his way to home plate and was tagged out . The crowd gave him a standing ovation for his effort . 
 On September 23 , Braun hit a three @-@ run , 450 @-@ foot home run that sealed the Brewers ' NL @-@ Central @-@ clinching victory . 
 He was named the NL Player of the Month for the fourth time in his career in September , after tying for second in the league with 8 home runs and 22 RBIs , while batting .330 . 
 In 2011 , Braun led the National League in slugging percentage ( <unk> ) , OPS ( .994 ) , and extra base hits ( 77 ) . He was 2nd in the NL in batting average ( .332 ) , runs ( 109 ) , and total bases ( 336 ) , 4th in RBIs ( 111 ) and doubles ( 38 ; tied ) , 5th in on @-@ base percentage ( .397 ) and hits ( 187 ) , 6th in home runs ( 33 ; T ) , and 7th in stolen bases ( 33 ; a career high ) . On defense , he led all major league left fielders in fielding percentage , at <unk> . 
 Braun became the 7th player to have at least four 30 @-@ homer , 100 @-@ RBI seasons in his first five years . He also became the 11th major leaguer to hit at least 30 home runs in four of his first five seasons . 
 In 2011 , Braun became the second Brewer ( and 56th player in MLB history ) to join the 30 – 30 club . He was also the second player in Brewers ' history to have two 20 @-@ steals / 20 @-@ homers seasons . He became the first Brewer to post three 100 @-@ run , 100 @-@ RBI seasons . In addition , he became one of three Brewers who have had four 100 @-@ RBI seasons . 
 Through 2011 , he was third among active ballplayers in career slugging percentage ( <unk> ) , behind Pujols and Alex Rodriguez , and first among left fielders in career fielding percentage ( .994 ) . He was also the Brewers ' all @-@ time leader in career batting average ( .312 ) , slugging percentage , and OPS ( <unk> ) , and fourth in on @-@ base percentage ( .371 ) . 
 In the 2011 playoffs , through October 14 Braun set the major league postseason record by reaching base in the first inning in nine consecutive playoff games . He also tied Yount and Molitor for the Brewers ' team record with his 22nd career postseason hit , and tied Charlie Moore for team 's longest postseason hitting streak , at 7 games . In the postseason he led the Brewers with a .405 batting average , while driving in a team @-@ best 10 RBIs . 
 Braun was awarded the 2011 NL Outfielder Silver Slugger Award , winning it for the fourth year in a row . That set a Brewers team record , and he became the fourth NL outfielder to win the award four years in a row . He was named the team 's 2011 MVP in unanimous voting by the Milwaukee chapter of the BBWAA . 
 On November 22 , Braun was named the NL MVP award winner for the 2011 season , receiving 20 of 32 first place votes . 
 = = = = 2012 : All Star , Home Run Champion , Silver Slugger , 40 – 30 club = = = = 
 On April 30 , 2012 , he became the first player to hit 3 home runs in one game at Petco Park . Braun was named to his fifth consecutive NL All @-@ Star team as a reserve outfielder . It marked Braun 's fifth All @-@ Star honor , tying him with Cecil Cooper and Paul Molitor for the most in Brewers franchise history . On July 20 , Braun had his 1,000th career hit . He accomplished the feat in his <unk> game , sooner in his career than Pete Rose , the all @-@ time hits leader , who did it in his <unk> game . 
 On September 16 , Braun hit his 200th career home run , against the New York Mets . In his following at bat , Braun hit another home run , his 40th of the year , the first time he had reached the 40 @-@ home @-@ run mark . 
 In 2012 , Braun led the National League in home runs ( 41 ) , runs scored ( 108 ) , total bases ( 356 ) , and power @-@ speed number ( 34 @.@ 6 ) , and led the league in OPS ( <unk> ) and extra @-@ base hits ( 80 ) for the second consecutive year . He was 2nd in the NL in RBIs ( 112 ) , slugging percentage ( .595 ) , and hits ( 191 ) , 3rd in batting average ( .319 ) , 4th in on @-@ base percentage ( .391 ) , and 9th in stolen bases ( 30 ) . On defense , he led all NL left fielders in putouts ( 276 ) and in range factor / game ( 1 @.@ 87 ) . By driving in more than 100 runs in 2012 for the fifth consecutive year , Braun became the first player in Brewers history to have five 100 @-@ RBI seasons . Cecil Cooper and Prince Fielder each drove in 100 runs four times . Braun became the ninth player in major league history to have a season of 40 home runs and 30 stolen bases . 
 Braun was awarded the 2012 NL Outfielder Silver Slugger Award , winning it for the fifth year in a row . His five consecutive awards are the longest active streak in the major leagues . 
 Braun finished second in National League MVP voting for 2012 , behind Buster Posey . 
 = = = = 2013 season = = = = 
 In 2013 , Braun played in 61 games with a .298 batting average including 14 doubles , 9 home runs , and 38 RBIs in 225 at @-@ bats . On July 22 , 2013 , Braun was suspended without pay for the remainder of the season for violations of the Basic Agreement and its Joint Drug Prevention and Treatment Program . 
 = = = = 2014 season = = = = 
 After the Brewers traded right fielder <unk> Aoki to the Royals for pitcher Will Smith , Braun moved to right field to open a spot for Khris Davis to play left field . 
 In 2014 , Braun batted a career @-@ low .266 , with 19 home runs while leading the Brewers with 81 RBIs and tying for the team lead with 6 triples . He finished the season with 230 career home runs , tied with Prince Fielder for second on the all @-@ time Brewers list , trailing only Robin Yount ( 251 ) , and during the season he tied Brewers records with 3 home runs and 7 RBIs in one game . He also became the 12th player to appear in 1 @,@ 000 games with the Brewers . 
 Braun underwent surgery in October to desensitize the pain receptors near the nerves at the base of his right thumb . The problem was affecting his grip on the bat . The surgery was performed by Dr. Vernon Williams . Through 2014 , he was fifth among all active ballplayers in career slugging percentage , and second among active left fielders in career fielding percentage . 
 = = = = 2015 season = = = = 
 In 2015 , Braun was named to the All Star Team representing the National League . It was the sixth time he was selected as an All Star , a team record , surpassing the prior record shared with Cecil Cooper and Paul Molitor . 
 On August 19 , Braun hit his 252nd during a game against the Miami Marlins setting the record as All @-@ Time Home Run leader in Milwaukee Brewers franchise history . The record was previously held by Robin Yount . 
 = = Performance @-@ enhancing drugs = = 
 = = = Disputed testosterone test = = = 
 On December 10 , 2011 , a confidential urine test conducted in October 2011 was leaked to ESPN 's Outside the Lines . They reported that Braun had tested positive for an elevated level of testosterone caused by a performance @-@ enhancing drug and faced a 50 @-@ game suspension . The Daily News quoted a source who said that the test results were " insanely high , the highest ever for anyone who has ever taken a test , twice the level of the highest test ever taken " . A second test conducted by an independent laboratory showed normal testosterone levels . Braun appealed the positive drug test in January 2012 , and a three @-@ member panel overturned the results on a 2 @-@ to @-@ 1 vote on February 22 , 2012 . It was the first time that a MLB player had successfully challenged a drug test result . The arbitration panel , consisting of MLB representative Rob Manfred , players ' union lawyer Michael Weiner , and Shyam Das , determined that Braun had raised valid questions about the manner in which test collector Dino Laurenzi , Jr. had handled his sample . 
 The New York Times wrote that Braun " won on a technicality " . Braun 's sample was collected and sealed on a Saturday . Laurenzi said that no FedEx delivery center was open , and he subsequently followed established protocol and stored the samples in a <unk> container ; he dropped the samples off to an open FedEx center on Monday . Braun , though , said there were at least five FedEx locations within 5 miles that were open until 9 p.m. and there also was a 24 @-@ hour location . MLB argued that there was no evidence of tampering of the sample , and the United States Anti @-@ Doping Agency said the testosterone levels in the samples would not grow in a refrigerator over a weekend . MLB 's drug @-@ testing program states that the samples should be sent to the laboratory on the same day they are collected " absent unusual circumstance " . 
 = = = Links to Biogenesis clinic and MLB suspension = = = 
 In February 2013 , Yahoo ! Sports reported that Braun 's name appeared three times in records of Biogenesis of America , a Coral Gables clinic alleged to have distributed performance @-@ enhancing drugs to a number of Major League Baseball players who tested positive for banned substances . One entry noted that Braun owed the clinic between $ 20 @,@ 000 and $ 30 @,@ 000 . Braun 's name was not listed next to any specific PEDs , unlike some of the other players mentioned in the records . Braun released a statement maintaining that his attorneys had retained the clinic 's operator , Anthony Bosch , as a consultant during his appeal of his positive drug test the previous season , and denied any further dealings with the clinic . 
 Later that month , ESPN 's Outside the Lines obtained a new Biogenesis document from April 2012 listing Braun among three other MLB players with the notation : " MLB Ryan Braun + 1500 . " An ESPN source said to be familiar with Bosch 's operation claimed the list was of players who obtained PEDs from Bosch and their respective balances , with a circle around the plus sign next to a player 's name indicating his balance was paid off . In late April , Bosch confirmed to ESPN that Braun 's legal team merely consulted with him during Braun 's appeal , and confirmed that he never spoke to Braun himself . 
 On June 4 , 2013 , ESPN reported that MLB was preparing suspensions for players linked to using PEDs provided by Biogenesis of America , and its founder , Anthony Bosch . ESPN reported that Braun could have been suspended for as many as 100 games if found guilty , although the appeals process could take months and not yield a suspension until 2014 . 
 On July 22 , 2013 , MLB suspended Braun for the remaining 65 games of the regular season , plus the entire postseason , for his involvement with the Biogenesis clinic . Braun , who will lose $ 3 @.@ 25 million as a result , did not appeal the suspension . In a statement , he said , " I realize now that I have made some mistakes . I am willing to accept the consequences of those actions . " ESPN reported that Braun decided to " strike a deal " with MLB after being presented with the evidence against him . Called a " liar " , he was heavily criticized by the media and other players , particularly for tarnishing Laurenzi 's reputation . In particular , it was later exposed that Braun engaged in a campaign for support from players around the league , accusing Laurenzi Jr. of being an anti @-@ Semite . 
 Although the standard suspension for a first offense under MLB 's drug policy is 50 games , Braun was suspended an additional 15 games for his actions during and after his appeal of the 2011 test . According to the Milwaukee Journal @-@ Sentinel , MLB officials were particularly angered by a speech Braun made during 2012 spring training in which he attacked Laurenzi 's integrity and the integrity of the drug program as a whole . MLB considered Braun 's speech , as well as his earlier attacks on Laurenzi , to be conduct detrimental to baseball — an offense punishable under the collective bargaining agreement , not the drug policy . Braun accepted the additional suspension without appeal because of overwhelming evidence in the Biogenesis case . On August 22 , Braun released a statement in which he apologized for using PEDs . He admitted he used PED 's during the later part of the 2011 season to nurse a nagging injury . The products he used were a cream and a lozenge that would expedite his rehabilitation . 
 = = = Civil lawsuit = = = 
 On August 17 , 2013 , Braun was sued for fraud and defamation by Ralph Sasson , a former close friend with whom Braun attended middle school , high school , and college at the University of Miami . In the lawsuit , Sasson , who claims to be a law student , alleges that he assisted Braun in his original arbitration resulting from a positive drug test in 2011 and that afterwards , Braun refused to pay him . Sasson also alleges that Braun 's use of performance @-@ enhancing drugs dates back to Braun 's days at the University of Miami . After filing the suit , Braun 's attorneys attempted to have the lawsuit dismissed , but in January 2014 , a Milwaukee County judge refused to dismiss the lawsuit . In June 2014 , the lawsuit was dismissed by presiding Judge Paul R. Van Grunsven citing Sasson 's " egregious " misconduct and bad faith throughout the pre @-@ trial process . In January 2014 , the judge granted a motion to seal the entire case and ordered Sasson to not speak about the case in any respect whatsoever . After the case was dismissed , Sasson posted a portion of his own videotaped deposition on YouTube . Sasson 's actions prompted Braun and his attorneys to motion the court to have Sasson held in contempt . On July 23 , 2014 , Sasson was arrested outside of the courtroom after a hearing on Braun 's contempt motion . Roughly 3 weeks later , the Milwaukee County District Attorney notified Sasson that no contempt charges would be filed as Sasson 's YouTube posting was not in violation of any law or valid court order . Sasson has appealed the decision to dismiss the case . On appeal , Sasson argued that he never acted in bad faith and never violated the seal order ; that the seal order violated his First Amendment rights by placing " prior restraints " on his " pure speech " ; and that the seal order was " instituted in violation of Sasson 's due process . " Braun responded by arguing that Sasson waived his First Amendment right to free speech and his Fourteenth Amendment right to due process . In June 2015 the appeals court ruled that the dismissal was properly exercised due to the fact that Sasson had never provided evidence that Braun had made disparaging remarks in writing . 
 = = Player profile = = 
 = = = Hitting = = = 
 Braun has the ability to hit for average and significant power . His fluid swing is compact and short , with tremendous bat speed and a protracted follow @-@ through . Braun waits well on offspeed pitches , and uses the entire field . He drives the ball , no matter where it is in the strike zone . Brewers hitting coach Jim <unk> observed : " He 's got tremendously quick hands and really hits through the ball . He stays on the ball as well as anyone we 've got . " 
 = = = Speed = = = 
 In addition , his speed garnered him comparisons to New York Yankees third baseman Alex Rodriguez . Braun has been timed at 4 @.@ 2 seconds to first base from the right side of the plate . In spring training in 2007 , he was second @-@ fastest in the Brewers ' 60 @-@ yard dash . 
 = = = Defense = = = 
 = = = = Third base = = = = 
 A shortstop most of his life and in college , Braun was inconsistent on defense after switching to third base in 2006 . However , he was noted for his athleticism , his occasional web gems , and particularly for his powerful throwing arm , which was rated the best infield arm in the Brewers ' minor league system by Baseball America in early 2007 . Braun was charged with 34 errors in 2006 , the majority on throws . " It 's a matter of proper footwork " , said Ash in early 2007 . " Most of his problems come because he relies on his arm , which is very strong . " 
 While Yost removed Braun from a number of games in September 2007 for defense , he praised Braun for his improvements . " The great thing about it is it doesn 't involve throwing at all now " , said Yost , referring to Braun 's biggest issue in the spring . " It involves first @-@ step quickness to the ball , which will increase his range . [ He needs to ] soften his hands a little bit . [ His ] hand @-@ eye coordination to the ball needs to be a little better . That comes with repetition , repetition , repetition . " Braun finished 2007 last of all eligible third basemen in fielding percentage ( .895 , with 26 errors ; only the fourth third baseman since 1916 to play 100 games or more in a season and have a fielding percentage under .900 ) , range factor ( 2 @.@ 11 ) , and zone rating ( <unk> ) . His target at first base was Prince Fielder , who finished 2007 last of all eligible major league first basemen in range factor ( 8 @.@ 49 ) , and first in errors ( 14 ) . Similarly , his target at second base , Rickie Weeks , had the lowest fielding percentage of all NL second basemen ( .976 ) , and the lowest zone rating among all major league second basemen ( <unk> ) . 
 It was suggested that it was possible that Braun would learn to play the position adequately , given that David Wright ( who tied for the major league lead in errors by a third baseman in 2005 , his second in the league ) in 2007 became a " passable defender " ( and won the NL Gold Glove at third base ) . 
 Braun , for his part , noted after the 2007 season : " It 's only my second full ( professional ) year of playing third base . I don 't expect to be perfect , but I certainly expect to be better than I have been . I have to continue to work hard , and hopefully I 'll improve . " 
 = = = = Left field = = = = 
 In January 2008 , however , the Brewers acquired three @-@ time Gold Glove @-@ winning center fielder Mike Cameron , prompting the team to move center fielder Bill Hall to third base and Braun to left field . 
 Before the news broke , Braun was taking ground balls at Pepperdine University near Los Angeles . General Manager Doug Melvin left him a voicemail , and after returning the call and learning of the team 's plans Braun grabbed his outfield glove , and started taking fly balls . Braun supported the switch . " [ The outfield glove ] is not broken in yet , but it will get there . I feel like I 'm a good enough athlete and have a good enough work ethic to make the transition pretty easily . " 
 While Braun 's outfield experience until then had consisted of " two games in center field my freshman year in high school , " Braun had speed , arm strength that would make him stand out against other left fielders , and athleticism to make the transition . Early reports were good , as in spring training in 2008 he showed an ability to cover ground , go back on the ball , to his left into the gap , and to his right to cut off balls down the line . Braun looked good tracking liners and high fly balls , and took good routes when cutting off balls down the line or in the gap , holding batters to singles . In March 2008 Manager Ned Yost said that Braun has been " spectacular " in left , and " he 's got an opportunity one day to win a Gold Glove in left field . He certainly does . " 
 In July , by which time Braun was being mentioned in the press as a Gold Glove candidate , Ed <unk> , the Brewers ' outfield defense expert , said : " He probably has the best arm in baseball in left field . He can cover more ground than 90 % of the outfielders out there . " 
 In 2008 , Braun led all major league outfielders with a 1 @.@ 000 fielding percentage . He also led all NL left fielders in putouts ( 275 ) , and was second in the league in range factor ( 1 @.@ 95 ) and fourth in assists ( 9 ) , in 1 @,@ 310 @.@ 1 innings . 
 On May 23 , 2009 , Braun was charged with his first error ever in 190 games in left field , when his throw to third was not caught by either Bill Hall or Craig Counsell , one of whom should have caught it according to Manager Ken Macha , but both of whom were confused as to who was covering the base . In July 2009 , ESPN 's Jon Heyman wrote that Braun had " become a terrific left fielder in no time " . Braun led all NL left fielders in 2009 with a .994 fielding percentage . He also led them in putouts ( 304 ) and range factor ( 2 @.@ 06 ) , was tied for the lead in double plays ( 2 ) , and was third in assists ( 8 ) , in 1 @,@ 364 innings . 
 In 2010 , Braun led NL left fielders in putouts for the third year in a row ( 279 ) , was second in range factor per game ( 1 @.@ 86 ) , and 4th in assists ( 6 ) . 
 = = = = Right field = = = = 
 In 2014 , Braun moved to right field for the Brewers after right fielder <unk> Aoki was traded to the Royals , opening a spot for Khris Davis to play left field . In 2016 , Braun moved back to left field . 
 = = Jewish heritage = = 
 Braun 's father Joe , most of whose side of the family was murdered in the Holocaust , was born in Israel . His father immigrated to the United States at age seven . His father is Jewish and his mother Diane is Catholic . 
 Braun said " I am Jewish " , and " I 'm extremely proud to be a role model for young Jewish kids . " " It 's something I 'm really proud of . But I don 't want to make it into something more than what it is . I didn 't have a Bar Mitzvah .... I didn 't celebrate the holidays . " He reiterated : " It 's something that draws a lot of interest and something I take pride in . " Braun 's mother , however , said he is not Jewish . 
 Braun 's nickname " The Hebrew Hammer " , which was also a nickname for former All @-@ Stars Al Rosen and Hank Greenberg , refers to his Jewish heritage . It is also the nickname of former teammate Gabe Kapler and alludes to former Milwaukee star Hank Aaron ( whose nickname was " <unk> ' Hank " ) , and the movie The Hebrew Hammer , starring Adam Goldberg . In response to the nickname , Braun 's mother reiterated , " He 's totally not Jewish . I heard some organization started called him ‘ The Hebrew Hammer . ’ I said , ‘ Oh no . ’ My mother would be rolling over in her grave if she heard that . " 
 Braun is one of the highest @-@ drafted Jewish ballplayers in the history of professional baseball . The New York Yankees made Ron Blomberg the number one pick in the 1967 draft . Braun was considered the best Jewish minor league baseball prospect in 2006 , and became major league baseball 's first Jewish Rookie of the Year the following season . In each of 2007 and 2008 , Braun hit more home runs ( 34 and 37 ) than all but 3 of the top 10 career Jewish home run hitters had hit in their best seasons . Only Hank Greenberg ( 58 ) , Shawn Green ( 49 ) , and Al Rosen ( 43 ) hit more in a single year . Through the 2012 season , he was 2nd on the all @-@ time career list in batting average ( behind Hank Greenberg ) , tied for 3rd in home runs ( with Sid Gordon ; behind Hank Greenberg and Shawn Green ) , 7th on the RBI list ( behind Al Rosen ) , and 8th in hits ( behind Mike Lieberthal ) , for Jewish major leaguers . 
 " Braun " was , coincidentally , the family name of Sandy Koufax , until his mother remarried and he took his stepfather 's name . " There 's no [ family ] connection that I know of " , Braun said , " but it 's kind of cool . " In another coincidence , Braun lived for a time with his maternal grandfather in a house that previously belonged to Jewish Hall of Fame first baseman Hank Greenberg . Braun 's grandfather has lived in the house for over 40 years . 
 In December 2007 , Braun was the only Jewish athlete invited by President George W. Bush to the annual Hanukkah Dinner at the White House , where he talked baseball with the President . Braun was later featured in the 2008 Hank Greenberg 75th Anniversary edition of Jewish Major Leaguers Baseball Cards , published in affiliation with <unk> Trading Cards and the American Jewish Historical Society , commemorating the Jewish Major Leaguers from 1871 through 2008 . Braun was one of three Jewish players in the 2008 All @-@ Star Game and one of three Jewish players on the Team USA 2009 World Baseball Classic team . He and Feldman were voted the 2009 co @-@ Jewish MVP by Jewish Major Leaguers , and he was voted the 2010 Jewish MVP as Breslow received the Most Valuable Jewish Pitcher honors . " There aren 't too many Jewish athletes at the highest level " , said Braun . " It 's something that I certainly embrace . " 
 Braun was inducted into the Southern California Jewish Sports Hall of Fame in January 2010 . 
 The Jewish Daily Forward listed him as number five in the 2011 " Forward 50 " , its list of the 50 most significant American Jews . 
 In 2011 , Braun became the fourth self @-@ identifying Jewish player , and the first in nearly a half @-@ century , to win the Most Valuable Player Award , after Greenberg ( 1935 and 1940 ) , Rosen ( 1953 ) , and Koufax ( 1963 ) . In April 2012 , Shalom Life ranked him Number 5 on its list of " the 50 most talented , intelligent , funny , and gorgeous Jewish men in the world . " 
 = = Outside pursuits = = 
 Braun developed his own signature fashion t @-@ shirt line for Affliction Clothing , a California @-@ based clothing manufacturer who manufactures shirts that are garment dyed and hand distressed . In August 2008 , he filmed a YouTube video with supermodel Marisa Miller for Remington 's <unk> clippers . In October 2008 , Apple released a commercial for a new iPhone , that showed a clip of Braun 's 10th inning walk @-@ off grand slam against the Pittsburgh Pirates on September 25 , 2008 , which kept the Brewers ' Wild Card hopes alive . Gatorade used the same clip in its November 2008 " League of Clutch " commercial . 
 Braun has signed endorsement deals with CytoSport , a supplement maker , Nike , Wilson , Mikita Sports for autographs and memorabilia , Sam Bat , and AirTran Airways , and is working on his own line of aluminum bats . He has appeared in commercials for Muscle Milk , Dick 's Sporting Goods , and regional convenience store chain Kwik Trip . He turned down a request by ABC that he appear on the TV show " The Bachelor " . 
 In 2010 , Braun opened two restaurants in Wisconsin , Ryan Braun 's Waterfront in Milwaukee 's Historic Third Ward and Ryan Braun 's Tavern & Grill in Lake Geneva . In late 2010 , Braun 's Milwaukee location closed for remodeling and re @-@ opened in April 2011 as Ryan Braun 's Graffito , an Italian restaurant . In July 2012 , Braun teamed up with Green Bay Packers quarterback Aaron Rodgers to open a restaurant , 8 @-@ Twelve , in Brookfield , Wisconsin . 
 Braun lost endorsement deals with Kwik Trip and Nike in 2013 after he was suspended for using performance @-@ enhancing drugs . In September 2013 , <unk> Restaurant Group , which manages Ryan Braun 's Graffito Restaurant and 8 @-@ Twelve MVP Bar & Grill , announced that it will end its relationship with Braun . 8 @-@ Twelve MVP Bar & Grill changed its name to " Hom " after losing their affiliation with <unk> and Graffito closed in October of that year . 
 = Destiny 's Child Video Anthology = 
 Destiny 's Child Video Anthology is the fourth video album by American recording group Destiny 's Child . It is a sixteen @-@ music video collection , filmed by the group with various directors during their music career ( 1997 – 2005 ) . The album was produced by Akil Brown with members Beyoncé , Kelly Rowland and Michelle Williams and their manager Mathew Knowles also serving as executive producers . To promote the album , Destiny 's Child collaborated with several publications which offered copies to their readers through their websites . The album was first released on May 31 , 2013 through Columbia Records . Upon its release , it received positive reviews from music critics who praised the visuals included complete with the accompanying choreography . However , one writer felt the album was incomplete and argued that many videos were omitted from the track listing . 
 = = Background and release = = 
 The album was announced via a press release on Destiny 's Child 's website on April 16 , 2013 . It was released through Music World Entertainment , Columbia Records , and Legacy Recordings , and was the group 's third record release with the latter . Destiny 's Child Video Anthology contained sixteen music videos for fourteen songs filmed throughout the band 's music career . It was produced by Akil Brown with members Beyoncé , Kelly Rowland and Michelle Williams as well as their manager Mathew Knowles serving as executive producers . All the featured videos are presented in an aspect ratio – 1 @.@ 33 : 1 . 
 The cover artwork used for the release of the DVD is taken from the music video of " Cater 2 U " ( 2005 ) directed by Jake Nava and it features the members of Destiny 's Child dressed in long form @-@ fitting blue fishtail evening dresses ; it was shot at Red Rock Canyon State Park in California by photographer Daniel Moss . For the release , Destiny 's Child partnered with the website <unk> on May 21 , 2013 which offered a prize pack to its readers featuring the album , two T @-@ shirts and the group 's tourbook . Jet magazine also organized a contest on its official website offering to give away five copies of the DVD . A similar contest was organized on Juicy magazine 's official website , offering five copies from the album to five of its readers . To further promote the album , the group was featured on the R & B division of the Vevo channel at YouTube on June 4 , 2013 . Destiny 's Child Video Anthology was first released in the UK and Germany on May 31 , 2013 It was later released in the US on June 4 and on the country 's iTunes Store two days later , while the following day it was released in Australia . In Japan , Destiny 's Child Video Anthology was released on June 26 , 2013 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Gregory Heaney from the website AllMusic positively reviewed the video album , writing , " [ it ] combines the group 's considerable vocal talents with their amazing choreography , delivering the total Destiny 's Child package as a video greatest @-@ hits compilation " . Jacob Rohn from the website Black Entertainment Television ( BET ) felt that " While each later became a star in their own right , Destiny 's Child as a group was known for their edgy and visually magnetic videos " . He further finished his review by writing , " Destiny 's Child Video Anthology is a must @-@ have for any DC fan and anyone that misses the time when music videos were at their peak . " A writer of ABC News Radio similarly noted that the album was created for " fans who studied all their moves " and remember the choreography . Tanner Stransky of Entertainment Weekly felt the album was the most " indulgent " memory trip to the period of the late @-@ 1990s and early @-@ 2000s memory lane . He further described the videos as " gaudy , stupid fun " . However , a more mixed review came from The Morton Report writer Chaz Lipp who felt that the album was incomplete and noted that eight other videos from the group 's videography were not released . He remarked that the unreleased videos for the songs , most notably the ones from the holiday album 8 Days of Christmas could have been included as bonus selections . Lipp concluded that Destiny 's Child Video Anthology " hits its peak with the group 's best single , the irresistibly funky ' Bootylicious ' " . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits are adapted from the album 's liner notes . 
 A & R – Henry Towns 
 Art direction , design – Rob Carter 
 Project direction – Tara Master 
 Executive producer – Beyoncé Knowles , Kelly Rowland , Michelle Williams , Mathew Knowles 
 Authoring – Mike Nack 
 Front cover photography – Daniel Moss 
 Record producer – Akil Brown 
 Product manager – Tim Anderson 
 Featured artists – Wyclef Jean , Missy Elliott , T.I. , Lil Wayne 
 = Saw ( video game ) = 
 Saw , also known as Saw : The Video Game , is a survival horror video game that was developed by Zombie Studios and published by Konami . The game launched on the PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 consoles , with a downloadable version released soon after for the Microsoft Windows platform . The game was first released on October 6 , 2009 , in North America and was released later that year in other regions . The Microsoft Windows version was released on October 22 , 2009 . Being a tie @-@ in game of the Saw film series , the game is set between the first and second films . 
 In Saw , The Jigsaw Killer has healed Detective David Tapp from his gunshot wound , and places him in an abandoned insane asylum to teach him a lesson in life appreciation . Obsessed , Tapp traverses the asylum and gathers clues along the way in hopes of finally apprehending Jigsaw . As he progresses through the asylum , he encounters several people with past and current connections to him , whom he must save . The asylum also has inhabitants who are in games of their own , ordered to kill Tapp . Along the way , Tapp uncovers the origins of Jigsaw and the motives behind his tests . The development team brought in the Saw creators James Wan and Leigh Whannell to help with the storyline and create new trap designs exclusive to the game . 
 Upon release , Saw received mixed reviews . It was praised for the storyline and multiple endings , as well as the immersive environment that is true to the Saw film series . The controls and combat system , however , were panned by critics . Since Konami purchased the publishing rights after former publisher Brash Entertainment went bankrupt , Konami had a significant input on the games ' final outcome . They stated that they had plans to make Saw their next big franchise as well as a spiritual successor to their other survival horror series , Silent Hill . A sequel , Saw II : Flesh & Blood , was released on multiple platforms on October 19 , 2010 . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Saw is primarily a third @-@ person survival horror game with action elements . The player controls David Tapp , a former detective trapped in the Jigsaw Killer 's asylum filled with traps . The primary goal of the game is to traverse the asylum and solve traps in order to escape . Tapp has several abilities in the game , such as the ability to search things like toilets and corpses to find items such as weapons , health , or clues he can use to fulfill his objectives . Items such as case files and cassette tapes are found hidden around the asylum , and provide additional information about the asylum 's past and give background information about certain victims . 
 The game 's combat system allows the character to block , counter @-@ attack , and perform attacks to fend off enemies . There are over eighteen different weapons available to players , including lead pipes , mop handles , firearms , and explosives . Certain weapons may also be used for other purposes , such as cutting open a body to search inside , or breaking down a molding wall to reveal hidden paths . Weapons in the game deplete upon use in real time until they are rendered unusable . As a way to avoid combat , Tapp has the ability to rearm or place certain traps after activating them . For example , he can electrify water puddles or create and place explosive mines on one of " Jigsaw 's <unk> " . Tapp 's health bar , once depleted , can only be restored by bandages or hypodermic needles , which can be stored in an inventory of items . When Tapp is losing health , the environment slowly fades to black @-@ and @-@ white until Tapp heals himself or dies . 
 At certain points in the game , the player will be joined by AI teammates that help Tapp . There are many points in the game where multiple paths are available that can be taken to avoid certain areas or uncover hidden items . Lighting plays a dynamic role in the game . While Tapp begins with a lighter , other light sources such as flashlights or camera flashes can be found later in the game . Minigames are a major part of the game . These include a searching game in which an X @-@ ray view is used to avoid dangers like razors or syringes , and a game that involves grabbing a key before a " Pain meter " fills and wounds Tapp . Other puzzle minigames include powering fuse boxes , placing rotating gears in a box , and aligning steam valves . Doors rigged with shotguns attached to pulleys are in place all around the asylum . When the player encounters one of these doors , they must press a randomly assigned button before the pulley falls too far , or the gun will discharge . There are puzzles called " environmental traps " , in which Tapp must use different elements in the environment , use the in @-@ game camera , or go to certain locations to accomplish a task . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 = = = Setting = = = 
 Saw , like its film predecessors , is set in the fictional Saw universe in an unnamed urban American city . The overlying storyline follows that of a man named John Kramer . According to the backstory in the film Saw IV , John encountered a series of events , including the loss of his unborn child and being diagnosed with cancer , that caused him to begin testing other people 's will to live . These tests , which ironically killed many of his victims , and the fact that he symbolically carved a puzzle piece out of the flesh of his victims , soon earned him the alias " The Jigsaw Killer " from newspaper reporter Oswald McGullicuty . Due to the chronology of Saw , Jigsaw is still alive and his apprentice Amanda is still assumed to be a victim rather than an accomplice . 
 In Saw , Jigsaw has just concluded the bathroom trap of Lawrence Gordon and Adam <unk> , an incident that occurred at the end of the first film . David Tapp , a police officer who had his throat damaged by Jigsaw 's knife and was later shot in the chest by a suspect named Zep Hindle , has been healed and is brought to Whitehurst insane asylum , an abandoned sanitarium with a reputation for medieval tactics and frequent patient abuse . The asylum has many areas , most of which contain a key trap scene for Tapp to solve . A large part of the asylum consists of cells that were at one time used to hold the criminally insane . Jigsaw placed traps all around the asylum to continue his tests of will for Detective Tapp and his apprentice , Amanda Young , who monitors Tapp as the story progresses . 
 = = = Characters = = = 
 Saw revolves around the Jigsaw Killer and his test subject Detective David Tapp , the games ' protagonist . Jigsaw , a serial killer who is determined to spend the remainder of his life making people appreciate their lives , gives clues to Tapp as he progresses through the game . Clues are usually delivered by Jigsaw 's puppet Billy . Tapp is a veteran detective for the local police force who was recently discharged for mental instability after the loss of his partner , Steven Sing , an event which led him to develop an obsession with Jigsaw . Throughout the game , Jigsaw attempts to teach Tapp to let go of his obsession and focus on survival . 
 In addition to Tapp and Jigsaw , there are six main characters who Tapp must save throughout the game . Amanda Young is a drug user who is now Jigsaw 's apprentice . Jennings Foster is a corrupt CSI who framed an innocent citizen for a hit and run he committed . Melissa Sing is the wife of Tapp 's former partner , Detective Steven Sing . She blames Tapp for her husband 's death and has since become a neglectful parent to her son . Oswald McGullicuty is a newspaper reporter who coined the name " Jigsaw Killer " and accused Tapp of being Jigsaw . Obi Tate is an arsonist who seeks a test from Jigsaw to give his life a purpose . Jeff Thomas is the second survivor of Jigsaw 's games , and has become suicidal after Tapp interrogated him relentlessly about Jigsaw . 
 There are also minor characters spread around the asylum . Most of these people have instructions to kill Tapp and obtain a key placed inside his chest by Jigsaw to free themselves . Some of these attackers have a Reverse Bear Trap and some have a Venus flytrap . Others are equipped with new , unique traps , and some have no traps at all . While not an attacker , a masked figure called " Pighead " is the antagonist . Pighead pursues Tapp around the asylum and watches over Tapp 's game as per Jigsaw 's instructions . At the end of the game , Pighead becomes the only boss battle . 
 = = = Plot = = = 
 The story centers on the kidnapping of David Tapp by The Jigsaw Killer . During the first Saw film , Tapp witnessed his longtime friend and partner , Detective Steven Sing , fall victim to one of Jigsaw 's traps . This left Tapp mentally unstable and he was soon discharged from the police force . Later , Tapp was shot in the chest by Zep Hindle after chasing him in pursuit of Jigsaw . Jigsaw had Tapp healed and concealed a key in his chest . Tapp was then placed in an abandoned insane asylum . Tapp wakes up in a bathroom with the Reverse Bear Trap on him . He quickly pulls it off and ventures into the rest of the asylum . He is led to a medical wing by another victim of Jigsaw , only to be betrayed by the man . Tapp learns that he is being hunted by other victims in the asylum who need the key inside his chest to escape their own games . In the medical wing , Jigsaw informs Tapp that there is a woman trapped in the area who needs Tapp 's help to survive . He quickly deciphers that it is Amanda Young , whom Tapp interviewed after she survived her first test . He saves Amanda , and she follows Tapp until a mysterious figure called Pighead captures her to fake her escape ; she is actually Jigsaw 's secret apprentice . 
 Tapp is forced to move further into the asylum , where he is captured by Pighead and is placed in the Shotgun Collar , which is later used in Saw III . Still in the trap , Tapp finds a second victim who is being held by Jigsaw . The victim , Jennings Foster , blames Tapp for being in his trap and thus harbors hatred for him . Tapp finds Jennings in a Pendulum Trap similar to the one used in Saw V. Tapp releases Jennings , who quickly runs away , believing that Tapp would get him killed if he stayed with him . Tapp moves on to find the next victim left behind by Jigsaw . He traverses the asylum and is led to the grave of his former partner Detective Steven Sing . It is there that Tapp discovers that Jigsaw has captured Melissa Sing , Detective Sing 's widow . She has become a neglectful parent and is convinced that it is Tapp 's fault that her husband was killed . Melissa is found in an Iron Maiden @-@ esque Trap with spinning blades that will mangle her body should the device close on her . Jigsaw informs her that Tapp did not call for backup when searching Jigsaw 's lair and that every one of the traps there could have been easily avoided by using standard police procedure , which makes Tapp responsible for his partner 's death . Tapp saves Melissa . She says Jigsaw gave her the option to leave Tapp , so she quickly runs away . 
 Tapp is beginning to learn that these people all have a dark connection to him . He proceeds to the offices of the building and finds Oswald McGullicuty in the next Jigsaw trap . Jigsaw felt that Oswald was perverting his message , and so he was placed into a Folding Table Trap , which would snap his body in half if Tapp failed to save him . Tapp saves Oswald , but he is swiftly killed by a compacting metal slab before either have a chance to react . 
 Jigsaw then leads Tapp to the asylum 's crematorium , where he informs Tapp that some people actually desire his tests , much to Tapp 's surprise . At the crematorium is Obi Tate , an arsonist who had put advertisements in the newspaper seeking for Jigsaw to test him . Tapp saves him from a burning furnace , but Obi is still frustrated because he wanted to survive his own test . Feeling that Tapp is throwing away a gift from Jigsaw , Obi runs away . Tapp then ventures through a theater , where he finds evidence that a former Jigsaw victim being held there . He soon finds that it is Jeff Thomas , the man who was saved by Sing while he and Tapp were in Jigsaw 's lair . Jeff has since become suicidal from Tapp 's incessant questioning , and has been recaptured by Jigsaw . Tapp saves Thomas from a wall of spikes . Thomas is still frustrated , so he runs away , wounded . As this was the last victim in the asylum , Tapp is free to pursue Jigsaw , but encounters Pighead again . Jigsaw informs Tapp that Pighead wishes to surpass Jigsaw and sabotage Tapp 's game , so he must be stopped . Tapp confronts and kills Pighead ; Jigsaw rhetorically asks him if he 's a murderer , in order to get a key to proceed . 
 = = = = Finale = = = = 
 Tapp heads to the asylum 's library , where Jigsaw confronts him in person to present his final choice to conclude his test . Tapp chases Jigsaw , to no avail , but manages to recover the final choice key . At this point , there are two possible endings . Tapp returns to the library , where he must choose between " Freedom " , which would simply allow Tapp to leave without catching Jigsaw , and " Truth " , in which Jigsaw promises Tapp that his obsession to catch Jigsaw will be satisfied , but at a cost . 
 If the player chooses the Freedom door , Tapp escapes from the asylum , freeing the rest of the people trapped inside . Tapp returns to his apartment and reviews newspaper clippings which label him a hero by those who survived their tests in the asylum . Despite this , Tapp cannot overcome his obsession with Jigsaw and commits suicide in his apartment , leaving Jigsaw free to conduct the rest of the tests as shown in the rest of the Saw films . Since Tapp is shown as being dead in the police memorial that takes place in Saw V , this is considered the canon ending that fits the films . The game 's sequel also confirmed that Tapp escaped from the asylum and killed himself . 
 If the player chooses the Truth door , Tapp pursues a mysterious cloaked figure who he believes to be Jigsaw . After catching and brutally beating the figure , Tapp realizes that it is actually Melissa Sing , a victim whom Tapp had saved earlier in the game . A tape found on Melissa explains that Jigsaw had put her in charge of keeping Tapp alive and making sure he followed the rules of Jigsaw 's game after Tapp rescued her . Jigsaw had kidnapped her son and had Pighead sew her mouth shut to avoid her spoiling Tapp 's test . Attempting to run away from Tapp , Melissa desperately charges through a nearby door rigged with a shotgun , which kills her in the same way as her late husband , Steven Sing . Tapp suffers a mental breakdown as a result of his death and is placed in a functional asylum where he still believes he is playing Jigsaw 's games . 
 = = Development = = 
 Prior to the release of Saw III , Twisted Pictures and Brash Entertainment announced they were planning to create a game based on the Saw property . Although no release was confirmed , they stated that the game would most likely release alongside Saw IV . Originally , Brash Entertainment was going to develop the game and co @-@ publish it with Twisted Pictures , the producers of all of the Saw films . The game 's plot was originally to follow that of the first Saw film , with the player assuming control of various characters in Jigsaw 's traps , but this was later changed as development progressed . 
 After the initial announcement , there were no updates from Brash Entertainment . The only form of news came from a teaser site for the game , which was removed as the game moved further into production . The game resurfaced at the Game Developers Conference 2008 , on January 22 , where a teaser trailer was played . The trailer showed franchise staple Billy the Puppet preaching to reporters about their wasted lives . Brash Entertainment confirmed that Zombie Studios had taken over development of the game , and Brash Entertainment would publish . The trailer briefly showed some gameplay elements from one of the traps featured in the game . After the trailer , Brash Entertainment confirmed that the game would utilize the Unreal Engine 3 and be released for the Xbox 360 , PlayStation 3 , PlayStation 2 , and Microsoft Windows platforms . A poster for the game which depicted an amorphous gamepad in a pool of blood was released soon after at the 2008 Comic Con convention . The tagline " Dying To Play ? " was coined by Brash Entertainment for the poster . The development team brought in James Wan and Leigh Whannell , the creators of the first Saw film , to design new traps and help with the storyline for the game . 
 On November 14 , 2008 , Brash Entertainment held a press conference announcing that they would be ceasing operations due to financial difficulties . Since Brash Entertainment was publishing the game with Twisted Pictures , the game itself may have been left in " possible state of limbo " . Considering that the game was far into production , the owners of the Saw brand , Lionsgate considered publishing the game themselves . The idea was soon rejected , as Lionsgate is primarily a film company and has no experience in the video game industry . Konami picked the game up for distribution / development on February 6 , 2009 , after almost four months of uncertainty regarding the game 's fate . The game , now under control of Konami , was redesigned to be a spiritual successor to Konami 's other survival horror franchise , Silent Hill . While key elements were retained , Konami did have a large influence in the development of the game . The only cast member to reprise their role from the films was Tobin Bell as The Jigsaw Killer . Other cast members were replaced with other actors prominent in the video game voice @-@ over industry . Earl Alexander replaced Danny Glover as the voice of protagonist David Tapp . Instead of actress Shawnee Smith , Jen Taylor voiced Amanda Young . Other cast members include David Scully as Oswald McGullicuty and Kahn Doan as new character Melissa Sing . Konami plans to use Saw for its visual intensity rather than traditional psychological terror . 
 = = = Mod support = = = 
 The PC version of Saw includes the Unreal Editor , which allows a user to create additional levels and modifications for the game . In order to launch it , <unk> must be run with " editor " command @-@ line parameter . The game was never advertised as moddable , and this feature is mostly unnoticed by the mod community . There is only one released mod , Truth , where the player controls Melissa Sing . The mod continues the game 's story after the Truth ending . 
 = = Marketing and release = = 
 To advertise the game , Konami released a series of screenshots and viral videos prior to release . The screenshots depicted different areas of the asylum and victims in their traps . The videos demonstrated the first hour or so of the game and included certain gameplay elements . While a few of the videos are inaccurate due to the developer making dramatic changes to the environment and gameplay , they still maintained the general roots of the game and the storyline . 
 On August 8 , 2009 , the Konami website had lost the entire section on Saw , including screenshots and information . The site was soon restored within a few days with updated information , including the official ESRB rating of Mature 17 + for blood and gore , drug reference , intense violence , and strong language . Other ratings were released later from the BBFC and the ACB , which gave Saw an 18 + and a MA15 + rating respectively . 
 The game was originally intended to include an online multi @-@ player offering , but that was later canceled . Since the game was in early development stages at the time , no further details were released . On September 17 , 2009 , Konami released the full list of Xbox Live achievements for the Xbox 360 version of the game . The game was released in North America on October 6 , 2009 , for the Xbox 360 and PlayStation 3 , with other countries and the Microsoft Windows platforms being released at later times in 2009 . The Microsoft Windows version , which was released on October 22 , 2009 , was originally intended to be released exclusively through Valve 's Steam digital distribution service ; this was later corrected when Konami announced that Saw would also be available through another online distributor , Direct2Drive . 
 = = Soundtrack = = 
 The soundtrack for the game is an original score composed by Alex Guilbert . The theme for Saw , a series of plunking piano keys joined by a bass drum and violins , can be heard during the menu screen and the end credits . At some points during the game , a quick tempo score similar to the opening piano track is used to increase suspense during trap and puzzle sequences . A high @-@ pitched tune can be heard during slower parts of the game , which was used to make these parts more ominous . Variations or mixes of these tracks occur throughout the game . The game utilizes a minimalist approach to music , with most of the ambient sound being provided by other victims , screaming or taunting protagonist David Tapp . Because the tracks were meant for a video game , there are no vocals ; the tracks are much shorter than typical songs and are more abundant . 
 The game is the first piece of digital Saw media not to feature the series ' staple " Hello Zepp " theme , a piece composed by Charlie Clouser and traditionally used in every Saw film . Because of this , the music for the game is often <unk> to Clouser , even though it was clarified as early as 2008 that Guilbert would be composing , with no mention of Clouser . 
 The soundtrack includes three bonus tracks , which extend the total length from 1 : 08 : 04 to 1 : 08 : 43 . These appear on the bonus features of the game , which include the Saw VI CGI trailer and the E3 2009 demo . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Saw received mixed reviews . The Xbox 360 version of the game currently holds an average score of 59 percent on the game aggregator Metacritic , based on 35 reviews ; the PlayStation 3 version has 59 percent from 36 reviews . On another aggregator site , GameRankings , the Xbox 360 version has a 60 @.@ 89 percent score based on 27 reviews , while the PlayStation 3 has 58 @.@ 57 percent from 23 reviews . The PC version holds a lower score of 44 @.@ 33 percent , based solely on three reviews . Although the game was nearly universally praised for the storyline and the two endings the game presented and critics consistently mentioned the immersive atmosphere and environment as being true to the Saw series , the quality level of puzzles were mixed , depending on the reviewer . The controls in general were not well received by many , and worse the combat system was panned by nearly every reviewer . 
 Official Xbox Magazine gave the game a 4 @.@ 5 out of a possible 10 , stating , " Whether you 're swinging a pipe or a scalpel , the controls never feel responsive , and rotten collision detection will drive you mad before Jigsaw 's twisted games even have the chance . " David Clayman , writer for IGN , gave Saw a 7 @.@ 5 out of a possible ten , earning it a rating of " Good " . Clayman praised the unique take on the survival horror franchise and the omnipresence of Jigsaw , but criticized the repetitive puzzles and the flawed combat system . Clayman even called the combat the Achilles ' heel of the game . He went on to say : 
 Overall , Saw is a welcome entry in the horror genre that provides a good dosage of thrills . Depending on your tolerance for repetition , it 's a good way to test your nerves and scare yourself silly during a dark and stormy night . 
 While reviewing the game , many critics pointed out the quality of Guilbert 's soundtrack . Eric Qualls praised the soundtrack , calling it a high point of the game . He stated that " The same sound effects and similar music and everything just sounds right " . Qualls went on to compliment Tobin Bell 's voice as a good addition to the music and the environment . Reviewer Kadath Bird noted the absence of the Hello Zepp theme , though the review did not comment on the soundtrack itself . 
 While Saw received mixed reviews , a general consensus among reviewers was that fans of the film series would enjoy it . Reviewer for Xbox 360 Achievements Alan Pettit wrote that while he enjoyed the game , it was not an outstanding title . Pettit commented that the game suffered due to the choice of Zombie Studios as the developer and that the franchise could be successful if a sequel was made with changes in developer and budget . Although he claimed it was repetitive , Pettit mentioned that " If there was only one thing the game did well , I 'd say the puzzles that are put before you are excellently constructed , well thought out and best of all , difficult enough that you may not get it on your first attempt . " The resulting score from Pettit 's review was a 74 out of 100 . 
 = = = Controversy = = = 
 Akin to the films , the Saw video game has been the subject of much controversy , often being classified as " torture porn " by its critics . Its violence and visual intensity sparked many allegations that the main goal of the game is to mutilate characters simply for the sake of doing so . It was compared to games such as Grand Theft Auto IV , MadWorld , and Manhunt , but contrasted for the claim that the aforementioned games ' violence served a somewhat humorous purpose or had some type of moral reprieve . William Usher of Cinema Blend wrote that Saw pushed controversial boundaries and called it a " tutorial for sadists to get pleasure from " . Usher said that the lack of a moral message makes it even more controversial . 
 The game contains one scene that allows players to cut open bodies and sift through their insides to retrieve a key . This area was a particular focus for critics , chief among them being Cinema Blend . It was stated that this scenario was " sick " and " tasteless " . Konami had already received indefinite BBFC and ESRB ratings , so the game was released in all regions without any censorship . Robert Workman of Game Daily agreed with the sentiment that moral messages presented an issue to the game and included it in the " top ten controversial games of 2009 . " Mac World writer Chris Holt showed surprise that Konami would choose to release Saw but refuse to publish Six Days in Fallujah due to controversial factors . Konami later stated that this was because the events that took place in Fallujah were real events that could cause offense to some while Saw was entirely fictional . 
 Despite the controversy surrounding the game , it was approved for release in Germany and Australia , countries that are known to ban explicit video games . Producer John Williamson stated in an interview , " I thought , just based on everything I always read online , that it would never get through , but it went through on the first pass . " Williamson attempted to justify the release of the game by noting the intellectual elements of both the game and the film franchise . He pointed out : 
 I think they reviewed the game based on everything that was in it , not just on a couple of minutes of it , just like the Saw movies themselves aren 't really pure torture porn . If you pay attention , there 's actually usually a big twist in them . 
 He went on to comment that the Saw films would not continue to appeal to fans if they were stereotypical torture porn . 
 = = Sequel = = 
 On April 9 , 2010 , Konami announced Saw II : Flesh & Blood and released a teaser trailer . The sequel is set between the first game and second films . The protagonist is David Tapp 's estranged son Michael , who seeks the cause of his father 's death , which leads him into conflict with the Jigsaw Killer and the second Pighead . It was released in October 2010 to coincide with the release of Saw 3D , the seventh and final film in the series . 
 = Elias Ashmole = 
 Elias Ashmole ( / <unk> <unk> / ; 23 May 1617 – 18 May 1692 ) was a celebrated English antiquary , politician , officer of arms , astrologer and student of alchemy . Ashmole supported the royalist side during the English Civil War , and at the restoration of Charles II he was rewarded with several lucrative offices . 
 Ashmole was an antiquary with a strong Baconian leaning towards the study of nature . His library reflected his intellectual outlook , including works on English history , law , numismatics , chorography , alchemy , astrology , astronomy , and botany . Although he was one of the founding Fellows of the Royal Society , a key institution in the development of experimental science , his interests were antiquarian and mystical as well as scientific . He was an early freemason , although the extent of his involvement and commitment is unclear . Throughout his life he was an avid collector of curiosities and other artefacts . Many of these he acquired from the traveller , botanist , and collector John Tradescant the Younger . Ashmole donated most of his collection , his antiquarian library and priceless manuscripts to the University of Oxford to create the Ashmolean Museum . 
 = = Solicitor , royalist and freemason = = 
 Ashmole was born in <unk> Street , Lichfield , Staffordshire . His family had been prominent , but its fortunes had declined by the time of Ashmole 's birth . His mother , Anne , was the daughter of a wealthy Coventry draper , Anthony Bowyer , and a relative of James Paget , a Baron of the Exchequer . His father , Simon Ashmole ( 1589 – 1634 ) , was a saddler , who had served as a soldier in Ireland and Europe . Elias Ashmole attended Lichfield Grammar School ( now King Edward VI School ) and became a chorister at Lichfield Cathedral . In 1633 , he went to live in London as mentor to Paget 's sons , and in 1638 , with James Paget 's help , he qualified as a solicitor . He enjoyed a successful legal practice in London , and married Eleanor Mainwaring ( 1603 – 1641 ) , a member of a déclassé Cheshire aristocratic family , who died , while pregnant , only three years later on 6 December 1641 . Still in his early twenties , Ashmole had taken the first steps towards status and wealth . He also became allied with Major @-@ General Charles Worsley ( who died 12 June 1656 and was buried at Westminster Abbey ) , brother @-@ in @-@ law of his sister , Mary Ashmole , who married John Booth , of Salford . 
 Ashmole supported the side of Charles I in the Civil War . At the outbreak of fighting in 1642 , he left London for the house of his father @-@ in @-@ law , Peter Mainwaring of Smallwood , Cheshire . There he lived a retired life until 1644 , when he was appointed King 's Commissioner of Excise at Lichfield . Soon afterwards , at the suggestion of George Wharton , a leading astrologer with strong court connections , Ashmole was given a military post at Oxford , where he served as an ordnance officer for the King 's forces . In his spare time , he studied mathematics and physics at his lodgings , Brasenose College . There he acquired a deep interest in astronomy , astrology , and magic . In late 1645 , he left Oxford to accept the position of Commissioner of Excise at Worcester . Ashmole was given the additional military post of captain in Lord Astley 's Regiment of Foot , part of the Royalist Infantry , though as a mathematician , he was seconded to artillery positions . He seems never to have participated in any actual fighting . 
 After the surrender of Worcester to the Parliamentary Forces in July 1646 , he retired to Cheshire . Passing through Lichfield on his way there , he learnt that his mother had died just three weeks before from the plague . During this period , he was admitted as a freemason . His diary entry for 16 October 1646 reads in part : " I was made a Free Mason at Warrington in Lancashire , with Coll : Henry Mainwaring of <unk> [ <unk> ] in Cheshire . " Although there is only one other mention of masonic activity in his diary he seems to have remained in good standing and well @-@ connected with the fraternity as he was still attending meetings in 1682 . On 10 March that year he wrote : " About 5 H : P.M. I received a <unk> to appeare at a Lodge to held the next day , at Masons Hall London . " The following day , 11 March 1682 , he wrote : " Accordingly , I went ... I was the Senior Fellow among them ( it being 35 <unk> since I was admitted ) ... We all <unk> at the halfe Moone Taverne in <unk> , at a Noble Dinner <unk> at the charge of the New @-@ accepted Masons . " Ashmole 's notes are one of the earliest references to Freemasonry known in England , but apart from these entries in his autobiographical notes , there are no further details about Ashmole 's involvement . 
 = = Wealthy collector = = 
 In 1646 – 47 , Ashmole made several simultaneous approaches to rich widows in the hope of securing a good marriage . In 1649 , he married Mary , Lady Mainwaring ( daughter of Sir William Forster of Aldermaston ) , a wealthy thrice @-@ widowed woman twenty years his senior ; she may have been a relative by marriage of his first wife 's family and was the mother of grown children . The marriage took place despite the opposition of the bride 's family , and it did not prove to be harmonious : Lady Mainwaring filed suit for separation and alimony but it was dismissed by the courts in 1657 . Nevertheless , the marriage provided Ashmole with Mary 's first husband 's estates centred on Bradfield in Berkshire which left him wealthy enough to pursue his interests , including botany and alchemy , without concern for having to earn a living . He arranged for his friend Wharton to be released from prison and appointed him to manage the estates . 
 During the 1650s , Ashmole devoted a great deal of energy to the study of alchemy . In 1650 , he published <unk> <unk> under the <unk> pseudonym James <unk> . This work was an English translation of two Latin alchemical works , one by Arthur Dee , the son of John Dee . In 1652 , he published his most important alchemical work , Theatrum Chemicum Britannicum , an extensively annotated compilation of metaphysical poems in English . The book preserved and made available many works that had previously existed only in privately held manuscripts . A corrected edition using Ashmole 's two errata sheets and the additional chapter seven of a piece by Thomas Charnock was published in 2011 . There is little evidence that Ashmole conducted his own alchemical experiments . He appears to have been a collector of alchemical writings and a student of alchemy rather than an active practitioner , and refers to himself as a pupil of William Backhouse . His final alchemical publication was The Way to Bliss in 1658 , but thereafter his interest seems to wane in favour of his other pursuits . Ashmole promoted the use of therapeutic remedies drawing on both Galenic and <unk> principles , and his works attempt to merge the two schools . The Way to Bliss recommends ways to prevent illness : a balanced diet , moderate exercise and enough sleep . His works were avidly studied by other natural philosophers , such as Isaac Newton . 
 Ashmole met the botanist and collector John Tradescant the younger around 1650 . Tradescant had , with his father , built up a vast and renowned collection of exotic plants , mineral specimens and other curiosities from around the world at their house in Lambeth . Ashmole helped Tradescant catalogue his collection in 1652 , and , in 1656 , he financed the publication of the catalogue , the <unk> <unk> . In 1659 , Tradescant , who had lost his only son seven years earlier , legally deeded his collection to Ashmole . Under the agreement , Ashmole would take possession at Tradescant 's death . When Tradescant died in 1662 , his widow , Hester , contested the deed , claiming her husband had signed it when drunk without knowing its contents , but the matter was settled in Chancery in Ashmole 's favour two years later . Hester was to hold the collection in trust for Ashmole until her death . Ashmole 's determined aggressiveness in obtaining the Tradescant collection for himself has led some scholars to consider that Ashmole was an ambitious , ingratiating social climber who stole a hero 's legacy for his own glorification . 
 = = Restoration = = 
 Ashmole embarked on further catalogues , including one of the Roman coin collection of the Bodleian Library , which he finally completed in 1666 after eight years of work . It may have taken so long because Ashmole 's progress was interrupted by the Restoration of Charles II in 1660 , when Ashmole 's loyalty was richly rewarded with political offices . He was appointed Secretary and Clerk of the Courts of Surinam and Comptroller of the White Office . While these two titles do not seem to have provided either an income or any specific duties , he also became Commissioner and then Comptroller for the Excise in London , and later was made the Accountant @-@ General of the Excise , a position that made him responsible for a large portion of the King 's revenue . These latter posts yielded him considerable income as well as considerable power of patronage . 
 The King commissioned Ashmole to prepare a catalogue of the coins and medals held in the Royal Collection , and appointed him to lead a commission responsible for tracing items from the collection which had been dispersed or sold by the parliamentary regime . Ashmole also appears to have been involved in the organisation of the coronation , or at least set himself up as an expert upon it . 
 Ashmole became one of the founding Fellows of the Royal Society in 1661 , but he was not very active in the society . His most significant appointment was to the College of Arms as Windsor Herald of Arms in Ordinary in June 1660 . In this position he devoted himself to the study of the history of the Order of the Garter , which had been a special interest of his since the 1650s , and he proposed a design for the Royal Society 's coat of arms . 
 By 1665 , he was collecting information for his county history , The Antiquities of Berkshire ; and in 1672 he published The Institution , Laws and Ceremonies of the Most Noble Order of the Garter , a lavish folio with illustrations by Wenceslaus Hollar , for which he had conducted years of research . An earlier attempt to promote himself as the official historiographer of the order had failed but this work firmly established Ashmole as an expert . He had written a large part of it in 1665 while living in the country to escape the Great Plague which was then raging in London . Presentation copies sent to the foreign members of the order were reciprocated by gifts of gold insignia from the King of Denmark , the Elector of Brandenburg and the Elector Palatine . Ashmole performed the heraldic and genealogical work of his office scrupulously , and he was considered a leading authority on court protocol and ceremony . 
 On 1 April 1668 , Lady Mainwaring died , and on 3 November the same year Ashmole married Elizabeth Dugdale ( 1632 – 1701 ) , the much younger daughter of his friend and fellow herald , the antiquarian Sir William Dugdale . All of Elizabeth 's pregnancies ended in stillbirths or miscarriages , and Ashmole remained childless . In 1675 , he resigned as Windsor Herald , perhaps because of factional strife within the College of Arms . He was offered the post of Garter Principal King of Arms , which traditionally came with a knighthood , but he turned it down in favour of Dugdale . 
 Ashmole possessed his own coat of arms , to which he proved his entitlement by descent from armigerous ancestors , expressed in heraldic terminology as Quarterly , Gules and Or a Fleur de lis Argent in the first quarter with a Greyhound courant for the crest . After the Restoration , Ashmole was granted a new crest in place of the greyhound , one which reflected his interest in astrology : On a wreath Sable and Or the Planet Mercury collocated in the middle of the <unk> Signe Gemini Proper his right hand extended toward Heaven and left holding a <unk> Rod Or . The new grant also altered the tinctures of his arms to Quarterly Sable and Or a Fleur de lis in the first quarter . 
 The Restoration led to the re @-@ establishment of the Church of England , and Ashmole presented new prayer books to Lichfield Cathedral . In 1684 , Dugdale wrote to his son @-@ in @-@ law that " the vulgar sort of people " were not " yet weaned from the presbyterian practises , which was long prayers of their own devising , and senseless sermons " . Like many royalists , Ashmole 's circle was contemptuous of non @-@ conformity . Though Ashmole was " one of the earliest Freemasons , [ and ] appears from his writings to have been a zealous Rosicrucian " , John <unk> wrote that " Anthony Wood hath falsely called him a Rosicrucian , Whereas no man was further from <unk> such follies . " Ashmole 's involvement with Freemasonry and Rosicrucianism may have been social or the interest of an antiquarian , rather than born out of any religious fervour . However , the notion of a repository of universal knowledge is described in Rosicrucian writings and this idea may have partly inspired Ashmole 's desire to found a great museum . 
 = = Ashmolean Museum = = 
 In 1669 , Ashmole received a Doctorate in Medicine from the University of Oxford . He maintained his links with the University and , in 1677 , Ashmole made a gift of the Tradescant Collection , together with material he had collected independently , to the University on the condition that a suitable home be built to house the materials and make them available to the public . Ashmole had already moved into the house adjacent to the Tradescants ' property in 1674 and had already removed some items from their house into his . In 1678 , in the midst of further legal wrangling over the Tradescant Collection , Hester was found drowned in a garden pond . By early 1679 , Ashmole had taken over the lease of the Tradescant property and began merging his and their collections into one . The Ashmolean Museum was completed in 1683 , and is considered by some to be the first truly public museum in Europe . According to Anthony Wood , the collection filled twelve wagons when it was transferred to Oxford . It would have been more , but a large part of Ashmole 's own collection , destined for the museum , including antiquities , books , manuscripts , prints , and 9 @,@ 000 coins and medals , was destroyed in a disastrous fire in the Middle Temple on 26 January 1679 . As a result of the fire , the proportion of the collection derived from the Tradescants was larger than originally anticipated and in the opinion of Professor Michael Hunter this misfortune has contributed to criticisms that Ashmole took an unfair share of the credit in assembling the collection at the expense of the Tradescants . 
 In 1678 , Ashmole stood as a candidate in a by @-@ election for the Lichfield borough parliamentary constituency caused by the death of one of the two incumbent members . During Ashmole 's campaign his cousin , Thomas <unk> , who was acting as a kind of campaign manager , fell ill and died . Ashmole did not visit the constituency , and , as Ashmole 's own horoscope had predicted , he lost the election . He also put himself forward as a candidate in the general election of 1685 . Surviving documents indicate that he was the most popular candidate , but after King James II requested he stand down ( in an age when monarchs were likely to interfere with parliamentary elections ) , Ashmole did so . On election day , all the votes cast for Ashmole , instead of being declared invalid , were declared as votes for the King 's candidate , and only as a result of this ruse was the candidate favoured by the Court ( Richard Leveson ) elected . 
 Ashmole 's health began to deteriorate during the 1680s . He continued to hold his excise office throughout the reign of James II and after the Glorious Revolution until his death but became much less active in affairs . His home cures included hanging three spiders around his neck which " drove my <unk> away " . He began to collect notes on his life in diary form to serve as source material for a biography ; although the biography was never written , these notes are a rich source of information on Ashmole and his times . He died at his house in Lambeth on 18 May 1692 , and was buried at St. Mary 's Church , Lambeth on 26 May . Ashmole bequeathed the remainder of his collection and library to Oxford for the Ashmolean Museum . Two @-@ thirds of his library now resides in the Bodleian at Oxford ; its separation from the museum collection in the Victorian era contributed to the belief that Ashmole designed the museum around the Tradescant collection , rather than his own . Ashmole 's widow , Elizabeth , married a stonemason , John Reynolds , on 15 March 1694 . They had no children and on her death seven years later the house and lands in Lambeth passed into Reynolds 's hands . 
 Vittoria <unk> , in her recent monograph , Elias Ashmole and the Uses of Antiquity ( Paris , 2013 ) has described Ashmole as an antiquary first and foremost , who understood the value of the New Science , which he promoted through his Museum . <unk> , however , has warned that antiquity was Ashmole 's greatest passion , as well as his main tool for self @-@ fashioning . Michael Hunter , in his entry on Ashmole for the Oxford Dictionary of National Biography , concluded that the most salient points of Ashmole 's character were his ambition and his hierarchical vision of the world — a vision that unified his royalism and his interests in heraldry , genealogy , ceremony , and even astrology and magic . He was as successful in his legal , business and political affairs as he was in his collecting and scholarly pursuits . His antiquarian work is still considered valuable , and his alchemical publications , especially the Theatrum Chemicum Britannicum ( 1652 ) , preserved many works that might otherwise have been lost . He formed several close and long @-@ lasting friendships , with the astrologer William Lilly for example , but , as Richard Garnett observed , " acquisitiveness was his master passion " . 
 = Pachylemur = 
 Pachylemur is an extinct , giant lemur most closely related to the ruffed lemurs of genus Varecia . Two species are known , Pachylemur insignis and Pachylemur jullyi , although there is some doubt as to whether or not they may actually be the same species . Pachylemur is sometimes referred to as the giant ruffed lemur , because although it and the living ruffed lemurs had similar teeth and skeletons , Pachylemur was more robust and as much as three to four times larger . DNA studies have confirmed a sister group relationship between these two types of lemur . Like living ruffed lemurs , Pachylemur specialized in eating fruit , and was therefore an important seed disperser , possibly for tree species with seeds too large for even ruffed lemurs to swallow . In the spiny thickets of southwestern Madagascar , they were also likely to have dispersed seeds evolved to attach to fur and be carried away . Unlike ruffed lemurs , the fore- and hindlimbs of Pachylemur were nearly the same length , and therefore it was likely to be a slow , deliberate climber . However , both used hindlimb suspension to reach fruit on small branches below them . 
 Like other lemurs , Pachylemur was only found on the island of Madagascar , and its subfossil remains have been found primarily at sites in the central and southwestern parts of the island . Fragmentary and indeterminate remains have also been found in northern Madagascar . Pachylemur once lived in diverse lemur communities within its range , but in many of these locations , 20 % or fewer of the original lemur species remain . Pachylemur went into decline following the arrival of humans in Madagascar around 350 BCE . Habitat loss , forest fragmentation , and bushmeat hunting are thought to have been the reasons for its disappearance . Pachylemur is thought to have gone extinct between 680 – 960 CE , although subfossil remains found in a cave pit in southwestern Madagascar may indicate that it survived up until 500 years ago . 
 Pachylemur remains were first described in 1895 by French zoologist Henri Filhol and were originally included in the genus Lemur , along with the ring @-@ tailed lemur and other close relatives currently classified within the family Lemuridae . In 1948 , French paleontologist Charles Lamberton placed the species in the subgenus Pachylemur , which was recognized as a genus by 1979 . However , due to earlier uses of the name Pachylemur , the priority of an alternative genus name proposed by Guillaume Grandidier in 1905 , and errors in Lamberton 's 1948 description of the genus , the availability of the name under the rules of zoological nomenclature was considered questionable . In 2011 , a petition was filed with the International Commission on Zoological Nomenclature to preserve the name . 
 = = Evolutionary history = = 
 Pachylemur was similar to but significantly larger and more robust than living ruffed lemurs ( genus Varecia ) . In addition to their general morphology , studies of their teeth ( dental anatomy ) also suggest a close relation . In 1953 , William Charles Osman Hill noted that the skull of both P. insignis and P. jullyi ( then called Lemur insignis and L. jullyi ) resembled that of ruffed lemurs more so than the rest of the lemurs classified in the genus Lemur at that time . 
 Because of the similarities , Pachylemur is sometimes referred to as a giant ruffed lemur . In addition to the morphological similarities , molecular studies also support a close relationship . Based on studies of their DNA , Pachylemur and ruffed lemurs form the sister group relative to the rest of the lemurs in the family Lemuridae . This sister group itself forms a sister group with the clade ( related group ) containing brown lemurs ( Eulemur ) , the ring @-@ tailed lemur ( Lemur ) , the greater bamboo lemur ( Prolemur ) , and the lesser bamboo lemurs ( Hapalemur ) . 
 = = = Taxonomic classification = = = 
 French zoologist Henri Filhol was the first to scientifically describe a species of Pachylemur ; he named Lemur insignis and Lemur intermedius in 1895 on the basis of a few subfossil bones . Descriptions of other species now placed in Pachylemur quickly followed . In 1899 , Guillaume Grandidier named a new genus and species , Palaeochirogalus jullyi , on the basis of two teeth from Antsirabe , central Madagascar , which he thought similar to dwarf lemurs ( Cheirogaleus ) . In 1903 , Grafton Elliot Smith placed this species in the genus Lemur ( as Lemur jullyi ) , and in 1905 , Grandidier himself considered the species a synonym of Lemur insignis . 
 Meanwhile , in 1904 , Herbert F. Standing had named a different species using the same name , Lemur jullyi , and named another species Lemur <unk> . He noted similarities between this group and the ruffed lemurs , then considered a single species , Lemur varius . In 1908 , Standing named another species in the group , Lemur majori , and included his Lemur <unk> in L. jullyi . The name Pachylemur was introduced for these animals in 1948 by Charles Lamberton , who grouped Lemur insignis , Lemur majori , and Lemur jullyi in a subgenus of the genus Lemur . 
 Since 1979 , Pachylemur has generally been regarded as a distinct genus , but some classifications include the genus in Lemur or the ruffed lemur genus Varecia . In a 1982 review , Ian Tattersall recognized two species , Lemur insignis and Lemur jullyi . He did not regard Pachylemur as a distinct genus or even subgenus . As Tattersall noted , Lemur jullyi Standing , 1904 , is preoccupied by Palaeochirogalus jullyi Grandidier , 1899 , and thus invalid . However , both names are based on material from the central plateau of Madagascar and Tattersall therefore presumed that they belong to the same species , which he could continue to call Lemur jullyi . Recent classifications recognize Pachylemur as a valid genus with two species — P. insignis ( Filhol , 1895 ) and P. jullyi ( Grandidier , 1899 ) — but express doubt about the distinction between the two species . 
 There are several nomenclatural problems with the current use of the name Pachylemur . First , Filhol had himself used the name Pachylemur in 1874 for a group of primitive primates , including Adapis , that he considered intermediate between pachyderms and lemurs . Several other authors mentioned this name in the 19th and early 20th centuries , but it is questionable that any rendered the name available under the rules of zoological nomenclature . Still , this name potentially renders Pachylemur Lamberton , 1948 , invalid under the Principle of <unk> . In addition , the generic name Palaeochirogalus Grandidier , 1899 , predates Pachylemur Lamberton , 1948 , by half a century and thus takes precedence under the Principle of Priority , and Pachylemur Lamberton is itself unavailable because Lamberton failed to select a type species . To conserve the name Pachylemur , Jelle Zijlstra , Colin Groves , and Alex Dunkel submitted a petition to the International Commission on Zoological Nomenclature in 2011 . The petition asks the Commission to suppress the names Pachylemur Filhol , 1874 , Pachylemur Palmer , 1904 ( based on Filhol 's name ) , and Palaeochirogalus Grandidier , 1899 , and to make Pachylemur Lamberton , 1948 , retroactively available with Lemur insignis as its type species . 
 = = Anatomy and physiology = = 
 Pachylemur resembled the living ruffed lemurs but was three or four times larger , with an estimated body mass of 10 kg ( 22 lb ) for P. insignis and 13 kg ( 29 lb ) for the larger P. jullyi . In addition , the skeleton is more robust . 
 The dental formula is 2 @.@ 1 @.@ 3 @.@ 32 @.@ 1 @.@ 3 @.@ 3 , as in all lemurids . The toothcomb — a comblike structure formed by the lower front teeth , characteristic of lemurs and lorisoids — is similar to that of other lemurids . The two halves of the mandible ( lower jaw ) do not fuse at the mandibular symphysis . However , there are some differences in tooth morphology from the living brown and ring @-@ tailed lemurs , similar to those between the ruffed lemurs and the other genera . In Pachylemur , the talonid basin ( a basin at the back end of the lower molars ) is more elongate , and it is not lined by an entoconid cusp . In the first two upper molars , the lingual cingulum ( a shelf on the inner , or lingual , side of the tooth ) is expanded towards the front . The two species differ in details of tooth morphology . P. insignis had narrower lower premolars and molars , and the buccal ( outer ) cusps on these teeth are located to the front of their lingual counterparts . Relative to the ruffed lemurs , Pachylemur has more massive jaws and larger molars . 
 The skull of Pachylemur is relatively broad , but the orbits ( eye sockets ) are smaller and oriented more towards the front than in the ruffed lemurs . In the postcranial skeleton , the most distinctive traits of Pachylemur are found . It had shorter and more robust limbs than the ruffed lemurs , and the fore- and hindlimbs were closer in length ( intermembral index of approximately 97 ) . 
 Compared to the axial skeleton of ruffed lemurs , the vertebrae of Pachylemur had shorter vertebral bodies and the spinous process had less <unk> . The head of its femur ( thigh bone ) was also relatively large . As of 2001 , no bones of the digits had been found for either species . 
 = = Behavior = = 
 Based on dental wear and the presence of dental caries , Pachylemur was likely a fruit specialist , just like the closely related ruffed lemurs , but unlike most of the other leaf @-@ eating , extinct , giant lemurs of Madagascar . Although it primarily ate fruit , it may have supplemented its diet with leaves and other foliage seasonally . Its teeth were similar in appearance to that of ruffed lemurs , while its molars and uneven dental wear suggest that it ate fewer leaves and more hard fruits and stems than today 's brown lemur species . 
 Because it ate larger , harder , more fibrous fruits than ruffed lemurs , Pachylemur was likely an important seed disperser compared to the more folivorous extinct giant lemurs . Within the spiny thickets of southwest Madagascar , only P. insignis and Archaeolemur majori , a type of extinct monkey lemur , are suspected of having been large @-@ seed dispersers , particularly for plants that use a form of photosynthesis known as C3 carbon fixation . The plants that may have depended on these giant extinct lemurs include Adansonia ( baobabs ) , <unk> , Commiphora , Delonix , Diospyros , Grewia , Pachypodium , Salvadora , Strychnos , Tamarindus , and Uncarina . 
 Black @-@ and @-@ white ruffed lemurs can swallow seeds with a diameter up to 30 millimeters ( 1 @.@ 2 in ) , which is larger than any other living lemur . Having been more than twice as large , Pachylemur would have been capable of swallowing even larger seeds . In the case of baobabs , the fruits have large seeds surrounded by a nutritious pulp and may have required seed dispersal through ingestion . In western Madagascar , the genetic diversity of Commiphora <unk> suggests it had more widespread seed dispersal in the past , but today shows signs of more localized diversity when compared to African species within the same genus that have not lost their seed dispersers . 
 Many small trees and shrubs in the spiny thickets , such as endemic Uncarina , conserve water by producing seeds with hooks and spines rather than fleshy fruits . These seeds attach themselves to the skin and fur of passing animals for dispersal , and are still dispersed by living lemur species as well as introduced species such as cattle . Pachylemur may also have helped disperse seeds in this fashion . 
 For many years , <unk> thought that Pachylemur was a ground @-@ dwelling lemur due to its robust postcranial skeleton . Yet more recent analysis of its axial and appendicular skeleton — particularly the vertebrae and femur — suggests that it was a tree @-@ dweller ( arboreal ) . Like the ruffed lemurs , Pachylemur was also an arboreal quadruped that frequently exhibited hindlimb suspension in order to reach fruit and leaves on smaller branches . However , Pachylemur was a slow , deliberate climber unlike the ruffed lemurs , which leap and bound through the upper canopy . Like the both living lemurs and extinct lemurs , Pachylemur likely conserved energy because of its diet , small brain , and slow climbing . 
 Because its eyes were comparable in size to those of modern day @-@ living ( diurnal ) lemurs , Pachylemur was probably diurnal as well , as were most of the giant , extinct lemurs . However , compared to similarly sized anthropoid primates , its visual acuity was relatively poor . 
