 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The subfossil remains of Pachylemur have been found in all regions of Madagascar , except in the eastern rainforests where no subfossil sites are known . The two species are typically found in the spiny thickets and succulent woodlands of southern / southwestern Madagascar ( P. insignis ) and the subhumid forests of the central highlands ( P. jullyi ) , although other indeterminate or fragmentary remains have been discovered at Ankilitelo Cave in southwestern Madagascar , as well as in the dry deciduous forests at <unk> in the northwest ( possibly P. insignis ) and Ankarana in the northern tip of the island ( possibly P. jullyi ) . 
 Subfossil sites with P. insignis include <unk> , <unk> ( near Anavoha ) , <unk> , Andrahomana , Manombo @-@ Toliara , <unk> , <unk> @-@ <unk> , <unk> @-@ Ankazoabo , Belo @-@ sur @-@ mer , <unk> , Taolambiby , <unk> , and Tsirave in south and southwestern Madagascar . P. jullyi has been recorded at Ampasambazimba , Antsirabe , and <unk> @-@ Betafo in the central highlands of Madagascar . 
 In general , lemur diversity has declined since the arrival of humans due to habitat loss , forest fragmentation , and bushmeat hunting . At some subfossil sites , Pachylemur lived alongside as many as 19 or 20 other lemur species , but now as few as 20 % of those species remain in those areas . 
 = = Extinction = = 
 Humans arrived in Madagascar around 350 BCE , but did not cause the extinction of Pachylemur and the other giant lemurs immediately . Instead , many human @-@ related factors , such as habitat loss , forest fragmentation , bushmeat hunting , and the introduction of invasive species , along with the gradual desiccation of certain parts of the island , caused their decline and eventual extinction over more than a millennium . The same factors threaten all living lemur species today . 
 The initial decline of Pachylemur began within 500 years of human colonization , but prior to the establishment of large human settlements . Hunting in the Central Highlands and the spiny thickets likely caused a substantial drop in its population . Large lemurs , including Pachylemur , survived in the Central Highlands , succulent woodlands , and spiny thickets until around 950 CE . Based on radiocarbon dating of subfossil remains collected as of 2010 , the most recent remains of P. insignis out of 17 dated specimens came from <unk> in the succulent woodlands and dated between 680 and 780 CE . Of eight dated specimens , the most recent remains of P. jullyi came from Ampasambazimba in the Central Highlands and dated between 620 to 680 CE . Pachylemur is generally thought to have gone extinct between 680 – 960 CE , but remains of P. insignis have been found in Ankilitelo Cave ( a pit cave in southwestern Madagascar ) , which is assumed to be less than 500 years old . 
 = Money Inc . = 
 Money Inc. was a villainous professional wrestling tag team in the World Wrestling Federation ( WWF ) from February 1992 to August 1993 . The team consisted of " Million Dollar Man " Ted DiBiase and Irwin R. Schyster ( I.R.S. ) . They held the WWF Tag Team Championship three times , defeating the Legion of Doom , the Natural Disasters and the Steiner Brothers for the title . In addition they had a feud with the Mega @-@ Maniacs ( Hulk Hogan and Brutus Beefcake ) . After Money Inc. split up , DiBiase and Schyster were reunited in two stables , the Million Dollar Corporation and the New World Order , and have made several television appearances during special episodes of Raw . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Formation = = = 
 Both DiBiase and Schyster had gimmicks that focused on money . Schyster , whose initials spelled I.R.S. , portrayed an evil tax accountant . DiBiase had used the gimmick of an arrogant millionaire in the WWF since 1987 . He called himself the " Million Dollar Man " and created his own championship belt , the Million Dollar Championship . He was involved in angles that included purchasing the WWF Championship and paying wrestlers and fans to perform demeaning tasks . The WWF creative team decided that the two characters fit well together and made the decision to pair them together in late 1991 . In February 1992 , a storyline began in which Jimmy Hart , who had been managing The Natural Disasters ( Earthquake and Typhoon ) , turned against his team . In return for a bribe , he gave his team 's contract for a WWF Tag Team Championship match against Legion of Doom ( LOD ) to Money Inc . 
 = = = Tag Team Championships = = = 
 DiBiase and Schyster , managed by Hart , defeated LOD at a house show on February 7 , 1992 in Denver , Colorado , to win the title . This title win was unusual for professional wrestling , as Money Inc. had not yet debuted as a team on WWF television programming . In addition , the decision to give the championship belts to Money Inc. was made in a hurry , as LOD 's Hawk had failed a drug test . The wrestlers were unaware until that night that the title would change hands , and Money Inc . ' s win was not immediately acknowledged on television , as WWF programming was taped in advance . The Natural Disasters , upset by Hart 's assistance to a rival tag team , fired Hart as their manager and turned face , beginning a feud with Money Inc. over the WWF Tag Team Championship . 
 Not wanting to carry two championship belts , Ted DiBiase returned the Million Dollar Championship to the WWF , telling an executive that he would no longer appear with the belt . Money Inc. defended their tag team title against The Natural Disasters at WrestleMania VIII on April 5 and lost the match by countout . Because titles can only change hands via pinfall or submission , Money Inc. retained the belts . Over the next few months , the teams faced each other in rematches on television and at house shows , but Money Inc. managed to retain the title . 
 After Hawk 's suspension ended , the Legion of Doom was given a rematch against Money Inc. at SummerSlam 1992 . The match was promoted as a championship bout , but the Natural Disasters beat Money Inc. for the title a month before the pay @-@ per @-@ view . At SummerSlam on August 29 , the Legion of Doom won the match when Animal pinned DiBiase . 
 At the October 13 , 1992 Wrestling Challenge taping , Money Inc. faced The Natural Disasters in a rematch for the WWF Tag Team Championship . The match originally pitted the Disasters against the Nasty Boys , who were also managed by Hart , but at the last minute , Hart replaced them with Money Inc . Because of this , the Nasty Boys split with Hart and attacked Money Inc. before the match . Later on , the Headshrinkers interfered on behalf of Money Inc. and helped DiBiase make Earthquake submit to the Million Dollar Dream , thereby winning Money Inc. the Championship . After the match , the Nasty Boys again attacked Jimmy Hart . At the 1992 Survivor Series on November 25 , Money Inc. and the Beverly Brothers faced the Nasty Boys and the Natural Disasters in an 8 @-@ man elimination tag team match . During the match , Money Inc. eliminated the Natural Disasters , but Jerry Sags of the Nasty Boys then pinned I.R.S. to win the match . This was the only major victory The Nasty Boys got over Money Inc . , as they failed to win the tag team title in several shots on television and at house shows in late 1992 into early 1993 . 
 = = = Feud with The Mega @-@ Maniacs = = = 
 On the February 15 , 1993 airing of Monday Night Raw , Ted DiBiase wrestled against Brutus " The Barber " Beefcake . Beefcake had sustained a real @-@ life injury to his face in 1990 . While Beefcake was wrestling his first match in two and a half years , DiBiase and Schyster attacked him . DiBiase held Beefcake for Schyster to hit him in the face with a briefcase , but Jimmy Hart repeatedly got in the way before Schyster shoved him out of the ring . I.R.S. then hit Beefcake in the face with the briefcase . Hart justified his face turn by claiming that he felt the need to " step up and do the right thing " and that he " had a change of heart " . 
 Shortly thereafter , Hulk Hogan made his return to WWF television , and he teamed with Beefcake to form The Mega @-@ Maniacs with Hart as their manager . Hogan and Beefcake challenged Money Inc. for the WWF Tag Team Championship at WrestleMania IX . During the match , the referee sustained a kayfabe injury and was knocked unconscious . Hart jumped into the ring , turned his jacket inside @-@ out to reveal black and white stripes similar to a referee 's shirt , and made the three @-@ count to give the match to The Mega @-@ Maniacs . Hogan , Beefcake , and Hart celebrated by opening Schyster 's briefcase and throwing his money into the crowd . A second referee then appeared , and the Mega @-@ Maniacs were disqualified because Hogan had used Beefcake 's steel face protector as a weapon . 
 = = = Final Tag Team Championship = = = 
 Money Inc. feuded with The Steiner Brothers in the spring of 1993 . At the 1993 King of the Ring , The Steiner Brothers and The Smokin ' Gunns defeated Money Inc. and The Headshrinkers in an 8 @-@ man tag team match . The following day , June 14 , 1993 , the Steiners defeated Money Inc. for the WWF Tag Team Championship . Two days later , Money Inc. regained the titles , only to drop them back to the Steiners three days later . Although Money Inc. received several rematches , they were unable to win the belts back from the Steiners . 
 After failing to regain the WWF Tag Team Championship , Money Inc. began a feud with Razor Ramon . DiBiase had been making fun of Ramon over his upset loss to the 1 @-@ 2 @-@ 3 Kid , and even offered Ramon a job as his servant . Ramon was furious with DiBiase and turned face during their feud . Soon after , Ramon distracted DiBiase in a match against the 1 @-@ 2 @-@ 3 Kid , causing the Million Dollar Man an embarrassing loss of his own . At SummerSlam 1993 , Razor Ramon defeated Ted DiBiase in what would be DiBiase 's last WWF match . Later in the event , I.R.S. defeated the 1 @-@ 2 @-@ 3 Kid . DiBiase went on a leave of absence for several months , and Schyster returned to singles competition , feuding with Ramon . 
 = = Reunions = = 
 Mike Rotunda , who portrayed Schyster , and Ted DiBiase continue to be close friends in real life , and they have reunited on several occasions following the disbanding of Money Inc . In 1994 , DiBiase formed the Million Dollar Corporation , a stable of heel wrestlers . Schyster was one of the first wrestlers to join the group and remained in the stable until leaving the WWF in 1995 . In 1996 , DiBiase and Rotunda ( the latter as V.K. <unk> ) were briefly together again in World Championship Wrestling as members of the New World Order . 
 Money Inc. made a surprise one @-@ night return at Raw Family Reunion on October 9 , 2006 . They joined Arn Anderson and Rowdy Roddy Piper to assist Ric Flair , who was facing Mitch . They prevented the rest of Mitch 's Spirit Squad from getting involved in the match , helping Flair secure the victory . 
 At the 15th Anniversary special edition of Monday Night Raw on December 10 , 2007 , Money Inc. had a brief reunion during a 15 @-@ man over @-@ the @-@ top @-@ rope battle royal . After I.R.S. was the last man standing out of the 14 wrestlers that made it to the ring , DiBiase came out as the 15th entrant and paid I.R.S. to eliminate himself . As a result , DiBiase was named the winner of the match . They were also reunited on an episode of RAW in 2010 where they fought with fellow legends after a match between DiBiase 's son Ted DiBiase and Christian . 
 = = In wrestling = = 
 Double @-@ team signature moves 
 Assisted abdominal stretch 
 Double back elbow strike 
 DiBiase 's finishing moves 
 Million Dollar Dream ( Cobra clutch ) 
 Schyster 's finishing moves 
 Write @-@ off ( Flying clothesline to an oncoming opponent ) 
 Managers 
 Jimmy Hart 
 = = Championships and accomplishments = = 
 World Wrestling Federation 
 Million Dollar Championship ( 1 time ) – Ted DiBiase 
 WWF Tag Team Championship ( 3 times ) 
 Pro Wrestling Illustrated 
 PWI ranked them No. 61 of the 100 best tag teams during the " PWI Years " in 2003 
 = Indonesian legislative election , 2004 = 
 Indonesia held legislative elections on 5 April 2004 for both houses of the People 's Consultative Assembly , the country 's national legislature . This included all 550 seats in the People 's Representative Council and 128 seats of the new Regional Representative Council . 
 Final results of the popular vote tally showed that Golkar , the former ruling party of the New Order era , received the largest number of votes . It had lost to the Indonesian Democratic Party – Struggle in the 1999 legislative election . The Democratic Party and the Prosperous Justice Party , two of the newest parties to participate in the elections , received a combined 14 @.@ 8 percent of the popular vote . 
 Based on the final allocation of seats in the People 's Representative Council , Golkar , the Indonesian Democratic Party – Struggle , the National Awakening Party , the United Development Party , the Democratic Party , the Prosperous Justice Party , and the National Mandate Party were qualified to submit candidates for the country 's first direct presidential election later in the year . 
 The election has been described as the most complicated election in the history of democracy . 
 = = Background = = 
 During its 2002 annual session , the People 's Consultative Assembly ( MPR ) added 14 amendments to the Constitution of Indonesia . Included in these amendments were measures to reorganize the legislature . Beginning in 2004 , the MPR was composed of the existing People 's Representative Council ( DPR ) and a new Regional Representative Council ( DPD ) . Because all the seats in the MPR were directly elected , this called for removal of the military from the legislature , whose 38 seats in the Assembly were appointed . This change and an amendment for direct election of the President and Vice President were major steps for Indonesia on the road towards a full democracy . 
 On 13 July 2003 , President Megawati Sukarnoputri signed into effect a law outlining the composition of the reorganized MPR . The new DPD was composed of four representatives from each of the 32 provinces of Indonesia , not totaling more than one @-@ third of the members of the DPR . The revised constitution also set membership in the DPR at 550 . 
 = = Electoral campaign = = 
 During the first phases of registration , 150 parties were registered with the Ministry of Justice and Human Rights . However , this number was reduced to 50 and then 24 after scrutiny from the newly created General Election Commission . This reduction from the 48 parties that stood in the 1999 legislative election was largely attributed to new an election law that allowed only parties that had won two percent of seats in the DPR , or three percent of seats in provincial and regental legislatures in half of the provinces to stand in the 2004 election . Only six parties met this requirement , and the remaining parties were required to merge or reorganize into a new party . 
 The campaign period for parties and candidates began on 11 March and continued until 1 April . It was split into two phases by <unk> , the Balinese day of silence . Parties delivered their national agendas indoors between 11 and 25 March . Although this was meant to encourage dialogue between parties and their constituents , these events were poorly attended . The International Foundation for Electoral Systems conducted a tracking survey that showed not all voters knew how to vote for candidates of the new DPD , or were even aware it existed . 
 Up to 475 @,@ 000 candidates were nominated by the political parties in the national , provincial , and regental levels . More than 1 @,@ 200 candidates stood for 128 seats in the DPD , and 7 @,@ 756 candidates stood for 550 seats in the DPR . Candidates were elected in an open list system . 
 = = Election results = = 
 The election results determined which political parties were eligible to submit candidates for Indonesia 's first direct presidential election , which was held on 5 July . Only parties that received five percent of the popular vote or three percent of seats in the People 's Representative Council could submit candidates . Parties that did not meet these criteria had to join with other parties to meet at least one criterion . 
 = = = Election day = = = 
 Election day , 5 April , was relatively free of major incidents and irregularities . Minor violations included officials helping elderly voters cast and submit ballots . Two Indonesian election officials were also reported killed when delivering voting equipment in Papua . The Australian Parliamentary Observer Delegation and the European Union Election Observer Mission were among the organizations observing the election . 
 = = = Grand total = = = 
 The counting of votes took one month , and the final results were announced on 5 May , one week later than was initially scheduled . Of 148 @,@ 000 @,@ 369 registered voters , 124 @,@ 420 @,@ 339 ballots ( 84 @.@ 06 percent ) were submitted . Of these ballots , 113 @,@ 462 @,@ 414 were considered valid , and 10 @,@ 957 @,@ 925 were declared invalid . In the People 's Representative Council , the Party of the Functional Groups ( Golkar ) received the most number of seats . It had previously lost to the Indonesian Democratic Party – Struggle in the 1999 legislative election after being in power since 1970 . However , fourteen of the twenty @-@ four participating parties refused to certify the election results after allegations of irregular vote counting . 
 = = = Seat allocation = = = 
 To achieve proportional representation , seat allocation was conducted using the largest remainder method , whereby the Hare quota was used to determine seats automatically secured by individual parties . Any remaining seats assigned to the electoral region were allocated to remaining political parties based on the rank order of their remaining votes . 
 A total of 273 disputes were brought before the Constitutional Court , the last of which were decided on 21 June . Of these cases , 38 decisions affected the final allocation of seats in the People 's Representative Council and provincial and regental legislatures . The Democratic Party lost two seats , one to the National Mandate Party and Prosperous Peace Party each . The Pioneers ' Party gained one seat from the United Democratic Nationhood Party . Meanwhile , the only seat allocated to the Freedom Bull National Party by the General Election Commission was reassigned to the Reform Star Party . 
 After the resolution of all disputes , sixteen parties received at least one seat in the People 's Representative Council , while eight received none . The inconsistency in the order of parties according to votes received and seats allocated arose due to a special rule created to address uneven population distribution between Java and other islands . This rule stipulates that the Hare quota values for the provinces in Java were on average higher than those for the outer islands . A party require fewer votes to automatically secure a seat outside of Java . For example , the National Awakening Party ( PKB ) received more votes than the National Mandate Party ( PAN ) but received nearly the same amount of seats . More than half of PKB seats were received in the party 's stronghold of East Java , where the quota value was higher . In contrast , only four of PAN seats were automatically secured . 
 = = = Analysis = = = 
 Results showed that Golkar , the former ruling party of the New Order era led by People 's Representative Council Speaker Akbar Tanjung , had won the largest number of seats , defeating President Megawati Sukarnoputri 's Indonesian Democratic Party – Struggle ( PDI – P ) . Golkar received more votes than other parties in twenty @-@ six out of thirty @-@ two provinces . However , these results occurred because of declining PDI – P popularity rather than an increase in Golkar 's popularity . Golkar 's support in its traditional stronghold of Sulawesi declined due to the performance of medium and small parties in the region . Despite winning the largest share of vote once again in Bali , PDI – P performance there suffered the greatest after the 2002 bombings by terrorist group Jemaah Islamiyah devastated the island province 's economy . 
 Both the National Awakening Party ( PKB ) and the United Development Party ( PPP ) , both of whom were considered Islamic parties , maintained their rankings in the People 's Representative Council . The PKB , co @-@ founded by former President and former Nahdlatul Ulama Chairman Abdurrahman Wahid , continued to perform well in its stronghold of East Java despite losing votes . 
 The Islamic Prosperous Justice Party ( PKS ) and the Democratic Party ( PD ) finished first and second , respectively , in Jakarta , where voting patterns were considered a " barometer of Indonesian politics " . Together , both parties received 42 @.@ 5 percent of votes in the capital city . 
 Polarization of voting patterns based on religion was evident in the eastern provinces . Christianity @-@ based Prosperous Peace Party ( PDS ) received 14 @.@ 8 percent of votes in Christian @-@ dominant North Sulawesi and 13 seats overall in the People 's Representative Council . Likewise , Muslims were more likely to vote for the PKS in regions where religious conflict has been historically prevalent . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The 2004 legislative election was the most complicated in Indonesian history because Indonesians had to vote for representatives at the national , provincial , and regental levels . These factors made Indonesia 's electoral system unique from other systems in the world . The election was described as the longest and most complicated election in the history of democracy and secured the nation 's place as the world 's third largest democracy . Even prior to the election , the seat allocation system for the People 's Representative Council was also deemed " the most complicated in the world " by several news sources across the country . 
 Seven political parties met the criteria to submit candidates for the July presidential election : Golkar , the Indonesian Democratic Party – Struggle ( PDI – P ) , the National Awakening Party ( PKB ) , the United Development Party ( PPP ) , the Democratic Party ( PD ) , the Prosperous Justice Party ( PKS ) , and the National Mandate Party ( PAN ) . The PKS was the only party not to nominate candidates , but it threw its support behind the PAN . 
 Newly elected members of the People 's Representative Council ( DPR ) and the Regional Representative Council ( DPD ) took the oath of office in separate sessions on 1 October , one day later than was scheduled . Both houses then convened together in the early morning of 2 October and took the oath of office as the People 's Consultative Assembly ( MPR ) . <unk> Kartasasmita was elected the inaugural chairman of the DPD with 72 of 128 votes in a run @-@ off against <unk> Gusman on 1 October . The following day , Agung <unk> of Golkar was elected Speaker of the DPR by a vote of 280 to 257 . The Chairman of the MPR was not elected until several days later , when <unk> Nur Wahid of the PKS won the vote 326 to 324 against PDI – P 's <unk> . 
 On 5 October , three regencies were carved out of the province of South Sulawesi to form West Sulawesi as the 33rd province of Indonesia . Because this occurred after the elections , West Sulawesi was not represented in the Regional Representative Council until the 2009 legislative election . 
 = Introduction to general relativity = 
 General relativity is a theory of gravitation that was developed by Albert Einstein between 1907 and 1915 . According to general relativity , the observed gravitational effect between masses results from their warping of spacetime . 
 By the beginning of the 20th century , Newton 's law of universal gravitation had been accepted for more than two hundred years as a valid description of the gravitational force between masses . In Newton 's model , gravity is the result of an attractive force between massive objects . Although even Newton was troubled by the unknown nature of that force , the basic framework was extremely successful at describing motion . 
 Experiments and observations show that Einstein 's description of gravitation accounts for several effects that are unexplained by Newton 's law , such as minute anomalies in the orbits of Mercury and other planets . General relativity also predicts novel effects of gravity , such as gravitational waves , gravitational lensing and an effect of gravity on time known as gravitational time dilation . Many of these predictions have been confirmed by experiment or observation , most recently gravitational waves . 
 General relativity has developed into an essential tool in modern astrophysics . It provides the foundation for the current understanding of black holes , regions of space where the gravitational effect is so strong that even light cannot escape . Their strong gravity is thought to be responsible for the intense radiation emitted by certain types of astronomical objects ( such as active galactic nuclei or microquasars ) . General relativity is also part of the framework of the standard Big Bang model of cosmology . 
 Although general relativity is not the only relativistic theory of gravity , it is the simplest such theory that is consistent with the experimental data . Nevertheless , a number of open questions remain , the most fundamental of which is how general relativity can be reconciled with the laws of quantum physics to produce a complete and self @-@ consistent theory of quantum gravity . 
 = = From special to general relativity = = 
 In September 1905 , Albert Einstein published his theory of special relativity , which reconciles Newton 's laws of motion with electrodynamics ( the interaction between objects with electric charge ) . Special relativity introduced a new framework for all of physics by proposing new concepts of space and time . Some then @-@ accepted physical theories were inconsistent with that framework ; a key example was Newton 's theory of gravity , which describes the mutual attraction experienced by bodies due to their mass . 
 Several physicists , including Einstein , searched for a theory that would reconcile Newton 's law of gravity and special relativity . Only Einstein 's theory proved to be consistent with experiments and observations . To understand the theory 's basic ideas , it is instructive to follow Einstein 's thinking between 1907 and 1915 , from his simple thought experiment involving an observer in free fall to his fully geometric theory of gravity . 
 = = = Equivalence principle = = = 
 A person in a free @-@ falling elevator experiences weightlessness ; objects either float motionless or drift at constant speed . Since everything in the elevator is falling together , no gravitational effect can be observed . In this way , the experiences of an observer in free fall are indistinguishable from those of an observer in deep space , far from any significant source of gravity . Such observers are the privileged ( " inertial " ) observers Einstein described in his theory of special relativity : observers for whom light travels along straight lines at constant speed . 
 Einstein hypothesized that the similar experiences of weightless observers and inertial observers in special relativity represented a fundamental property of gravity , and he made this the cornerstone of his theory of general relativity , formalized in his equivalence principle . Roughly speaking , the principle states that a person in a free @-@ falling elevator cannot tell that they are in free fall . Every experiment in such a free @-@ falling environment has the same results as it would for an observer at rest or moving uniformly in deep space , far from all sources of gravity . 
 = = = Gravity and acceleration = = = 
 Most effects of gravity vanish in free fall , but effects that seem the same as those of gravity can be produced by an accelerated frame of reference . An observer in a closed room cannot tell which of the following is true : 
 Objects are falling to the floor because the room is resting on the surface of the Earth and the objects are being pulled down by gravity . 
 Objects are falling to the floor because the room is aboard a rocket in space , which is accelerating at 9 @.@ 81 m / s2 and is far from any source of gravity . The objects are being pulled towards the floor by the same " inertial force " that presses the driver of an accelerating car into the back of his seat . 
 Conversely , any effect observed in an accelerated reference frame should also be observed in a gravitational field of corresponding strength . This principle allowed Einstein to predict several novel effects of gravity in 1907 , as explained in the next section . 
 An observer in an accelerated reference frame must introduce what physicists call fictitious forces to account for the acceleration experienced by himself and objects around him . One example , the force pressing the driver of an accelerating car into his or her seat , has already been mentioned ; another is the force you can feel pulling your arms up and out if you attempt to spin around like a top . Einstein 's master insight was that the constant , familiar pull of the Earth 's gravitational field is fundamentally the same as these fictitious forces . The apparent magnitude of the fictitious forces always appears to be proportional to the mass of any object on which they act - for instance , the driver 's seat exerts just enough force to accelerate the driver at the same rate as the car . By analogy , Einstein proposed that an object in a gravitational field should feel a gravitational force proportional to its mass , as embodied in Newton 's law of gravitation . 
 = = = Physical consequences = = = 
 In 1907 , Einstein was still eight years away from completing the general theory of relativity . Nonetheless , he was able to make a number of novel , testable predictions that were based on his starting point for developing his new theory : the equivalence principle . 
 The first new effect is the gravitational frequency shift of light . Consider two observers aboard an accelerating rocket @-@ ship . Aboard such a ship , there is a natural concept of " up " and " down " : the direction in which the ship accelerates is " up " , and unattached objects accelerate in the opposite direction , falling " downward " . Assume that one of the observers is " higher up " than the other . When the lower observer sends a light signal to the higher observer , the acceleration causes the light to be red @-@ shifted , as may be calculated from special relativity ; the second observer will measure a lower frequency for the light than the first . Conversely , light sent from the higher observer to the lower is blue @-@ shifted , that is , shifted towards higher frequencies . Einstein argued that such frequency shifts must also be observed in a gravitational field . This is illustrated in the figure at left , which shows a light wave that is gradually red @-@ shifted as it works its way upwards against the gravitational acceleration . This effect has been confirmed experimentally , as described below . 
 This gravitational frequency shift corresponds to a gravitational time dilation : Since the " higher " observer measures the same light wave to have a lower frequency than the " lower " observer , time must be passing faster for the higher observer . Thus , time runs more slowly for observers who are lower in a gravitational field . 
 It is important to stress that , for each observer , there are no observable changes of the flow of time for events or processes that are at rest in his or her reference frame . Five @-@ minute @-@ eggs as timed by each observer 's clock have the same consistency ; as one year passes on each clock , each observer ages by that amount ; each clock , in short , is in perfect agreement with all processes happening in its immediate vicinity . It is only when the clocks are compared between separate observers that one can notice that time runs more slowly for the lower observer than for the higher . This effect is minute , but it too has been confirmed experimentally in multiple experiments , as described below . 
 In a similar way , Einstein predicted the gravitational deflection of light : in a gravitational field , light is deflected downward . <unk> , his results were off by a factor of two ; the correct derivation requires a more complete formulation of the theory of general relativity , not just the equivalence principle . 
 = = = Tidal effects = = = 
 The equivalence between gravitational and inertial effects does not constitute a complete theory of gravity . When it comes to explaining gravity near our own location on the Earth 's surface , noting that our reference frame is not in free fall , so that fictitious forces are to be expected , provides a suitable explanation . But a freely falling reference frame on one side of the Earth cannot explain why the people on the opposite side of the Earth experience a gravitational pull in the opposite direction . 
 A more basic manifestation of the same effect involves two bodies that are falling side by side towards the Earth . In a reference frame that is in free fall alongside these bodies , they appear to hover weightlessly – but not exactly so . These bodies are not falling in precisely the same direction , but towards a single point in space : namely , the Earth 's center of gravity . Consequently , there is a component of each body 's motion towards the other ( see the figure ) . In a small environment such as a freely falling lift , this relative acceleration is minuscule , while for skydivers on opposite sides of the Earth , the effect is large . Such differences in force are also responsible for the tides in the Earth 's oceans , so the term " tidal effect " is used for this phenomenon . 
 The equivalence between inertia and gravity cannot explain tidal effects – it cannot explain variations in the gravitational field . For that , a theory is needed which describes the way that matter ( such as the large mass of the Earth ) affects the inertial environment around it . 
 = = = From acceleration to geometry = = = 
 In exploring the equivalence of gravity and acceleration as well as the role of tidal forces , Einstein discovered several analogies with the geometry of surfaces . An example is the transition from an inertial reference frame ( in which free particles coast along straight paths at constant speeds ) to a rotating reference frame ( in which extra terms corresponding to fictitious forces have to be introduced in order to explain particle motion ) : this is analogous to the transition from a Cartesian coordinate system ( in which the coordinate lines are straight lines ) to a curved coordinate system ( where coordinate lines need not be straight ) . 
 A deeper analogy relates tidal forces with a property of surfaces called curvature . For gravitational fields , the absence or presence of tidal forces determines whether or not the influence of gravity can be eliminated by choosing a freely falling reference frame . Similarly , the absence or presence of curvature determines whether or not a surface is equivalent to a plane . In the summer of 1912 , inspired by these analogies , Einstein searched for a geometric formulation of gravity . 
 The elementary objects of geometry – points , lines , triangles – are traditionally defined in three @-@ dimensional space or on two @-@ dimensional surfaces . In 1907 , Hermann Minkowski , Einstein 's former mathematics professor at the Swiss Federal Polytechnic , introduced a geometric formulation of Einstein 's special theory of relativity where the geometry included not only space but also time . The basic entity of this new geometry is four @-@ dimensional spacetime . The orbits of moving bodies are curves in spacetime ; the orbits of bodies moving at constant speed without changing direction correspond to straight lines . 
 For surfaces , the generalization from the geometry of a plane – a flat surface – to that of a general curved surface had been described in the early 19th century by Carl Friedrich Gauss . This description had in turn been generalized to higher @-@ dimensional spaces in a mathematical formalism introduced by Bernhard Riemann in the 1850s . With the help of Riemannian geometry , Einstein formulated a geometric description of gravity in which Minkowski 's spacetime is replaced by distorted , curved spacetime , just as curved surfaces are a generalization of ordinary plane surfaces . Embedding Diagrams are used to illustrate curved spacetime in educational contexts . 
 After he had realized the validity of this geometric analogy , it took Einstein a further three years to find the missing cornerstone of his theory : the equations describing how matter influences spacetime 's curvature . Having formulated what are now known as Einstein 's equations ( or , more precisely , his field equations of gravity ) , he presented his new theory of gravity at several sessions of the Prussian Academy of Sciences in late 1915 , culminating in his final presentation on November 25 , 1915 . 
 = = Geometry and gravitation = = 
 Paraphrasing John Wheeler , Einstein 's geometric theory of gravity can be summarized thus : spacetime tells matter how to move ; matter tells spacetime how to curve . What this means is addressed in the following three sections , which explore the motion of so @-@ called test particles , examine which properties of matter serve as a source for gravity , and , finally , introduce Einstein 's equations , which relate these matter properties to the curvature of spacetime . 
 = = = Probing the gravitational field = = = 
 In order to map a body 's gravitational influence , it is useful to think about what physicists call probe or test particles : particles that are influenced by gravity , but are so small and light that we can neglect their own gravitational effect . In the absence of gravity and other external forces , a test particle moves along a straight line at a constant speed . In the language of spacetime , this is equivalent to saying that such test particles move along straight world lines in spacetime . In the presence of gravity , spacetime is non @-@ Euclidean , or curved , and in curved spacetime straight world lines may not exist . Instead , test particles move along lines called geodesics , which are " as straight as possible " , that is , they follow the shortest path between starting and ending points , taking the curvature into consideration . 
 A simple analogy is the following : In geodesy , the science of measuring Earth 's size and shape , a geodesic ( from Greek " geo " , Earth , and " <unk> " , to divide ) is the shortest route between two points on the Earth 's surface . Approximately , such a route is a segment of a great circle , such as a line of longitude or the equator . These paths are certainly not straight , simply because they must follow the curvature of the Earth 's surface . But they are as straight as is possible subject to this constraint . 
 The properties of geodesics differ from those of straight lines . For example , on a plane , parallel lines never meet , but this is not so for geodesics on the surface of the Earth : for example , lines of longitude are parallel at the equator , but intersect at the poles . Analogously , the world lines of test particles in free fall are spacetime geodesics , the straightest possible lines in spacetime . But still there are crucial differences between them and the truly straight lines that can be traced out in the gravity @-@ free spacetime of special relativity . In special relativity , parallel geodesics remain parallel . In a gravitational field with tidal effects , this will not , in general , be the case . If , for example , two bodies are initially at rest relative to each other , but are then dropped in the Earth 's gravitational field , they will move towards each other as they fall towards the Earth 's center . 
 Compared with planets and other astronomical bodies , the objects of everyday life ( people , cars , houses , even mountains ) have little mass . Where such objects are concerned , the laws governing the behavior of test particles are sufficient to describe what happens . Notably , in order to deflect a test particle from its geodesic path , an external force must be applied . A chair someone is sitting on applies an external upwards force preventing the person from falling freely towards the center of the Earth and thus following a geodesic , which they would otherwise be doing without matter in between them and the center of the Earth . In this way , general relativity explains the daily experience of gravity on the surface of the Earth not as the downwards pull of a gravitational force , but as the upwards push of external forces . These forces deflect all bodies resting on the Earth 's surface from the geodesics they would otherwise follow . For matter objects whose own gravitational influence cannot be neglected , the laws of motion are somewhat more complicated than for test particles , although it remains true that spacetime tells matter how to move . 
 = = = Einstein 's equations = = = 
 Einstein 's equations are the centerpiece of general relativity . They provide a precise formulation of the relationship between spacetime geometry and the properties of matter , using the language of mathematics . More concretely , they are formulated using the concepts of Riemannian geometry , in which the geometric properties of a space ( or a spacetime ) are described by a quantity called a metric . The metric encodes the information needed to compute the fundamental geometric notions of distance and angle in a curved space ( or spacetime ) . 
 A spherical surface like that of the Earth provides a simple example . The location of any point on the surface can be described by two coordinates : the geographic latitude and longitude . Unlike the Cartesian coordinates of the plane , coordinate differences are not the same as distances on the surface , as shown in the diagram on the right : for someone at the equator , moving 30 degrees of longitude westward ( magenta line ) corresponds to a distance of roughly 3 @,@ 300 kilometers ( 2 @,@ 100 mi ) . On the other hand , someone at a latitude of 55 degrees , moving 30 degrees of longitude westward ( blue line ) covers a distance of merely 1 @,@ 900 kilometers ( 1 @,@ 200 mi ) . Coordinates therefore do not provide enough information to describe the geometry of a spherical surface , or indeed the geometry of any more complicated space or spacetime . That information is precisely what is encoded in the metric , which is a function defined at each point of the surface ( or space , or spacetime ) and relates coordinate differences to differences in distance . All other quantities that are of interest in geometry , such as the length of any given curve , or the angle at which two curves meet , can be computed from this metric function . 
 The metric function and its rate of change from point to point can be used to define a geometrical quantity called the Riemann curvature tensor , which describes exactly how the space or spacetime is curved at each point . In general relativity , the metric and the Riemann curvature tensor are quantities defined at each point in spacetime . As has already been mentioned , the matter content of the spacetime defines another quantity , the energy – momentum tensor T , and the principle that " spacetime tells matter how to move , and matter tells spacetime how to curve " means that these quantities must be related to each other . Einstein formulated this relation by using the Riemann curvature tensor and the metric to define another geometrical quantity G , now called the Einstein tensor , which describes some aspects of the way spacetime is curved . Einstein 's equation then states that 
 <formula> 
 i.e. , up to a constant multiple , the quantity G ( which measures curvature ) is equated with the quantity T ( which measures matter content ) . Here , G is the gravitational constant of Newtonian gravity , and c is the speed of light from special relativity . 
 This equation is often referred to in the plural as Einstein 's equations , since the quantities G and T are each determined by several functions of the coordinates of spacetime , and the equations equate each of these component functions . A solution of these equations describes a particular geometry of spacetime ; for example , the Schwarzschild solution describes the geometry around a spherical , non @-@ rotating mass such as a star or a black hole , whereas the Kerr solution describes a rotating black hole . Still other solutions can describe a gravitational wave or , in the case of the Friedmann – Lemaître – Robertson – Walker solution , an expanding universe . The simplest solution is the <unk> Minkowski spacetime , the spacetime described by special relativity . 
 = = Experiments = = 
 No scientific theory is <unk> true ; each is a model that must be checked by experiment . Newton 's law of gravity was accepted because it accounted for the motion of planets and moons in the solar system with considerable accuracy . As the precision of experimental measurements gradually improved , some discrepancies with Newton 's predictions were observed , and these were accounted for in the general theory of relativity . Similarly , the predictions of general relativity must also be checked with experiment , and Einstein himself devised three tests now known as the classical tests of the theory : 
 Newtonian gravity predicts that the orbit which a single planet traces around a perfectly spherical star should be an ellipse . Einstein 's theory predicts a more complicated curve : the planet behaves as if it were travelling around an ellipse , but at the same time , the ellipse as a whole is rotating slowly around the star . In the diagram on the right , the ellipse predicted by Newtonian gravity is shown in red , and part of the orbit predicted by Einstein in blue . For a planet orbiting the Sun , this deviation from Newton 's orbits is known as the anomalous perihelion shift . The first measurement of this effect , for the planet Mercury , dates back to 1859 . The most accurate results for Mercury and for other planets to date are based on measurements which were undertaken between 1966 and 1990 , using radio telescopes . General relativity predicts the correct anomalous perihelion shift for all planets where this can be measured accurately ( Mercury , Venus and the Earth ) . 
 According to general relativity , light does not travel along straight lines when it propagates in a gravitational field . Instead , it is deflected in the presence of massive bodies . In particular , starlight is deflected as it passes near the Sun , leading to apparent shifts of up 1 @.@ 75 arc seconds in the stars ' positions in the sky ( an arc second is equal to 1 / 3600 of a degree ) . In the framework of Newtonian gravity , a heuristic argument can be made that leads to light deflection by half that amount . The different predictions can be tested by observing stars that are close to the Sun during a solar eclipse . In this way , a British expedition to West Africa in 1919 , directed by Arthur Eddington , confirmed that Einstein 's prediction was correct , and the Newtonian predictions wrong , via observation of the May 1919 eclipse . Eddington 's results were not very accurate ; subsequent observations of the deflection of the light of distant quasars by the Sun , which utilize highly accurate techniques of radio astronomy , have confirmed Eddington 's results with significantly better precision ( the first such measurements date from 1967 , the most recent comprehensive analysis from 2004 ) . 
 Gravitational redshift was first measured in a laboratory setting in 1959 by Pound and Rebka . It is also seen in astrophysical measurements , notably for light escaping the white dwarf Sirius B. The related gravitational time dilation effect has been measured by transporting atomic clocks to altitudes of between tens and tens of thousands of kilometers ( first by <unk> and Keating in 1971 ; most accurately to date by Gravity Probe A launched in 1976 ) . 
 Of these tests , only the perihelion advance of Mercury was known prior to Einstein 's final publication of general relativity in 1916 . The subsequent experimental confirmation of his other predictions , especially the first measurements of the deflection of light by the sun in 1919 , catapulted Einstein to international stardom . These three experiments justified adopting general relativity over Newton 's theory and , incidentally , over a number of alternatives to general relativity that had been proposed . 
 Further tests of general relativity include precision measurements of the Shapiro effect or gravitational time delay for light , most recently in 2002 by the Cassini space probe . One set of tests focuses on effects predicted by general relativity for the behavior of gyroscopes travelling through space . One of these effects , geodetic precession , has been tested with the Lunar Laser Ranging Experiment ( high @-@ precision measurements of the orbit of the Moon ) . Another , which is related to rotating masses , is called frame @-@ dragging . The geodetic and frame @-@ dragging effects were both tested by the Gravity Probe B satellite experiment launched in 2004 , with results confirming relativity to within 0 @.@ 5 % and 15 % , respectively , as of December 2008 . 
 By cosmic standards , gravity throughout the solar system is weak . Since the differences between the predictions of Einstein 's and Newton 's theories are most pronounced when gravity is strong , physicists have long been interested in testing various relativistic effects in a setting with comparatively strong gravitational fields . This has become possible thanks to precision observations of binary pulsars . In such a star system , two highly compact neutron stars orbit each other . At least one of them is a pulsar – an astronomical object that emits a tight beam of <unk> . These beams strike the Earth at very regular intervals , similarly to the way that the rotating beam of a lighthouse means that an observer sees the lighthouse blink , and can be observed as a highly regular series of pulses . General relativity predicts specific deviations from the regularity of these radio pulses . For instance , at times when the radio waves pass close to the other neutron star , they should be deflected by the star 's gravitational field . The observed pulse patterns are impressively close to those predicted by general relativity . 
 One particular set of observations is related to eminently useful practical applications , namely to satellite navigation systems such as the Global Positioning System that are used both for precise positioning and timekeeping . Such systems rely on two sets of atomic clocks : clocks aboard satellites orbiting the Earth , and reference clocks stationed on the Earth 's surface . General relativity predicts that these two sets of clocks should tick at slightly different rates , due to their different motions ( an effect already predicted by special relativity ) and their different positions within the Earth 's gravitational field . In order to ensure the system 's accuracy , the satellite clocks are either slowed down by a relativistic factor , or that same factor is made part of the evaluation algorithm . In turn , tests of the system 's accuracy ( especially the very thorough measurements that are part of the definition of universal coordinated time ) are testament to the validity of the relativistic predictions . 
 A number of other tests have probed the validity of various versions of the equivalence principle ; strictly speaking , all measurements of gravitational time dilation are tests of the weak version of that principle , not of general relativity itself . So far , general relativity has passed all observational tests . 
 = = Astrophysical applications = = 
 Models based on general relativity play an important role in astrophysics ; the success of these models is further testament to the theory 's validity . 
 = = = Gravitational lensing = = = 
 Since light is deflected in a gravitational field , it is possible for the light of a distant object to reach an observer along two or more paths . For instance , light of a very distant object such as a quasar can pass along one side of a massive galaxy and be deflected slightly so as to reach an observer on Earth , while light passing along the opposite side of that same galaxy is deflected as well , reaching the same observer from a slightly different direction . As a result , that particular observer will see one astronomical object in two different places in the night sky . This kind of focussing is well @-@ known when it comes to optical lenses , and hence the corresponding gravitational effect is called gravitational lensing . 
 Observational astronomy uses lensing effects as an important tool to infer properties of the lensing object . Even in cases where that object is not directly visible , the shape of a lensed image provides information about the mass distribution responsible for the light deflection . In particular , gravitational lensing provides one way to measure the distribution of dark matter , which does not give off light and can be observed only by its gravitational effects . One particularly interesting application are large @-@ scale observations , where the lensing masses are spread out over a significant fraction of the observable universe , and can be used to obtain information about the large @-@ scale properties and evolution of our cosmos . 
 = = = Gravitational waves = = = 
 Gravitational waves , a direct consequence of Einstein 's theory , are distortions of geometry that propagate at the speed of light , and can be thought of as ripples in spacetime . They should not be confused with the gravity waves of fluid dynamics , which are a different concept . 
 In February 2016 , the Advanced LIGO team announced that they had directly observed gravitational waves from a black hole merger . 
 Indirectly , the effect of gravitational waves had been detected in observations of specific binary stars . Such pairs of stars orbit each other and , as they do so , gradually lose energy by emitting gravitational waves . For ordinary stars like the Sun , this energy loss would be too small to be detectable , but this energy loss was observed in 1974 in a binary pulsar called PSR1913 + 16 . In such a system , one of the orbiting stars is a pulsar . This has two consequences : a pulsar is an extremely dense object known as a neutron star , for which gravitational wave emission is much stronger than for ordinary stars . Also , a pulsar emits a narrow beam of electromagnetic radiation from its magnetic poles . As the pulsar rotates , its beam sweeps over the Earth , where it is seen as a regular series of radio pulses , just as a ship at sea observes regular flashes of light from the rotating light in a lighthouse . This regular pattern of radio pulses functions as a highly accurate " clock " . It can be used to time the double star 's orbital period , and it reacts sensitively to distortions of spacetime in its immediate neighborhood . 
 The discoverers of PSR1913 + 16 , Russell Hulse and Joseph Taylor , were awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1993 . Since then , several other binary pulsars have been found . The most useful are those in which both stars are pulsars , since they provide accurate tests of general relativity . 
 Currently , a number of land @-@ based gravitational wave detectors are in operation , and a mission to launch a space @-@ based detector , LISA , is currently under development , with a precursor mission ( LISA Pathfinder ) which was launched in 2015 . Gravitational wave observations can be used to obtain information about compact objects such as neutron stars and black holes , and also to probe the state of the early universe fractions of a second after the Big Bang . 
 = = = Black holes = = = 
 When mass is concentrated into a sufficiently compact region of space , general relativity predicts the formation of a black hole – a region of space with a gravitational effect so strong that not even light can escape . Certain types of black holes are thought to be the final state in the evolution of massive stars . On the other hand , supermassive black holes with the mass of millions or billions of Suns are assumed to reside in the cores of most galaxies , and they play a key role in current models of how galaxies have formed over the past billions of years . 
 Matter falling onto a compact object is one of the most efficient mechanisms for releasing energy in the form of radiation , and matter falling onto black holes is thought to be responsible for some of the brightest astronomical phenomena imaginable . Notable examples of great interest to astronomers are quasars and other types of active galactic nuclei . Under the right conditions , falling matter accumulating around a black hole can lead to the formation of jets , in which focused beams of matter are flung away into space at speeds near that of light . 
 There are several properties that make black holes most promising sources of gravitational waves . One reason is that black holes are the most compact objects that can orbit each other as part of a binary system ; as a result , the gravitational waves emitted by such a system are especially strong . Another reason follows from what are called black @-@ hole uniqueness theorems : over time , black holes retain only a minimal set of distinguishing features ( these theorems have become known as " no @-@ hair " theorems , since different hairstyles are a crucial part of what gives different people their different appearances ) . For instance , in the long term , the collapse of a hypothetical matter cube will not result in a cube @-@ shaped black hole . Instead , the resulting black hole will be indistinguishable from a black hole formed by the collapse of a spherical mass , but with one important difference : in its transition to a spherical shape , the black hole formed by the collapse of a cube will emit gravitational waves . 
 = = = Cosmology = = = 
 One of the most important aspects of general relativity is that it can be applied to the universe as a whole . A key point is that , on large scales , our universe appears to be constructed along very simple lines : all current observations suggest that , on average , the structure of the cosmos should be approximately the same , regardless of an observer 's location or direction of observation : the universe is approximately homogeneous and isotropic . Such comparatively simple universes can be described by simple solutions of Einstein 's equations . The current cosmological models of the universe are obtained by combining these simple solutions to general relativity with theories describing the properties of the universe 's matter content , namely thermodynamics , <unk> and particle physics . According to these models , our present universe emerged from an extremely dense high @-@ temperature state – the Big Bang – roughly 14 billion years ago and has been expanding ever since . 
 Einstein 's equations can be generalized by adding a term called the cosmological constant . When this term is present , empty space itself acts as a source of attractive ( or , less commonly , repulsive ) gravity . Einstein originally introduced this term in his pioneering 1917 paper on cosmology , with a very specific motivation : contemporary cosmological thought held the universe to be static , and the additional term was required for constructing static model universes within the framework of general relativity . When it became apparent that the universe is not static , but expanding , Einstein was quick to discard this additional term . Since the end of the 1990s , however , astronomical evidence indicating an accelerating expansion consistent with a cosmological constant – or , equivalently , with a particular and ubiquitous kind of dark energy – has steadily been accumulating . 
 = = Modern research = = 
 General relativity is very successful in providing a framework for accurate models which describe an impressive array of physical phenomena . On the other hand , there are many interesting open questions , and in particular , the theory as a whole is almost certainly incomplete . 
 In contrast to all other modern theories of fundamental interactions , general relativity is a classical theory : it does not include the effects of quantum physics . The quest for a quantum version of general relativity addresses one of the most fundamental open questions in physics . While there are promising candidates for such a theory of quantum gravity , notably string theory and loop quantum gravity , there is at present no consistent and complete theory . It has long been hoped that a theory of quantum gravity would also eliminate another problematic feature of general relativity : the presence of spacetime singularities . These singularities are boundaries ( " sharp edges " ) of spacetime at which geometry becomes ill @-@ defined , with the consequence that general relativity itself loses its predictive power . Furthermore , there are so @-@ called singularity theorems which predict that such singularities must exist within the universe if the laws of general relativity were to hold without any quantum modifications . The best @-@ known examples are the singularities associated with the model universes that describe black holes and the beginning of the universe . 
 Other attempts to modify general relativity have been made in the context of cosmology . In the modern cosmological models , most energy in the universe is in forms that have never been detected directly , namely dark energy and dark matter . There have been several controversial proposals to remove the need for these enigmatic forms of matter and energy , by modifying the laws governing gravity and the dynamics of cosmic expansion , for example modified Newtonian dynamics . 
 Beyond the challenges of quantum effects and cosmology , research on general relativity is rich with possibilities for further exploration : mathematical relativists explore the nature of singularities and the fundamental properties of Einstein 's equations , and ever more comprehensive computer simulations of specific spacetimes ( such as those describing merging black holes ) are run . More than ninety years after the theory was first published , research is more active than ever . 
 = Summer of ' 42 = 
 Summer of ' 42 is a 1971 American coming @-@ of @-@ age comedy @-@ drama film based on the memoirs of screenwriter Herman Raucher . It tells the story of how Raucher , in his early teens on his 1942 summer vacation on Nantucket Island ( off the coast of Cape Cod ) , embarks on a one @-@ sided romance with a young woman , Dorothy , whose husband had gone off to fight in World War II . 
 The film was directed by Robert Mulligan , and starred Gary Grimes as Hermie , Jerry Houser as his best friend Oscy , Oliver Conant as their nerdy young friend Benjie , Jennifer O 'Neill as Hermie 's mysterious love interest , and Katherine Allentuck and Christopher Norris as a pair of girls whom Hermie and Oscy attempt to seduce . Mulligan also has an uncredited role as the voice of the adult Hermie . Maureen Stapleton ( Allentuck 's real @-@ life mother ) also appears in a small , uncredited voice role ( calling after Hermie as he leaves the house in an early scene , and after he enters his room in a later scene ) . 
 Raucher 's novelization of his screenplay of the same name was released prior to the film 's release and became a runaway bestseller , to the point that audiences lost sight of the fact that the book was based on the film and not vice versa . Though a pop culture phenomenon in the first half of the 1970s , the novelization went out of print and slipped into obscurity throughout the next two decades until a Broadway adaptation in 2001 brought it back into the public light and prompted Barnes & Noble to acquire the publishing rights to the book . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 The film opens with a series of still photographs appearing over melancholic music , representing the abstract memories of the unseen Herman Raucher , now a middle @-@ aged man . We then hear Raucher recalling the summer he spent on the island in 1942 . The film flashes back to a day that then 15 @-@ year @-@ old " Hermie " and his friends – jock Oscy and introverted nerd Benjie – spent playing on the beach . They spot a young soldier carrying his new bride into a house on the beach and are struck by her beauty , especially Hermie , who is unable to get her out of his mind . 
 They continue spending afternoons on the beach where , in the midst of scantily @-@ clad teenage girls , their thoughts invariably turn to sex . All of them are virgins : Oscy is obsessed with the act of sex , while Hermie finds himself developing romantic interest in the bride , whose husband he spots leaving the island on a water taxi one morning . Later that day , Hermie finds her trying to carry bags of groceries by herself , and helps get them back to her house . They strike up a friendship and he agrees to return to help her with chores . 
 Meanwhile , Oscy and Hermie , thanks to a sex manual discovered by Benjie , become convinced they know everything necessary to lose their virginity . Led by Oscy , they test this by going to the cinema and picking @-@ up a trio of high @-@ school girls . Oscy stakes out the most attractive one , Miriam , " giving " Hermie her less attractive friend , Aggie , and leaving Benjie with Gloria , a heavyset girl with braces . Frightened by the immediacy of sex , Benjie runs off , and is not seen by Hermie or Oscy again that night . Hermie and Oscy spend the entirety of the evening 's film attempting to " put the moves " on Miriam and Aggie . Oscy pursues Miriam , eventually making out with her during the movie , and later learns her ways are well @-@ known on the island . Hermie finds himself succeeding with Aggie , who allows him to grope what he thinks is her breast ; Oscy later points out Hermie was fondling her arm . 
 The next morning , Hermie helps the bride move boxes into her attic and she thanks him by giving him a kiss on the forehead . Later , in preparation for a marshmallow roast on the beach with Aggie and Miriam , Hermie goes to the local drugstore . In a painfully humorous sequence , he builds up the nerve to ask the druggist ( Lou Frizzell ) for condoms . 
 That night , Hermie roasts marshmallows with Aggie while Oscy succeeds in having sex with Miriam between the dunes . He is so successful he sneaks over to Hermie and Aggie to ask for more condoms . Confused as to what 's happening , Aggie follows Oscy back , where she sees him having sex with Miriam and runs home , upset . 
 The next day , Hermie comes across the bride sitting outside her house , writing to her husband . Hermie offers to keep her company that night and she says she looks forward to seeing him , revealing her name is Dorothy . An elated Hermie goes home and puts on a suit , dress shirt and heads back to Dorothy 's house , running into Oscy on the way ; Oscy relates that Miriam 's appendix burst and she 's been rushed to the mainland . Hermie , convinced he is at the brink of adulthood because of his relationship with Dorothy , brushes Oscy off . 
 He heads to her house , which is eerily quiet . Going in , he discovers a bottle of whiskey , several cigarette butts , and a telegram from the government . Dorothy 's husband is dead , his plane shot down over France . Dorothy comes out of her bedroom , crying , and Hermie tells her " I 'm sorry . " The sense of empathy triggers her to channel to Hermie some of her loneliness . She turns on the record player and invites Hermie to dance with her . They kiss and embrace , tears on both their faces . Without speaking , and to the sound only of the waves , they move to the bedroom , where she draws him into bed and gently makes love with him . Afterward , withdrawing again into her world of hurt , Dorothy retires to the porch , leaving Hermie alone in her bedroom . He approaches her on the porch , where she can only quietly say " Good night , Hermie . " He leaves , his last image of Dorothy being of her leaning against the railing , as she smokes a cigarette and stares into the night sky . 
 At dawn Hermie meets Oscy and the two share a moment of reconciliation , with Oscy informing Hermie that Miriam will recover . Oscy , in an uncharacteristic act of sensitivity , lets Hermie be by himself , departing with the words , " Sometimes life is one big pain in the ass . " 
 Trying to sort out what has happened , Hermie goes back to Dorothy 's house . Dorothy has fled the island in the night and an envelope is tacked to the front door with Hermie 's name on it . Inside is a note from Dorothy , saying she hopes he understands she must go back home as there is much to do . She assures Hermie she will never forget him , and he will find his way of remembering what happened that night . Her note closes with the hope that Hermie may be spared the senseless tragedies of life . 
 In the final scene , Hermie , suddenly approaching manhood , is seen looking at Dorothy 's old house and the ocean from a distance before he turns to join his friends . To bittersweet music , the adult Raucher sadly recounts that he has never seen Dorothy again or learned what became of her . 
 = = Cast = = 
 = = Production = = 
 Herman Raucher wrote the film script in the 1950s during his tenure as a television writer , but " couldn 't give it away . " In the 1960s , he met Robert Mulligan , best known for directing To Kill a Mockingbird . Raucher showed Mulligan the script , and Mulligan took it to Warner Bros. , where Mulligan argued the film could be shot for the relatively low price of $ 1 million , and Warner approved it . They had so little faith in the film becoming a box @-@ office success , though , they shied from paying Raucher outright for the script , instead promising him ten percent of the gross . 
 When casting for the role of Dorothy , Warner Bros. declined to audition any actresses younger than the age of 30 ; Jennifer O 'Neill 's agent , who had developed a fondness for the script , convinced the studio to audition his client , who was only 22 at the time . O 'Neill auditioned for the role , albeit hesitantly , not wanting to perform any nude scenes . O 'Neill got the role and Mulligan agreed to find a way to make the film work without blatant nudity . 
 Though the film took place on Nantucket , by the 1970s the island was too far modernized to be convincingly transformed to resemble a 1940s resort , so production was taken to Mendocino , California , on the West Coast of the US . Shooting took place over eight weeks , during which O 'Neill was sequestered from the three boys cast as " The Terrible Trio , " in order to ensure that they did not become close and ruin the sense of awkwardness and distance that their characters felt towards Dorothy . Production ran smoothly , finishing on schedule . 
 After production , Warner Bros. , still wary about the film only being a minor success , asked Raucher to adapt his script into a book . Raucher wrote it in three weeks , and Warner Bros. released it prior to the film to build interest in the story . The book quickly became a national bestseller , so that when trailers premiered in theaters , the film was billed as being " based on the national bestseller , " despite the film having been completed first . Ultimately , the book became one of the best selling novels of the first half of the 1970s , requiring 23 reprints between 1971 and 1974 to keep up with customer demand . 
 = = Factual basis = = 
 The film ( and subsequent novel ) were memoirs written by Herman Raucher ; they detailed the events in his life over the course of the summer he spent on Nantucket Island in 1942 when he was fourteen years old . Originally , the film was meant to be a tribute to his friend Oscar " Oscy " Seltzer , an Army medic killed in the Korean War . Seltzer was shot dead on a battlefield in Korea whilst attending to a wounded man ; this happened on Raucher 's birthday , and consequently , Raucher has not celebrated a birthday since . During the course of writing the screenplay , Raucher came to the realization that despite growing up with Oscy and having bonded with him through their formative years , the two had never really had any meaningful conversations or gotten to know one another on a more personal level . 
 Instead , Raucher decided to focus on the first major adult experience of his life , that of falling in love for the first time . The woman ( named Dorothy , like her screen counterpart ) was a fellow vacationer on the island whom Raucher had befriended one day when he helped her carry groceries home ; he became a friend of her and her husband and helped her with chores after her husband was called to fight in World War II . Raucher went to bed with her one night when he came to visit her , arriving only minutes after she received notification of her husband 's death . The next morning , Raucher discovered that she had left the island , leaving behind a note for him ( which is read at the end of the film and reproduced in the book ) . He never saw her again ; his last " encounter " with her , recounted on an episode of The Mike Douglas Show , came after the film 's release in 1971 , when she was one of over a dozen women who wrote letters to Raucher claiming to be " his " Dorothy . Raucher recognized the " real " Dorothy 's handwriting , and she confirmed her identity by making references to certain events only she could have known about . She told Raucher that she had lived for years with the guilt that she had potentially traumatized him and ruined his life . She told Raucher that she was glad he turned out all right , and that they had best not re @-@ visit the past . 
 In a 2002 Scripps Treasure Coast Publishing interview , Raucher lamented never hearing from her again and expressed his hope that she was still alive . Raucher 's novelization of the screenplay , with the dedication , " To those I love , past and present , " serves more as the tribute to Seltzer that he had intended the film to be , with the focus of the book being more on the two boys ' relationship than Raucher 's relationship with Dorothy . Consequently , the book also mentions Seltzer 's death , which is absent from the film adaptation . 
 = = Reception and awards = = 
 The film became a blockbuster upon its release , grossing over $ 32 million , making it the sixth highest @-@ grossing film of 1971 and one of the most successful films in history , with an expense @-@ to @-@ profit ratio of 1 : 32 ; beyond that , it is estimated video rentals and purchases in the United States since the 1980s have produced an additional $ 20 @.@ 5 million . On this point , Raucher said in May 2002 that his ten percent of the gross , in addition to royalties from book sales , " has paid bills ever since . " 
 As well as being a commercial success , Summer of ' 42 also received rave critical reviews . It went on to be nominated for over a dozen awards , including Golden Globe Awards for " Best Motion Picture – Drama " and " Best Director " , and five Academy Award nominations for Best Original Music Score , Best Cinematography , Best Editing , Best Writing @-@ Story and Best Screenplay . Ultimately , the film won two awards : the 1972 44th Academy Awards Oscar for Original Dramatic Score , and the 1971 BAFTA Anthony Asquith Award for Film Music , both to Michel Legrand . It counted among its fans Stanley Kubrick , who had the film play on a television in a scene in The Shining . 
 = = Sequel = = 
 In 1973 , the film was followed by Class of ' 44 , a slice @-@ of @-@ life film made up of vignettes about Herman Raucher and Oscar Seltzer 's experiences in college . Class of ' 44 involves the boys facing army service in the last year of World War II . The only crew member from Summer of ' 42 to return to the project was Raucher himself , who wrote the script ; a new director and composer were brought in to replace Mulligan and Legrand . Of the principal four cast members of Summer of ' 42 , only Jerry Houser and Gary Grimes returned for prominent roles , with Oliver Conant making two brief appearances totaling less than two minutes of screen time . Jennifer O 'Neill did not appear in the film at all , nor was the character of Dorothy mentioned . 
 The film is noted for featuring a young , slim John Candy briefly appearing in his first film role . The film met with poor critical reviews ; the only three reviews available at Rotten Tomatoes are resoundingly negative , with Channel 4 calling it " a big disappointment , " and The New York Times stating " The only things worth attention in ' Class of ' 44 are the period details , " and " ' Class of ' 44 ' seems less like a movie than 95 minutes of animated wallpaper . " 
 = = Soundtrack = = 
 The film 's soundtrack consists almost entirely of compositions by Michel Legrand , many of which are variants upon " The Summer Knows " , the film 's theme . Lyrics are by Marilyn and Alan Bergman . Because the complete score runs just under 17 minutes , only the first and eighth tracks on the album are from Summer of ' 42 ; the rest of the music is taken from Legrand 's score for 1969 's The Picasso Summer . 
 In addition to Legrand 's scoring , the film also features the song " Hold Tight " by The Andrews Sisters and the theme from Now , Voyager . On the Billboard 200 , it debuted on 9 / 11 / 1971 and peaked at # 52 on 11 / 20 / 1971 . 
 In 2014 Intrada Records released Summer of ' 42 and The Picasso Summer on a limited @-@ edition two @-@ disc set , with the entire score for the former and the original album presentation of the latter ( dubbed " The Picasso Suite " ) on disc 1 , and the complete score for The Picasso Summer on disc 2 . 
 Warner Bros. Publications released a sheet music folio , Summer of ' 42 & Other Hits of the Forties , which contains the movie theme and 34 other unrelated songs . 
 = = Cultural impact = = 
 = = = Music = = = 
 Legrand 's theme song for the film , " The Summer Knows " , has since become a pop standard , being recorded by such artists as Peter Nero ( who had a charting hit with his 1971 version ) , Biddu , Tony Bennett , Frank Sinatra , Sarah Vaughan , Andy Williams , Jonny Fair , Scott Walker , Jackie Evancho , Oscar Peterson , Bill Evans , Toots Thielemans , and Barbra Streisand . 
 The 1973 song " Summer ( The First Time ) " by Bobby Goldsboro has almost exactly the same subject and apparent setting , although there is no direct credited link . Bryan Adams has , however , credited the film as being a partial inspiration for his 1985 hit " Summer of ' 69 " . 
 = = = Film and television = = = 
 In Stanley Kubrick 's 1980 film version of Stephen King 's The Shining , Wendy ( Shelley Duvall ) is shown watching Summer of ' 42 on television ( a brief clip of the scene featuring Hermie helping Dorothy bring her groceries in the house is playing on the television in the background during the scene ) . 
 An episode of the 1970s sitcom Happy Days was loosely based upon Summer of ' 42 , with Richie Cunningham befriending a Korean War widow . The film 's title formed the basis of an episode of The Simpsons : the seventh season Summer of 4 Ft . 2 . 
 = = = Remakes = = = 
 In the years since the film 's release , Warner Bros. has attempted to buy back Raucher 's ten percent of the film as well as his rights to the story so it could be remade ; Raucher has consistently declined . The 1988 film Stealing Home has numerous similarities to both Summer of ' 42 and Class of ' 44 , with several incidents ( most notably a subplot dealing with the premature death of the protagonist 's father and the protagonist 's response to it ) appearing to have been directly lifted from Raucher 's own life ; Jennifer O 'Neill stated in 2002 she believes " Home " was an attempted remake of " Summer " . 
 There are also similarities between Summer of ' 42 and 2000 's <unk> , another coming @-@ of @-@ age film set in the context of World War II , and starring Monica Bellucci and Giuseppe <unk> . 
 = = = Off @-@ Broadway musical = = = 
 In 2001 , Raucher consented to the film being made into an off Broadway musical play . He was on hand opening night , giving the cast a pep @-@ talk which he concluded , " We 've now done it every possible way – except go out and piss it in the snow ! " The play met with positive critical and fan response , and was endorsed by Raucher himself , but the play was forced to close down in the aftermath of the September 11 attacks . Nevertheless , the play was enough to spark interest in the film and book with a new generation , prompting Warner to re @-@ issue the book ( which had since gone out of print , along with all of Raucher 's other works ) for sale with Barnes & Noble 's online bookstore , and to restore the film and release it on DVD . The musical has since been performed across the country , at venues such as <unk> Stage in Cleveland Heights , Ohio in 2004 ( directed by Paul <unk> ) and Mill Mountain Theatre in Roanoke , Virginia , ( directed by Jere <unk> and choreographed by Bernard Monroe ) , and was subsequently recorded as a concert by the York Theatre Company in 2006 . 
 = = = Alternate sequel = = = 
 In 2002 , O 'Neill claimed to have obtained the rights to make a sequel to Summer of ' 42 , based on a short story she wrote , which took place in an alternate reality where Herman Raucher had a son and divorced his wife , went back to Nantucket in 1962 with a still @-@ living Oscar Seltzer , and encountered Dorothy again and married her . As of 2015 , this project – which O 'Neill had hoped to produce with Lifetime television – has not been realized , and it is unknown whether O 'Neill is still attempting to get it produced , or if Raucher consented to its production . 
 = Enlargement of NATO = 
 Enlargement of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization ( NATO ) is the process of including new member states in NATO . NATO is a military alliance of twenty @-@ six European and two North American countries that constitutes a system of collective defence . The process of joining the alliance is governed by Article 10 of the North Atlantic Treaty , which allows only for the invitation of " other European States , " and by subsequent agreements . Countries wishing to join have to meet certain requirements and complete a multi @-@ step process involving political dialogue and military integration . The accession process is overseen by the North Atlantic Council , NATO 's governing body . 
 After its formation in 1949 with twelve founding members , NATO grew by including Greece and Turkey in 1952 and West Germany in 1955 , and then later Spain in 1982 . After the Cold War ended , and Germany reunited in 1990 , there was a debate in NATO about continued expansion eastward . In 1999 , Poland , Hungary , and the Czech Republic joined the organization , amid much debate within the organization and Russian opposition . Another expansion came with the accession of seven Central and Eastern European countries : Bulgaria , Estonia , Latvia , Lithuania , Romania , Slovakia and Slovenia . These nations were first invited to start talks of membership during the 2002 Prague summit , and joined NATO shortly before the 2004 Istanbul summit . The most recent new members , Albania and Croatia , joined on 1 April 2009 , prior to the 2009 Strasbourg – Kehl summit . 
 In 2011 , NATO officially recognized four aspiring members : Bosnia and Herzegovina , Georgia , Macedonia , and Montenegro . Macedonia has been prevented from joining the alliance by Greece , one effect of the Macedonian naming dispute , while Montenegro 's membership is in the process of being ratified by current members . Future expansion is currently a topic of debate in several countries outside the alliance , and countries like Sweden , Finland and Serbia have open political debate on the topic of membership , while in countries like Ukraine , support and opposition to membership is tied to ethnic and nationalist ideologies . The incorporation of countries formerly in the Soviet sphere of influence has been a cause of increased tension between NATO countries and Russia . 
 = = Past enlargements = = 
 NATO has added new members six times since its founding in 1949 to include twenty @-@ eight members . Twelve countries were part of the founding of NATO : Belgium , Canada , Denmark , France , Iceland , Italy , Luxembourg , the Netherlands , Norway , Portugal , the United Kingdom , and the United States . The early years of the Cold War saw a stark divide between Capitalist ideologies , backed by NATO , and Communist satellite states of the Soviet Union . This divide encouraged the anti @-@ Communist governments of Greece and Turkey to join NATO in 1952 . Greece would suspend its membership in 1974 , over the Turkish invasion of Cyprus , but rejoined in 1980 with Turkey 's cooperation . 
 The Bonn – Paris conventions ended the allies occupation of West Germany , and were ratified in part on the basis that West Germany join NATO , which it did in 1955 . Though initially isolationist , Spain under Francisco Franco was heavily anti @-@ Communist , and bound by regular defence agreements with NATO countries . After its transition to democracy , Spain came under pressure to normalize its European relations , including joining NATO , which it did in 1982 . A referendum in 1986 confirmed popular support for this . 
 = = = German reunification = = = 
 The first post @-@ Cold War expansion of NATO came with German reunification on 3 October 1990 , when the former East Germany became part of the Federal Republic of Germany and the alliance . This had been agreed in the Two Plus Four Treaty earlier in the year . To secure Soviet approval of a united Germany remaining in NATO , it was agreed that foreign troops and nuclear weapons would not be stationed in the former East Germany , and the topic of further NATO expansion east was raised . 
 Jack Matlock , US ambassador to the Soviet Union during its final years , said that the West gave a " clear commitment " not to expand , and declassified documents indicate that Soviet negotiators were given the oral impression by diplomats like Hans @-@ Dietrich Genscher and James Baker that NATO membership was off the table for countries such as Czechoslovakia , Hungary , or Poland . 
 In 1996 , Gorbachev wrote in his Memoirs , that " during the negotiations on the unification of Germany they gave assurances that NATO would not extend its zone of operation to the east , " and repeated this view in an interview in 2008 . According to Robert Zoellick , a State Department official involved in the Two Plus Four negotiating process , this appears to be a misperception , and no formal commitment regarding enlargement was made . Other authors , such as Mark Kramer , have also highlighted that in 1990 neither side imagined that countries still technically in the Warsaw Pact or the Soviet Union could one day join NATO . 
 = = = Visegrád Group = = = 
 In February 1991 , Poland , Hungary , and the Czech Republic and Slovakia ( as Czechoslovakia ) formed the Visegrád Group to push for European integration under the European Union and NATO , as well as to conduct military reforms in line with NATO standards . Internal NATO reaction to these former Warsaw Pact countries was initially negative , but by the 1991 Rome summit in November , members agreed to a series of goals that could lead to accession , such as market and democratic liberalization , and that NATO should be a partner in these efforts . In subsequent years , wider forums for regional cooperation between NATO and its eastern neighbors were set up , including the North Atlantic Cooperation Council ( later the Euro @-@ Atlantic Partnership Council ) and the Partnership for Peace . 
 While the other Visegrád members were invited to join NATO at its 1997 Madrid summit , Slovakia was excluded based on what several members considered undemocratic actions by nationalist Prime Minister Vladimír <unk> . Romania and Slovenia were both considered for invitation in 1997 , and each had the backing of a prominent NATO member , France and Italy respectively , but support for enlargement was not unanimous , particularly in the US Congress . In an open letter to US President Bill Clinton , more than forty foreign policy experts including Bill Bradley , Sam Nunn , Gary Hart , Paul Nitze , and Robert McNamara expressed their concerns about NATO expansion as both expensive and unnecessary given the lack of an external threat from Russia at that time . 
 = = = Vilnius Group = = = 
 Domestic politics in Eastern European countries continued to push for more enlargement , and political parties reluctant to move on NATO membership , such as the Bulgarian Socialist Party and Slovak <unk> , were voted out of office . Hungary 's interest in joining was confirmed by a November 1997 referendum that returned 85 @.@ 3 percent in favor of membership . Russia 's actions in the First Chechen War were also a motivating factor for several countries that had memories of similar Soviet offensives . 
 At the 1999 Washington summit , where Hungary , Poland , and the Czech Republic officially joined , NATO also issued new guidelines for membership with individualized " Membership Action Plans " for Albania , Bulgaria , Estonia , Latvia , Lithuania , Macedonia , Romania , Slovakia , and Slovenia . In May 2000 , these countries joined with Croatia to form the Vilnius Group in order to cooperate and lobby for common NATO membership , and by the 2002 Prague summit seven were invited for membership , which took place at the 2004 Istanbul summit . 
 Russia was particularly upset with the addition of the three Baltic states , the first countries that were part of the Soviet Union to join NATO . Croatia also started a Membership Action Plan at the 2002 summit , leading to a national debate on whether a referendum on NATO membership needed to be held there . Croatian Prime Minister Ivo Sanader ultimately agreed in January 2008 , as part of forming a coalition government with the HSS and HSLS parties , not to officially propose one . Albania and Croatia were invited to join NATO at the 2008 Bucharest summit that April , though Slovenia threatened to hold up Croatian membership over their border dispute in the Bay of Piran . Slovenia did ratify Croatia 's accession protocol in February 2009 , and Croatia and Albania both officially joined NATO just prior to the 2009 Strasbourg – Kehl summit , with little opposition from Russia . 
 = = Criteria and process = = 
 = = = Article 10 = = = 
 The North Atlantic Treaty is the basis of the organization and as such , any changes including new membership requires ratification by all current signers of the treaty . The treaty 's Article 10 describes how non @-@ member states may join NATO , and outlines NATO 's " open door " policy : 
 The Parties may by unanimous agreement , invite any other European State in a position to further the principles of this Treaty and to contribute to the security of the North Atlantic area to accede to this Treaty . Any State so invited may become a Party to the Treaty by depositing its instrument of accession with the Government of the United States of America . The Government of the United States of America will inform each of the Parties of the deposit of each such instrument of accession . 
 This article poses two general limits to non @-@ member states . First , only European states are eligible for new membership , and second , these states not only need the approval of all the existing member states , but every member state can put some criteria forward that have to be attained . In practice , NATO formulates a common set of criteria , but for instance Greece blocks the Republic of Macedonia 's accession to NATO , due to the disagreement over the use of the name Macedonia . Turkey similarly opposes the participation of the Republic of Cyprus with NATO institutions as long as the Cyprus dispute is not resolved . 
 Since the 1991 Rome summit , when the delegations of its member states officially offered cooperation with Europe 's newly democratic states , NATO has addressed and further defined the expectations and procedure for adding new members . The 1994 Brussels Declaration reaffirmed the principles in Article 10 and led to the " Study on NATO Enlargement . " Published in September 1995 , the study outlined the " how and why " of possible enlargement in Europe , highlighting three principles from the 1949 treaty for members to have : " democracy , individual liberty , and rule of law . " 
 As NATO Secretary General Willy Claes noted , the 1995 study did not specify the " who or when , " though it discussed how the then newly formed Partnership for Peace and North Atlantic Cooperation Council could assist in the enlargement process , and noted that on @-@ going territorial disputes could be an issue for whether a country was invited . At the 1997 Madrid summit , the heads of state of NATO issued the " Madrid Declaration on Euro @-@ Atlantic Security and Cooperation " which invited three Eastern European countries to join the alliance , out of the twelve that had at that point requested to join , laying out a path for others to follow . 
 = = = Membership Action Plan = = = 
 The biggest step in the formalization of the process for inviting new members came at the 1999 Washington summit when the Membership Action Plan ( MAP ) mechanism was approved as a stage for the current members to regularly review the formal applications of aspiring members . A country 's participation in MAP entails the annual presentation of reports concerning its progress on five different measures : 
 <unk> to settle international , ethnic or external territorial disputes by peaceful means , commitment to the rule of law and human rights , and democratic control of armed forces 
 Ability to contribute to the organization 's defence and missions 
 Devotion of sufficient resources to armed forces to be able to meet the commitments of membership 
 Security of sensitive information , and safeguards ensuring it 
 Compatibility of domestic legislation with NATO cooperation 
 NATO provides feedback as well as technical advice to each country and evaluates its progress on an individual basis . Once a country is agreed to meet the requirements , NATO can issue that country an invitation to begin accession talks . Currently , three countries have a Membership Action Plan : Bosnia and Herzegovina , Macedonia and Montenegro . Former MAP participants were Albania and Croatia between May 2002 and April 2009 , when they joined NATO . The final accession process , once invited , involves five steps leading up to the signing of the accession protocols and the acceptance and ratification of those protocols by the governments of the current NATO members . 
 = = = Intensified Dialogue = = = 
 Intensified Dialogue was first introduced in April 2005 at an informal meeting of foreign ministers in Vilnius , Lithuania , as a response to Ukrainian aspirations for NATO membership and related reforms taking place under President Viktor Yushchenko , and which followed the 2002 signing of the NATO @-@ Ukraine Action Plan under his predecessor , Leonid Kuchma . This formula , which includes discussion of a " full range of political , military , financial and security issues relating to possible NATO membership " had its roots in the 1997 Madrid summit , where the participants had agreed " to continue the Alliance 's intensified dialogues with those nations that aspire to NATO membership or that otherwise with to pursue a dialogue with NATO on membership questions . " 
 In September 2006 , Georgia became the second to be offered the Intensified Dialogue status , following a rapid change in foreign policy under President Mikheil Saakashvili , and what they perceived as a demonstration of military readiness during the 2006 Kodori crisis . Montenegro , Bosnia and Herzegovina , and Serbia similarly received offers at the April 2008 Bucharest summit . While their neighbors both requested and accepted the dialogue programme , Serbia 's offer was presented to guarantee the possibility of future ties with the alliance . 
 = = Current status = = 
 Montenegro , Macedonia , and Bosnia and Herzegovina are currently the only countries with a Membership Action Plan , and together with Georgia , were named NATO " aspirant countries " at the North Atlantic Council meeting on 7 December 2011 . In 2008 , Greece blocked an invitation to its northern neighbor , pending resolution of the Macedonia naming dispute . Macedonia was part of the Vilnius group , and had formed the Adriatic Charter with Croatia and Albania in 2003 to better coordinate NATO accession . 
 = = = Bosnia and Herzegovina = = = 
 The 1995 NATO bombing of Bosnia and Herzegovina targeted the Bosnian Serb Army and together with international pressure led to the resolution of the Bosnian War and the signing of the Dayton Agreement in 1995 . Since then , NATO has led the Implementation Force and Stabilization Force , and other peacekeeping efforts in the country . Bosnia and Herzegovina joined the Partnership for Peace in 2006 , and signed an agreement on security cooperation in March 2007 . 
 Bosnia and Herzegovina began further cooperation with NATO within their Individual Partnership Action Plan in January 2008 . The country then started the process of Intensified Dialogue at the 2008 Bucharest summit . The country was invited to join the Adriatic Charter of NATO aspirants in September 2008 . On 2 October 2009 , Haris <unk> , the Bosniak Member of the Presidency , announced official application for Membership Action Plan . On 22 April 2010 , NATO agreed to launch the Membership Action Plan for Bosnia and Herzegovina , but with certain conditions attached . Turkey is thought to be the biggest supporter of Bosnian membership , and heavily influenced the decision . 
 The conditions of the MAP however stipulated that no Annual National Programme could be launched until 63 military facilities are transferred from Bosnia 's political divisions to the central government , which is one of the conditions for the OHR closure . The leadership of the Republika Srpska has opposed this transfer as a loss of autonomy . Bosnia 's chances of joining NATO may depend on Serbia 's attitude towards the alliance , since the leadership of Republika Srpska might be reluctant to go against Serbian interests . An August 2010 poll showed that 70 percent of the country supports NATO @-@ membership , but results were very different in the two constituent entities . While 90 percent of the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina supported NATO @-@ membership , only 33 percent in Republika Srpska did . 
 = = = Georgia = = = 
 Georgia moved quickly following the Rose Revolution in 2003 to seek closer ties with NATO . Georgia 's northern neighbor , Russia , opposed the closer ties , including those expressed at the 2008 Bucharest summit where NATO members promised that Georgia would eventually join the organization . 
 Complications in the relationship between NATO and Georgia includes presence of Russian forces in internationally recognized Georgian territory as a result of multiple recent conflicts , like the 2008 South Ossetia war , over the territories of Abkhazia and South Ossetia , both of which are home to a large number of citizens of the Russian Federation . On 21 November 2011 , Russian President Dmitry Medvedev while addressing soldiers in <unk> near the Georgian border stated that the 2008 invasion had prevented any further NATO enlargement into the former Soviet sphere . 
 A nonbinding referendum in 2008 resulted in 72 @.@ 5 percent of voters supporting NATO accession . In May 2013 , Georgian Prime Minister Bidzina Ivanishvili stated that his goal is to get a Membership Action Plan ( MAP ) for his country from NATO in 2014 . In June 2014 , diplomats from NATO suggested that while a MAP was unlikely , a package of " reinforced cooperation " agreements was a possible compromise . Anders Fogh Rasmussen confirmed that this could include the building of military capabilities and armed forces training . 
 = = = Macedonia = = = 
 Macedonia is recognized under the name The Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia by NATO , though they note that Turkey recognizes the name Macedonia . The country joined the Partnership for Peace in 1995 , and commenced its Membership Action Plan in 1999 , at the same time as Albania . Participating in the 1999 NATO intervention in Kosovo , it received aid from NATO in dealing with refugees fleeing from Kosovo . In August 2001 , NATO intervened in the 2001 insurgency , during which a rebel Albanian group , the National Liberation Army , fought government forces . In Operation Essential Harvest , NATO troops joined with the Macedonian military to disarm rebel forces following a cease @-@ fire agreement . 
 At the 2008 Bucharest summit , Greece blocked a proposed invitation due to Greece 's belief that its neighbor 's constitutional name implies territorial aspirations against its own region of Greek Macedonia . NATO nations agreed that the country would receive an invitation upon resolution of the Macedonia naming dispute . Macedonia sued Greece at the International Court of Justice ( ICJ ) over their veto of Macedonia 's NATO membership . The ICJ ruled in December 2011 that Greece was wrong to have blocked its neighbor 's bid , finding them in breach of a 1995 interim accord that allowed Macedonia to join international organizations under the name " the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia " , which is how NATO , with the exception of Turkey , recognizes their bid . Greece also blocks Macedonia 's accession to the European Union over the naming dispute . In March 2016 , Macedonian Defense Minister Zoran <unk> stated his hope that his country 's handling of the European migrant crisis might bring it closer to NATO membership . 
 A poll following the 2008 summit showed that 82 @.@ 5 percent of citizens surveyed opposed changing the constitutional name in order to join NATO . Elections were called following the 2008 summit , resulting in further support for the centre @-@ right pro @-@ NATO party , VMRO – DPMNE . The elections were marred by violence that was criticized by NATO members . Ethnic tensions have persisted in Macedonia , and NATO has called for dialogue following clashes such as those in the city of Kumanovo in 2015 , which were blamed in part on the delay in NATO and European integration . NATO membership in general is supported by 81 percent according to a November 2014 poll . 
 = = = Montenegro = = = 
 The State Union of Serbia and Montenegro applied to NATO 's Partnership for Peace ( PfP ) in June 2003 . Montenegro declared independence on 3 June 2006 , and the new country subsequently joined the Partnership for Peace programme at the 2006 Riga summit . In November 2007 , Montenegro signed a transit agreement with NATO , allowing the alliance 's troops to move across the country . Montenegro then signed an agreement with the United States , in which Montenegro will destroy its outdated weaponry as a precondition for NATO membership . Montenegro has received particular support for its membership from Romania and Turkey . 
 In late 2007 , Montenegro 's Defence Minister Boro <unk> said that Montenegro would accelerate its relationship with the alliance after the 2008 Bucharest summit . Montenegro entered Intensified Dialogue with NATO in April 2008 , and adopted an Individual Partnership Action Plan in June 2008 . The country then applied for a Membership Action Plan on 5 November 2008 with support of Prime Minister Milo Đukanović , which was granted in December 2009 . Montenegro also began full membership with the Adriatic Charter of NATO aspirants in May 2009 . The Montenegrin military has contributed to NATO military missions , including joining the ISAF mission in Afghanistan in 2010 . 
 The memory of NATO 's 1999 bombing campaign of the then Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and resulting civilian casualties form a crucial part of the opposition to NATO membership in Montenegro . According to a government poll in March 2014 , 46 percent of Montenegro 's populace supported NATO membership , while 42 percent opposed it . A poll in July 2015 from the Centre for Democracy and Human Rights , which receives financial support from NATO , found that 36 @.@ 6 percent support membership , to 37 @.@ 3 percent against , with sharp divisions between ethnic groups : 71 @.@ 2 percent of Montenegrin Albanians and 68 percent of Montenegrin Bosniaks support membership , while only 11 @.@ 3 percent of Montenegrin Serbs do . Russian MP Mikhail Degtyarev of the Nationalist <unk> threatened in May 2014 that NATO membership would make Montenegro " a legitimate target of Russian missiles . " 
 In June 2014 , then NATO Secretary General Anders Fogh Rasmussen suggested that NATO would open " intensified talks " with the aim of inviting Montenegro to join the alliance by the end of 2015 , though the Prime Minister of France stated his county 's opposition to this timetable in March 2015 . In late 2015 , anti @-@ government and NATO protests , supported by pro @-@ Serbian parties , had developed in the run up to Montenegro 's invitation , which Đukanović has accused Serbia and Russia of supporting . On December 2nd 2015 , NATO formally invited Montenegro to join the alliance . In February 2016 , final accession talks began , and concluded in May , allowing Montenegro to take an " observer " status pending ratification by the governments of the other members , as well as by Montenegro 's own parliament . 
 = = Membership debates = = 
 = = = Finland = = = 
 Finland participates in nearly all sub @-@ areas of the Partnership for Peace programme , and has provided peacekeeping forces to both the Afghanistan and Kosovo missions . The possibility of Finland 's membership in NATO was one of the most important issues debated in relation to the Finnish presidential election of 2006 , and continues to be a significant issue in Finnish politics . In 2007 , Finland made various technical preparations for membership , with the then Defence Minister <unk> <unk> eager to pursue NATO membership . Nevertheless , public interest in the issue has since decreased . In April 2014 , the government announced that they would sign a " Memorandum of Understanding " with NATO on Finland 's readiness to receive military assistance and to aid NATO in equipment maintenance . However , Defence Minister Carl Haglund emphasized that this memorandum would not be a step towards membership . 
 Out of the major Finnish political parties , the National Coalition Party and Swedish People 's Party of Finland support NATO membership . In 2016 , the party conference of the National Coalition Party agreed that Finland should apply for membership in the " following years " . In the vision of the Swedish People 's Party of Finland , Finland will be a NATO member in 2025 . Many individual politicians have advocated for the NATO as well , including the current President Sauli Niinistö and former Prime Minister Alexander Stubb , as well as former President Martti Ahtisaari , who has argued that Finland should join all the organizations supported by other Western democracies in order " to shrug off once and for all the burden of <unk> . " Two other ex @-@ presidents from the Social Democratic Party , Tarja Halonen and Mauno Koivisto , have publicly opposed the idea , arguing that NATO membership would deteriorate Finland 's relations with Russia . 
 Finland has received some very critical feedback from Russia for even considering the possibility of joining NATO , with a 2009 study suggesting this could have repercussions for Russia 's relations with the EU and NATO as a whole . Following the 2008 South Ossetia war , Finnish Prime Minister Matti Vanhanen reiterated that Finland had no plans to join NATO , and stated that the main lesson of the war was the need for closer ties to Russia . In a June 2014 interview in the Finnish newspaper <unk> , Vladimir Putin ’ s personal envoy Sergey Alexandrovich Markov accused Finland of extreme " Russophobia " and suggested that Finland joining NATO could start World War III . In July 2016 , Putin stated on a visit to Finland , that Russia would increase the amount of troops on the Finnish border if Finland were to join NATO . He also warned that NATO would " fight to the last Finn against Russia " . 
 A survey conducted by Finnish pollster EVA in January 2015 found that 43 percent of Finns polled opposed their country 's NATO membership , while 26 percent supported and 32 percent were undecided . EVA has noted a downward trend in the percent opposed that started in 1998 , including a steep decline after the 2012 presidential election . In March 2014 , during the 2014 Crimean crisis , one survey showed only 22 percent supported membership , though a second showed that 53 percent would support membership if Finnish leadership recommended it . Support for a military alliance with neighbor Sweden was also high , at 54 percent , and Finland could possibly seek an enlarged role for <unk> . Finnish Minister of Defence Carl Haglund suggested that a referendum on NATO membership could be held sometime after the 2015 parliamentary election . 
 = = = Ireland = = = 
 Ireland has been a member of NATO 's Partnership for Peace ( PfP ) programme and Euro @-@ Atlantic Partnership Council ( EAPC ) since 1999 , but has not applied to join NATO as a member state due to its traditional policy of military neutrality . Ireland participates in the alliance 's PfP Planning and Review Process ( PARP ) , which aims to increase the interoperability of the Irish military , the Defence Forces , with other NATO member states and bring them into line with accepted international standards so as to successfully deploy with other professional military forces on peacekeeping operations overseas . Ireland supplied a small number of troops to the NATO @-@ led International Security Assistance Force ( ISAF ) in Afghanistan ( 2001 @-@ 2014 ) and supports the ongoing NATO @-@ led Kosovo Force ( KFOR ) . 
 Currently no major political party in Ireland fully supports ascension into NATO , a reflection on public and media opinion in the country . There are a number of politicians who support Ireland joining NATO , mainly within the centre @-@ right Fine Gael party , but the majority of politicians still do not . It is widely understood that a referendum would have to be held before any changes could be made to neutrality or to joining NATO . Former Secretary General of NATO Anders Fogh Rasmussen said during a visit to the country in 2013 that the " door is open " for Ireland to join NATO at any time . 
 = = = Moldova = = = 
 Moldova 's constitution forbids the country from joining a military alliance , but some politicians , such as Moldovan Minister of Defence <unk> <unk> , have suggested joining NATO as part of a larger European integration . Moldova joined NATO 's Partnership for Peace in 1994 , and initiated an Individual Partnership Action Plan in 2010 . Following the 2014 Crimean Crisis , NATO officials warned that Russia might seek to annex Transnistria , a breakaway Moldovan region . This separatist issue could preclude Moldova from joining NATO . 
 = = = Serbia = = = 
 The NATO intervention in Bosnia and Herzegovina in 1992 and the NATO bombing of Yugoslavia in 1999 resulted in strained relations between Serbia and NATO . Relations were further strained following Kosovo 's declaration of independence in 2008 while a protectorate of the United Nations with security support from NATO . However , Serbia was invited and joined the Partnership for Peace programme during the 2006 Riga Summit and in 2008 , was invited to enter the intensified dialogue programme whenever the country is ready . 
 Serbia 's Parliament passed a resolution in 2007 which declared their military neutrality until such time as a referendum was held on the issue . On 1 October 2008 , Serbian Defence Minister Dragan <unk> signed the Information Exchange Agreement with NATO , one of the prerequisites for fuller membership in the Partnership for Peace programme . In April 2011 Serbia 's request for an <unk> was approved by NATO , and Serbia submitted a draft <unk> in May 2013 . The agreement was finalized on 15 January 2015 . 
 A <unk> poll in June 2015 conducted with the support of USAID indicated that only 12 percent of those polled supported for NATO membership , down from 25 percent in 2012 , and 73 percent were opposed . The minor Liberal Democratic Party and Serbian Renewal Movement remain the most vocal political parties in favor of NATO membership . Although Serbia aspires to join the European Union , Serbia may seek to maintain military neutrality , joining neither NATO nor the CSTO . 
 = = = Sweden = = = 
 In 1949 Sweden chose not to join NATO and declared a security policy aiming for non @-@ alignment in peace and neutrality in war . A modified version now qualifies non @-@ alignment in peace for possible neutrality in war . This position was maintained without much discussion during the Cold War . Since the 1990s however there has been an active debate in Sweden on the question of NATO membership in the post – Cold War world . These ideological divides were visible in November 2006 when Sweden could either buy two new transport planes or join NATO 's plane pool , and in December 2006 , when Sweden was invited to join the NATO Response Force . Sweden have been active participants in NATO @-@ led missions in Bosnia ( IFOR and SFOR ) , Kosovo ( KFOR ) , Afghanistan ( ISAF ) and Libya ( Operation Unified Protector ) . 
 The ruling Swedish Social Democratic Party have remained in favour of neutrality and non @-@ alignment . This preference is shared by their partners , the Green Party , as well as the Left Party . The right wing Moderate Party and the Liberal Party are the largest parties by current parliamentary representation in favor of NATO membership . The 2014 Crimean Crisis is credited with renewed public calls for NATO membership from notable politicians . The Centre Party was opposed to NATO membership until September 2015 , when party leadership under Annie <unk> announced that they would motion to change the party policy in order to push for Sweden to join NATO at their next party conference . The Christian Democrats , also previously opposed , likewise voted to support NATO membership at their party meeting on 9 October 2015 . 
 Polling has shown a modest rise in support for NATO membership among Swedes since 2008 according to Ipsos polling , going from 22 percent in May 2008 to 33 percent in January 2015 , with another from the SOM Institute in May 2015 showing similar numbers . According to Svenska Dagbladet , support in 2011 was at 23 percent , and has rose somewhat significantly to 41 percent in September 2015 , when only 39 percent of respondents were opposed to NATO membership . An October 2014 survey commissioned by TV4 News also showed slightly more respondents supporting membership than opposing it . In 2014 , news that a military expert in Sweden had calculated that the country could hold out for a week if attacked temporarily lifted support for NATO membership in polls . 
 = = = Ukraine = = = 
 Ukraine 's present and future relationship with NATO has been politically divisive , and is part of a larger debate between Ukraine 's political and cultural ties to both the European Union and Russia . It established ties to the alliance with a NATO @-@ Ukraine Action Plan on 22 November 2002 , and became the first CIS country to join NATO 's Partnership for Peace initiative in February 2005 . Then in April 2005 , Ukraine entered into the Intensified Dialogue programme with NATO . 
 In March 2008 , under Ukrainian President Viktor Yushchenko and Prime Minister Yulia Tymoshenko , Ukraine sent an official letter of application a Membership Action Plan ( MAP ) , the first step in joining NATO . These leaders however guaranteed their opposition that membership in any military alliance would not pass without public approval in a referendum . This idea had gained support from a number of NATO leaders , particularly those in Central and Eastern Europe . Russian leaders like Prime Minister and President @-@ Elect Dmitri Medvedev made clear their opposition to Ukraine membership , and leading up to the April 2008 Bucharest summit their emissary actively lobbied against a Ukrainian MAP . After some debate among members at the summit , NATO Secretary General Jaap de Hoop Scheffer declared in a press conference that Ukraine , together with Georgia , would someday join NATO , but neither would begin Membership Action Plans . At this summit , Russian President Vladimir Putin , in his last international speech before switching jobs with Medvedev , listed his grievances with NATO , and called Ukrainian membership " a direct threat " to his country . 
 The 2010 election returned Viktor Yanukovych as Ukrainian President and marked a turnaround in Ukraine 's relations with NATO . In February 2010 , he stated that Ukraine 's relations with NATO were currently " well @-@ defined " , and that there was " no question of Ukraine joining NATO " . He said the issue of Ukrainian membership of NATO might " emerge at some point , but we will not see it in the immediate future . " While visiting Brussels in March 2010 , he further stated that there would be no change to Ukraine 's status as a member of the alliance 's outreach programme . He later reiterated during a trip to Moscow that Ukraine would remain a " European , non @-@ aligned state . " Then , on 3 June 2010 the Ukrainian parliament voted to exclude the goal of " integration into Euro @-@ Atlantic security and NATO membership " from the country 's national security strategy in a bill drafted by Yanukovych himself . The bill forbid Ukraine 's membership of any military bloc , but allowed for co @-@ operation with alliances such as NATO . 
 Following months of " Euromaidan " street protests that began because of his refusal to sign an Association Agreement with the European Union in favor of deals from Russia , President Yanukovych fled Kiev in February 2014 , ultimately to Russia , and parliament voted to remove him from his post . This brought another possible change in direction of Ukraine 's association with Europe and by extension NATO . In 2014 , pro @-@ Russian unrest occurred in eastern Ukraine and the Crimean Peninsula was annexed by the Russian Federation in March . As part of an effort to assuage concerned groups , newly installed Prime Minister <unk> Yatsenyuk addressed the topic in a Russian language speech on 18 March 2014 , emphasizing that Ukraine is not seeking NATO membership . US President Barack Obama echoed this position the following week , while however calling for greater NATO presence in Eastern Europe . 
 In response to growing Russian aggression in eastern Ukraine including the deployment of Russian troops on Ukrainian soil , Yatsenyuk announced his intentions to resume the bid for NATO integration on 29 August 2014 , and in December 2014 , Ukraine 's parliament voted to drop the non @-@ aligned status that it adopted in 2010 . NATO Secretary General Anders Fogh Rasmussen has stated that NATO membership is still an option for Ukraine , and support for NATO membership has risen to 63 @.@ 9 percent in government @-@ controlled Ukraine according to a July 2015 poll . Previous polls had shown that the decline in opposition to membership was linked to the ongoing Russian intervention . 
 = = = Other countries = = = 
 Austria and Switzerland are both members of the Partnership for Peace , and border NATO member states . Malta is also a member of the Partnership for Peace and the European Union . However , each country has a long @-@ standing policy of neutrality . Cyprus is the only European Union member state that is not a member of the Partnership for Peace , with any treaty blocked by Turkey 's concerns regarding the Cyprus dispute . According to Minister of Foreign Affairs Enver Hoxhaj , integration with NATO is a priority for the Republic of Kosovo , which declared independence from Serbia in 2008 . Hoxhaj stated in 2014 that the country 's goal is to be a NATO member by 2022 . However , four NATO member states , Greece , Romania , Spain and Slovakia , do not recognize Kosovo 's independence . United Nations membership , which Kosovo does not have , is considered to be necessary for NATO membership . 
 Russia , Armenia , Belarus , and Kazakhstan are all members of the Collective Security Treaty Organization ( CSTO ) , an alternative military alliance . In 2009 , Russian envoy Dmitry Rogozin did not rule out joining NATO at some point , but stated that Russia was currently more interested in leading a coalition as a great power . Azerbaijan has committed to a policy of neutrality , but has not ruled out eventually joining NATO or the CSTO . 
 Christopher Sands of the Hudson Institute proposed Mexican membership of NATO in order to enhance NATO cooperation with Mexico and develop a " North American pillar " for regional security . In June 2013 , Colombian President Juan Manuel Santos stated his hope that Colombia 's cooperation with NATO could result in NATO membership , though his Foreign Minister , Juan Carlos <unk> , quickly clarified that Colombia is not actively seeking NATO membership . Ivo <unk> and James <unk> proposed a " global NATO " that would incorporate democratic states from around the world , including Australia , New Zealand , Japan , South Korea , Brazil , South Africa , and India , while Republican presidential candidate Rudy Giuliani suggested expanding NATO to include Singapore , Israel , Australia , India , and Japan . Expanding NATO outside of Europe would require amending Article 10 of the North Atlantic Treaty . 
 = Numerically controlled oscillator = 
 A numerically controlled oscillator ( NCO ) is a digital signal generator which creates a synchronous ( i.e. clocked ) , discrete @-@ time , discrete @-@ valued representation of a waveform , usually sinusoidal . NCOs are often used in conjunction with a digital @-@ to @-@ analog converter ( DAC ) at the output to create a direct digital synthesizer ( DDS ) . 
 Numerically controlled oscillators offer several advantages over other types of oscillators in terms of agility , accuracy , stability and reliability . NCOs are used in many communications systems including digital up / down converters used in 3G wireless and software radio systems , digital <unk> , radar systems , drivers for optical or acoustic transmissions , and multilevel FSK / PSK modulators / demodulators . 
 = = Operation = = 
 An NCO generally consists of two parts : 
 A phase accumulator ( PA ) , which adds to the value held at its output a frequency control value at each clock sample . 
 A phase @-@ to @-@ amplitude converter ( PAC ) , which uses the phase accumulator output word ( phase word ) usually as an index into a waveform look @-@ up table ( LUT ) to provide a corresponding amplitude sample . Sometimes interpolation is used with the look @-@ up table to provide better accuracy and reduce phase error noise . Other methods of converting phase to amplitude , including mathematical algorithms such as power series can be used , particularly in a software NCO . 
 When clocked , the phase accumulator ( PA ) creates a modulo @-@ 2N sawtooth waveform which is then converted by the phase @-@ to @-@ amplitude converter ( PAC ) to a sampled sinusoid , where N is the number of bits carried in the phase accumulator . N sets the NCO frequency resolution and is normally much larger than the number of bits defining the memory space of the PAC look @-@ up table . If the PAC capacity is 2M , the PA output word must be truncated to M bits as shown in Figure 1 . However , the truncated bits can be used for interpolation . The truncation of the phase output word does not affect the frequency accuracy but produces a time @-@ varying periodic phase error which is a primary source of spurious products . Another spurious product generation mechanism is finite word length effects of the PAC output ( amplitude ) word . 
 The frequency accuracy relative to the clock frequency is limited only by the precision of the arithmetic used to compute the phase . NCOs are <unk> and frequency @-@ agile , and can be trivially modified to produce a phase @-@ modulated or frequency @-@ modulated output by summation at the appropriate node , or provide quadrature outputs as shown in the figure . 
 = = Phase accumulator = = 
 A binary phase accumulator consists of an N @-@ bit binary adder and a register configured as shown in Figure 1 . Each clock cycle produces a new N @-@ bit output consisting of the previous output obtained from the register summed with the frequency control word ( FCW ) which is constant for a given output frequency . The resulting output waveform is a staircase with step size <formula> , the integer value of the FCW . In some configurations , the phase output is taken from the output of the register which introduces a one clock cycle latency but allows the adder to operate at a higher clock rate . 
 The adder is designed to overflow when the sum of the absolute value of its operands exceeds its capacity ( 2N − 1 ) . The overflow bit is discarded so the output word width is always equal to its input word width . The remainder <formula> , called the residual , is stored in the register and the cycle repeats , starting this time from <formula> ( see figure 2 ) . Since a phase accumulator is a finite state machine , eventually the residual at some sample K must return to the initial value <formula> . The interval K is referred to as the grand repetition rate ( GRR ) given by 
 <formula> 
 where GCD is the greatest common divisor function . The GRR represents the true periodicity for a given <formula> which for a high resolution NCO can be very long . Usually we are more interested in the operating frequency determined by the average overflow rate , given by 
 <formula> ( 1 ) 
 The frequency resolution , defined as the smallest possible incremental change in frequency , is given by 
 <formula> ( 2 ) 
 Equation ( 1 ) shows that the phase accumulator can be thought of as a programmable non @-@ integer frequency divider of divide ratio <formula> . 
 = = Phase @-@ to @-@ amplitude converter = = 
 The phase @-@ amplitude converter creates the sample @-@ domain waveform from the truncated phase output word received from the PA . The PAC can be a simple read only memory containing 2M contiguous samples of the desired output waveform which typically is a sinusoid . Often though , various tricks are employed to reduce the amount of memory required . This include various trigonometric expansions , trigonometric approximations and methods which take advantage of the quadrature symmetry exhibited by <unk> . Alternatively , the PAC may consist of random access memory which can be filled as desired to create an arbitrary waveform generator . 
 = = Spurious products = = 
 Spurious products are the result of harmonic or non @-@ harmonic distortion in the creation of the output waveform due to non @-@ linear numerical effects in the signal processing chain . Only numerical errors are covered here . For other distortion mechanisms created in the digital @-@ to @-@ analog converter see the corresponding section in the direct @-@ digital synthesizer article . 
 = = = Phase truncation spurs = = = 
 The number of phase accumulator bits of an NCO ( N ) is usually between 16 and 64 . If the PA output word were used directly to index the PAC look @-@ up table an <unk> high storage capacity in the ROM would be required . As such , the PA output word must be truncated to span a reasonable memory space . <unk> of the phase word causes phase modulation of the output sinusoid which introduces non @-@ harmonic distortion in proportion to the number of bits truncated . The number of spurious products created by this distortion is given by : 
 <formula> ( 3 ) 
 where W is the number of bits truncated . 
 In calculating the Spurious @-@ free dynamic range , we are interested in the spurious product with the largest amplitude relative to the carrier output level given by : 
 <formula> 
 where P is word width of the DAC . For W > 4 @,@ 
 <formula> 
 Another related spurious generation method is the slight modulation due to the GRR outlined above . The amplitude of these spurs is low for large N and their frequency is generally too low to be detectable but they may cause issues for some applications . 
 = = = Amplitude truncation spurs = = = 
 Another source of spurious products is the amplitude quantization of the sampled waveform contained in the PAC look up table ( s ) . If the number of DAC bits is P , the AM spur level is approximately equal to − 6 @.@ 02 P − 1 @.@ 76 dBc . 
 = = = Mitigation techniques = = = 
 Phase truncation spurs can be reduced substantially by the introduction of white gaussian noise prior to truncation . The so @-@ called dither noise is summed into the lower W + 1 bits of the PA output word to <unk> the truncation operation . Often the improvement can be achieved without penalty because the DAC noise floor tends to dominate system performance . Amplitude truncation spurs can not be mitigated in this fashion . Introduction of noise into the static values held in the PAC ROMs would not eliminate the <unk> of the <unk> error terms and thus would not achieve the desired effect . 
 = Training Day ( Archer ) = 
 " Training Day " is the second episode of the animated comedy Archer . It was written by Archer creator and co @-@ executive producer , Adam Reed , and directed by Mack Williams . In the episode , Archer 's mother Malory assigns her son the task of training Cyril to be an agent . Meanwhile , secretary Cheryl and human resources representative Pam take advantage of Malory being temporarily blinded by an allergic reaction . 
 " Training Day " was produced at Floyd County Productions and animated at Radical Axis studio in Atlanta , over the course of approximately one month . FX had initially planned on airing the series alongside the fifth season of It 's Always Sunny in Philadelphia in 2009 , but production constraints led to it being pushed back to January 2010 . The episode features cultural references to the films Rain Man and James Bond , and stand @-@ up comedian and actor Dane Cook . In its original broadcast , the episode was met with 1 @.@ 8 million viewers and positive reviews . 
 = = Plot = = 
 After Archer recklessly foils an Irish terrorist 's attempt to assassinate a British nobleman , Malory begins to suspect that Lana 's feelings for her son are resurfacing . Hoping to readjust Lana 's desires so they are steered towards her current boyfriend , Cyril , she promotes Cyril to a field agent and assigns Archer the job of training him . Archer briefs Cyril of his multiple training tactics , including learning Krav Maga and using <unk> weapons which have a tendency to malfunction " for , like , no reason . " One of his sessions involves trying to kill an assassin ( portrayed by Archer 's butler , Woodhouse ) and using a dance partner ( played by a prostitute Archer has befriended ) as a human shield . During the session , however , Cyril accidentally poisons the prostitute and both he and Archer pronounce her deceased . 
 The pair put the prostitute in Archer 's trunk and drive off , hoping to dispose of the body in an undisclosed location . On the way , however , Archer reveals he is aware of Malory 's plan and has been attempting to discourage Cyril from becoming a field agent , presumably due to his own feelings for Lana , and had orchestrated the whole fiasco to this end ( revealing the prostitute was merely tranquilized ) . At this point , the car is rammed by a pursuing vehicle . Cyril believes this is part of Archer 's hoax , until their pursuer opens fire on them . In a true show of his character , Archer threatens to eject from the car and leave the hysterical Cyril behind . Their mystery attacker then ceases fire and reveals herself to be Lana , who has discovered Archer 's assignment and decided to put a stop to it . Despite Cyril 's concern about being caught with a dead hooker , Lana reveals she is only upset he felt the need to keep secrets from her , so she punishes Cyril by forcing him to buy interracial pornography from " the sweet old Korean lady " at the video store . Archer releases the prostitute in the trunk after Cyril and Lana depart , who reveals she was not in on the plan . Archer is forced to not only pay her obscene amounts of money as collateral , but also give her his car , leaving him stranded . 
 Meanwhile , Malory becomes temporally blinded after having an allergic reaction to zucchini . Seeing this as an opportunity to help themselves , secretary Cheryl and human resources representative Pam hack into the ISIS computer mainframe from Malory 's office and alter their files , allowing them better health care and other perks they can not afford themselves . The whole time , Malory rants about how disgruntled she is about her own and others ' life choices . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Training Day " was written by Archer creator and co @-@ executive producer Adam Reed , while the series ' animation director Mack Williams directed it . In 2009 , FX network had officially greenlit production of the series , ordering six episodes and an additional four scripts . Over the course of approximately one month , " Training Day " was produced at Reed 's Floyd County Productions studio in Atlanta , Georgia , and animated at the Radical Axis Studio , also located in Atlanta . 
 FX originally planned on pairing Archer with the fifth season of the network 's situation comedy It 's Always Sunny in Philadelphia on Thursday nights in the Fall . However , the network learned of the month @-@ long production period needed to create the necessary six episodes , and realized that there was not enough time to have all of the episodes ready before Philadelphia began its new season . FX instead decided to release a sneak airing of the pilot episode " Mole Hunt " on September 17 , 2009 , without any promotion or announcement , and began broadcast of the first season with " Training Day " on January 14 , 2010 . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 The episode featured multiple cultural references . While discussing his training , Cyril asks Archer if he will teach him the art of karate . In response , Archer negatively compares karate to the stand @-@ up comedian and actor Dane Cook . Archer explains that Cyril shall be trained by a former member of Mossad in order to perform Krav Maga , an eclectic hand @-@ to @-@ hand combat system developed in Israel . 
 While Archer and Cyril are being shot at by an unknown vehicle behind them , Archer refers to Cyril as " Rain Man , " a 1988 drama film starring Tom Cruise and Dustin Hoffman . Cyril believes that Archer is calling himself a better spy than James Bond from the James Bond film series , to which Archer pronounces " I don ’ t like to invite that comparison but ... yeah , basically . " Several critics have noted satirical comparisons between Archer and the Bond films . Reed , himself , based the Archer character on Bond , perceiving Bond as misogynistic and racist . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original broadcast on FX , " Training Day " was watched by 1 @.@ 8 million viewers , according to Nielsen ratings . 1 @.@ 2 million of these viewers were aged between the ages of 18 and 49 , the core demographic for Archer . A re @-@ airing of the pilot episode " Mole Hunt " preceded it and attracted a slightly smaller amount of viewers , with 1 @.@ 4 million viewers , only 950 @,@ 000 being between 18 and 49 . 
 " Training Day " received generally positive reviews from television critics . Annie Wu applauded the episode in her review for TV Squad . Wu dispensed that the best part was the writing , and acted as " a prime example of how ridiculously rapid @-@ fire the conversations can get . " She singled out the scene where Archer gives an " oddly specific " situation as to when he would utilize a gun hidden in his underwear . Wu opined that she " loved " Jessica Walter 's performance as Malory , declaring that she " wins this episode " with lines such as " Immigrants ! That 's how they do , y 'know . Just drive around , listening to raps and shooting all the jobs . " 
 Brian Zoromski of IGN rewarded the episode a 9 @.@ 0 out of 10 , signifying it as " Outstanding . " Zoromski called the voice cast " absolutely excellent , " writing that H. Jon Benjamin 's delivery as Archer was " brilliantly over @-@ the @-@ top , from his drunken outburst and almost @-@ accidental stopping of a terrorist , to his education of all things spy @-@ related , " and noted that both the series satirical themes and character development were " alternately obvious and subtle " and " Archer 's biggest strength . " Salon.com 's Heather Havrilesky called the exchange between Archer and Cyril concerning the latter 's martial arts training a " [ zinger that flies ] by pretty quickly . " 
 = Floyd ( 30 Rock ) = 
 " Floyd " is the sixteenth episode of the fourth season of the American television comedy series 30 Rock , and the 74th overall episode of the series . It was written by series producer Paula Pell , and directed by Millicent Shelton . The episode originally aired on the National Broadcasting Company ( NBC ) network in the United States on March 25 , 2010 . Cheyenne Jackson , Kristin McGee , and Jason Sudeikis guest star in this episode , and there are cameo appearances by Kathie Lee Gifford , Lester Holt , Hoda Kotb , and Meredith Vieira . 
 In the episode , Liz Lemon 's ( Tina Fey ) ex @-@ boyfriend , Floyd DeBarber ( Sudeikis ) , tells her that he is getting married . At the same time , Jack Donaghy ( Alec Baldwin ) helps Danny Baker ( Jackson ) get his revenge against The Girlie Show with Tracy Jordan ( TGS ) writers — Frank Rossitano ( Judah Friedlander ) , James " Toofer " Spurlock ( Keith Powell ) , and J. D. Lutz ( John Lutz ) — after they play a practical joke on him . Meanwhile , Jenna Maroney ( Jane Krakowski ) and Tracy Jordan ( Tracy Morgan ) spend a long day listening to NBC page Kenneth Parcell ( Jack McBrayer ) tell stories about his childhood . 
 " Floyd " received generally mixed reception from television critics . According to the Nielsen ratings system , the episode was watched by 6 @.@ 252 million households during its original broadcast , and received a 2 @.@ 9 rating / 8 share among viewers in the 18 – 49 demographic . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Liz Lemon ( Tina Fey ) gets a surprise phone call from her ex @-@ boyfriend , Floyd DeBarber ( Jason Sudeikis ) , who says he will be coming to New York and wants to have dinner with her . She begins to hope that the two can get back together , however , while watching The Today Show she discovers that he is getting married to a woman named Kaitlin ( Kristin McGee ) . Her boss , Jack Donaghy ( Alec Baldwin ) , warns her not to attempt revenge ; nevertheless , Liz invites Floyd to a seafood restaurant where she had food poisoning on three separate occasions . He does not get food poisoning , but instead , Floyd , a recovering alcoholic , gets drunk off of the whiskey @-@ based fish sauce . The two get into an argument , and after Floyd insults her , Liz leaves the restaurant . The next day , Floyd appears on The Today Show , but still drunk from the night before , refuses to leave the 30 Rock building . Liz apologizes to both Floyd and Kaitlin for getting him drunk . They accept the apology , and Kaitlin asks Liz to be a participant in their wedding , to which she agrees . 
 At the same time , jealous of the publicity that Danny Baker ( Cheyenne Jackson ) is getting after receiving a Juno Award nomination , Frank Rossitano ( Judah Friedlander ) , James " Toofer " Spurlock ( Keith Powell ) , and J. D. Lutz ( John Lutz ) , the staff writers from TGS with Tracy Jordan , print a fake , embarrassing New York Times interview with him and circulate it throughout the 30 Rock building . Danny brings the upsetting article to Jack , but Jack quickly figures out that Frank , Toofer , and Lutz are the ones behind it . To get back at them , Jack and Danny trick them into stripping in front of the TGS dancers . Frank , Toofer , and Lutz , however , discover a secret code from a prank society that Jack belonged to while attending Princeton University . Frank realizes he can use this to manipulate him , which works . As a result of this , Jack threatens to sleep with Frank 's mother , which prompts them to ease off on their pranks . 
 Finally , to keep Jenna Maroney ( Jane Krakowski ) and Tracy Jordan ( Tracy Morgan ) distracted from Danny 's fanfare , TGS producer , Pete Hornberger ( Scott Adsit ) sends them to the makeup department to have plaster face @-@ prints made while NBC page Kenneth Parcell ( Jack McBrayer ) talks to them . Jenna and Tracy are plagued by erotic dreams involving Kenneth , and to stop having them , they decide to stay awake . This fails , so they decide to deal with it à la A Nightmare on Elm Street , by killing Kenneth in their dreams . They wake up ( believing they are still dreaming ) and attack Kenneth . Witnessing this , Pete tells them they are wide awake , and that it is morning , which prompts Jenna and Tracy to realize that they slept through the night without having any dreams of Kenneth . They apologize to Kenneth for attacking him , and he accepts their apology . 
 The episode ends with Pete scolding Tracy and Jenna for their bad behavior , and the two apologize , promise to be good , and are about to sing Pete a thank you song , only for Pete to awaken ( this having been a dream ) at his desk . Kenneth arrives , and it soon turns out that Pete is having an erotic dream about Kenneth and Liz . Pete is unable to wake up , and he screams in horror . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Floyd " was written by series producer Paula Pell and directed by Millicent Shelton . This episode was Pell 's first writing credit and the second episode for Shelton who had directed the March 26 , 2009 , season three episode " Apollo , Apollo " . " Floyd " originally aired in the United States on March 25 , 2010 , on NBC as the sixteenth episode of the show 's fourth season and the 74th overall episode of the series . Pell has appeared on the show as the character Paula Hornberger , the wife of Pete Hornberger , played by Scott Adsit . 
 " Floyd " was filmed on January 27 and February 3 , 2010 . Comedian actor Jason Sudeikis , who played Floyd DeBarber in this episode , has appeared in the main cast of Saturday Night Live ( SNL ) , a weekly sketch comedy series which airs on NBC in the United States . Tina Fey , the series creator of 30 Rock , was the head writer on SNL from 1999 until 2006 . This was Sudeikis 's tenth appearance on the show . Actor Cheyenne Jackson made his fifth appearance as Danny Baker . Jackson previously appeared in the episodes " The Problem Solvers " , " Secret Santa " , " Black Light Attack ! " , and " Winter Madness " . In an interview with The New York Times , Jackson revealed that the song he sings in the episode was composed by Jeff Richmond , the show 's composer , and said that the song was " actually a little longer " and that they shot a " whole " music video to accompany it . 
 " Floyd " featured cameo appearances from The Today Show correspondents Meredith Vieira , Lester Holt , Kathie Lee Gifford , and Hoda Kotb . In the episode , Vieira introduces Floyd and his fiancée , Kaitlin , as finalists competing to have their wedding featured on The Today Show . In one scene , Danny runs into the writers ' room where Frank , Toofer , and Lutz are . He turns on the television to see Holt who reports , " We 're now getting reports that the toxic leaks have created a Cloverfield type monster in the building . The monster cannot detect the smell of human skin . Anyone still inside should disrobe immediately . " Jack calls Liz into his office and shows her that Floyd , drunk from his dinner with her , is still in the 30 Rock building , where he is shown interrupting a segment featuring Gifford and Kotb . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 In the beginning of the episode , Liz tells Jenna about a bad date that she had with someone she met on the <unk> section of the Kraft Foods web site , K @-@ date . Pete congratulates Danny on his Juno Award nomination for his Canadian pump @-@ up song for the National Hockey League team , the Ottawa Senators . Danny replies , " It 's an honor to be nominated in the same category as Sir Dave Coulier " , the latter is an American actor . Liz imitates singer @-@ songwriter Christopher Cross while singing " All my days I 've been waiting , for you to come back home . Moonlight of New York City " , after revealing that she hoped to end up with Floyd one day and Cross would sing a romantic song about them . This song would be extended on the 30 Rock Original Television Soundtrack by Cross himself . Liz makes reference to the fact that once , on television , one could not say the word " crap " , but " then they let that slide and now we can say whatever we want . " She and Jack exchange the words , " Douchebag " , " <unk> " , and " Anal rot " , as examples . Later , Liz tells Jack , " I don 't care . I 'll start my own group . Rejection from society is what created the X @-@ Men " , which references the comic book superhero team , the X @-@ Men , who are rejected from society due to their mutant special powers . 
 In the false breaking news story , Lester Holt references the 2007 monster movie Cloverfield . After learning about the toxic leaks in the building , in which Frank , Toofer , and Lutz need to strip down , Frank says " So much of my life was wasted creating hats ! " This is a reference to Judah Friedlander , who portrays Frank in the show and who is known for his trademark trucker hats which he wears in and out of the Frank character . When Liz tells Floyd that she saw him on The Today Show , on which she learned he is getting married , Floyd says " Dammit ! I could have sworn you watch The Early Show on CBS " , to which Liz replies , " The Early Show ? What am I , in a hospital ? " . Liz reveals that she once participated in a reenactment on America 's Most Wanted playing a woman who is strangled on a toilet . Jenna and Tracy , who are having strange dreams about Kenneth , decide they " have to Elm Street this . We have to go to sleep and kill Kenneth in our dreams ! " This references the A Nightmare on Elm Street film series , in which the movie 's main character — Freddy Krueger — stalks and kills his victims in their dreams . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original American broadcast , " Floyd " was watched by 6 @.@ 252 million households , according to the Nielsen ratings system . It received a 2 @.@ 9 rating / 8 share among viewers in the 18 – 49 demographic , meaning that 2 @.@ 9 percent of all people in that group , and 8 percent of all people from that group watching television at the time , watched the episode . This was a decrease from the previous episode , " Don Geiss , America and Hope " , which was watched by 6 @.@ 9 million American viewers . " Floyd " has received mixed reception from television critics . 
 IGN contributor Robert Canning gave the episode a 7 @.@ 4 out of 10 rating , writing that he " merely " liked the episode . " It wasn 't nearly as fun as I had hoped it would be . I mean , if you were going to bring Floyd back and name the episode after him , it would have been nice to give [ Liz and Floyd ] a little spark . " The A.V. Club 's Nathan Rabin gave it a C rating , calling it a disappointing episode . In regards to Jason Sudeikis , Rabin commented that he is a " gifted comic actor " but this episode " found him at his hammy , embarrassing worst . " Meredith Blake , writing for the Los Angeles Times , remarked that the episode " may have been the worst one yet " , and said that when Floyd called Liz a " badger " , her heart broke into smithereens , " There 's mean @-@ funny , and then there 's plain old mean . [ ... ] Liz 's love life has become the central butt of the joke on 30 Rock ... and it 's starting to feel like the writers have run out of ways to be funny without being sadistic . " Sean Gandert of Paste said that " Floyd " was not a great episode , " but it 's still pretty good by this season 's standards , if a somewhat disappointing use of Floyd 's return . " He explained that part of the episode 's problem was that Liz 's relationships not succeeding " has become pretty old hat for the show since we 've seen it time and time again " , and hoped to see her " find a good man and let the show move onto something else for a while . " TV Guide 's Adam Mersel wrote that it " really didn 't do it for me . I didn 't really laugh out loud much , and the cameo from one of my favorite SNL players came off a bit forced . " 
 Bob Sassone of AOL 's TV Squad gave a positive review of both Liz and Jack 's plot , but was not favorable towards Jenna and Tracy 's , opining that " Floyd " was one of those episodes of 30 Rock where their plot " really dragged the show down . " He reported that he felt bad for Liz " because of all the guys [ she ] has dated over these four seasons , [ Floyd ] ' s the one she should end up with . " Sassone hoped the episode would have concluded with the two finding out " something horrible " about Floyd 's fiancée " or maybe we 'd find out that Floyd did all of this just to get close to Liz again in some weird way " . Like Sassone , Time contributor James Poniewozik said that the Floyd character " was one of the better drawn boyfriends for Liz " . Further in his recap , Poniewozik was " a little disappointed " that the episode brought him back " to get sloppy drunk , to tell off Liz ... and to get engaged to a vapid @-@ seeming ' ab model . ' " Television columnist Alan Sepinwall for The Star @-@ Ledger commented that Sudeikis 's return gave Tina Fey 's Liz " one of her more down @-@ to @-@ earth and relatable stories in a while " , and enjoyed the Frank , Toofer , and Lutz rivalry with Jack and Danny , as well as Pete 's involvement in the Jenna and Tracy story . Overall , Sepinwall said that the episode did not " really hang together for me . " 
 = Dromaeosauroides = 
 Dromaeosauroides is a genus of dromaeosaurid theropod dinosaur from the Early Cretaceous of what is now Denmark . It was discovered in the Jydegaard Formation in Robbedale , on the island of Bornholm in the Baltic Sea . This is the only likely place for dinosaur remains to be discovered on Danish territory , since the Mesozoic deposits exposed in the rest of the country are marine . Dromaeosauroides is the first known dinosaur from this location , and the only one which has been scientifically named . It is one of the oldest known dromaeosaurs in the world , and the first known uncontested dromaeosaur from the Early Cretaceous of Europe . 
 It is known from two teeth , the first of which was found in 2000 and the second in 2008 . Based on the first tooth ( the holotype ) , the genus and species Dromaeosauroides bornholmensis was named in 2003 . The genus name means " Dromaeosaurus @-@ like " , due to the similarity to the teeth of that genus , and the species name means " from Bornholm " . After this discovery , remains and tracks of more dinosaurs were found in several formations on Bornholm . Some teeth from the United Kingdom that have been referred to the genus Nuthetes may also belong to this animal . Coprolites containing fish remains found in the Jydegaard Formation may belong to Dromaeosauroides . 
 The holotype tooth is 21 @.@ 7 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 85 in ) long , and the second tooth is 15 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 59 in ) . They are curved and finely serrated . In life , Dromaeosauroides would have been 3 to 4 metres ( 10 to 10 ft ) in length , and weighed about 40 kilograms ( 88 lb ) . As a dromaeosaur it would have been feathered , and had a large sickle claw on its feet like its relatives Dromaeosaurus and Deinonychus . It lived in a coastal lagoon environment with sauropods , as evidenced by a possible titanosaur tooth . 
 = = Discovery and naming = = 
 Few dinosaur remains have been found in Scandinavia . The mainland of western Denmark is an unlikely region to find dinosaur remains , since the Mesozoic sediments there are marine Maastrichtian chalk . Fossils of non @-@ dinosaurian marine animals , including mosasaurs and plesiosaurs , have been found in these deposits . Mesozoic deposits in Scania , Sweden , are much richer in fossils , including those of dinosaurs . The Danish island of Bornholm in the Baltic Sea was part of the same land mass as Scania ( the Scandinavian @-@ Russian continent ) , and has a similar geology . The southwestern part of the island is the only place in Denmark which has yielded dinosaur remains . 
 During the 1990s , the Fossil Project ( disbanded in 2005 ) was formed by a group of unemployed people who received funding from Denmark and the EEC to maintain geological sites on Bornholm . One of these , " Carl Nielsen 's sandpit " in the Robbedale valley ( not to be confused with the Robbedale Formation , where no vertebrate remains have been found ) , is part of the Jydegaard Formation . This formation is 140 million years old , dating to the Late Berriasian ( or <unk> ) stage of the Early Cretaceous period . The Fossil Project sifted sand at these sites in cooperation with the <unk> interpretation centre , which exhibited the fossils discovered . In September 2000 , Danish palaeontologists Per Christiansen and Niels Bonde taught a field course at the site , " The Hunt for Danish Dinosaurs " . During the course , geology student Eliza Jarl <unk> found a theropod tooth , the first dinosaur discovered on Danish territory , and the find was recorded by a local television station . 
 The tooth was presented at the 45th annual meeting of the Palaeontological Association in 2001 , and identified as a dromaeosaur . In 2003 the tooth ( <unk> <unk> / DK 315 ) was made the holotype specimen of Dromaeosauroides bornholmensis — named and described by Christiansen and Bonde . The genus name combines Dromaeosaurus with the Greek <unk> ( " in the form of " ) , referring to the resemblance between the teeth of the taxa . The specific name refers to Bornholm . Bonde and Christiansen had expected the first Danish dinosaur remains to be teeth of herbivorous dinosaurs such as hypsilophodonts or Iguanodon , and were surprised to find a dromaeosaur tooth instead , since these are rare in Early Cretaceous formations ; herbivores would have been more abundant than carnivores . Because the dromaeosaur seems to have been large , they expected that resilient bones , such as claws , might be found in the future . The palaeontologists did not expect bones of larger dinosaurs to be discovered in the formation ( since these would most likely have been found when the sand was commercially exploited ) , but hoped the remains of a Mesozoic mammal would be found . The holotype tooth has been illustrated in several books and research articles . It was certified " <unk> " ( " Danish creature " , according to a 1990 Danish museum law securing important fossils ) when its scientific importance was evaluated by the Geological Museum in Copenhagen . 
 In late summer 2008 , ranger Jens Kofoed found a second dromaeosaurid tooth . This specimen ( DK 559 ) was found in the same location , and later assigned to D. bornholmensis as well . Kofoed explained that the finds were surprising because people had been unsuccessfully searching for dinosaur remains in Denmark for years , and it was like finding a " needle in a haystack " . In a press release , the second dromaeosaur tooth was also certified <unk> by the Natural History Museum of Denmark , which compared the animal to the raptors in Jurassic Park , noting that the animals , unlike the film 's raptors , would have been feathered . 
 Since the discovery of Dromaeosauroides , evidence of more dinosaurs has been found on Bornholm . In 2002 , a tooth thought to belong to a juvenile titanosaurian sauropod was found in the Jydegaard Formation . Footprints of a sauropod and a <unk> were reported from the Middle Jurassic <unk> Formation in 2005 . Small dromaeosaur and indeterminate maniraptoran teeth from the Early Cretaceous Rabekke Formation were reported in 2008 , and sauropod tracks were also reported from the formation that year . In 2011 , footprints of a sauropod , a <unk> and a theropod were reported from the <unk> Formation . Lower Jurassic tracks reported form the Rønne Formation on Bornholm in 2014 are the earliest evidence of dinosaur activity in Denmark . A tooth from the multituberculate <unk> was found in the Rabekke Formation in 2004 , making it the first known Danish and Scandinavian Mesozoic mammal . 
 In 2012 , Jesper <unk> and colleagues described two coprolites ( fossilised faeces ) containing fish scales and bones . They were found in the Jydegaard Formation , the first such fossils found in Danish continental Mesozoic deposits . Although the producer of these faeces cannot be identified with certainty , marine turtles and dromaeosaurids such as Dromaeosauroides are the most likely candidates . 
 = = Description = = 
 Features used to identify fossil theropod teeth include size , proportion , curvature of the crown and the morphology and number of denticles ( serrations ) . The holotype of D. bornholmensis is a tooth crown 21 @.@ 7 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 85 in ) long , 9 @.@ 7 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 38 in ) from front to back and 6 @.@ 6 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 26 in ) wide at the base . The front part of the tooth was worn , indicating that it was shed when the animal was alive . It was further affected by taphonomic wear ; the base of the tooth is irregular , so it may have been slightly longer in life . The curvature and length of the holotype tooth and the length of its hindmost cutting edge ( carina ) indicates it was in the front of the jaw . 
 The tooth is recurved with a backward bend , and is oval in cross @-@ section . Its front and back cutting edges are finely serrated , extending two @-@ thirds down each edge . There are six denticles per millimeter ( 0 @.@ 04 in ) , and each denticle is square and chiseled . The overall form of the tooth , its width and shape in cross @-@ section and its curvature resemble those in the maxilla ( upper jawbone ) and mandible of the species Dromaeosaurus albertensis from North America . Blood grooves are indistinct or absent , also similar to Dromaeosaurus , and differing from members of the Velociraptorinae subfamily . Dromaeosauroides differs from Dromaeosaurus in that the cutting edge at the front side is further from the middle of the tooth . Although the tooth is larger and the denticles similar , each denticle was smaller than those of Dromaeosaurus , which had only 13 – 20 denticles per 5 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 20 in ) , instead of Dromaeosauroides ' 30 . The second known tooth is smaller — 15 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 59 in ) — with the same features as the holotype . 
 The holotype tooth is roughly 25 percent larger than equivalent Dromaeosaurus teeth , from which a body length of 3 metres ( 120 in ) or more was estimated for Dromaeosauroides ; it may have been as long as 3 to 4 metres ( 9 @.@ 8 to 13 @.@ 1 ft ) . In an interview , Christiansen estimated its skull to be 35 centimetres ( 14 in ) long and the animal 's weight 40 kilograms ( 88 lb ) ; a Bengal tiger of the same length would weigh 150 to 180 kilograms ( 330 to 400 lb ) by comparison . As a dromaeosaur , Dromaeosauroides would have had a large sickle claw on its highly mobile second toe , like its relatives Dromaeosaurus , Velociraptor and Deinonychus . This group is closely related to birds , and the <unk> interpretive centre houses a roughly life @-@ sized sculpture of Dromaeosauroides covered in feathers . Later Chinese finds of well @-@ preserved feathered dromaeosaurs indicate that the sculpture should have more and longer feathers to be accurate . Although some smaller dromaeosaurs may have been able to fly , flight was unlikely for an animal the size of Dromaeosauroides . 
 = = Classification = = 
 Several features of the tooth are only known from members of the family Dromaeosauridae of theropod dinosaurs . Dromaeosauroides was classified as a member of the Dromaeosaurinae subfamily within the Dromaeosauridae , due to its similarity to Dromaeosaurus . Despite the resemblance , Dromaeosauroides is not considered part of that genus . It is unlikely that a genus would survive for 60 million years ; Dromaeosauroides lived during the Early Cretaceous , and Dromaeosaurus during the Late Cretaceous . The differences between their denticles also indicate they should be kept separate . 
 Dromaeosauroides is one of the oldest known dromaeosaurs in the world ; older remains , for the most part , have only tentatively been referred to Dromaeosauridae . Dromaeosauroides was the first definite dromaeosaurid known from the Early Cretaceous of Europe , depending on the identity of Nuthetes from the Middle Purbeck formation of the United Kingdom ( which may slightly predate the Jydegaard Formation ) . It is uncertain whether the juvenile holotype specimen of Nuthetes has dromaeosaurid characteristics . Large specimens referred to Nuthetes appear to belong to true dromaeosaurs , and may belong to Dromaeosauroides rather than Nuthetes . These specimens measure 15 to 18 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 59 to 0 @.@ 71 in ) . 
 Dromaeosauroides has been considered an indeterminate dromaeosaur by some scientists . Bonde responded that since the teeth differ from those of other dromaeosaurs from the Early Cretaceous ( and later members of the group , including Dromaeosaurus ) , it should be considered valid . He also said that these scientists had provided incorrect information about the location , strata and age of the specimen , and that the circumstances of its naming were no different from those of other tooth @-@ based taxa . 
 = = Palaeoecology = = 
 Only a corner of the Jydegaard Formation is exposed today ; the remainder is overgrown . Jydegaard is part of the <unk> Group , which includes three formations ( Rabekke , Robbedale and Jydegaard ) ranging from the Berriasian to the Valanginian ages of the Early Cretaceous . Jydegaard consists of sediments deposited in a fresh @-@ to @-@ brackish lagoon facing a coastal strip . In addition to Dromaeosauroides and a possible titanosaur , remains of <unk> sharks , fish such as Lepidotes and <unk> , turtles , lizards , the crocodile <unk> and thin bone fragments from birds or pterosaurs have been found in the deposit . The bivalve <unk> is found in abundance in the sediments below ( the <unk> Bed ) , indicating mass mortality , perhaps due to dinoflagellate toxins . 
 The fish and bivalves were found in clay which was probably a lagoon , and the dinosaurs and lizards in sand which probably was land , perhaps a beach ; turtles and crocodiles were found in both . Freshwater snails were found in clay that may have been shallow , drying lakes behind a sandy barrier between lagoon and sea , in a setting perhaps similar to the Florida Keys or the southwestern coast of Jutland . Dinosaurs may have fed there , based on the remains of plants and small land animals , and theropods may have hunted along the shore . Bornholm and Scania appear to be the only places were remains of the Scandinavian @-@ Russian fauna of the Early Cretaceous can be found . Further investigations there may show whether this fauna has European or Asian affinities . 
 Based on possible dromaeosaur coprolites from the Jydegaard Formation , which contained scales of the fish Lepidotes , <unk> and colleagues speculated that some dromaeosaurids were able to catch fish with the enlarged sickle claw on the second digit of the foot , similar to the " spear fishing " that has been proposed for the theropod Baryonyx and its enlarged thumb claw . The larger of the two coprolites has evidence of <unk> organisms . 
 = Space Stories = 
 Space Stories was a pulp magazine which published five issues from October 1952 to June 1953 . It was published by Standard Magazines , and edited by Samuel Mines . Mines ' editorial policy for Space Stories was to publish straightforward science fiction adventure stories . Among the better @-@ known contributors were Jack Vance , Gordon R. Dickson and Leigh Brackett , whose novel The Big Jump appeared in the February 1953 issue . 
 = = Publication history and contents = = 
 The early 1950s saw dramatic changes in the world of U.S. science fiction ( sf ) publishing . At the start of 1949 , all but one of the major magazines in the field were in pulp format ; by the end of 1955 , almost all had either ceased publication or switched to digest format . Despite the rapid decline of the pulp market , several new science fiction magazines were launched in pulp format during these years . Space Stories was one of the last of these ; it was launched in October 1952 by Standard Magazines , which already published three other sf magazines : Startling Stories , Thrilling Wonder Stories , and Fantastic Story Magazine . Samuel Mines , the editor , had worked for Standard Magazines since 1942 , though not on the science fiction pulps ; he had taken over the editorship of the sf titles when Sam Merwin left Standard in 1951 . 
 In the first issue , Mines declared that Space Stories ' editorial policy would be focused on entertainment : it would be aimed at readers " who want action and thrills , strange and exotic backgrounds , weird and wonderful adventure " , instead of the " coldly mental story , the complex parable , the tale of social significance " . The response in the letters column of the magazine was positive , with several fans quoting Mines ' editorial approvingly . Mines was able to obtain stories from well @-@ known writers , including Gordon R. Dickson , Leigh Brackett , Jack Vance , and William Morrison , though few of the stories were memorable . The best @-@ known story published in the magazine was Brackett 's The Big Jump , which appeared in the February 1953 issue . Sf historian Wendy Bousfield regards most of the lesser @-@ known stories in the magazine as uninteresting , but praises Robert Zack 's " Expedition to Earth " , which is set in a " science fiction restaurant " where the alien staff are assumed to be merely wearing costumes , as a witty variation on the stereotypical hostile alien story . Bousfield also singles out Charles Foster 's " The Satyr Stratagem " as an example of an old @-@ fashioned sexist science fiction plot . In the story , a planet inhabited only by women welcomes a team of earth miners who will provide husbands for them . Bousfield comments that Joanna Russ and James Tiptree , Jr. would later " expose the absurdities of this stock science fictional situation " . In addition to the letter column , Mines included articles and essays on science . A book review column appeared in the April 1953 issue ; it did not appear in the next and final issue , which instead included some science @-@ fictional cartoons . 
 The interior art was of generally good quality ; the artists included Paul Orban , Virgil Finlay , Emsh , and Alex Schomburg . The cover art , by Emsh , Earle K. Bergey , and Walter Popp , was stereotypical , with Emsh 's cover for the February 1953 issue including what sf historian Wendy Bousfield describes as the three stereotypes of sf art : " the spaceman , the voluptuous blonde , and the threatening bug @-@ eyed monster " . Only the final issue 's cover , also by Emsh , was painted to illustrate one of the stories inside the magazine . Bergey died in 1952 , and his cover for the December 1952 issue was the last cover he painted for Standard . 
 = = Bibliographic details = = 
 Space Stories had one volume of three numbers , and a second volume of two numbers . It appeared on a regular bimonthly schedule . All five were published by Standard Magazines of Kokomo , Indiana , and edited by Samuel Mines . Each issue was in pulp format , priced at 25 cents , and 128 pages long . 
 = David Molk = 
 David Molk ( born December 15 , 1988 ) is a former American football center . Molk previously played college football at the same position for University of Michigan , where he was a consensus All @-@ American and won the 2011 Rimington Trophy as the best center in college football . He played professionally in the National Football League ( NFL ) for the Philadelphia Eagles , and the San Diego Chargers . 
 Molk grew up in the Chicago area and played high school football at Lemont Township High School . He was named an All @-@ State player by the Chicago Tribune and was selected to play in the first East @-@ West All @-@ America Football Game in January 2007 . 
 Molk enrolled at the University of Michigan in 2007 . He missed portions of the 2008 and 2009 seasons with injury . As a redshirt junior in 2010 , Molk was the cornerstone in an offensive line that helped Denard Robinson break the Big Ten Conference single @-@ season record with 4 @,@ 189 yards of total offense . Molk was recognized as a first @-@ team All @-@ Big Ten Conference player at the end of the 2010 season . As a redshirt senior in 2011 , Molk anchored a line that led the way for Denard Robinson and Fitzgerald Toussaint to become Michigan 's first duo of 1 @,@ 000 @-@ yard rushers since 1975 . At the end of the 2011 season , he won the Rimington Trophy and was a consensus first @-@ team All @-@ American . 
 Molk was selected by the San Diego Chargers in the seventh round of the 2012 NFL Draft . He has appeared in 12 games , none as a starter , for the Chargers during the 2012 NFL season . 
 = = High school = = 
 Molk was once a 5 @-@ foot @-@ 6 @-@ inch ( 1 @.@ 68 m ) 175 @-@ pound ( 79 kg ) Lemont Township High School freshman who could only bench press 110 pounds ( 50 kg ) and squat 250 pounds ( 110 kg ) . By the end of his junior year , he was one of the most highly recruited high school football players in the Chicago metropolitan area . By his senior season , he was a 6 @-@ foot @-@ 2 @-@ inch ( 1 @.@ 88 m ) 270 @-@ pound ( 120 kg ) center who could bench press 370 pounds ( 170 kg ) , squat 550 pounds ( 250 kg ) and power clean 320 pounds ( 150 kg ) . His high school gym closed at 5 : 00 PM and he had to go into town for extra workout time . He chose to be a center because , although he is too short to be a major Division I college football offensive guard or offensive tackle , he had the potential to be a successful center . He was actually discovered when a scout came to his school to watch a teammate . During the summer prior to his senior season , he made a verbal commitment to the University of Michigan , in part due to its business school , the Ross School of Business . At the end of his junior year he had received scholarship offers from ten schools , including six Big Ten Conference football programs . 
 As a senior , Molk was selected to numerous All @-@ area football teams by various organizations including The Star , Daily Southtown , and Prep Football Report selected by Tom Lemming . In addition , he was selected to the Chicago Tribune All @-@ State team , and he was selected to play in the first East @-@ West All @-@ America Football Game sponsored by ESPN and MLS Sports in Orlando , Florida suburb Lake Buena Vista on January 6 , 2007 . Molk was also an honors student in his senior year of high school . 
 = = College = = 
 Molk attended the University of Michigan , where he played for the Michigan Wolverines football team from 2007 to 2011 . Entering the 2007 NCAA Division I FBS football season , Molk was a serious contender to start in the season opener due to injuries for the 2007 Michigan Wolverines football team . Upon the arrival of new head coach Rich Rodriguez in the spring prior to the 2008 NCAA Division I FBS football season , Molk was expected to be a starter for the 2008 Michigan Wolverines football team after <unk> the prior year . He spent the summer after his redshirt season perfecting the shotgun formation snap . However , he endured a serious undisclosed illness that caused him to lose 15 pounds ( 6 @.@ 8 kg ) and found himself in a battle with redshirt junior David Moosman to be the starting center . As his struggles continued , it was revealed that he had mononucleosis . Despite his struggles , he was awarded the Iron Wolverine Award at the spring football awards in recognition of his superior conditioning based on a series of physical tests . As a result of injuries , both Moosman and Molk were in the starting lineup for the 2008 opener . Offensive line injuries continued to affect the lineup through the early part of the season with Molk ( center ) , Moosman ( right offensive guard ) and Stephen Schilling ( right offensive tackle ) being the only players to start each of the first four games . Molk injured his toe at the end of the November 8 , 2008 Battle for the Little Brown Jug against Minnesota , but he was fine the following week . As the young offense finished the season with a 3 – 9 record , it expected its entire starting offensive line to return the following season . In fact , considering injuries , the team returned a total of seven offensive linemen who started games . 
 In Molk 's second year of spring football he earned the sophomore award for toughness and work ethic during the Michigan spring football awards . By the end of the spring he was among the 44 centers on the 2009 Rimington Trophy spring watch list for the 2009 NCAA Division I FBS football season . He was also included on the watch list for the 2009 Lombardi Award . Molk suffered a broken foot in the third game of the season as the 2009 Wolverines pushed their record to 3 – 0 and had surgery two days later . He was expected to miss 4 – 6 weeks . After missing four games , he returned to practice . However , during the subsequent game against Penn State on October 24 , he tore knee ligaments and was lost for the season as well as spring football . 
 As a redshirt junior , he was selected to the 2010 preseason Rimington Trophy watchlist for the 2010 Michigan Wolverines football team and later a finalist after the regular season had concluded . That season Denard Robinson established numerous quarterback rushing records lining up behind and often running behind Molk . He broke Drew Brees ' Big Ten single @-@ season total offense record of 4 @,@ 189 yards . Robinson fell 116 yards short of Tim Biakabutuka 's Michigan school record of 1 @,@ 818 rushing yards . However , he led the conference in both total offense and rushing yards per game . Following the Big Ten conference regular season , Molk was a first team All @-@ conference selection by the coaches and second team member as selected by the media . He was also recognized by Sports Illustrated as an honorable mention All @-@ American . 
 As a fifth @-@ year senior he was selected to three preseason watchlists : the Outland Trophy list , which goes to the nation 's top interior lineman ; the Lombardi Award watch list , which is awarded to the nation 's top lineman ; and the Rimington Trophy watch list , which is awarded to the nation 's top center . During the season , Michigan had two 1000 @-@ yard rushers ( Robinson and Fitzgerald Toussaint ) for the first time since the 1975 team . He earned the 2011 Big Ten Conference Rimington @-@ Pace Offensive Lineman of the Year Award ( the first year it was thus named ) and was a repeat first team All @-@ Big Ten Conference selection by the coaches and a second team selection by the media . The following week , he was named a finalist for the Rimington Trophy . A few days later , he was declared the Rimington Trophy winner . He was also first team All @-@ American selection by AP , Football Writers Association of America , Scout.com , Sporting News and the Walter Camp Football Foundation , which resulted in him becoming a consensus All @-@ American . He was a third team All @-@ American selection by Yahoo ! Sports and an honorable mention All @-@ American selectee by Sports Illustrated and the Pro Football Weekly . Molk was invited to participate in the January 28 , 2012 Senior Bowl , and he was an early invite to the February 22 – 28 , 2012 NFL Scouting Combine . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 = = = 2012 NFL Draft = = = 
 Molk was one of 54 offensive linemen , and the fourth @-@ ranked center — behind Peter <unk> , Garth Gerhart , and Ben Jones — , that participated in the 2012 NFL Scouting Combine . However , he tore the <unk> longus tendon in his foot at the 2012 Sugar Bowl , and he had surgery on January 13 . As a result , he was only able to participate in one Combine event . His 41 reps in the bench press ranked first among offensive linemen and second at the entire combine , behind only nose tackle <unk> Poe . Molk 's total was most by a center and ranks third among offensive lineman since 2000 , behind only Mitch Petrus and Scott Young , who were both offensive guards . 
 = = = San Diego Chargers = = = 
 He was selected by the San Diego Chargers in the seventh round of the 2012 NFL Draft with the <unk> selection overall . He was one of three Michigan Wolverines and 41 Big Ten players drafted . On May 8 , 2012 , he signed a four @-@ year contract . He played 12 games for the 2012 San Diego Chargers , mostly on special teams and as an extra lineman in short yardage situations , before being placed on injured reserve on December 4 , 2012 . Molk was one of 11 players released by the Chargers on August 31 , 2013 , during the last round of preseason roster cuts . 
 = = = Philadelphia Eagles = = = 
 On January 9 , 2014 , he signed a futures contract with the Philadelphia Eagles . He was placed on injured reserve with a torn bicep after the second game of the 2015 NFL season by the Eagles on September 14 , 2015 . Molk announced his retirement from the NFL on March 4 , 2016 . 
 = Symphony in White , No. 1 : The White Girl = 
 Symphony in White , No. 1 , also known as The White Girl , is a painting by James Abbott McNeill Whistler . The work shows a woman in full figure standing on a white polar bear skin in front of a white curtain with a white lily in her hand . The colour scheme of the painting is almost entirely white . The model is Joanna Hiffernan , the artist 's mistress . Though the painting was originally called The White Girl , Whistler later started calling it Symphony in White , No. 1 . By referring to his work in such abstract terms , he intended to emphasise his " art for art 's sake " philosophy . 
 Whistler created the painting in the winter of 1861 – 62 , though he later returned to it and made alterations . It was rejected both at the Royal Academy and at the Salon in Paris , but eventually accepted at the Salon des Refusés in 1863 . This exhibition also featured Édouard Manet 's famous Déjeuner sur l 'herbe , and together the two works gained a lot of attention . The White Girl shows clearly the influence of the Pre @-@ Raphaelite Brotherhood , with whom Whistler had recently come in contact . The painting has been interpreted by later art critics both as an allegory of innocence and its loss , and as a religious allusion to the Virgin Mary . 
 = = Artist and model = = 
 James Abbott McNeill Whistler was born in the United States in 1834 , the son of George Washington Whistler , a railway engineer . In 1843 , his father relocated the family to Saint Petersburg , Russia , where James received training in painting . After a stay in England , he returned to America to attend the US Military Academy at West Point in 1851 . In 1855 , he made his way back to Europe , determined to dedicate himself to painting . He settled in Paris at first , but in 1859 moved to London , where he would spend most of the remainder of his life . There he met Dante Gabriel Rossetti and other members of the Pre @-@ Raphaelite Brotherhood , who would have a profound influence on Whistler . 
 It was also in London that Whistler met Joanna Heffernan , the model who would become his lover . Their relationship has been referred to as a " marriage without benefit of clergy . " By 1861 , Whistler had already used her as a model for another painting . Wapping , named after Wapping in London where Whistler lived , was begun in 1860 , though not finished until 1864 . It shows a woman and two men on a balcony overlooking the river . According to Whistler himself , the woman – portrayed by Heffernan – was a prostitute . Heffernan supposedly had a strong influence over Whistler ; his brother @-@ in @-@ law Francis Seymour Haden refused a dinner invitation in the winter of 1863 – 64 due to her dominant presence in the household . 
 = = Creation and reception = = 
 Whistler started working on The White Girl shortly after December 3 , 1861 , with the intention of submitting it to the prestigious annual exhibition of the Royal Academy . In spite of bouts of illness , he had finished the painting by April . In a letter to George du Maurier in early 1862 , he described it as : 
 ... a woman in a beautiful white cambric dress , standing against a window which filters the light through a transparent white muslin curtain – but the figure receives a strong light from the right and therefore the picture , barring the red hair , is one gorgeous mass of brilliant white . 
 Whistler submitted the painting to the Academy , but according to Heffernan , he expected it to be rejected at this point . The previous year , in 1861 , another painting had caused a minor scandal . Edwin Henry Landseer 's The Shrew Tamed showed a horse with a woman resting on the ground nearby . The model was named as Ann Gilbert , a noted <unk> of the period : however it was soon rumoured that it was actually Catherine Walters , the notorious London courtesan . Whistler 's painting was reminiscent enough of Landseer 's that the judges were wary of admitting it . White Girl was submitted to the Academy along with three etchings , all three of which were accepted , while the painting was not . 
 Whistler exhibited it at the small Berners Street Gallery in London instead , where it was shown under the title The Woman in White , a reference to the novel of that name by Wilkie Collins , which was a popular success at the time . The book was a tale of romance , intrigue and double identity , and was considered a bit of a sensation at the time of its publication . Du Maurier apparently believed that the painting referred to the novel . The review in the Athenaeum complained that painting did not correspond to the character in the novel , <unk> Whistler to write a letter asserting that the gallery chose the title without consulting him , adding " I had no intention whatsoever of illustrating Mr Wilkie Collins ' novel . My painting simply represents a girl dressed in white standing in front of a white curtain . " 
 The next year , Whistler tried to have the painting exhibited at the Salon in Paris – the official art exhibition of the Académie des Beaux @-@ Arts – but it was rejected there as well . Instead , it was accepted at the alternative Salon des Refusés – the " exhibition of rejects " that opened on May 15 , two weeks after the official Salon . 
 The 1863 Salon des Refusés was the same exhibition where Édouard Manet 's Déjeuner sur l 'herbe caused a scandal , yet the attention given to Whistler 's White Girl was even greater . The controversy surrounding the paintings was described in Émile Zola 's novel L 'Œuvre ( 1886 ) . The reception Whistler 's painting received was mostly favourable , however , and largely vindicated him after the rejection he had experienced both in London and in Paris . It was greatly admired by his colleagues and friends Manet , the painter Gustave Courbet and the poet Charles Baudelaire . The art critic Théophile <unk> @-@ Bürger saw it in the tradition of Goya and Velázquez . There were , however , those who were less favourable ; certain French critics saw the English Pre @-@ Raphaelite trend as somewhat eccentric . 
 The painting remained in the Whistler family until 1896 , when it was sold by the artist 's nephew to art collector Harris Whittemore . In 1943 , the Whittemore family gave it as a gift to the National Gallery of Art in Washington , D.C. 
 = = Composition and interpretation = = 
 Whistler , especially in his later career , resented the idea that his paintings should have any meaning beyond what could be seen on the canvas . He is known as a central proponent of the " art for art 's sake " philosophy . His comment on the The White Girl , denying a connection to Wilkie Collins ' novel The Woman in White is one of the earliest of these assertions ( " My painting simply represents a girl dressed in white standing in front of a white curtain . " ) Because English critics saw the painting as an illustration , they tended to be less favourable than their French colleagues , who saw it as a visionary , poetic fantasy . One English critic , referring to Collins ' novel , called The White Girl " ... one of the most incomplete paintings we ever met with . " Since the Berners Street Gallery had used the name The Woman in White for the painting , critics were disappointed with its lack of resemblance to the novel 's heroine . Whistler , who had never even read the novel , resented the comparison . About ten years later , he began referring to the painting as Symphony in White , No. 1 , though a French critic had called it a Symphonie du blanc already at the time of its exhibition in Paris . By the musical analogy , he further emphasised his philosophy that the composition was the central thing , not the subject matter . The title was probably also inspired by Théophile Gautier 's 1852 poem Symphonie en Blanc <unk> . 
 Whistler was not entirely content with the realism the painting displayed in its original form , a trait he blamed on the influence Courbet had on him at the time . Later , between 1867 and 1872 , he reworked it to give it a more spiritual expression . Even though Symphony was begun before Whistler first met Rossetti , the Pre @-@ Raphaelite influence is still clear . The painting was an early experiment in white on white , with a woman standing in a white dress in front of a white background . This colour scheme was a subject he would return to later , in two paintings that would be given the titles of Symphony in White , No. 2 ( 1864 ) and Symphony in White , No. 3 ( 1865 – 67 ) . The panel is long and slender , and the model 's pose and the shape of her clothes further emphasise the vertical nature of the painting . The woman is bold , almost confrontational , in her direct gaze at the viewer , and her features are highly individualised . Art critic Hilton Kramer sees in Whistler 's portraits a charm and a combination of craft and observational skills that his more radical landscapes lacked . 
 Though Whistler himself resented attempts to analyse the meaning of his art , this has not deterred later critics from doing so . The 19th @-@ century French art critic Jules @-@ Antoine <unk> saw in the painting symbols of lost innocence , a theme that has been picked up by later critics . Art historian Wayne Craven also sees the painting as more than a formalist exercise , and finds " enigmatic , expressive and even erotic undercurrents " in the image . He points to the contrasts presented by the imagery , with the white lily representing innocence and virginity , and the fierce animal head on the rug symbolising the loss of innocence . Beryl <unk> , coming from the perspective of literary criticism , sees allusions to the Madonna of religious art in the work . To <unk> , the rug under the woman 's feet is the cloud on which the Virgin is often seen standing , and the bear is the serpent , crushed under her heel . 
 = Geastrum quadrifidum = 
 Geastrum quadrifidum , commonly known as the rayed earthstar or four @-@ footed earthstar , is an inedible species of mushroom belonging to the genus Geastrum , or earthstar fungi . First described scientifically by Christian Hendrik Persoon in 1794 , G. quadrifidum is a cosmopolitan — but not common — species of Europe , the Americas , Africa , Asia , and Australasia . The fungus is a saprobe , feeding off decomposing organic matter present in the soil and litter of coniferous forests . 
 The small , tough , fruit bodies are grayish @-@ brown balls that are initially enclosed by a skin , or peridium , made up of four distinct layers of tissue . The outer tissue layer splits to form star @-@ like rays and expose a circular spore case . Inside the spore case is the gleba — fertile spore @-@ producing tissue that is white and firm when young , but becomes brown and powdery in age . The grayish @-@ brown spore case is set on a short , slender stalk , and has a well @-@ defined narrow pore at the top where mature spores may escape . Fully expanded , the fruit body reaches dimensions up to 2 – 3 cm ( 0 @.@ 8 – 1 @.@ 2 in ) wide and up to about 3 cm ( 1 @.@ 2 in ) tall . The outer skin is purplish @-@ brown , with four or five cream or yellowish @-@ brown colored rays that have their tips stuck in the substrate . There is a flat mat of interwoven mycelia between ray tips . The spores are spherical , warty , and have a diameter of up to 6 µm . Geastrum quadrifidum is one of a number of earthstars whose rays arch downward as they mature , lifting the spore sac upward , high enough to catch air currents that disseminate the spores into new habitats . The species is easily confused with Geastrum fornicatum , a larger earthstar without a well @-@ defined pore mouth . 
 = = Taxonomy and naming = = 
 The Dutch mycologist Christian Hendrik Persoon published the first official description of Geastrum quadrifidum in 1794 , and later sanctioned this name in his 1801 Synopsis Methodica Fungorum ( as Geastrum quadrifidum var. minus , a variety now considered synonymous with G. quadrifidum ) . Although the species had been previously described as Lycoperdon coronatum by Jacob Christian Schaeffer ( 1763 ) and Giovanni Antonio Scopoli ( 1772 ) , then afterward as Geaster coronatus by Joseph Schröter ( 1889 ) , the epithet coronatus is not to be used because of the existence of the sanctioned name . 
 In Japan , G. quadrifidum has occasionally been called " Geastrum minus " ( Pers . ) G. <unk> . ( for example , as in Imai , 1936 ) ; within taxonomical terminology , this usage is an <unk> non — a misapplication or misinterpretation of the species name . 
 According to Stanek 's classification of the genus Geastrum , ( a classification later endorsed in Sunhede 's 1989 monograph of European Geastrum species ) , G. quadrifidum belongs in the subsection <unk> of the section <unk> , a grouping of similar Geastrum species that incorporate and encrust debris in the mycelial layer , and have an even peristome ( opening ) that is fibrillose ( made of more or less parallel thin thread @-@ like filaments ) . Several common names for G. quadrifidum have been suggested , including " rayed earthstar " , " four @-@ pointed earthstar " and " four @-@ footed earthstar " . Samuel Frederick Gray called it the " four @-@ cut shell @-@ puff " in his 1821 The Natural Arrangement of British Plants , but the name was not adopted by subsequent authors . The specific epithet quadrifidum is derived from Latin , and means " four @-@ forks " . 
 = = Description = = 
 As in all Geastrum fungi , the internal spore @-@ producing gleba is enclosed in the peridium , a protective structure composed of four layers of tissue : an inner endoperidium , and outer exoperidium that may further be divided into an external mycelial , a tough and membranous middle fibrillose layer , and an internal fleshy layer ( known as the pseudoparenchyma ) . The immature , unopened fruit body is roughly spherical to somewhat flattened or irregular in shape . It lies partly or wholly submerged , encrusted with debris . The expanded fruit body is usually taller than it is wide , about 10 – 40 mm ( 0 @.@ 4 – 1 @.@ 6 in ) high , with mycelial cup included about 15 – 55 mm ( 0 @.@ 6 – 2 @.@ 2 in ) . The exoperidium ( the outer tissue layer of the four @-@ layered peridium ) splits in the middle into three to six , but usually four or five rays . The exoperidium is typically fornicate — a structural feature that arises when the <unk> separates from the exoperidium , adhering only at the edge . In this way , the endoperidium ( the internal tissue layer that encloses the spore sac ) is lifted upwards with the downward movement of the rays . In this species , the tips of the rays remain attached to the mycelial layer , which remain attached to the substrate as a cup in the ground . 
 Unlike those of some other Geastrum species , the rays of G. quadrifidum are not hygroscopic : they do not open and close in response to changes in humidity . Generally , the rays are broad , but they may seem narrow as their edges are often rolled inwards . The width of the exoperidium ( when still attached to the mycelial cup ) is 8 – 25 mm ( 0 @.@ 3 – 1 @.@ 0 in ) , when fully expanded about 15 – 90 mm ( 0 @.@ 6 – 3 @.@ 5 in ) . The pseudoparenchymatous layer when fresh is about 1 – 2 mm thick , initially whitish , later turning beige to brownish ( sometimes over reddish tints ) , and dark brown when old . In newly expanded specimens this layer is covered with a thin layer of crystals and hyphae , sometimes forming a pseudoparenchymatous cup or collar that often peels off in patches , when dry shrunken and hard . The fibrous layer is papery to leathery . The inner side , when free from pseudoparenchymatous remnants , is almost white , in age becoming dirty grayish @-@ white and sometimes greenish due to algae ; the outer side is initially whitish , somewhat glossy , but in age becomes grayish @-@ white and dull . The mycelial layer has a whitish inner side and is strongly attached to the litter on its outer side . It persists for a long time ( 1 – 2 @-@ year @-@ old fruit bodies with intact mycelial cups have been found ) . 
 The spore sac is variable in shape , ranging from roughly spherical to egg @-@ shaped or irregular , but it is usually taller than it is wide . Its diameter ranges between 3 @.@ 5 and 16 mm ( 0 @.@ 14 and 0 @.@ 63 in ) , although it is most commonly between 5 and 10 mm ( 0 @.@ 2 and 0 @.@ 4 in ) . An apophysis ( a swelling on the underside of the spore sac ) is often present . The stalk is visible when the pseudoparenchymatous layer has dried up , and is short but distinct , measuring 1 – 2 @.@ 5 mm tall . The color is variable ; in dry specimens it is whitish , light beige , beige gray , smoky gray or brownish @-@ gray . The endoperidium in newly expanded fruit bodies is pruinose : covered with a light beige to whitish powder of hyphae and crystalline matter . This powder gradually disappears as the fruit body ages . Its color is highly variable , and both light and dark <unk> are present . The peristome ( a clearly demarcated region encircling the opening of the spore sac ) is distinctly delimited , with a disc @-@ like to more or less conical shape . It is lighter in color than the spore sac , and up to 2 mm high . In old specimens , the hyphae around the peristome sometimes stick together to develop radial grooves . The color is variable , but often of grayish or grayish @-@ brown tints , often lighter than the endoperidium . The columella ( sterile tissue , usually originating in the base of the gleba , extending into or through the gleba ) is rather weak , more or less columnar to club @-@ shaped , emerging from a more or less bulge @-@ like continuation of the stalk and intruding to about the half or more into the mature gleba . The mature gleba is dark brown . G. quadrifidum is inedible . 
 = = = Microscopic characteristics = = = 
 The basidia of G. quadrifidum have a basal clamp connection , or they narrow into a hyphal part that ends at a clamp . When they are young , they are more or less ellipsoid to club @-@ shaped , but in age they often become more or less bottle @-@ shaped , ampullaceous or sometimes almost <unk> , among other shapes ; when mature they measure 14 – 21 x 4 @.@ 5 – 7 µm ( excluding the hyphal part ) . The hyphal part is less than 1 – 6 x 1 – 2 µm . The sterigmata ( thin projections of the basidia that attach to the spore ) are 4 – 6 µm long and mostly 1 – 1 @.@ 5 µm thick . The hyphae located immediately underneath the basidia are thin @-@ walled , 1 – 2 µm wide , provided with clamps and densely branched . The hyphae of the tramal plates are roughly parallel , thin @-@ walled , 1 – 2 µm wide , and provided with clamps which may be dilated . 
 The spores in mass are dark brown when mature . They are spherical , covered with " warts " or verrucae , and measure 5 – 6 µm in diameter ( including ornamentation ) . The spores often contain a drop of oil . Scanning electron microscopy reveals the verrucae to be up to 0 @.@ 8 µm long , conical to columnar processes with rounded to almost flattened tips . The apiculus ( the part of a spore which attaches to the sterigmata at the end of a basidium ) is distinct with radiating ridge @-@ like processes . The young spore is first broadly egg @-@ shaped before becoming roughly spherical in maturity . 
 The capillitium refers to coarse , late @-@ maturing , thick @-@ walled cells in the gleba that develop pores or slits in their thick secondary walls . The capillitial hyphae are 1 @.@ 5 – 9 @.@ 5 µm wide , thick @-@ walled , often with a narrow lumen , and with or without surface ornamentation . The columella hyphae are 1 @.@ 5 – 14 µm wide ( occasionally wider , up to 34 µm ) , thick @-@ walled , often with narrow lumen . Single thin @-@ walled , about 1 @.@ 5 µm wide hyphae with clamps can be observed . The endoperidial hyphae are densely interwoven , thick @-@ walled , and about 2 – 6 µm wide . The whitish powder on newly expanded specimens consists of crystalline matter and thin @-@ walled , 1 @.@ 5 – 4 µm wide , branched hyphae with clamps . The peristome hyphae are thick @-@ walled , 2 – 11 µm wide . The pseudoparenchymatous layer is built up by bladder @-@ like , thin @-@ walled hyphae of varying size . On the surface of newly expanded specimens crystals and thin @-@ walled hyphae of the same kind as on the endoperidium are present . The crystals are calcium oxalate dihydrate that have the crystalline structure of a pyramid , and are arranged singly or in loose aggregates , 11 to 30 µm in size . The fibrous layer has thick @-@ walled hyphae 1 @.@ 5 – 4 µm wide . The mycelial layer in the inner , very thin part ( seen as a glossy lining on the fibrous layer of newly expanded fruit bodies ) consists of a dense web of thin @-@ walled , 1 @.@ 5 – 4 µm wide , clamped hyphae . Thick @-@ walled hyphae are also present , measuring 2 – 11 ( sometimes up to 19 ) µm wide . The outer part ( the mycelial cup ) consists of thick @-@ walled , branched and densely interwoven hyphae ( often with a narrow lumen ) that measure 1 @.@ 5 – 4 µm wide . 
 = = Similar species = = 
 Geastrum quadrifidum is readily confused with G. fornicatum , which is larger — up to 15 cm ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) — and has smaller spores ( 4 – 5 μm in diameter ) . Geastrum minimum , although small like G. quadrifidum , is distinguished by having more rays ( usually more than seven ) , and it is not fornicate . Also , its mycelial layer is attached to the fibrous layer for a long time , without forming a mycelial cup like G. quadrifidum . The Chilean species G. <unk> does not have a clearly demarcated peristome . 
 Geastrum quadrifidum is also similar to G. <unk> , G. <unk> , and G. welwitschii in its fruit body morphology , especially the exoperidial rays , endoperidial body , and peristome . Geastrum <unk> differs from G. quadrifidum by its often sulcate or silky fimbriate , smooth peristome , and slightly smaller spores ( 4 – 5 μm in diameter ) . Geastrum <unk> can be distinguished from G. quadrifidum by its smaller spores ( 2 – 3 μm in diameter ) , and by its preference for growing in mosses on tree trunks . G. welwitschii differs from G. quadrifidum by its epigeal mycelial cup with a felted or tufted outer surface , and indistinctly delimited peristome . 
 = = Distribution , ecology , and habitat = = 
 Although Geastrum quadrifidum has a wide distribution , it is not a common species . European countries from which the fungus has been reported include Belgium , Denmark , France , Germany , Montenegro , Norway , Poland , and Sweden . In Asia , it has been collected in China and Japan . The North American distribution extends from Canada south to Mexico , and includes Hawaii . It is also found in Australia and New Zealand , South Africa , and South America . Because of its rarity , it has been placed on the Regional Red Lists of several European countries , including Montenegro , Denmark , Norway , and Poland . 
 Like most earthstars , G. quadrifidum is a saprobic fungus , and spends most of its life cycle as thin strands of mycelium , deriving nutrients by decomposing leaf litter and similar detritus , converting it to humus and mineralizing organic matter in the soil . The fungal fruit bodies are generally found in coniferous woodland , where they appear in summer and autumn . In Mexico , it was found in tropical thorn forest and pine @-@ oak forest in the summer . In Britain , all collections have been made in beech forest on calcareous soil . 
 = = = Cited books = = = 
 Sunhede S. ( 1989 ) . Geastraceae ( <unk> ) : Morphology , Ecology , and Systematics with Special Emphasis on the North European Species . Synopsis Fungorum , 1 . Oslo , Norway : <unk> . ISBN 82 @-@ <unk> @-@ 05 @-@ 5 . 
 = Troy H. Middleton = 
 Lieutenant General Troy Houston Middleton ( 12 October 1889 – 9 October 1976 ) was a distinguished educator and senior officer of the United States Army who served as a corps commander in the European Theatre during World War II and later as President of Louisiana State University ( LSU ) . He is best known for his decision to hold Bastogne during the Battle of the Bulge , contrary to the recommendation of General George Patton , Commanding General ( CG ) of the United States Third Army . 
 Enlisting in the U.S. Army in 1910 , Middleton was first assigned to the 29th Infantry Regiment where he worked as a clerk . Here he did not become an infantryman as he had hoped , but he was pressed into service playing football , a sport strongly endorsed by the Army . Following two years of enlisted service , Middleton was transferred to Fort Leavenworth , Kansas , where he was given the opportunity to compete for an officer 's commission . Of the 300 individuals who were vying for a commission , 56 were selected , and four of them , including Middleton , would become general officers . As a new second lieutenant , Middleton was assigned to the 7th Infantry Regiment in Galveston , Texas , which was soon pressed into service , responding to events created by the Mexican Revolution . Middleton spent seven months doing occupation duty in the Mexican port city of Veracruz , and later was assigned to Douglas , Arizona , where his unit skirmished with some of Pancho Villa 's fighters . 
 Upon the entry of the United States into World War I , in April 1917 , Middleton was assigned to the 4th Infantry Division , and soon saw action as a battalion commander during the Second Battle of the Marne . Three months later , following some minor support roles , his unit led the attack during the Meuse @-@ Argonne Offensive , and Middleton became a regimental commander . Because of his exceptional battlefield performance , on 14 October 1918 he was promoted to the rank of colonel , becoming at 29 the youngest officer of that rank in the American Expeditionary Forces . He also received the Distinguished Service Medal for his exemplary service . Following World War I , Middleton served at the U.S. Army School of Infantry , the Command and General Staff School , the Army War College , and as Commandant of Cadets at LSU . He retired from the Army in 1937 to become Dean of Administration and later comptroller and acting Vice President at LSU . His tenure at LSU was fraught with difficulty , as Middleton became one of the key players in helping the university recover from a major scandal where nearly a million dollars had been embezzled . 
 Recalled to service in early 1942 , Middleton became CG of the 45th Infantry Division during the Sicily and Salerno battles in Italy , and then in March 1944 moved up to command the U.S. VIII Corps . His leadership in Operation Cobra during the Battle of Normandy led to the capture of the important port city of Brest , France , and for his success he was awarded a second Distinguished Service Medal by General George Patton . His greatest World War II achievement , however , was in his decision to hold the important city of Bastogne , Belgium during the Battle of the Bulge . Following this battle , and his corps ' relentless push across Germany until reaching Czechoslovakia , he was recognized by both General Dwight D. Eisenhower and Patton as being a corps commander of extraordinary abilities . Middleton logged 480 days in combat during World War II , more than any other American general officer . Retiring from the Army again in 1945 , Middleton returned to LSU and in 1951 was appointed to the university presidency , a position he held for 11 years , while continuing to serve the Army in numerous consultative capacities . He resided in Baton Rouge , Louisiana until his death in 1976 and was buried in Baton Rouge National Cemetery . Both the Air Force / Army ROTC building at Mississippi State University , Middleton 's alma mater , and the library at Louisiana State University are named for him . 
 = = Family and early life = = 
 = = = Ancestry = = = 
 Troy H. Middleton was born near Georgetown , Copiah County , Mississippi on 12 October 1889 , the son of John Houston Middleton ( 12 May 1856 – 27 August 1935 ) and Laura Catherine " Kate " Thompson ( 25 December 1860 – 20 September 1925 ) . His paternal grandfather , Benjamin Parks Middleton ( 1825 – 1891 ) served as a private in Company G , 6th Regiment , Mississippi Infantry for the Confederate States Army during the American Civil War , and his maternal grandfather , <unk> M. Thompson , was also a Confederate soldier who died 27 May 1862 at the hospital in Hazlehurst , Mississippi . His great great grandfather , Captain Holland Middleton ( <unk> @-@ 1795 / 96 ) served from Georgia in the American Revolutionary War . 
 Holland Middleton was the son of William Middleton ( <unk> – 1769 ) and grandson of Robert Middleton ( <unk> – <unk> ) who had extensive land interests in Charles County and Prince George 's County , both in Maryland . Some of Robert Middleton 's property was near Piscataway Creek , about twelve miles south of present @-@ day Washington D.C. , across the Potomac River from the future site of Mount Vernon , the home of President George Washington . In 1678 Robert Middleton was paid for expenses incurred in fighting the Nanticoke Indians and in 1681 he was commissioned as cornet ( second lieutenant ) in a troop of cavalry . 
 = = = Early life = = = 
 Troy Middleton was the fifth of nine children and grew up at the end of the 19th century on a 400 @-@ acre plantation in southeastern Copiah County . The plantation was virtually a self @-@ contained community , and he had a variety of chores to do depending on the season , with sausage @-@ stuffing being one of his favorites . The local Lick Creek and Strong River had plentiful fish that he would catch , and he loved to hunt , particularly with his 12 @-@ gauge shotgun . While his family was Episcopal by heritage , they worshiped at the Bethel Baptist Church , a few miles west of Georgetown , the only church reachable on a Sunday morning . His education was conducted at the small Bethel schoolhouse , near the Bethel Church , but in the summertime he was tutored by his oldest sister Emily , who came home from Blue Mountain College to share her knowledge of different subjects with her family . Having exhausted all the educational opportunities available at home , Middleton 's father asked him if he was interested in a college education . Finding this an attractive proposition , in the summer of 1904 , at the age of fourteen , Middleton made the 172 @-@ mile train trip to Starkville , where he would begin his studies at Mississippi Agricultural and Mechanical College ( Mississippi A & M ) , later to become Mississippi State University . 
 = = = College at Mississippi A & M = = = 
 At his young age , Middleton was required to complete a year of preparatory school before being enrolled in the four @-@ year program at Mississippi A & M. In essence he did a final year of high school while living in the dormitory and following the regimen of the students at the college . The students were treated like cadets at a military academy , marching to and from all meals , and beginning their day with the first bugle call at 5 : 30 a.m. Every week day was the same : cleanup and study time in the morning , march to breakfast , a usually short chapel call , classes from 8 : 30 to 4 : 00 , broken only by lunch , athletics from 4 : 00 to 6 : 30 p.m. , dinner , and then study from 7 : 30 to 10 : 00 p.m. , followed by the playing of taps at 10 : 30 , and lights out at 10 : 40 . While Middleton did not particularly savor the military atmosphere , he settled into the routine , and the year passed quickly . The highlight of his preparatory year came on 10 February 1905 when John Philip Sousa brought his band to A & M , attracting people from around the state , and packing the 2000 @-@ seat mess hall . The train that would take the band to its next stop was held up for over an hour as the concert was extended by repeated calls for encores . 
 The student corps at A & M was organized into a battalion , with a size of about 350 cadets during Middleton 's Freshman year . He began as a cadet corporal , and by his junior year was appointed as the cadet Sergeant Major . As a senior he had the cadet rank of Lieutenant Colonel and was the student commander of more than 700 cadets , organized into two battalions . Working with the military officer in charge of the cadets , Middleton took on additional responsibilities for which he was paid $ 25 per month . 
 Middleton was involved in numerous activities during his college days , and took leadership roles in most of them . He was the vice president of A & M 's Collegian Club , and president of the school 's Gun Club , being photographed on one occasion with his beloved shot gun , which he was allowed to keep in his dormitory room and use for hunting on weekends when campus activities did not fill his schedule . He was the president of his junior class and during his senior year was the commandant of the select Mississippi Sabre Company , which was a club restricted to seniors of good social , academic and military standing . Among his favorite activities were baseball and football , and he played both sports throughout college . Early in his tenure , however , he had to give up a season of baseball when he failed a chemistry course , and spent his afternoons back in the classroom and laboratory instead of on the athletic fields . Whether playing or spectating , the baseball and football games gave the students a chance to leave campus , and they took the train to play various teams around the state or region . Games were played wherever a suitable field could be found , but football games against the University of Mississippi were always played in Jackson . 
 Middleton graduated with a bachelor 's degree in the spring of 1909 , and was hoping to get an appointment to the United States Military Academy at West Point . No such opportunity presented itself , however , and at the age of 19 he was too young to take the examination for an Army commission . Taking the advice of an Army officer back at A & M , he decided to enlist in the United States Army . 
 = = Early service in the U.S. Army = = 
 = = = Enlisted service = = = 
 On 3 March 1910 Troy Middleton enlisted into the 29th Infantry Regiment at Fort Porter in Buffalo , New York . He was put to work as a company clerk , and as a private earned $ 15 a month , which was paid in gold until it became scarce , and was then paid in silver . Private Middleton tired of this desk work quickly and asked to become a soldier . While this did not happen at Fort Porter , his talents as a football player became known , and he was pressed into duty as the quarterback of the local team , which played civilian teams in the Buffalo area as well as other Army teams such as the one at Fort Niagara near Niagara Falls . For the next several years Middleton would play a lot of football , a sport that was strongly endorsed by the Army . After getting a commission , an officer is never returned to the same unit from which he served as an enlisted member , but Middleton became the exception because of his talents as a quarterback . Middleton felt that football provided him with the finest training he received while in the Army , and he said he never met a good football player who wasn 't also a good soldier . 
 = = = Officer 's commission = = = 
 After 27 months of serving in the Army , Middleton got his first promotion , to corporal . Promotions came very slowly , and occurred only when a position was vacated by someone else getting promoted or retiring . Shortly after his promotion on 10 June 1912 , Corporal Middleton was transferred to Fort Leavenworth , Kansas , where he would have a chance to compete for an Army commission . Here Middleton attended an intensive training course to prepare for the written examination required for a second lieutenant 's commission . Of the 300 civilians and enlisted men who took the exam , 56 of them passed and were commissioned . Middleton 's score was just about in the middle of the passing scores . Almost all of those passing were college graduates , coming from schools such as Harvard , Yale , Virginia Military Institute , and Stanford . Four of the 56 , including Middleton , would go on to become general officers . 
 In addition to taking the written exam , all of the applicants had to take a horse @-@ riding test as well . Having grown up riding horses on his family 's plantation , Middleton scored very well on this exam , and the officer in charge thought that he would want to go into the cavalry . Middleton , however , wanted to go into the infantry , leaving the officer stunned that anyone with such horsemanship skills would even consider spending his time walking instead of riding a fine horse . 
 Having passed his exam , Middleton was recommended for a commission by President Howard Taft in November 1912 , but it wasn 't until after the new President , Woodrow Wilson , was sworn in the following March , and the new congress convened , that the 56 successful candidates were confirmed by the Senate . Their appointment was back @-@ dated to 30 November 1912 . During this interim period , Middleton was transferred to Fort Crockett in Galveston , Texas , where he arrived early in 1913 . 
 = = = Fort Crockett and deployment to Mexico = = = 
 In February 1913 Troy Middleton reported to Fort Crockett as a second lieutenant without a commission , being assigned to Company K of the 7th Infantry Regiment . A large part of the United States Army was rotating here in response to trouble in Mexico . In 1910 Mexico 's President Porfirio Diaz was overthrown by a reform leader , Francisco Madero , beginning the Mexican Revolution which would last for nearly a decade . Madero was supported by General Victoriano Huerta in putting down a series of revolts in 1912 , but the following year was assassinated by the General who then seized power . Though many countries recognized the Huerta government , President Woodrow Wilson would not , and he hoped to return Mexico to a constitutional government by backing Venustiano Carranza . The troops at Fort Crockett went into a waiting mode , preparing for the call from the President to take action in support of American interests . 
 In April 1914 the waiting for the military units ended , and American troops under the command of Brigadier General Frederick Funston were sent into Mexico . The Navy had taken the port city of Veracruz and the 7th Regiment was ordered to take part in the occupation of the city . Middleton 's landing party went in unopposed and settled into occupation duty without a shot being fired . Middleton spent a total of seven months in Mexico and returned home to Galveston in November 1914 . 
 = = = Marriage = = = 
 After first arriving at Fort Crockett , Middleton adapted to garrison life while engaging in the Galveston social scene by attending Saturday night dances in town . At one such dance he had a Navy lieutenant introduce him to Jerusha Collins who would later become his wife . She had attended Southwestern University in Georgetown , Texas and had made her debut in Galveston society in 1911 . Following the death of her father , Sidney G. Collins , Jerusha had come to live with her aunt and uncle , Mr. and Mrs. John Hagemann , in the heart of Galveston . As a merchant , Hagemann was well to do , and drove a Studebaker touring car when most people in the town rode in buggies , wagons , and <unk> . Middleton met the <unk> , soon becoming a regular visitor at their house while calling on Jerusha . 
 Following seven months in Mexico , Middleton 's return to Galveston brought a special anticipation . He had proposed to Jerusha Collins at an earlier time , and renewed the proposal upon his return . The couple was married on 6 January 1915 , and this allowed them to be in New Orleans two days later with other members of Middleton 's unit for the one hundredth anniversary of the Battle of New Orleans in which the 7th Regiment had served a century earlier . After a week in New Orleans , the couple returned to Galveston , and were invited to move into the Hagemann 's house , where they were given a large upstairs room . 
 = = = Fort Bliss = = = 
 When Galveston 's second major hurricane hit the Texas coastline in mid @-@ August 1915 , most of the Army units had scattered to safe locations away from the storm 's path , with a few units remaining in the secure buildings of Fort Crockett or in downtown Galveston . The Middletons chose to ride out the storm at the Hagemann house . Following the storm cleanup , in October 1915 , the 7th Regiment was ordered to Fort Bliss in El Paso , Texas as events in Mexico flared up again . Here they were put under the command of Brigadier General John Pershing , a highly capable officer who had skipped three ranks by being promoted from Captain to Brigadier General for his exceptional service during the Philippine @-@ American War . 
 The Mexican Revolutionary General Pancho Villa , who had at one time been supported by the United States , felt betrayed when the Americans backed Carranza . In January 1916 , Villa 's followers , known as Villistas , attacked a train and killed 16 American businessmen who were aboard . Two months later Villa 's men crossed the border into the United States and attacked the town of Columbus , New Mexico , killing an additional 19 Americans . Following these attacks , General Pershing took his forces into Mexico to pursue Pancho Villa . 
 Preceding these events , Middleton 's 7th Regiment was sent to Douglas , Arizona to perform border security . While there , Middleton and a squad of his men were fired upon by the Villistas who unsuccessfully attacked the Mexican village of Agua Prieta , across the border from Douglas . While several of Middleton 's men were hit , no one was killed , and they all returned with the 7th Regiment back to Fort Bliss in late December 1915 . 
 = = = Preparation for war = = = 
 The hunt for Pancho Villa ended unsuccessfully for the Americans . War was raging in Europe , and following several months in Mexico , Pershing was called back to Fort Bliss to begin preparing his troops for this much larger conflict . In April 1917 , President Wilson requested that Congress declare war , which they did . The same month Middleton was assigned to Gettysburg National Park where the 7th Regiment would continue its training . Here , he was promoted to first lieutenant on 1 July 1916 , after a little more than three and a half years as a second lieutenant . With the pending war , his promotions would become much more frequent , and in less than a year he was promoted to captain , on 15 May 1917 . 
 In preparation for its buildup in strength , the Army had to train a large cadre of officers . On 10 June 1917 Middleton was assigned to Fort Myer , Virginia , just outside Washington , D.C. as the adjutant of a reserve officer training camp . These camps were organized to take civilians and turn them into officers in ninety days , and as adjutant Middleton was responsible for directing the flow of paperwork for 2700 officer candidates . By November 1917 , his camp graduated its last class of officers , and Middleton requested to join a combat division . His request was granted and on 21 December 1917 he reported to the 4th Division at Camp Greene near Charlotte , North Carolina . Two days later , however , he received new orders to become the commander of a reserve officer training camp in Leon Springs , Texas . Here , he reported as ordered , and stayed until the mission was complete in April 1918 . As he was technically on loan from the 4th Division , his request to rejoin that unit was granted , and Middleton was soon on his way to France . 
 = = World War I = = 
 Believing that the 4th Division was still at Camp Greene , Middleton wired there to find out that the unit was already on its way overseas . He caught a train for New York , and when he arrived on 28 April 1918 , he found his division at Camp Mills on Long Island , living in tents and awaiting transport . Middleton was given command of the First Battalion , 47th Infantry Regiment , and departed New York with his regiment aboard the Princess <unk> on 11 May in a convoy of fourteen ships . Three days out of France , a fleet of destroyers met the convoy and escorted it to the port city of Brest where they arrived on 23 May . There the division unloaded and organized for several days , subsequently loading onto a troop train to arrive at Calais on 30 May . 
 = = = Calais , Chateau Thierry and Saint @-@ Mihiel = = = 
 The first assignment of the 4th Division was to become a reserve unit for the British , just south of Calais . The Americans gave up their Springfield Rifles for some British <unk> for which there was available ammunition . When the Germans began an offensive north of Paris , the 4th was put onto trains and sent to the Marne River , about twenty @-@ five miles west of Chateau Thierry . Here the 4th became a reserve unit for the badly battered 42nd Division . In late July 1918 , Middleton , promoted to Major on 7 June , moved his First Battalion in to support the 167th Regiment of the 42nd Division . In the ensuing operation , called the Second Battle of the Marne , four days of heavy fighting took place against the Prussian Fourth Guard Division fresh from a month 's rest . While the veteran Germans fought with determination , the Americans were able to push them back about twelve miles , though at a considerable cost — more than one in four of the Americans became casualties . 
 When the 4th Division was relieved , they were sent to the Saint @-@ Mihiel area , where they would undertake a small support role . Major Middleton was given the task of directing the unit 's transport , complicated by the requirement to move at night with equipment and personnel to be drawn by horse and mule . After Saint @-@ Mihiel , the unit was moved to Verdun where hundreds of thousands of French and Germans had become casualties earlier in the war . This would become the last major engagement of the First World War for Middleton , who was promoted to Lieutenant Colonel on 17 September , shortly before the commencement of the operation , called the Meuse @-@ Argonne Offensive . 
 = = = Meuse @-@ Argonne Offensive = = = 
 The 4th Division , on its own for the first time in the war , was assigned a front that was one to two miles wide , sandwiched between two seasoned French divisions , about eight miles from Verdun . Lieutenant Colonel Middleton 's battalion led the attack for the Americans on 26 September 1918 . That day , they covered five miles , breaking through German defenses , after which it was up to the entire 47th Infantry Regiment to hold onto the gains . Middleton then put his second @-@ in @-@ command in charge of the battalion when he was assigned as the Executive Officer of the regiment . He was in this staff position for two weeks when , on 11 October , he was given command of the 39th Infantry Regiment after commander James K. Parsons and most of his regimental staff became casualties following a gas attack . At about one o 'clock in the morning , Middleton had to find his way to the 39th headquarters and prepare for battle at daybreak . Shortly before 7 : 30 a.m. , Middleton led his new regiment into enemy @-@ held territory using a tactic called " marching fire , " where all of the troops constantly fired their weapons while moving a mile through heavy woods . This compelled most of the dug @-@ in and concealed Germans to surrender , and allowed the 4th Division to move to the edge of the Meuse River . Three days after taking command of the 39th , and two days after his twenty @-@ ninth birthday , Middleton was promoted to Colonel , becoming the youngest officer in the American Expeditionary Forces to attain that rank . He also received the Distinguished Service Medal for his exceptional battlefield performance . 
 On 19 October , the 4th Division was withdrawn from the battle line after 24 days of continuous contact with the enemy , the longest unbroken period of combat for any American division during the war . Middleton was now given command of his former regiment , the 47th . In early November the 4th Division relieved an African American regiment near Metz , and was preparing to chase German defenders down the Moselle River , with Middleton to lead the attack . The attack did not materialize , however , because , on 10 November , Middleton received confidential news that an armistice was imminent . The following morning a messenger brought word that there would be no more firing after 11 a.m. There was celebration throughout the ranks , but there was still much work to be done ; the 4th Division would soon be assigned to Germany as an occupying force . 
 = = = Occupation of Germany = = = 
 In late November 1918 the 4th Division began a road march of more than 125 miles from the French city of Metz toward the German city of Koblenz , on the Rhine River . The final destination of Middleton 's 47th Regiment would be the town of Adenau , 35 miles due west of Koblenz . The road trip took fifteen days of moving through almost incessant rain and ended in a driving snowstorm on 15 December . During the march , Middleton broke character and rode a horse during most of each day , surveying his troops and occasionally dismounting to talk with them . The formation marched for fifty minutes of each hour , and rested for ten , with a full hour for lunch . 
 Once in Adenau , the regiment dispersed to many villages in the area , while Colonel Middleton stayed in a large home in Adenau where the owners continued to live as well . During the stay in Adenau , the 47th continued with its training , building a rifle range , running combat problems , and practicing lessons learned from its recent combat operations . In early March 1919 , after nearly four months in Adenau , the 47th was ordered to the area of Remagen on the Rhine . On the morning of the move , Middleton had breakfast with General Pershing 's aide , Colonel George Marshall , who had come to Adenau the day before to inform Middleton of his regiment 's new orders . 
 At Remagen the 47th Regiment was given the mission of guarding the Ludendorff Bridge over the Rhine River . Twenty five years later the 47th would once again guard this bridge during World War II . The regiment remained here until given orders to return home in mid @-@ summer 1919 . Before his departure from Europe , Middleton was summoned to report to the Third Army Chief of Staff in Koblenz . Here he was informed that he and other senior officers were being assigned to Camp Benning , Georgia to form the first faculty of the Infantry School that was being established there . Middleton sailed out of Brest in mid @-@ July , met his wife in New York , and together they traveled to Columbus , Georgia by way of Washington , D.C. and Atlanta . 
 = = Military Schools = = 
 For the ten years following World War I , Troy Middleton would be either an instructor or a student in the succession of military schools that Army officers attend during their careers . Middleton arrived in Columbus , Georgia with strong praise from his superiors , and would soon get his efficiency report , in which Brigadier General Benjamin Poore of the 4th Division wrote of him , " The best all @-@ around officer I have yet seen . <unk> by his rapid promotion from captain in July to colonel in October ; and made good in every grade . He gets better results in a quiet unobtrusive way than any officer I have ever met . Has a wonderful grasp of situations and a fine sense of proportion . " 
 = = = Infantry School = = = 
 Up until the World War , other branches of the Army had their own specialty schools , but the infantry did not . This situation was being amended , and Middleton would be part of that change as a new faculty member of the Infantry School at Camp Benning , about nine miles from Columbus . Middleton , whose rank had reverted to his permanent rank of captain following the war , was an instructor in the new school for his first two years at Benning , and also a member of the Infantry Board , set up for research on weapons and tactics . One of his jobs on the board was to evaluate new weapons and equipment , and at one point he tested a new semiautomatic rifle which would eventually become the M @-@ 1 rifle , the standard weapon of the infantry in World War II . 
 The first nine @-@ month class of the new infantry school began in September 1919 , and students were taken through a curriculum of weapons and tactics . Captain Middleton , the youngest faculty member on the school staff , was an ideal instructor , fresh with experiences from the recent war . After two years as an instructor , and a promotion to major on 1 July 1920 , Middleton prevailed upon his commanders to be allowed to enroll in the advanced infantry course as a student . This ten @-@ month course included instruction on combined arms , tactical principles and decisions , military history and economics , then ended with a written thesis . Middleton , who was one of the most junior members of his class , finished at the top of the class . 
 Following the advanced course , Middleton spent the summer as the senior instructor at a Reserve Officer Training Camp at Fort Logan , Colorado , then returned to Camp Benning for one more year as a member of the Infantry Board . Four years at Benning had been enough for him and he was ready to move on . After expressing his wishes to a senior officer , he was assigned to Fort Leavenworth in the summer of 1923 , a place he had been eleven years earlier to prepare for his officer 's commission . 
 = = = Command and General Staff School = = = 
 As one of the youngest majors in the Army , Middleton found himself among officers who were ten to fifteen years his senior at the Army 's Command and General Staff School at Fort Leavenworth , Kansas . Students attended this ten @-@ month school to qualify for higher commands . Here Middleton met a classmate , George Patton , who would become one of his friends . Patton had confided to Middleton that he predicted completing the course as an Honor Graduate , one who finishes in the top 25 % of the nearly 200 students . His prediction came true , and he finished 14th in the class . Middleton finished 8th . With his exceptional class performance , Middleton , along with half a dozen other graduates , was invited to stay on for the next four years as an instructor at the school . 
 During his second year of teaching at Command and General Staff School , one of his students , Dwight D. Eisenhower , would come to his office , sit on the corner of his desk , and pump him for information , knowing that Middleton had commanded a regiment in combat in France . Eisenhower asked the most practical questions , and was unquestionably motivated — he finished first in his class . Nearly every officer who commanded a division in Europe during World War II attended the Command and General Staff School during Middleton 's tenure there from 1924 to 1928 . There was also a point in time during World War II when every corps commander in Europe had been a student of Middleton 's . 
 = = = War College = = = 
 In 1928 , his final year at Leavenworth , Middleton received orders to attend the Army War College in Washington , D.C .. His year at this highest level of professional military education was very fulfilling . He spent time in the school library and the Library of Congress . He wrote his staff memorandum ( equivalent to a thesis ) on the subject of Army transportation . Recalling his personal experience with horses and mules in France , he recommended that motorized transport significantly replace the Army 's use of livestock . The commandant of the school commended Middleton for work of exceptional merit , and sent his ideas to the highest levels in the War Department . 
 = = Late career = = 
 Having spent the previous ten years in the various Army schools , Major Middleton requested a return to Camp Benning , where he and his wife still had friends . The request was approved and he was assigned as a battalion commander in the 29th Infantry Regiment there , the same unit in which he had enlisted nineteen years earlier at Fort Porter . He was at Benning for only a year when he was told he would be assigned to the General Staff at the War Department in Washington D.C. , but this changed when a new requirement for career officers was brought to his attention . Officers were now expected to have an assignment with a civilian component of the Army such as the National Guard , the Reserves , or the Reserve Officer Training Corps ( ROTC ) . The last option appealed to Middleton the most , and he wanted to work at a school in the south . There was an opening at Louisiana State University ( LSU ) , and this is where Middleton soon headed . 
 = = = ROTC duty at Louisiana State University = = = 
 In July 1930 Troy Middleton stopped at his new headquarters at Fort McPherson in Atlanta , then drove west with his family to Baton Rouge , Louisiana which would become the family home for many years . Major Middleton became the Commandant of cadets at LSU , along with being the professor of military science . 
 While at headquarters , Middleton had learned that his predecessor did not get along with Louisiana 's governor , Huey P. Long . Middleton was told a few stories about the governor that made him curious enough to call on him the day after arriving in town . While the meeting turned out to be somewhat awkward for Major Middleton , it began a friendship between the two men . Governor Long loved LSU , and loved the cadet corps there . When Middleton mentioned to him that the cadet band of just a few dozen members was rather rag @-@ tag , the governor saw to it that the band would grow to 250 members . Governor Long was a showman , and enjoyed parades and fanfare , and would negotiate special fares to get the cadets and band transported to athletic events across the region . Because of the governor 's dealings , LSU transformed from a third rate school in 1930 to the largest university in the south by 1936 . 
 During Middleton 's tenure at LSU the presidency of the university changed hands from President Atkinson to President James Monroe Smith , the latter an appointee of Governor Long . Towards the end of Middleton 's fourth year on campus President Smith asked him if he would stay on for an additional year and also become Dean of Men . <unk> responded that he would accept , but it had to be cleared through the War Department . Smith 's request to the War Department for both the extension and the deanship for Middleton were approved . Toward the end of the fifth year Smith went a step further , suggesting that Middleton retire from the Army and become a permanent member of the LSU staff . Middleton would not even consider retirement , but accepted a sixth year with the ROTC program . As he began his sixth year on campus , on 1 Aug 1935 , he was promoted to lieutenant colonel . 
 Early in his final year on campus , Middleton was once again pressed by the university president to retire from the Army and go to work for the college . Again , Middleton could not do that , and began looking for a suitable follow @-@ on assignment . Not having been overseas in over sixteen years , he put in a request for duty in the Philippines . He finished his tenure at LSU in the summer of 1936 , having overseen the increase in students completing the ROTC program from about 500 to over 1700 cadets . 
 = = = Philippines and retirement = = = 
 In August 1936 the Middletons made a leisurely drive to New York City where they boarded a ship for the Philippines . The trip took them 42 days and included passage through the Panama Canal with stops in Panama , San Francisco , Hawaii , and Guam . When they arrived in Hawaii , they were greeted by George Patton and his wife Bea . Patton was on duty in Honolulu and had sailed his own boat from San Diego to Hawaii , and later sailed it back to the states at the end of his tour . 
 Middleton was assigned as an assistant inspector general in the Army headquarters in Manila . Here he listened to complaints as he travelled to various Army installations including Fort William McKinley and Corregidor . Less than six months into his Philippine tour he received a telegram from President Smith renewing his offer of a job at LSU as the dean of administration with a salary of $ 5400 per year . Middleton was in the hospital undergoing testing for some heart irregularity when the telegram arrived , and he showed it to two other lieutenant colonels who were visiting him . One of them said he should take the offer , the salary being excellent . The other lieutenant colonel , Dwight Eisenhower , said he should stay in the Army . Eisenhower had spent three years in Panama as an aide to General Fox Conner , who knew that the terms of the Treaty of Versailles were being ignored by Adolf Hitler and the Nazis , and who was certain another war was coming soon . Eisenhower reasoned that this was no time for an officer with Middleton 's combat experience to be getting out of the Army . 
 To Middleton , as a very junior lieutenant colonel , the prospect of becoming a general officer seemed very remote , and upon giving the matter more thought he ultimately decided to retire from the Army . Once his decision was made , he wired President Smith at LSU advising him that he was ready to become a civilian and accept the university post . The Middletons left the Philippines in May 1937 , making a long leisurely trip back to the United States . They stopped in Hong Kong , Japan , and China en route to San Francisco . Lieutenant Colonel Middleton officially retired from the Army on 31 October 1937 , though he began his service at LSU two and a half months earlier . 
 = = Tenure at LSU = = 
 The first year in his new job as administrative dean at Louisiana State went smoothly . The Middletons had a new house built on Highland Road near the campus , and an oil field was discovered under their property , bringing them royalties that would pay for their property many times over . University enrollment began to climb in 1938 and the LSU football team had just finished three outstanding seasons under coach Bernie Moore , winning 27 of their 30 regular season games . Middleton was photographed breaking ground for a new faculty club that year , as the campus grew in many areas . All seemed to be running well when in June 1939 the campus was given a shock from which it would take many years to recover . A New Orleans newspaper ran a photo on the front page showing an LSU truck unloading building materials in suburban New Orleans , revealing an illegal operation . The ensuing investigation led to the discovery that LSU 's President Smith had embezzled nearly a million dollars from the university , using the money to cover his losses while speculating in the Chicago wheat futures market . Smith stood trial , and was sent to the penitentiary in Angola . The LSU superintendent of grounds and buildings , George Caldwell , was also involved in the scandal and served time in Atlanta for tax evasion . Meanwhile , the state 's governor , Richard Leche , resigned , but was soon found guilty of several federal charges and sent to Atlanta to serve time . 
 The Board of Supervisors met in a special session at the end of June 1939 and Middleton was directed to take over the business management of the university . The school 's finances were in a state of chaos , and it would take effort and time to dig out of the mess . The dean of the Law School , Paul M. Hebert , became the acting president , and Middleton became acting vice president and comptroller . Middleton chose two accounting professors , Dr. Daniel Borth and Dr. Mack Hornbeak , to work with him , and a New York firm was hired to come in and establish sound business procedures . 
 Before the revelation of the illegal activities , expenditures had been routinely made on a cash basis , all of the university funding and program money was thrown into a single account , and university bond indentures had been violated . The new leadership had to advertise in Louisiana newspapers to find out to whom they owed money . The first year of dealing with the situation required 16- to 18 @-@ hour days , six days a week , and after that the process still required overtime through the year 1941 . Faculty and staff members , accustomed to making purchases without bids , purchase orders or knowledge of the budget , had to be educated on the accepted business procedures on which the rest of the world operated . 
 While Middleton was helping LSU recover from this traumatic ordeal , he was also keeping an eye on events in Europe . In July 1940 he wrote a letter to General George Marshall asking if his services were needed by the Army as the United States was making preparations for war . Marshall replied that as much as the Army would like to have Middleton back in uniform , all the Army could do would be to place him in some training role , which would not effectively use his battle experience . 
 Middleton stayed at LSU until 1942 , describing his days as the comptroller of LSU as long days that he would not want to relive , but after the first year he found both the work and his association with Hebert , Borth and Hornbeak to be satisfying and rewarding . He felt that during this period of time , from 1939 to 1941 , he was able to make his greatest contribution to an institution that had been very good to him in the past . 
 = = World War II = = 
 Troy Middleton was out dove hunting with his son , Troy Jr . , and a friend on Sunday morning , 7 December 1941 . Having had a successful morning , the trio decided to take a break for lunch , then come back out and get their bag limits in the afternoon . When they arrived at home for the mid @-@ day meal , Mrs. Middleton greeted them with the news of the attack on Pearl Harbor . This put an end to the dove hunting , and Troy Middleton began to make plans . The next day he reported to the LSU president announcing his intention to offer his services to the U.S. Army , and he sent a telegram to the War Department announcing his availability for service . Within a day or so he received a reply : he would report to active duty as a lieutenant colonel on 20 January 1942 , allowing him time to get his affairs in order . 
 Having returned to active military duty , Middleton was assigned to a training regiment at Camp Wheeler , Georgia where he was quickly promoted to colonel on 1 February , and oversaw the combat training of thousands of recruits . After less than two months , he was given a rapid succession of assignments , including to Camp Gordon , Georgia and Camp Blanding , Florida . While at Blanding he was called to the War Department in Washington , where he was given an assignment to be a staff officer in London , but this rapidly changed when he was subsequently called to the War College , and met a classmate from Command and General Staff School , Brigadier General Mark Clark , who told him that he was being assigned to the Forty @-@ fifth Infantry Division at Fort Devens , Massachusetts . 
 = = = 45th Infantry Division = = = 
 Upon returning to Florida in early June 1942 to pick up his personal effects , Middleton received his orders for Fort Devens , and also word that he had been promoted to brigadier general . In mid @-@ June he reported to the Forty @-@ fifth , known as the " Thunderbirds , " an Army National Guard division consisting mostly of troops from Oklahoma , but also including some from Colorado , Arizona , and New Mexico . The commanding general of the forty @-@ fifth , Major General William S. Key , suspected that he was going to be replaced because he had no combat experience . Though Middleton was not informed of this , in late summer this is what happened , and Middleton was given the command of the division , along with a promotion to major general . 
 In the summer , the 45th did its training at Cape Cod , Massachusetts , after which Middleton was in command for winter training at Pine Camp , New York . Here the temperature dipped to 36 degrees below zero ( F ) and snow drifted head @-@ high . A soldier in the division by the name of Bill Mauldin did a cartoon showing slop from the kitchen frozen in a column as it descended into the garbage can outside . Mauldin later became famous for his cartoons during World War II , and won two Pulitzer Prizes for his work . In February 1943 the training moved from Pine Camp to Camp Pickett , Virginia for mountain training , and then to the Atlantic Coast for ship @-@ to @-@ shore training between Norfolk , Virginia and Solomons , Maryland . In early April , while the division was at Camp Pickett , Middleton was sent to North Africa with some of his staff to begin planning the ensuing military operation . Here he went to the headquarters of the Seventh Army commander , General George S. Patton , in Morocco and stayed nearly a month . Patton would command the Seventh Army in the Sicily landings during the summer , and the 45th would be the only combat @-@ loaded division coming from the United States . With the division scheduled to sail from Norfolk on 5 June , Middleton left beforehand to complete the planning for the landing on a hostile shore , this time reporting to the headquarters of General Omar Bradley in Algiers , Algeria . For this operation , Bradley was subordinate to Patton , under British overall direction . By the time the division arrived in Oran , Algeria , the planning was complete , and the unit was able to run one rehearsal in western Algeria before embarking for Sicily . 
 = = = Sicily = = = 
 The Forty @-@ fifth Division was under Omar Bradley 's II Corps , which in turn was subordinate to Patton 's Seventh Army . Overall command of the Sicilian invasion , called Operation Husky , was with British General Sir Harold Alexander , and the British forces were organized under the British Eighth Army commanded by General Bernard Montgomery . The Forty @-@ fifth Division consisted of three infantry regiments , the 157th , 179th and 180th , and numerous other elements . Fighting alongside the Forty @-@ fifth Division were the First Infantry Division , Third Infantry Division , and the 505th Parachute Infantry Regiment ( PIR ) ( with the 3rd Battalion of the 504th PIR and numerous other support units attached ) , part of the 82nd Airborne Division . 
 The forty @-@ fifth departed Oran on 4 July 1943 , with little attention paid to the fact that it was Independence Day . The six @-@ day trip to Sicily was smooth at first , then turned fairly rough , with seasickness prevalent among the troops . The weather calmed as several troop ships rendezvoused near the town of Scoglitti , on the western side of Sicily 's south coast . At 2 a.m. on 10 July the landing craft were filled with infantrymen , and as the craft approached the shoreline , the Navy opened up with a volley of preparatory fire . The primary mission of the Forty @-@ fifth was to capture two airfields needed for Allied aircraft . Comiso Airfield , about eleven miles from the shore , was captured in a day and was being used by American planes the next day . It took four days for the division to capture Biscari Airfield , about twelve miles inland . 
 The next objective of the forty @-@ fifth was to fight German and Italian forces en route to the north coast of Sicily . The plan was to use Highway 124 , one of Sicily 's four major highways . This highway , originally in the American sector , had been usurped by Montgomery , with no word of the change of boundaries given to Middleton . Word eventually came down from Alexander that the boundaries had been changed , which meant that when the forty @-@ fifth reached the highway , they became frozen in place with no opportunity to advance . Middleton , not willing to sit out the remainder of the battle , moved his division from the right of II Corps to the left , traveling ninety miles out of the way through back areas of the other American divisions , to get in position for the march north . On 23 July the first elements of the forty @-@ fifth reached the north coast of the island at Station Cerda , five miles east of Termini <unk> , taking thirteen days to move from south coast to north coast . The division then moved east along the coast , reaching its objective of Santo Stefano on 30 July . Here they were stormed by the Germans , but fought back , forcing the German rear guard out of the area by the following morning . This was the end of active fighting for the forty @-@ fifth in Sicily , where the division endured 1 @,@ 156 casualties while taking nearly 11 @,@ 000 prisoners . 
 The Third Infantry Division was moved in to replace the forty @-@ fifth , which was now ticketed for the upcoming invasion of the Italian mainland . In recalling events on Sicily in his biography , Middleton noted a strain in his relationship with General Patton . Patton , never comfortable as the brunt of someone else 's humor , felt that the Mauldin cartoons published in the division newspaper were irreverent and <unk> . Middleton consistently defended Mauldin , but was verbally ordered by Patton to get rid of Mauldin and his cartoons . When Middleton told Patton to put the order in writing , the issue was dropped . Soon thereafter , Patton had much more to worry about after he slapped two soldiers who he suspected of malingering in hospitals . These incidents brought General Patton public condemnation , and loss of his command . 
 = = = Italian mainland = = = 
 The month of August 1943 was used by the 45th Division for some rest and planning . Seven plans for the invasion of Italy were put on the table , and three of them were adopted , of which the British had two ( Operation Baytown and Operation Slapstick ) and the Americans had one , called Operation Avalanche . The 45th Division would be under Major General Ernest J. Dawley 's VI Corps , within Fifth Army commanded by Lieutenant General Mark W. Clark . The plan called for the landing of the Allied forces in the vicinity of Salerno , Italy , about 200 miles north of Sicily . 
 The first Allied landings on the beach occurred on 9 September , with two regiments of Middleton 's 45th Infantry Division , the 157th and 179th , landing the following day . The other regiment of the division , the 180th , would land at a different point and be held in reserve by General Clark . Middleton was responsible for ten miles of beachhead between the British X Corps and the U.S. 36th Infantry Division . The German defensive positions pounded the Allies , who gained little ground in the first few days of the operation . Clark , the Fifth Army commander , faltered and sent around a confidential memo indicating that he was contemplating taking the troops back off the beaches . Middleton , telling his staff that they were not leaving , spread around the word to his troops that it was a good time to do some hard fighting . On the morning of 14 September units of the Forty @-@ fifth did some particularly hard fighting at a large tobacco factory , consisting of five imposing stone buildings in a somewhat circular pattern . The Germans were dug in here , and repulsed the Americans initially , but with the aid of some naval gun fire , the Germans were eventually pushed back . Lieutenant General Clark visited the front later that day , and was convinced that his army was going to stay . 
 General Eisenhower , now the Supreme Allied Commander Mediterranean , visited the beachhead on 17 September , observing that the battle had been won . The following day the Germans had pulled out of the area , and the Forty @-@ fifth was able to advance to Venafro before meeting any resistance . The division was at the far right of the Fifth Army , working up the center of the Italian boot , adjacent to Montgomery 's British Eighth Army which was responsible for the eastern half of the boot . By 24 September the division had taken <unk> and <unk> after some heavy fighting , and by 3 October they had taken Benevento . On 21 October the division was put into corps reserve , following six weeks of uninterrupted action . There was still some German resistance around Venafro , and elements of the 179th Infantry Regiment secured the town on 2 November . With this the fighting came to a large pause as Allied planners studied further action . 
 With the lull in the fighting , and the onset of autumn rains , coupled with endless hills and deepening mud , Middleton 's left knee , which had been uncomfortable for more than a year , was now becoming agonizing . He had hurt his right knee many years earlier playing football , but there was no immediate explanation for the pain in his left leg . Medics studied his leg , but had no answers . In late November Middleton went to the hospital in Naples , staying well into December , still without adequate diagnosis . He was able to hobble around , and did some staff work , then flew to General Eisenhower 's headquarters in North Africa . He stayed there until mid @-@ January , when he was sent to Walter Reed Hospital back in the United States . While Middleton was at Walter Reed , General Eisenhower communicated to Marshall , the Army Chief of Staff , that he needed Middleton back overseas . Acknowledging Middleton 's difficulty with his knees , Eisenhower said , " I don 't give a damn about his knees ; I want his head and his heart . And I 'll take him into battle on a litter if we have to . " 
 The two generals came up with a plan , and Middleton was sent to six Army installations in Tennessee , Colorado , and Washington D.C. with a brief stopover to visit his family in Baton Rouge . Middleton would be taking command of VIII Corps in England , and was sent to the various locations to confuse the enemy about the personnel change . Accompanying him was a sergeant who had been a physical therapist in civilian life , and who would massage Middleton 's knees twice a day for the next year . When asked what staff he needed to take with him , Middleton replied that he would keep the staff that was already in place , except that for an aide he would like his old LSU friend , Mack Hornbeak , who had served with him through Sicily and Italy . 
 = = = VIII Corps = = = 
 The U.S. VIII Corps had arrived in the United Kingdom in December 1943 , and was commanded by Major General Emil F. Reinhardt , who Middleton had known for many years . While he was an able commander , his lack of combat experience resulted in his being replaced by Middleton ( though Reinhardt would later command a division in the European fighting ) . Middleton 's first stop in Europe before assuming command of VIII Corps was to confer with his friend and commander , Dwight Eisenhower . Eisenhower had asked Middleton about his views on making Patton the commander of an army . Middleton thought it was a good idea since Patton was such an able fighter . Eisenhower agreed , but was concerned about Patton 's propensity to embarrass the Army by things he said to the press . Following this Patton was given command of the Third Army , which was headquartered north of London during the preparation for the invasion of Normandy . 
 Middleton 's VIII Corps headquarters was in the town of Kidderminster about fifteen miles from Birmingham , and about 110 miles northwest of London . In order to deceive the Germans , Middleton moved his headquarters another 75 miles to the north , near Liverpool . This made it appear that the corps would move east to the English Channel for a landing near Calais , France . The ruse was effective , keeping the Germans guessing , and compelling them to split their forces among multiple locations along the French coast , instead of concentrating their forces at one probable landing point . 
 The VIII Corps fell under Patton 's Third Army , and trained in England from March to late May 1944 . Two weeks before the invasion , the corps was pulled out of the Third Army and placed in Omar Bradley 's First Army . First Army was responsible for the D @-@ Day landings in Normandy , and once the Allies were established on shore , Middleton was to bring his VIII Corps across . Shortly before the invasion , Middleton took his corps to Southampton where they awaited their channel crossing time . 
 = = = Cotentin Peninsula and Operation Cobra = = = 
 The VIII Corps sat in Southampton from D @-@ Day , 6 June , until 11 June 1944 when it began crossing the English Channel . The corps lost only one of its Landing Ship Tanks ( LSTs ) to a mine during the crossing , but on it was about half of Middleton 's headquarters complement . Other than the members of the sunken LST , who would rejoin the corps ten days later , the entire corps was ashore on 12 June near Carentan , where Joe Collins ' VII Corps had cleared the beach on D @-@ Day . At this point the divisions of VIII Corps included the 82nd Airborne , 101st Airborne , 79th Infantry and 90th Infantry . The 82nd , under Major General Matthew Bunker Ridgway , performed admirably , but soon left the corps , and once in Brittany the corps would have an entirely different complement of divisions . 
 After VII Corps took the port city of Cherbourg , VIII Corps began moving south against German forces in the middle of the Cotentin Peninsula . The Germans had the high ground , and the fighting was further complicated by the bocage countryside — a series of farmers fields and pastures forming a latticework , with each unit separated by walls of earth up to six feet high supporting dense shrubbery and trees . The German defenders had every advantage over the Americans , whose tanks would tip up and expose their thin bottom armor as they attempted to cross the barriers . By mid July , field expedient devices were developed to equip tanks to penetrate the hedgerows and restore battlefield mobility . Such specially equipped tanks were referred to as Rhino Tank . 
 After breaking out of the bocage , VIII Corps was able to roll fifty miles in seven days , but it , and the remainder of Bradley 's First Army , remained bottled up on the Cotentin Peninsula . The next phase of the fight , codenamed Operation Cobra was to break out of the peninsula , and once this occurred , Patton 's Third Army would join the fight . The operation began on 24 July 1944 when American air commanders were asked to lay a carpet of bombs on the Germans to soften them up for the advancing ground forces . Poor weather curtailed the operation on the first day , but more than a thousand bombing missions were carried out the following day . Lieutenant General Lesley McNair , chief of the Army Ground Forces , came to Middleton 's headquarters to witness the bombing . Middleton warned him to stay at corps headquarters , but McNair strayed away far enough that he and other members of his party were killed when they got caught by a stick of Allied bombs . More than 600 U.S. troops were killed or wounded in this friendly fire incident when the bombs fell short of their intended target . 
 Despite the mishap , the bombing was effective in reducing the German resistance , and over the next few days the VIII Corps was able to move south along the coast . On 30 July they seized the town of Avranches , the gateway to Brittany and southern Normandy . Once in command of Avranches , VIII Corps then secured the bridges at Pontaubault , and in doing so , broke out of the Cotentin Peninsula and into Brittany . This brought about the planned command change , and at noon on 1 Aug 1944 Omar Bradley moved up to command the 12th Army Group , Courtney Hodges took over the First Army , and Patton 's Third Army was activated into the group along with First Army , with Middleton 's VIII Corps now falling under General Patton . 
 Following the breakout , Middleton found himself in a doctrinally uncomfortable situation , as the allies were now in a position to pursue the Germans . The cautious and methodical Middleton was in command of two infantry divisions and two armored divisions within his corps , and the impatient and audacious Patton could not understand why Middleton was not moving his armor quickly in pursuit . In early August Patton wrote in his diary , " I cannot make out why Middleton was so apathetic or dumb . I don 't know what was the matter with him . " Despite his wealth of battlefield experience and years of military schooling , Middleton had only limited experience in conducting pursuit operations , and was a bit overwhelmed by them . Ultimately he allowed his armored divisions some autonomy in their operations , while using his infantry to clean up pockets of resistance en route to Brest . His estimates of enemy strength turned out to be much more accurate than those provided to him by Patton , and Patton ultimately acknowledged Middleton 's value as a corps commander by presenting him with a Distinguished Service Medal within seven weeks of calling him " dumb " in his diary . 
 = = = Battle for Brest = = = 
 After the breakout from the Cotentin Peninsula , VIII Corps followed the Brittany coast westward en route to Brest , the port of Middleton 's arrival and departure from Europe during World War I. As the corps passed St. Malo , Middleton turned his 83rd Division on the town , resulting in the capture of 14 @,@ 000 Germans . Patton had already directed the corps ' 6th Armored Division under Major General Bob Grow to move on to Brest while Middleton was still cleaning up in St. Malo , which fell on 17 August . Grow had arrived outside of Brest on 7 August , and met stiff resistance once there . The city , housing important German submarine pens and extensive machine facilities , was defended by three elite German divisions and several powerful 90 @-@ millimeter guns which were capable of destroying most of the armor in the 6th Armored Division . The siege of Brest required infantry , and once the 2nd Infantry Division under Major General Walter M. Robertson arrived , the armored division was released back to Patton for other operations . Also joining VIII Corps for the siege was the 8th Division commanded by Major General Donald A. Stroh and the 29th Division , a National Guard unit from Virginia , commanded by Major General Charles H. Gerhardt . Middleton also had a cavalry group and two ranger battalions commanded by Colonel Earl Rudder who later became president of Texas A & M University . 
 The city was well organized for defense , and in the Battle for Brest Middleton 's units went about capturing it methodically . The defense of the city was under German Generalleutnant Hermann Ramcke with whom Middleton carried on a dialog during the siege . Ramcke sent Middleton a map showing where several hundred American prisoners were being held in the city , but also slyly placed on the map a number of red crosses where the Allies knew some good bombing targets were located , such as ammunition depots . Middleton wrote back to Ramcke telling him to remove some of the bogus red crosses , or some terms of the Geneva Convention might have to be ignored . Middleton also reminded Ramcke of the Allies ' superior artillery and air power . 
 The battle for Brest was intense and very destructive . After two weeks of constant day and night attacks , Middleton 's units forced the Germans into ever tighter positions . On 12 September , Middleton sent a letter to Ramcke offering him an opportunity to stop the bloodshed , and to surrender the city in a humane and reasonable way , with terms of surrender spelled out in the letter . Ramcke 's terse reply was simply , " I must decline your proposal . " Unhappy with the response , Middleton directed his soldiers to " enter the fray with renewed vigor ... take them apart — and get the job finished . " One week later , on 19 September , the Germans surrendered to Middleton , who , with much of his staff , had 99 unbroken days of combat . In a formal ceremony , Middleton gave the city back to its mayor , and General Patton arrived to pin a Distinguished Service Medal oak leaf cluster on Middleton for outstanding conduct during the campaign in Brittany , resulting in the capture of Brest . 
 The Americans captured more than 36 @,@ 000 Germans , and evacuated 2 @,@ 000 wounded , far exceeding the estimate of 10 @,@ 000 Germans given to Middleton by Patton before the operation . Ramcke was captured by troops of the 8th Division , and asked the deputy division commander for his credentials . The American general pointed to the M @-@ 1 rifles being carried by his soldiers and told Ramcke that those were his credentials . Ramcke appeared at his formal surrender clean shaven and with a well @-@ groomed Irish setter . With plenty of reporters and photographers documenting the occasion , Ramcke commented in English that he felt like a film star . He was soon sent to a prisoner of war camp in Clinton , Mississippi , not more than 50 miles from where Middleton was born and raised . After the war he spent time in a prison camp in England , and then was sent to France where he was tried and soon released following five total years of incarceration . He went back to Germany and entered the concrete business , continuing a correspondence with Middleton for 15 years following the war . — — — — — — — 
 = = = Move to the Ardennes = = = 
 With western France in the hands of the Allies , in late September Middleton made a leisurely trip east across France to the Ardennes Mountains , stopping en route to visit battlefields where he had served with distinction in 1918 during the Great War . The Germans were now behind a line from west of Metz , France , through Luxembourg , and east of the Belgian cities of Bastogne , Liege and Antwerp . The Allies had outrun their supply lines and had to slow their advance to resupply . 
 Middleton 's VIII Corps was assigned a 50 @-@ mile front , half of which belonged to the 2nd Division and the other half to the 8th Division . The front extended from Losheim , on the German @-@ Belgian border , to central Luxembourg . On 11 October , the 83rd Division was brought back under VIII Corps control , and another 38 miles of front in Luxembourg was added to the responsibility of the corps . The new 9th Armored Division was added to the lineup on 20 October , but put into corps reserve by Middleton . During October and into November these divisions ran deception maneuvers to confuse the Germans , and also became thoroughly familiar with the terrain so as to be able to absorb a heavy thrust from the enemy should they be attacked . However , from mid @-@ November to early December the three well @-@ prepared infantry divisions were all replaced by two battle @-@ weary divisions and one green division . Both the 28th Infantry Division and the 4th Infantry Division , Middleton 's old division from World War I , had taken heavy losses in the <unk> Forest , and were at less than 75 % normal strength . The 106th Infantry Division was just entering the lineup with no combat experience . Middleton now had about 68 @,@ 000 officers and men in his corps , many weary and many uninitiated , along an 88 @-@ mile front facing about 200 @,@ 000 veteran German troops who were deftly moving into position under the cover of darkness . 
 = = = Battle of the Bulge = = = 
 Striking at 5 : 30 a.m. on Saturday , 16 December , the Germans achieved almost total surprise in breaking through the allied lines , beginning what is commonly called the Battle of the Bulge . The Germans launched their great attack of 1940 through the same region , with Generalfeldmarschall Gerd von Rundstedt in command then as he was once again in this campaign . His goal was to separate the American forces from the British and Canadian forces , and take the important port city of Antwerp . By late afternoon the Germans had 14 divisions operating in the Ardennes , but this number would swell to an estimated 25 divisions , with 600 tanks and 1 @,@ 000 aircraft . The 106th Division , located in the most exposed positions along the corps line , and the 28th Division took the brunt of the attack . Middleton , headquartered in Bastogne , was awakened by a guard and could hear the guns from there . Throughout the day , the 106th was able to hold its position , but additional German units poured in during the night . Much of the 106th was on the German side of the Our River in an area known as the Schnee Eifel . The division 's commander , Major General Alan Jones , called Middleton , concerned about his two regiments east of the river . The conversation was interrupted by another call , and then resumed . At the end of the conversation Middleton told an aide that he had given his approval to have the two regiments pull back to the west side of the river . Jones , on the other hand was convinced that Middleton had directed these units to stay , and was further convinced of this based on a written order from earlier in the day , but just received . As a result of the miscommunication , the pullback did not occur , and the two regiments were ultimately surrounded with most of the men captured on 17 December . While two of the 28th Division 's regiments survived the German onslaught intact , the 110th Infantry Regiment , commanded by Colonel Hurley Fuller , was directly in the path of the massive advance . On 17 December Fuller counterattacked , but his lone regiment was up against three German divisions , and when Fuller 's command post was attacked his escape was thwarted and he was taken prisoner . Middleton next heard from him in April when he was released . Though the 110th Regiment was shattered , the stubborn resistance given by them and other VIII Corps units greatly slowed down the German timetable . 
 The city of Bastogne , Belgium was a hub of several major roads and became a prime target for the Germans , seeing its capture as necessary to their advance . Middleton was in continuous communication with Bradley at 12th Army Group headquarters in Luxembourg , and maintained that though Bastogne could soon be surrounded , it should be held . As the Germans advanced on Bastogne , both Bradley and First Army commander Hodges recognized the threat to Middleton and had him move his headquarters . He was supposed to leave Bastogne on 18 December , but spent another night there so that he could brief his relief force , the 101st Airborne Division . Not only did that division 's acting commander , Brigadier General Anthony McAuliffe , show up ahead of schedule , but so did Colonel William Roberts from the 10th Armored Division Combat Command R ( CCR ) , sent by Patton . Another welcome guest arriving later that evening was Major General Matthew Ridgway , commander of XVIII Airborne Corps , en route to his headquarters , but advised by Middleton to stay in Bastogne for the night to avoid capture by the Germans . While Middleton and his guests slept , elements of the 101st Airborne poured into Bastogne all during the night and into the following day . 
 Having conferred with McAuliffe at length the previous evening , Middleton left Bastogne after full daylight on 19 December , and set up headquarters in a school building in Neufchâteau , 17 miles to the southwest . For the next several days , Bastogne was defended by the 101st , along with elements of CCR and some corps artillery assets that Middleton was able to supply . McAuliffe had units scattered in towns surrounding Bastogne , which bore the brunt of attacks by the Panzer Lehr Division and Second Panzer Division . At one point on 19 December , some of McAuliffe 's units wanted to fall back , and McAuliffe concurred , calling Middleton for his approval . Middleton 's response was , " we can 't hold Bastogne if we keep falling back " and the units were ordered to stay . 
 On 20 December , VIII Corps was moved from Hodges ' First Army back to Patton 's Third Army . Bastogne was being surrounded by the Germans and without adequate weather for airdrops , supplies were running low . By 22 December the Germans felt that their position around Bastogne was strong enough to send in an emissary with a note advising the Americans to surrender the city , or they would be attacked in the afternoon . McAuliffe 's famous reply , " Nuts ! " was sent back to the German commander . The Germans did renew their attack that afternoon , but it was muted by freshly falling snow , and a stiff American response . The next morning , 23 December , was the eighth day of fighting and the first day that the sun had emerged from behind the thick fog and clouds since the beginning of the battle . The Ninth Air Force was able to send 240 aircraft over Bastogne that day , each dropping about 1200 pounds of critically needed supplies , including artillery rounds that were delivered in the morning and used against the Germans the same afternoon . Over the next three days , offensives made by the Germans were countered with responses from the Americans . In the late afternoon on 26 December the first elements of the long @-@ awaited 4th Armored Division arrived in Bastogne , breaking the siege of the city . Hitler demanded that Bastogne be taken , but even with nine divisions in the fight , the Germans were not able to break in . With the siege broken and additional elements of the 4th Armored Division coming in , Middleton stipulated that the top priority was to get the 964 wounded troops out of Bastogne and into area hospitals . Despite the small opening to the city , it was clear by 27 December that the Germans were throwing their principal effort against Bastogne . 
 In response to this renewed German thrust against Bastogne , Eisenhower released two new divisions on 28 December , the 87th Infantry and the 11th Armored . These units joined the 101st Airborne Division in the corps lineup just in time for a new offensive on 30 December to shrink the bulge created in the allied line . The Americans began their attack at 7 : 30 that morning , which , coincidentally , was the exact time that the Germans , under General der <unk> ( Lieutenant General equivalent ) Hasso von Manteuffel scheduled an attack of their own . The 11th Armored Division had difficulty meeting its objectives ( for reasons not related to the strength of the Germans ) , but the 87th Division fought well in the snow , sleet and deepening cold . On 3 January the new 17th Airborne Division relieved the 11th Armored Division , and the corps stretched along a crude 15 @-@ mile line due west of Bastogne , with the 101st continuing to hold the city . For the next two weeks the corps moved steadily north in heavy , sometimes even desperate , fighting , and on 16 January they met units from First Army pushing south at Houffalize . Over the following twelve days the combined force pushed the Germans back eastward across the Our River , returning the Allied line to its original position before the 16 December battle began , eliminating the bulge created in the Allied line on 16 December . 
 = = = Push across Germany and victory = = = 
 With the front restored to its previous boundary , Bradley summoned his Army and Corps commanders to his headquarters . He wanted Hodges ' First Army to advance to the Rhine , while Patton 's Third Army would stay put until First Army reached the river . Patton was very reluctant to hold in place , and questioned the advisability to do so . Bradley explained that all available ammunition and reinforcements would go to First Army , since two armies could not be simultaneously supplied . Patton reluctantly accepted Bradley 's explanation , but after that meeting he called together his three corps commanders , Manton Eddy of XII Corps , Walton H. Walker of XX Corps , and Middleton . He asked Eddy if he could ease forward and capture Trier , Walker if he could do the same with Bitburg and Middleton if he could take Gerolstein . All three commanders agreed to this , and within a few days all three had reached their objectives . Middleton was then asked by Patton to take his corps all the way to Koblenz on the Rhine River , which he did , and VIII Corps reached the river before any units of First Army arrived . 
 Once the VIII Corps was at Koblenz , Patton took most of its divisions away for an operation with XII Corps further up the river at Mainz , leaving Middleton with some corps units ( mostly artillery ) and a single division , the 87th Infantry . Middleton asked Patton if he could take Koblenz with the 87th , eliciting a laugh from the Army commander . Middleton pressed him to let him try , and with the commander 's approval he was able to take the city , which only had about 500 defenders . Most of the other German troops were on the other side of the Rhine not wanting to get trapped between the Rhine and the Moselle Rivers . 
 Once Koblenz was captured in mid @-@ March 1945 , VIII Corps was assigned a 25 @-@ mile front from Koblenz upstream ( southeast ) to beyond Boppard and the famous landmark , the Lorelei . Patton then gave Middleton the 89th Division and 76th Division for the river crossing . Middleton chose to cross the river near the Lorelei where the river was narrow , swift , and flanked by steep terrain , eliciting another laugh from Patton . Middleton knew there would be little German resistance there , and he was able to get the entire 89th across in one night using inflatable rafts , and then put a pontoon bridge in place by early morning . The 87th initially attempted to cross at Koblenz but met too much resistance there , compelling them to move further upstream closer to Boppard , where their crossing went smoothly . Within two days Middleton had all three of his divisions across the Rhine . 
 In late March , VIII Corps advanced eastward through Eisenach and then across the Fulda River . Here some of Middleton 's infantrymen came across the concentration camp at Ohrdruf , discovering the sickening evidence of what had transpired there . Middleton called Patton to come take a look , and Patton was joined by Bradley and Eisenhower . In his diary , Patton described the place as " one of the most appalling sights that I have ever seen . " This was the first Nazi concentration camp to be discovered by the United States Army , and Eisenhower cabled Marshall to get a delegation from congress over to witness and communicate what took place there . Middleton later had officials from the town come in to witness what was going on in their midst . While every one of them denied knowing what was happening , the mayor and his wife both committed suicide that night . 
 The VIII Corps continued its eastward advance well into the month of April , and was ordered to stop between Chemnitz and the Czechoslovakian border , where the corps would make contact with the Russians . The immediate problem was dealing with the prisoners of war . The Americans were almost overwhelmed by the number of Germans wanting to surrender to them , and despite orders to take no more prisoners , thousands of Germans filtered through VIII Corps lines at night , desperately trying to avoid capture by the Russians . During the last week of April , a Russian cavalry unit made contact with Middleton . While the leaders of both the Americans and the Russians exchanged luncheon <unk> , the Russians were extremely reluctant to allow any Americans across the Russian line , and their American lunch guests were taken by a very circuitous route into Russian @-@ held territory . 
 On 25 April 1945 Patton wrote a recommendation , citing Middleton 's " outstanding tactical skill and determination , " his " magnificent resistance against ... Von <unk> 's attack , " and his " tireless energy and unfaltering aggressiveness . " With the war in Europe almost over , the disposition of the various units was being decided by higher command . Some would remain as occupation forces in Europe , some would return to the United States , and some would be sent to the Pacific theater to fight against the Japanese . The Germans formally surrendered in the American sector on 7 May 1945 , and two days later Patton issued his General Order Number 98 thanking the soldiers of the Third Army , past and present , for their accomplishments . On 13 May , Middleton wrote a letter to Bradley requesting to be released from active duty , once his combat services were no longer needed . He asked to return to LSU by 1 August 1945 , but also paid compliments to Bradley and others by writing , " That men such as you , Ike , Joe Collins , Courtney Hodges and others have accomplished so much in this war , are available to guide the future of our Army , we cannot but feel the future is in safe hands . " 
 Middleton was the only commander that VIII Corps had ever had in combat . He had been away from home for over 1200 days since departing in January 1942 , and had logged 480 days in combat , more time than any other American general officer during World War II . Near the end of May 1945 groups of general officers , other officers and enlisted men were sent to several major cities across the United States to appear in parades . Middleton was part of a group headed by Courtney Hodges that went to Atlanta , where he and his son reunited with his wife and daughter ( his son , Lieutenant Troy Middleton Jr. had been with him in Europe ) and where they were treated to a reception held by the mayor . From Atlanta the family flew to Baton Rouge where Middleton took 15 days of leave , after which he went to Washington D.C. to meet with General Marshall . Marshall told Middleton that he could either return to Germany to be with his corps , or he could wait at home until the unit returned to the states , Middleton opting for the latter . Marshall also told Middleton that VIII Corps was being ticketed for Japan . When the atomic bomb was dropped on Hiroshima , Middleton went back to Washington , and this time Marshall told him he doubted any more units would be sent to the Pacific . Asked if he wanted to stay in the Army , Middleton 's reply was that he had retired in 1937 , and he intended to be returned to retired status once he was no longer needed as a combat commander . 
 = = Return to LSU = = 
 In late August 1945 Middleton returned to LSU and reported to President Hatcher , requesting his old job as comptroller . While still in Europe in May , he was very busy getting troops returned to the states . Now at LSU he was at the other end of the pipeline , getting things ready for thousands of soldiers who would be going back to school . Enrollments had swollen in 1945 , but in 1946 the bulge in new students became an avalanche . One of Middleton 's priorities was to get housing for all of these new students , many of whom were married . With keen insights into military procurement , he was able to find a variety of types of excess housing units that the military no longer needed , and was able to provide both students and faculty with adequate housing at a very small cost . 
 = = = Military advisory roles = = = 
 Though retired from the military , Middleton was soon called to serve in a variety of advisory capacities . In April 1946 he was appointed to the Doolittle Board , set up to investigate officer @-@ enlisted men relationships , and headed by former Air Corps General James H. Doolittle . The board made a number of recommendations , one of the more significant ones being to allow the non @-@ commissioned officers to establish their own clubs , a recommendation supported by Bill Mauldin . Three years later Middleton was asked to serve on the Military Education Panel of the Service Academy Board to look at the curricula of the Military and Naval Academies , and the proposed Air Force Academy as well . Working for nine months on recommendations , Middleton stressed a more liberal education for the academies , and much of what he recommended was accepted . 
 Middleton was also asked to speak to military groups on occasion , such as for commissioning exercises at Fort Benning in 1951 . As late as 1958 he was called on by the United States Military Academy to come and review the curriculum offered to the cadets , and then was called again in 1959 to do related work . 
 In the spring of 1951 , Middleton got a call from General J. Lawton Collins , who was now the Army Chief of Staff , asking for Middleton to take an assignment on behalf of the Army . Middleton was compelled to say yes . There were allegations of wholesale honor code violations at the U. S. Military Academy in West Point , and Middleton was to serve on a committee to oversee the proceedings and make recommendations . Though personally painful to Middleton , the committee 's recommendation was to dismiss 82 cadets for cheating , including most of the members of the football team . A headline in a New Orleans newspaper wryly summarized the event as " Army Football Team Severely <unk> for Illegal Passing . " While this was a drastic undertaking , the committee also recommended that the same tests not be given to different groups on different days , which practice offered the cadets a big temptation to cheat . Though this was not a pleasant assignment for Middleton , he had been selected for the task because of his reputation for fairness . Though he had never attended West Point , in 1952 he was asked to serve the academy on its Board of Visitors , a position which he held for one three @-@ year term . 
 = = = University presidency = = = 
 Dr. Hatcher , the President of LSU , resigned his position in February 1947 because of ill health . The search went out for a new president , and when Middleton was asked to be considered for the job , he declined , being very content with his job as comptroller . Following the search , Harold W. Stoke was brought in from the University of New Hampshire . Middleton thought Stoke had many good qualities , but he could not work well with the Board of Supervisors . Stoke was sometimes doctrinaire , and his formality when working with the board members was found to be annoying by some . While he was respected by most of the faculty , Stoke continued to have run @-@ ins with the board members , and in December 1950 his differences with the board resulted in his tendering his resignation . 
 Stoke asked the board to hold a special meeting on 28 December to act on his resignation . Following the meeting , three members of the board came to Middleton 's office , and told him , " The board has elected you president of the university and we are here to notify you . It is the board 's desire that you accept . " Middleton was pressed to make a quick decision , and feeling confident that he could fulfill the job with no misgivings , he accepted the position . There was some backlash from the resignation of Stoke , as students and members of the community criticized the board . Nevertheless , the resignation became effective on 1 February 1951 , on which day Middleton began his role as university president . 
 The years that Middleton was president of LSU were marked by tremendous growth , resulting in many battles over funding priorities . The four major projects being considered were a new library , enclosure of the football stadium , a new auditorium and an addition to the medical school in New Orleans . Middleton 's priorities put the library at the head of the list , and the stadium last . The Board of Supervisors , on the other hand , gave priority to the stadium , and in February 1953 voted to accept a bid for the project . After the stadium expansion had been approved , the Board of Supervisors agreed to give priority to a new library in September 1953 . Within a year , the state legislature had given LSU all of the funds it asked for , about 20 % more than the previous request , to be used mostly for higher staff salaries , but also including 3 @.@ 6 million dollars for the new library to be built across from the Hill Memorial Library in the central part of the campus . In 1954 projections indicated that student enrollment would nearly double in the next 15 years , and in response the university entered into its most ambitious building program to date . 
 As the university president , Middleton was constantly involved in personnel decisions , some of them making national news . One such ordeal occurred in February 1955 when the Board of Supervisors decided that it was time for the head football coach , <unk> Tinsley , to be relieved following a break @-@ even record in seven years . His successor , Paul Dietzel , was a 29 @-@ year @-@ old assistant coach at the United States Military Academy . Dietzel had a rough beginning at LSU with three losing seasons , and calls for his removal became louder . Middleton supported Dietzel , however , and in his fourth season as coach the LSU Tigers not only had an undefeated season , but also won the Sugar Bowl and were declared the national champions . 
 A serious issue facing most southern schools in 1956 was that of desegregation . While Middleton , like most white Louisianans , was in favor of segregation , as the university president his responsibility was to uphold the laws of the state and nation , and his intention was to do just that . In April he wrote a sobering report to the Board of Supervisors entitled " LSU and Segregation . " Here he outlined the history of the enrollment of blacks at LSU , which showed how resistant the university had been to such an undertaking . While there were avid segregationists who declared the federal desegregation laws would not be fulfilled , more practical minds could see the futility and extreme expense of having to create duplicate facilities in every area of advanced education , and the process of integration , which had already begun at a slow pace , now became accelerated . 
 When Middleton reached the university 's mandatory retirement age of 70 in 1959 , the Alumni Council adopted a resolution to have the Board of Supervisors waive the age requirement , and allow Middleton to stay on as president . This was done , and again at the end of the 1959 – 1960 school year he was once again declared to be essential to the university , and once again reluctantly agreed to stay for one , but only one , additional year . Though it became a long year , on 1 February 1962 Middleton officially retired , and three weeks earlier the 11th of January was declared as " Troy H. Middleton Day in Louisiana " by Governor Jimmie H. Davis . LSU classes were suspended , an honor guard from the Cadet Corps was formed , and Secretary of the Army Elvis Stahr came to address the convocation , at which Middleton was given the honorary degree of Doctor of Laws . 
 = = = Retirement and death = = = 
 Middleton was a little more than 72 years old when he retired from LSU in 1962 . He was now President Emeritus , and maintained an office on campus in the David F. Boyd building . He went to this office every Wednesday morning where a staff secretary handled the typing of a large number of letters in response to his mail . 
 Two years after his retirement , in May 1964 , Governor John J. <unk> came to his office hoping that Middleton would accept a job on a commission that he was forming . The governor was wanting to ease the state 's growing racial tensions by creating a biracial commission composed of 21 blacks and 21 whites . The governor needed a chairman who would command a tremendous amount of respect , and his choice was Middleton . Middleton said he would do it for a year , beginning in 1965 , but as had often happened in the past , the year stretched into five , and it wasn 't until 1970 when the commission had reached its goals and was disbanded that Middleton was freed from this duty . Middleton 's black counterpart on the commission was Dr. Albert Dent , president of Dillard University in New Orleans , and the directors chosen to head the staff of this Commission on Human Relations , Rights , and Responsibilities were white attorney John <unk> and black attorney Jesse N. Stone . Some of the potential trouble spots where the commission was able to have a positive effect included the towns of Ferriday and Opelousas , and the commission helped to open the ranks of the Louisiana State Police to qualified blacks . The commission was disbanded in May 1970 , after having effectively served its purpose , and the members each received a letter of thanks from the governor . 
 In January 1969 the Coordinating Council for Higher Education was authorized , and Middleton agreed to serve once again , but this time refused pressure from the governor to become the chairman . After two years , Middleton felt that the council had more than justified itself by merging redundant facilities , and disapproving projects that were wasteful of taxpayer 's money . Middleton served in this role until 1973 , when he was 83 years old , and also served in a number of other capacities , but continued to hunt and fish when he could , while also enjoying his growing family . 
 Middleton died in Baton Rouge on 9 October 1976 , three days before his 87th birthday . His wife , Jerusha , died on 16 March 1980 , aged 89 , and both were interred in the Baton Rouge National Cemetery , sharing a tall granite marker , one of the few non @-@ standard markers in the cemetery . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 In 1962 , the year of Middleton 's retirement from LSU , Mississippi State University declared him the " alumnus of the year , " joining the company of earlier honoree , John C. Stennis , who had been the 1958 designate . On 10 September 1966 , the Louisiana Association of Broadcasters awarded Middleton a bronze plaque , honoring him as the Louisianan of the Year for his accomplishments in racial peace @-@ keeping while chairing the Commission on Human Relations , Rights , and Responsibilities . On 24 March 1973 , the Middleton Collection of Memorabilia was dedicated at LSU . Housed in a 24 by 54 foot room in the university 's library , the collection included pictures , letters , citations , awards , plaques , a uniform , riding boots , a saber and numerous other artifacts and documents . The room was maintained until 1999 , when the space was given to other priorities , and all of the items were cataloged and moved to the university archives in the old Hill Memorial Library on campus . 
 On 3 November 1978 the LSU Board of Supervisors officially named the LSU library the " Troy H. Middleton Library , " 20 years after the building was first dedicated . In Baton Rouge , off of South Foster Drive is a street named Middleton Place in honor of the General ; and in 1986 at Mississippi State University the Army and Air Force ROTC building was named in honor of Middleton . 
 When interviewed by Middleton 's biographer in 1965 , former United States President Dwight Eisenhower , who had once been a student of Middleton 's , had this to say about his former instructor : 
 First of all , he had moral courage , and he had common sense , and he took full advantage of all the experiences he 'd had . You know , I like that saying attributed to Napoleon , that the genius in war is the man who can do the sensible thing or an average thing , when everybody else around him was crazy . Well now , that was Troy Middleton .... I was impressed always by his complete command of himself and of the situation .... Troy typified what you think of as the best in the Regular Army . He was intelligent , dedicated , and loyal . He always acted according to the old aphorism : Always take your job seriously and never yourself . If the war had gone on , he would certainly have led an army because we were still bringing in people . 
 = = Dates of rank = = 
 = = Ancestry of Troy Houston Middleton = = 
 = Harold Washington Cultural Center = 
 Harold Washington Cultural Center is a performance facility located in the Grand Boulevard community area of Chicago in Cook County , Illinois , United States . It was named after Chicago 's first African @-@ American Mayor Harold Washington and opened August 17 , 2004 ten years after initial groundbreaking . In addition to the 1000 seat Com @-@ Ed Theatre , the center offers a Digital Media Resource Center . Former Chicago City Council Alderman Dorothy Tillman and singer Lou Rawls take credit for championing the center , which cost $ 19 @.@ 5 million . It was originally to be named the Lou Rawls Cultural Center , but Alderman Tillman changed the name without telling Rawls . Although it is considered part of the Bronzeville neighborhood it is not part of the Chicago Landmark Black Metropolis @-@ Bronzeville District that is in the Douglas community area . 
 The limestone building , which is located on the same site as a former historic black theatre , has become the subject of controversy stemming from nepotism . After a construction phase marked by delays and cost overruns , it has had a financially disappointing start and has been underutilized by many standards . These disappointments were chronicled in an award winning investigative report . 
 The center suffered from under use leading to financial management difficulties . After it defaulted on some loans , the Chicago City Council voted in November 2010 to have the City Colleges of Chicago take over the Center and use it for a consolidated Performing Arts program . 
 = = Harold Washington = = 
 Harold Washington was a native Chicagoan who served 16 years in the Illinois Legislature and two years in the United States House of Representatives before he was elected to the mayor 's office in 1983 . Washington earned a B.A. in 1949 from Roosevelt University and his law degree in 1952 from Northwestern University . He was then admitted to the Illinois Bar in 1953 after which he practiced law in Chicago . His Mayoral victory encouraged Blacks throughout the country to register to vote , and marked the end of racial inequality in Chicago politics . 
 = = Today = = 
 The center has not been successful by most measures . The center received $ 800 @,@ 000 from Commonwealth Edison for the naming rights to the theatre for ten years before the center opened . The center had originally broken ground on what was to be called the Lou Rawls Theatre and Cultural Center , in 1993 and had accepted a $ 100 @,@ 000 check from Lou Rawls 's aunt , Vivian Carter , to help fund @-@ raising efforts , during a second ground breaking in 1998 . However , by 2002 , in frustration of what should have been completed Rawls withdrew from and distanced himself from the project . Tillman insisted the delays were a function of her insistence that the project use at least 70 % African @-@ American contractors . The original plan to have a Blues District surrounding the Center never materialized . 
 = = = Finances = = = 
 The center lost nearly twice as much money as it grossed in its first full year of operations . Investigative reports by the Lakefront Outlook show that between August 17 , 2004 and June 30 , 2005 , which marked its first fiscal calendar year , the HWCC show federal tax return revenues of $ 678 @,@ 688 , including government grants of $ 25 @,@ 000 while its expenses totaled $ 1 @,@ 269 @,@ 514 . It has essentially used all of the $ 2 million in private donations made during the construction and fund @-@ raising phases . Despite a small steady flow of public money , Tobacco Road Inc . , the non @-@ profit manager of the center has had to refinance one of the three mortgages on the property . The property did make a $ 50 @,@ 000 profit in 2006 . 
 = = = Calendar = = = 
 Although the center was originally meant to be an education center first , and an entertainment center second it has not been a success at either . Youth programming has been scarce and the performance calendar has been sparse . As a result it has failed to lure the anticipated amount of tourism to the neighborhood . 
 = = = City takeover = = = 
 On November 1 , 2010 , a committee of the Chicago City Council voted to invest $ 1 @.@ 8 million in the Center and take over control of the Center as its primary lien holder for outstanding debt . By that time Tobacco Road Inc. was in loan foreclosure . The plan called for having the Center run by the City Colleges of Chicago . This was considered a way to protect the city 's previous $ 8 @.@ 9 million investment . Alderman Tillman pointed out that the move was done without a proper feedback time and at a time when City Colleges finance difficulties included the Olive – Harvey College and Kennedy – King College nursing school closures . However , the plan included consolidating City Colleges performing arts programs at the center . Mayor Daley noted that the center had been " more than 200 events @-@ a @-@ year short of its booking obligations " . The City Colleges were expected to use the center for both educational and entertainment events . 
 = = History = = 
 The Center is located on a historical corner in the historical Bronzeville neighborhood . The intersection at 47th Street and Dr. Martin Luther King , Jr . Drive ( formerly South Park ) was at one time one of the most storied intersections in the Afro @-@ American culture . As the location of the former Regal Theatre , it played host to the most prominent icons in African @-@ American music such as Count Basie and Duke Ellington regularly . The corner provided fodder for national gossip columnists and for the dreams of Black American youth . The Bronzeville neighborhood was at one time the city 's center of Black cultural , business and political life . It was also the former home to famous musicians such as Scott Joplin , Louis Armstrong , Jelly Roll Morton and Fats Waller , as well as legendary blues artist Willie Dixon and many more . 
 = = Features = = 
 The Harold Washington Cultural Center has private corporate meetings rooms , to host workshops , and receptions . It also has a two @-@ story atrium equipped with three 48 ' plasma screens for video . The center features the Com @-@ Ed Theatre and the Digital Media Resource Center . The center is 40 @,@ 000 square feet ( 3 @,@ 700 m2 ) and has a statue measuring 20 feet ( 6 @.@ 1 m ) of the late Mayor at the entrance on the corner of 47th Street and Dr. Martin Luther King Drive . The lobby features two @-@ story windows that permitting natural lighting , marble floors , a black @-@ and @-@ white spiral staircase , which looks like a winding piano keyboard . The Center was originally configures with an 1800 @-@ seat theatre , an art gallery and museum space . 
 The current Com @-@ Ed Theatre is a 1 @,@ 000 seat , state- of @-@ the @-@ art performance facility . It has not only served as host to internationally acclaimed artist and events , but also as host to community fundraisers and celebrations . 
 The Digital Media Resource Center offers technology workshops that are free to the public . The main objective of the center is to " foster an environment that provides children and seniors of the Bronzeville community ( and Chicago 's south side at large ) with hands on technology driven experiences . " The Digital Media Resource Center is sponsored by the Illinois Institute of Technology , Comcast and Advance Computer Technical Group . The state of the art center offers a wireless network with a one @-@ mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) radius . The center is powered by Comcast broadband and has upload capability to offer online concerts from the center . The computer center has 30 computer stations . The center serves seniors , small business owners as well as local youth . 
 The 750 pounds ( 340 kg ) statue shows Mayor Washington looking authoritative in a business suit and tie and talking as if to a committee while clenching a document in his right hand and gesturing with his left . The sculpture also has a biography of Washington 's political , military and academic record at the bottom . 
 = = Controversy = = 
 The Lakefront Outlook , a free weekly newspaper with a circulation of 12 @,@ 000 that reports on the Chicago 's Bronzeville neighborhood , won a George Polk Award , one of the most coveted honors in journalism , for its investigative reports about Dorothy Tillman ( 3rd ) and the Harold Washington Cultural Center . These reports focus on the post construction controversies and ignore the construction delays and cost overruns . Despite these controversies and his stand on ethics reform , U.S. Senator Barack Obama endorsed Tillman in her 2007 election in part because she was an early supporter of his . 
 = = = Management = = = 
 Jimalita Tillman , Dorothy Tillman 's daughter , is the executive director of Tobacco Road for which she is paid $ 45 @,@ 000 . Current and former members of the Tobacco Road board include her brother <unk> Tillman ; Otis Clay , a Chicago musician and long time friend of Dorothy Tillman ; Robin Brown , Dorothy Tillman ’ s former chief of staff ; Brenda Ramsey , a campaign contributor to Tillman ’ s 3rd Ward Democratic Organization ; and Terrence Bell , a financial contributor to Tillman ’ s campaigns . 
 = = = Catering = = = 
 Some of the events that the Center has hosted are under scrutiny for violating federal non @-@ profit tax law . The Internal Revenue Service forbids persons affiliated with a non @-@ profit group — and their relatives — from transacting for profit to a non @-@ profit group ’ s senior management or members of its board of directors . Jimalita Tillman owns and operates the Spoken Word <unk> , located directly north of the HWCC , which seems provide catering for HWCC events . That is potentially a violation of federal tax law . 
 = = Events = = 
 The grand opening gala featured Roy Ayers leading a 14 @-@ piece Harold Washington Cultural Center Orchestra . Among the other events hosted at the HWCC have been the Olympic Champion speedskater , Shani Davis , celebration marking his return to the United States following the 2006 Winter Olympics in March 2006 . 
 In addition , from July 23 @-@ July 25 , 2006 , a three @-@ day conference commemorating the 40th anniversary of the Chicago Freedom Movement was held at the center . Attendees included C.T. Vivian and Jesse Jackson who delivered the concluding lecture . 
 In September 2006 , the Black United Fund honored Tillman and her daughters Jimalita , Ebony and Gimel at a gala at the center . 
 The building has hosted several concerts by groups such as De La Soul , and it has hosted a birthday party for Da Brat with invitees such as Mariah Carey , Jermaine Dupri and Twista , 
 In July 2009 , the Center was swarmed for a viewing of the memorial of Michael Jackson . 
 = 2013 – 14 Michigan Wolverines men 's basketball team = 
 The 2013 – 14 Michigan Wolverines men 's basketball team represented the University of Michigan during the 2013 – 14 NCAA Division I men 's basketball season . The team played its home games in Ann Arbor , Michigan for the 47th consecutive year at the Crisler Center , with a capacity of 12 @,@ 707 . It was nicknamed " Team 98 " in reference to that it was the program 's 98th season overall and its 97th consecutive year as a member of the Big Ten Conference . The team was led by seventh @-@ year head coach John Beilein . The team won the 2013 – 14 Big Ten Conference regular @-@ season championship , for the 14th time in program history and the eighth time outright . It was Beilein 's fourth conference championship and his second at Michigan . 
 Although the 2012 – 13 team graduated five seniors and had two underclassmen ( Trey Burke and Tim Hardaway , Jr . ) who were first @-@ round draft choices in the 2013 NBA Draft from the 2013 NCAA Men 's Division I Basketball Tournament national runner @-@ up team , three of the five national runner @-@ up team starters ( Mitch McGary , Glenn Robinson III and Nik Stauskas ) were returning . The entering class included a pair of state Boys Basketball Gatorade Players of the Year in Indiana Mr. Basketball Zak Irvin and Derrick Walton , runner @-@ up Mr. Basketball of Michigan , three scholarship players and four walk @-@ ons . The team was a top @-@ 10 preseason selection , according to the vast majority of preseason rankings , and many media outlets selected McGary as a preseason All @-@ American . Plagued with back problems during the season , McGary played in eight of the team 's first eleven games before opting for season @-@ ending surgery . 
 During the conference portion of the schedule Michigan won its first eight games , including a stretch of three games in which it defeated top @-@ ten opponents in consecutive games ( which no Division I team accomplished since the 2006 – 07 NCAA Division I men 's basketball season ) . Michigan won at Wisconsin for the first time since 1999 and at Ohio State for the first time since 2003 . The team defeated the same ranked opponent ( Michigan State ) twice in the same season for the first time in thirteen years . 
 The Wolverines were led by 2014 Consensus All @-@ American and Big Ten Conference Men 's Basketball Player of the Year Stauskas , a unanimous first @-@ team All @-@ B1G selection . Caris LeVert ( B1G 2nd team ) , Robinson ( B1G honorable mention ) and Walton ( B1G All @-@ Freshman ) also earned conference honors , and Beilein was named Coach of the Year by the B1G media . 
