 Saviem @-@ owned Richard @-@ Continental had two factories in Lyon . 
 = = Models = = 
 = = = Trucks and light commercial vehicles = = = 
 Saviem / Renault Galion 
 Saviem / Renault Goélette 
 Saviem Super Galion 
 Saviem Super Goélette 
 Saviem H 
 Saviem J 
 Saviem JL 
 Saviem JM 
 Saviem P 
 Saviem S 
 Saviem SM 
 = = = Buses and coaches = = = 
 Saviem R @-@ series 
 Saviem ZR 20 
 Saviem @-@ Floirat ZF 20 
 Saviem SC ( Saviem @-@ Chausson ) 1 / 2 / 5 
 Saviem SC10 
 Saviem <unk> 
 Saviem <unk> 
 Saviem <unk> 
 Saviem E5 
 Saviem E7 
 = Everglades National Park = 
 Everglades National Park is a U.S. National Park in Florida that protects the southern 20 percent of the original Everglades . In the United States , it is the largest tropical wilderness , the largest wilderness of any kind east of the Mississippi River , and is visited on average by one million people each year . It is the third @-@ largest national park in the lower 48 states after Death Valley and Yellowstone . It has been declared an International Biosphere Reserve , a World Heritage Site , and a Wetland of International Importance , one of only three locations in the world to appear on all three lists . 
 Although most U.S. national parks preserve unique geographic features , Everglades National Park was the first created to protect a fragile ecosystem . The Everglades are a network of wetlands and forests fed by a river flowing .25 miles ( 0 @.@ 40 km ) per day out of Lake Okeechobee , southwest into Florida Bay . The Park is the most significant breeding ground for tropical wading birds in North America , contains the largest mangrove ecosystem in the western hemisphere , is home to 36 threatened or protected species including the Florida panther , the American crocodile , and the West Indian manatee , and supports 350 species of birds , 300 species of fresh and saltwater fish , 40 species of mammals , and 50 species of reptiles . The majority of South Florida 's fresh water , which is stored in the Biscayne Aquifer , is recharged in the park . 
 Humans have lived for thousands of years in or around the Everglades , until plans arose in 1882 to drain the wetlands and develop the recovered land for agricultural and residential use . As the 20th century progressed , water flow from Lake Okeechobee was increasingly controlled and diverted to enable explosive growth of the South Florida metropolitan area . The park was established in 1934 to protect the quickly vanishing Everglades , and dedicated in 1947 as massive canal building projects were initiated across South Florida . The ecosystems in Everglades National Park have suffered significantly from human activity , and restoration of the Everglades is a politically charged issue in South Florida . 
 = = Geography = = 
 Everglades National Park covers 1 @,@ 509 @,@ 000 acres ( 6 @,@ 110 km2 ) , throughout Dade , Monroe , and Collier counties in Florida . The elevation typically ranges from 0 to 8 feet ( 2 @.@ 4 m ) above sea level , but a Calusa @-@ built shell mound on the Gulf Coast rises 20 feet ( 6 @.@ 1 m ) above sea level . 
 = = = Geology = = = 
 The terrain of South Florida is relatively and consistently flat . Although rock formations are not a central draw to Everglades National Park , the limestone that underlies the Everglades is integral to the formation of the diverse ecosystems within the park . Florida was once part of the African portion of the supercontinent Gondwana . After it separated , conditions allowed a shallow marine environment to deposit calcium carbonate in sand , shells , and coral to be converted into limestone . Tiny bits of shell , sand , and bryozoans compressed over multiple layers forming unique structures in the limestone called ooids , which created porous and permeable conditions to hold water . 
 The Florida peninsula appeared above sea level between 100 @,@ 000 and 150 @,@ 000 years ago . As sea levels at the end of the Wisconsin ice age rose , the water table appeared closer to land . Lake Okeechobee began to flood and convection thunderstorms were created . Vast peat deposits south of Lake Okeechobee indicate that regular flooding had occurred about 5 @,@ 000 years ago . Plants began to migrate , subtropical ones from the northern part of Florida , and <unk> carried as seeds by birds from islands in the Caribbean . Although the limestone shelf appears to be flat , there are slight rises — called pinnacles — and depressions caused by the erosion of limestone by the acidic properties of the water . The amount of time throughout the year that water is present in a location in the Everglades determines the type of soil , of which there only two in the Everglades : peat , created by many years of decomposing plant matter , and marl , the result of dried periphyton , or chunks of algae and microorganisms that create a grayish mud . Portions of the Everglades that remain flooded for more than nine months out of the year are usually covered by peat . Areas that are flooded six months or less are covered by marl . Plant communities are determined by the type of soil and amount of water present . 
 = = = Climate = = = 
 While they are common in the northern portion of Florida , no underground springs feed water into the Everglades system . An underground reservoir called the Floridan Aquifer lies about 1 @,@ 000 feet ( 300 m ) below the surface of South Florida . However , the Everglades has an immense capacity for water storage , owing to the sponge @-@ like permeable limestone beneath the exposed land . Most of the water arrives in the form of rainfall , and a significant amount is stored in the limestone . Water evaporating from the Everglades becomes rain over metropolitan areas , providing the fresh water supply for the region . Water also flows into the park after falling as rain to the north onto the watersheds of the Kissimmee River and other sources of Lake Okeechobee , to appear in the Everglades days later . Water overflows Lake Okeechobee into a river 40 to 70 miles ( 110 km ) wide , which moves almost imperceptibly . 
 Everglades National Park has a tropical savanna climate ( Köppen climate classification : Aw ) and tropical monsoon climate ( Köppen climate classification : Am ) , depending on location . Most of the central region has a savanna climate while regions closer to shore , especially the eastern quarter of the park has a monsoonal climate . Both climates are characterized by two seasons : wet and dry . The park 's dry season lasts from December to April , when temperatures vary from 53 ° F ( 12 ° C ) to 77 ° F ( 25 ° C ) and humidity is low . Since water levels are low at that time , animals congregate at central water locations , providing popular opportunities for viewing the wildlife . During the wet season , from May to November , temperatures are consistently above 90 ° F ( 33 ° C ) and humidity over 90 percent . Storms can drop 10 to 12 inches ( 300 mm ) of rain at a time , providing half the year 's average of 60 inches ( 152 cm ) of rainfall in just two months . 
 = = Ecosystems = = 
 At the turn of the 20th century common concepts of what should be protected in national parks invariably included formidable geologic features like mountains , geysers , or canyons . As Florida 's population began to grow significantly and urban areas near the Everglades were developed , proponents of the park 's establishment faced difficulty in persuading the federal government and the people of Florida that the subtle and constantly shifting ecosystems in the Everglades were just as worthy of protection . When the park was established in 1947 , it became the first area within the U.S. to protect flora and fauna native to a region as opposed to geologic scenery . The National Park Service recognizes nine distinct interdependent ecosystems within the park that constantly shift in size owing to the amount of water present and other environmental factors . 
 = = = Freshwater sloughs and marl prairies = = = 
 Freshwater sloughs are perhaps the most common ecosystem associated with Everglades National Park . These drainage channels are characterized by low @-@ lying areas covered in fresh water , flowing at an almost imperceptible 100 feet ( 30 m ) per day . Shark River Slough and Taylor Slough are significant features of the park . Sawgrass growing to a length of 6 feet ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) or more , and broad @-@ leafed marsh plants , are so prominent in this region that they gave the Everglades its nickname " River of Grass " , cemented in the public imagination in the title for Marjory Stoneman Douglas 's book ( 1947 ) , which culminated years of her advocacy for considering the Everglades ecosystem as more than a " swamp " . Excellent feeding locations for birds , sloughs in the Everglades attract a great variety of waders such as herons , egrets , roseate spoonbills ( Platalea ajaja ) , ibises and brown pelicans ( Pelecanus occidentalis ) , as well as <unk> ( Aramus <unk> ) and snail kites that eat apple snails , which in turn feed on the sawgrass . The sloughs ' availability of fish , amphibians , and young birds attract a variety of freshwater turtles , alligators ( Alligator mississippiensis ) , water moccasins ( Agkistrodon piscivorus <unk> ) , and eastern diamondback rattlesnakes ( Crotalus <unk> ) . 
 Freshwater marl prairies are similar to sloughs , but lack the slow movement of surface water ; instead , water seeps through a calcitic mud called marl . Algae and other microscopic organisms form periphyton , which attaches to limestone . When it dries it turns into a gray mud . Sawgrass and other water plants grow shorter in freshwater marl than they do in peat , the other type of soil in the Everglades which is found where water remains present longer throughout the year . Marl prairies are usually under water from three to seven months of the year , whereas sloughs may remain submerged for longer than nine months and sometimes remain under water from one year to the next . Sawgrass may dominate sloughs , creating a monoculture . Other grasses , such as <unk> grass ( <unk> <unk> ) and broad @-@ leafed water plants can be found in marl prairies . Animals living in the freshwater sloughs also inhabit in marl prairies . Marl prairies may go dry in some parts of the year ; alligators play a vital role in maintaining life in remote parts of the Everglades by burrowing in the mud during the dry season , creating pools of water where fish and amphibians survive from one year to the next . Alligator holes also attract other animals who congregate to feed on smaller prey . When the region floods again during the wet season , the fish and amphibians who were sustained in the alligator holes then repopulate freshwater marl prairies . 
 = = = Tropical hardwood hammocks = = = 
 Hammocks are often the only dry land within the park . They rise several inches above the grass @-@ covered river , and are dominated by diverse plant life consisting of subtropical and tropical trees , such as large southern live oaks ( Quercus virginiana ) . Trees often form canopies under which animals thrive amongst scrub bushes of wild coffee ( Psychotria ) , white <unk> ( <unk> aculeata ) , <unk> ( <unk> <unk> ) and saw palmetto ( Serenoa repens ) . The park features thousands of these tree islands amid sloughs — which often form the shape of a teardrop when seen from above ( see park map ) because of the slowly moving water around them — but they can also be found in pineland and mangroves . Trees in the Everglades , including wild tamarind ( <unk> <unk> ) and gumbo @-@ limbo ( Bursera simaruba ) , rarely grow higher than 50 feet ( 15 m ) due to wind , cold weather , and lightning strikes . 
 The plant growth around the hammock base is nearly impenetrable ; however , beneath the canopy hammocks are an ideal habitat for animals . Reptiles ( such as various species of snake and anole ) and amphibians ( such as the American green tree frog , Hyla cinerea ) , find their homes in the hardwood hammocks . Birds such as barred owls ( Strix varia ) , woodpeckers , northern cardinals ( Cardinalis cardinalis ) , and southern bald eagles ( Haliaeetus leucocephalus ) nest in hammock trees . Mammal species living in hardwood hammocks include opossums ( Didelphis virginiana ) , raccoons ( Procyon lotor ) , bobcats ( Lynx rufus ) , Everglades mink ( <unk> vison ) , marsh rabbits ( Sylvilagus palustris ) , white @-@ tailed deer ( Odocoileus virginianus ) , and the rare , critically endangered Florida panther ( Puma concolor coryi ) . 
 = = = Pineland = = = 
 Dade County was once covered in 186 @,@ 000 acres ( 750 km2 ) of pine rockland forests , but most of it was harvested by the lumber industry . Pineland ecosystems ( or pine rocklands ) are characterized by shallow , dry sandy loam over a limestone substrate covered almost exclusively by slash pines ( Pinus elliottii var. densa ) . Trees in this ecosystem grow in solution holes , where the soft limestone has worn away and filled with soil , allowing plants to take hold . Pinelands require regular maintenance by fire to ensure their existence . South Florida slash pines are uniquely adapted to promote fire by dropping a large amount of dried pine needles and shedding dry bark . Pine cones require heat from fires to open , allowing seeds to disperse and take hold . The trunks and roots of slash pines , however , are resistant to fire . Prescribed burns in these areas take place every three to seven years ; without regular fires , hardwood trees begin to grow in this region and pinelands become recategorized as mixed swamp forests . Most plants in the area bloom about 16 weeks after a fire . Nearly all pinelands have an understory of palm shrubs , and a diverse ground covering of wild herbs . 
 Pine rocklands are considered one of the most threatened habitats in Florida ; less than 4 @,@ 000 acres ( 16 km2 ) of pineland exist outside the park . Within the park , 20 @,@ 000 acres ( 81 km2 ) of pineland are protected . A variety of animal species meet their needs for food , shelter , nesting , and <unk> in pine rocklands . Woodpeckers , eastern meadowlarks ( <unk> magna ) , loggerhead shrikes ( Lanius ludovicianus ) , grackles , and northern mockingbirds ( Mimus polyglottos ) are commonly found in pinelands . Black bears and Florida panthers also live in this habitat . 
 = = = Cypress and mangrove = = = 
 Cypress trees are conifers that are adapted to live in standing fresh water . They grow in compact structures called cypress domes and in long strands over limestone . Water levels may fluctuate dramatically around cypress domes and strands , so cypresses develop " knees " that protrude from the water at high levels to provide oxygen for the root systems . Dwarf cypress trees grow in drier areas with poorer soil . <unk> , such as bromeliads , Spanish moss ( <unk> <unk> ) , orchids and ferns grow on the branches and trunks of cypress trees . Everglades National Park features twenty @-@ five species of orchids . Tall cypress trees provide excellent nesting areas for birds including wild turkeys ( Meleagris gallopavo ) , ibis , herons , egrets , <unk> ( Anhinga anhinga ) , and belted kingfishers ( Megaceryle alcyon ) . Mammals in cypress regions include white @-@ tailed deer , squirrels , raccoons , opossums , skunks , swamp rabbits , river otters ( Lontra canadensis ) , and bobcats , as well as small rodents . 
 Mangrove trees cover the coastlines of South Florida , sometimes growing inland depending on the amount of salt water present within the Everglades ecosystems . During dryer years when less fresh water flows to the coast , mangroves will appear among fresh water plants . When rain is abundant , sawgrass and other fresh water plants may be found closer to the coast . Three species of mangrove trees — red ( Rhizophora mangle ) , black ( Avicennia germinans ) , and white ( Laguncularia racemosa ) — can be found in the Everglades . Due to their high tolerance of salt water , winds , extreme tides , high temperatures , and muddy soils , mangrove trees are uniquely adapted to extreme conditions . They act as nurseries for many marine and bird species . They are also Florida 's first defense against the destructive forces of hurricanes , absorbing flood waters and preventing coastal erosion . The mangrove system in Everglades National Park is the largest continuous system of mangroves in the world . 
 Within the Florida mangrove systems live 220 species of fish , and a variety of crabs , crayfish , shrimp , mollusks , and other invertebrates , which serve as the main source of food for many birds . Dozens of bird species use mangroves as nurseries and food stores , including pelicans , grebes , tricolored herons ( Egretta tricolor ) , gulls , terns , hawks and kites , and arboreal birds like mangrove cuckoos ( <unk> minor ) , yellow warblers ( Dendroica <unk> ) , and white @-@ crowned pigeons ( Patagioenas leucocephala ) . The mangroves also support 24 species of amphibians and reptiles , and 18 species of mammals , including the endangered green turtle ( Chelonia mydas ) , hawksbill turtle ( Eretmochelys imbricata ) , and West Indian manatee ( Trichechus manatus ) . 
 = = = Coastal lowlands = = = 
 Coastal lowlands , or wet prairies , are salt water marshes that absorb marine water when it gets high or fresh water when rains are heavy . Floods occur during hurricane and tropical storm surges when ocean water can rise several feet over the land . Heavy wet seasons also cause floods when rain from the north flows into the Everglades . Few trees can survive in the conditions of this region , but plants — succulents like saltwort and glasswort — tolerate salt , brackish water , and desert conditions . Animal life in this zone is dependent upon the amount of water present , but commonly found animals include Cape Sable seaside sparrows ( Ammodramus maritimus mirabilis ) , Everglades snail kites ( Rostrhamus sociabilis ) , wood storks ( Mycteria americana ) , eastern indigo snakes ( <unk> <unk> ) , and small mammals such as rats , mice , and rabbits . 
 = = = Marine and estuarine = = = 
 The largest body of water within the park is Florida Bay , which extends from the mangrove swamps of the mainland 's southern tip to the Florida Keys . Over 800 square miles ( 2 @,@ 100 km2 ) of marine ecosystem lies in this range . Coral , sponges , and seagrasses serve as shelter and food for crustaceans and mollusks , which in turn are the primary food source for larger marine animals . Sharks , stingrays , and barracudas also live in this ecosystem , as do larger species of fish that attract sport fishing . Pelicans , shorebirds , terns , and black skimmers ( <unk> niger ) are among the birds frequenting park shorelines . The bay also has its own resident population of bottlenose dolphins ( Tursiops truncatus ) . 
 = = Human history = = 
 = = = Native people = = = 
 Humans likely first inhabited the South Florida region 10 @,@ 000 to 20 @,@ 000 years ago . Two tribes of Native Americans developed on the peninsula 's southern tip : the Tequesta lived on the eastern side and the Calusa , greater in numbers , on the western side . The Everglades served as a natural boundary between them . The Tequesta lived in a single large community near the mouth of the Miami River , while the Calusa lived in 30 villages . Both groups traveled through the Everglades , but rarely lived within them , remaining mostly along the coast . 
 The diets of both groups consisted mostly of shellfish and fish , small mammals , game , and wild plants . Having access only to soft limestone , most of the tools fashioned by Native Americans in the region were made of shell , bone , wood , and animal teeth ; shark teeth were used as cutting blades , and sharpened reeds became arrows and spears . Shell mounds still exist today within the park , giving archaeologists and anthropologists evidence of the raw materials available to the indigenous people for tool construction . Spanish explorers estimated the number of Tequesta at first contact to be around 800 , and Calusa at 2 @,@ 000 , although the National Park Service reports there were probably about 20 @,@ 000 natives living in or near the Everglades when the Spanish established contact in the late 16th century . The Calusa society was more advanced , as they lived in social strata , and were able to create canals , earthworks , and <unk> . The Calusa were also able to resist Spanish attempts at conquest . 
 Although the Spanish had contact with these societies , they established missions further north , near Lake Okeechobee . In the 18th century , invading Creeks incorporated the dwindling numbers of the Tequesta into their own . Neither the Tequesta nor Calusa tribe existed by 1800 . Disease , warfare , and capture for slavery were the reasons for the eradication of both groups . The only evidence of their existence within the park boundaries is a series of shell mounds that were built by the Calusa . 
 In the early 19th century , Creeks , escaped African slaves , and other Indians from northern Florida displaced by the Creek War formed the area 's Seminole nation . After the end of the Seminole Wars in 1842 , the Seminoles faced relocation to Indian territory near Oklahoma . A few hundred Seminole hunters and scouts settled within what is today Big Cypress National Preserve , to escape the forced emigration to the west . From 1859 to about 1930 , the Seminoles and Miccosukee , a similar but linguistically unique tribe , lived in relative isolation , making their living by trading . In 1928 , surveying and construction began on the Tamiami Trail , along the northern border of Everglades National Park . The road not only bisected the Everglades but also introduced a steady , if small , traffic of white settlers into the Everglades . 
 Some members of the Miccosukee and Seminole tribes continue to live within park boundaries . Management of the park includes approval of new policies and procedures by tribal representatives " in such a manner that they do not conflict with the park purpose " . 
 = = = American settlements = = = 
 Following the end of the Seminole Wars , Americans began settling at isolated points along the coast in what is now the park , from the Ten Thousand Islands to Cape Sable . Communities developed on the two largest pieces of dry ground in the area , on Chokoloskee Island and at Flamingo on Cape Sable , both of which established post offices in the early 1890s . Chokoloskee Island is a shell mound , a midden built roughly 20 feet ( 6 m ) high over thousands of years of occupation by the Calusa . The settlements in Chokoloskee and Flamingo served as trading centers for small populations of farmers , fishermen and charcoal burners settled in the Ten Thousand Islands . Both settlements and the more isolated homesteads could only be reached by boat until well into the 20th century . Everglades City , on the mainland near Chokoloskee , enjoyed a brief period of prosperity when , beginning in 1920 , it served as the headquarters for construction of the Tamiami Trail . A dirt road from Florida City reached Flamingo in 1922 , while a causeway finally connected Chokoloskee to the mainland 's Everglades City in 1956 . After the park was established , residents of Flamingo were bought out , and the site was incorporated into the park as a visitor center . 
 = = = Land development and conservation = = = 
 Several attempts were made to drain and develop the Everglades in the 1880s . The first canals built in the Everglades did little harm to the ecosystem , as they were unable to drain much of it . However , Napoleon Bonaparte Broward based the majority of his 1904 campaign for governor on how drainage would create " The Empire of the Everglades " . Broward ordered the drainage that took place between 1905 and 1910 , and it was successful enough that land developers sold tracts for $ 30 an acre , settling the town of Davie , and developing regions in Lee and Dade counties . The canals also cleared water that made way for agricultural fields growing sugarcane . 
 The 1920s saw a population boom in South Florida that created the Florida land boom fueled by a demand for land described by author Michael Grunwald as " insanity " . Land was sold before any homes or structures were built on it , and in some cases before any plans for construction were in place . New landowners , eager to make good on their investments , hastily constructed homes and small towns on recently drained land . Mangrove trees on the coasts were taken down for better views and replaced with shallow rooted palm trees . The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers began construction on larger canals to control the rising waters in the Everglades . Nevertheless , Lake Okeechobee continued to rise and fall , the region was covered with rain , and city planners continued to battle the water . The 1926 Miami Hurricane caused Lake Okeechobee levees to fail ; hundreds of people who had just moved in south of the lake drowned . Two years later , the 1928 Okeechobee Hurricane claimed 2 @,@ 500 lives when Lake Okeechobee once again surged over its levees . Politicians who declared the Everglades uninhabitable were silenced when a four @-@ story wall , named the Herbert Hoover Dike , was built around Lake Okeechobee . This wall effectively cut off the water source from the Everglades . 
 Following the wall 's construction , South Florida endured a drought severe enough to cause massive wildfires in 1939 . The influx of humans had a detrimental effect on the plants and animals of the region when melaleuca trees ( Melaleuca quinquenervia ) were introduced to help with drainage , along with Australian pines brought in by developers as windbreaks . The region 's timber was devastated for lumber supplies . Alligators , birds , frogs , and fish were hunted on a massive scale . Entire rookeries of wading birds were shot to collect their plumes , which were used in women 's hats in the early 20th century . However , the largest impact people had on the region was the diversion of water away from the Everglades . Canals were deepened and widened , and water levels fell dramatically , causing chaos in food webs . Salt water replaced fresh water in the canals , and by 1997 scientists noticed that salt water was seeping into the Biscayne Aquifer , South Florida 's water source . 
 In the 1940s , a freelance writer and former reporter for The Miami Herald named Marjory Stoneman Douglas began to research the Everglades for an assignment about the Miami River . She studied the land and water for five years , and published The Everglades : River of Grass in 1947 , describing the area in great detail , including a chapter on its disappearance . She wrote : " What had been a river of grass and sweet water that had given meaning and life and uniqueness to this enormous geography through centuries in which man had no place here was made , in one chaotic gesture of greed and ignorance and folly , a river of fire . " The book has sold 500 @,@ 000 copies since its publication , and Douglas ' continued dedication to ecology conservation earned her the nicknames " Grand Dame of the Everglades " , " Grandmother of the Everglades " and " the anti @-@ Christ " for her singular focus at the expense of some political interests . She founded and served as president for an organization called Friends of the Everglades , initially intended to protest the construction of a proposed Big Cypress jetport in 1968 . Successful in that confrontation , the organization has grown to over 4 @,@ 000 members , committed to the preservation of the Everglades . She wrote and spoke about the importance of the Everglades until her death at age 108 in 1998 . 
 = = Park history = = 
 Floridians hoping to preserve at least part of the Everglades began to express their concern over diminishing resources in the early 20th century . Royal Palm State Park was created in 1916 ; it included several trails and a visitor 's center several miles from Homestead . Miami @-@ based naturalists first proposed that the area become a national park in 1923 . Five years later , the Florida state legislature established the Tropical Everglades National Park Commission to study the formation of a protected area . The commission was led by a land developer turned conservationist named Ernest F. Coe , who was eventually nicknamed Father of Everglades National Park . Coe 's original plan for the park included more than 2 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 acres ( 8 @,@ 100 km2 ) including Key Largo and Big Cypress , and his unwillingness to compromise almost prevented the park 's creation . Various other interests , including land developers and sport hunters , demanded some of the land be trimmed . 
 The commission was also tasked with proposing a method to raise the money to purchase the land . The search coincided with the arrival of the Great Depression in the United States , and money for land purchase was scarce . The U.S. House of Representatives authorized the creation of the new national park on May 30 , 1934 , but it passed only with a rider that ensured no money would be allotted to the project for at least five years . Coe 's passion and U.S. Senator <unk> Holland 's politicking helped to fully establish the park , after Holland was able to negotiate 1 @,@ 300 @,@ 000 acres ( 5 @,@ 300 km2 ) of the park , leaving out Big Cypress , Key Largo , the Turner River area , and a 22 @,@ 000 @-@ acre ( 89 km2 ) tract of land called " The Hole in the Donut " that was too highly valued for agriculture . Miami Herald editor John Pennekamp was instrumental in pushing the Florida Legislature to raise $ 2 million to purchase the private land inside the park boundaries . It was dedicated by President Harry Truman on December 6 , 1947 , one month after Douglas ' book was released . In the same year , several tropical storms struck South Florida , prompting the construction of 1 @,@ 400 miles ( 2 @,@ 300 km ) of canals , sending water unwanted by farmers and residents to the ocean . 
 The Central and Southern Florida Flood Control Project ( C & SF ) was authorized by Congress to construct more than a thousand miles of canals and flood control structures across South Florida . The C & SF , run by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers , established an agricultural area directly south of Lake Okeechobee , and three water conservation areas , all bordered by canals that diverted excess water either to urban areas or into the Atlantic Ocean , Gulf of Mexico or Florida Bay . South of these manmade regions was Everglades National Park , which had been effectively cut off from its water supply . By the 1960s , the park was visibly suffering . Although the C & SF was directed to provide enough water to sustain the park , it did not follow through . A proposed airport that would have dire environment effects on Everglades National Park became the center of a battle that helped to initiate the environmental movement into local and national politics . The airport proposal was eventually abandoned and in 1972 a bill was introduced to curb development in South Florida and ensure the national park would receive the amount of water it needed . Efforts turned to repairing the damage wrought by decades of mismanagement : the Army Corps of Engineers changed its focus in 1990 from constructing dams and canals to constructing " purely environmental projects " . 
 Regions originally included in Ernest Coe 's vision for a national park were slowly added over the years to the park or incorporated into other protected areas : Biscayne National Park , Big Cypress National Preserve , John Pennekamp Coral Reef State Park on Key Largo , Ten Thousand Islands National Wildlife Refuge , and Florida Keys National Marine Sanctuary were all protected after the park 's opening in 1947 . Everglades National Park was designated an International Biosphere Reserve on October 26 , 1976 . On November 10 , 1978 , most of the park was declared a wilderness area . Wilderness designations covered 1 @,@ 296 @,@ 505 acres ( 5 @,@ 246 @.@ 77 km2 ) in 2003 — about 86 percent of the park . It was listed as a UNESCO World Heritage Site on October 24 , 1979 and as a Wetland of International Importance on June 4 , 1987 . It was placed on the List of World Heritage in Danger from 1993 until 2007 and then again in 2010 . 
 = = = Restoration efforts = = = 
 President George H. W. Bush signed the Everglades National Park Protection and Expansion Act on December 13 , 1989 that added 109 @,@ 506 acres ( 443 @.@ 16 km2 ) to the eastern side of the park , closed the park to <unk> , directed the Department of the Army to restore water to improve the ecosystems within Everglades National Park , and " Direct ( ed ) the Secretary of the Interior to manage the Park in order to maintain the natural abundance , diversity , and ecological integrity of native plants and animals , as well as the behavior of native animals , as part of their ecosystem . " Bush remarked in his statement when signing the act , " Through this legislation that river of grass may now be restored to its natural flow of water " . In 1993 , however , the park was placed on the List of World Heritage in Danger . 
 In 2000 , Congress approved a federal effort to restore the Everglades , named the Comprehensive Everglades Restoration Plan ( CERP ) , with the objectives of " restoration , preservation and protection of the south Florida ecosystem while providing for other water @-@ related needs of the region " , and claiming to be the largest environmental restoration in history . It was a controversial plan ; detractors worried that it " relies on uncertain technologies , overlooks water quality , subsidizes damaging growth and delays its environmental benefits " . Supporters of the plan included the National Audubon Society , who were accused by Friends of the Everglades and the Biodiversity Legal Foundation of prioritizing agricultural and business interests . 
 CERP projects are designed to capture 1 @.@ 7 billion US gallons ( 6 @,@ 400 @,@ 000 m3 ) of fresh water every day , store it in underground reservoirs and release the water to areas within 16 counties in South Florida . Approximately 35 @,@ 600 acres ( 144 km2 ) of man @-@ made wetlands are to be constructed to confine contaminated water before it is released to the Everglades , and 240 miles ( 390 km ) of canals that divert water away from the Everglades are to be destroyed . During the first five years of implementation , CERP was responsible for the purchase of 207 @,@ 000 acres ( 840 km2 ) of land at a cost of $ 1 billion . The plan aims to spend $ 10 @.@ 5 billion over 30 years , combining 50 different projects and giving them 5 @-@ year timelines . The State of Florida has invested more than $ 2 billion into restoring the Everglades , but the funds have not been matched by the U.S. government . As of June 2008 , the U.S. government has spent only $ 400 million of the $ 7 @.@ 8 billion legislated . Initiatives that could aid Everglades restoration include the U.S. Sugar Land Corp transaction , the C @-@ 111 spreader canal and the Tamiami Trail bridging . These projects are supported by groups such as the Everglades Foundation , whose mission is to aid in the efforts of saving America 's Everglades for future generations . In spite of this , Everglades National Park was removed in 2007 from the List of World Heritage in Danger . However , it was listed again on the List of World Heritage in Danger in 2010 . The National Research Council reported in September 2008 that no CERP projects had been completed , and the lack of progress on water deliveries to Everglades National Park " is one of the most discouraging stories in Everglades restoration " . 
 Everglades National Park was directly hit by Hurricanes Katrina , Wilma , and Rita in 2005 . Such storms are a natural part of the park 's ecosystem ; 1960 's Hurricane Donna left nothing in the mangroves but " standing dead snags " several miles wide , but 30 years later the area had completely recovered . Predictably , what suffered the most in the park from the 2005 hurricanes were manmade structures . In 2009 the visitors ' center and lodge at Flamingo were irreparably damaged by 125 mph ( 201 km / h ) winds and an 8 ft ( 2 @.@ 4 m ) storm surge ; the lodge had been functioning for 50 years when it was torn down : nothing is slated to replace it . 
 = = = Park economics = = = 
 Everglades National Park reported in 2005 a budget of over $ 28 million . Of that , $ 14 @.@ 8 million is granted from the National Park Service , and $ 13 @.@ 5 million from various sources including CERP , donations , and other grants . The entry fee for vehicles in 2006 ranged from $ 10 to $ 200 for bus tours . Of the nearly one million visitors to Everglades National Park in 2006 , more than 38 @,@ 000 were overnight campers , paying $ 16 a night or $ 10 a night for backcountry permits . Visitors spent $ 2 @.@ 6 million within the park and $ 48 million in local economies . More than 900 jobs were sustained or created within or by the park , and the park added value of $ 35 million to local economies . 
 = = Activities = = 
 The busiest season for visitors is from December to March , when temperatures are lowest and mosquitoes are least active . The park features four visitor centers : on the Tamiami Trail ( part of U.S. Route 41 ) directly west of Miami is the Shark Valley Visitor Center . A fifteen @-@ mile ( 24 km ) round trip path leads from this center to a two @-@ story observation tower . Tram tours are available during the busy season . Closest to Homestead on State Road <unk> is the Ernest F. Coe Visitor Center , where a 38 @-@ mile ( 61 km ) road begins , winding through pine rockland , cypress , freshwater marl prairie , coastal prairie , and mangrove ecosystems . Various hiking trails are accessible from the road , which runs to the Flamingo Visitor Center and marina , open and staffed during the busier time of the year . The Gulf Coast Visitor Center is closest to Everglades City on State Road 29 along the west coast . The Gulf Coast Visitor Center gives canoers access to the Wilderness Waterway , a 99 @-@ mile ( 160 km ) canoe trail that extends to the Flamingo Visitor Center . The western coast of the park and the Ten Thousand Islands and the various key islands in Florida Bay are accessible only by boat . 
 = = = Trails = = = 
 Several walking trails in the park vary in hiking difficulty on Pine Island , where visitors can cross hardwood hammocks , pinelands , and freshwater sloughs . Starting at the Royal Palm Visitor Center , the Anhinga Trail is a half @-@ mile self @-@ guided tour through a sawgrass marsh where visitors can see alligators , marsh and wading birds , turtles , and bromeliads . Its proximity to Homestead and its accessibility make it one of the most visited sites in the park . The nearby Gumbo Limbo Trail is also self @-@ guided , at half a mile long . It loops through a canopy of hardwood hammocks that include gumbo limbo , royal palms ( Roystonea ) , strangler figs ( Ficus aurea ) , and a variety of epiphytes . Twenty eight miles ( 45 km ) of trails start near the Long Pine Key campgrounds and wind through Long Pine Key , well @-@ suited for offroad cycling through the pine rocklands in the Marjory Stoneman Douglas Wilderness Area . Two boardwalks allow visitors to walk through a cypress forest at Pa @-@ Hay @-@ O @-@ Kee , which also features a two @-@ story overlook , and another at Mahogany Hammock ( referring to <unk> <unk> ) that takes hikers through a dense forest in the middle of a freshwater marl prairie . Closer to Flamingo , more rugged trails take visitors through mangrove swamps , along Florida Bay . Christian Point Trail , Snake Bight Trail , Rowdy Bend Trail and Coastal Prairie Trail allow viewing of shorebirds and wading birds among the mangroves . Portions of the trails may be impassable depending on the time of year , because of mosquitoes and water levels . Ranger @-@ led tours take place in the busier season only . 
 = = = Camping and recreation = = = 
 Camping is available year @-@ round in Everglades National Park . <unk> camping , with some services , is available at Long Pine Key , close to the Ernest F. Coe Visitor Center , where 108 sites are accessible by car . Near Flamingo , 234 campsites with some services are also available . Recreational vehicle camping is available at these sites , although not with all necessary services . Backcountry permits are required for campsites along the Wilderness Waterway , Gulf Coast sites , and sites in the various keys . Several backcountry sites are chickees ; others are beach and ground sites . 
 Low @-@ powered motorboats are allowed in the park , although the majority of salt water areas are no @-@ wake zones to protect manatees and other marine animals from harm . Jet skis , <unk> , and other motorized personal watercraft are prohibited . However , many trails allow kayaks and canoes . A state license is required for fishing , and although fresh water licenses are not sold in the park , a salt water license may be available . Swimming is not recommended within the park boundaries ; water moccasins , snapping turtles ( Chelydra serpentina ) , alligators and crocodiles thrive in fresh water . Sharks , barracuda , and sharp dangerous coral are plentiful in salt water . Visibility is low in both kinds . 
 Everglades National Park is an important part of the Great Florida Birding Trail . It has great biodiversity and many species of birds for bird watching and bird photography also . 
 = = Threats to the park and ecology = = 
 = = = Diversion and quality of water = = = 
 Less than 50 percent of the Everglades which existed prior to drainage attempts remains intact today . Populations of wading birds dwindled 90 percent from their original numbers between the 1940s and 2000s . The diversion of water to South Florida 's still @-@ growing metropolitan areas is the Everglades National Park 's number one threat . In the 1950s and 1960s , 1 @,@ 400 miles ( 2 @,@ 300 km ) of canals and levees , 150 gates and spillways , and 16 pumping stations were constructed to direct water toward cities and away from the Everglades . Low levels of water leave fish vulnerable to reptiles and birds , and as sawgrass dries it can burn or die off , which in turn kills apple snails and other animals that wading birds feed upon . Populations of birds fluctuate ; in 2009 , the South Florida Water Management District claimed wading birds across South Florida increased by 335 percent . However , following three years of higher numbers , The Miami Herald reported the same year that populations of wading birds within the park decreased by 29 percent . 
 The west coast of Florida relies on <unk> for its fresh water ; the quantity demanded is too great for the land to provide . Nitrates in the underground water system and high levels of mercury also impact the quality of fresh water the park receives . In 1998 a Florida panther was found dead in Shark Water Slough , with levels of mercury high enough to kill a human . Increased occurrences of algal blooms and red tide in Biscayne Bay and Florida Bay have been traced to the amounts of controlled water released from Lake Okeechobee . The brochure given to all visitors at Everglades National Park includes a statement that reads , " Freshwater flowing into the park is engineered . With the help of pumps , floodgates , and retention ponds along the park 's boundary , the Everglades is presently on life support , alive but diminished . " 
 = = = Urban encroachment = = = 
 A series of levees on the park 's eastern border marks the line between urban and protected areas , but development into these areas threatens the park system . Florida still attracts nearly a thousand new residents every day , and building residential , commercial and industrial zones near Everglades National Park stresses the water balance and ecosystems within the park . On the park 's western border , Fort Myers , Naples and Cape Coral are expanding , but no system of levees exists to mark that border . National Geographic rated both Everglades National Park and Big Cypress National Preserve the lowest @-@ scoring parks in North America , at 32 out of 100 . Their scoring system rated 55 parks in terms of sustainable tourism , destination quality , and park management . The experts who compiled the results justified the score by stating : " Encroachment by housing and retail development has thrown the precious ecosystem into a tailspin , and if humankind doesn 't back off , there will be nothing left of one of this country 's most amazing treasures " . 
 = = = Endangered and threatened animals = = = 
 Thirty @-@ six federally protected animals live in the park , some of which face grave threats to their survival . 
 In the United States , the American crocodile 's only habitat is within South Florida . They were once overhunted for their hides . They are protected today from hunting , but are still threatened due to habitat destruction and injury from vehicle collisions when crossing roads to reach waterways . About 1 @,@ 000 crocodiles live in Florida and there are roughly 50 nests in the Everglades and Biscayne National Parks . Crocodiles populations in South Florida have increased as has the number of alligators . Crocodiles were reclassified from " endangered " to " threatened " in the United States in 2007 . 
 The Florida panther is one of the most endangered mammals on earth . About 50 live in the wild , primarily in the Everglades and the Big Cypress Swamp . The biggest threats to the panther include habitat destruction from human development , vehicle collisions , inbreeding due to their limited gene pool , parasites , diseases , and mercury poisoning . 
 Four <unk> species of sea turtle including the Atlantic green sea turtle , the Atlantic hawksbill , the Atlantic loggerhead ( Caretta caretta ) , and the Atlantic ridley ( <unk> <unk> ) are endangered . Also , the leatherback sea turtle ( Dermochelys coriacea ) is threatened . Numbers are difficult to determine , since males and juveniles do not return to their birthplace , although females lay eggs in the same location every year . Habitat loss and illegal poaching and destructive fishing practices are the biggest threats to these animals . 
 Two species of birds in the park are in danger of disappearing . The range of the Cape Sable seaside sparrow is restricted to Everglades National Park and the Big Cypress Swamp . In 1981 6 @,@ 656 Cape Sable seaside sparrows were reported in park boundaries , but surveys over 10 years documented a decline to an estimated 2 @,@ 624 birds by 2002 . Attempts to return natural levels of water to the park have been controversial ; Cape Sable seaside sparrows nest about a foot off the ground , and rising water levels may harm future populations , as well as threaten the endangered snail kite . The Everglades snail kite eats apple snails almost exclusively , and the Everglades is the only location in the United States where this bird of prey exists . There is some evidence that the population may be increasing , but loss of habitat and food sources keep the estimated number of these birds at several hundred . 
 The West Indian manatee has been upgraded from endangered to threatened . Collisions with boats and habitat loss are still its biggest threats . 
 = = = Drought , fire , and rising sea levels = = = 
 Fire naturally occurs after lightning storms , but takes its heaviest toll when water levels are low . Hardwood hammock and cypress trees are susceptible to heavy damage from fire , and some may take decades to grow back . Peat built up over centuries in the marsh can cause fires to burn deep scars in the soil . In 2007 , Fred Sklar of the South Florida Water Management District said : " An extreme drought can be viewed ( as ) almost as catastrophic as a volcano . It can reshape the entire landscape . It can take 1 @,@ 000 years to produce two inches of peat , and you can lose those couple of inches in a week . " 
 Rising sea levels caused by global warming are another threat to the future of the park . Since 1932 , ocean levels at Key West have steadily risen over 0 @.@ 7 feet ( 0 @.@ 2 m ) , which could have disastrous consequences for land so close to the ocean . It is estimated that within 500 years freshwater habitats in the Everglades National Park will be obliterated by salt water , leaving only the northernmost portion of the Everglades . Cost estimates for raising or replacing the Tamiami Trail and Alligator Alley with bridges are in the hundreds of millions of dollars . 
 = = = Non @-@ native species = = = 
 The introduction of non @-@ native species into South Florida is a considerable problem for the park . Many of the biological controls like weather , disease , and consumers that naturally limit plants in their native environments do not exist in the Everglades , causing many to grow larger and multiply far beyond their average numbers in their native habitats . Approximately 26 percent of all fish , reptiles , birds , and mammal species in South Florida are exotic — more than in any other part of the U.S. — and the region hosts one of the highest numbers of exotic plant species in the world . Species that adapt the most aggressively to conditions in the Everglades , by spreading quickly or competing with native species that are sometimes threatened or endangered , are called " invasive " . Thousands of exotic plant species have been observed in South Florida , usually introduced as ornamental landscaping , but park staff must eradicate such invasive plants as melaleuca tree ( Melaleuca quinquenervia ) , Brazilian pepper ( Schinus terebinthifolius ) , and Old World climbing fern ( Lygodium microphyllum ) . Similarly , animals often do not find the predators or natural barriers to reproduction in the Everglades as they do where they originate , thus they often reproduce more quickly and efficiently . <unk> lac scale insects ( <unk> <unk> ) kill shrubs and other plants in hardwood hammocks . <unk> beetles ( <unk> <unk> ) destroy bromeliads and the ecosystems they host . Walking catfish ( Clarias <unk> ) can deplete aquaculture stocks and carry enteric septicemia . The Florida Fish and Wildlife Conservation Commission ( <unk> ) listed eight " Reptiles of Concern " , including the Burmese python ( Python molurus bivittatus ) , focusing on them for their large sizes and aggressive natures , allowing licensed hunters to kill any listed animals in protected areas and sell their meat and hides . Burmese pythons , two subspecies of African rock pythons ( Python <unk> ; northern and southern ) , and yellow anacondas ( <unk> <unk> ) were banned from import into the U.S. in 2012 . U.S. Secretary of the Interior Ken Salazar announced the inclusion of these reptiles at Everglades National Park . Exotic species control falls under the management of the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service , which has been compiling and disseminating information about invasive species since 1994 . Control of invasive species costs $ 500 million a year , but 1 @,@ 700 @,@ 000 acres ( 6 @,@ 900 km2 ) of land in South Florida remains infested . 
 = In the Land of Grey and Pink = 
 In the Land of Grey and Pink is the third album by English progressive rock band Caravan , released in April 1971 on <unk> Records . It was produced by David Hitchcock and was the last album to feature the original lineup of Richard Coughlan , Pye Hastings , Richard Sinclair and David Sinclair until 1982 's Back to Front . 
 The album was written and recorded during late 1970 and early 1971 , and featured more material from Richard Sinclair . Hastings , who had been the main songwriter on the previous two releases , contributed only one track . Instrumentally , the music is dominated by David Sinclair 's keyboard solos , and side two is taken up by a 22 @-@ minute suite of songs , " Nine Feet Underground " . The cover features a Tolkien @-@ influenced painting . 
 The album was critically well received but was not a chart success , which led to frustration within the band and David Sinclair 's departure . Nevertheless , it has remained in print and sold steadily , and been recommended by critics as a good introduction to the Canterbury Scene genre . The band look back favourably on the album and several of its tracks have remained fixtures in Caravan 's live repertoire . It has been reissued several times , including a comprehensive 40th anniversary remix package by British musician and producer Steven Wilson in 2011 . 
 = = Background and recording = = 
 Though Caravan had yet to achieve strong commercial success in 1970 , they had started to build a live following , including an appearance at the <unk> Pop Festival in the Netherlands to an audience of 250 @,@ 000 and the 10th Plumpton Festival . In between touring , the group had written several new pieces that they wanted to record . Having had problems self @-@ producing the previous album , If I Could Do It All Over Again , I 'd Do It All Over You , the group decided to collaborate with producer David Hitchcock . Hitchcock had become a fan of the band and had been a key figure in getting them signed to Decca Records . He had progressed from the label 's art department to production and was keen to work on the album . The group had been apprehensive about Hitchcock working on If I Could Do It All Over Again ... but after discovering his enthusiasm and creative ideas , decided it would be a good idea to enrol him as producer . 
 Recording began in September 1970 at Decca Studios , West Hampstead , London . Guitarist Pye Hastings had written the bulk of material for earlier albums , which led to a backlog of songs composed by the rest of the group ; consequently he only offered a single song , " Love To Love You ( And Pigs Might Fly ) " . Bassist Richard Sinclair had written " Golf Girl " , a song about his girlfriend and future wife . Both songs were written in a straightforward pop style , in contrast to some longer pieces on the album . Keyboardist David Sinclair had composed a number of different musical segments that he wanted to link together to a suite of songs . The group helped with the arranging and joining of sections , resulting in a 22 @-@ minute piece , " Nine Feet Underground " . The song was recorded in five separate sections and edited together by Hitchcock and engineer Dave Grinsted . Most of the work is instrumental , aside from two sections with lyrics . David Sinclair played most of the solos on the track , and indeed the entire album , on either fuzztone organ or piano . 
 Most of the album aside from " Nine Feet Underground " was recorded in December at Air Studios in Oxford Street . " Glow Girl " had been tried at Decca Studios but was re @-@ recorded with different lyrics as " Golf Girl " , which featured flute and trombone parts . " Winter Wine " had been recorded in September as a rough instrumental with wordless vocals , but was given a second attempt at Air Studios , by which time it had acquired lyrics about dreams and fairy tales . The final version features a folk influenced acoustic guitar introduction and included an improvised organ section in the middle . The last track to be recorded was the title track , which featured the sound of Richard Sinclair blowing bubbles . The album was mixed at Decca in January 1971 . 
 During the sessions at Air Studios , the band recorded a rough version of " Aristocracy " , but it was shelved and re @-@ recorded the following year for the next album , Waterloo Lily . The title was suggested by Richard Sinclair ; the " land of grey and pink " refers to the band 's home county of Kent . He came up with the phrase after looking at the sky at sunset during rehearsals at Graveney early in the band 's career . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 The album was released on 8 April 1971 and featured a Tolkien influenced cover , drawn by Anne Marie Anderson . It did not chart in the UK , but sold steadily throughout the 1970s and remaining in print , with " Nine Feet Underground " becoming a popular track on late @-@ night FM radio . The group became frustrated with their lack of commercial success , which they blamed on Decca 's lack of promotion . In August 1971 , David Sinclair accepted an offer to join former Soft Machine drummer and vocalist Robert Wyatt in a new band , Matching Mole . 
 The album was reissued in 2001 on CD with bonus tracks , including early takes of " Winter Wine " and " Golf Girl " at Decca Studios . A new edition of the album , remixed in both stereo and 5 @.@ 1 surround sound by British musician and producer Steven Wilson was released on two CDs and a DVD to coincide with its 40th anniversary in 2011 . As well as the original album , the reissue included outtakes , BBC Radio sessions , and a television performance on the German music show Beat @-@ Club . The album was also available in a limited edition of 500 copies on 180g vinyl , remastered by Pascal Byrne . It was reissued on vinyl in Canada in September 2014 . Extended remixes of " Golf Girl " and " Love To Love You " were included in the 2000 anthology , Where But For Caravan Would I ? . 
 Rolling Stone listed the album as No. 34 on their list of 50 Greatest Prog Rock Albums of All Time , saying it evoked " a Middle Earth sunset , with the music wavering between medieval folk melodies and jazz @-@ savvy <unk> " . According to AllMusic reviewer Dave Thompson , the album is " one of the most beloved , and eccentric prog albums of them all " and " probably Caravan 's finest hour " . He also said that " Nine Feet Underground " was " the most for the dynamic chemistry that blended the band together " and that " Golf Girl " " emerges as the kind of song that remains stuck in your head for days after you hear it , no matter how many more records you play immediately after " . Progressive rock author Stephen Lambe has said that " Nine Feet Underground " is " not just the archetypal Caravan piece but a symbol of a whole movement . " Marco Rossi , writing in Record Collector said " Canterbury Scene initiates are strongly advised to start here . " In the Q and Mojo Classic Special Edition Pink Floyd & The Story of Prog Rock , the album came No. 19 in its list of " 40 Cosmic Rock Albums " . Mojo also said In the Land of Grey and Pink was " the quintessential Canterbury album " . 
 The band look favourably on the album . Hastings later said the group " began to peak in many ways " and praised in particular David Sinclair 's playing and Hitchcock 's production skills . Caravan continue to perform songs from In The Land of Grey and Pink in their live repertoire , particularly " Nine Feet Underground " and " Golf Girl " . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs by Richard Coughlan , Pye Hastings , Dave Sinclair and Richard Sinclair ( except " Aristocracy " , by Coughlan , Hastings and Richard Sinclair ) . 
 Side One 
 Side Two 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Caravan 
 Richard Sinclair – bass guitar , acoustic guitar , vocals 
 Pye Hastings – electric guitars , acoustic guitar , vocals 
 David Sinclair – organ , piano , Mellotron , harmony vocals 
 Richard Coughlan – drums and percussion 
 Additional personnel 
 Jimmy Hastings – flute , tenor sax , piccolo 
 Dave Grinstead – cannon , bell and wind 
 John Beecham - trombone on " Golf Girl " 
 Production 
 David Hitchcock – production 
 Dave Grinstead – engineering 
 John Punter – engineering 
 Derek <unk> – engineering 
 Julian Hastings – production for bonus material on 2001 CD reissue . 
 = = Release information = = 
 = = Cover versions = = 
 " Golf Girl " was covered by Nigel Planer ( in his guise as hippy Neil from The Young Ones ) on his album Neil 's Heavy Concept Album , and featured a cameo from Dawn French as a policewoman . Annie Whitehead played the song 's trombone part as arranged on In the Land of Grey and Pink and longtime Caravan collaborator Jimmy Hastings played on the album . The song was also covered by German band M. walking on the water . 
 = Foreign workers in Saudi Arabia = 
 Foreign workers in Saudi Arabia , estimated to number about 9 million as of April 2013 , began migrating to the country soon after oil was discovered in the late 1930s . Initially , the main influx was composed of Arab and Western technical , professional and administrative personnel , but subsequently substantial numbers came from Southeast Asia . Saudi Arabia has become increasingly dependent on foreign labour , and although foreign workers remain present in technical positions , most are now employed in the agriculture , cleaning and domestic service industries . The hierarchy of foreign workers is often dependent on their country of origin ; workers from Arab and Western countries generally hold the highest positions not held by Saudis , and the lower positions are occupied by persons from Africa , South Asia and Southeast Asia . The Saudi government has faced criticism from legal bodies and employers over the treatment of foreign workers . 
 = = Background and history = = 
 Saudi Arabia was one of the poorest and most undeveloped countries in the world when oil was discovered in the late 1930s . The country therefore needed foreign expertise and labour to exploit its vast oil reserves . As a result , in the years after World War II there was a growth in the numbers of foreign technical , professional and administrative personnel , mainly from other Middle Eastern countries but also supplied by Western oil companies , many of whom worked for ARAMCO ( Arabian @-@ American Oil Company ) . A much greater increase in the numbers of foreign workers came with the oil @-@ price boom following the 1973 oil crisis . Infrastructure and development plans led to an influx of skilled and unskilled workers , principally Palestinians , Egyptians , Yemenis and others from Arab countries , but also Indians and Pakistanis , leading to a doubling of the Saudi population by 1985 . Beginning in the early 1980s , South and East Asian countries , such as Thailand , Philippines and South Korea , increasingly provided migrant workers . 
 From 1985 the declining oil price led to a decreased demand for foreign labour , resulting in a substantial drop in migration from Asia . However , at the same time , there was a significant increase of female " guest workers " from Sri Lanka , Bangladesh , Philippines and Indonesia who filled roles in the services sector – particularly in hotels and as domestic servants . The Gulf War of 1991 sparked a series of expulsions of guest workers suspected of disloyalty , including the removal of 800 @,@ 000 Yemenis . The numbers of foreign workers reached a plateau in the 1990s , but from the end of the decade the inflow of migrants resumed its increase . According to official figures in 2012 , foreign workers filled 66 per cent of jobs in Saudi Arabia , despite an official unemployment rate of 12 per cent amongst Saudis , and expatriates sent , on average , US $ 18 billion each year , in remittances to their home countries . 
 Although the country 's reliance on foreign workers has been a concern to the Saudi government since the mid @-@ 1950s , the situation has persisted because of a reluctance by Saudis to take on menial work and a shortage of Saudi candidates for skilled jobs . This has , in part , been blamed on the Saudi education system , which has been criticized for its emphasis on religion and rote learning . The Saudi economy has , therefore , remained dependent on Westerners for expertise in specialised industries and on the Asian workforce for the construction industry as well as for menial and unskilled tasks . In response , since 1995 the Saudi government has initiated a policy of <unk> , replacing foreign workers with Saudi nationals . For example , in 2000 , it was decreed that the work force of businesses with more than 20 employees must be at least 25 per cent Saudi . In the private sector , there has been a reluctance to employ Saudis and <unk> is generally considered to have been a failure . Saudis themselves may be unwilling to take certain jobs , considering them to lack social value . 
 The Saudi government only recognises contracts for foreign workers written in Arabic . Where bilingual contracts are available , the Arabic language one is authoritative . The contracts , which must contain the terms of employment , are held in duplicate , one for the sponsor and one for the worker . Wages for foreign workers vary , depending on the position , although in general Saudis holding similar positions earn more . 
 = = Composition and numbers = = 
 The 2010 edition of the Central Intelligence Agency 's World Factbook estimated that non @-@ nationals represented 5 @,@ 576 @,@ 076 out of a population of 25 @,@ 731 @,@ 776 in Saudi Arabia . However , official 2010 census figures stated that there were 8 @,@ 429 @,@ 401 expatriates out of a total population of 27 @,@ 136 @,@ 977 or roughly 31 per cent of the total . 
 The results of the 2004 census indicates that only about 15 per cent of foreign workers are in the skilled category , with the remainder mostly working in agriculture , cleaning and domestic service . Country of origin has been an important factor in determining foreign workers ' occupational roles in Saudi Arabia . Saudi businesses have traditionally adopted an ethnically defined hierarchical organisation . For example , a recent academic study of a Danish manufacturing company 's Saudi subsidiary noted that a manager had to be European , a supervisor had to be Egyptian , Filipino employees often had technical roles , and Indians , the lowest in the hierarchy , worked in production . Foreign workers ' presence in Saudi Arabia tends to be transitory : only 3 % remain in the country for more than six years . 
 = = = Skilled workers = = = 
 Most specialized technical workers are American or Western European , and are occupied particularly in the defence and petrochemical industries . Westerners generally feel that they are paid well and have excellent living conditions and housing with schooling paid for by their employers . They often live in compounds or gated communities , such as the Saudi Aramco compound at Dhahran Camp . However , many Westerners left the country in 2003 and 2004 following the terrorist attacks in Riyadh , Khobar and Yanbu . A significant number of U.S. workers are English teachers . 
 Additionally Egyptians have long migrated to Saudi Arabia to take up professional jobs such as doctors , nurses , teachers and engineers , as have Filipinos to work in the health , oil and manufacturing sectors . 
 = = = Domestic workers = = = 
 According to The Guardian , as of 2013 there were more than half a million foreign @-@ born domestic workers in Saudi Arabia . Most have backgrounds in poverty and come from Africa , the Indian subcontinent and Southeast Asia . To go to work in Saudi Arabia , they must often pay large sums to recruitment agencies in their home countries . The agencies then handle the necessary legal paperwork . Some falsify their dates of birth , allowing them easier access to the country . These workers can bring much @-@ needed capital to their home countries , sometimes in the billions of dollars . 
 = = Restrictions = = 
 All visitors to Saudi Arabia must have a sponsor , which is usually arranged months in advance . Unlike countries which recognize the Universal Declaration of Human Rights ( which declares in part " Everyone has the right to leave any country , including his own " ) Saudi Arabia requires foreign workers to have their sponsor 's permission to enter and leave the country , and denies exit to those with work disputes pending in court . Sponsors generally confiscate passports while workers are in the country ; sometimes employers also hold passports of workers ' family members . Foreign workers must be free of infectious disease , including HIV . 
 = = Abuse and scandals = = 
 Many domestic servants in Saudi Arabia are treated adequately , but there have been numerous cases of abuse . Foreign workers have been raped , exploited , under- or unpaid , physically abused , overworked and locked in their places of employment . The international organisation Human Rights Watch ( HRW ) describes these conditions as " near @-@ slavery " and attributes them to " deeply rooted gender , religious , and racial discrimination " . In many cases the workers are unwilling to report their employers for fear of losing their jobs or further abuse . Other forms of general discrimination , such as a lack of freedom of religion for non @-@ Sunni Muslims , are also applicable . 
 Some American English teachers have complained they were not informed of a 90 @-@ day probation period . 
 According to a spokesperson from HRW , Saudi Arabian law does not provide strong legal protection for migrant workers and housemaids . As such , they face " arbitrary arrests , unfair trials and harsh punishments " and may falsely be accused of crime . Amnesty International reports that those charged are often unable to follow the court proceedings , as they are often unable to speak the language and are not given interpreters or legal counsel . Foreign workers have been charged with various crimes , including theft , murder and " black magic " . After a worker is convicted and sentenced to death , in many cases the worker 's home government is not notified . When the country 's representatives are notified , it is often difficult for them to argue for a commutation of sentence . Efforts by the Indonesian government in 2011 , for example , required the victims ' families to grant clemency and be given diyya ( " blood money " ) in the millions of <unk> before the Saudi government would consider the case . As of January 2013 , the majority of foreign workers held on death row in Saudi Arabia come from Indonesia . 
 These conditions have sparked condemnation both inside and outside of Saudi Arabia . In 2002 , Grand Mufti Abdul @-@ <unk> ibn <unk> <unk> ash @-@ Shaikh argued that Islam required employers to honour their contracts and not intimidate , blackmail or threaten their workers . 
 Several executions have sparked international outcries . In June 2011 <unk> <unk> <unk> , an Indonesian maid , was beheaded for killing her employer 's wife , reportedly after years of abuse . A video of the execution , posted online , prompted extensive criticism . In September 2011 a Sudanese migrant worker was beheaded for " sorcery " , an execution which Amnesty International condemned as " appalling " . In January 2013 a Sri Lankan maid named <unk> <unk> was beheaded after she was convicted of murdering a child under her care , an occurrence which she attributed to the infant choking . The execution drew international condemnation of the government 's practices and led Sri Lanka to recall its ambassador . These are not isolated cases . According to figures by Amnesty International , in 2010 at least 27 migrant workers were executed and , as of January 2013 , more than 45 foreign maids were on death row awaiting execution . 
 = Vlaams Blok = 
 The Vlaams Blok ( English : Flemish Block , or VB ) was a Belgian far @-@ right and secessionist political party with an anti @-@ immigration platform . Its ideologies embraced Flemish nationalism , calling for the independence of Flanders . From its creation in 1978 , it was the most notable militant right wing of the Flemish movement . Vlaams Blok 's track record in the Flemish and Belgian parliament elections was strong . The election campaigns consisted mainly of the immigration and law @-@ and @-@ order theme , combined with the desire for Flemish autonomy . 
 All significant Flemish political parties were reluctant to enter coalitions with the Vlaams Blok . Following a 1989 agreement , known as the cordon sanitaire , the party was effectively blocked from entering any level of government . The Court of Appeal in Ghent in April 2004 ruled that some of the party 's organizations had breached the 1981 anti @-@ racism law and that the party sanctioned discrimination . The ruling was made definite on 9 November 2004 , and the party shortly after reorganised itself as the Vlaams Belang . By 2004 , the party had arguably become the single most popular Flemish party in Belgium , supported by about one in four of the Flemish electorate , as well as being one of the most successful radical right @-@ wing populist parties in Europe as a whole . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Background , Flemish Movement = = = 
 The Vlaams Blok originated from the loose Flemish Movement , which historically has included an array of organisations seeking , to varying degrees , to promote Flanders . In the second half of the nineteenth century , Flemish nationalists operated within the established political parties , and had close ties with the political left . The early organised political expression of Flemish nationalism was triggered by World War I , and the introduction of universal suffrage and proportional representation in elections . The main party that initially represented the movement was the left @-@ wing nationalist Front Party , founded by former soldiers and sympathizers from the trench wars in Flanders Fields disaffected with their French @-@ speaking , often anti @-@ Flemish , officers that had been unable to communicate with their troops . From the 1930s , the main party became the Flemish National Union which turned to collaborate with the Nazis during World War II , as they had promised them increased Flemish autonomy . These circumstances would compromise the re @-@ emergence of Flemish nationalism after the war , although only a faction of the broader movement had actually pursued an agenda of collaboration . 
 The direct predecessor to the Vlaams Blok was the People 's Union , which was founded in 1954 as the successor to the Christian Flemish People 's Union electoral alliance , that had successfully run for election earlier the same year . The party had been careful to choose its leaders from nationalist circles that had not collaborated with the Nazis . While Flemish separatists had been suspicious of the People 's Union since its outset , it became clear by the 1970s that the party had moved to a moderate left @-@ liberal course , which led to the defection of its more radical members . The remaining nationalist hardliners finally rejected the party 's participation in a new five @-@ party government coalition in 1977 , and particularly the Egmont pact , believing it had conceded too much to the francophone government parties . 
 = = = Early years ( 1978 – 1988 ) = = = 
 In late 1977 , the rejection of the Egmont pact by the hardliner faction of the People 's Union led to the establishment of two new ( short @-@ lived ) parties ; the radical nationalist Flemish National Party ( <unk> ) and the national liberal Flemish People 's Party ( <unk> ) , respectively led by Karel Dillen and Lode Claes . The parties contested the 1978 general elections in a coalition called " Vlaams Blok " , where they won 1 @.@ 4 % of the vote and one seat in the Chamber of Representatives ( taken by Dillen ) . On 28 May 1979 , the <unk> and <unk> finally merged to form a new party named Vlaams Blok , and Dillen was nominated to be the party 's leader for life . The party initially recruited its members from Flemish nationalist organisations , such as the Taal <unk> <unk> , <unk> , Were Di , and the Order of Flemish Militants , while some local groups also simply turned into local branches of the Vlaams Blok . In its inception , the party was widely regarded as a conservative separatist party , rather than an extreme right @-@ wing party . 
 The party did not have much electoral success at first , and was stable at one seat in the 1981 general elections . It stood candidates in very few communities , and was active almost entirely in the city of Antwerp . Having been founded mainly as a protest against the Egmont pact , the party revamped and broadened its platform after the pact collapsed . It did not make much progress in the 1985 general elections , and Dillen thus started the so @-@ called " Operation Rejuvenation " , allowing for an across @-@ the @-@ board change of the party leadership , integrating many leaders of nationalist youth and student organisations into the party council . The party 's youth organisation , the Vlaams Blok <unk> ( <unk> ) , was founded in 1987 by among others Filip Dewinter and Frank Vanhecke . 
 Starting in 1983 , the Vlaams Blok increasingly began focusing on immigration ( inspired by the success of other European right @-@ wing populist parties ) , and on the international day against racism in 1984 held its first conference to discuss the " foreigner problem . " The same year , Dillen proposed a bill in the Chamber of Representatives to offer cash incentive for immigrants to return to their native country . In April 1987 , a group around Roger <unk> of the only right @-@ wing competitor to the Vlaams Blok , the anti @-@ tax Respect for Labour and Democracy , switched to the party . The party campaigned for the 1987 general election with the slogan " Own people first " ( Eigen volk eerst ! , inspired by French National Front slogan " The French first " ) , and saw a slight victory , winning their first seat in Senate ( taken by Dillen ) , and for the first time two seats in the Chamber ( Dewinter and Annemans ) . The party 's shift towards focusing on immigration was however criticised by some Vlaams Blok members , and ultimately also led to the defection of some top party figures . The party nevertheless made a clear choice of focussing on the immigration issue , which had , and would , give results in elections . 
 = = = Rise of the party ( 1988 – 2004 ) = = = 
 The electoral success of the Vlaams Blok began after the younger generation in the party shifted the party 's emphasis from Flemish nationalism ( separatism ) to the immigration issue . In the 1988 local election in Antwerp the party first started to take off , going from 5 @.@ 5 % of the vote in the city to 17 @.@ 7 % , a success which drew much publicity . On 10 May 1989 , based on the Antwerp success , the presidents of all major Belgian parties ( including the People 's Union ) signed a cordon sanitaire ( hygienic barrier ) , where the parties agreed to never conclude any political agreements with the Vlaams Blok , nor make immigration a political issue . While the Vlaams Blok itself also largely rejected cooperation with other parties , it did increasingly consider such cooperation , particularly in elections in 1994 , 1999 and 2000 , only to find themselves effectively blocked by the cordon sanitaire . Although intended to keep the Vlaams Blok from gaining political influence , many argued that the agreement in reality gave room for the strong electoral surge for the party , as it was made into what could be seen as the only " true opposition . " The agreement was renewed in following years , and Vlaams Blok chairman Karel Dillen was used to call it the " insurance policy " of his party ; 
 " I was basically very happy with its existence . There was something a bit too much about it : everybody against us . If the sense is that there is a hunt out for us , then this will only drive people to take the side of the outlaw . " 
 In December 1988 , a major split occurred in the party , when a group who opposed the " Operation Rejuvenation " tried to squeeze the Dewinter @-@ <unk> faction out of the party leadership . Led by Geert Wouters , he accused Dewinter 's faction of being " <unk> " , and of attempting to sideline the Flemish question to rather favour the immigration question . Dillen however sided with Dewinter , and Wouters and his group left the party and founded the nationalist pressure group called the Nationalist Association @-@ Dutch People ’ s Movement . In 1989 , the party won a seat in the Brussels city council , as well as in the European Parliament . There , the Vlaams Blok agreed to form a parliamentary group together with the French National Front and the German The Republicans , called the Technical Group of the European Right . The group lacked an ideological coherence ( stemming in part from Le Pen 's support for a Belgian state nationalism ) , and was largely organised on pragmatic grounds simply to get financial support . 
 In the 1991 general election , the Vlaams Blok for the first time surpassed the People 's Union , going from two to 12 seats in the Chamber , and from one to five seats in the Senate , in what was afterwards referred to by its opponents as " Black Sunday " . In the following years , the party saw a systematic upwards trend in all elections it participated in . In July 1992 , the first Vlaams Blok motion was accepted in the Flemish Parliament , which rejected the right of francophone inhabitants in Flemish Brabant and <unk> to vote for Wallon institutions . In late 1992 , it was announced that <unk> Neel , a popular Antwerp city councillor for 22 years for the Socialist Party went over to the Vlaams Blok , thereby causing the SP and CVP to lose their majority in the city council . In 1992 , the party ideologue Filip Dewinter and chairman Karel Dillen established the party 's comprehensive immigration program , titled the 70 @-@ point plan . The plan sought to close the borders towards non @-@ European immigrants , gradually repatriate those already in the country , and implement an " own people first " principle in all policy areas . Over the course of the 1990s , the party however increasingly distanced itself from the plan as it had alienated the party from gaining political influence , until it was finally officially discarded in 2000 . 
 In the 1994 European election , the party doubled its seats ( Dillen and Vanhecke ) with 12 @.@ 6 % of the vote , but failed to continue a European Right group , due to other nationalist parties having dropped out of the parliament , or refusing to join a group . National Front and Vlaams Blok MEPs nevertheless established an " alliance " called The Coordination of the European Right . In 1996 , party leader Karel Dillen , who had been nominated to hold his position for life , stepped down and personally appointed Frank Vanhecke as his successor . The choice of Vanhecke was seen a compromise between the Flemish nationalist wing around Annemans and the <unk> wing around Dewinter , thus avoiding a potential internal struggle . In 1999 , elections were scheduled for the European Parliament , the Chamber of Representatives and Senate and the Flemish Parliament , where the Vlaams Blok overtook the position as the third largest Flemish party , winning more than 15 % of the vote in all elections , and a total of 45 seats in the various parliaments . 
 The Vlaams Blok continued to be particularly strong in and around Antwerp , where it received as much as 33 % of the vote in the 2000 local elections . In 2001 , the party was forced to alter its political program , as according to the laws for party financing , it was not compatible with the European Treaty on Human Rights . In the 2004 Flemish Parliament election , the party finally became the single largest party group in parliament . The party was invited by the <unk> for government discussions , only to find that its differences with the other parties was insurmountable , resulting in the three traditional parties forming a majority government , retaining the cordon sanitaire . By this time , the party had nevertheless become the very most popular Flemish party in Belgium , being supported by about one in four of the Flemish electorate . 
 = = = Court of Cassation ruling ( 2004 ) = = = 
 In October 2000 , the Centre for Equal Opportunities and Opposition to Racism , together with the Dutch @-@ speaking Human Rights League in Belgium registered a complaint at the Correctional Court , in which they claimed that three non @-@ profit organisations connected to the Vlaams Blok ( its education and research office and the " National Broadcasting Corporation " ) had violated the 1981 anti @-@ racism law . The publications which were referred to included its 1999 election agenda and 1997 party platform . The challenged passages included those where the party called for a separate education system for foreign children , a special tax for employers employing non @-@ European foreigners , and a restriction of unemployment benefits and child allowances for non @-@ European foreigners . 
 In June 2001 , the Brussels Correctional Court declared itself incompetent to hear the case , as it related to political misconduct . In February 2003 , the Brussels Appellate Court followed and gave a similar judgement . The original plaintiffs then appealed , and the case was sent to the Court of Appeals in Ghent , which upheld the complaint ; the Vlaams Blok non @-@ profit organisations were fined , and it was deemed that the Vlaams Blok was an organisation that sanctioned discrimination . The Vlaams Blok lodged an appeal which was rejected , and in November 2004 , the ruling was made definite , when it was upheld by the Court of Cassation . The ruling meant that the party would lose access to state funding and access to television , effectively shutting the party down . 
 = = = = Reactions = = = = 
 The whole trial was seen by some as a political trial , inspired by the Belgian establishment . The federal parliament had notably amended the Constitution in order to create legal possibilities to condemn the party . The Vlaams Blok also pointed at the problem of political nomination of judges , and again claimed that the lawsuit had been a political process coordinated with the Belgian Ministry of the Interior . 
 The leadership of the Vlaams Blok seized the occasion of the ban to dissolve the party , and start afresh under a new name . Five days later , on 14 November , the Vlaams Blok disbanded itself , and a new party with the name Vlaams Belang was established . ( Other proposed names included the Flemish People 's Party and Flemish Freedom Front . ) The new party instituted a number of changes in its political program , carefully moderating some of the more extreme positions of the former Vlaams Blok . Nevertheless , the party leadership made it clear that the party would fundamentally remain the same . 
 Professor Lamine ( <unk> ) , a former Vlaams Blok member and " advisor " of the party 's legal team , claimed that the party , for propaganda reasons , purposely undertook a weak defence , in order to lose the case ; " For the party leaders , losing was much more interesting . Winning just wasn 't an option . " Lamine himself had earlier stated that the party should have carried the trial to the European Court of Human Rights , but Vlaams Blok senator Joris Van <unk> had already stated in 2005 , that ; " If we had gone to Strasbourg [ ECHR ] based on procedural arguments , we might have had a case . But Lamine already put in a private claim to overturn the Appeals Court verdict , on the basis of substantive arguments . If Vlaams Belang were to put forth a claim against the verdict as well , at Strasbourg , the Court will bundle both cases . Then we would lose the case for sure . Lamine has thus given us the final blow . " 
 = = Ideology = = 
 The main ideological and political strategies of the Vlaams Blok started out with its radical nationalist rejection of the People 's Union compromise on the Flemish autonomy issue , later to be followed by focus on immigration and security , exploitation of corruption and other scandals , and defense of traditional values . While the party was legitimized first and foremost by its defense of Flemish interests , its voters were mainly motivated by anti @-@ immigration and anti @-@ establishment protest . 
 = = = Flemish nationalism = = = 
 The main issue for the party was Flemish nationalism , and most issues that were added later , were in some way also connected to this . The Flemish nationalism promoted by the party ( <unk> ) was according to its program " based on the ethnic community being a naturally occurring entity whose cultural , material , ethical and intellectual interests need to be preserved . " While the party primarily worked for an independent Flemish state ( modeling the split on that of Czechoslovakia ) , it for a long time also promoted the idea that the new state should merge with the Netherlands , and establish a Dutch @-@ speaking federation ( Greater Netherlands ) . From the 1990s however , the latter idea was downplayed by the party , as the Netherlands then turned into a " permissive , multicultural and social @-@ democratic state " according to one scholar ( although this Dutch political situation would be sharply overturned in the 2000s ) . 
 = = = Immigration , minorities = = = 
 Immigration became an important issue for the Vlaams Blok from the late 1980s . Interconnected with the Flemish nationalism issue , immigrants were considered to be a threat to the Flemish ethnic community . In 1992 , the party established its 70 @-@ point plan , which included measures to stop all immigration , return most immigrants to their native countries by force , and legally discriminate against residing migrants in respect of markets such as labour , housing and education . The party 's opponents particularly saw its immigration program as a source of claims of racism , and the party thus in its latest years downplayed the relevance of the 70 @-@ point plan , and softened its written positions regarding immigration . 
 Concerns about crime and security was also linked to immigration , as the party particularly blamed Turks and Moroccans for various criminal activity , and sought a zero tolerance approach regarding law and order . The party was also strongly anti @-@ Islamic from early on , and in its 1993 program regarded Islam as " a doctrine , which preaches holy war , assassination , forced conversions , oppression of women , slavery and extermination of " infidels " , [ which ] will automatically lead to what we now call fundamentalism . " The party was anti @-@ Muslim and portrayed Muslims as fifth column of a cruel and expansionist religion , and after the 1990 Gulf War called on the government to introduce measures to keep Belgium from being <unk> . 
 The party was according to political scientist Cas Mudde only very rarely accused of anti @-@ Semitism – and even then , it was strongly condemned by the party leadership . When Roeland Raes cast doubt on the scale of the Holocaust in a television interview in 2001 for instance , the party leadership immediately called an emergency meeting , distanced itself from him and forced him to resign . The party also took screening measures against its local candidates to reveal any possible extremist connections , and rather wanted to risk not being able to fill its lists , rather than filling them with extremists . Particularly , the party wanted to distance itself from Holocaust denial , as it actively sought to reach out to Jewish voters in Antwerp . 
 = = = Anti @-@ establishment = = = 
 Another element in the ideology of the party was a populist fight against the political establishment , often manifested through political scandals which flourished in 1990s Belgium ; including corruption , food and even pedophile scandals . These included the Agusta scandal and the Marc <unk> affair . The usual suspects were politicians in the three traditional party families ; especially the francophone parties . 
 = = = Economy = = = 
 The party had no strong economic preferences , and generally supported a mixed economy . While it supported privatisation and tax reductions for small and medium businesses , it also sometimes supported protectionism and defended the welfare state , especially if allocated to the native Flemish population . 
 = = = Foreign policy = = = 
 The party was the only major Belgian party that opposed Belgium 's membership of the European Union , as well as the idea of a federal Europe itself . It however defended a con @-@ federal Europe based on sovereign culturally homogeneous nation @-@ states . The European issue was however not an issue the party promoted much . 
 It also favoured the abolition of the United Nations , citing ; " The illogical composition of the Security Council . The unwieldy bureaucracy . The democratic deficit . " The party did also not have any faith in such a world community or international legal system , questioning the entire logic behind the UN . It rejected the view of any international consensus about concepts as democracy , justice , freedom and human rights , especially since most of its member countries are non @-@ Western and undemocratic . 
 = = International relations = = 
 The Vlaams Blok maintained good contacts with nationalist parties throughout Europe and other countries . The Vlaams Blok did traditionally have the closest contacts with Dutch and South African far @-@ right groups , including the Dutch Centre Party ' 86 , the Centre Democrats and <unk> , and the South African <unk> Party . In the mid @-@ 1980s , it also established close relations particularly with the French National Front , as well as the German People 's Union , The Republicans and National Democratic Party of Germany . In the 1990s , it supported the minor Dutch Block party , which had modeled itself directly on the Vlaams Blok . 
 The party also became very active in establishing contacts with post @-@ communist parties in Eastern European countries , including the Croatian Party of Rights , Slovak National Party and IMRO – Bulgarian National Movement . While not keeping official contacts , it was in addition very supportive of left @-@ wing nationalist parties such as the Scottish National Party , Irish Sinn Féin and Basque Herri Batasuna . Some of the parties it established contacts with most recently was the Freedom Party of Austria and the Italian Lega Nord , which after a period of distrust , maintained contacts since 2002 . 
 = = Election results = = 
 Note that the election results in elections other than those for the Flemish Parliament ( and the Dutch @-@ speaking electoral college in the European Parliament ) gives a somewhat wrong image of the party 's support , given that the party only ran in Flanders , the one half of Belgium . 
 = = = Chamber of Representatives = = = 
 = = = Senate = = = 
 = = = Flemish Parliament = = = 
 = = = European Parliament = = = 
 Results in the Dutch @-@ speaking electoral college is given in the parenthesis . 
 = Horace Silver = 
 Horace Ward Martin Tavares Silver ( September 2 , 1928 – June 18 , 2014 ) was an American jazz pianist , composer , and arranger , particularly in the hard bop style that he helped pioneer in the 1950s . 
 After playing tenor saxophone and piano at school in Connecticut , Silver got his break on piano when his trio was recruited by Stan Getz in 1950 . Silver soon moved to New York City , where he developed a reputation as a composer and for his bluesy playing . Frequent sideman recordings in the mid @-@ 1950s helped further , but it was his work with the Jazz Messengers , co @-@ led by Art Blakey , that brought both his writing and playing most attention . Their Horace Silver and the Jazz Messengers album contained Silver 's first hit , " The Preacher " . After leaving Blakey in 1956 , Silver formed his own quintet , with what became the standard small group line @-@ up of tenor saxophone , trumpet , piano , bass , and drums . Their public performances and frequent recordings for Blue Note Records increased Silver 's popularity , even through changes of personnel . His most successful album was Song for My Father , made with two iterations of the quintet in 1963 and 1964 . 
 Several changes occurred in the early 1970s : Silver disbanded his group to spend more time with his wife and to concentrate on composing ; he included lyrics in his recordings ; and his interest in spiritualism developed . The last two of these were often combined , resulting in commercially unsuccessful releases such as The United States of Mind series . Silver left Blue Note after 28 years , founded his own record label , and scaled back his touring in the 1980s , relying in part on royalties from his compositions for income . In 1993 , he returned to major record labels , releasing five albums before gradually withdrawing from public view because of health problems . 
 As a player , Silver transitioned from bebop to hard bop by stressing melody rather than complex harmony , and combined clean and often humorous right @-@ hand lines with darker notes and chords in a near @-@ perpetual left @-@ hand rumble . His compositions similarly emphasized catchy melodies , but often also contained dissonant harmonies . Many of his varied repertoire of songs , including Doodlin ' , Peace , and Sister Sadie , became jazz standards that are still widely played . His considerable legacy encompasses his influence on other pianists and composers , and the development of young jazz talents who appeared in his bands over the course of four decades . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Silver was born on September 2 , 1928 , in Norwalk , Connecticut . His mother , Gertrude , was from Connecticut ; his father , John Tavares Silver , was born on the island of Maio , Cape Verde , and emigrated to the United States as a young man . She was a maid and sang in a church choir ; he worked for a tire company . Horace had a much older half @-@ brother , Eugene Fletcher , from his mother 's first marriage , and was the third child for his parents , after John , who lived to 6 months , and Maria , who was stillborn . 
 Silver began playing the piano in his childhood and had classical music lessons . His father taught him the folk music of Cape Verde . At the age of 11 Silver became interested in becoming a musician , after hearing the Jimmie Lunceford orchestra . His early piano influences included the styles of boogie @-@ woogie and the blues , the pianists Nat King Cole , Thelonious Monk , Bud Powell , Art Tatum , and Teddy Wilson , as well as some jazz horn players . 
 Silver graduated from St. Mary 's Grammar School in 1943 . From ninth grade he played Lester Young @-@ influenced tenor saxophone in the Norwalk High School band and orchestra . Silver played gigs locally on both piano and tenor saxophone while still at school . He was rejected for military service by a draft board examination that concluded that he had an excessively curved spine . Around 1946 he moved to Hartford , Connecticut to take up a regular job as pianist in a nightclub . 
 = = Later life and career = = 
 = = = 1950 – 55 = = = 
 Silver 's break came in 1950 , when his trio backed saxophonist Stan Getz at a club in Hartford : Getz liked Silver 's band and recruited them to tour with him . The saxophonist also gave Silver his recording debut , in December 1950 , for the Stan Getz Quartet album . After about a year , Silver was replaced as pianist in Getz 's band and he moved to New York City . There , working as a freelance , he quickly built a reputation , based on his compositions and bluesy playing . He worked for short periods with tenor saxophonists Young and Coleman Hawkins , before meeting <unk> Lou Donaldson , with whom he developed his bebop understanding . Donaldson made his first recording on Blue Note Records in 1952 , with Silver on piano , Gene Ramey on bass and Art Taylor on drums . Later that year , another Blue Note quartet session was booked for Donaldson , with Art Blakey replacing Taylor , but the saxophonist withdrew and producer – owner Alfred Lion offered Silver the studio time for a trio recording . Most of the tracks recorded at it were Silver originals , and he went on to stay with Blue Note as a leader for the following 28 years . 
 Silver was also busy recording as a sideman . In 1953 , he was pianist on sessions led by Sonny Stitt , Howard McGhee , and Al Cohn , and , the following year , he played on albums by Art Farmer , Miles Davis , Milt Jackson and others . Silver won the Down Beat critics ' new star award for piano players in 1954 , and appeared at the first Newport Jazz Festival , substituting for John Lewis in the Modern Jazz Quartet . Silver 's early 1950s recordings demonstrate that Powell was a major pianistic influence , but this had waned by the middle of the decade . 
 In New York , Silver and Blakey co @-@ founded the Jazz Messengers , a cooperatively @-@ run group that initially recorded under various leaders and names . Their first two studio recordings , with Hank Mobley on tenor saxophone , Kenny Dorham on trumpet , and Doug Watkins on bass , were made in late 1954 and early 1955 and were released as two 10 @-@ inch albums under Silver 's name , then soon thereafter as the 12 @-@ inch Horace Silver and the Jazz Messengers . This album contained Silver 's first hit , " The Preacher " . Unusually in Silver 's career , recordings of concert performances were also released at this time , involving quintets at Birdland ( 1954 ) and the Café Bohemia ( 1955 ) . This set of studio and concert recordings was pivotal in the development and defining of hard bop , which combined elements of blues , gospel , and R & B , with bebop @-@ based harmony and rhythm . The new , funky hard bop was commercially popular , and helped to establish Blue Note as a successful business . 
 = = = 1956 – 69 = = = 
 Silver 's final recordings with the Jazz Messengers were in May 1956 . Later that year , he left Blakey after one and a half years , in part because of the heroin use prevalent in the band , which Silver did not want to be involved in . Soon after leaving , Silver formed his own long @-@ term quintet , after receiving offers of work from club owners who had heard his albums . The first line @-@ up was Mobley ( tenor saxophone ) , Farmer ( trumpet ) , Watkins ( bass ) , and Louis Hayes ( drums ) . The quintet , with various line @-@ ups , continued to record , helping Silver to build his reputation . He wrote almost all of the material they played , and , in concert , he " won over the crowds through his affable personality and all @-@ action approach . He crouched over the piano as the sweat poured out , with his forelock brushing the keys and his feet pounding . " 
 After more than a dozen sideman recording sessions in 1955 and a similar number in 1956 – 57 , Silver 's appearance on Sonny Rollins , Vol . 2 in April 1957 was his last for another leader , as he opted to concentrate on his own band . For several years from the late 1950s , this contained Junior Cook ( tenor saxophone ) , Blue Mitchell ( trumpet ) , Gene Taylor ( bass ) , and either Hayes or Roy Brooks ( drums ) . Their first album was Finger Poppin ' , in 1959 . Silver 's tour of Japan early in 1962 led to the album The Tokyo Blues , recorded later that year . By the early 1960s , Silver 's quintet had influenced numerous bandleaders and was among the most popular performers at jazz clubs . They also released singles , including " Blowin ' the Blues Away " , " Juicy Lucy " , and " Sister Sadie " , for jukebox and radio play . This quintet 's sixth and final album was Silver 's Serenade , in 1963 . 
 Around this time , Silver composed music for a television commercial for the drink Tab . Early in 1964 , Silver visited Brazil for three weeks , an experience he credited with increasing his interest in his heritage . In the same year , he created a new quintet , featuring Joe Henderson on tenor saxophone and <unk> Jones on trumpet . This band recorded most of Silver 's best @-@ known album , Song for My Father , which reached No. 95 on the Billboard 200 in 1965 , and was added to the Grammy Hall of Fame in 1999 . Recordings and personnel changes – sometimes expanding the band to a sextet – continued in the mid @-@ 1960s . In 1966 , The Cape Verdean Blues charted at No. 130 . The liner notes to the album Serenade to a Soul Sister ( 1968 ) included lyrics ( written but not sung ) , indicating a new interest for Silver . His quintet , by then including saxophonist Bennie Maupin , trumpeter Randy Brecker , and drummer Billy Cobham , toured parts of Europe in October and November 1968 , sponsored by the U.S. government . They also recorded one of Silver 's last quintet albums for Blue Note , You Gotta Take a Little Love . The Penguin Guide to Jazz 's retrospective summary of Silver 's main Blue Note recordings was that they were of a consistently high standard : " each album yields one or two themes that haunt the mind , each usually has a particularly pretty ballad , and they all lay back on a deep pile of solid riffs and workmanlike solos . " 
 = = = 1970 – 80 = = = 
 At the end of 1970 , Silver broke up his regular band , to concentrate on composing and to spend more time with his wife . He had met Barbara Jean Dove in 1968 and married her two years later . They had a son , Gregory . Silver also became increasingly interested in spiritualism from the early 1970s . 
 Silver included lyrics in more of his compositions at this point , although these were sometimes regarded as doggerel or proselytizing . The first album to contain vocals , That <unk> ' Feelin ' ( 1970 ) , was commercially unsuccessful and Silver had to insist on the support of Blue Note executives to continue releasing music of the same , new style . They agreed to a further two albums that contained vocals and Silver on an RMI electric keyboard ; the three were later compiled as The United States of Mind , but were soon dropped from the catalog . 
 Silver reformed a touring band in 1973 . This contained brothers Michael and Randy Brecker . Around this time , according to saxophonist Dave Liebman , Silver 's reputation among aspiring young jazz musicians was that he was " a little – not commercial , but not quite the real deal [ in jazz ] . " Silver and his family decided to move to California around 1974 , after a burglary at their New York City apartment while they were in Europe . The couple divorced in the mid @-@ 1970s . 
 In 1975 , he recorded Silver ' n Brass , the first of five Silver ' n albums , which had other instruments added to the quintet . The personnel in his band continued to change , and continued to contain young musicians who made telling contributions . One of these was trumpeter Tom Harrell , who stayed from 1973 to 1977 . Silver 's pattern in the late 1970s was to tour for six months a year . His final Blue Note album was Silver ' n Strings , recorded in 1978 and 1979 . His stay was the longest in the label 's history . By Silver 's account , he left Blue Note after its parent company was sold and the new owners were not interested in promoting jazz . In 1980 , he formed the record label Silveto , " dedicated to the spiritual , holistic , self @-@ help elements in music " , he commented . Silver also formed Emerald at the same time , a label for straight @-@ ahead jazz , but it was short @-@ lived . 
 = = = 1981 – 98 = = = 
 The first Silveto release was Guides to Growing Up in 1981 , which contained recitations from actor and comedian Bill Cosby . Silver stated in the same year that he had reduced his touring to four months a year , so that he could spend more time with his son . This also meant that he had to audition for new band members on an annual basis . He continued to write lyrics for his new albums , although these were not always included on the recordings themselves . The song titles reflected his spiritual , self @-@ help thinking ; for example , <unk> the Senses from 1983 included " Seeing with Perception " and " Moving Forward with Confidence " . The next albums were There 's No Need to Struggle ( 1983 ) and The Continuity of Spirit ( 1985 ) . His band for performances in the UK and elsewhere in 1987 included trumpeter Dave Douglas and saxophonist Vincent Herring . Douglas reported that Silver seldom gave direct verbal guidelines about the music , preferring to lead through playing . A revival of interest in more traditional forms of jazz in the 1980s largely passed Silver by , and his albums on Silveto were not critical successes . Its last release was Music to Ease Your Disease , in 1988 . By the early 1990s Silver did not often play at jazz festivals , but his need to tour was limited , as he received steady <unk> from his songbook . 
 Rockin ' with Rachmaninoff , a musical work featuring dancers and narration , written by Silver and choreographed and directed by Donald <unk> , was staged in Los Angeles in 1991 . A recording of the work was released on Bop City Records in 2003 . After a decade of trying to make his independent label work , Silver abandoned it in 1993 , and signed to Columbia Records . This also signalled a return to mostly instrumental releases . The first of these , It 's Got to Be Funky , was a rare big band album . Silver came close to dying soon after its release : he was hospitalized with a previously undiagnosed blood clot problem , but went on to record Pencil <unk> ' Papa , containing a six @-@ piece brass section , in 1994 . That year , he also played as a guest on Dee Dee Bridgewater 's album Love and Peace : A Tribute to Horace Silver . 
 Silver received a National Endowment for the Arts Jazz Masters award in 1995 , and in the following year was added to Down Beat 's Jazz Hall of Fame . He moved from Columbia to Impulse ! Records , where he made the septet The <unk> <unk> ( 1996 ) and the quintet A Prescription for the Blues ( 1997 ) . The former was nominated for two Grammy Awards : as an album for best instrumental performance , individual or group ; and for Silver 's solo on " <unk> ' on Dexter " . He was again unwell in 1997 , so was unable to tour to promote his records . His final studio recording was made in the following year – Jazz Has a Sense of Humor , for Verve Records . One continuation from his early career was that Silver recorded his own compositions for his later albums and they were typically new , rather than re @-@ workings of previous releases . 
 = = = 1999 – 2014 = = = 
 Silver performed in public for the first time in four years in 2004 , appearing with an octet at the Blue Note Jazz Club in New York . He was not often seen in public after this . In 2005 , the National Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences awarded him its President 's Merit Award . In 2006 , Let 's Get to the Nitty Gritty : The Autobiography of Horace Silver , was published by the University of California Press . A 2008 release , Live at Newport ' 58 , from a Silver concert fifty years earlier , reached the top ten of Billboard 's jazz chart . 
 In 2007 , it was revealed that Silver had Alzheimer 's disease . He died of natural causes in New Rochelle , New York on June 18 , 2014 . He was survived by his son . 
 = = Playing style = = 
 Silver 's early recordings displayed " a crisp , chipper but slightly wayward style , idiosyncratic enough to take him out of the increasingly stratified realms of bebop " . In contrast to the more elaborate bebop piano , he stressed straightforward melodies rather than complex harmonies , and included short riffs and motifs that came and went over the course of a solo . While his right hand provided cleanly played lines , his left added bouncy , darker notes and chords in a near @-@ perpetual rumble . Silver " always played <unk> , rarely suggesting excessive force on the keys but mustering a crisp [ ... ] sound . " His fingering was idiosyncratic , but this added to the individuality of his pianism , particularly to the authenticity of the blues facets of his playing . The Penguin Guide to Jazz gave the overall assessment that " Blues and gospel @-@ tinged devices and percussive attacks give his methods a more colourful style , and a generous good humour gives all his records an upbeat feel . " Part of the humor was Silver 's predilection for quoting other pieces of music in his own playing . 
 Writer and academic Thomas Owens stated that characteristics of Silver 's solos were : " the short , simple phrases that all derive from the three @-@ beat figure ♩ ♩ | ♩ , or a variant of it ; the pianist 's ' blue fifth ' ( those rapid slurs up to [ ... a flattened fifth ] ) ; and the low tone cluster used strictly as a rhythmic punctuation " . He also employed blues and minor pentatonic scales . Music journalist Marc Myers observed that " Silver 's advantage was pianistic grace and a keen awareness that by resolving dark , minor @-@ passages in airy , ascending and descending major @-@ key chord configurations , the result could produce an exciting and uplifting feeling . " In his accompanying of a soloing saxophonist or trumpeter , Silver was also distinctive : " Rather than reacting to the soloist 's melody and waiting for melodic holes to fill , he typically plays background patterns similar to the background riffs that saxes or brasses play behind soloists in big bands . " 
 = = Compositions = = 
 Early in his career , Silver composed <unk> and blues @-@ based melodies ( including " Doodlin ' " and " Opus de Funk " ) . The latter was " a typical Silver creation : advanced in its harmonic structure and general approach but with a catchy tune and finger @-@ snapping beat . " His innovative incorporation of gospel and blues sounds into jazz compositions took place while they were also being added to rock ' n ' roll and R & B pieces . 
 Silver soon expanded the range and style of his writing , which grew to include " funky groove tunes , gentle mood pieces , vamp songs , outings in 3 / 4 and 6 / 8 time , Latin workouts of various stripes , up @-@ tempo jam numbers , and examples of almost any and every other kind of approach congruent with the hard bop aesthetic . " An unusual case is " Peace " , a ballad that prioritizes a calm mood over melodic or harmonic effects . Owens observed that " Many of his compositions contain no folk blues or gospel music elements , but instead have highly chromatic melodies supported by richly dissonant harmonies " . The compositions and arrangements were also designed to make Silver 's typical line @-@ up sound larger than a quintet . 
 Silver himself commented that inspiration came from multiple sources : " I 'm inspired by nature and by some of the people I meet and some of the events that take place in my life . I 'm inspired by my mentors . I 'm inspired by various religious doctrines . [ ... ] Many of my songs are impressed on my mind just before I wake up . Others I get from just <unk> ' around on the piano " . He also wrote that , " when I wake up with a melody in my head , I jump right out of bed before I forget it and run to the piano and my tape recorder . I play the melody with my right hand and then harmonize it with my left . I put it down on my tape recorder , and then I work on getting a bridge or <unk> release for the tune . " 
 = = Influence and legacy = = 
 Silver was among the most influential jazz musicians of his lifetime . Grove Music Online describes his legacy as at least fourfold : as a pioneer of hard bop ; as a user of what became the archetypal quintet instrumentation of tenor saxophone , trumpet , piano , bass , and drums ; as a developer of young musicians who went on to become important players and bandleaders ; and for his skill as a composer and arranger . 
 Silver was also an influence as a pianist : his first Blue Note recording as leader " redefined the jazz piano , which up until then was largely modeled on the dexterity and relentless attack of Bud Powell " , in Myers ' words . As early as 1956 , Silver 's piano playing was described by Down Beat as " a key influence on a large segment of modern jazz pianists . " This went on to include Ramsey Lewis , Les McCann , Bobby Timmons , and Cecil Taylor , who was impressed by Silver 's aggressive style . 
 Silver 's legacy as a composer may be greater than as a pianist , because his works , many of which are jazz standards , continue to be performed and recorded worldwide . As a composer , he led a return to an emphasis on melody , observed critic John S. Wilson : for a long time , jazz musicians had written <unk> of great technical complexity , but " Silver wrote originals that were not only actually original but memorably melodic , presaging a gradual return to melodic creativity among writing <unk> . " 
 = = Discography = = 
 = Eduard von Capelle = 
 Admiral Eduard von Capelle ( 10 October 1855 – 23 February 1931 ) was a German Imperial Navy officer from Celle . He served in the navy from 1872 until his retirement in October , 1918 . During his career , Capelle served in the Reichsmarineamt ( Imperial Navy Office ) , where he was primarily responsible for writing the Fleet Laws that funded the expansion of the High Seas Fleet . By the time he retired , Capelle had risen to the rank of admiral , and had served at the post of state secretary for the Reichsmarineamt . From this post , he oversaw the German naval war during the latter three years of World War I. Capelle retired to Wiesbaden , where he died on 23 February 1931 . 
 = = Early career = = 
 Eduard Capelle was born on 10 October 1855 , in Celle , in what was then the Kingdom of Hanover . His father , Eduard ( 1832 – 1897 ) , was a factory owner , and his mother was Emilie Kraus ( 1831 – 1903 ) ; the younger Eduard had a brother , Hans ( 1864 – 1948 ) , a physicist who served as President of the German Naval Observatory . Capelle joined the Imperial German Navy in 1872 , as a naval cadet . He served in various capacities in the fleet , including in the <unk> ( Torpedo Department ) with Alfred von Tirpitz . In December 1894 , he was serving as the executive officer of the battleship SMS Weissenburg . He was later assigned to the Reichsmarineamt ( RMA ) , the Imperial Navy Office , as the chief of the administrative department . In this capacity , he began to work closely with now @-@ Admiral von Tirpitz , who had been promoted to become the State Secretary for the Navy . Capelle was responsible for drafting the legislation that became the <unk> , the Fleet Laws , and the supplementary laws in 1906 , 1908 , and 1912 . During this period , he and other senior members of the naval command worked repeatedly to break monopolies in the shipbuilding industry , as a means to keep costs low and stable . The only firm that proved resistant to their efforts was Krupp , which held a near monopoly on armor plating and large @-@ caliber guns , and proved to be too powerful for the RMA to effectively pressure . 
 Capelle was promoted to <unk> ( rear admiral ) in 1906 , and to <unk> ( vice admiral ) three years later . In 1912 , Capelle was elevated to the nobility , which allowed him to add " von " to his name . He rose to the rank of admiral in 1913 , and by 1914 , he was Tirpitz 's deputy . During the July Crisis that instigated World War I , Capelle was temporarily the acting state secretary , as Tirpitz was away at his summer home . In this capacity , he endorsed the " blank check " Kaiser Wilhelm II had extended to Austria @-@ Hungary in the aftermath of the assassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand by Serbian terrorists the previous month . With regard to the deepening crisis , Capelle stated that while " many swords will be rattled and much poisonous ink spilled , Europe will not tear itself to pieces over Serbia . 
 = = = World War I = = = 
 By late August 1915 , Capelle had fallen ill , and so requested retirement from the navy , though he agreed to remain in the post until 1 November . In March , 1916 , Capelle was recalled to service and replaced Tirpitz , whose views on the naval war had become unpopular , as the State Secretary for the Navy . Tirpitz had by this point pushed for unrestricted submarine warfare in order to break the deadlock on the Western Front ; Chancellor Theobald von Bethmann @-@ Hollweg , fearing war with the United States , maneuvered to have Tirpitz relieved of command . He meanwhile secured the support of Capelle and brought him out of retirement . Capelle 's position as state secretary was decidedly weaker than under Tirpitz 's tenure ; this was in large part due to the course of the war and the discrediting of the surface fleet policy advocated at first by Tirpitz and then by Capelle . Admiral Paul Behncke , who would later serve as Capelle 's deputy , stated that , " In the Navy , the position of the RMA has become purely administrative , it no longer plays a leading role . " Though Capelle was initially opposed to unrestricted submarine warfare , a group of senior officers led by the commander of the High Seas Fleet , Admiral Reinhard Scheer , convinced Capelle to change his mind , who in turn worked to convince Wilhelm II to permit a return to unrestricted submarine warfare . By January 1917 , Wilhelm II had consented , and Germany resumed the U @-@ boat campaign against Britain on 1 February . The US Congress voted to declare war with Germany on April 6 , 1917 . 
 Even though he agreed to resume the U @-@ boat campaign , Capelle did not believe that submarines had replaced the battleship as the decisive naval weapon , arguing in February 1917 that new battleship construction — that of the L 20 α design — should not be stopped . In order to keep costs down , Capelle announced that the Navy would not build any ships over 41 @,@ 000 t ( 40 @,@ 000 long tons ; 45 @,@ 000 short tons ) displacement or with a draft in excess of 9 @.@ 8 m ( 32 ft ) ; these were the maximum dimensions of the existing harbors and drydocks . Larger designs would require prohibitively expensive dredging on harbors and channels and new docks . Nevertheless , by February 1918 , design work on the new class of battleships had ground to a halt , and Capelle could do nothing about it ; by this far into the war , the U @-@ boat arm had absorbed all of the limited production capabilities of the Navy . Capelle also advocated for shipbuilding contracts with the Ottoman Empire , Germany 's wartime ally ; he secured contracts for twelve torpedo boats and twelve U @-@ boats for the Ottoman Navy . Capelle also used the naval construction program to keep skilled workers out of the Army , in order to preserve their expertise for the Navy 's needs . 
 In August 1917 , Capelle banned socialist literature from the fleet , in the aftermath of several disturbances . On 9 October 1917 , in a speech to the Reichstag , he accused the radical , independent branch of the <unk> Partei Deutschlands ( SPD – Social Democratic Party ) of knowingly supporting these revolutionary actions , which drove moderate SPD members closer to the radical independent faction . This led to the toppling of Chancellor Georg Michaelis , who was replaced by Georg von Hertling . On 9 January 1918 , Capelle was awarded the Pour le Mérite , Germany 's highest military award . By August 1918 , Scheer and a group of prominent commanders in the High Seas Fleet had convinced Wilhelm II that the senior officers in the naval high command needed to be replaced by more dynamic individuals . To this end , Wilhelm II requested the resignation of Capelle , Henning von Holtzendorff , the Admiralty Chief , and Karl Alexander von Müller , the head of the Naval Cabinet . Capelle resigned from the Navy in October 1918 , shortly before the end of the war . His deputy , Paul Behnke , briefly replaced him but was also forced out due to his opposition to Scheer , who had by this time been promoted to the <unk> ( Chief of Naval Staff ) . 
 In 1919 , Capelle testified before the Reichstag War Failures Committee about his tenure as State Secretary during the war , particularly relating to the U @-@ boat campaign against Britain . Capelle died in Wiesbaden on 23 February 1931 . 
 = = Decorations and awards = = 
 Order of the Red Eagle , 1st class with Oak Leaves and Swords 
 Order of the Crown , 1st class ( Prussia ) 
 Pour le Mérite ( 9 January 1918 ) 
 Knight 's Cross of the Royal House Order of Hohenzollern 
 Iron Cross of 1914 , 1st and 2nd class 
 Service Award ( Prussia ) 
 Military Merit Order , 1st class with Swords ( Bavaria ) 
 Hanseatic Crosses of Bremen , Hamburg and Lubeck 
 Commander Second Class of the Order of Philip ( Hesse ) 
 Commander of the Order of the Griffon ( Mecklenburg ) 
 Honorary Grand Cross of the House and Merit Order of Peter Frederick Louis ( Oldenburg ) 
 Friedrich August Cross , 1st class ( Oldenburg ) 
 Grand Cross of the Albert Order with golden star and swords ( Saxony ) 
 = Brean Down = 
 Brean Down is a promontory off the coast of Somerset , England , standing 318 feet ( 97 m ) high and extending 1 @.@ 5 miles ( 2 km ) into the Bristol Channel at the eastern end of Bridgwater Bay between Weston @-@ super @-@ Mare and Burnham @-@ on @-@ Sea . 
 Made of Carboniferous Limestone , it is a continuation of the Mendip Hills . Two further continuations are the small islands of Steep Holm and Flat Holm . The cliffs on the northern and southern flanks of Brean Down have large quantities of fossils laid down in the marine deposits about 320 – 350 million years ago . The site has been occupied by humans since the late Bronze Age and includes the remains of a Romano @-@ Celtic Temple . At the seaward end is Brean Down Fort which was built in 1865 and then re @-@ armed in the Second World War . 
 Brean Down is now owned by the National Trust , and is rich in wildlife , history and archaeology . It is a Site of Special Scientific Interest due to both the geology and presence of nationally rare plants including the white rock @-@ rose . It has also been scheduled as an ancient monument . 
 = = Geology = = 
 The Mendip Hills , of which Brean Down forms the most westerly part , are the most southerly Carboniferous Limestone upland in Britain . These rock strata were laid down during the early Carboniferous period , about 320 – 350 million years ago . Subsequently , much of northwestern Europe underwent continental collision throughout the late Paleozoic era , culminating in the final phases of the Variscan orogeny near the end of the Carboniferous period , 300 million years ago . This tectonic activity produced a complex suite of mountain and hill ranges across what is now southern Ireland , south @-@ western England , Brittany , and elsewhere in western Europe . As a result of the Variscan mountain @-@ building , the Mendip area now comprises at least four anticlinal fold structures , with an east @-@ west trend , each with a core of older Devonian sandstone and Silurian volcanic rocks . West of the main Mendip plateau the Carboniferous Limestone continues in Bleadon Hill and Brean Down , and on the islands of Steep Holm and Flat Holm . 
 Brean Down is just over 2 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 2 mi ) long and runs in an east @-@ west direction near the mouth of the River Axe opposite Uphill Cliff . The flat area on the top of the peninsula may represent a raised bench laid down when the sea level was much higher than it is today , as the highest point of the promontory is approximately 97 metres ( 318 ft ) above sea level . The cliffs on the north and south faces are rich in fossils that include corals , seashells and crinoids , which supports the theory of the marine deposition of the rocks . 13 separate layers have been identified in the ' sand cliff ' on the south side , the lowest five dating to the millennia of the last glaciation . 
 = = History = = 
 Human occupation dates back to the Beaker culture of the late Bronze Age . There is also evidence of an Iron Age hill fort and prehistoric barrows and field systems . There is evidence of a shrine dating from pre @-@ Roman times , which was re @-@ established as a Romano @-@ Celtic Temple in the mid @-@ 4th century . According to at least one source , it is extremely likely this was succeeded by a small late @-@ 4th @-@ century Christian oratory . Several Roman finds including gold coins of Augustus , Nero , and Drusus , two silver denarii of Vespasian and a Roman carnelian ring were found at the site during quarrying . 
 Brean Down Fort was built on the headland between 1864 and 1871 on the recommendations of the 1859 Royal Commission . It was the most southerly of a chain of defences across the Bristol Channel , protecting the access to Bristol and Cardiff . Four acres of land at the end of Brean Down were requisitioned in 1862 , with construction beginning in 1864 and completed in 1871 . 
 In the 1860s plans were laid for a deep @-@ water harbour on the northern shore of Brean Down . It was intended that this harbour would replace Bristol as a port on embarkation for transatlantic crossings and the export of minerals and agricultural produce from the Mendip Hills and the rest of Somerset . The foundation stones of the pier were laid , but the project was later abandoned after a large storm destroyed the foundations . In 1897 , following wireless transmissions from Lavernock Point in Wales and Flat Holm , Guglielmo Marconi moved his equipment to Brean Down and set a new distance record of 14 kilometres ( 8 @.@ 7 mi ) for wireless transmission over open sea . In 1912 Brean Down was leased by the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds as a bird sanctuary , acquiring the shooting rights to stop others shooting on the promontory . 
 On the outbreak of World War II , the fort was rearmed with two 6 @-@ inch ( 15 @-@ centimetre ) ex @-@ naval guns , and machine gun posts were built on the Down . Birnbeck Pier was taken over by the Admiralty in 1941 as an outpost of the Department of Miscellaneous Weapons Development ( DMWD ) . It was commissioned as HMS Birnbeck , and was used for secret weapons development and storage with testing . The " Bouncing bomb " was tested at the Brean Down Fort on the opposite side of Weston Bay . 
 In 1954 the former Axbridge Rural District Council gave 59 @,@ 685 hectares ( 147 @,@ 480 acres ) of the down to the National Trust to celebrate the Festival of Britain . The Major Aldermen and Burgesses of the Borough of Weston @-@ Super Mare gave 1 @,@ 494 hectares ( 3 @,@ 690 acres ) in 1963 , and a further 1 @,@ 371 hectares ( 3 @,@ 390 acres ) at Brean Down Cove was acquired from M.D. and M Matthews in 2000 . After restoring the fort , which covers 1 @,@ 606 hectares ( 3 @,@ 970 acres ) , Sedgemoor District Council gave this to the trust as well in 2002 . 
 Various proposals have been put forward to construct a Severn Barrage for tidal electricity production from Brean Down to Lavernock Point in south Wales . The proposals , which go back over 100 years , have never been successful so far , however Peter Hain and others are still working on further proposals and trying to persuade the government to fund either the barrage or tidal lagoons . 
 = = Ecology = = 
 In addition to the geological interest of the site , the range of plants growing on Brean Down has led to it being designated as a Site of Special Scientific Interest . The nationally rare white rock @-@ rose ( Helianthemum <unk> ) is a common species at the site , occurring in abundance on the upper reaches of the grassy south @-@ facing slopes . Some of the <unk> growing here , which were originally thought to be <unk> broomrape ( <unk> <unk> @-@ <unk> ) , are now no longer believed to be this species , but atypical specimens of ivy broomrape ( <unk> <unk> ) . Other plants on the southern slopes include the Somerset hair grass , wild thyme , horseshoe vetch and birds @-@ foot @-@ trefoil . The northern side is dominated by bracken , bramble , privet , hawthorn , cowslips and bell heather . 
 The birds seen on Brean Down include peregrine falcon , jackdaw , kestrel , collared and stock doves , common whitethroat , common linnet , stonechat , <unk> , rock pipit and – in 2007 – Britain 's first and only Atlantic yellow @-@ nosed albatross . There are also several species of butterfly , including <unk> blue , dark green fritillary , meadow brown , marbled white , small heath , and common blue . 
 = Rupert Grint = 
 Rupert Alexander Lloyd Grint ( born 24 August 1988 ) is an English actor who rose to prominence playing Ron Weasley , one of the three main characters in the Harry Potter film series . Grint was cast as Ron Weasley at the age of 11 , having previously acted only in school plays and at his local theatre group . From 2001 to 2011 , he starred in all eight Harry Potter films alongside Daniel Radcliffe playing as Harry Potter and Emma Watson playing as Hermione Granger . 
 Beginning in 2002 , Grint began to work outside of the Harry Potter franchise , playing a co @-@ leading role in Thunderpants . He has had starring roles in Driving Lessons , a dramedy released in 2006 , and <unk> , a drama film of limited release in 2010 . Grint co @-@ starred with Bill Nighy and Emily Blunt in Wild Target , a comedy . His first film project following the end of the Harry Potter series was the 2012 anti @-@ war film , Into the White , in which he has a supporting role . In 2013 , Grint 's new film CBGB was released and he has been cast in CBS 's new show Super Clyde . Grint made his stage debut in Jez Butterworth 's Mojo in October 2013 at the Harold Pinter Theatre in London . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Grint was born in Harlow , Essex , England , to Nigel Grint ( b . 1963 ) , a dealer in racing memorabilia , and Joanne Grint ( née Parsons ; b . 1967 ) . Grint is the eldest of five siblings . He has stated that his earliest ambition in life was to become an ice cream man . He attended Richard Hale School , in Hertford . While in school , Grint took an avid interest in theatre . He started performing in school productions and joined the Top Hat Stage and Screen School , a local theatre group that cast him as a fish in Noah 's Ark and a donkey in another nativity play . He continued performing in school plays as he moved into secondary school . However , Grint had never acted professionally before the Harry Potter series . At the age of 16 , he left school to focus on his acting career . " I didn 't really like school that much , " the actor later commented . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Harry Potter ( 2001 – 11 ) = = = 
 Starting in 2000 , casting began for the film adaptation of Harry Potter and the Philosopher 's Stone , the best @-@ selling novel written by author J. K. Rowling . Rowling personally insisted that the cast be British and assisted Susie Figgis and director Chris Columbus in casting the roles . Grint chose to try out for the role of protagonist Ron Weasley , one of Harry Potter 's best friends at Hogwarts , and was a fan of the book series . Having seen a Newsround report about the open casting , he sent in a video of himself rapping about how he wished to receive the role . His attempt was successful as the casting team asked for a meeting with him . On 8 August 2000 , Daniel Radcliffe , Emma Watson , and an 11 @-@ year @-@ old Grint were selected to play the roles of Harry , Hermione Granger , and Ron , respectively . Grint is the oldest member of the trio . The release of Harry Potter and the Philosopher 's Stone in 2001 was Grint 's debut screen performance . Breaking records for opening @-@ day sales and opening @-@ weekend takings , it was the highest @-@ grossing film of that year . With a total of US $ 974 million in its theatrical run , Philosopher 's Stone stands as the second most commercially successful entry in the series . It was also critically well @-@ received , scoring mainly positive reviews from critics . However , a number of critics found the adaption staying faithful to the book to be both its best and worst quality . Grint won a Satellite Award in the category of " Outstanding New Talent " , and a Young Artist Award for " Most Promising Young Newcomer " . 
 A year later , Grint again starred as Ron in Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets ( 2002 ) , the second installment of the series . The film opened to positive reviews and critics generally enjoyed the lead actors ' performances . Both Los Angeles Times and New York Magazine observed that Grint and his peers had matured between films , with the latter pointing out that Grint had become " more proficient " and said they missed " the amateurish ardour " the actor and Watson carried in Philosopher 's Stone . Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban ( 2004 ) was released on 31 May in the UK . The film sees all three of its lead characters hover on the brink of adolescence , " and while they look braver and more capable than before , the dangers they face seem far more grave and their own vulnerability more intense . " Academy Award @-@ nominee Alfonso Cuarón took over direction for Prisoner of Azkaban which remains the lowest @-@ grossing Harry Potter film with US $ 795 million in revenue . Nonetheless it was the second highest @-@ grossing movie of 2004 behind Shrek 2 . Despite this it remains the second highest rated in the series in terms of critical reaction . 
 In 2005 , Grint reprised his role again for the fourth film in the series – Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire . The adaptation , unlike previous films , explored romantic elements and included more humour . In a 2005 interview with IGN , all three lead actors singled out the humour as being a reason for the film 's success . This project was directed by Mike Newell . According to the actor , the director was " really loud and not afraid to swear at you , but he was really cool . " Goblet of Fire stands as one of the best reviewed instalments within the series , and is noted for the maturity and sophistication of its characters , darker and more complex plotline , writing and performances of the lead actors . Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix , the fifth film in the Harry Potter franchise , was released to cinemas in 2007 . A huge financial success , Order of the Phoenix set a record worldwide opening @-@ weekend gross of US $ 394 million , superseding Spider @-@ Man 3 as the title holder . This entry was directed by a new filmmaker , David Yates , who would continue to direct all of the following movies . Grint said the laid back director was " really good " and helped keep the material fresh . As the fame of the actor and the series continued , Grint and fellow Harry Potter cast members left imprints of their hands , feet and wands in front of Grauman 's Chinese Theater in Hollywood . 
 On 15 July 2009 , the series 's sixth instalment , Harry Potter and the Half @-@ Blood Prince , was released . It did considerably better financially than the previous film , again setting new box office records . In its total theatrical run , Half @-@ Blood Prince totalled in US $ 933 million ticket sales . Also , Half @-@ Blood Prince remains one of the most positively reviewed entries within the series among film critics , who praised the film 's " emotionally satisfying " story , direction , cinematography , visuals and music . Grint observed a change in Ron in this entry , pointing out that his once insecure , often overshadowed character started to become more secure and even began to show a dark side of himself . The actor found it fun to personify a more emotional Ron . Between 2009 and 2010 , his work received three nominations , including one win – an Otto Award from the German magazine Bravo . 
 Despite the success of the past films , the future of the franchise was put into question as all three lead actors were unsure about signing on to continue their roles for the final two films . However , by March 2007 , Grint agreed to return for the last instalments . For financial and scripting reasons , the last book was divided into two films which were shot back to back , with filming concluding in June 2010 . After completing the final film he said : " I mean it literally has been my childhood and suddenly it all came down to really just one random scene , with us jumping through a fireplace , and then it was over . [ ... ] But because you shoot out of sequence , it 's often just ' Turn left , cross the room , okay , that 's a wrap . ' And you 're done . [ ... ] Yeah , it 's very odd . Because suddenly it was all over , just like that . It was really emotional for all of us , realising that we 're never going to be doing this again . 
 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows – Part 1 ( 2010 ) was released in November and made over US $ 950 million . It set several box office records and opened to mostly favourable reviews in the media . His portrayal of Ron again earned him critical praise . Reviewing the adaption in Slate , Dana Stevens called all three of the leads " terrific . " Despite giving Deathly Hallows – Part 1 a negative rating , Joe Morgenstern of The Wall Street Journal publication stated " Grint has grown up to be a skilful actor who knows the value of a slow burn " . New York Post writer Lou Lumenick , however , observed that both Grint and Radcliffe had grown weary of playing the same characters and expressed it in their performances . Grint 's performance scored him nominations from the MTV Movie Awards and National Movie Awards for Best Fight and Performance of the Year in 2011 . Grint reprised his role for the eighth time , in Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows – Part 2 , the last Harry Potter instalment . This film picked @-@ up from where the previous film left @-@ off and included a lot of action , whereas the first part had focused more on character development . Rupert , along with the film , was critically acclaimed : Ann Hornaday of The Washington Post asked , " Who could have predicted that Radcliffe , Grint and Watson would turn out to be good actors ? " . The film broke several box office records , including biggest midnight release , biggest first @-@ day opening , and biggest opening @-@ weekend . Deathly Hallows – Part 2 is currently the 4th highest @-@ grossing film of all time , and the second highest @-@ grossing non @-@ James Cameron film with more than US $ 1 @.@ 3 billion worldwide ( behind The Avengers ) . 
 Harry Potter 's author J. K. Rowling gave a speech during the final , world premiere of Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows – Part 2 on 7 July 2011 in London , England . She announced that there are seven Harry Potter film series cast members , to whom she refers as " The Big Seven , " and she named Grint as one of the seven members , alongside Daniel Radcliffe , Emma Watson , Tom Felton , Matthew Lewis , Evanna Lynch and Bonnie Wright . 
 = = = Other work ( 2002 – present ) = = = 
 In 2002 , Grint starred in his first non @-@ Harry Potter film , Thunderpants , which revolves around Patrick ( played by Bruce Cook ) whose remarkable capacity for flatulence scores him a job as an astronaut . In this film , Grint portrayed the co @-@ lead role of Alan , an <unk> boy who is Patrick 's only friend . It was generally ignored by critics and audiences alike . Most of the critics that did take notice of Thunderpants did not respond well to it , with one writing : " This film should be shown in prisons so that inmates have a good reason to never return . " Another film he appeared in was Driving Lessons , a comedy @-@ drama released in 2006 , where he starred opposite Julie Walters . The film was met with a mixed reception by critics , but his portrayal of an oppressed teenaged boy was generally praised . " Grint , on the other hand , is a revelation " , who " displays an innate naturalness mixed with personal charisma that turn a potentially pathetic Christian freak into a humorous , thoroughly likable – if more than a little awkward – young man " , wrote Alt Film Guide 's Andre Soares . 
 In July 2008 , it was announced that Grint would star in the drama film <unk> with Robert Sheehan and Kimberley Nixon . Grint found shooting this film very different from the Harry Potter films since he had to adjust to doing a dozen scenes per day . Grint 's character – Malachy , a worker at Belfast – goes to great lengths to impress his boss 's daughter , with whom he is infatuated . This film , like his next project , would involve him playing violent roles . Despite premiering at the 2009 Berlin International Film Festival , the film was initially unable to find a distributor . An online campaign by Grint 's fans was credited with helping to secure a deal for distribution in the UK in 2010 . 
 Jonathan Lynn directed Grint in Wild Target , a 2010 comedy thriller film , which he starred in alongside Emily Blunt and Bill Nighy . A remake of the 1993 French film <unk> <unk> , Wild Target was made on a relatively small production budget of US $ 8 million . However , it was a commercial failure , only earning back US $ 3 @.@ 4 million . It also garnered mostly negative reviews in the media , which criticised it for dishonouring the original film and wasting the comedic potential of its cast , but Grint also attracted some positive notice : " It ’ s nice to see Rupert Grint perform well in a role other than that of Ron Weasley , and it ’ s clear that he ’ s got a career ahead of him . " 
 In January 2011 , Grint made a cameo appearance in BBC popular comedy show Come Fly with Me starring comedy duo Matt Lucas and David Walliams ( Little Britain ) . In March 2011 , Grint was cast as the lead character in the small @-@ budget anti @-@ war Norwegian film Into the White , which was directed by Petter Næss . Principal photography started in April , and the project , which was shot on location , was released in 2012 . Into the White is based on a real incident that took place on 27 April 1940 , when German Luftwaffe pilot Horst <unk> ’ s bomber was shot down at <unk> by a Royal Navy Fleet Air Arm Blackburn Skua , which then crash @-@ landed . The several German and British crew members found shelter by chance during a harsh winter there . 
 In August 2011 , Grint did a photo shoot with his friend and Harry Potter co @-@ star Tom Felton in Los Angeles for the autumn / winter collection of the fashion label Band of Outsiders . In September 2011 , it was announced that Grint would voice a character in the film adaptation of Postman Pat along with David Tennant , Stephen Mangan and Jim Broadbent ; the film was released in May 2014 . Grint also appears in the music video for Ed Sheeran 's song " Lego House " ; the video was released on 20 October 2011 . 
 In March 2012 the " Visit Britain " TV ad was released , which features Grint alongside Julie Walters , Michelle Dockery and Stephen Fry . The TV ad promotes holidaying at home in the UK . 
 On 14 March 2012 , Variety reported that Grint had been cast alongside Chloë Grace Moretz in The Drummer , a biopic film about drummer Dennis Wilson of the Beach Boys . On the same day , Hollywood Reporter confirmed this and announced filming was scheduled to begin on 15 June 2012 in California and Savannah , Georgia 
 On 25 July 2012 , Grint carried the 2012 London Olympic torch during the Olympic Torch Relay , which is part of 2012 Summer Olympic Games in London . In interviews , Rupert told the BBC News that it was an " overwhelming " experience that he hoped to remember forever , and told The Daily Telegraph " It was amazing , it was really overwhelming . It 's just such an honour to be a part of this . I 'm really proud " . 
 In October 2012 Grint narrated We Are Aliens , a <unk> 3D Planetarium <unk> film about the possibility of other intelligent life in our Universe . 
 On 13 February 2013 , The Hollywood Reporter 's Live Feed announced that Grint would star in a television show on CBS called Super Clyde . " Grint will play the title role of Clyde , the well @-@ meaning and sweet yet slightly neurotic guy who never feels like he really fits in . The avid comic book reader considers himself a borderline agoraphobic with mild to severe anxiety issues who wishes he were a super hero himself . When Clyde inherits a $ 100 @,@ 000 a month inheritance from his long @-@ dead eccentric Uncle Bill , he decides that the cash will be his secret super power and will use it only for good and reward the good @-@ hearted . " 
 In July 2013 , it was confirmed that Grint will be making his stage debut in Jez Butterworth 's second run of his black comedy , Mojo , playing the role as a minor hood called Sweets who pops amphetamines like Smarties and does a sort of double act , full of comic menace . Grint will be starring alongside actors Brendan Coyle , Ben Whishaw and Daniel Mays . The play is based on real @-@ life events and ran from 26 October 2013 until 8 February 2014 at the Harold Pinter Theatre in London . He won the <unk> Award for Best London Newcomer for his role in this play . 
 In September 2013 , The Hollywood Reporter confirmed that in an adaptation of Macbeth called Enemy of Man , Grint will be starring with Sean Bean , Charles Dance , Jason Flemyng , James D ’ Arcy , Neil Maskell and Joe <unk> , directed by Vincent Regan . The filming production was set to begin in January 2014 in the United Kingdom . 
 In June 2014 , it was announced that Grint would make his Broadway debut as Frank Finger in the play It 's Only a Play at the Gerald Schoenfeld Theatre , appearing alongside Matthew Broderick , Nathan Lane , Stockard Channing , and Megan Mullally . Grint 's first performance was on 28 August 2014 and his last performance was on 4 January 2015 . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Grint is involved with charity , having donated items such as clothes to charity auctions , as well as participating in the Wacky Rally in 2010 with James and Oliver Phelps , which raised money for Britain ’ s Royal National Lifeboat Institution . He was one of more than forty participants to produce designs for Chrysalis Collection for <unk> Hospice Care in London . His piece , a painted butterfly , was auctioned on <unk> in March 2010 . 
 In May 2011 , along with other celebrities , Grint took part in the ad campaign for " Make Mine Milk " to promote daily milk drinking . His ads can be seen on thousands of bus sides and posters across the United Kingdom . Grint supports Little Star Award since 2011 in support of Cancer Research UK , joining Leona Lewis among others . " I think that it ’ s wonderful that Cancer Research UK is helping to bring a little bit of magic to the children ’ s lives in this way , ” said Grint . 
 Grint is private about his personal life , but was confirmed to be in a relationship in October 2014 . 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = = = Film = = = 
 = = = Television = = = 
 = = = Theatre = = = 
 = = = Music video = = = 
 = = = Other roles = = = 
 = = Awards and nominations = = 
 = Roy Kilner = 
 Roy Kilner ( 17 October 1890 – 5 April 1928 ) was an English professional cricketer who played nine Test matches for England between 1924 and 1926 . An all @-@ rounder , he played for Yorkshire County Cricket Club between 1911 and 1927 . In all first @-@ class matches , he scored 14 @,@ 707 runs at an average of 30 @.@ 01 and took 1 @,@ 003 wickets at an average of 18 @.@ 45 . Kilner scored 1 @,@ 000 runs in a season ten times and took 100 wickets in a season five times . On four occasions , he completed the double : scoring 1 @,@ 000 runs and taking 100 wickets in the same season , recognised as a sign of a quality all @-@ rounder . 
 Kilner first played for Yorkshire as a batsman before the First World War , establishing a regular place in the side . After being wounded in the war , he returned in 1919 to a Yorkshire side which was short of bowlers . As a result , Kilner began to practise his bowling to the point where he became highly regarded as a slow left @-@ arm bowler . His aggressive batting and warm personality made him a popular player with both cricketers and spectators . His form brought selection by England in 1924 and a visit to Australia for the Ashes tour of 1924 – 25 . Although the second most successful bowler of the tour , his bowling subsequently declined in effectiveness , and did not trouble batsmen on good pitches . He was selected during the 1926 Ashes but dropped for the final Test . Kilner went on several coaching trips to India during English winters , and on one of these , in 1928 , he contracted an illness ; on his return to England , he died aged 37 . His funeral was attended by over 100 @,@ 000 people and there was widespread sadness at his death . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Kilner was born on 17 October 1890 in Wombwell , Barnsley , Yorkshire , England , the second son and one of eleven children of Seth Kilner and Mary Alice Washington . His brother Norman also played cricket , representing Yorkshire and Warwickshire . The <unk> attended Wombwell Parish Church and the boys were members of the Church Lads ' Brigade . His father and his uncle , Irving Washington , the former Yorkshire player , encouraged him to play cricket from an early age . He showed enough ability to join the local colliery team , Mitchell Main . 
 At the age of 14 in 1904 , Kilner reached the Mitchell Main first team . Although selected regularly from 1905 , Kilner was not particularly successful with the bat . He displayed aggression but often attempted difficult shots and consequently lost his wicket . His bowling was more effective but used infrequently . By 1909 his batting improved ; he scored his first century for the team and began to make consistently good scores , attracting the attention of Yorkshire . 
 = = First years at Yorkshire = = 
 = = = Debut for Yorkshire = = = 
 After scoring a second century for Mitchell Main at the start of the 1910 season , Kilner was chosen to play for Yorkshire Second XI . In his first season , he took three wickets and had a batting average of 12 @.@ 50 but continued to do well for Mitchell Main . For 1911 , Yorkshire sent Kilner to play for Harrogate Cricket Club which provided a higher standard of cricket than Mitchell Main : the county had a system whereby promising young players were sent to gain experience in competitive matches for local clubs . Kilner began to record good batting and bowling performances . Although his form for Yorkshire Second XI was more inconsistent , he made his first @-@ class debut for Yorkshire that season against Somerset in the County Championship . He scored 0 and 14 and did not bowl . In a further six matches for Yorkshire in 1911 , his highest innings was 18 runs , his average with the bat was just 6 @.@ 66 in ten innings and he did not take any wickets . For Harrogate , he was more successful , with 519 runs and 28 wickets . 
 = = = Yorkshire regular = = = 
 Kilner made a good start to 1912 for Yorkshire Second XI , scoring centuries in two consecutive games ; in the second he also took twelve wickets for 75 runs . These performances , coupled with continued good form for Harrogate , led to Kilner 's recall to the Yorkshire first team in June . He replaced the injured all @-@ rounder George Hirst for a match against Nottinghamshire . On the first morning , Kilner was used as the sixth bowler and proved successful ; he finished with four wickets for 66 runs . Although failing to score in the first innings , he came in to bat in the second innings with Yorkshire 133 for four , needing 249 for victory . He shared a partnership of 113 for the fifth wicket and scored 83 not out to take Yorkshire to a five wicket win . This performance kept Kilner in the team for the remainder of the season , even after Hirst 's return . He played 23 times for Yorkshire . He scored 570 runs at an average of 22 @.@ 80 and took 16 wickets at an average of 22 @.@ 12 , figures regarded as respectable for a first full season . Yorkshire won the County Championship that season . Apart from one game in the 1913 season , he ceased playing for Harrogate . In his years there , he scored 967 runs , averaging 38 @.@ 68 , and took 71 wickets at an average of less than ten runs per wicket . 
 In the 1913 season , Kilner scored 1 @,@ 586 runs at an average of 34 @.@ 47 , which remained his highest seasonal aggregate of runs and placed him third in the Yorkshire batting averages . He also took 18 wickets at 25 @.@ 22 . At the end of May and beginning of June , Kilner took part in century partnerships in four consecutive matches , culminating in his maiden first @-@ class century against Leicestershire . During his innings of 104 , he hit 18 fours and shared a partnership of 184 in under two hours with his close friend Major Booth , rescuing Yorkshire from 58 for five and taking the score to 300 . Throughout the season , he played several valuable innings when Yorkshire were under pressure . His batting was always adventurous and attacking although he often made uncertain starts to his innings and showed impatience . The strength and variety of the Yorkshire bowling attack meant his left @-@ arm spin was not often required . Even so , Yorkshire dropped to second in the Championship . 
 An illness during the winter of 1913 – 14 took its toll on Kilner at the start of the 1914 season . He passed 1 @,@ 000 runs for the second time but due to his uncertain form , his aggregate of runs and his average both fell . He scored 1 @,@ 329 runs ( average 30 @.@ 90 ) , placing him fourth in the Yorkshire batting averages . His bowling was rarely used and he took just one wicket . Kilner scored his second first @-@ class century against Gloucestershire late in the season ; he made 169 in nearly three and a half hours , hitting 28 fours . Yorkshire fell to fourth in the championship . 
 = = First World War = = 
 The United Kingdom declared war on Germany on 4 August 1914 , while Kilner was playing in that season 's Roses Match at Old Trafford . Initially the government requested that cricket should continue , though several cricketers with military obligations , including Yorkshire 's captain , Sir Archibald White , were called up immediately . As the fighting started , and casualties began to mount , public opinion turned against the continuation of the season , and Yorkshire 's match against Sussex at Hove , which concluded on 1 September , was the last County Championship match until 1919 . The newspaper Cricket reported " The men 's hearts were barely in the game , and the match was given up as a draw at tea . " With the suspension of the championship , Kilner and Major Booth enlisted in the army together , joining the Leeds and Bradford " Pals " in the West Yorkshire Regiment . Kilner trained as a mechanic before being stationed at <unk> in North Yorkshire as a corporal . While on leave in November 1914 , Kilner married Annie <unk> — the daughter of James <unk> , an engineer — at Wombwell Parish Church ; Booth served as best man . During the war , Annie gave birth to the couple 's first child , Roy junior . Kilner was posted with his battalion to Egypt but was forced home with an injury . When he recovered , he was sent to the Western Front in France . During the Battle of the Somme , he was wounded shortly before his battalion engaged in the fighting , receiving a shrapnel wound in the wrist ; later in the same action , Booth was killed . Kilner recovered in a military hospital near Blackpool before being assigned to Preston Garrison as a mechanic . Kilner suffered a second loss when his brother Bernard was killed at Ypres in 1917 . 
 Having previously played football for Mitchell Main in the winter of 1912 – 13 , Kilner played as a right @-@ back for Preston North End F.C. while posted to Preston during the war . The team won promotion from the Second Division in 1915 , and took their place in the First Division when league football resumed in 1919 . Sometimes playing under the name of Smith to avoid detection ( although it is not certain why he did so ) , Kilner 's first certain appearance for the team was in September 1918 . It is unclear how often he represented the club . 
 = = First @-@ class career after the war = = 
 = = = From batsman to bowler = = = 
 When cricket resumed after the war in 1919 , County Championship matches were reduced from three days to two in a one @-@ season experiment . Following the deaths of Booth in the war and Alonzo Drake from illness , as well as the decline in the bowling of the aging George Hirst , Yorkshire lacked an effective attack . Subsequently , Kilner was asked to deliver more overs , although not to the extent of a main bowler . He took 45 wickets , more than his entire first @-@ class wicket aggregate before the war , at an average of 18 @.@ 12 . This placed him third in the Yorkshire averages . With the bat he scored three centuries and reached 1 @,@ 135 runs at 29 @.@ 10 . His performances earned him a place in the Gentlemen v Players match at the end of season during the Scarborough Festival , although he neither took a wicket nor scored . Kilner 's brother Norman also played for Yorkshire in 1919 , although he was ultimately unable to secure a permanent place in the team . 
 Kilner began the 1920 season with an innings of 206 not out in his first match , against Derbyshire , and the effort remained the highest score of his career . He batted for four hours , hitting 24 fours and two sixes . He could have been caught when he had scored around fifty , but a local newspaper described the innings as brilliant , his driving and pulling being particularly effective . Kilner appeared in one representative match : at the end @-@ of @-@ season Scarborough Festival , he played for CI Thornton 's XI against the Marylebone Cricket Club ( MCC ) side which visited Australia in the winter — at the time , the MCC administered English cricket , and the England team toured under its name . In total , he scored 1 @,@ 316 runs at an average of 37 @.@ 09 with two more centuries , placing him second in the Yorkshire averages . With the ball , he took 27 wickets but his average of 25 @.@ 33 was relatively high . The county finished fourth in the Championship as Middlesex were crowned winners . Critics believed Kilner should have bowled more frequently , an opinion shared by Wilfred Rhodes , Yorkshire 's main slow left @-@ arm spinner . Conscious of his increasing age , the 42 @-@ year @-@ old Rhodes wanted support with the bowling workload ; he considered Kilner the best option and encouraged him to improve his left @-@ arm spin . Consequently , during the winter , Kilner practised bowling in the yard of the Wombwell hotel where his father was landlord . Around the same time he celebrated the birth of his second son , named Major after Major Booth . 
 Kilner 's bowling had greater success in 1921 , helping Yorkshire to rise to third in the Championship . Used more regularly , he took 61 wickets ( average 18 @.@ 80 ) , including his first five @-@ wicket hauls in an innings ] ] , against Warwickshire and Nottinghamshire . He scored 1 @,@ 137 runs at an average of 27 @.@ 73 . He made centuries in the two matches against Northamptonshire , sharing big partnerships in both games : 276 with Rhodes in the first and 299 with Percy Holmes in the second . His overall performance left him sixth in the Yorkshire batting averages , and fourth in the bowling averages . Through the winter , he continued to develop his bowling . 
 = = = Established all @-@ rounder = = = 
 By 1922 , Kilner 's bowling had improved to the point where he passed 100 wickets in the season for the first time , taking 122 at an average of 14 @.@ 72 , helping Yorkshire to win the County Championship . Wisden recognised this was the first season when he was a front @-@ line bowler , " [ leaving ] his previous form far behind . " In the first five games of the campaign , he took 21 wickets for 142 runs . In the match against Essex , he claimed ten wickets in a match for the first time , taking eleven for 51 runs . Against Hampshire , he took ten wickets for 90 runs , including six for 13 in the second innings as Hampshire were bowled out for 44 . At the same time , he maintained his batting form , having a similar record to the previous season . He scored 1 @,@ 198 runs at 27 @.@ 22 and scored two centuries . This meant he completed the double — regarded as the sign of a quality all @-@ round cricketer — for the first time . Kilner was fifth in the Yorkshire batting averages and fourth in the bowling averages . At the end of the season , he was again selected for CI Thornton 's XI , as well as in two games at Eastbourne . Over the English winter , Kilner accepted a job coaching for the Maharaja of Patiala in India . He played in several first @-@ class matches , and enjoyed himself enough to return the following winter . 
 Statistically , Kilner 's peak as a bowler came in the 1923 season , when he took 158 wickets at an average of 12 @.@ 90 and finished second in the Yorkshire averages . With the bat , he failed to score a hundred for the first time since 1912 , but still made 1 @,@ 401 runs at 34 @.@ 17 and including nine scores over fifty . This placed him third in the Yorkshire batting averages , his contributions helping his team to retain the County Championship . He made a very effective start to the season , taking 27 wickets in the first four matches for just 157 runs , including the best figures of his career , eight for 26 against Glamorgan , and six for 14 against Middlesex . Later that season against Surrey , he performed what was regarded by Wisden as one of his best bowling feats . Surrey needed 184 runs to win and seemed certain winners when they had scored 127 for two . After Emmott Robinson took a wicket , Kilner took the last five for only 15 runs in a match @-@ winning performance . He finished with bowling figures of six for 22 and took ten wickets in the match . He had been under the impression that Surrey had only needed seven runs ( rather than the 27 they required ) to win at the end , and his team @-@ mates remembered he was pale with effort and concentration . In the same season , Kilner was picked for the Gentlemen v Players match at Lord 's Cricket Ground , the most prestigious such fixture at the time , where he scored eight in his only innings and took three wickets . Wisden commented that he seemed certain to be picked for the England Test match side shortly ( there were no Tests played that summer ) . He took a step towards this when he was selected for a Test trial match , scoring 26 and 11 not out , but only bowling 18 overs in the match to take two wickets . He also made another appearance for the Players , this time at Scarborough . His performances in the season earned him selection as one of Wisden 's Bowlers of the Year . 
 = = Test match career = = 
 = = = Test debut = = = 
 After another winter coaching in India and practising his bowling , Kilner took 145 first @-@ class wickets at 13 @.@ 28 during the 1924 English summer , placing him second in the national averages behind his teammate George Macaulay . His batting suffered a decline ; he scored 731 runs at 20 @.@ 88 , the lowest aggregate of his career and his first sub @-@ 1 @,@ 000 total since 1912 . Kilner took 33 wickets in the first six matches of the season , and his form earned selection for a Test trial match . In this game , he took three for 49 in the first innings and a further wicket in the second but only scored 20 runs in two innings . After 19 wickets in his next three matches , including seven in the match against the South African touring side , he was awarded a place in the England team for the first Test . In his maiden Test , he scored 59 out of a large total , batting at number seven . South Africa were dismissed for 30 runs in the first innings before Kilner had an opportunity to bowl . In the second innings , he delivered 22 overs without taking a wicket and commentators were not impressed by his bowling . The selectors left Kilner out of the next two Tests , all @-@ rounder J. W. Hearne taking his place , but he played in the Gentlemen v Players match at Lord 's . He scored a rapid 113 — his only century of the season — for the Players . By lunch on the last day , the Gentlemen had followed @-@ on but were well placed to secure a draw with the score at 112 for three . Kilner settled the match by taking quick wickets and ending the innings with figures of six for 20 as the Players won by an innings . Kilner was recalled for Hearne in the fourth Test , but rain prevented all play after the first day . He bowled 12 wicketless overs , meaning he had not dismissed anyone in his first two Tests and he did not play in the last Test as Hearne returned . For Yorkshire , he had a more successful time , three times taking ten wickets in a match , including twelve for 55 in the final championship match of the season , which Yorkshire had to win to have a chance of winning the title . Yorkshire 's opponents , Sussex , were bowled out twice for less than 100 , and when other results went Yorkshire 's way , the club were crowned champions for the third successive year . Kilner was chosen for the Players again in an end of season match at Scarborough . Although his poor batting meant his form as an all @-@ rounder was disappointing , he had a very good season as a bowler . Nevertheless , his selection to tour Australia that winter with the MCC team surprised commentators . 
 = = = Tour of Australia = = = 
 Playing for MCC under the captaincy of Arthur Gilligan , Kilner made 103 against Western Australia on his maiden first @-@ class appearance in Australia . He continued to show good all @-@ round form in the less important , non first @-@ class matches , but in first @-@ class matches leading up to the Tests he was less successful . Kilner passed fifty runs just once after his century and with the ball took one wicket in 81 overs during seven innings . He did not play in the first two Test matches , both of which were lost by England , but was selected for the third when the selectors altered the bowling attack . During the match , a series of injuries to colleagues left Kilner with a heavy workload . Australia batted first and scored 489 , a total which looked unlikely when they lost three wickets for 22 and later six wickets for 119 . England 's pace bowlers , Gilligan and Maurice Tate , had to leave the field injured , allowing Australia to recover ; later the spinner Tich Freeman hurt his wrist and could not bowl . The only fit front @-@ line bowlers remaining were Kilner and Frank Woolley . England fielded for nearly nine hours , and Kilner bowled 56 eight @-@ ball overs to take four for 127 , his first wicket in Test matches being Arthur Richardson . Given the injuries , Gilligan later said Kilner gave " a truly great performance " . England could not match Australia 's total , scoring only 365 , but when the hosts batted again , rain fell and affected the pitch , making it responsive to spin bowling . Australia lost their last seven wickets for 39 runs in an hour and Kilner took four for 14 in his final spell of bowling to end with four for 51 . Needing 375 to win , Kilner scored 24 but England fell just short to lose by 11 runs . Consequently , Australia took an unbeatable 3 – 0 series lead . Between the third and fourth matches in the series , Kilner recorded good bowling performances , with five for 35 against Tasmania and match figures of ten for 66 against Victoria , and kept his place for the final two Tests . 
 In the fourth Test , which England won comfortably , Kilner scored 79 , his highest Test score , adding 133 with Dodger <unk> , the largest partnership of the match . When Australia batted , Kilner took five wickets in the match and stood out as one of the best bowlers . In the final Test , Kilner took four for 97 in Australia 's first innings , but could not prevent the home team 's fourth victory of the series . Kilner finished the series with 129 runs and averaged 29 @.@ 80 , batting mainly at number eight in the order , and Wisden noted he scored runs when they were needed . In the Tests , he captured 17 wickets at an average of 23 @.@ 47 . Wisden noted that no @-@ one but Kilner could take wickets to support Tate , the most successful bowler . Apart from these two , no other bowler could manage more than 11 wickets and the other main bowlers averaged around 50 . In all first @-@ class matches , Kilner scored 488 runs at 24 @.@ 88 and took 40 wickets at 25 @.@ 17 . 
 = = Final seasons = = 
 = = = Decline as a bowler = = = 
 During 1925 , Kilner was awarded a benefit match and had an improved batting record for the season but critics began to notice a decline in his bowling . He was effective on pitches which favoured spin bowlers , but not on the flatter pitches prevalent in the dry summer of 1925 . Cricket journals , such as The Cricketer , criticised his tendency to bowl leg theory — a tactic regarded as negative and overly defensive — when confronted with batting @-@ friendly conditions . He took 131 wickets at 17 @.@ 92 , finishing second in the Yorkshire averages and helping his team to their fourth successive County Championship . He scored 1 @,@ 068 runs at an average of 30 @.@ 51 with two centuries . This gave him the third double of his career . Kilner 's popularity with the crowds peaked in 1925 , when over three days , 71 @,@ 000 people attended his benefit match against Middlesex . It raised £ 4 @,@ 106 ( the equivalent of around £ 175 @,@ 000 in 2008 ) , to set a new record for benefit proceeds . There were no Test matches in 1925 , but Kilner was once again selected for the Gentlemen v Players match at Lord 's , scoring 59 in his only innings and taking five wickets in the match , as well as some end of season matches for the MCC 's team from the previous winter . 
 In the winter of 1925 – 26 , Kilner was selected for the MCC tour of the West Indies , during which no Test matches were played . It was not personally successful for him and he recorded few effective performances . He scored 249 runs in first @-@ class matches at 22 @.@ 63 , with just one score over fifty , and took 34 wickets at 29 @.@ 50 . 
 Yorkshire 's run of success ended in 1926 as fierce rivals Lancashire relegated them into second place . Kilner had some successful matches in the season and achieved at a consistent level , but his performance showed signs of deteriorating . He scored 1 @,@ 187 runs at 37 @.@ 09 , the highest seasonal average of his career . He completed the double for the fourth and final time by taking 107 wickets , but his bowling average of 22 @.@ 52 was his worst since 1920 , before he became a regular bowler . He finished sixth in the Yorkshire batting and third in the bowling averages . He played for the Players for the final time at Lord 's , scoring 72 , but failed to take a wicket . His final first @-@ class century came against Middlesex , when he compiled 150 out of a total of 415 , dominating the scoring while he was at the crease . During the summer 's Ashes series , he was selected for the first four Tests . He only batted twice with a highest score of 36 . With the ball , he took seven wickets at 39 @.@ 42 , but the editor of Wisden criticised much of the English bowling ; he described Kilner 's only notable achievement as quickly ending Australia 's innings in the second Test at Lord 's . For the final Test , Kilner was dropped in favour of 48 @-@ year @-@ old Wilfred Rhodes . According to the chairman of selectors , Pelham Warner , Rhodes was recalled because of the lack of an effective alternative left @-@ arm spinner . Rhodes had a successful match and England defeated Australia to win the Ashes for the first time since 1912 , but Kilner had played his last Test . In nine Tests , he scored 233 runs at an average of 33 @.@ 28 and took 24 wickets at 30 @.@ 58 . 
 Over the winter of 1926 – 27 , Kilner declined an invitation to tour India by the MCC . The 1927 season , which proved to be Kilner 's last , was his least effective for several years and a disappointing summer for Yorkshire . The county fell to third in the Championship behind Lancashire and Nottinghamshire . He failed to achieve a century , scoring 1 @,@ 004 runs ( average 33 @.@ 46 ) , and did not reach 100 wickets for the first time since 1921 , taking just 86 wickets at an average of 23 @.@ 68 . Wisden said his bowling had lost its effectiveness and was no longer dangerous even when the pitch was helpful to spinners . In the Yorkshire averages , he finished fifth in both batting and bowling . In Kilner 's final County Championship match , he scored 91 not out and took eight wickets , including five for 21 in the second innings , helping Yorkshire to a nine wicket victory . In his final first @-@ class match , for Yorkshire against MCC , Kilner scored an unbeaten 51 to guide Yorkshire to an eight wicket win . He ended his first @-@ class career with 14 @,@ 707 runs at an average of 30 @.@ 01 and 1 @,@ 003 wickets at an average of 18 @.@ 45 . 
 = = = Death = = = 
 The Maharaja of Patiala again invited Kilner to play and coach in India in the winter of 1927 – 28 . Kilner 's sister Mollie later said he was very reluctant to take up the invitation and hesitated before accepting . The trip started badly when Kilner 's uncle , Irving Washington , died the day after he departed , and several of Kilner 's actions suggest this triggered some form of depression . Even so , Kilner recorded several large scores , including an unbeaten 283 in one ( non first @-@ class ) match . Near the end of trip , he began to suffer from a fever . His Yorkshire team mates , Arthur Dolphin and Maurice Leyland , who were also in India , believed he became unwell after eating oysters , but it is not certain how or when Kilner became ill . He began to have shivering attacks and perspiration while travelling from Marseilles on the way home . It was obvious he was seriously ill when he arrived in Southampton ; a cricketing engagement was cancelled and he was confined to bed . He refused treatment in Southampton , wishing to return to his family , and asking for his wife . Arriving in Wombwell on 27 March 1928 , he was examined by his doctor and taken home . Subsequently , his condition deteriorated and he was taken to <unk> Fever Hospital , near Barnsley . Although it was thought he had passed the worst , his condition became critical in the first few days of April . On 5 April 1928 , Kilner died from enteric fever in the presence of his wife . 
 The town of Wombwell expressed enormous sympathy and tributes came from around the world . When Kilner 's funeral took place on 10 April , the streets were packed with mourners . Many came from outside the town , and according to contemporary estimates 100 @,@ 000 people were present to pay tribute to Kilner ; there may have been more . Over a thousand people were at the cemetery for the burial , and Yorkshire cricketers carried the coffin . Two years later , the Australian team which toured England in 1930 visited Kilner 's grave in Wombwell to lay a wreath . The rector at the funeral said in his tribute : " A Yorkshire wicket has fallen and one of Yorkshire 's best men is out ; and we lament his loss ; not merely because it is the loss of a great cricketer , but because it is the loss of such a cricketer as Roy Kilner was . " 
 = = Style and personality = = 
 Kilner first came into the Yorkshire side as a batsman . He was considered a good , reliable batsman when he began , although his style was regarded by Yorkshire critics as unorthodox to the point where they disapproved of some of his unusual , eccentric shots . For Yorkshire , he appeared high in the order , but batted between number seven and number nine for England . If the circumstances of the game demanded it , he was able to play slowly and defensively and restrain his naturally aggressive style . He was particularly effective while playing the drive and pull shot . For most of his career , his effectiveness as a batsman was not compromised by his improvement and increasing workload as a bowler . 
 In terms of bowling , Kilner was an effective performer on rain affected pitches . His accuracy also enabled him to bowl on good pitches without the batsmen being able to score too many runs . In 1923 , journalist Alfred Pullin said Kilner spun the ball more than any other English bowler . He noted , as did Wisden , how Kilner often bowled over the wicket , meaning he bowled from the right hand side of the wickets , unusual for a left @-@ arm spinner in this period . This established a contrast with his fellow left @-@ arm spinner , Wilfred Rhodes , and increased their effectiveness . Furthermore , it allowed him to surprise batsmen with a different delivery , such as one which did not turn . Kilner 's Wisden portrait also credited him with the gift of imagination , describing how he always tried to think of new ways to beat and dismiss batsmen . He would experiment with his bowling , for example altering his pace slightly , if conditions were unfavourable towards bowlers . Kilner delivered left @-@ arm wrist spin at times , constantly practising it in the cricket nets . His brother Norman believed Roy was the person who coined the term " chinaman " to describe such a style , although other players have also claimed to originate the phrase . 
 At a time when the Yorkshire team was successful but exhibited a grim and determined attitude , Kilner was very popular with spectators . They liked him for his cheerfulness and desire to entertain , an attitude not shared by all of his team @-@ mates . He had many friends in the game at a time when Yorkshire were not always welcome in other counties due to their on @-@ field attitude . When he was chosen as a Bowler of the Year in 1924 , Wisden remarked that he was devoted to the game , possessed a cheery temperament and stood out among players for his personality , while his obituary described him as modest and generous . His Times obituary described him as " not only a notable exponent of the game , but a man of rare charm . Few modern professionals commanded such a measure of esteem and kindly regard from his own immediate colleagues and his opponents in the cricket field as did Roy Kilner " . 
 Kilner was a favourite of cricket writer Neville Cardus , who attributed several sayings to him in his prose . For example , Cardus described Kilner as saying about Yorkshire and Lancashire matches at the time : " What we want is no umpires and fair cheating all round , " and " We say good morning and after that all we say is ' <unk> ? ' " Also , when asked about contemporary problems in the game , in particular the negative attitude of some teams , he replied the game was fine , it was " t <unk> that wants educating up to it . " 
 = Moonraker ( film ) = 
 Moonraker ( 1979 ) is the eleventh spy film in the James Bond series , and the fourth to star Roger Moore as the fictional MI6 agent James Bond . The third and final film in the series to be directed by Lewis Gilbert , it co @-@ stars Lois Chiles , Michael Lonsdale , Corinne Cléry , and Richard Kiel . Bond investigates the theft of a space shuttle , leading him to Hugo Drax , the owner of the shuttle 's manufacturing firm . Along with space scientist Dr. Holly Goodhead , Bond follows the trail from California to Venice , Rio de Janeiro , and the Amazon rainforest , and finally into outer space to prevent a plot to wipe out the world population and to re @-@ create humanity with a master race . 
 Moonraker was intended by its creator Ian Fleming to become a film even before he completed the novel in 1954 , since he based it on a screenplay manuscript he had written even earlier . The film 's producers had originally intended to film For Your Eyes Only , but instead chose this title due to the rise of the science fiction genre in the wake of the Star Wars phenomenon . Budgetary issues caused the film to be primarily shot in France , with locations also in Italy , Brazil , Guatemala and the United States . The soundstages of Pinewood Studios in England , traditionally used for the series , were only used by the special effects team . 
 Moonraker was noted for its high production cost of $ 34 million , almost twice as much money as predecessor The Spy Who Loved Me , and it received mixed reviews . However , the film 's visuals were praised , Derek Meddings being nominated for the Academy Award for Best Visual Effects , and it eventually became the highest @-@ grossing film of the series with $ 210 @,@ 300 @,@ 000 worldwide , a record that stood until 1995 's GoldenEye . 
 = = Plot = = 
 A Drax Industries Moonraker space shuttle on loan to the United Kingdom is hijacked in mid @-@ air and the MI6 operative James Bond , agent 007 , is assigned to investigate . En route to England in a small charter plane , Bond is attacked by the crew and pushed out of the plane by the mercenary assassin Jaws . He survives by stealing a parachute from the pilot , whilst Jaws lands on a circus tent . 
 Bond proceeds to the Drax Industries shuttle @-@ manufacturing complex in California where he meets the owner of the company , Hugo Drax , and his henchman Chang . Bond also meets Dr. Holly Goodhead , an astronaut , and survives an assassination attempt via a centrifuge chamber . Bond is later aided by Drax 's personal pilot , Corinne Dufour , as he finds blueprints for a glass vial made in Venice . Bond then foils another attempt on his life , using a hunting shotgun to shoot a sniper . Upon discovering that Dufour assisted Bond 's investigations , Drax has her killed . 
 Bond again encounters Goodhead in Venice where he is chased through the canals by Drax 's henchmen . He discovers a secret biological laboratory , and by accidentally poisoning the scientists there , learns that the glass vials are to hold a nerve gas deadly to humans , but harmless to animals . Chang attacks Bond and is killed , but during the fight , Bond finds evidence that Drax is moving his operation to Rio de Janeiro . Rejoining Goodhead , he deduces that she is a CIA agent spying on Drax . They promise to work together , but quickly dispense with the truce . Bond has saved one of the vials he found earlier , as the only evidence of the now @-@ empty laboratory , giving it to M for analysis , who permits him to go to Rio de Janeiro under the pretence of being on leave . 
 In Rio Bond meets his Brazilian contact Manuela . Drax hires Jaws to finish Chang 's job of eliminating Bond . Bond meets Goodhead at the top of Sugarloaf Mountain , where they are attacked by Jaws on a cable car . After Jaws ' car crashes he is rescued from the rubble by Dolly , and the two fall in love . Bond and Goodhead are captured by henchmen , but Bond escapes and reports to an MI6 base in Brazil and learns that the toxin comes from a rare orchid indigenous to the Amazon jungle . Bond travels the Amazon River looking for Drax 's research facility and again encounters Jaws and other henchmen ; a speedboat chase develops . Bond escapes from his boat just before it hits the Iguazu Falls , and finds Drax 's base . Captured by Jaws again , Bond is taken to Drax and witnesses four <unk> lifting off . Drax explains that he stole the loaned Moonraker because another in his fleet had developed a fault during assembly . Bond is reunited with Goodhead ; they escape and successfully pose as pilots on the sixth shuttle . The shuttles dock with Drax 's space station , hidden from radar by a cloaking device . 
 Once on board the station , Bond and Holly disable the radar jamming cloaking device , resulting in the United States sending a platoon of Marines to intercept the now @-@ visible space station . Jaws captures Bond and Holly and brings them to Drax . 
 Drax plans to destroy human life by launching fifty globes containing the nerve gas into the Earth 's atmosphere . Before launching them , Drax also transported several dozen genetically perfect young men and women of varying races to the space station in the shuttles . They would live there until Earth was safe again for human life ; their descendants would be the seed for a " new master race " . Bond persuades Jaws and Dolly to switch their allegiance by getting Drax to admit that anyone not measuring up to his physical standards would be exterminated . Jaws then attacks Drax 's guards , and a laser battle ensues both inside and outside the space station . Drax 's guards and his master race are all killed . During the battle , Bond shoots Drax with a cyanide @-@ tipped dart , then pushes him into an airlock and ejects him into space . 
 To destroy the three already launched globes and return to Earth , Goodhead and Bond use Drax 's personal shuttle to fire lasers at the globes , while at the same time observing Jaws and Dolly escape from the disintegrating space station . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Roger Moore as James Bond : An MI6 agent assigned to look into the theft of a shuttle from the " Moonraker " space programme . 
 Lois Chiles as Holly Goodhead : A CIA agent and astronaut who joins Bond and flies with him to Drax 's space station . 
 Michael Lonsdale as Hugo Drax : Main antagonist . An industrialist who plans to poison all humans on earth , then repopulate the planet from his space station . 
 Richard Kiel as Jaws : Drax 's replacement bodyguard after Chang is killed , afflicted by <unk> and with a set of stainless steel teeth . 
 Corinne Cléry as Corinne Dufour : Drax 's personal pilot . 
 Bernard Lee as M : The head of MI6 . This was Bernard Lee 's final appearance as M. 
 Geoffrey Keen as Frederick Gray : The British Minister of Defence . 
 Desmond Llewelyn as Q : MI6 's " quartermaster " who supplies Bond with multi @-@ purpose vehicles and gadgets useful for the latter 's mission . 
 Lois Maxwell as Miss Moneypenny : M 's secretary . 
 Toshiro Suga as Chang : Drax 's original bodyguard . 
 Emily Bolton as Manuela : 007 's contact in Rio . 
 Michael Marshall as Colonel Scott : US Space Marines commander . 
 Walter Gotell as General Gogol : The head of the KGB . 
 Blanche <unk> as Dolly : Jaws ' girlfriend . 
 = = Production = = 
 The end credits for the previous Bond film , The Spy Who Loved Me , said , " James Bond will return in For Your Eyes Only " ; however , the producers chose the novel Moonraker as the basis for the next film , following the box office success of the 1977 space @-@ themed film Star Wars . For Your Eyes Only was subsequently delayed and ended up following Moonraker in 1981 . 
 = = = Script = = = 
 Ian Fleming had originally intended the novel , published in 1955 , to be made into a film even before he began writing it and was based on an original manuscript of a screenplay which had been on his mind for years . In 1955 , American actor John Payne offered $ 1 @,@ 000 for a nine @-@ month option to Moonraker , plus $ 10 @,@ 000 if production eventually took off . The negotiations broke up the following year due to disagreements regarding Payne 's ownership of the other Bond novels . Fleming eventually settled with Rank Organisation , a British company who owned Pinewood Studios . Rank wound up not developing the film , even after Fleming contributed his own script trying to push production forward , and Fleming purchased the rights back in 1959 . Moonraker ended up being the last James Bond novel to receive a screen adaptation . 
 However , as with several previous Bond films , the story from Fleming 's novel is almost entirely dispensed with , and little more than the name of Hugo Drax was used in film , in favour of a film more in keeping with the era of science fiction . The 2002 Bond film Die Another Day makes further use of some ideas and character names from the novel . Tom Mankiewicz wrote a short outline for Moonraker that was mostly discarded . According to Mankiewicz , footage shot at Drax 's lairs was considerably more detailed than the edited result in the final version . The crew had shot a scene with Drax meeting his co @-@ financiers in his jungle lair and they used the same chamber room below the space shuttle launch pad that Bond and Goodhead eventually escape from . This scene was shot but later cut out . Another scene involving Bond and Goodhead in a meditation room aboard Drax 's space station , was shot but never used in the final film . However , press stills were released of the scene which featured on Topps trading cards in 1979 as was a cinema trailer which featured a close @-@ up of Jaws ' reaction after Bond punches him in the face aboard the space station , neither of which featured in the complete film . Some scenes from Mankiewicz 's script were later used in subsequent films , including the <unk> Jet sequence used in the pre @-@ credit sequence for Octopussy , and the Eiffel Tower scene in A View to a Kill . 
 In March 2004 an Internet hoax stated rumours about a lost 1956 version of Moonraker by Orson Welles , and a James Bond web site repeated it on April Fool 's Day in 2004 as a hoax . Supposedly , this recently discovered lost film was 40 minutes of raw footage with Dirk Bogarde as Bond , Welles as Drax , and Peter Lorre as Drax 's henchman . 
 = = = = Novelization = = = = 
 The screenplay of Moonraker differed so much from Ian Fleming 's novel that Eon Productions authorised the film 's screenwriter , Christopher Wood to write a novelisation ; this would be his second Bond novelisation . It was named James Bond and Moonraker to avoid confusion with Fleming 's original novel Moonraker . It was published in 1979 , with the film 's release . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Initially , the chief villain , Hugo Drax , was to be played by British actor James Mason , but once the decision was made that the film would be an Anglo @-@ French co @-@ production under the 1965 – 79 film treaty , French actor Michael Lonsdale was cast as Drax and Corinne Cléry was chosen for the part of Corinne Dufour , to comply with qualifying criteria of the agreement . American actress Lois Chiles had originally been offered the role of Anya Amasova in The Spy Who Loved Me ( 1977 ) , but had turned down the part when she decided to take temporary retirement . Chiles was cast as Holly Goodhead by chance , when she was given the seat next to Lewis Gilbert on a flight and he believed she would be ideal for the role as the CIA scientist . Drax 's henchman Chang , played by Japanese aikido instructor Toshiro Suga , was recommended for the role by executive producer Michael G. Wilson , who was one of his pupils . Wilson , continuing a tradition he started in the film Goldfinger , has a small cameo role in Moonraker : he appears twice , first as a tourist outside the <unk> Glass shop and museum in Venice , then at the end of the film as a technician in the US Navy control room . 
 The Jaws character , played by Richard Kiel , makes a return , although in Moonraker the role is played more for comedic effect than in The Spy Who Loved Me . Jaws was intended to be a villain against Bond to the bitter end , but director Lewis Gilbert stated on the DVD documentary that he received so much fan mail from small children saying " Why can 't Jaws be a goodie not a baddie " , that as a result he was persuaded to make Jaws gradually become Bond 's ally at the end of the film . 
 Diminutive French actress Blanche <unk> , who had recently begun her career with minor roles in French films such as Michel Lang 's Holiday Hotel ( 1978 ) and Claude Sautet 's Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film nominee , A Simple Story ( 1978 ) , was cast as the bespectacled Dolly , the girlfriend of Jaws . Originally , the producers were dubious about whether the audience would accept the height difference between them , and only made their decision once they were informed by Richard Kiel that his real @-@ life wife was of the same height . Lois Maxwell 's 22 @-@ year @-@ old daughter , Melinda Maxwell , was also cast as one of the " perfect " human specimens from Drax 's master race . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Production began on 14 August 1978 . The main shooting was switched from the usual 007 Stage at the Pinewood Studios to France , due to high taxation in England at the time . Only the cable car interiors and space battle exteriors were filmed at Pinewood . The massive sets designed by Ken Adam were the largest ever constructed in France and required more than 222 @,@ 000 man @-@ hours to construct ( roughly 1000 hours by each of the crew on average ) . They were shot at three of France 's largest film studios in <unk> and Boulogne @-@ Billancourt . 220 technicians used 100 tonnes of metal , two tonnes of nails and 10 @,@ 000 feet of wood to build the three @-@ story space station set at <unk> Studios . The elaborate space set for Moonraker holds the world record for having the largest number of zero gravity wires in one scene . The Venetian glass museum and fight between Bond and Chang was shot at Boulogne Studios in a building which had once been a World War II Luftwaffe aircraft factory during Germany 's occupation of France . The scene in the Venice glass museum and warehouse holds the record for the largest amount of break @-@ away sugar glass used in a single scene . 
 Drax 's mansion , set in California , was actually filmed at the Château de Vaux @-@ le @-@ Vicomte , about 55 kilometres ( 34 mi ) southeast of Paris , for the exteriors and Grand Salon . The remaining interiors , including some of the scenes with Corinne <unk> and the drawing room , were filmed at the Château de <unk> . 
 Much of the film was shot in the cities of London , Paris , Venice , Palmdale , California , Port St. Lucie , Florida , and Rio de Janeiro . The production team had considered India and Nepal as a location in the film but on arriving at those places to investigate , they found that it was inconceivable to write them into the script , particularly with time restrictions to do so . They decided on Rio de Janeiro , Brazil , relatively early on , a city that Cubby Broccoli had visited on holiday , and a team was sent to that city in early 1978 to capture initial footage from the Carnival festival , which featured in the film . 
 At the Rio de Janeiro location , many months later , Roger Moore arrived several days later than scheduled for shooting due to recurrent health problems and an attack of kidney stones that he had suffered while in France . After arriving in Rio de Janeiro , Moore was immediately whisked off the plane and went straight to hair and make @-@ up work , before re @-@ boarding the plane , to film the sequence with him arriving as James Bond in the film . Sugarloaf Mountain was a prominent location in the film , and during filming of the cable car sequence in which Bond and Goodhead are attacked by Jaws during mid @-@ air transportation high above Rio de Janeiro , the stuntman Richard Graydon slipped and narrowly avoided falling to his death . For the scene in which Jaws bites into the steel tramway cable with his teeth , the cable was actually made of liquorice , although Richard Kiel was still required to use his steel dentures . 
 Iguazu Falls was a natural location depicted in the film , although as stated by " Q " in the film , the falls were intended to be located somewhere in the upper basin of the Amazon River rather than where the falls are actually located in the south of Brazil . The second unit had originally planned on sending an actual boat over the falls . However , on attempting to release it , the boat became firmly embedded on rocks near the edge . Despite a dangerous attempt by helicopter and rope ladder to retrieve it , the plan had to be abandoned , forcing the second unit to use a miniature at Pinewood instead . The exterior of Drax 's pyramid headquarters in the Amazon rain forest near the falls was actually filmed at the Tikal Mayan ruins in Guatemala . The interior of the pyramid , however , was designed by Ken Adam at a French studio , in which he purposefully used a shiny coating to make the walls look plastic and false . All of the space centre scenes were shot at the Vehicle Assembly Building of the Kennedy Space Center , Florida , although some of the earlier scenes of the Moonraker assembly plant had been filmed on location at the Rockwell International manufacturing plant in Palmdale , California . 
 The early scene involving Bond and Jaws in which Bond is pushed out of the aircraft without a parachute took weeks of planning and preparation . The skydiving sequence was coordinated by Don <unk> under the supervision of second unit director John Glen . As <unk> and skydiving champion B.J. Worth developed the equipment for the scene , which included a 1 @-@ inch @-@ thick ( 25 mm ) parachute pack that could be concealed beneath the suit to give the impression of the missing parachute , and equipment to prevent the <unk> cameraman from suffering whiplash while opening his parachute , they brought in stuntman Jake Lombard to test it all . Lombard eventually played Bond in the scene , with Worth as the pilot from which Bond takes a parachute , and Ron Luginbill as Jaws . Both Lombard and Worth would become regular members of the stunt team for aerial sequences in later Bond films . When the stuntmen opened their parachutes at the end of every shoot , custom @-@ sewn <unk> costume seams would separate to allow the hidden parachutes to open . The skydiver cinematographer used a lightweight Panavision camera , bought from an old pawn shop in Paris , which he had adapted , and attached to his helmet to shoot the entire sequence . The scene took a total of 88 <unk> by the stuntmen to be completed . The only scenes shot in studio were close @-@ ups of Roger Moore and Richard Kiel . 
 Since NASA 's Space Shuttle program had not been launched , Derek Meddings and his miniatures team had to create the rocket launch footage without any reference . Shuttle models attached to bottle rockets and signal flares were used for take @-@ off , and the smoke trail was created with salt that fell from the models . The space scenes were done by rewinding the camera after an element was shot , enabling other elements to be superimposed in the film stock , with the space battle needing up to forty rewinds to incorporate everything . 
 For the scene involving the opening of the musical electronic laboratory door lock in Venice , producer Albert R. Broccoli requested special permission from director Steven Spielberg to use the five @-@ note melody from his film Close Encounters of the Third Kind ( 1977 ) . In 1985 , Broccoli would return the favour by fulfilling Spielberg 's request to use the James Bond theme music for a scene in his film , The Goonies ( 1985 ) . 
 As James Bond is arriving at the scene of the pheasant shoot , a trumpet is sounded playing the first three brass notes from Also sprach Zarathustra , referencing the film 2001 : A Space Odyssey ( 1968 ) . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 Moonraker was the third of three Bond films for which the theme song was performed by Shirley Bassey ( following Goldfinger and Diamonds Are Forever ) . Kate Bush and Frank Sinatra were both considered for the vocals , before Johnny Mathis was approached and offered the opportunity . However Mathis , despite having started recording with Barry , was unable to complete the project , leaving producers to offer the song to Bassey just weeks before the premiere date in England . Bassey made the recordings with very short notice and as a result , she never regarded the song ' as her own ' as she had never had the chance to perform it in full or promote it first . The film uses two versions of the title theme song , a ballad version heard over the main titles , and a disco version over the closing titles . Confusingly , the United Artists single release labelled the tracks on the 7 " single as " Moonraker ( Main Title ) " for the version used to close the film and " Moonraker ( End Title ) " for the track that opened the film . The song made little impact on the charts , reaching 159 , partly attributed to Bassey 's failure to promote the single , given the last @-@ minute decision to quickly record it to meet the schedule . 
 The soundtrack of Moonraker was composed by John Barry and recorded in Paris , again , as with production , marking a turning point away from the English location at CTS Studios in London . The score also marked a turning point in John Barry 's output , abandoning the <unk> brass of his earlier Bond scores and instead scoring the film with slow , rich string passages – a trend which Barry would continue in the 1980s with scores such as Out of Africa and Somewhere in Time . For Moonraker , Barry uses for the first time since Diamonds Are Forever ( 1971 ) a piece of music called " 007 " ( on track 7 ) , the secondary Bond theme composed by Barry which was introduced in From Russia with Love during Bond 's escape with the Lektor ; some classical music pieces were also included in the film . For the scene where Bond visits Drax in his chateau , Drax plays Frédéric Chopin 's Prelude no . 15 in D @-@ flat major ( op . 28 ) , " Raindrop " on his grand piano ( although he plays in the key of D major ) . <unk> @-@ Tratsch @-@ Polka by Johann Strauss II was featured during the hovercraft scene on the Piazza San Marco in Venice , and Tchaikovsky 's " Romeo and Juliet Overture " was used for the scenes in Brazil in which Jaws meets Dolly following his accident . Other passages pay homage to earlier films including Richard Strauss 's Also sprach Zarathustra ( op . 30 ) , associated with 2001 : A Space Odyssey , with the hunting horn playing its distinctive first three notes , Elmer Bernstein 's theme from The Magnificent Seven when Bond appears on horseback in gaucho clothing at MI6 headquarters in Brazil , and the alien @-@ contacting theme from Close Encounters of the Third Kind as the key @-@ code for a security door as mentioned previously . 
 The Italian aria " <unk> la <unk> " from the Ruggero Leoncavallo 's opera " I Pagliacci " , was sung in Venice , before one of the henchmen falls to his death from a building , landing and ruining a piano , resulting in Bond to quip the often misquoted line from the film Casablanca , " Play it again , Sam " . Finally in 2005 , Bassey sang the song for the first time outside James Bond on stage as part of a medley of her three Bond title songs . An instrumental strings version of the title theme was used in 2007 tourism commercials for the Dominican Republic . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 Moonraker premiered on 26 June 1979 , in the Odeon Leicester Square , United Kingdom , grossing $ 70 @,@ 308 @,@ 099 in the UK . Three days after the UK release , it went on general release in the US , opening in 788 cinemas . On the mainland of Europe , the most common month of release was in August 1979 , opening in the Scandinavian countries of Denmark , Finland , Norway , Iceland and Sweden between 13 and 18 August . Given that the film was produced largely in France , and it involved some notable French actors , the French premiere for the film was relatively late , released in that country on 10 October 1979 . Moonraker grossed a worldwide total of $ 210 @,@ 300 @,@ 000 . 
 Moonraker had a mixed reception by critics . The film has a " fresh " 60 % rating on review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes , and reviewers such as James Berardinelli praised the visual effects and stunts . 
 The New York Times film critic Vincent Canby called Moonraker " one of the most buoyant Bond films of all . Almost everyone connected with the movie is in top form , even Mr. Moore . Here he 's as ageless , resourceful , and graceful as the character he inhabits . " Canby subsequently said the film was , alongside Goldfinger , the best of the series . 
 Whilst The Globe and Mail critic Jay Scott said Moonraker was second only to Goldfinger . " In the first few minutes – before the credits – it offers more thrills than most escapist movies provide in two hours . " During the title sequence , " the excitement has gone all the way up to giddy and never comes down . " Scott admired the film 's theme song and cited with approval the film 's location work . He also singled out Ken Adam 's sets , dubbing them " high @-@ tech Piranesi . " 
 Frank Rich of Time felt " The result is a film that is irresistibly entertaining as only truly mindless spectacle can be . Those who have held out on Bond movies over 17 years may not be convinced by Moonraker , but everyone else will be . " 
 Film scholar James Monaco designated the film a " minor masterpiece " and declared it the best Bond film of them all . 
 However , some critics consider Moonraker one of the lesser films in the series , largely due to the extent of the plot which takes James Bond into space , some of the ploys used in the film for comedic effect , and its extended dialogue . In November 2006 , Entertainment Weekly ranked Moonraker fourteenth among the Bond films , describing it as " by far the <unk> of all 007 movies " with " one of the worst theme songs " ; while IGN listed it as eleventh , calling it outlandish and saying that despite the actors " trying what they can to ground the film in reality , the laser gun / space station finale pretty much undercuts their efforts " ; and Norman Wilner of MSN chose it as the fourth worst film of the series , considering that the film " just flat @-@ out sucks " . 
 Critic Nicholas Sylvain said " Moonraker seems to have more than its share of little flaws and annoyances which begin right from the opening pre @-@ credit sequence . The sheer idiocy ( and impossibility ) of having a fully fueled shuttle on the back of the Boeing during the trans @-@ Atlantic crossing should be evident , and later in the film , the whole Jaws @-@ falls @-@ in @-@ love and becomes a ' good guy ' routine leaves me rather cold , and provides far too much cheesy comedy moments , as does the gondola driving through the square scene . " 
 In his review of Moonraker in 1979 , the Chicago Sun @-@ Times film critic Roger Ebert , while clearly expressing his approval of the advanced special effects and Ken Adam 's extravagant production sets , criticised the pace in which the locations of the film evolved , remarking that , " it 's so jammed with faraway places and science fiction special effects that Bond has to move at a trot just to make it into all the scenes " . Christopher Null of Filmcritic.com said of the film : " Most rational observers agree that Moonraker is without a doubt the most absurd James Bond movie , definitely of the Roger Moore era and possibly of all time " . However , while he criticised the extravagance of the plot and action sequences , he believed that this added to the enjoyment of the film , and particularly approved of the remark " I think he 's attempting re @-@ entry ! " by " Q " during Bond and Goodhead 's orbiting of the Earth which he described as " featuring what might be the best double entendre ever " . 
 Reviewing Moonraker , film critic Danny Peary wrote that " The worst James Bond film to date has Roger Moore walking through the paces for his hefty paycheck and giving way to his double for a series of unimaginative action scenes and ' humorous ' chases . There 's little suspense and the humor falls flat . Not only is Jaws so pacified by love that he becomes a good guy , but the filmmakers also have the gall to set the finale in outer space and stage a battle right out of Star Wars . " 
 The exaggerated nature of the plot and space station sequence has seen the film parodied on numerous occasions . Of note is the Austin Powers spoof film The Spy Who Shagged Me ( 1999 ) which whilst a parody of other James Bond films , pays reference to Moonraker by Dr. Evil 's lair in space . The scene in which Drax is shot by the cyanide dart and ousted into space is parodied by Powers ' ejection of Dr. Evil 's clone Mini @-@ Me into outer space in the same way . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 Derek Meddings , Paul Wilson and John Evans were nominated for the Academy Award for Best Visual Effects , and the film was nominated for three Saturn Awards , Best Science Fiction Film , Best Special Effects , and Best Supporting Actor ( Richard Kiel ) . 
 = New York State Route 28A = 
 New York State Route 28A ( NY 28A ) is an east – west state highway in Ulster County , New York , in the United States . It extends for nearly twenty miles ( 32 km ) along the south side of Ashokan Reservoir in Catskill Park , serving as a southerly alternate route of NY 28 through the area . Many of the communities along its length , such as West Shokan and Olivebridge , are relocated versions of those condemned for the reservoir 's construction . Near Olivebridge , NY 28A intersects NY 213 , the only other state route that NY 28A intersects aside from its parent , NY 28 . 
 NY 28A was built in the early 20th century during the Ashokan Reservoir 's construction . The highway was built and subsequently maintained by New York City as the result of a 1909 court order , which mandated that the city maintain the reservoir perimeter roads in perpetuity . In the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York , the portion of the southern loop road between Boiceville and Olivebridge became part of NY 213 . The entire southern loop road was redesignated as NY 28A c . 1933 . In the 1970s , New York City sought to transfer control of its upstate roads to the New York State Department of Transportation ( NYSDOT ) ; however , as of 2013 , no action had been taken . 
 = = Route description = = 
 Maintenance of NY 28A is split between the New York City Department of Transportation ( NYCDOT ) and Ulster County . NYCDOT maintenance begins at the western junction with NY 28 and ends at a point near Shady Lane , a local street near the eastern end of the reservoir in Hurley . The remaining 1 @.@ 63 miles ( 2 @.@ 62 km ) of the highway is county @-@ maintained and signed as part of County Route 50 ( CR 50 ) . 
 = = = Boiceville to Olivebridge = = = 
 NY 28A begins at a large triangular intersection with NY 28 just south of the hamlet of Boiceville , within the Catskill Park . From there , it heads to the west as a narrow two @-@ lane road , crossing Esopus Creek just west of where it empties into the Ashokan Reservoir . The highway turns southward , loosely paralleling the reservoir shoreline as it heads through the town of Olive . The shoreline itself is less than one @-@ half mile ( 0 @.@ 8 km ) from NY 28A , separated by woods and the New York City Department of Environmental Protection fences . About one mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) south of Boiceville , the highway crosses Traver Hollow Brook by way of a bridge that leads the road to the lower slopes of Samuels Point , where houses begin to appear in the woods on the western side of the road . NY 28A closely follows the base of the hill , winding back and forth as it heads southward toward the hamlet of West Shokan . 
 After one mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) of continuous curves , the road straightens out just north of West Shokan , where it crosses the Bushkill . Immediately beyond the creek is an intersection with Watson Hollow Road ( CR 42 ) and the center of West Shokan . Olive 's town hall and municipal garage are a short distance to the west on Watson Hollow Road , which leads through the mountains to Sundown and ultimately to Sullivan County . South of the junction , the area returns and the road continues through some undeveloped stretches . The road closely follows the shoreline here , going east , south , or southeast to match turns in the reservoir 's perimeter . Only a handful of homes are located along this stretch , situated at intersections between NY 28A and other local roads . 
 = = = Olivebridge to Stony Hollow = = = 
 Five miles ( 8 km ) past West Shokan , NY 28A intersects Monument Road , which used to connect to the reservoir 's spillway and the road above the reservoir , which is closed to automobile traffic . The junction has been converted into a small parking area . A quarter @-@ mile ( 0 @.@ 4 km ) further on is the western terminus of NY 213 , the only other state route that NY 28A intersects aside from its parent . Although NY 213 is an east – west route , it actually heads due south from this junction to the nearby hamlet of Olivebridge on its way to Stone Ridge and High Falls . Continuing east , NY 28A descends to cross Esopus Creek again before climbing back up to the city 's watershed visitor center . Across from the center is Beaverkill Road , a local highway leading southeastward to SUNY New Paltz 's outdoor environmental education center and Ashokan Bridge , a covered bridge over Esopus Creek , located on Ashokan Road . 
 Not far from Beaverkill Road is the east end of the spillway road , which was closed as a security precaution following the September 11 , 2001 attacks , but reopened after construction of a new alignment of NY 28A was completed in 2012 . Past the spillway road , NY 28A continues east , briefly crossing the Blue Line and leaving Catskill Park as it passes another spillway . At the spillway 's southeastern tip is a junction with Stone Church Road , where the route turns back to the north and reenters the park . Now in the town of Hurley , NY 28A continues to follow the irregular reservoir shoreline to the northeast , but on a slightly further inland alignment than before . The land here remains wooded , but more frequently broken by houses on the southern side . 
 The route reaches the eastern end of the reservoir roughly three @-@ tenths mile ( 0 @.@ 5 km ) west of Basin Road , at which point it winds back to a northerly heading through some areas where the land slopes down from the road rather than up . The route eventually turns east , leaving the reservoir behind and crossing into the town of Kingston . Here , it runs parallel with NY 28 for just under one mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) before ending at an intersection with the route just east of the hamlet of Stony Hollow . The junction is roughly two miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) west of the city of Kingston , where NY 28 connects to U.S. Route 209 and the Interstate 87 portion of the New York State Thruway . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Origins and designation = = = 
 The origins of NY 28A date back to 1907 when construction began on one of several dams that would eventually create the Ashokan Reservoir , a water body built by New York City to increase its water supply . In the initial stages of construction , seven villages in the reservoir 's dimensions were destroyed and 64 miles ( 103 km ) of roads were taken out of service . The latter were to be replaced with 40 miles ( 64 km ) of new roads and 10 bridges carrying the highways around the reservoir 's perimeter . According to a 1909 court order , the roads and bridges would be built and maintained by New York City in perpetuity to ensure that the residents displaced by the new reservoir would not be permanently isolated . The city 's Board of Estimate initially balked at the measure , citing the mandate as their primary reason for rejecting a June 20 , 1913 , request by the city 's Board of Water Supply for $ 1 @.@ 3 million ( equivalent to $ 311 million in 2016 ) to pave the perimeter roads . 
 In order to fill the reservoir , the perimeter of the water body — and thus , the roads built along it — had to be completed . Even so , the Board of Estimate sought to have the 1909 court order dropped before allocating the necessary funds toward the roadways . The roads were eventually paved by the state of New York instead . Most of the perimeter road was finished by October 11 , 1913 , the day that water first began to be added to the reservoir . The entire highway was completed by 1917 . While the northern loop road was designated as NY 19 in 1924 , the southern loop road went unnumbered until 1930 . In the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York , the Margaretville – Kingston segment of NY 19 became part of an extended NY 28 , while the portion of the southern perimeter road west of Olivebridge became part of NY 213 . NY 213 was truncated c . 1933 to begin in Olivebridge while the entirety of the southern loop road was designated as NY 28A . 
 = = = Maintenance and realignment = = = 
 By the mid @-@ 1970s , New York City was struggling to maintain its upstate road network . Annual maintenance costs of the city 's 82 miles ( 132 km ) of roads and 26 bridges had grown to $ 310 @,@ 000 ( equivalent to $ 1 @.@ 36 million in 2016 ) . Additionally , one bridge along NY 28A in Traver Hollow was temporarily closed in June 1975 due to safety concerns , a move that ultimately led to a lawsuit between the city and the town of Olive over economic hardship caused by the closure . In October 1975 , New York City Environmental Protection Administrator Robert Low requested that NYSDOT assume maintenance of the city 's upstate roads , claiming that the state could maintain them in a more efficient and effective manner . The plan was never implemented . 
 As part of the reservoir 's construction , a north – south road was built across the water body , linking Olivebridge on the south bank to Shokan on the northern side . This highway was closed to automotive traffic by New York City in early 2002 following the September 11 , 2001 attacks , citing a potential security vulnerability . However , the route was re @-@ opened for traffic that year , and remained open until March 20 , 2003 due to a United States Army Corps of Engineers confidential risk assessment , which suggested that the city should close it again to protect the reservoir spillway from sabotage . In March 2007 , the town of Olive filed suit against the city of New York in the New York State Supreme Court 's Appellate Division for it to be re @-@ opened as a violation of the Water Supply Act of 1905 or to guarantee $ 5 million ( equivalent to $ 5 @.@ 71 million in 2016 ) to reconstruct NY 28A . However , Olive v. City of New York was dismissed by the court on June 18 , 2009 as it had surpassed the four month statute of limitations . 
 In the late 2000s , the New York City Department of Environmental Protection began work on a project to eliminate a sharp S @-@ curve in NY 28A between NY 213 and the now @-@ closed cross @-@ reservoir road . The impetus for the project came from residents who wanted the narrow NY 28A improved in lieu of reopening the road . Work on the realignment began in January 2009 , but was halted just one month later over environmental and easement issues . Construction resumed on August 12 , 2010 , after the issues were resolved , and was expected to be completed in December 2011 . The project was completed in early August 2012 , two years after construction began , with the total cost at $ 15 million ( equivalent to $ 15 @.@ 5 million in 2016 ) . As a result , the spillway road and dam was completed and reopened to traffic . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in Ulster County . 
 = John Y. Brown ( politician , born 1835 ) = 
 John Young Brown ( June 28 , 1835 – January 11 , 1904 ) was a politician from the U.S. state of Kentucky . He represented the state in the United States House of Representatives and served as its 31st governor . Brown was elected to the House of Representatives for three non @-@ consecutive terms , each of which was marred by controversy . He was first elected in 1859 , despite his own protests that he was not yet twenty @-@ five years old ; the minimum age set by the Constitution for serving in the legislature . The voters of his district elected him anyway , but he was not allowed to take his seat until the Congress ' second session , after he was of legal age to serve . After moving to Henderson , Kentucky , Brown was elected from that district in 1866 . On this occasion , he was denied his seat because of alleged disloyalty to the Union during the Civil War . Voters in his district refused to elect another representative , and the seat remained vacant throughout the term to which Brown was elected . After an unsuccessful gubernatorial bid in 1871 , Brown was again elected to the House in 1872 and served three consecutive terms . During his final term , he was officially censured for delivering a speech excoriating Massachusetts Representative Benjamin F. Butler . The censure was later expunged from the congressional record . 
 After his service in the House , Brown took a break from politics , but re @-@ entered the political arena as a candidate for governor of Kentucky in 1891 . He secured the Democratic nomination in a four @-@ way primary election , then convincingly won the general election over his Republican challenger , Andrew T. Wood . Brown 's administration , and the state Democratic Party , were split between gold standard supporters ( including Brown ) and supporters of the free coinage of silver . Brown 's was also the first administration to operate under the Kentucky Constitution of 1891 , and most of the legislature 's time was spent adapting the state 's code of laws to the new constitution . Consequently , little of significance was accomplished during Brown 's term . 
 Brown hoped the legislature would elect him to the U.S. Senate following his term as governor . Having already alienated the free silver faction of his party , he backed " <unk> " candidate Cassius M. Clay , Jr. for the Democratic nomination in the upcoming gubernatorial election . However , the deaths of two of Brown 's children ended his interest in the gubernatorial race and his own senatorial ambitions . At the Democratic nominating convention of 1899 , candidate William Goebel used questionable tactics to secure the gubernatorial nomination , and a disgruntled faction of the party held a separate nominating convention , choosing Brown to oppose Goebel in the general election . Goebel was eventually declared the winner of the election , but was assassinated . Brown became the legal counsel for former Kentucky Secretary of State Caleb Powers , an accused conspirator in the assassination . Brown died in Henderson on January 11 , 1904 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 John Young Brown was born on June 27 , 1835 , in <unk> ( near Elizabethtown ) , Hardin County , Kentucky . He was the son of Thomas Dudley and Elizabeth ( Young ) Brown . His father served in the state legislature and was a delegate to the 1849 state constitutional convention . Two of his uncles , Bryan Rust Young and William Singleton Young , served as U.S. Representatives . Brown spent much time with his father at the state capitol , which sparked his early interest in politics . 
 Brown received his early education in the schools of Elizabethtown , and in 1851 , at the age of sixteen , matriculated at Centre College in Danville , Kentucky . In 1855 , he graduated from Centre and returned to Hardin County to read law . He was admitted to the bar in 1857 and opened his practice in Elizabethtown . His reputation as an orator put him in high demand , but his zealous criticism of the Know Nothing Party drew threats against his life . 
 Brown married Lucie Barbee in 1857 , but she died the following year . In September 1860 , he married Rebecca Hart Dixon , the daughter of former U.S. Senator Archibald Dixon . The couple had eight children . 
 = = U.S. House of Representatives = = 
 At a meeting of local Democrats in Bardstown , Kentucky , in 1859 , Brown was nominated to oppose Joshua Jewett for Jewett 's seat in the House of Representatives . Despite Brown 's protests that he was more than a year younger than the legal age to serve , he was elected over Jewett by about two thousand votes . He did not take his seat until the second congressional session because of his age . He became a member of the Douglas National Committee in 1860 and engaged in a series of debates with supporters of John C. Breckinridge for president , including Breckinridge 's cousin , William Campbell Preston Breckinridge . 
 It is not clear exactly when Brown relocated to Henderson , Kentucky . Confederate officer Stovepipe Johnson recounts that Brown was among the city leaders who welcomed him to Henderson in early 1862 , but other sources state that Brown did not settle in Henderson until after the war . His sympathies during the war were decidedly with the Confederacy . [ a ] 
 Brown was re @-@ elected to the House of Representatives in 1866 . His seat was declared vacant , however , because of his alleged disloyalty during the war . Voters in his district refused to elect anyone else to fill the vacancy , and Governor John W. Stevenson filed an official protest of the House 's action , but the seat remained unfilled throughout the Fortieth Congress . 
 Governor Stevenson resigned his office to accept a seat in the U.S. Senate , and the remainder of his term was filled by President Pro Tem of the Senate Preston Leslie . When Leslie , who enjoyed only lukewarm support from his party , sought the Democratic gubernatorial nomination in 1871 , Brown 's name was among those put in nomination against his ; after a few ballots , however , it became clear that Brown would not be able to gain a majority , and his supporters abandoned their support of him in favor of other candidates . The following year , Brown was re @-@ elected to the House of Representatives by an overwhelming vote of 10 @,@ 888 to 457 and was allowed to assume his seat . He was twice re @-@ elected , serving until 1877 . 
 Brown 's most notable action in the House was a speech he made on February 4 , 1875 , in response to Massachusetts Representative Benjamin F. Butler 's call to pass the Civil Rights Act of 1875 . Referring to comments Butler had made the previous day about lawlessness against African @-@ Americans in the South , Brown claimed that unjust charges had been made against Southerners by an individual " who is outlawed in his own home by respectable society , whose name is synonymous with falsehood , who is the champion , and has been on all occasions , of fraud ; who is the apologist of thieves , who is such a prodigy of vice and meanness that to describe him would sicken the imagination and exhaust invective . " Brown continued by referencing notorious Scottish murderer William Burke , whose method of murdering his victims became known as " <unk> . " At this point in the speech , Speaker of the House James G. Blaine interrupted Brown , asking if he was referring to a member of the House ; Brown gave an ambiguous response before continuing : " If I wished to describe all that was <unk> in war , inhuman in peace , forbidden in morals , and infamous in politics , I should call it ' <unk> ' . " The House gallery exploded in protest at Brown 's remark , and incensed Republican legislators called for Brown 's immediate expulsion . Though not expelled , he was officially censured by the House for the use of unparliamentary language . The censure was expunged from the record by a subsequent Congress . 
 = = 1891 gubernatorial election = = 
 Following his service in the House , Brown resumed his law practice in Louisville , Kentucky . In 1891 , he was a candidate for the Democratic gubernatorial nomination . The other candidates included Cassius Marcellus Clay , Jr . , son of former Congressman Brutus J. Clay and nephew of abolitionist Cassius Marcellus Clay ; Dr. John Daniel Clardy , later to be elected a U.S. Representative ; and Attorney General Parker Watkins Hardin . The party was split between supporters of corporations , such as the Louisville and Nashville Railroad , and supporters of agrarian interests . Another split was between the more conservative Bourbon Democrats , who supported maintaining the gold standard , and more progressive Democrats , who called for the free coinage of silver . Agrarian voters were about equally split between Clay and Clardy , while Free Silver Democrats were about equally split between Hardin and Clardy . Having lived in the agrarian western part of the state for most of his life , and never having alienated the powerful Farmers ' Alliance , Brown was acceptable to most agrarian interests , while the Louisville and Nashville Railroad felt he was a moderate on the issue of corporate regulation . Bourbon Democrats were also pleased with his sound money stand . 
 Entering the Democratic nominating convention , Brown seemed to be the favorite for the nomination . On the first ballot , he garnered the most votes ( 275 ) , leading Clay ( 264 ) , Clardy ( 190 ) , and Hardin ( 186 ) . Over the next nine ballots , the vote counts changed little . Finally , the convention chairman announced that the candidate receiving the fewest votes on the next ballot would be dropped from the voting . Clardy received the fewest votes , and on the next ballot , his supporters divided almost equally between the remaining three candidates . Hardin was the next candidate to be dropped , and Brown received a majority over Clay on the thirteenth ballot . 
 The Republicans nominated Andrew T. Wood , a lawyer from Mount Sterling , who had failed in earlier elections for Congress and state attorney general . Concurrently with the gubernatorial election , the state 's voters would decide whether to ratify a proposed new constitution for the state in 1891 . The divided Democrats had taken no stand on the document as part of their convention 's platform , and Wood spent much of the campaign trying to get Brown to declare his support for or opposition to it . About six weeks before the election , Brown , sensing strong public support for the new constitution , finally came out in favor of it . For the remainder of the race , Wood touted an alleged conspiracy between Brown and the Louisville and Nashville Railroad to thwart meaningful corporate regulations , but the issue failed to gain much traction . 
 Both Democrats and Republicans were concerned about the presence of S. Brewer Erwin , nominee of the newly formed Populist Party , in the race ; he enjoyed strong support for a third @-@ party candidate , despite the fact that many believed his party 's platform was too radical . Democrats , who were used to carrying the agrarian vote by a wide margin , were especially concerned that the Farmers ' Alliance , consisting of over 125 @,@ 000 members in Kentucky , would endorse Erwin . This did not occur , however , and in the general election , Brown defeated Wood by a vote of 144 @,@ 168 to 116 @,@ 087 . Though he won the election , Brown had not won a majority of the votes ; Populist Erwin captured 25 @,@ 631 votes – 9 percent of the total cast – and a Prohibition candidate received 3 @,@ 292 votes . 
 = = Governor of Kentucky = = 
 Turmoil marked the legislative sessions of Brown 's term ; his supporters had been either unwilling or unable to influence the rest of the Democratic slate , and tensions over the currency issue soon split the administration . Attorney General William Jackson Hendricks , Treasurer Henry S. Hale , and Auditor Luke C. Norman were all free silver supporters and feuded with Brown and his ( appointed ) secretary of state , John W. Headley , throughout Brown 's term . Over time , the rift deepened and spread to the entire Democratic party . Brown also frequently clashed with the legislature and vetoed several of the bills it passed ; none of his vetoes were ever overridden . 
 When the General Assembly convened on the last day of 1891 , Brown reported that he had appointed a commission to study the impact of the new constitution on the state 's existing laws . He also announced that the state 's present budget deficit was $ 229 @,@ 000 and was expected to reach almost half a million dollars by the end of 1893 . With these two large issues facing it , the Assembly was in session almost continuously from December 1891 to July 1893 . The length of the session earned it a derisive nickname – the " Long Parliament " . Part of the reason for the extended session was each chamber 's difficulty in achieving a quorum ; a Louisville newspaper reported that , for an entire month , the largest attendance in the House of Representatives was 61 of 100 members . Consequently , some bills were passed by a plurality instead of a majority of the legislators . Fearing that these bills would be challenged in court , Brown vetoed them . 
 During the session , Brown secured the termination of a statewide geological survey , deeming it too expensive . By constitutional mandate , the regular session ended August 16 , but Brown convened a special session of the legislature on August 25 because important bills that he had vetoed needed to be rewritten and passed , and because some bills he had signed needed to be amended to comply with the new constitution . Major legislation advocated by Brown and passed by the General Assembly included improvements in tax collection processes and tighter controls on corporations . Among the measures not specifically advocated by Brown that were enacted by the General Assembly was a measure racially segregating the state 's railroad cars , called the " separate coach law " . The special session lasted until November 1 . 
 Brown won acclaim from the railroad companies for vetoing a proposed railroad tax increase , but soon drew their ire for preventing the merger of the state 's two largest railways , the Louisville and Nashville Railroad and the Chesapeake and Ohio Railway . The Mason and Foard Company , which leased convict labor to build railroads , resented Brown 's prison reforms . Brown accused his predecessor , Simon Bolivar Buckner , of illegally allowing Mason and Foard to use convict labor , a charge Buckner vehemently denied . 
 During the 1894 legislative session , Brown advocated and won passage of several government efficiency measures , including a bill to transfer certain state governmental expenses to the counties , a bill to reform state printing contracts , and measures clarifying laws governing asylums and charitable institutions . The most significant bill , and the one that generated the most debate , was a law giving married women individual property rights for the first time in state history . Other measures passed during the session included a basic coal safety measure , a common school statute , a measure prohibiting collusive bidding on tobacco , new regulations on grain warehouses , and a law providing free turnpikes . Measures advocated by Brown but not enacted by the Assembly included broadening the powers of the state railroad commission , establishing the offices of state bank inspector and superintendent of public printing , and reforming prison management , including separate detention of adolescent criminals . Brown also lobbied for the abolition of the state parole board ; when the Assembly refused , Brown vowed to ignore the board 's recommendations . 
 Mob violence was prevalent in Kentucky during Brown 's tenure as governor . From 1892 to 1895 , there were fifty @-@ six lynchings in the state . During one notable incident , a Cincinnati judge refused to extradite a black man suspected of shooting a white man in Kentucky . The judge 's decision was based on his opinion that the accused was likely to be the victim of mob violence if returned to Kentucky . In disputing the judge 's decision , Governor Brown attempted to justify some of the violence that had occurred in the state 's past , declaring " It is much to be regretted that we have occasionally had mob violence in this Commonwealth , but it has always been when the passions of the people have been inflamed by the commission of the most atrocious crimes . " 
 = = Later life and death = = 
 It was widely known that Brown desired election to the U.S. Senate when his gubernatorial term expired in 1896 . The leading Democratic candidates to succeed Brown as governor were his old rivals , Cassius M. Clay , Jr. and Parker Watkins Hardin , and Brown believed he would need his eventual successor 's support to secure the Senate seat . Having already alienated Hardin and his free silver allies , Brown threw his support to Clay . Family tragedy would soon remove his interest in the race , however . On October 30 , 1894 , Brown 's teenage daughter Susan died of tuberculosis . A few months later , his son , Archibald Dixon Brown , divorced his wife ; it was subsequently discovered that he had been carrying on an extramarital affair . Acting on an anonymous tip , his lover 's husband found the couple at a brothel in Louisville ; drawing his pistol , he shot his wife and Archibald Brown , killing them both . Of the series of family tragedies , Governor Brown wrote to Clay , " I shall not be a candidate for the Senate . The calamities of my children , which have recently befallen , have utterly unfitted me for the contest . My grief is so severe that , like a black vampire of the night , it seems to have sucked dry the very arteries and veins of my ambition . " Clay went on to lose the nomination to Hardin . Brown refused to endorse Hardin , and the fractured Democratic party watched as the Republicans elected William O. Bradley , the party 's first @-@ ever governor of Kentucky . Despite Brown 's proclaimed lack of interest in the Senate seat , he received one vote during the tumultuous 1896 Senate election to replace Senator J. C. S. Blackburn . 
 After his term as governor , Brown again returned to his legal practice in Louisville . He was an unsuccessful candidate for the House of Representatives in 1896 , losing to Republican Walter Evans . He would later claim that he had only run in order to improve Democratic voter turnout for William Jennings Bryan 's 1896 presidential bid . Prior to the 1899 Democratic nominating convention , Brown was mentioned as a possible gubernatorial nominee , but he declined to become a candidate . When the convention began , he was mentioned as a candidate for convention chairman , but he also refused to serve in this capacity . 
 Despite his proclaimed lack of interest in the gubernatorial nomination , Brown 's name was entered as a candidate on the first ballot , along with Parker Watkins Hardin , former Congressman William J. Stone , and William Goebel , President Pro Tempore of the state senate . The convention was thrown into chaos when a widely known agreement between Stone and Goebel – designed to get Hardin out of the race – broke down . As balloting continued over the next four days ( Sunday excepted ) with no candidate receiving a majority , Brown continued to receive a few votes on each ballot . Finally , the convention delegates decided to drop the candidate with the lowest vote total until one candidate received a majority ; this resulted in the nomination of Goebel a few ballots later . 
 Following the convention , disgruntled Democrats began to talk about rejecting their party 's nominee and holding another nominating convention . Brown became the leader of this group , styled the " Honest Election League " . Plans for the new convention were made at a meeting held August 2 , 1899 , in Lexington , Kentucky . The nomination was made official at a convention held in that city on August 16 . In addition to Brown , the Honest Election League nominated a full slate of candidates for the other state offices . 
 Brown opened his campaign with a speech at Bowling Green on August 26 , 1899 . He answered many allegations that had been made about him , including claims that he had secretly been seeking the Democratic gubernatorial nomination all along , that he had ambitions of succeeding Senator William Joseph Deboe , and that following the nominating convention , he had agreed to speak on behalf of the Goebel ticket . Brown conceded that he desired Senator Deboe 's senate seat and that he had agreed to accept the gubernatorial nomination if it had been offered to him , but he denied that he had ever agreed to speak on Goebel 's behalf . Outgoing Senator Blackburn also charged that Brown was bolting the party again , just as he had in supporting Stephen Douglas over John C. Breckinridge for president in 1860 . Brown replied by quoting an article by William Jennings Bryan 's Omaha World @-@ Herald that asserted the right of an individual to vote against the nominee of his party if the individual deemed the nominee unfit . 
 Due to his age and ill health , Brown was able to speak only once per week . At a campaign event in Madisonville , he challenged Goebel to a debate , but Goebel ignored the challenge . Brown , and other speakers enlisted on behalf of his campaign , frequently called attention to Goebel 's refusal to acknowledge the challenge or agree to a debate . When William Jennings Bryan came to the state to campaign with Goebel , Brown sent him a letter challenging him to repudiate Goebel 's nomination because of the broken agreement between Goebel and Stone . Bryan refused to comment on the events of the convention and stressed the importance of party loyalty . He denounced the Honest Election League 's convention as irregular and invalid . 
 Brown 's campaign faltered as the race drew to a close . Two weeks prior to the election , Brown was injured in a fall at <unk> ; as a result of the injury , he was confined to his home and unable to deliver campaign speeches , despite several attempts to allow him to speak from a chair or wheelchair . The final vote count gave Republican William S. Taylor a small plurality with 193 @,@ 714 votes to Goebel 's 191 @,@ 331 ; Brown garnered only 12 @,@ 140 votes . 
 Goebel challenged the vote returns in several counties . While the challenges were being adjudicated , Goebel was shot by an unknown assassin ; Goebel was ultimately declared the winner of the election , but died of his wounds two days after being sworn into office . Among those charged in Goebel 's murder was Governor Taylor 's Secretary of State , Caleb Powers . Powers employed Brown as his legal counsel during his first trial , which ended in a conviction in July 1900 . Brown died January 11 , 1904 , in Henderson and was buried at the Fernwood Cemetery in that city . He was the namesake of , but not related to , 20th century Kentucky Congressman John Y. Brown , Sr. 
 = Phineas Flynn = 
 Phineas Flynn is one of the protagonists of the animated television series Phineas and Ferb . Voiced by Vincent Martella and created and designed by Dan Povenmire , Phineas first appeared along with the rest of the series ' main characters in the pilot episode " Rollercoaster . " Phineas , along with his stepbrother Ferb Fletcher , star in each A @-@ Plot of every episode . 
 The series concerns Phineas 's attempts to avoid boredom by finding something new to do for each day of his summer vacation . His sister 's name is Candace Flynn , who tries to reveal their outrageous creations , but to no avail . He does this with his less @-@ talkative stepbrother Ferb , and often with many other neighborhood children . The activities they devise usually involve outlandish contraptions , including roller coasters , haunted houses , roller rinks , and a backyard beach etc. which Phineas designs and Ferb builds . 
 Phineas comes from a blended family . The creators chose this arrangement because they considered it underused in children 's programming as well as from creator Jeff " Swampy " Marsh 's past experiences in one . As a character , Phineas has received positive critical response , with one reviewer describing him and his brother as a " comical pairing . " Phineas appears in Phineas and Ferb merchandise , including plush toys , t @-@ shirts , and a video game . 
 = = Role in Phineas and Ferb = = 
 Phineas is part of a blended family , a decision creator Marsh made to reflect his own experiences growing up . His stepbrother , Ferb , is his best friend . Phineas 's birth father is never present or discussed in the series , something Marsh and Povenmire have stated that they fully intend to keep that way . It is established that his mother , Linda Flynn @-@ Fletcher married Ferb 's father , Lawrence Fletcher , after dating him for a while in the 1990s . They truly fell in love at a concert of the fictitious band " Love Händel " after they were put on the kiss cam . 
 Phineas is portrayed as a selfless , intelligent , innocent , and creative child . As a means to defeat boredom , he and his brother devise outrageous activities throughout their summer vacation , often participating in activities – toy design ( in " Toy to the World " ) ; piracy ( in " The Ballad of <unk> " ) ; engineering ( in " It 's About Time ! " ) ; restaurant management ( in " Chez Platypus " ) ; usually inaccessible to children . Phineas lives in the fictional town of Danville ( part of the Tri @-@ State Area ) , in a large , suburban neighborhood ; he comes up with most of his ideas while sitting with Ferb in his backyard . 
 = = Character = = 
 = = = Creation and conception = = = 
 Dan Povenmire and Jeff " Swampy " Marsh had conceived the idea of the Phineas and Ferb series while working as layout artists on The Simpsons . After planning the basics of the show , the two began laying out characters . Povenmire , eating dinner with his family at a Wild Thyme restaurant in South Pasadena , California , drew a quick sketch of a " triangle kid . " Povenmire named the triangle doodle " Phineas , " saying he " look [ ed ] like [ one ] " , and with reference to the character Phileas Fogg ( often <unk> as " Phineas Fogg " ) from Around the World in 80 Days . ( 1873 ) Povenmire tore the paper out and called Marsh that night , telling him " Hey , I think we have our show . " 
 After designing the show , the two had significant difficulties getting the series green lit . It was not picked up for fifteen years . In their final pitch to the Walt Disney Company , the creators designed a recorded storyboard , featuring a very rough outline of characters . The prototype Phineas was ruder to others than the version in the eventual show , where the creators decided to make him more kind . Citing comedy 's " big duos " including Wallace and Gromit and Jay and Silent Bob , the creators chose to give Phineas most of the dialogue while Ferb remains almost silent . 
 = = = Design = = = 
 All characters in Phineas and Ferb were drawn in a design borrowed from Tex Avery 's style , with geometric shapes being included in their structure ; Phineas in particular is that of a triangle . The triangle face has been stated in the series as being just his nose that covers the entire head . The goal while drawing characters was to make them simple enough to be drawn by child viewers and be recognized by silhouette . Phineas 's eyes lie on the top of his head and are of oval shape . For his hair , three " tufts " are put in the back and front , while three freckles lie underneath . For the ear , a small 3 is used to represent the ear lobe . Povenmire uses thin , spindly arms for every character as a simple reason to add fun . 
 = = = Voice = = = 
 Young actor Vincent Martella , previously known for The CW series Everybody Hates Chris , was cast for the role of Phineas . Martella originally auditioned for the role five months before his initial pickup , but was left without feedback for the time . When Dan Povenmire was given a tape of Martella in Everybody Hates Chris , he called him to do Phineas for the pilot . He designed a different voice than his own which he describes as " wacky [ and ] crazy . " The creators were afraid of him losing it when his voice changed , though he was still able to retain it for the most part even afterward , though the tone is now slightly different than the original sound . 
 While in recording sessions , Martella has a large amount of enthusiasm and describes it as humorous to watch him while doing a take . In interviews Martella has said that he enjoys working on the series and voicing Phineas , and appreciates the opportunity to work alongside guest stars , especially Malcolm McDowell . 
 Martella once wrote as an article for Popstar ! Magazine his thoughts on the role and of the show itself : 
 The greatest thing about being on Phineas so far is that I can get my parents to laugh ! We all sat down to see the beach episode on New Years Eve ! Once I saw all the adults laughing along with me and my 10 @-@ year @-@ old brother , that was the greatest thing in the world to me ! 
 = = = Hallmarks = = = 
 Phineas and Ferb makes liberal use of running gags , and Phineas has several recurrent lines that are featured in most episodes . When he comes up with an idea of what adventure he and his brother are going to have that day , he says " Ferb , I know what we 're gonna do today ! " During the course of an adventure , Phineas is generally asked by a disbelieving adult if he is not " a little young to be ... " part of whatever occupation he is currently carrying out . For example , while constructing a shrine to his sister on the face of Mount Rushmore , a park ranger asks him " Aren 't you boys a little young to be restoring a national monument ? " Phineas generally answers " Yes , yes I am , " though on a few occasions has responded " No " or " Well , I don 't think so . " 
 In every episode , Phineas and Ferb 's pet platypus , Perry , disappears to carry out his job as a secret agent . The kids almost always notice this , asking " Hey , where 's Perry ? " Then , when Perry comes home , they say , " Oh , there you are , Perry ! " Discussing Perry , creator Povenmire cited the example of his own pet cat , Sprocket , which he claimed led a " secret life " with his neighbors in order to get extra food . 
 = = = Personality and traits = = = 
 His [ Phineas ] confidence makes people think , " He must be a prodigy . " People rarely ask him if he 's too young . He 'd never lie to an adult or try to get away with anything . He 's just motivated by fun . If he thought mom would actually dislike the things they 're doing , he would probably stop , but since he 's never gotten in trouble for it , he doesn 't think of it as getting into trouble . 
 Phineas is portrayed as being an extremely intelligent , lighthearted , naive , confident , warmhearted and redheaded boy . The Disney Channel promos for Phineas and Ferb describe him as someone who " thinks big " , refusing to let any day be ordinary . Povenmire also characterizes him as assertive , someone so secure in his abilities that others assume he is a prodigy . Povenmire and Marsh wanted the series to reflect their own childhood memories of going out during the summer and have fun , digging trenches and building tunnels , forts , and tree houses . 
 The creators wanted Phineas , like Ferb , to be a character who would never " [ do ] anything with any animosity , " or to agitate his sister or outsmart his mother purposely . Instead , the character was supposed to be motivated only by enjoyment and free from mean spiritedness . He is generous , kind , and optimistic , and several of his plots involve helping someone out . He tries to please his sister Candace , carving her face into Mount Rushmore for her birthday in one episode and helping her retrieve a tape detailing his summer adventures even though she intended on using the footage as evidence to " bust " him and Ferb . Another episode has him throwing an extravaganza for his mother 's birthday , and yet another has him ( along with Ferb and Candace ) recreating their parent 's most romantic moment for their wedding anniversary . He has also been shown helping his grandparents , reenacting his grandfather Reginald 's daredevil stunt from his youth and setting up a roller derby for a rematch race with his grandmother Betty Jo 's old rival . In the episodes " One Good Scare Ought to Do It ! " and " Hail <unk> ! " , Phineas goes to great lengths to help his friend Isabella . Other episodes , like " Unfair Science Fair , " " Oil on Candace , " " The Bully Code , " and " Voyage To The Bottom of Buford , " further explore Phineas 's generosity toward all of his friends . He even has plans at the beginning of " The Bully Code " for a <unk> currency system for emerging nations . 
 On other occasions , though , Phineas 's adventures have upset others , intentionally or otherwise . Most notably Candace is constantly frustrated in her efforts to " bust " her brothers throughout the series , and in rare cases Phineas has unwittingly caused misfortune to others . For example , in the episode " Get That Bigfoot Outta My Face , " Phineas intentionally gives all the kids at camp a fright when he tricks them into thinking Bigfoot is attacking , though this is mostly getting into the spirit of spooky story telling . 
 Nonetheless , Povenmire and Marsh intended for Phineas and Ferb to be motivated only by fun . In one episode , " Thaddeus and Thor " , Phineas says that fun is his only goal in his daily schemes – though Ferb adds that they also do it " for the ladies . " Phineas also says that he wants his adventures to give him something interesting to say when he gets back to school , a setting the creators have confirmed they will never put him in . 
 Phineas is also very modest . He tends to put Ferb 's name on inventions . This may be because Ferb does most of the building . However , he never seems angry or resentful of giving his brother the credit . 
 Phineas appears to be addicted to inventing . In " Bully <unk> Break Up " he goes into withdrawal when the other kids insist on climbing a mountain without using any crazy gadgets . 
 On a few episodes , Phineas shows an angrier side of himself , first seen in the Phineas and Ferb the Movie : Across the 2nd Dimension movie , where Phineas gets angry at Perry after finding out his secret identity because Perry " never trusted him " by telling him the truth , but later realizes that Perry kept his identity hidden because if Phineas and his family found out , Perry would be forced to relocate to another family . Another episode , Phineas and Ferb : Mission Marvel again demonstrates Phineas ' angry side , when he got angry at Candice when she accidentally caused Baljeet to turn into a Hulk @-@ type version of himself , but they later made amends at the end of the episode . Later , on " Phineas and Ferb Save Summer " , when Candace tries to power @-@ up the machine , Phineas starts raising his voice at her in order for her to stop , to which Bulford breaks the fourth wall by saying : " Must be a special episode , he 's yelling at his sister again ! " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Phineas has received mostly positive reviews . Emily Ashby of Common Sense Media describes Phineas as " boisterous , " and he and Ferb as " partner [ s ] in crime . " Susan Stewart , reviewing the show in the New York Times , notes that Phineas and Ferb " work on a heroic scale and are apparently not limited by the laws of nature . " Jean Yoo , an official press member for Disney Channel , describes him as " a precocious bundle of energy whose tolerance for sitting still is just a little thinner than his patience for the social echelon in which he finds himself . " She as well notes that he is " endearing and smart . " 
 Variety calls Phineas 's adventures " spectacular . " Animation Insider reporter Aaron Bynum described him as a " <unk> kid idea machine . " The Seattle Times wrote that both Phineas and Ferb were " young heroes . " The song " Ain 't Got Rhythm , " which Vincent Martella performed in the voice of Phineas alongside Steve Zahn and Thomas Sangster in the episode " Dude , We 're Getting the Band Back Together , " was nominated for an Emmy Award in 2008 for " Outstanding Original Music and Lyrics . " 
 = = In other media = = 
 Besides the series Phineas and Ferb , Phineas has been featured in several other pieces of merchandise from the series . To date , he has appeared in all Phineas and Ferb novelizations , published by Disney Press . Phineas appears in the Nintendo DS video game based on the series , simply titled Phineas and Ferb . Dan Povenmire has said that he saw nothing of the game until its release , on which he was given a copy for free . 
 Plush toys of the character , along with toys representing Ferb and Perry , have been manufactured . Phineas also appears on most of the Phineas and Ferb t @-@ shirts . Phineas is set to appear in the forthcoming comic book series based on the series , though details are unconfirmed . Phineas and his brother Ferb have as well both been referenced in the book Lost and Found : How Churches Are Connecting to Young Adults as examples of how media and television characters can be influential in people 's lives . Both Phineas and his brother Ferb appeared in the MAD segments " The Straight @-@ A Team " and " <unk> and Ferb Tale " where Phineas was shown wearing glasses with a nerdy type look . 
 = Gullfisk = 
 Class B and Class E , normally referred to as Gullfisk ( Norwegian for " goldfish " ) , were a class of 46 trams built by Strømmens Værksted and Skabo Jernbanevognfabrikk for Oslo Sporveier and Bærumsbanen of Oslo , Norway , in 1937 and 1939 . They were the first aluminium trams to operate on the Oslo Tramway and the first bogie trams to operate on street lines . They had contemporary modern electronic equipment , a streamlined shape , and comfortable accommodation . Till 1964 , they were also faster than any other Norwegian tramcar or suburban railcar . 
 Six prototype trams were delivered by Strømmen in 1937 , with four different motor solutions , from AEG , Siemens , Vickers and Norsk Elektrisk & Brown Boveri ( NEBB ) . None of these were particularly successful , and the 40 serial production trams used conventional motors from <unk> . These were delivered in 1939 , with 20 ( class E ) being used by Oslo Sporveier mainly on the Kjelsås Line , but also on other services . The remaining 20 trams ( class B ) were leased to Bærumsbanen , that used them on the Kolsås and Østensjø Lines , and later on the Ekeberg Line . 
 From 1967 , Oslo Sporveier transferred all its trams to Bærumsbanen , where they remained in use until 1985 . The class has been involved in several fatal incidents , including the <unk> tram fire in 1958 . Six trams ( prototype no 163 , nos 166 , 170 , 196 and 199 ) remain at the Oslo Tramway Museum ; whilst Oslo Sporveier has kept two and converted them to maintenance vehicles ( nos 185 and 198 ) , painted them yellow with zebra stripes . They also kept one themselves as a veteran tram ( no 183 ) . 
 = = Background = = 
 During the 1930s , Oslo Sporveier operated a fleet of 150 trams and 130 trailers . The latest series , the HaWa Class , had been delivered during the early 1920s and were , by the late 1930s , becoming old fashioned , with low speed , uncomfortable interiors and a two @-@ axle wheel arrangement . Increased competition from cars and buses made the tram company start a process to find a new " generation " of trams and buses . In 1935 , an agreement was made with <unk> Værksted to build a series of aluminium @-@ <unk> trams and buses . Since the last order , the tracks had been relaid farther from one another , so the tramway could operate 2 @.@ 5 metres ( 8 @.@ 2 ft ) wide and 15 metres ( 49 ft ) long trams . 
 The use of an aluminium body was controversial , and international experts recommended that the tram company should not choose that solution . The goal was to decrease the weight so the trams could operate with less @-@ powerful motors , giving a lower cost . The first prototype was a full @-@ scale model of a tram , built at Homansbyen Depot in 1935 , using an undercarriage from disused horsecars . 
 = = Construction = = 
 Strømmens Værksted delivered six prototypes for Oslo Sporveier in 1937 , all with slightly different specifications . They were numbered 158 – 163 . The four main types of prototypes were later designated B2 ( 158 – 159 with motors from Vickers ) , E4 ( 160 with motors from Siemens ) , E3 ( 161 – 162 with motors from AEG ) and E2 ( 163 with motors from NEBB ) . The trams were taken into use in February 1937 on the Kjelsås Line . They were capable of 65 km / h ( 40 mph ) , compared to the maximum 35 km / h ( 22 mph ) possible by the older trams . According to tests by J. G. Brill Co . , which was a specialist on high @-@ speed interurban railcars , streamline construction would afford a power reduction of 17 % at as low speed as 32 km / h ( 20 mph ) . 
 Shortly after being taken into use , No. 158 lost braking power , killing one person when it landed on the pavement . The initial plan was to use the six trams to operate all services on the Kjelsås Line , with one vehicle in reserve , but this was not possible because of more out @-@ of @-@ service vehicles than estimated . 
 A further 40 units were ordered — 20 from Strømmens Værksted and 20 license @-@ built by Skabo Jernbanevognfabrikk . The various experimental configurations fitted to the prototype trams did not work too well ; and instead a conventional motor solution was chosen . The serial units were also not equipped with regenerative brakes . The series from Strømmen and Skabo received the same motors and bogies , but the electrical equipment was different . The Skabo series had electrical equipment from AEG and was optimized for street @-@ tram operation , while the Strømmen trams were optimized for the suburban tramways and equipped with electrical equipment from Vickers . The Strømmen series was delivered from February to June 1939 and leased to Oslo Sporveier 's subsidiary Bærumsbanen , that gave them the designation Class B. They were put into service on the Østensjø – Kolsås Line , with both end stations far outside Oslo 's city limits that time . The trams partially ran through a relatively rural landscape , and more than any other Norwegian tramway this line may be called an interurban . The Oslo Sporveier trams were numbered 164 – 183 , while the Bærumsbanen trams were numbered 184 – 203 . The tram 's body was streamlined and had a tail at the end that made them look like a goldfish . They were therefore nicknamed " Gullfisk " , the Norwegian term for goldfish ; this later became the most common term for the class . 
 = = Operation = = 
 During World War II , the rationing of petroleum fuels gave a boost to ridership on the electric tramways . To handle the massive increase in ridership , the trams were equipped with two conductors . The single @-@ centre @-@ door solution that worked excellently before the war became a bottle @-@ neck as the trams became packed with riders . Lack of parts , particularly for the British Vickers motors , caused long waits for defective vehicles at the depots . From 1942 , the Kolsås Line was transferred to terminate at Nationaltheatret in the city centre , and the Class B was operated along the Lilleaker Line from the west . Trams 164 – 166 were sent to Düsseldorf in Germany , but were never used because the city lacked balloon loops and the trams were too wide . 
 After the end of the war , Oslo Sporveier decided to transfer all the remaining trams to Bærumsbanen . Their high speed made them well suited on the light rail , but the centre door reduced their capacity . The order of the SM53 @-@ series from <unk> gave Oslo Sporveier sufficient stock to operate the street lines , and from 1952 to 1957 , the company transferred the 19 trams to Bærumsbanen . Here , they were given the designation Class E. No. 163 was in too bad condition to be used on the line , and was retired . In October 1949 , no . 184 caught fire and was taken out of service . On 2 August 1958 , five people perished and 17 were injured in the <unk> tram fire , the worst disaster in the tramway 's history . 
 The Østensjø Line became part of the Oslo Metro in 1967 , and several of the Class E trams were transferred to other parts of the tramway . However , the Lilleaker Line was instead tied to the Ekeberg Line on the east side of the city , and the trams started operating on the Jar – Ljabru service . After the last bus route had been converted to one @-@ man operation and the conductor replaced with a ticket @-@ selling motorman , Oslo Sporveier started the process of converting their tram fleet . No. 176 was converted as a trial , and after 1971 , all the remaining <unk> were converted . Because the trams had been delivered with a single front door , the cost of converting the trams was very little , and the single @-@ manning highly profitable . 
 In 1976 , no . 1976 was retired after it had lost braking power and crashed . After this , only selected trams were given overhauls , the last being no . 170 in 1980 . Following the delivery of the articulated SL79 , the Class B and E were gradually retired , with the last tram running into 1985 . Oslo Tramway Museum has kept six trams , while Oslo Sporveier kept two , converted them to maintenance vehicles and painted them yellow with zebra stripes . 
 = = Specifications = = 
 The Gullfisk were built as self @-@ contained aluminium riveted bodies . This gave a light body that was strong as steel , giving what at the time was regarded as a more elastic structure which would not break as easy . However , this resulted in the bodies sinking somewhat at the ends and between the bogies . It also caused more deformation during accidents , increasing the costs of repairs . The bodies were 15 @.@ 40 meters ( 50 ft 6 in ) long and 2 @.@ 50 meters ( 8 ft 2 in ) wide . The centre beam between the two bogies was made of steel , and was intended to compensate for the soft aluminium structure ; these were prone to rust and needed repeated replacement . The bodies had a very streamlined shape and a distinct tail , that in addition to the aesthetic purpose was chosen because it strengthened the structure . During prototyping , the vehicle was tested in a wind tunnel . 
 The trams were unidirectional and had a single door at the front and a double door in the middle , both on the right side . Class E also had a single door at the rear . The trams were originally delivered with two apartments , with a wall and inside door in front of the centre door . This was removed after the trams became smoke @-@ free . They had a partial wooden interior , with linoleum floors . Various renovations changed the panelling , usually variations of brown and yellow . The trams originally had incandescent light bulbs , but these were replaced with fluorescent lamps after 1955 . From 1970 to 1974 , the trams were rebuilt to remove the conductor , and the driver was given space for a purse and ticket machine , as well as an announcement system . The E @-@ series eventually had the rear door taken out of use and blocked with an extra seat . 
 All but one of the trams had a <unk> @-@ bogie from Strømmens Værksted . The two bogies , each with two axles , were attached to the steel crossbeam . The aluminium body was attached to the crossbeam with leaf springs . The bogie frames were fastened to the axle box via a revolute joint and a spiral spring . Each bogie had two motors , each controlling one axle . In 1941 , no . 187 was equipped with a <unk> @-@ bogie from Strømmen ; it had a different spring system that allowed the tram to remain at the same height independent of the weight . 
 Class E was equipped with disc brakes , while the Class B was equipped with drum brakes . All the trams were equipped with rail brakes , and dynamic brakes . The serial production models were equipped with four 36 @.@ 6 @-@ kilowatt ( 49 @.@ 1 hp ) <unk> <unk> motors . This gave a maximum speed of 65 km / h ( 40 mph ) . They were built with two serial motors connected in parallel to the two other serial motors , so each motor used 300 V. 
 = = = Prototypes = = = 
 No. 158 and 159 were equipped with four 36 @.@ 5 @-@ kilowatt ( 48 @.@ 9 hp ) Vickers <unk> motors . This was a compound motor with regenerative brakes . The trams had sixteen regulating notches and were very complicated to operate . The technology had previously been used in Birmingham , but there the tram company had discontinued them quickly because of their complexity . This complicated set @-@ up was part of the reason for the fatal accident in Sannergata in 1937 . The regenerative brakes were removed in the late 1940s . The two trams ' motors were prone to technical failures , and spent much time in the workshop . They weighed 12 @.@ 87 tonnes ( 12 @.@ 67 long tons ; 14 @.@ 19 short tons ) . 
 No. 160 was equipped with four 33 @.@ 5 @-@ kilowatt ( 44 @.@ 9 hp ) Siemens <unk> motors . The motor controller and electrical equipment were run by a battery that was charged from the overhead wire . The motorman regulated the motor controller that again magnetized the motors . The tram was also equipped with regenerative brakes . Particularly the battery @-@ charging system had many defects , and the tram needed frequent repairs . Eventually the controller and regenerative brakes were removed . It weighed 13 @.@ 16 tonnes ( 12 @.@ 95 long tons ; 14 @.@ 51 short tons ) . 
 No. 161 and 162 were equipped with four 33 @.@ 0 @-@ kilowatt ( 44 @.@ 3 hp ) AEG <unk> motors . They had a conventional design and regenerative brakes , although the latter was eventually removed . They had many technical difficulties , and held Bærumsbanen 's record in maintenance time . They weighed 13 @.@ 57 tonnes ( 13 @.@ 36 long tons ; 14 @.@ 96 short tons ) . 
 No. 163 was equipped with two 50 @.@ 0 @-@ kilowatt ( 67 @.@ 1 hp ) NEBB <unk> motors , one on each bogie that powered both axles . This caused problems because the <unk> required the wheels to be ground regularly to avoid uneven driving , but this was not discovered until 1941 . It weighed 13 @.@ 44 tonnes ( 13 @.@ 23 long tons ; 14 @.@ 82 short tons ) . 
 = The Simpsons Wrestling = 
 The Simpsons Wrestling is a fighting video game based on the animated television series The Simpsons and is based on the professional wrestling genre . The game was made for the PlayStation console , was developed by Big Ape Productions , published by Electronic Arts in Europe and Activision in North America and distributed by Fox Interactive . It was released in Europe on March 22 , 2001 , and in North America on April 12 , 2001 . 
 There are 20 characters in the game , all of whom are voiced by the same actors that provide their voices in the show , and each character executes his or her own exclusive moves and gestures and power moves in the wrestling ring . The matches take place in detailed 3D locations from Springfield . A round in the game ends when one wrestler pins his opponent for a three count . Two victorious rounds wins a match . Unlike in traditional wrestling rules , the opponent may be pinned belly @-@ down . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 The game is loosely based on professional wrestling games , but more closely resembles a beat- ' em up . The game can be played in two modes : a tournament style single @-@ player game or a grudge match where two players can interact . The matches take place in ten different detailed 3D locations from Springfield , such as the Simpsons ' house , the Springfield Nuclear Power Plant , the Kwik @-@ E @-@ Mart , and Moe 's Tavern . Letters float around in the wrestling ring , and if a wrestler collects enough of them , they can taunt and temporarily become invincible . A round ends when one wrestler pins their opponent for a three count . Two rounds are needed to win a match . 
 Each time a successful attack is performed on a player , their health meter depletes . Players with low health stay stunned for longer when knocked down . A player can increase their health by picking up food items that randomly appear in the ring . Running and attacks drain stamina . If a player does not have enough stamina to perform a certain move , it becomes unavailable until they recover . Stamina is regained through not pressing the actions buttons or picking up certain items . Attacks which require more stamina are generally more effective . The stun meter only appears when the opponent is knocked down . It depletes gradually , but the stunned player cannot move until the Stun meter is completely drained . A player can reduce the stun meter faster by pressing the action buttons , or by receiving certain attacks . If a player is low on health , the stun meter will normally be higher , making pin attempts harder to resist . Once a player 's health is completely depleted , it will only take one hit to stun them . Certain attacks to a stunned opponent will actually reset the stun meter . 
 During matches , wrestlers have a health meter that drains as they perform special moves , and gradually refills when they are not attacking . Different moves use up different amounts of energy , and certain characters can win any match by repeatedly using a particularly damaging move that does not require much energy . Several different power @-@ ups are also available in the game , including a donut that increases speed , bowling pins that can be used as clubs , and bubble gum that slows players down . 
 In addition to health items , the letters A , N , U and T appear randomly in the ring . If either player collects enough to spell the word " <unk> " , they can then perform a taunt . The taunt will completely drain the opponent 's stamina , making them unable to attack for a limited time . 
 = = Characters = = 
 The game features 20 characters from the show , all of whom are voiced by the same actors that provide their voices in The Simpsons . The player begins with only 8 of the 12 main characters to begin with . Others can be made playable by unlocking them , or unlocking a certain game mode . 
 Homer - Homer is the most balanced character in the game , but relies particularly on brawling . 
 Bart - Bart is a faster character who uses toys ( skateboard , catapult ) to make up for his lack of strength . 
 Lisa - Lisa is another smaller character who uses her speed to make quick strikes on opponents . Her saxophone attack can hit an opponent anywhere within the ring . 
 Marge - Marge has good reach but lacks strength . She uses household items as weapons . She can even use Maggie to limit an opponent 's movement . 
 Barney - Barney is one of the stronger characters , but lacks speed and stamina . His attacks are based on beer ( including throwing beer glasses ) . 
 Krusty - Krusty is a balanced character who uses a combination of brawling and typical clown paraphernalia . 
 Apu - Apu is a brawler with moderate strength , but has good speed and stamina . 
 Groundskeeper Willie - Willie uses gardening equipment to either keep opponents at a distance or to limit their movement . 
 Bumblebee Man - ( Unlockable ) Bumblebee Man is a balanced brawler . 
 Moe - ( Unlockable ) Moe is one of the faster characters who relies on fighting dirty . To that end , he carries a lot of makeshift weapons . 
 Ned Flanders - ( Unlockable ) Ned Flanders is a weak character with very strong special attacks . His prayer attack is the most damaging in the game as it causes high damage , stuns instantly and hits repeatedly anywhere in the ring . He also fully recovers when pinned , so opponents must beat him twice just to win one singular round . 
 Professor Frink - ( Unlockable ) Frink is a hard to control character who relies on gadgets to wear down opponents . 
 Mr. Burns - ( Boss Character ) Waylon Smithers fights on Mr. Burn 's behalf while Burns stands outside of the ring . Their strongest attack involves Mr. Burns throwing explosives into the ring that do not affect Smithers . They are only playable in the Mr. Burn 's Office level . 
 Kang and Kodos - ( Boss Character ) Kang battles on behalf of this team while Kodos supports by throwing random items into the ring . They are only available in the Spaceship level . 
 Itchy - Itchy is a cartoon mouse with a lot of dangerous booby traps and weapons . He is only available in his own stage and can only battle Scratchy . 
 Scratchy - Scratchy is the long @-@ suffering victim of Itchy . However , his moves and attributes are comparable to Itchy 's . He is only available in his own stage , meaning that he can only battle Itchy . 
 The voice of Kent Brockman can be heard occasionally during matches as a commentator . Various characters make cameos as background images . Each character executes their own exclusive moves and gestures . 
 = = Development = = 
 Big Ape Productions developed The Simpsons Wrestling . At the Electronic Entertainment Expo in 2000 , Fox Interactive announced its plans to produce and publish the game for the PlayStation console . Karly Young , director of Fox Interactive , said that the company had received an " overwhelming " response to their previous Simpsons games , so they wanted to give the fans " another dose of Bart and Homer — this time for PlayStation gamers " . 
 The following months , Fox Interactive looked to partner with somebody who could help publish the game . Activision , who knew the possible casual gamer interest in The Simpsons , announced on March 12 , 2001 that it had signed a deal with Fox Interactive that would allow it to publish The Simpsons Wrestling in North America . Kathy <unk> , executive vice president of Activision , commented that " The Simpsons is a property that enjoys phenomenal success across several entertainment mediums , including interactive entertainment . The acquisition of this game reinforces our strategy of delivering products based on powerful , recognizable brands . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 The Simpsons Wrestling received negative reviews from critics . It received an aggregated score of 41 @.@ 21 % on GameRankings and 32 / 100 on Metacritic . They criticized the game for having simplistic , unbalanced gameplay and bad graphics , but praised the game 's audio track . 
 Doug Perry of IGN described The Simpsons Wrestling as one of the " ugliest " games he had ever seen . He thought the graphics were " choppy " looking , and the character outlines looked " broken up " . Game Informer 's Andrew Reiner criticized the game 's design by saying that he did not think it held any wrestling qualities at all , and that the characters looked " awful " . He said that instead of " grappling " or performing " devastating slams " , you have to " slap your opponent silly " by mashing the buttons <unk> . GameZone , however , called the graphics " quite good , though a little clipped at times by the pace of the combat " . Perry also thought there was little wrestling in the game , instead it is " all about smashing buttons and not having any skill whatsoever " . Reiner said that the game was a major disappointment and is " one of the worst PS games to date " . 
 In contrast to the game 's negative response , GameZone said that even though the game does not feature continuous play , " the action flows well once into an event " . GameZone 's review praised the game 's audio track , and thought it was " fun " because the comedy is straight from the television show , and the characters will " bring a smile to your face " . Reiner also commented positively on the soundtrack and that the game may not be the best wrestling game available , " but it delivers what the cover advertises " . GameSpot 's Frank Provo said that " wit " and " charm " are the two most redeeming features of The Simpsons Wrestling , and in spite of the game 's weak gameplay , it has " plenty of laughs in store " that devoted fans of the The Simpsons will enjoy . The BBC 's David Gibbon wrote that the end result of the track is one that will not " fail to impress fans " . 
 = Panavision = 
 Panavision is an American motion picture equipment company specializing in cameras and lenses , based in Woodland Hills , California . Formed by Robert Gottschalk as a small partnership to create anamorphic projection lenses during the widescreen boom in the 1950s , Panavision expanded its product lines to meet the demands of modern filmmakers . The company introduced its first products in 1954 . Originally a provider of CinemaScope accessories , the company 's line of anamorphic widescreen lenses soon became the industry leader . In 1972 , Panavision helped revolutionize filmmaking with the lightweight Panaflex 35 mm movie camera . The company has introduced other groundbreaking cameras such as the Millennium XL ( 1999 ) and the digital video Genesis ( 2004 ) . 
 Panavision operates exclusively as a rental facility — the company owns its entire inventory , unlike most of its competitors . 
 = = Early history = = 
 Robert Gottschalk founded Panavision in late 1953 , in partnership with Richard Moore , Meredith Nicholson , Harry Eller , Walter Wallin , and William Mann ; the company was formally incorporated in 1954 . Panavision was established principally for the manufacture of anamorphic projection lenses to meet the growing demands of theaters showing CinemaScope films . At the time of Panavision 's formation , Gottschalk owned a camera shop in Westwood Village , California , where many of his customers were cinematographers . A few years earlier , he and Moore — who worked with him in the camera shop — were experimenting with underwater photography ; Gottschalk became interested in the technology of anamorphic lenses , which allowed him to get a wider field of view from his underwater camera housing . The technology was created during World War I to increase the field of view on tank periscopes ; the periscope image was horizontally " squeezed " by the anamorphic lens . After it was <unk> by a complementary anamorphic optical element , the tank operator could see double the horizontal field of view without significant distortion . Gottschalk and Moore bought some of these lenses from C. P. <unk> , a New York optics company , for use in their underwater photography . As widescreen filmmaking became popular , Gottschalk saw an opportunity to provide anamorphic lenses to the film industry — first for projectors , and then for cameras . Nicholson , a friend of Moore , started working as a cameraman on early tests of anamorphic photography . 
 In the 1950s , the motion picture industry was threatened by the advent of television — TV kept moviegoers at home , reducing box office revenues . Film studios sought to lure audiences to theaters with attractions that television could not provide . These included a revival of color films , three @-@ dimensional films , stereophonic sound , and widescreen movies . Cinerama was one of the first widescreen movie processes of the era . In its initial conception , the cumbersome system required three cameras for shooting and three synchronized projectors to display a picture on one wide , curved screen . Along with the logistical and financial challenges of tripling equipment usage and cost , the process led to distracting vertical lines between the three projected images . Looking for a high @-@ impact method of widescreen filmmaking that was cheaper , simpler , and less visually distracting , 20th Century Fox acquired the rights to a process it branded CinemaScope : in this system , the film was shot with anamorphic lenses . The film was then exhibited with a complementary anamorphic lens on the projector that expanded the image , creating a projected aspect ratio ( the ratio of the image 's width to its height ) twice that of the image area on the physical frame of film . By the time the first CinemaScope movie — The Robe ( 1953 ) — was announced for production , Gottschalk , Moore and Nicholson had a demo reel of work with their anamorphic underwater system . 
 Gottschalk learned from one of his vendors that Bausch & Lomb , whom Fox had contracted to manufacture CinemaScope lenses , was having difficulty filling the lens orders for theatrical anamorphic projection equipment . He teamed up with William Mann , who provided optical manufacturing capability , and Walter Wallin , an optical physicist who was an acquaintance of Mann 's . The anamorphic lens design they selected was prismatic rather than the cylindrical design of the Bausch & Lomb CinemaScope lens . This design meant the anamorphic lens extension factor — how much the image is horizontally <unk> — could be manually shifted , useful for projectionists switching between nonanamorphic ( " flat " or " spherical " ) trailers and an anamorphic feature . The result was the <unk> system , designed by Wallin , used in the Panatar lens ; the patent for the system was filed on August 11 , 1954 , and awarded five years later . 
 = = Entering the market = = 
 Panavision 's first product — the Super Panatar projection lens — debuted in March 1954 . Priced at $ 1 @,@ 100 , it captured the market . The Super Panatar was a rectangular box that attached to the existing projection lens with a special bracket . Its variable prismatic system allowed a range of film formats to be shown from the same projector with a simple adjustment of the lens . Panavision improved on the Super Panatar with the Ultra Panatar , a lighter design that could be screwed directly to the front of the projection lens . Panavision lenses gradually replaced CinemaScope as the leading anamorphic system for theatrical projection . 
 In December 1954 , the company created a specialized lens for film laboratories — the Micro Panatar . When fitted to an optical printer , the Micro Panatar could create " flat " ( nonanamorphic ) prints from anamorphic negatives . This allowed films to be distributed to theaters that did not have an anamorphic system installed . To accomplish this dual platform release strategy before the Micro Panatar , studios would sometimes shoot films with one anamorphic and one spherical camera , allowing <unk> theaters to exhibit the film . The cost savings of eliminating the second camera and making flat prints in post @-@ production with the Micro Panatar were enormous . 
 Another innovation of the era secured Panavision 's leading position : the Auto Panatar camera lens for 35 mm anamorphic productions . Early CinemaScope camera lenses were notoriously problematic in close @-@ ups with an optical aberration that was commonly known as " the mumps " : a widening of the face due to a loss of anamorphic power as a subject approaches the lens . Because of the novelty of the new anamorphic process , early CinemaScope productions compensated for this aberration by avoiding tightly framed shots . As the anamorphic process became more popular , it became more problematic . Panavision invented a solution : adding a rotating lens element that moved in mechanical sync with the focus ring . This eliminated the distortion and allowed for natural close @-@ up anamorphic photography . The Auto Panatar , released in 1958 , was rapidly adopted , eventually making CinemaScope lenses obsolete . This innovation earned Panavision the first of its 15 Academy Awards for technical achievement . Soon the screen credit " Filmed in Panavision " ( as if Panavision itself were a widescreen format ) began appearing on motion picture screen credits . 
 Since 1954 , Panavision had been working on a new widescreen process commissioned by MGM . The resulting system used a 65 mm film camera in conjunction with the APO Panatar lens , which was an integrated anamorphic lens ( as opposed to a standard prime lens with an <unk> mounted on it ) . This created a <unk> anamorphic squeeze factor . Movies using the process had an astounding potential aspect ratio of 2 @.@ 76 : 1 when exhibited with 70 mm anamorphic projection prints . Introduced as MGM Camera 65 , the system was used on just a few films , the first of which was Raintree County ( 1956 ) . However , the film was released only in 35 mm anamorphic prints because the circuit of 70 mm theaters was booked with Around the World in Eighty Days ( 1956 ) , shot with the competing , nonanamorphic Todd @-@ AO system . In January 1959 , the posters for the 70 mm release of Disney 's Sleeping Beauty carried the notation " Process lenses by Panavision " next to the Super Technirama 70 logo . The first film to be presented in 70 mm anamorphic — Ben @-@ Hur — was released by MGM in 1959 under the trade name MGM Camera 65 . Panavision also developed a nonanamorphic widescreen process called Super Panavision 70 , which was essentially identical to Todd @-@ AO . Super Panavision made its screen debut in 1959 with The Big Fisherman , released by Disney 's Buena Vista division . 
 = = Cameras = = 
 By 1962 , four of Panavision 's founders had left the company to pursue private careers . That year , MGM 's Camera 65 production of Mutiny on the Bounty went so far over budget that the studio liquidated assets to cover its costs . As a result of this liquidation , Panavision acquired MGM 's camera equipment division , as well as the rights to the Camera 65 system it had developed for MGM ; the technology was renamed Ultra Panavision . Only six more features were made with the system : It 's a Mad , Mad , Mad , Mad World ( 1963 ) , The Fall of the Roman Empire ( 1964 ) , Battle of the Bulge ( 1965 ) , The Greatest Story Ever Told ( 1965 ) , The Hallelujah Trail ( 1965 ) , and Khartoum ( 1966 ) . The system was revived in 2015 for Quentin Tarantino 's The Hateful Eight . As 1 @.@ 25 × <unk> for 70 mm projectors have become rare , most of the 70 mm prints of these films still in circulation are designed for projection with non @-@ anamorphic , spherical lenses . The result is a 2 @.@ 20 : 1 aspect ratio , rather than the broader ratio originally intended . 
 Although Fox insisted on maintaining CinemaScope for a time , some actors disliked the system . For Fox 's 1965 production Von Ryan 's Express , Frank Sinatra reputedly demanded that Auto Panatar lenses be used . Such pressures led Fox to completely abandon CinemaScope for Auto <unk> that year ; Von Ryan 's Express was the studio 's first picture with Panavision lenses . To meet the extraordinary demand for Panavision projection lenses , Gottschalk had Bausch & Lomb CinemaScope lenses retrofitted into Panavision housings with a new <unk> attachment , improving them greatly . This was revealed many years after Gottschalk 's death ; a lead designer from Bausch & Lomb , who had been involved with the original CinemaScope project , came to work as a designer for Panavision and — after opening some of the older lenses — figured out the secret . 
 In the mid @-@ 1960s , Gottschalk altered Panavision 's business model . The company now maintained its full inventory , making its lenses and the cameras it had acquired from MGM available only by rental . This meant that equipment could be maintained , modified , and regularly updated by the company . When Panavision eventually brought its own camera designs to market , it was relatively unconstrained by retrofitting and manufacturing costs , as it was not directly competing on sales price . This allowed Panavision to build cameras to new standards of durability . 
 The new business model required additional capital . To this end , the company was sold to Banner Productions in 1965 , with Gottschalk remaining as president . Panavision would soon expand into markets beyond Hollywood , eventually including New York , Europe , Australia , Hong Kong , and Southeast Asia . Kinney National Company bought out Banner in 1968 and took over Warner Bros.-Seven Arts the following year , eventually renaming itself Warner Communications due to a financial scandal . Kinney / Warner 's financial resources made possible a massive expansion in Panavision 's inventory , as well as substantial leaps in research and development . 
 During this period , the company 's R & D department focused on retrofitting the industry standard 35 mm camera , the Mitchell BNC . The first cameras produced by Panavision were Mitchell cameras , and all standard 35mm cameras made by Panavision to this day are based on the Mitchell movement . 
 The effort to develop a lighter , quieter camera with a reflex viewfinder led to the introduction of the Panavision Silent Reflex ( PSR ) in 1967 . The camera could provide a shutter angle of up to 200 degrees . Many refinements were made to the PSR during the first few years after its introduction , and it soon became one of the most popular studio cameras in the world . Panavision also began manufacturing spherical lenses for 1 @.@ 85 : 1 photography , garnering a significant share of the market . 
 In 1968 , Panavision released a handheld 65 mm camera . By that time , however , the much cheaper process of blowing up 35 mm anamorphic films to 70 mm — introduced with The Cardinal ( 1964 ) — had made 65 mm production virtually obsolete . In 1970 , the last two feature films shot entirely with Super Panavision were released : Song of Norway and Ryan 's Daughter . In the decades since , only a handful of films have been shot in 65 mm . 
 = = Birth of Panaflex = = 
 Albert Mayer led the next major project : the creation of a lightweight reflex camera adaptable to either handheld or studio conditions . After four years of development , the Panaflex debuted in 1972 . A revolutionary camera that operated quietly , the Panaflex eliminated the need for a cumbersome sound blimp , and could synchronize handheld work . The Panaflex also included a digital electronic tachometer and magazine motors for the take @-@ up reel . Steven Spielberg 's The Sugarland Express ( 1974 ) was the first motion picture filmed with the Panaflex . 
 During the 1970s , the Panaflex line was updated and marketed in new incarnations : the Panaflex X , Panaflex Lightweight ( for steadicam ) , the high @-@ speed <unk> , Panaflex Gold , and Panaflex G2 . Panavision came out with a direct competitor to Tiffen 's Steadicam stabilizer , the <unk> harness . The <unk> , a video camera , was also brought out , though the company largely left the video field to others . 
 Robert Gottschalk died in 1982 at the age of 64 . After Gottschalk 's death , Warner Communications sold the company to a consortium headed by Ted Field , John Farrand , and Alan Hirschfield . With new ownership came sweeping changes to the company , which had stagnated . Optics testing was computerized and , in 1986 , the new Platinum model camera was introduced . The next year — responding to a perceived demand for the resurrection of the 65 mm camera — development began on a new model . The company was sold to Lee International PLC for $ 100 million in 1987 , but financing was overextended and ownership reverted to the investment firm Warburg Pincus two years later . 
 In 1989 , the company brought out Primo , a new line of lenses . Designed with a consistent color match between all the different focal @-@ length instruments in the line , these were also the sharpest lenses yet manufactured by Panavision . Six years later , Oscars were awarded to the company and to three of its employees for their work on the Primo 3 : 1 zoom lens : Iain Neil for the optical design , Rick <unk> for the mechanical design , and Eric <unk> for the lens 's engineering . According to the AMPAS citation , " The high contrast and absence of flare , along with its ability to provide close focusing and to maintain constant image size while changing focus , make the Primo 3 : 1 Zoom Lens truly unique . " In 1991 , the company released its new 65 mm technology , System 65 , though Arri had beaten it to market by two years with the Arriflex 765 . The gauge was not widely readopted , and only two major Hollywood films were shot with the new 65 mm Panavision process : Far and Away ( 1992 ) and Kenneth Branagh 's Hamlet ( 1996 ) . 
 In 1992 , Panavision launched a project to develop a camera that involved rethinking every aspect of the company 's existing 35 mm system . Nolan Murdock and Albert Mayer Sr. headed up the design team . The new Millennium camera , replacing the Platinum as the company 's flagship , was introduced in 1997 . The Millennium XL came to the market in 1999 and was led by Al Mayer , Jr . It soon established itself as Panavision ’ s new 35mm workhorse . The XL was the first product in Panavision history to win both an Academy Award and a Primetime Emmy Award within the first year of official release . The update to the XL , the <unk> was initially released in 2004 . [ 26 ] . The first feature films to use these latter two systems were , respectively , The Perfect Storm ( 2000 ) and Just Like Heaven ( 2005 ) . The XL series not only had a much smaller camera body — making it suitable for studio , handheld , and steadicam work — but also marked the first significant change to the film transport mechanism in the camera since the Panaflex : two smaller sprocket drums for feed and take @-@ up ( a design similar to the Moviecam and subsequent Arricam ) instead of one large drum to do both . As of 2006 , Panavision has no further plans to develop additional film camera models . 
 = = Recent restructuring and acquisitions = = 
 In May 1997 , Panavision announced it would be purchasing Visual Action Holdings PLC , a major film services group for $ <unk> ( £ <unk> ) . The British @-@ based company was formally known as Samuelson Group PLC . The company operated three rental depots in the UK and was main agent for Panavision in France and Australia . It also had smaller rental operations in New Zealand , Singapore , Malaysia , and Indonesia . Crucially , it controlled three Panavision agencies in the US cities of Atlanta , Chicago , and Dallas ( acquired from Victor Duncan , Inc . ) . Panavision CEO William C Scott said , " This transaction provides Panavision with a strong platform on which to grow the international side of our business and also completes our company @-@ controlled distribution system in the US . Additionally , we will immediately expand our presence in key Southeast Asia markets , where television and film activity are expect to grow rapidly . Overall , the transaction enables us to control a true worldwide distribution network for Panavision ’ s camera systems and related products , one of our most important strategic objectives . " 
 Ronald Perelman 's solely owned MacAndrews & Forbes Holdings ( Mafco ) acquired a majority interest in Panavision in 1998 , via a Mafco subsidiary . After aborted attempts to create a film @-@ style video camera in the 1970s and 1980s , Panavision joined the digital revolution in July 2000 , establishing DHD Ventures in partnership with Sony . The new company 's objective was to raise the quality of high definition digital video to the standards of top @-@ level Hollywood motion @-@ picture production . 
 This cooperative venture was established , largely at the instigation of George Lucas , to serve his designs for the Star Wars prequels . The collaboration resulted in the Sony HDW @-@ F900 CineAlta HDCAM high definition video camera . Sony produced the electronics and a stand @-@ alone version of the camera ; Panavision supplied custom @-@ designed high definition lenses , trademarked Primo Digital , and retrofitted the camera body to incorporate standard film camera accessories , facilitating the equipment 's integration into existing crew equipment as a " digital cinema camera " . This Panavision HD @-@ <unk> , was used in the making of Lucasfilm 's Star Wars : Episode II – Attack of the Clones ( 2002 ) , described as " the first digital major feature film " . Panavision 's next step in the evolution of digital cinema cameras also involved collaboration between Sony and Panavision ; this time , Panavision participated in all the stages of development . The aim was to create a system that could use the entire range of the company 's 35 mm spherical lenses . 
 This led to the 2004 introduction of the Genesis HD — a full bandwidth ( 4 : 4 : 4 ) HD SDI camera with improved <unk> and <unk> @-@ related specs . Its Super 35 mm film – sized recording area made it <unk> compatible with regular 35 mm lenses , giving it a true 35 mm depth of field . The camera 's electronics — including its CCD ( charge @-@ coupled device ) image sensor — and HDCAM SR record deck were manufactured by Sony . The chassis and mechanics were designed by a Panavision team led by Albert Mayer Jr . , son of the Panaflex designer . The Genesis was first used on Superman Returns ( 2006 ) followed soon after by Flyboys ( 2006 ) ; But the comedy Scary Movie 4 ( 2006 ) , shot afterward on a mixture of 35mm film and the Genesis , actually went into general release first because of the extensive visual effects work needed to complete both Flyboys and Superman Returns . Subsequent to the completion of major design work on the Genesis , Panavision bought out Sony 's 49 percent share of DHD Ventures and fully consolidated it in September 2004 . 
 During the same period , Panavision began acquiring related motion picture companies , including EFILM ( acquired 2001 ; sold to Deluxe in full by 2004 ) , Technovision France ( 2004 ) , the motion picture camera @-@ rental arm of the Canadian rental house William F. White International ( 2005 ) , the digital camera rental company <unk> ( 2006 ) , the international lighting and equipment company AFM and the camera company <unk> ( 2006 ) , and the camera inventory of Joe Dunton & Company ( 2007 ) . On July 28 , 2006 , Mafco announced it was acquiring the remaining Panavision stock and returning the company to private status . A $ 345 million credit line from Bear Stearns and Credit Suisse was secured to finance the company 's debt as well as to facilitate " global acquisitions . " That same year , Mafco acquired Deluxe Entertainment Services Group . 
 In March 2010 , citing a drop in production and difficulty servicing significant debt as a result of the 1998 Mafco transaction , shareholder MacAndrews & Forbes agreed to a debt restructuring arrangement with Panavision 's creditors . Private equity firm Cerberus Capital was the lead investor in the deal , which involved a US $ 140 million reduction in debt and a US $ 40 million cash infusion . In return the majority shareholder Ronald Perelman was required to relinquish control of Panavision , and he no longer has any equity in the company . In June 2013 , its creditors sued over an unpaid debt of $ 1 @.@ 7 million , threatening to dissolve the company if they win . 
 = = Panavision 3D = = 
 Panavision 3D was a system for presenting 3 @-@ D film in a digital cinema . It was a passive stereoscopic 3D system that utilized spectral comb filters produced using thin @-@ film optics technology . In such systems , the visible spectrum is broken into alternate bands of light that evenly span the entire visible spectrum . 
 In June 2012 the Panavision 3D system was discontinued by <unk> Theatrical , who marketed it on behalf of Panavision , citing " challenging global economic and 3D market conditions " . 
 = = = Video clips = = = 
 Panavision YouTube channel 
 = Mr. Plow = 
 " Mr. Plow " is the ninth episode of The Simpsons ' fourth season . It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on November 19 , 1992 . In the episode , Homer buys a snow plow and starts a business plowing driveways . It is a huge success , and inspired by this , Barney Gumble starts a rival company and quickly puts Homer out of business . The episode was written by Jon Vitti and directed by Jim Reardon . The episode was well received , with some critics calling it one of the best in the show 's history . In 1993 , Dan Castellaneta won his second Emmy Award for " Outstanding Voice @-@ Over Performance " for this episode . The episode was also submitted in the " Outstanding Comedy Series " category although ultimately it was not nominated . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Springfield is hit by a blizzard , so Marge calls Homer at Moe 's Tavern and tells him to come home . While on the way home , Homer 's view is obscured by the snow and he crashes into another car , which turns out to be the family 's station wagon . Without transportation , as both cars are completely wrecked , Homer begins looking for a new car . After several unsuccessful attempts , the family go to a car show . 
 After an unsettling encounter with Adam West , a salesman talks Homer into getting a snowplow . Homer agrees on the basis that he can make the payments by plowing people 's driveways . Homer starts his snow plow business , titled " Mr. Plow " , but he has trouble finding any customers . His advertising campaigns are unsuccessful until Lisa suggests an advertisement on late night local television . The resulting commercial and jingle attracts lots of customers and the business is a booming success . Homer is given the key to the city in recognition of his service to the community . 
