 = = = Mediterranean operations = = = 
 Sydney was in Alexandria harbour on 10 June 1940 , and that evening learned of Italy 's intention to declare war at midnight . By 01 : 00 on 11 June , all ships in harbour had departed to search for Italian warships in position to attack Alexandria , and secure the sea lines of communication in the eastern Mediterranean and Aegean . The Australian cruiser was involved in the westbound sweep , and sailed as far as the Gulf of Taranto during the four @-@ day operation . Apart from an unsuccessful depth charge attack on a suspected submarine during the afternoon of 13 June , Sydney did not encounter any enemy vessels . 
 On 21 June , Sydney fired in anger for the first time , joining the British cruisers Orion and Neptune , the French battleship Lorraine , and a force of destroyers in shelling the Italian port of Bardia . Sydney focused her fire on a military camp throughout the twenty @-@ two @-@ minute bombardment . During this operation , the Australian ship 's Walrus amphibian performed bombardment spotting for the squadron , but was fired on by three biplanes : although reported at the time as Italian Fiat CR.42s , the attackers were later determined to be British Gloster Gladiators . The pilot flew the damaged aircraft to Mersa Matruh , and was awarded the Distinguished Flying Cross for his skill in doing so , but the <unk> Walrus was the only casualty of the operation . The next day , a retaliatory airstrike against the ships , by then having returned to Alexandria , failed to do damage . That same day , Germany and Vichy France signed the Second Armistice at Compiègne : although French warships ( which had until that point operated with the Allies ) were ordered to return to France and disarm , the British government was unwilling to allow them to fall into Axis hands . Sydney and the British warships in Alexandria turned their guns on the French , but unlike the situation in Mers @-@ el @-@ Kébir , which deteriorated into a naval battle , British Admiral Cunningham and French Admiral René @-@ Emile Godfroy peacefully negotiated to disarm the ships at Alexandria . 
 Sydney and other elements of the 7th Squadron sailed from Alexandria on 27 June , escorting a Malta convoy . Late on 28 June , the ships engaged a force of three Italian destroyers . Although two Italian vessels were able to withdraw , the third , Espero was disabled . At 20 : 00 , Sydney ( which had little opportunity to fire during the engagement ) was detailed to recover any survivors and sink the destroyer while the rest of the force continued on to Malta . However , while 6 @,@ 000 yards ( 5 @,@ 500 m ) from Espero , the Italian ship fired two shells , both of which fell in line with but short of the cruiser . Sydney opened fire , and after four salvos struck the destroyer with no shots fired in return , resumed the approach . Espero sank at 20 : 35 , and Sydney remained in the area for almost two hours to collect survivors despite the risk of submarine attack , before she was ordered to withdraw to Alexandria . The cruiser rescued 47 Italians ( three of whom died from wounds during the return voyage ) , and left a fully provisioned cutter in the water to be used by other Italian survivors after Sydney had departed . 
 On the evening of 7 July , Sydney departed from Alexandria as part of a fleet including four other light cruisers , three battleships , an aircraft carrier , and sixteen destroyers , divided into three groups . The three groups were to rendezvous on 9 July at a point 120 nautical miles ( 220 km ; 140 mi ) east of Cape Passero and 150 nautical miles ( 280 km ; 170 mi ) from Malta , at which point the destroyers would escort two convoys outbound from Malta , while the other vessels would attack targets of opportunity around Sicily . However , early on 8 June , the British submarine HMS Phoenix reported that she had unsuccessfully attacked an Italian fleet including two battleships . Throughout the day , the fleet had to defend itself from multiple Italian air raids : at one point Sydney and the other cruisers of the 7th Squadron attacked what they thought was a high @-@ flying bomber , but was later determined to be the planet Venus . Aerial reconnaissance located the Italian force during the afternoon , which was made up of at least two battleships , accompanied by multiple cruisers and destroyers . The sightings of such a large force of warships , combined with the heavy air attack , led Admiral Andrew Cunningham to conclude that the Italians were also covering a major convoy , and decide to reposition his fleet between the Italians and Taranto , the projected destination . 
 Contact with the Italian fleet was lost during the night , but regained in the morning of 9 July . By 14 : 00 , the Allied fleet had positioned itself in the Italians ' path , and Cunningham ordered them west , to close on the projected position of the enemy and engage . Sydney spotted smoke at 14 : 45 , and made visual contact with a force of five cruisers just after 15 : 00 . The Allied cruiser squadron , supported by the battleship HMS Warspite altered their course northward , and at 15 : 20 , Sydney opened fire on an Italian Zara @-@ class cruiser , 23 @,@ 000 yards ( 21 @,@ 000 m ) distant , but both the Allied and Italian cruiser forces were unable to successfully hit their opposing numbers . Sydney remained unsuccessful until the late part of the engagement , when she successfully shelled a smokescreen @-@ laying destroyer . The naval component of what came to be known as the Battle of Calabria concluded around 17 : 00 , with Cunningham unwilling to pursue the Italian fleet through the smokescreen they had created . The Allied ships instead broke off for Malta , while enduring several heavy but ineffective air attacks ; during the safe delivery of Malta Convoy MA 5 and the return to Alexandria on 13 July , Sydney sustained no damage , but expended all her anti @-@ aircraft ammunition . Sydney 's participation in the battle earned the ship a battle honour : " Calabria 1940 " . 
 The Australian cruiser spent five days in Alexandria for resupply and maintenance , before departing for Crete with the British destroyer HMS Havock . They arrived at sunset on 18 July , and the next morning , the two ships were ordered to patrol the Gulf of Athens for Axis warships and shipping , while providing support for a four @-@ ship destroyer force ( HM Ships Hyperion , Ilex , Hero , and Hasty ) conducting an anti @-@ submarine sweep north of Crete . Believing that these two tasks were incompatible , and that protecting the destroyers was the more important , Sydney 's commander , Captain John Collins , ordered the two ships to move 100 nautical miles ( 190 km ; 120 mi ) south of their patrol area while maintaining radio silence . At 07 : 20 on 19 July , the destroyer force spotted and was spotted by a pair of Italian light cruisers ; Giovanni dalle Bande Nere and Bartolomeo Colleoni , which opened fire seven minutes later . The British destroyers turned to a north @-@ east heading and set off at 30 knots ( 56 km / h ; 35 mph ) , broadcasting news of the attack to the silent Sydney while closing the gap between the two forces . Using the wireless signals to track the four destroyers , Sydney and Havock made to intercept the destroyers and their cruiser pursuit , and was able to close at least half an hour earlier than if they had followed their original instructions : when Sydney opened fire on Bande Nere at 08 : 29 , both sides were surprised by the appearance of the cruiser . Within minutes , Sydney had successfully damaged Bande Nere , and when the Italians withdrew to the south , the six Allied ships pursued . At 08 : 48 , with Bande Nere hiding behind a smoke screen , Sydney shifted her fire to Bartolomeo Colleoni , which was disabled by 09 : 33 . Collins ordered the destroyers to torpedo the ship and rescue survivors : Hyperion , Ilex , and Havock did so , while Hero and Hasty supported Sydney in continuing pursuit of Bande Nere . At 10 : 37 , the chase ended , as the faster Italian cruiser had outrun the Allies , visibility was reduced by smoke and haze , and ammunition aboard the pursuing ships was low : Sydney had ten shells left for her forward turrets . The six ships returned to Alexandria around 11 : 00 on 20 July after fending off several air attacks ( one of which damaged Havock ) , and were met by cheering from all ships in the harbour . 
 The only damage to Sydney during what came to be known as the Battle of Cape Spada was caused by a shell at 09 : 21 , which knocked a hole in the forward funnel , and wounded a sailor through splinter damage . For his actions , Collins was appointed a Companion of the Order of the Bath , while other officers and sailors from Sydney received two Distinguished Service Orders , two Distinguished Service Crosses , five Distinguished Service Medals , and twelve Mentions in Despatches between them . Sydney herself was awarded the battle honour " Spada 1940 " . 
 After refuelling and rearming , Sydney and HMS Neptune departed Alexandria on 27 July to join the covering force for a southbound convoy from the Aegean . The ships were attacked five times that afternoon by aircraft , but Sydney escaped with only minor damage and shrapnel wounds . The two cruisers broke away from the convoy the next day to locate and sink the Italian tanker Ermioni , which was supplying the Dodecanese Islands . The two cruisers located Ermioni just before dusk : Sydney provided anti @-@ submarine protection while the tanker 's crew were convinced to transfer to the British warships , after which Ermioni was shelled by Neptune . The two ships returned to Alexandria on 30 July , and Sydney departed the same day in company with HMS Orion for a three @-@ day patrol . 
 Back in Alexandria , Sydney underwent a refit , during which a 3 @-@ foot ( 0 @.@ 91 m ) high , 0 @.@ 5 @-@ inch ( 13 mm ) thick wall of armour plating was constructed around the 4 @-@ inch gun platform , while the ship 's company repainted the ship from standard grey to a naval camouflage pattern . The refit was completed by 12 August , when Sydney , Neptune , and five destroyers set off to interdict Axis shipping along the north African coast and the Aegean Sea . The operation was cancelled after no ships were located during the first two days , and Sydney was tasked with assisting a destroyer squadron during shore bombardments at Bomba and Bardia . At the end of the month , the cruiser joined the escort of Malta convoy MB 5 . 
 On the return voyage , Sydney and several other vessels were tasked with attacking Italian facilities . Canvas and timber were used to alter the cruiser 's profile to resemble an Italian <unk> @-@ class cruiser , allowing her to manoeuvre close to Scarpanto during the night of 3 – 4 September . At dawn , Sydney and the British destroyer Ilex attacked the Italian <unk> <unk> Airbase at Scarpanto ; the cruiser fired 135 shells in 25 minutes , while the destroyer fended off five E @-@ boats , sinking two . On completion , the two ships rejoined the fleet , but were again mistaken for Italian warships and nearly fired on before Sydney raised the White Ensign and cut down her disguise . Admiral Cunningham congratulated Sydney with the message " Well Done . You are a stormy petrel . " , which was adopted as a nickname for the cruiser . On her return to Alexandria , the Australian cruiser underwent another short refit , which was completed late in the month : on 24 September Sydney supported HMS Protector during the interception of a French merchant ship , then completed a two @-@ day patrol west of Cyprus . Late on 28 September , Sydney joined the heavy escort of a Malta @-@ bound troop convoy . During the return voyage , Sydney and HMS Orion left the fleet on 1 October for a sweep of the Aegean Sea , which was concluded with a brief bombardment of <unk> before returning to Alexandria two days later . 
 The entire Mediterranean fleet sailed from Alexandria on 8 October to provide cover for several Malta Convoys , and attempt to draw the Italian fleet into battle . The convoys reached their destination safely , and the operation was uneventful for Sydney ; the only contact with Italian forces was an engagement during the early morning of 12 October between the British cruiser Ajax and seven Italian torpedo boats and destroyers , of which Ajax sank three and damaged a fourth . From 25 October , Sydney , Orion , and the destroyers Jervis and Juno were engaged in a sweep of the Aegean for Axis vessels , reaching as far north as the Dardanelles . No major incidents occurred until 28 October , when the Italians invaded Greece : the four ships were recalled to Alexandria , where they arrived that evening . Shortly after , the two cruisers were joined by HM Ships York and Gloucester and met the main force of the Mediterranean fleet west of Crete on 30 October . Over the next few days , the warships patrolled around Crete and along the Greek mainland , and provided cover for the first supply convoy to Crete . 
 On 5 November , Sydney and HMS Ajax departed from Port Said with military equipment to be used to establish an Allied advanced base at Souda Bay , Crete . After delivering the equipment , which included almost 1 @,@ 000 soldiers , the equipment for a Bofors battery , cases of food , and several trucks , the cruisers rejoined the main fleet . The Mediterranean Fleet remained on patrol for several days , and during the night of 11 – 12 November , while the bulk of the fleet supported the world 's first all @-@ naval @-@ aircraft attack on the Italian fleet anchored in Taranto , Sydney , Ajax , Orion and the destroyers Nubian and Mohawk attempted to transit the Strait of Otranto as a diversion . Despite the mission of " looking for trouble " , the northbound passage through the strait passed without incident . The return was not so uneventful : at 01 : 20 , a convoy of four merchantmen with two escorting destroyers was spotted by Sydney 's lookouts . The Allied warships manoeuvred in close , and opened fire at 01 : 27 : Sydney directing her fire onto a freighter 7 @,@ 000 yards ( 6 @,@ 400 m ) away . During the 23 @-@ minute engagement , the cruiser successfully contributed to the destruction of three merchant ships and damaged a destroyer , avoided a torpedo , and unsuccessfully fired two in return . At 01 : 57 , the undamaged Allied force departed the strait , and met the main fleet before midday . 
 From 15 to 20 November , Sydney and three other cruisers transported 4 @,@ 000 Allied soldiers and their equipment from Alexandria to the Piraeus as reinforcements for the Greek military . On returning to Alexandria , Sydney deployed with the majority of the Mediterranean fleet to cover multiple convoys across the sea : the Australian cruiser spent the remainder of the month operating throughout the eastern and central Mediterranean , and was bombed by Italian aircraft on 24 November at Souda Bay , but escaped damage . Sydney started December in the Aegean , where she escorted convoys and shelled the port of Valona , then proceeded to Malta for a refit and repairs to her rudder , which lasted until the end of the year . During this refit , the cruiser was fitted with degaussing equipment . The ship rejoined the fleet on 8 January 1941 , when she was instructed to head home after proceeding along the north coast of Africa and linking up with any Australia @-@ bound merchant ships she encountered . The recall was attributed to the need to bring Sydney in for a major refit and give her personnel leave , a plan to spread combat experience throughout the RAN by trading the cruiser with her sister ship , Perth , and a need to protect Australia against the German merchant raiders operating in the area , particularly following the attacks on Nauru . 
 Before leaving , 100 of the ship 's company were removed on 11 January , so they could be sent to England to help man the new N @-@ class destroyers . The next day , the ship sailed for Aden via the Suez Canal . Sydney and the troopship Empress of Canada left Aden on 16 January to join Convoy SW 4B , which Sydney escorted until relieved by HMS Ceres four days later . The Australian cruiser was instructed to attack any Italian ships at Mogadiscio , but as there were no large merchant ships in port and Sydney was forbidden to attack the harbour itself , she then proceeded to the Seychelles to refuel . On 24 January , Sydney was one of several warships which responded to an attack on the merchantman <unk> by the German merchant raider Atlantis . Despite a three @-@ day search , Sydney did not come into contact with Atlantis . Sydney resumed her voyage home , and arrived in her namesake city after sunset on 9 February . The cruiser anchored in Watsons Bay for the night , then sailed into the inner harbour the next morning and tied up alongside at Sydney Cove to a heroes ' welcome . On 11 February , a holiday was declared for school students in Sydney , so they could join the thousands of people who witnessed the ship 's company perform a freedom of entry march . 
 As well as the battle honours for the battles at Calabria and Cape Spada , Sydney was granted the " Mediterranean 1940 " battle honour for her various actions during the Mediterranean naval campaign . During the eight @-@ month deployment , the only fatality in the ship 's company was a death due to illness . 
 = = = Australian waters = = = 
 Following a short refit , Sydney sailed for Fremantle on 27 February , where she was assigned to escort and patrol tasks in the Indian Ocean . This primarily involved meeting convoys off the southern Australian coast and escorting them on the next leg of their journey , either westbound to the Middle East and Europe , or northwards to the Dutch East Indies . 
 In April , Sydney escorted the troopship Queen Mary from Fremantle to Jervis Bay , before embarking Admiral Ragnar Colvin and a party of advisors from all three branches of the Australian military and transporting them to Singapore by 19 April for a secret conference between the British Commonwealth , the Netherlands East Indies , and the United States of America . The cruiser returned to Fremantle before month 's end , after which Collins handed command over to Captain Joseph Burnett on 15 May . Shortly after , the cruiser escorted the transport SS Zealandia during a troop transport run to Singapore . Sydney escorted the troopship to Sunda Strait , where responsibility was handed over to the British light cruiser HMS Danae . In early June , Sydney met Zealandia and Danae on the troopship 's return voyage , and took over escort duties from Sunda Strait back to Fremantle . After replenishing in Fremantle , Zealandia joined a multiple ship convoy to the east coast of Australia , which was also escorted by Sydney . The convoy departed on 24 June and made for Sydney , after which the cruiser joined the escort of a Pacific convoy before returning for maintenance . This concluded on 8 August , when Sydney escorted the troopship <unk> to New Zealand , then Fiji . 
 On her return to Sydney at the end of August , the cruiser joined the troopships Queen Mary and Queen Elizabeth during the first leg of their voyage ( Anzac convoy US 12A ) , escorting them until rendezvousing with Canberra in the Great Australian Bight . Sydney then sailed to Melbourne , and remained until 19 September , during which her camouflage was repainted in a new pattern . The cruiser then escorted the four @-@ ship Anzac convoy US 12B to Fremantle : heavy seas while crossing the Great Australian Bight caused " A " turret to become jammed on a port facing . This was repaired in Fremantle , and the convoy proceeded to Sunda Strait , where Sydney handed the merchant ships over to the British cruisers Glasgow and Danae on 3 October and set course for Fremantle . On the night of 5 – 6 October , a mysterious ship that responded to challenge signals near Rottnest Island then disappeared led the Naval Officer in Charge Fremantle to believe that the approaches to the harbour had been mined . Sydney was diverted to intercept Queen Mary before the troopship reached Fremantle , and ordered to remain with her until a channel was swept and found free of mines . After reaching port on 7 October , Sydney officially assumed patrol and escort duties in Western Australian waters . 
 The next few weeks were uneventful for Sydney , and between 18 and 29 October , the cruiser visited Geraldton and Bunbury . On 2 November , the Australian cruiser sailed to meet Zealandia off Albany . The troopship was on a second troop transport run to Singapore ; delivering the 8th Division . The two ships returned to Fremantle , and on 11 November , they departed for Sunda Strait . Zealandia was handed over on 17 November to HMS Durban for the next leg , and the Australian cruiser turned for home : she was scheduled to arrive in Fremantle late on 20 November . 
 = = Final battle and loss = = 
 Note : all times in this section are UTC + 7 
 On the afternoon of 19 November 1941 , Sydney was off the coast of Western Australia , near Carnarvon , and heading south towards Fremantle . Around 15 : 55 , the cruiser spotted a merchant ship on a northbound course , which quickly turned away from the coast at 14 knots ( 26 km / h ; 16 mph ) . Sydney increased speed to 25 knots ( 46 km / h ; 29 mph ) and made to intercept . As she closed the gap , Sydney began to signal the unidentified merchantman , first by signal light , then after no reply was forthcoming and the distance between the two ships had decreased , by a combination of light and signal flag . The merchant ship hoisted her callsign , but as she was ahead and just port of Sydney , the flags were obscured by the funnel . A request from the cruiser that the merchant ship make her signal letters clear , which the signals officer did by lengthening the halyard and swinging the flags clear . The callsign was that of the Dutch ship Straat Malakka , but she was not on Sydney 's list of ships meant to be in the area . Further flag signals were exchanged between the ships , with Sydney asking the Dutch ship 's destination and cargo . 
 At 17 : 00 , a distress signal was transmitted by Straat Malakka , indicating that she was being pursued by a merchant raider . Following this , Sydney pulled alongside the merchant ship from astern ; pacing the merchantman on a parallel course , approximately 1 @,@ 300 metres ( 4 @,@ 300 ft ) away . Sydney 's main guns and port torpedo launcher were trained on the ship , while she sent the interior portion of Straat Malakka 's secret callsign . Fifteen minutes later , at around 17 : 30 , the merchantman had not replied , and Sydney sent a signal ordering her to show the secret callsign . 
 Straat Malakka had not replied because she was the German auxiliary cruiser Kormoran in disguise , and when asked to reveal a callsign the Germans did not know , they responded by <unk> and opened fire . Prompted by the raider 's unveiling , Sydney also fired ( accounts are divided as to which ship fired first ) , but while her first salvo either missed or passed through Kormoran 's upper superstructure with minimal damage , four of the raider 's six 15 @-@ centimetre ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) guns ( the other two guns were on the port side and could not fire to starboard ) were able to destroy the cruiser 's bridge and gun director tower , damage the forward turrets , and set the aircraft on fire . Sydney did not fire again until after the raider 's sixth salvo : " Y " turret fired without effect , but " X " turret was able to put multiple shells into Kormoran , damaging machinery spaces and one of the raider 's guns , while igniting an oil tank . During this , Kormoran maintained heavy fire , and around the time of the eighth or ninth German salvo , a torpedo launched at the start of the engagement hit Sydney just forward of " A " turret and near the ASDIC compartment ( the weakest point on the ship 's hull ) , ripping a hole in the side and causing the bow of the cruiser to angle down . Down by the bows , the cruiser swung hard to port , and passed behind Kormoran ; during the turn , shells from the raider knocked " B " turret off Sydney . 
 By 17 : 35 , Sydney was heading south and losing speed , wreathed in smoke from multiple fires . Her main armament was disabled ( the two aft turrets had jammed on a port facing and could not be swung around ) , and her secondary guns were out of effective range . The cruiser continued to be hit by shells from Kormoran 's aft guns as the distance between the ships increased . The Germans reported that around 17 : 45 , all four torpedoes from Sydney 's starboard launcher were fired , but as Kormoran was manoeuvring to bring her port broadside to bear , they all missed . In fact , only two torpedoes from Sydney 's port launcher were ever fired , which must have happened some time earlier . The raider 's engines broke down after this turn , but she continued to fire on Sydney at a high rate despite being immobilised , although many of the shells would have missed as the distance between the two ships increased . Kormoran ceased fire at 17 : 50 , with the range at 6 @,@ 600 yards ( 6 @,@ 000 m ) , and launched another torpedo at 18 : 00 , but missed Sydney . 
 The Australian cruiser continued on a south @-@ south @-@ east heading at low speed ; observers aboard Kormoran doubted that Sydney was under control . Although disappearing over the horizon shortly later , the glow from the damaged , burning warship was consistently seen by the Germans until about 22 : 00 , and sporadically until midnight . At some point during the night , Sydney lost buoyancy and sank : the bow was torn off as she submerged and descended almost vertically , while the rest of the hull glided 500 metres ( 1 @,@ 600 ft ) forward as she sank , hitting the bottom upright and stern first . Sydney 's shells had crippled Kormoran ; the German sailors abandoned ship after it was determined that below @-@ deck fires could not be controlled before they reached the gun magazines or the mines in the cargo hold . The raider was scuttled at midnight , and sank slowly until the mine deck exploded half an hour later . 
 = = = Aftermath = = = 
 Sydney 's failure to reach Fremantle on 20 November was not initially cause for concern , as several factors might have delayed the cruiser , none of which were sufficient reason to break the order to maintain wireless silence . However , with no sign of the cruiser by 23 November , shore @-@ based wireless stations began transmitting orders for Sydney to break silence and report in . A raft of German survivors was recovered by a British tanker on 24 November , at which point a large @-@ scale air and sea search began . During this search , which lasted until the evening of 29 November , 318 survivors from Kormoran 's 399 personnel were found , but apart from a <unk> float and a lifebelt , nothing from Sydney or the 645 aboard was recovered . 
 Australian Prime Minister John Curtin officially announced the loss of the cruiser during the afternoon of 30 November . Sydney 's destruction was a major blow to Australian morale and military capability : her ship 's company made up 35 % of the RAN 's wartime casualties . The cruiser 's loss did not have the same impact internationally ; two British capital ships were destroyed during the same fortnight , and Japan entered World War II with attacks on Pearl Harbor and Singapore three weeks later . 
 The German survivors were taken to Fremantle and interrogated . Attempts to learn what had happened were hampered by the German officers instructing their sailors to obfuscate the enemy with false answers , people describing events they did not witness but heard of later , and difficulty in keeping groups separated in order to check their stories against each other . Despite this , Australian authorities were able to piece together the broad details of the battle , which was verified by a group of German sailors who had been taken to Sydney instead : their interviews showed the same commonalities and inconsistencies as those from Fremantle , and the interrogators concluded that the true story was being recounted . Interrogations were concluded in December , and by the end of January , Kormoran 's personnel had been moved to prisoner @-@ of @-@ war camps in Victoria , where they remained until their repatriation to Germany in early 1947 . 
 On 6 February 1942 , a Carley float containing a dead body was spotted just off Christmas Island and towed ashore . Examination of the raft and its occupant led the island 's inhabitants to believe that they were from Sydney . Although a 1949 investigation conducted by the Royal Navy stated the raft was not from HMAS Sydney , and while some historians agreed , others concluded that the raft and the body originated from Sydney . The body was exhumed in October 2006 and reburied at Geraldton Cemetery in November 2008 , after DNA was extracted . As of 2009 , attempts to compare the DNA with relatives of Sydney personnel had yet to identify the unknown sailor . 
 = = = Controversy = = = 
 The battle between Sydney and Kormoran is seen as controversial : the disbelief that a modified merchant ship could so successfully defeat a cruiser combined with the lack of Australian survivors led some to believe that the German account was false . Rumours that the battle was not what it seemed had been around since Sydney failed to reach Fremantle on schedule in 1941 , but several historians ( including Tom Frame and Wesley Olson ) credit Michael Montgomery and his 1980 book Who Sank The Sydney ? with igniting the controversy . 
 The main claims made by supporters of an alternative view of the engagement include : that the Germans fired on Sydney before raising their battle ensign , or after using a flag of surrender or signals of distress to lure the cruiser in , that a Japanese submarine was partially or completely responsible for sinking Sydney , that the involvement of the Japanese was covered up to lure the United States into the war , and that Australian survivors were killed in the water to eliminate witnesses . Other claims , less widely heard , include a belief that Sydney was not at action stations and thus not prepared for Kormoran 's attack , distress calls from the cruiser were heard by Australian shore facilities but ignored , and that survivors were captured then executed by the Japanese . These claims have been proven false by historians and researchers ; the 1998 inquiry by the Joint Standing Committee for Foreign Affairs , Defence , and Trade concluded that the German accounts were a " feasible " interpretation of the battle , but there was no reliable evidence to support any of the alternative claims , while the 2009 report for the Cole Inquiry ( the third volume of which was completely dedicated to the " frauds , conspiracies and speculations " surrounding the battle ) found nothing to substantiate any of the theories raised . 
 In addition , most researchers have speculated as to why Sydney was so close to an unknown vessel , with various levels of blame assigned to Captain Burnett for the demise of his ship . Theories to explain Burnett 's actions include that he was inexperienced or incompetent , deceived by Kormoran 's disguise , the idea that he was under conflicting orders instructing that raiders be attacked at range but enemy supply ships be captured , or that he was trying to clearly identify the merchantman . 
 = = Search and rediscovery = = 
 Despite the approximate position of Kormoran being known ( most German accounts giving the battle coordinates as 26 ° S 111 ° E ) , the required search area for both ships was immense . Calculating a search area was complicated by the fact that several people distrusted the German location , and believed the ships would be found further south and closer to shore . Several attempts to bring supporters of the ' northern ' and ' southern ' positions to a consensus and narrow down the potential search area were unsuccessful . 
 Multiple searches were carried out by the RAN between 1974 and 1997 ( using the survey ship HMAS Moresby and later the trials ship HMAS Protector ) , but efforts were restricted to the continental shelf , and were usually in response to civilian claims that they had found Sydney at a certain location . Other searches were conducted by RAAF aircraft carrying magnetometers ; again , these were only in response to possible location claims . These searches failed to find either ship . 
 American shipwreck hunter David Mearns first learned of the battle in 1996 , and began to study it as a prelude to a search for the ships in 2001 . Mearns , with the aid of other researchers , focused on primary sources ( rediscovering several archive files and diaries in the process ) , and came to the conclusion that the German accounts were true , and that the ship would be found at the northern position . After attracting the interest of the RAN , Mearns entered into a partnership with HMAS Sydney Search , a not @-@ for @-@ profit company set up to administer and help fund an expedition to locate Sydney and Kormoran . State and Federal government grants totalling just under A $ 5 million , coupled with private and corporate donations , were used to fund a 45 @-@ day search from the end of February to early April 2008 . 
 Mearns ' plan was to inspect a 52 @-@ by @-@ 34 @-@ nautical @-@ mile ( 96 by 63 km ; 60 by 39 mi ) search box around the German location with a deep @-@ water , towed side @-@ scan sonar to locate Kormoran , after which the search team would be able to narrow down the search area for Sydney . After locating one or both vessels , the search ship ( survey vessel SV Geosounder , chartered from the subsea exploration company <unk> <unk> Australia ) would return to port and replace the sonar with a remotely operated vehicle ( ROV ) to photograph and video the wrecks . After problems with equipment and weather , Geosounder commenced the search , and located Kormoran on 12 March 2008 at 26 ° 05 ′ 46 ″ S 111 ° 04 ′ 33 ″ E. Using the newly discovered wreck and the accounts of the Germans describing Sydney 's heading , speed , and last sighting after the battle , a 20 @-@ by @-@ 18 @-@ nautical @-@ mile ( 37 by 33 km ; 23 by 21 mi ) search box for the cruiser was calculated : the dramatically smaller area was due to the quality of information regarding Sydney 's position and heading in relation to Kormoran , while the raider 's location consisted of only broad coordinates . 
 Sydney was located on 17 March 2008 just after 11 : 00 , only hours after Kormoran 's discovery was made public . News that the cruiser had been found was announced by Prime Minister Kevin Rudd on 18 March . Sydney 's wreck was located at 26 ° 14 ′ 31 ″ S 111 ° 12 ′ 48 ″ E at 2 @,@ 468 metres ( 8 @,@ 097 ft ) below sea level , 11 @.@ 4 nautical miles ( 21 @.@ 1 km ; 13 @.@ 1 mi ) south @-@ east of the raider . The bow of the cruiser had broken off as the ship sank , and was located at the opposite end of a debris field stretching less than 500 metres ( 1 @,@ 600 ft ) north @-@ west from the hull , which was sitting upright on the ocean floor . On discovery , both wrecks were placed under the protection of the Historic Shipwrecks Act 1976 , which <unk> anyone disturbing a protected shipwreck with a fine of up to A $ 10 @,@ 000 or a maximum five years imprisonment . Both wrecks were placed on the Australian National Heritage List on 14 March 2011 . 
 After the side @-@ scan sonar aboard Geosounder was switched out for the ROV ( again delayed by technical issues and more bad weather ) , the survey ship returned to Sydney 's wreck site on 3 April , and performed a detailed study of the ship and her debris field . Inspections were also carried out on Kormoran and the believed battle site ( the latter found to be outcrops of pillow lava ) , before Mearns declared the search over on 7 April . In April 2015 , an expedition to the wrecks by Curtin University and the Western Australian Museum commenced , with the objective of using 3D imaging to map the <unk> for further study , and to determine if any deterioration since the 2008 discovery requires the development of a conservation management plan . 
 = = Awards , memorials , and legacy = = 
 Sydney was granted the battle honour " Kormoran 1941 " in recognition of the damage done to Kormoran . This was one of only three honours awarded during the 20th century for the sinking of a single ship , and the second to a ship named Sydney ( the other had been awarded to the previous Sydney for her defeat of the German light cruiser SMS Emden at the Battle of Cocos ) . 
 The main memorial for the loss of Sydney is located at Geraldton , Western Australia , on top of Mount Scott . Planning for the memorial commenced in late 1997 , after a speech by Sydney researcher Glenys McDonald at the local Rotary club . The first , temporary memorial ( consisting of a large boulder , a flagpole , and a bronze plaque ) , was installed prior to 19 November 1998 , and was used in a remembrance ceremony that year . During the playing of the Last Post , a large flock of seagulls flew over the participants and headed out to sea in formation : this became a major feature of the permanent memorial . The permanent memorial included four major elements : a stele of the same size and shape of the ship 's prow , a granite wall listing the ship 's company , a bronze statue of a woman looking out to sea and waiting in vain for the cruiser to come home , and a dome ( dubbed the " dome of souls " ) onto which 645 stainless steel seagulls were welded . The memorial ( minus the stele , which had not been completed in time ) was dedicated on 18 November 2001 , and was used the next evening for a commemoration ceremony marking the 60th anniversary of the ship 's loss . In May 2009 , the memorial was recognised by the Australian government as being of national significance . By 2011 , the stele had been completed , and a fifth element — a pool of remembrance containing a map of the region and the marked position of Sydney 's wreck — had been added . 
 Other memorials commemorating the loss of Sydney include an oak tree planted at the Melbourne Shrine of Remembrance , and an avenue in Carnarvon lined with 645 trees . The service of Sydney , along with the other ships of the same name , is commemorated by a stained @-@ glass window at the Garden Island Naval Chapel , and by the mast of the first Sydney at Bradleys Head , New South Wales . The names of those killed aboard Sydney are inscribed at the Australian War Memorial . 
 The " HMAS Sydney Replacement Fund " was established to help finance the acquisition of a replacement ship . The AU £ 426 @,@ 000 raised was contributed to the purchase of Australia 's first aircraft carrier in the late 1940s ; the Majestic @-@ class carrier was named HMAS Sydney upon her commissioning into the RAN in December 1948 . This Sydney operated during the Korean War , then was modified into a troop transport and served in the Vietnam War , before her sale for scrap in 1973 . 
 The Supermarine Seagull V aircraft that operated from Sydney between 1937 and 1938 , still survives as part of the collection of the Royal Air Force Museum in London . 
 The " HMAS Sydney II Cup " was introduced in 2010 as a commemorative trophy competed for by two Australian Football League clubs , the Sydney Swans ( representing the ship 's namesake ) and the West Coast Eagles ( representing the site of the ship 's loss ) , in an annual match . The trophy is based on the cruiser 's battle honour board , while the design of a Best On Ground trophy for the match 's best player is based on a shell casing from the frigate Sydney . 
 = Joe McGinnity = 
 Joseph Jerome McGinnity ( March 20 , 1871 – November 14 , 1929 ) was an American right @-@ handed pitcher in Major League Baseball ( MLB ) in the late 19th and early 20th century . McGinnity played in MLB for ten years , pitching for the National League 's ( NL ) Baltimore Orioles ( 1899 ) and Brooklyn Superbas ( 1900 ) , before jumping to the American League ( AL ) to play for the Baltimore Orioles ( AL ) ( 1901 – 1902 ) . He returned to the NL with the New York Giants ( 1902 – 1908 ) . McGinnity continued to pitch in the minor leagues , eventually retiring from baseball for good at the age of 54 . 
 In MLB , he won 246 games with a 2 @.@ 66 earned run average ( ERA ) . He had seven 20 @-@ win seasons and two 30 @-@ win seasons . Including his time in the minor leagues , McGinnity won close to 500 games as a professional ballplayer . He led MLB in wins five times ( 1899 , 1900 , 1903 , 1904 , and 1906 ) and ERA once ( 1904 ) . With the Giants , he won the 1905 World Series . His teams also won NL pennants in 1900 and 1904 . 
 McGinnity was nicknamed " Iron Man " because he worked in an iron foundry during the baseball offseasons . His nickname came to convey his longevity and durability , as he routinely pitched in both games of doubleheaders . He set NL records for complete games ( 48 ) and innings pitched ( 434 ) in a single season , which still stand . McGinnity is considered one of the better players in the history of the New York Giants . The Veterans Committee elected him to the National Baseball Hall of Fame in 1946 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 McGinnity 's father , Peter , was born in Dublin , Ireland . His last name was <unk> before he came to United States . He changed it by adding an " n " after he emigrated to the United States in 1861 . Peter worked in coal mines and on the farm owned by John and Rebecca Denning , and they accepted him , allowing him to move in with them in their Henry County farm . John and Rebecca moved to Oregon , leaving the homestead in the hands of Peter and their daughter , Hannah . The two married in August 1865 , three months before the birth of their first son , William . Their second son , Peter , was born in 1869 , and Joe was born in 1871 . The <unk> had four more children . 
 Joe received little formal schooling . Due to the transient lifestyle of coal miners , his family moved frequently during his childhood . The <unk> moved to Gallatin County in 1878 . Two days after the birth of their seventh child , Peter died in an accident . At the age of eight , Joe and his older brothers went to work in the mines to support their family . In 1880 , the family moved to Springfield , Illinois , where Joe and his brothers worked for the Springfield Coal Company . They moved to Decatur , Illinois less than six months later , continuing to mine coal , while their mother cleaned houses . 
 = = Baseball career = = 
 = = = Early career = = = 
 While living in Decatur , McGinnity began playing baseball with other coal miners in their leisure time . The owner of the Decatur Coal Company founded the Decatur Baseball Association in 1886 . An outfielder , McGinnity substituted for his team 's pitcher in an 1888 game , which he won . He continued to pitch from that point on . He pitched for semi @-@ professional teams based in Decatur in 1888 and 1889 . His family headed west , stopping in the Indian Territory on their way to Montana , where Hannah 's sister struck gold in their coal mine . McGinnity and his brothers worked in a coal mine in Krebs . There , he met his future wife , Mary Redpath , the oldest daughter of a fellow coal miner . McGinnity also played baseball for the local team . He increased baseball 's popularity in the area , and was later referred to as " the father of Oklahoma baseball " by a sportswriter for The Oklahoman , as he organized , managed , and pitched for teams in Krebs . One of these teams began traveling to other towns along the Missouri – Kansas – Texas Railroad to play against their local teams . He also pitched for teams in neighboring towns . 
 John McCloskey , the manager of the minor league baseball Montgomery Colts of the Class @-@ B Southern League , heard about McGinnity 's pitching . McCloskey signed McGinnity , who made his professional debut with the Colts in 1893 . McCloskey habitually baited umpires during games , a trait which McGinnity learned . The league folded as a result of financial troubles related to the Panic of 1893 . Jimmie Manning , manager of the Southern League franchise in Savannah , Georgia , became manager of the Kansas City Blues of the Class @-@ A Western League for the 1894 season , and signed McGinnity to pitch for the Blues . Combined for Montgomery and Kansas City , McGinnity had a 21 – 29 win – loss record , while walking more batters than he could strikeout , and allowing more than a hit per inning pitched . According to a Western League umpire , catcher Tim Donahue tipped McGinnity 's pitches to opposing batters due to a personal feud . As McGinnity continued to struggle for Kansas City , he requested his release in June . 
 McGinnity moved to Springfield , Illinois , where he worked as a coal miner , bartender , and operated a saloon . McGinnity also pitched locally for semi @-@ professional teams in Springfield and Decatur , receiving a salary between $ 1 to $ 3 ( between $ 27 @.@ 35 to $ 85 @.@ 33 in current dollar terms ) for each game . During this time , McGinnity developed a sidearm pitch he nicknamed " Old Sal " , described as a " slow curve " , which became a feature of his later success . He also improved his fielding , as opponents attempted to bunt " Old Sal " . 
 While pitching for a semi @-@ professional team , McGinnity defeated the National League 's ( NL ) Baltimore Orioles in an exhibition game after he had already defeated a team from Chatham , Illinois earlier in the day . Pat Wright , who managed Springfield 's semi @-@ professional team , was named manager of the Peoria Distillers of the Class @-@ B Western Association , and he signed McGinnity to Peoria for the 1898 season , marking his return to professional baseball . Armed with " Old Sal " , McGinnity compiled a 9 – 4 record for Peoria , allowing only 118 hits and 60 walks while striking out 74 batters in 142 innings . He pitched a complete 21 @-@ inning game , believed to be the second longest professional baseball game to date . With low attendance and the distraction of the Spanish – American War , the Western Association folded in August . 
 = = = Major League Baseball = = = 
 Former Brooklyn Grooms player George Pinkney , who lived in Peoria during his retirement , saw McGinnity pitch , and contacted Brooklyn owner Charles Ebbets to recommend he sign McGinnity . He signed McGinnity in the spring of 1899 for $ 150 a month ( $ 4 @,@ 267 in current dollar terms ) . The syndicate that owned Brooklyn also owned the Baltimore Orioles . 
 With the ownership consolidation , Orioles player @-@ manager Ned Hanlon , who received an ownership stake in the clubs , moved from Baltimore to Brooklyn and assigned many of his best players to Brooklyn , including Joe Kelley , Dan McGann , Hughie Jennings and Willie Keeler . Hanlon assigned McGinnity to the Orioles for the 1899 season after seeing his unorthodox pitching delivery and slow pitching speed . With the Orioles , McGinnity played with John McGraw , who succeeded Hanlon as player @-@ manager , and Wilbert Robinson , who caught McGinnity . McGraw and Robinson had refused to relocate to Brooklyn due to their investment in a Baltimore restaurant . The two imparted their aggressive style of play to McGinnity . In his first year in the NL , McGinnity had a 28 – 16 record . His 28 wins led the NL , while he ranked second with 48 games , third with a 2 @.@ 68 earned run average ( ERA ) , and fourth with 366 1 ⁄ 3 innings pitched . 
 After the 1899 season , the NL voted to contract four teams , which included the Orioles . Hanlon assigned McGinnity to Brooklyn , now known as the " Superbas " . McGinnity posted a 28 – 8 record for Brooklyn in the 1900 season . His 28 wins and 343 innings pitched led the league , as the Dodgers won the NL pennant . McGinnity also pitched two complete games in the Chronicle @-@ Telegraph Cup , as the Superbas defeated the Pittsburgh Pirates . Rather than draw straws to decide who would keep the trophy , the team voted to award it to McGinnity . 
 With the formation of the American League ( AL ) as a competitor to the NL , and rumors that the AL 's Detroit Tigers were interested in McGinnity , Brooklyn offered McGinnity a $ 5 @,@ 000 contract ( $ 136 @,@ 750 in current dollar terms ) to stay with Brooklyn . McGinnity considered retiring from baseball , but ultimately jumped to the AL , signing with the Baltimore Orioles of the AL before the 1901 season . He received a salary of $ 2 @,@ 800 ( $ 76 @,@ 580 in current dollar terms ) , choosing less money in an upstart league for the chance to be reunited with McGraw , who was player @-@ manager and part @-@ owner of the Orioles . 
 Fighting continued to erupt in games McGraw managed . During a brawl that erupted during a game against the Detroit Tigers on August 21 , 1901 , McGinnity spat on umpire Tom Connolly . McGinnity was arrested for the incident and permanently suspended by AL president Ban Johnson , who wanted there to be no fighting in AL games . Johnson later cut the suspension down to 12 days after McGinnity apologized . McGinnity compiled a 26 – 20 record for the 1901 Orioles , and his 48 games , 39 complete games , and 382 innings pitched led the AL . 
 McGinnity began the 1902 season with the Orioles . However , the franchise began to fall into significant debt . Joe Kelley , star player for the Orioles and son @-@ in @-@ law of part @-@ owner John Mahon , reported that the team owed as much as $ 12 @,@ 000 ( $ 328 @,@ 200 in current dollar terms ) . Unable to afford that debt , Mahon purchased shares of the team from Kelley and player @-@ manager John McGraw , who had resigned from the team and signed with the New York Giants of the NL . With this , Mahon became the majority shareholder . On July 17 , 1902 , Mahon sold his interest in the Orioles to Andrew Freedman , principal owner of the Giants , and John T. Brush , principal owner of the Cincinnati Reds , also of the NL . That day , Freedman and Brush released McGinnity , McGraw , Kelley , Roger Bresnahan , Jack Cronin , Cy Seymour , and Dan McGann from their Oriole contracts . Brush then signed Kelley and Seymour to the Reds , while Freedman signed McGinnity , Bresnahan , Cronin , and McGann , joining McGraw , his new player @-@ manager , on the Giants . McGinnity attempted to contact Johnson that night , offering to stay with the Orioles if he could receive Johnson 's personal assurance that he was welcome to stay . McGinnity did not hear back from Johnson , who had left his phone off the hook that night to avoid being contacted , and joined his teammates with the Giants . 
 With the Giants for the 1903 season , McGinnity won 31 games . He also set MLB records with 48 games started and 434 innings pitched , which remain NL records today . Jack Chesbro , pitching for the New York Highlanders of the American League during the 1904 season , set the current MLB records with 55 games started and 454 2 ⁄ 3 innings . In 1903 , McGinnity started both games of a doubleheader on numerous occasions . He performed this feat three times in a single month , winning all six games . On the final instance , The New York Times reported " he seemed fresh enough to tackle the visitors for a third contest if that were necessary " . He pitched over 100 innings in the month of August . Wins by McGinnity and fellow pitcher Christy Mathewson accounted for 73 % of the Giants ' winning games in 1903 , setting an MLB record for a pitching tandem . After the season , McGinnity and some of his teammates threatened to quit the Giants , accusing Brush , now the Giants owner , of going back on a promise to pay the team a monetary bonus for having finished among the top three teams in the NL , as well as a share of the gate receipts from exhibition games , for which they were paid $ 56 @.@ 35 ( $ 1 @,@ 484 in current dollar terms ) , though Brush allegedly had made over $ 200 @,@ 000 ( $ 5 @,@ 267 @,@ 407 in current dollar terms ) . McGinnity claimed that he would pitch in the California League , as he had received a salary offer for " $ 1 @,@ 000 ( $ 26 @,@ 337 in current dollar terms ) more than [ he ] got in New York " . Jack Warner eventually joined McGinnity in publicly threatening to quit . 
 McGinnity set a MLB record during the 1904 season recording his tenth win in 21 team games on May 21 , the fewest team games to for a pitcher to reach the mark . In 1904 , McGinnity had a 35 – 8 record , leading the NL in games ( 51 ) innings pitched ( 408 ) , shutouts ( 9 ) , saves ( 5 ) , and his career @-@ best 1 @.@ 61 ERA . With the Giants competing for the pennant , McGinnity again won both games in a doubleheader three times in a matter of weeks . Aided by McGinnity , the Giants again won the NL pennant . However , they did not compete in the 1904 World Series as Brush and McGraw refused to face the AL champion Boston Pilgrims , following their altercations with Johnson . After the 1904 season , McGinnity attempted to hold out from the Giants when Brush refused to allow McGinnity to play winter baseball with a team in the Southern United States . 
 McGinnity won 21 games in the 1905 season , as the Giants won the NL pennant . This year , the Giants participated in the 1905 World Series , against the AL champion Philadelphia Athletics . McGinnity started Games Two and Four of the five game series against the Athletics , winning one and losing one , while Mathewson pitched the other three . All five games , including the game McGinnity lost to Chief Bender , were shutouts . In 1906 , McGinnity again led the NL in wins , with 27 . This came in spite of a suspension McGinnity served for fighting Pirates catcher Heinie <unk> , which NL president Harry Pulliam described as " attempting to make the ball park a slaughterhouse . " The Mayor of Pittsburgh , who attended the game , insisted that McGinnity be arrested . 
 In the 1907 season , McGinnity finished with an 18 – 18 record with a 3 @.@ 16 ERA , allowing more than a hit per inning for the first time since the 1901 season . He missed the beginning of the 1908 season with a severe fever . In June 1908 , Brush put McGinnity on waivers , hoping another owner would relieve him of McGinnity 's $ 5 @,@ 000 salary ( $ 131 @,@ 685 in current dollar terms ) . He tried to wave McGinnity again in August , but both times McGinnity went unclaimed . Despite this , McGinnity reverted to his old form : from August 22 through the end of the season , McGinnity had an 11 – 7 record , five shutouts , a 2 @.@ 27 ERA , and an NL @-@ leading five saves . The Giants released McGinnity on February 27 , 1909 , when McGinnity decided to pay for his own release . 
 = = = Later career = = = 
 McGinnity purchased the Newark Indians of the Class @-@ A Eastern League ( EL ) for $ 50 @,@ 000 ( $ 1 @,@ 316 @,@ 852 in current dollar terms ) in 1909 from Frank J. Farrell . The press reported that McGinnity would operate the team as a farm team of the Giants , though he denied these reports . When McGinnity could not retain manager Harry Wolverton , he stepped in as player @-@ manager for the Indians . That season , he had a 29 – 16 record . His 422 innings pitched and 11 shutouts set EL single @-@ season records . He also won both games of doubleheaders on August 27 , 1909 , and July 23 , 1912 . 
 McGinnity played for and managed the Indians through 1912 . The Indians finished second in the EL in 1909 and 1910 . McGinnity sold his interests in the Indians to Ebbets and Ed McKeever and purchased the Tacoma Tigers of the Class @-@ B Northwestern League for $ 8 @,@ 500 ( $ 208 @,@ 426 in current dollar terms ) , spending another $ 50 @,@ 000 ( $ 1 @,@ 226 @,@ 034 in current dollar terms ) on the franchise in renovating the stadium . He served as player @-@ manager the Tigers at the start of the 1913 season , but stepped down as manager , hiring Russ Hall to serve as manager in June . McGinnity sold stock in the team in 1915 in order to afford operating expenses . He also briefly played for the Venice Tigers of the Class @-@ A Pacific Coast League in 1914 . 
 McGinnity sold the Tigers and purchased the Butte Miners of the Northwestern League in 1916 , serving as player @-@ manager and bringing with him several players from Tacoma . In June 1917 , he sold his stock in the team and secured his release . He played for the Great Falls Electrics of the Northwestern League for the remainder of the 1917 season . 
 McGinnity served as player @-@ manager of the Danville Veterans of the Class @-@ B Illinois – Indiana – Iowa League in the 1922 season and Dubuque Climbers of the Class @-@ D Mississippi Valley League during the 1923 season . With Dubuque , McGinnity won 15 games at age 52 . One of those wins was a shutout , pitched in a record one hour and seven minutes . Two years later , he returned to play for Dubuque and Springfield Senators of the Illinois – Indiana – Iowa League during the 1925 season . He pitched in his final professional game on July 28 , 1925 , after participating in an old @-@ timers game earlier in the day . 
 McGinnity joined the coaching staff of former teammate Wilbert Robinson , along with Kelley , for the Brooklyn Dodgers during the 1926 MLB season . McGinnity and Kelley were not retained after the season . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 McGinnity acquired his nickname , " Iron Man " , before his doubleheader pitching became widely discussed . According to Lee Allen in The National League Story ( 1961 ) , a reporter asked McGinnity , while he was still a minor league pitcher , what he did in between seasons . " I 'm an iron man " , he answered . " I work in a foundry . " McGinnity 's wife 's family operated an iron foundry in McAlester , Oklahoma , where McGinnity worked in the offseasons . 
 Because of his nickname and connection to the foundry , John McGraw named McGinnity the starter for the Giants ' March 23 , 1904 exhibition game against the Southern Association 's Birmingham Iron Men which was scheduled to raise funds for the Vulcan statue then being cast for the Louisiana Purchase Exposition that summer in St. Louis , Missouri . At his own request , McGinnity was allowed to visit the downtown foundry and personally pour some of the iron into the moulds for the statue . 
 While working with Williams College 's baseball team in 1929 , McGinnity became ill . He had surgery to remove tumors from his bladder , and was said to be in critical condition . After the surgery , he was quoted as saying " it 's the ninth inning , and I guess they 're going to get me out . " He died November 14 , 1929 in Brooklyn , New York , at the home of his daughter . He was interred in McAlester . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 McGinnity finished his MLB career with 246 career wins , seven 20 @-@ win seasons , and two 30 @-@ win seasons . He had nearly 500 professional wins including his years in the minor leagues . McGinnity set a career record in batters hit by pitch with 152 . He revolutionized the fielding of the pitching position , by attempting to make force outs at any base , instead of only throwing the ball to first base . 
 After his death , McGinnity was eulogized as " hard player " and " a fighter with brains " who hated to lose . Jennings described him as an even better fielder than he was a pitcher . McGraw said that McGinnity was " the hardest working pitcher I ever had on my <unk> " . Connie Mack called him a " magician " . 
 After failing to receive the necessary votes from the Baseball Writers ' Association of America for entry in the National Baseball Hall of Fame on seven occasions , McGinnity was elected to the Hall of Fame posthumously by the Veterans Committee in the 1946 balloting . He was also inducted into the Quad City Sports Hall of Fame in 1988 . 
 In a 1976 article in Esquire magazine , sportswriter Harry Stein published an " All Time All @-@ Star Argument Starter " , consisting of five ethnic baseball teams . Though Stein chose McGinnity as the right @-@ handed pitcher for the Irish team , the team was omitted from the article due to space limitations . The Irish team was included in The Book of Lists , published the following year . Lawrence Ritter and Donald Honig included McGinnity in their 1981 book , The 100 Greatest Baseball Players of All Time . The Chicago Tribune included McGinnity in its all @-@ time Illinois team in 1990 . 
 = Decompression practice = 
 The practice of decompression by divers comprises the planning and monitoring of the profile indicated by the algorithms or tables of the chosen decompression model , to allow asymptomatic and harmless release of excess inert gases dissolved in the tissues as a result of breathing at ambient pressures greater than surface atmospheric pressure , the equipment available and appropriate to the circumstances of the dive , and the procedures authorized for the equipment and profile to be used . There is a large range of options in all of these aspects . 
 Decompression may be continuous or staged , where the ascent is interrupted by stops at regular depth intervals , but the entire ascent is part of the decompression , and ascent rate can be critical to harmless elimination of inert gas . What is commonly known as no @-@ decompression diving , or more accurately no @-@ stop decompression , relies on limiting ascent rate for avoidance of excessive bubble formation . Staged decompression may include deep stops depending on the theoretical model used for calculating the ascent schedule . Omission of decompression theoretically required for a dive profile exposes the diver to significantly higher risk of symptomatic decompression sickness , and in severe cases , serious injury or death . The risk is related to the severity of exposure and the level of supersaturation of tissues in the diver . Procedures for emergency management of omitted decompression and symptomatic decompression sickness have been published . These procedures are generally effective , but vary in effectiveness from case to case . 
 The procedures used for decompression depend on the mode of diving , the available equipment , the site and environment , and the actual dive profile . Standardized procedures have been developed which provide an acceptable level of risk in the circumstances for which they are appropriate . Different sets of procedures are used by commercial , military , scientific and recreational divers , though there is considerable overlap where similar equipment is used , and some concepts are common to all decompression procedures . 
 = = Decompression = = 
 Decompression in the context of diving derives from the reduction in ambient pressure experienced by the diver during the ascent at the end of a dive or hyperbaric exposure and refers to both the reduction in pressure and the process of allowing dissolved inert gases to be eliminated from the tissues during this reduction in pressure . When a diver descends in the water column the ambient pressure rises . Breathing gas is supplied at the same pressure as the surrounding water , and some of this gas dissolves into the diver 's blood and other fluids . Inert gas continues to be taken up until the gas dissolved in the diver is in a state of equilibrium with the breathing gas in the diver 's lungs , ( see : " Saturation diving " ) , or the diver moves up in the water column and reduces the ambient pressure of the breathing gas until the inert gases dissolved in the tissues are at a higher concentration than the equilibrium state , and start diffusing out again . Dissolved inert gases such as nitrogen or helium can form bubbles in the blood and tissues of the diver if the partial pressures of the dissolved gases in the diver gets too high above the ambient pressure . These bubbles and products of injury caused by the bubbles can cause damage to tissues known as decompression sickness , or " the bends " . The immediate goal of controlled decompression is to avoid development of symptoms of bubble formation in the tissues of the diver , and the long @-@ term goal is to also avoid complications due to sub @-@ clinical decompression injury . 
 = = Common procedures = = 
 The descent , bottom time and ascent are sectors common to all dives and hyperbaric exposures . 
 = = = Descent rate = = = 
 Descent rate is generally allowed for in decompression planning by assuming a maximum descent rate specified in the instructions for the use of the tables , but it is not critical . Descent slower than the nominal rate reduces useful bottom time , but has no other adverse effect . Descent faster than the specified maximum will expose the diver to greater ingassing rate earlier in the dive , and the bottom time must be reduced accordingly . In the case of real time monitoring by dive computer , descent rate is not specified , as the consequences are automatically accounted for by the programmed algorithm . 
 = = = Bottom time = = = 
 Bottom time is the time spent at depth before starting the ascent . Bottom time used for decompression planning may be defined differently depending on the tables or algorithm used . It may include descent time , but not in all cases . It is important to check how bottom time is defined for the tables before they are used . For example , tables using Bühlmann 's algorithm define bottom time as the elapsed time between leaving the surface and the start of the final ascent at 10 metres per minute , and if the ascent rate is slower , then the whole of the ascent time needs to be considered part of the bottom time for the algorithm to remain safe . 
 = = = Ascent rate = = = 
 The ascent is an important part of the process of decompression , as this is the time when reduction of ambient pressure occurs , and it is of critical importance to safe decompression that the ascent rate is compatible with safe elimination of inert gas from the diver 's tissues . Ascent rate must be limited to prevent supersaturation of tissues to the extent that unacceptable bubble development occurs . This is usually done by specifying a maximum ascent rate compatible with the decompression model chosen . This will be specified in the decompression tables or the user manual for the decompression software or personal decompression computer . The instructions will usually include contingency procedures for deviation from the specified rate , both for delays and exceeding the recommended rate . Failure to comply with these specifications will generally increase the risk of decompression sickness . 
 Typically maximum ascent rates are in the order of 10 metres ( 33 ft ) per minute for dives deeper than 6 metres ( 20 ft ) . Some dive computers have variable maximum ascent rates , depending on depth . Ascent rates slower than the recommended standard for the algorithm will generally be treated by a computer as part of a multilevel dive profile and the decompression requirement adjusted accordingly . Faster ascent rates will elicit a warning and additional decompression stop time to compensate . 
 = = No decompression dives = = 
 A " no decompression " , or " no stop " dive is a dive that needs no decompression stops during the ascent according to the chosen algorithm or tables , and relies on a controlled ascent rate for the elimination of excess inert gases . In effect , the diver is doing continuous decompression during the ascent . 
 = = = Safety stop = = = 
 As a precaution against any unnoticed dive computer malfunction , diver error or physiological predisposition to decompression sickness , many divers do an extra " safety stop " in addition to those prescribed by their dive computer or tables . A safety stop is typically 1 to 5 minutes at 3 to 6 metres ( 10 to 20 ft ) . They are usually done during no @-@ stop dives and may be added to the obligatory decompression on staged dives . Many dive computers indicate a recommended safety stop as standard procedure for dives beyond specific limits of depth and time . The Goldman decompression model predicts a significant risk reduction following a safety stop on a low @-@ risk dive 
 = = = No decompression limit = = = 
 The no decompression limit ( NDL ) or no stop time , is the interval that a diver may theoretically spend at a given depth without having to perform decompression stops . The NDL helps divers plan dives so that they can stay at a given depth and ascend without stopping while avoiding unacceptable risk of decompression sickness . 
 The NDL is a theoretical time obtained by calculating inert gas uptake and release in the body , using a model such as the Bühlmann decompression algorithm . Although the science of calculating these limits has been refined over the last century , there is still much that is unknown about how inert gases enter and leave the human body . In addition , every individual 's body is unique and may absorb and release inert gases at different rates . For this reason , dive tables typically have a degree of safety built into their recommendations . Divers can and do suffer decompression sickness while remaining inside <unk> , though the incidence is very low . Each NDL for a range of depths is printed on dive tables in a grid that can be used to plan dives . There are many different tables available as well as software programs and calculators , which will calculate no decompression limits . Most personal decompression computers ( dive computers ) will indicate a remaining no decompression limit at the current depth during a dive . The displayed interval is continuously revised to take into account changes of depth as well as elapsed time . 
 = = Continuous decompression = = 
 Continuous decompression is decompression without stops . Instead of a fairly rapid ascent rate to the first stop , followed by a period at static depth during the stop , the ascent is slower , but without officially stopping . In theory this is the optimum decompression profile . In practice this is very difficult to do manually , and it may be necessary to stop the ascent occasionally to get back on schedule , but these stops are not part of the schedule , they are corrections . For example , USN treatment table 5 , referring to treatment in a decompression chamber for type 1 decompression sickness , states " Descent rate - 20 ft / min . Ascent rate - Not to exceed 1 ft / min . Do not compensate for slower ascent rates . <unk> for faster rates by halting the ascent . " 
 To further complicate the practice , the ascent rate may vary with the depth , and is typically faster at greater depth and reduces as the depth gets shallower . In practice a continuous decompression profile may be approximated by ascent in steps as small as the chamber pressure gauge will resolve , and timed to follow the theoretical profile as closely as conveniently practicable . For example , USN treatment table 7 ( which may be used if decompression sickness has reoccurred during initial treatment in the compression chamber ) states " <unk> with stops every 2 feet for times shown in profile below . " The profile shows an ascent rate of 2 fsw every 40 min from 60 fsw ( feet of sea water ) to 40 fsw , followed by 2 ft every hour from 40 fsw to 20 fsw and 2 ft every two hours from 20 fsw to 4 fsw . 
 = = Staged decompression = = 
 Decompression which follows the procedure of relatively fast ascent interrupted by periods at constant depth is known as staged decompression . The ascent rate and the depth and duration of the stops are integral parts of the decompression process . The advantage of staged decompression is that it is far easier to monitor and control than continuous decompression . 
 = = = Decompression stops = = = 
 A decompression stop is a period a diver must spend at a relatively shallow constant depth during ascent after a dive to safely eliminate absorbed inert gases from the body tissues to avoid decompression sickness . The practice of making decompression stops is called staged decompression , as opposed to continuous decompression . 
 The diver identifies the requirement for decompression stops , and if they are needed , the depths and durations of the stops , by using decompression tables , software planning tools or a dive computer . 
 The ascent is made at the recommended rate until the diver reaches the depth of the first stop . The diver then maintains the specified stop depth for the specified period , before ascending to the next stop depth at the recommended rate , and follows the same procedure again . This is repeated until all required decompression has been completed and the diver reaches the surface . 
 Once on the surface the diver will continue to eliminate inert gas until the concentrations have returned to normal surface saturation , which can take several hours , and is considered in some models to be effectively complete after 12 hours , and by others to take up to , or even more than 24 hours . 
 The depth and duration of each stop is calculated to reduce the inert gas excess in the most critical tissues to a concentration which will allow further ascent without unacceptable risk . Consequently , if there is not much dissolved gas , the stops will be shorter and shallower than if there is a high concentration . The length of the stops is also strongly influenced by which tissue compartments are assessed as highly saturated . High concentrations in slow tissues will indicate longer stops than similar concentrations in fast tissues . 
 Shorter and shallower decompression dives may only need one single short shallow decompression stop , for example 5 minutes at 3 metres ( 10 ft ) . Longer and deeper dives often need a series of decompression stops , each stop being longer but shallower than the previous stop . 
 = = = = Deep stops = = = = 
 A deep stop was originally an extra stop introduced by divers during ascent , at a greater depth than the deepest stop required by their computer algorithm or tables . This practice is based on empirical observations by technical divers such as Richard Pyle , who found that they were less fatigued if the made some additional stops for short periods at depths considerably deeper than those calculated with the currently published decompression algorithms . More recently computer algorithms that are claimed to use deep stops have become available , but these algorithms and the practice of deep stops have not been adequately validated . Deep stops are likely to be made at depths where ingassing continues for some slow tissues , so the addition of deep stops of any kind can only be included in the dive profile when the decompression schedule has been computed to include them , so that such ingassing of slower tissues can be taken into account . Nevertheless , deep stops may be added on a dive that relies on a personal dive computer with real @-@ time computation , as the PDC will track the effect of the stop on its decompression schedule . Deep stops are otherwise similar to any other staged decompression , but are unlikely to use a dedicated decompression gas , as they are usually not more than two to three minutes long . 
 A study by Divers Alert Network in 2004 suggests that addition of a deep ( c . 15 m ) as well as a shallow ( c . 6 m ) safety stop to a theoretically no @-@ stop ascent will significantly reduce decompression stress indicated by <unk> doppler detected bubble ( PDDB ) levels . The authors associate this with gas exchange in fast tissues such as the spinal cord and consider that an additional deep safety stop may reduce the risk of spinal cord decompression sickness in recreational diving . A follow @-@ up study found that the optimum duration for the deep safety stop under the experimental conditions was 2 @.@ 5 minutes , with a shallow safety stop of 3 to 5 minutes . Longer safety stops at either depth did not further reduce PDDB . 
 In contrast , experimental work comparing the effect of deep stops observed a significant decrease in vascular bubbles following a deep stop after longer shallower dives , and an increase in bubble formation after the deep stop on shorter deeper dives , which is not predicted by the existing bubble model . 
 A controlled comparative study by the Navy Experimental Diving Unit in the NEDU Ocean Simulation Facility wet @-@ pot comparing the <unk> Thalmann Algorithm with a deep stop profile suggests that the deep stops schedule had a greater risk of DCS than the matched ( same total stop time ) conventional schedule . The proposed explanation was that slower gas washout or continued gas uptake offset benefits of reduced bubble growth at deep stops . 
 = = = = Profile determined intermediate stops = = = = 
 <unk> are intermediate stops at a depth above the depth at which the leading compartment for the decompression calculation switches from <unk> to offgassing and below the depth of the first obligatory decompression stop , ( or the surface , on a no @-@ decompression dive ) . The ambient pressure at that depth is low enough to ensure that the tissues are mostly offgassing inert gas , although under a very small pressure gradient . This combination is expected to inhibit bubble growth . The leading compartment is generally not the fastest compartment except in very short dives , for which this model does not require an intermediate stop . 
 The 8 compartment Bühlmann - based <unk> <unk> @-@ L8 ADT MB PMG decompression model in the Mares Galileo dive computer processes the dive profile and suggests an intermediate 2 @-@ minute stop that is a function of the tissue nitrogen loading at that time , taking into account the accumulated nitrogen from previous dives . Within the Haldanian logic of the model , at least three compartments are offgassing at the prescribed depth - the 5 and 10 minute half time compartments under a relatively high pressure gradient . Therefore , for decompression dives , the existing obligation is not increased during the stop . 
 A <unk> is not a mandatory stop , nor is it considered a substitute for the more important shallow safety stop on a no @-@ stop dive . Switching breathing gas mix during the ascent will influence the depth of the stop . 
 The <unk> concept was introduced by Sergio Angelini . 
 = = = Decompression schedule = = = 
 A decompression schedule is a specified ascent rate and series of increasingly shallower decompression stops — often for increasing amounts of time — that a diver performs to outgas inert gases from their body during ascent to the surface to reduce the risk of decompression sickness . In a decompression dive , the decompression phase may make up a large part of the time spent underwater ( in many cases it is longer than the actual time spent at depth ) . 
 The depth and duration of each stop is dependent on many factors , primarily the profile of depth and time of the dive , but also the breathing gas mix , the interval since the previous dive and the altitude of the dive site . The diver obtains the depth and duration of each stop from a dive computer , decompression tables or dive planning computer software . A technical scuba diver will typically prepare more than one decompression schedule to plan for contingencies such as going deeper than planned or spending longer at depth than planned . Recreational divers often rely on a personal dive computer to allow them to avoid obligatory decompression , while allowing considerable flexibility of dive profile . A surface supplied diver will normally have a diving supervisor at the control point who monitors the dive profile and can adjust the schedule to suit any contingencies as they occur . 
 = = = Missed stops = = = 
 A diver missing a required decompression stop increases the risk of developing decompression sickness . The risk is related to the depth and duration of the missed stops . The usual causes for missing stops are : not having enough breathing gas to complete the stops , or accidentally losing control of buoyancy . An aim of most basic diver training is to prevent these two faults . There are also less predictable causes of missing decompression stops . Diving suit failure in cold water may force the diver to choose between hypothermia and decompression sickness . Diver injury or marine animal attack may also limit the duration of stops the diver is willing to carry out . 
 A procedure for dealing with omitted decompression stops is described in the US Navy Diving Manual . In principle the procedure allows a diver who is not yet presenting symptoms of decompression sickness , to go back down and complete the omitted decompression , with some extra added to deal with the bubbles which are assumed to have formed during the period where the decompression ceiling was violated . Divers who become symptomatic before they can be returned to depth are treated for decompression sickness , and do not attempt the omitted decompression procedure as the risk is considered unacceptable under normal operational circumstances . 
 If a decompression chamber is available , omitted decompression may be managed by chamber recompression to an appropriate pressure , and decompression following either a surface decompression schedule or a treatment table . If the diver develops symptoms in the chamber , treatment can be started without further delay . 
 = = Accelerated decompression = = 
 Decompression can be accelerated by the use of breathing gases during ascent with lowered inert gas fractions ( as a result of increased oxygen fraction ) . This will result in a greater diffusion gradient for a given ambient pressure , and consequently accelerated decompression for a relatively low risk of bubble formation . Nitrox mixtures and oxygen are the most commonly used gases for this purpose , but oxygen rich trimix blends can also be used after a trimix dive , and oxygen rich heliox blends after a heliox dive , and these may reduce risk of isobaric counterdiffusion complications . Doolette and Mitchell showed that when a switch is made to a gas with a different proportion of inert gas components , it is possible for an inert component previously absent , or present as a lower fraction , to in @-@ gas faster than the other inert components are eliminated ( inert gas counterdiffusion ) , sometimes resulting in raising the total tissue tension of inert gases in a tissue to exceed the ambient pressure sufficiently to cause bubble formation , even if the ambient pressure has not been reduced at the time of the gas switch . They conclude that " breathing @-@ gas switches should be scheduled deep or shallow to avoid the period of maximum supersaturation resulting from decompression " . 
 = = = Oxygen decompression = = = 
 The use of pure oxygen for accelerated decompression is limited by oxygen toxicity . In open circuit scuba the upper limit for oxygen partial pressure is generally accepted as 1 @.@ 6 bar , equivalent to a depth of 6 msw ( metres of sea water ) , but in @-@ water and surface decompression at higher partial pressures is routinely used in surface supplied diving operation , both by the military and civilian contractors , as the consequences of CNS oxygen toxicity are considerably reduced when the diver has a secure breathing gas supply . US Navy tables ( Revision 6 ) start in @-@ water oxygen decompression at 30 fsw ( 9 msw ) , equivalent to a partial pressure of 1 @.@ 9 bar , and chamber oxygen decompression at 50 fsw ( 15 msw ) , equivalent to 2 @.@ 5 bar . 
 = = Repetitive dives = = 
 Any dive which is started while the tissues retain residual inert gas in excess of the surface equilibrium condition is considered a repetitive dive . This means that the decompression required for the dive is influenced by the divers decompression history . Allowance must be made for inert gas <unk> of the tissues which will result in them containing more dissolved gas than would have been the case if the diver had fully equilibrated before the dive . The diver will need to decompress longer to eliminate this increased gas loading . 
 = = = Surface interval = = = 
 The surface interval ( SI ) or surface interval time ( SIT ) is the time spent by a diver at surface pressure after a dive during which inert gas which was still present at the end of the dive is further eliminated from the tissues . This continues until the tissues are at equilibrium with the surface pressures . This may take several hours . In the case of the US Navy 1956 Air tables , it is considered complete after 12 hours , The US Navy 2008 Air tables specify up to 16 hours for normal <unk> but other algorithms may require more than 24 hours to assume full equilibrium . 
 = = = Residual nitrogen time = = = 
 For the planned depth of the repetitive dive , a bottom time can be calculated using the relevant algorithm which will provide an equivalent gas loading to the residual gas after the surface interval . This is called " residual nitrogen time " ( RNT ) when the gas is nitrogen . The RNT is added to the planned " actual bottom time " ( ABT ) to give an equivalent " total bottom time " ( TBT ) which is used to derive the appropriate decompression schedule for the planned dive . 
 Equivalent residual times can be derived for other inert gases . These calculations are done automatically in personal diving computers , based on the diver 's recent diving history , which is the reason why personal diving computers should not be shared by divers , and why a diver should not switch computers without a sufficient surface interval ( more than 24 hours in most cases , up to 4 days , depending on the tissue model and recent diving history of the user ) . 
 Residual inert gas can be computed for all modeled tissues , but repetitive group designations in decompression tables are generally based on only the one tissue , considered by the table designers to be the most limiting tissue for likely applications . In the case of the US Navy Air Tables ( 1956 ) this is the 120 minute tissue , while the Bühlmann tables use the 80 minute tissue . 
 = = Diving at altitude = = 
 The atmospheric pressure decreases with altitude , and this has an effect on the absolute pressure of the diving environment . The most important effect is that the diver must decompress to a lower surface pressure , and this requires longer decompression for the same dive profile . A second effect is that a diver ascending to altitude , will be decompressing en route , and will have residual nitrogen until all tissues have equilibrated to the local pressures . This means that the diver should consider any dive done before equilibration as a repetitive dive , even if it is the first dive in several days . 
 The US Navy diving manual provides repetitive group designations for listed altitude changes . These will change over time with the surface interval according to the relevant table . 
 Altitude corrections ( Cross corrections ) are described in the US Navy diving manual . This procedure is based on the assumption that the decompression model will produce equivalent predictions for the same pressure ratio . The " Sea Level Equivalent Depth " ( <unk> ) for the planned dive depth , which is always deeper than the actual dive at altitude , is calculated in inverse proportion to the ratio of surface pressure at the dive site to sea level atmospheric pressure . 
 Sea level equivalent depth 
 = Actual depth at altitude × Pressure at sea level ÷ Pressure at altitude 
 Decompression stop depths are also corrected , using the ratio of surface pressures , and will produce actual stop depths which are shallower than the sea level stop depths . 
 Stop depth at altitude = 
 Stop depth at sea level × Pressure at altitude ÷ Pressure at sea level 
 These values can be used with standard open circuit decompression tables , but are not applicable with constant oxygen partial pressure as provided by closed circuit rebreathers . Tables are used with the sea level equivalent depth and stops are done at the altitude stop depth . 
 The decompression algorithms can be adjusted to compensate for altitude . This was first done by Bühlmann for deriving altitude corrected tables , and is now common on diving computers , where an altitude setting can be selected by the user . 
 = = Flying and ascent to altitude after diving = = 
 Exposure to reduced atmospheric pressure during the period after a dive when the residual gas levels have not yet stabilized at atmospheric saturation levels can incur a risk of decompression sickness . Rules for safe ascent are based on extension of the decompression model calculations to the desired altitude , but are generally simplified to a few fixed periods for a range of exposures . For the extreme case of an exceptional exposure dive , the US Navy requires a surface interval of 48 hours before ascent to altitude . A surface interval of 24 hours for a Heliox decompression dive and 12 hours for Heliox no @-@ decompression dive are also specified . More detailed surface interval requirements based on the highest repetitive group designator obtained in the preceding 24 ‑ hour period are given on the US Navy Diving Manual Table 9 @.@ 6 , both for ascents to specified altitudes , and for commercial flights in aircraft nominally pressurized to 8000 ft . 
 The first DAN flying after diving workshop in 1989 consensus guidelines recommended : 
 wait for 12 hours before flying after up to two hours of no @-@ stop diving within the previous 48 hours ; 
 wait for 24 hours before flying after multi @-@ day , unlimited no @-@ stop diving ; 
 wait for 24 – 48 hours before flying after dives that required decompression stops ; 
 do not fly with DCS symptoms unless necessary to obtain hyperbaric treatment . 
 DAN later proposed a simpler 24 @-@ hour wait after any and all recreational diving , but there were objections on the grounds that such a long delay would result in lost business for island diving resorts and the risks of DCS when flying after diving were too low to warrant this blanket restraint . 
 The DAN Flying after Diving workshop of 2002 made the following recommendations for flying after recreational diving : 
 a 12 @-@ hour surface interval for uncertified individuals who took part in a " resort " or introductory scuba experience ; 
 an 18 @-@ hour surface interval for certified divers who make an unlimited number of no @-@ decompression air or nitrox dives over multiple days ; and 
 substantially longer than 18 hours for technical divers who make decompression dives or used helium breathing mixes , as no specific evidence concerning decompression or helium diving was available . 
 These recommendations apply to flying at an altitude greater than , or cabin pressure less than , an altitude equivalent of 2 @,@ 000 feet ( 610 meters ) . 
 NASA astronauts train underwater to simulate the weightlessness and occasionally need to fly afterwards at cabin altitudes not exceeding 10 @,@ 000 feet ( 3 @,@ 000 meters ) . Training dives use 46 % Nitrox and can exceed six hours at a maximum depth of 40 <unk> ( 12 <unk> ) for a maximum equivalent air depth ( EAD ) of 24 fsw ( 7 msw ) . NASA guidelines for <unk> of 20 – 50 fsw ( 6 – 15 msw ) with maximum dive durations of 100 – 400 minutes allow either air or oxygen to be breathed in the preflight surface intervals . Oxygen breathing during surface intervals reduces the time to fly by a factor of seven to nine times compared with air . A study by another military organization , the Special Operations Command also indicated that preflight oxygen might be an effective means for reducing DCS risk . 
 Some places , ( for example , the Altiplano in Peru and Bolivia , or the plateau around Asmara ( where the airport is ) in Eritrea , and some mountain passes ) , are many thousand feet above sea level and travelling to such places after diving at lower altitude should be treated as flying at the equivalent altitude after diving . 
 = = Specialised decompression procedures = = 
 = = = Surface decompression = = = 
 Surface decompression is a procedure in which some or all of the staged decompression obligation is done in a decompression chamber instead of in the water . This reduces the time that the diver spends in the water , exposed to environmental hazards such as cold water or currents , which will enhance diver safety . The decompression in the chamber is more controlled , in a more comfortable environment , and oxygen can be used at greater partial pressure as there in no risk of drowning and a lower risk of oxygen toxicity convulsions . A further operational advantage is that once the divers are in the chamber , new divers can be supplied from the diving panel , and the operations can continue with less delay . 
 A typical surface decompression procedure is described in the US Navy Diving Manual . If there is no in @-@ water 40 ft stop required the diver is surfaced directly . Otherwise , all required decompression up to and including the 40 ft ( 12 m ) stop is completed in @-@ water . The diver is then surfaced and pressurised in a chamber to 50 fsw ( 15 msw ) within 5 minutes of leaving 40 ft depth in the water . If this " surface interval " from 40 ft in the water to 50 fsw in the chamber exceeds 5 minutes , a penalty is incurred , as this indicates a higher risk of DCS symptoms developing , so longer decompression is required . 
 In the case where the diver is successfully <unk> within the nominal interval , he will be decompressed according to the schedule in the air decompression tables for surface decompression , preferably on oxygen , which is used from 50 fsw ( 15 msw ) , a partial pressure of 2 @.@ 5 bar . The duration of the 50 fsw stop is 15 minutes for the Revision 6 tables . The chamber is then decompressed to 40 fsw ( 12 msw ) for the next stage of up to 4 periods on oxygen . A stop may also be done at 30 fsw ( 9 msw ) , for further periods on oxygen according to the schedule . Air breaks of 5 minutes are taken at the end of each 30 minutes of oxygen breathing . 
 Surface decompression procedures have been described as " semi @-@ controlled accidents " . 
 Data collected in the North Sea have shown that the overall incidence of decompression sickness for in @-@ water and surface decompression is similar , but surface decompression tends to produce ten times more type II ( neurological ) DCS than in @-@ water decompression . A possible explanation is that during the final stage of ascent , bubbles are produced that are stopped in the lung capillaries . During recompression of the diver in the deck chamber , the diameter of some of these bubbles is reduced sufficiently that they pass through the pulmonary capillaries and reach the systemic circulation on the arterial side , later lodging in systemic capillaries and causing neurological symptoms . The same scenario was proposed for type II DCS recorded after sawtooth profile diving or multiple repetitive diving . 
 = = = Dry bell decompression = = = 
 " Dry " , or " Closed " diving bells are pressure vessels for human occupation which can be deployed from the surface to transport divers to the underwater workplace at pressures greater than ambient . They are equalized to ambient pressure at the depth where the divers will get out and back in after the dive , and are then re @-@ sealed for transport back to the surface , which also generally takes place with controlled internal pressure greater than ambient . During and / or after the recovery from depth , the divers may be decompressed in the same way as if they were in a decompression chamber , so in effect , the dry bell is a mobile decompression chamber . Another option , used in saturation diving , is to decompress to storage pressure ( pressure in the habitat part of the saturation spread ) and then transfer the divers to the saturation habitat under pressure ( transfer under pressure – <unk> ) , where they will stay until the next shift , or until decompressed at the end of the saturation period . 
 = = = Saturation decompression = = = 
 Once all the tissue compartments have reached saturation for a given pressure and breathing mixture , continued exposure will not increase the gas loading of the tissues . From this point onwards the required decompression remains the same . If divers work and live at pressure for a long period , and are decompressed only at the end of the period , the risks associated with decompression are limited to this single exposure . This principle has led to the practice of saturation diving , and as there is only one decompression , and it is done in the relative safety and comfort of a saturation habitat , the decompression is done on a very conservative profile , minimising the risk of bubble formation , growth and the consequent injury to tissues . A consequence of these procedures is that saturation divers are more likely to suffer decompression sickness symptoms in the slowest tissues , whereas bounce divers are more likely to develop bubbles in faster tissues . 
 Decompression from a saturation dive is a slow process . The rate of decompression typically ranges between 3 and 6 fsw ( 0 @.@ 9 and 1 @.@ 8 msw ) per hour . 
 The US Navy Heliox saturation decompression rates require a partial pressure of oxygen to be maintained at between 0 @.@ 44 and 0 @.@ 48 atm when possible , but not to exceed 23 % by volume , to restrict the risk of fire . For practicality the decompression is done in increments of 1 fsw at a rate not exceeding 1 fsw per minute , followed by a stop , with the average complying with the table ascent rate . Decompression is done for 16 hours in 24 , with the remaining 8 hours split into two rest periods . A further adaptation generally made to the schedule is to stop at 4 fsw for the time that is would theoretically take to complete the decompression at the specified rate , i.e. 80 minutes , and then complete the decompression to surface at 1 fsw per minute . This is done to avoid the possibility of losing the door seal at a low pressure differential and losing the last hour or so of slow decompression . 
 The Norwegian saturation decompression tables are similar , but specifically do not allow decompression to start with an upward excursion . Partial pressure of oxygen is maintained between 0 @.@ 4 and 0 @.@ 5 bar , and a rest stop of 6 hours is specified each night starting at midnight . 
 = = = Therapeutic decompression = = = 
 Therapeutic decompression is a procedure for treating decompression sickness by <unk> the diver , thus reducing bubble size , and allowing the gas bubbles to re @-@ dissolve , then decompressing slowly enough to avoid further formation or growth of bubbles , or eliminating the inert gases by breathing oxygen under pressure . 
 = = = = Therapeutic decompression on air = = = = 
 Recompression on atmospheric air was shown to be an effective treatment for minor DCS symptoms by Keays in 1909 . 
 Historically , therapeutic decompression was done by <unk> the diver to the depth of relief of pain , or a bit deeper , maintaining that pressure for a while , so that bubbles could be re @-@ dissolved , and performing a slow decompression back to the surface pressure . Later air tables were standardised to specific depths , followed by slow decompression . This procedure has been superseded almost entirely by hyperbaric oxygen treatment . 
 = = = = Hyperbaric oxygen therapy = = = = 
 Evidence of the effectiveness of recompression therapy utilizing oxygen was first shown by Yarbrough and Behnke , and has since become the standard of care for treatment of DCS . 
 A typical hyperbaric oxygen treatment schedule is the US Navy Table 6 , which provides for a standard treatment of 3 to 5 periods of 20 minutes of oxygen breathing at 60 fsw ( <unk> ) followed by 2 to 4 periods of 60 minutes at 30 fsw ( 9 msw ) before surfacing . Air breaks are taken between oxygen breathing to reduce the risk of oxygen toxicity . 
 = = = = In water recompression = = = = 
 If a chamber is not available for recompression within a reasonable period , a riskier alternative is in @-@ water recompression at the dive site . In @-@ water recompression ( IWR ) is the emergency treatment of decompression sickness ( DCS ) by sending the diver back underwater to allow the gas bubbles in the tissues , which are causing the symptoms , to resolve . It is a risky procedure that should only be used when it is not practicable to travel to the nearest recompression chamber in time to save the victim 's life . 
 The procedure is high risk as a diver suffering from DCS may become paralysed , unconscious or stop breathing whilst under water . Any one of these events may result in the diver drowning or further injury to the diver during a subsequent rescue to the surface . These risks can be mitigated to some extent by using a helmet or full @-@ face mask with voice communications on the diver , and suspending the diver from the surface so that depth is positively controlled , and by having an in @-@ water standby diver attend the diver undergoing the treatment at all times . 
 The principle behind in water recompression treatment is the same as that behind the treatment of DCS in a recompression chamber 
 Although in @-@ water recompression is regarded as risky , and to be avoided , there is increasing evidence that technical divers who surface and demonstrate mild DCS symptoms may often get back into the water and breathe pure oxygen at a depth 20 feet ( 6 @.@ 1 m ) for a period to seek to alleviate the symptoms . This trend is noted in paragraph 3 @.@ 6 @.@ 5 of DAN 's 2008 accident report . The report also notes that whilst the reported incidents showed very little success , " [ w ] e must recognize that these calls were mostly because the attempted IWR failed . In case the IWR were successful , [ the ] diver would not have called to report the event . Thus we do not know how often IWR may have been used successfully . " 
 Historically , in @-@ water recompression was the usual method of treating decompression sickness in remote areas . Procedures were often informal and based on operator experience , and used air as the breathing gas as it was all that was available . The divers generally used standard diving gear , which was relatively safe for this procedure , as the diver was at low risk of drowning if he lost consciousness . 
 = = Decompression equipment = = 
 There are several types of equipment used to help divers carry out decompression . Some are used to plan and monitor the decompression and some mark the underwater position of the diver and act as a buoyancy control aid and position reference in low visibility or currents . Decompression may be shortened ( or accelerated ) by breathing an oxygen @-@ rich " deco gas " such as a nitrox with 50 % or more oxygen . The high partial pressure of oxygen in such decompression mixes create the effect of the oxygen window . This decompression gas is often carried by scuba divers in side @-@ slung cylinders . Cave divers who can only return by a single route , will often leave decompression gas cylinders attached to the guideline at the points where they will be used . Surface supplied divers will have the composition of the breathing gas controlled at the gas panel . Divers with long decompression obligations may be decompressed inside gas filled chambers in the water or at the surface . 
 = = = Planning and monitoring decompression = = = 
 Equipment for planning and monitoring decompression includes decompression tables , surface computer software and personal decompression computers . There is a wide range of choice : 
 A decompression algorithm is used to calculate the decompression stops needed for a particular dive profile to reduce the risk of decompression sickness occurring after surfacing at the end of a dive . The algorithm can be used to generate decompression schedules for a particular dive profile , decompression tables for more general use , or be implemented in dive computer software . Depending on the algorithm chosen the range of no @-@ decompression limits at a given depth on the same gas can vary considerably . It is not possible to discriminate between " right " and " wrong " options , but it is considered correct to say that the risk of developing DCS is greater for the longer exposures and less for the shorter exposures for a given depth . 
 Dive tables or decompression tables are tabulated data , often in the form of printed cards or booklets , that allow divers to determine a decompression schedule for a given dive profile and breathing gas . In some cases they may also specify an altitude range . The choice of tables for professional diving use is generally made by the organization employing the divers , and for recreational training it is usually prescribed by the certifying agency , but for recreational purposes the diver is generally free to make use of any of the range of published tables , and for that matter , to modify them to suit himself or herself . 
 Decompression software is available for personal computers to model the decompression requirements of user specified dive profiles with different gas mixtures using a <unk> of decompression algorithms . Schedules generated by decompression software represent a diver 's specific dive plan and breathing gas mixtures . It is usual to generate a schedule for the planned profile and for the most likely contingency profiles . 
 A personal dive computer is a small computer designed to be worn by a diver during a dive , with a pressure sensor and an electronic timer mounted in a waterproof and pressure resistant housing which has been programmed to model the inert gas loading of the diver 's tissues in real time during a dive . A display allows the diver to see critical data during the dive , including the maximum and current depth , duration of the dive , and decompression data including the remaining no decompression limit calculated in real time for the diver throughout the dive . The dive computer keeps track of residual gas loading for each tissue used in the algorithm . Dive computers also provide a measure of safety for divers who accidentally dive a different profile to that originally planned . Most dive computers will provide the necessary decompression information for acceptably safe ascent in the event that the no @-@ decompression limits are exceeded . The use of computers to manage recreational dive decompression is becoming the standard and their use is also common in occupational scientific diving . Their value in surface supplied commercial diving is more restricted , but they can usefully serve as a dive profile recorder . 
 = = = Controlling depth and ascent rate = = = 
 A critical aspect of successful decompression is that the depth and ascent rate of the diver must be monitored and sufficiently accurately controlled . Practical in @-@ water decompression requires a reasonable tolerance for variation in depth and rate of ascent , but unless the decompression is being monitored in real time by a decompression computer , any deviations from the nominal profile will affect the risk . Several items of equipment are used to assist in facilitating accurate adherence to the planned profile , by allowing the diver to more easily control depth and ascent rate , or to transfer this control to specialist personnel at the surface . 
 A shot line is a rope between a float at the surface , and a sufficiently heavy weight holding the rope approximately vertical . The shot line float should be sufficiently buoyant to support the weight of all divers that are likely to be using it at the same time . Recreational divers are free to choose lesser buoyancy ay their own risk . The shot weight should be sufficient to prevent a diver from lifting it from the bottom by over @-@ inflation of the buoyancy compensator or dry suit , but not sufficient to sink the float if the slack on the line is all taken up . Various configurations of shot line are used to control the amount of slack . The diver ascends along the <unk> , and may use it purely as a visual reference , or can hold on to it to positively control depth , or can climb up it hand over hand . A <unk> may be used to fasten a diver to a <unk> during a decompression stop . 
 A decompression trapeze is a device used in recreational diving and technical diving to make decompression stops more comfortable and more secure and provide the divers ' surface cover with a visual reference for the divers ' position . It consists of a horizontal bar or bars suspended at the depth of intended decompression stops by buoys . The bars are of sufficient weight and the buoys of sufficient buoyancy that the trapeze will not easily change depth in turbulent water or if the divers experience buoyancy control problems . 
 A surface marker buoy ( SMB ) with a reel and line is often used by a dive leader to allow the boat to monitor progress of the dive group . This can provide the operator with a positive control of depth , by remaining slightly negative and using the buoyancy of the float to support this slight over @-@ weighting . This allows the line to be kept under slight tension which reduces the risk of entanglement . The reel or spool used to store and roll up the line usually has slightly negative buoyancy , so that if released it will hang down and not float away . 
 A delayed or deployable surface marker buoy ( <unk> ) is a soft inflatable tube which is attached to a reel or spool line at one end , and is inflated by the diver under water and released to float to the surface , deploying the line as it ascends . This provides information to the surface that the diver is about to ascend , and where he is . This equipment is commonly used by recreational and technical divers , and requires a certain level of skill to operate safely . They are mostly used to signal the boat that the diver has started ascent or to indicate a problem in technical diving . 
 A diving stage , sometimes known as the basket , or diver launch and recovery system ( <unk> ) , is a platform on which one or two divers stand which is hoisted into the water , lowered to the workplace or the bottom , and then hoisted up again to return the diver to the surface and lift him out of the water . This equipment is almost exclusively used by surface supplied professional divers , as it requires fairly complex lifting equipment . A diving stage allows the surface team to conveniently manage a diver 's decompression as it can be hoisted at a controlled rate and stopped at the correct depth for decompression stops , and allows the divers to rest during the ascent . It also allows the divers to be relatively safely and conveniently lifted out of the water and returned to the deck or quayside . 
 A wet bell , or open bell , is similar to a diving stage in concept , but has an air space , open to the water at the bottom in which the divers , or at least their heads , can shelter during ascent and descent . 
 = = = Providing gases to accelerate decompression = = = 
 Reducing the partial pressure of the inert gas component of the breathing mixture will accelerate decompression as the concentration gradient will be greater for a given depth . This is usually achieved by increasing the partial pressure of oxygen in the breathing gas , as substituting a different inert gas may have counter @-@ diffusion complications due to differing rates of diffusion , which can lead to a net gain in total dissolved gas tension in a tissue . This can lead to bubble formation and growth , with decompression sickness as a consequence . Partial pressure of oxygen is usually limited to 1 @.@ 6 bar during in water decompression for scuba divers , but can be up to 1 @.@ 9 bar in @-@ water and 2 @.@ 2 bar in the chamber when using the US Navy tables for surface decompression . 
 Stage cylinders are cylinders which are stored by scuba divers along the return route containing decompression and emergency gas . This is only practicable where the return route is known and marked by a guideline . Similar cylinders are carried by the divers when the route back is not secure . They are commonly mounted as sling cylinders , clipped to D @-@ rings at the sides of the diver 's harness . The divers must avoid breathing oxygen enriched " deco gas " at excessive depths because of the high risk of oxygen toxicity . To prevent this happening , cylinders containing oxygen @-@ rich gases must always be positively identifiable . One way of doing this is by marking them with their maximum operating depth as clearly as possible . 
 Surface supplied divers may be supplied with a gas mixture suitable for accelerated decompression by connecting a supply to the surface gas panel and providing it through the umbilical to the divers . This allows accelerated decompression , usually on oxygen , which can be used to a maximum depth of 30 ft ( 9 m ) . Surface supplied heliox bounce divers will be provided with mixtures suitable for their current depth , and the mixture may be changed several times during descent and ascent from great depths . 
 Closed circuit rebreathers are usually controlled to provide a fairly constant partial pressure of oxygen during the dive ( set point ) , and may be reset to a richer mix for decompression . The effect is to keep the partial pressure of inert gases as low as safely practicable throughout the dive . This minimizes the absorption of inert gas in the first place , and accelerates the elimination of the inert gases during ascent . 
 = = = Surface decompression = = = 
 Specialised equipment is available to decompress a diver out of the water . This is almost exclusively used with surface supplied diving equipment : 
 Deck decompression chambers are used for surface decompression , described in a previous section . Most deck decompression chambers are fitted with built in breathing systems ( <unk> ) , which supply an alternative breathing gas to the occupants ( usually oxygen ) , and discharge the exhaled gas outside the chamber , so the chamber gas is not excessively enriched by oxygen , which would cause an unacceptable fire hazard , and require frequent flushing with chamber gas ( usually air ) . 
 A dry bell may be used for bounce dives to great depths , and then used as the decompression chamber during the ascent and later on board the support vessel . In this case it is not always necessary to transfer into a deck chamber , as the bell is quite capable of performing this function , though it would be relatively cramped , as a bell is usually as small as conveniently possible to minimize weight for deployment . 
 A Saturation System or Saturation spread typically comprises a living chamber , transfer chamber and submersible decompression chamber , which is commonly referred to in commercial diving as the diving bell and in military diving as the personnel transfer capsule , PTC ( Personnel Transfer Capsule ) or <unk> ( Submersible Decompression Chamber ) . The diving bell is the elevator or lift that transfers divers from the system to the work site and back . At the completion of work or a mission , the saturation diving team is decompressed gradually back to atmospheric pressure by the slow venting of system pressure , at rates of about of 15 metres ( 49 ft ) to 30 metres ( 98 ft ) per day , ( schedules vary ) . Thus the process involves only one ascent , thereby mitigating the time @-@ consuming and comparatively risky process of multiple decompressions normally associated with multiple non @-@ saturation ( " bounce diving " ) operations . 
 A hyperbaric lifeboat or hyperbaric rescue unit may be provided for emergency evacuation of saturation divers from a saturation system . This would be used if the platform is at immediate risk due to fire or sinking , and allows the divers under saturation to get clear of the immediate danger . The crew would normally start decompression as soon as possible after launching . 
 = = Teaching of decompression practice = = 
 Basic decompression theory and use of decompression tables is part of the theory component of training for commercial divers , and dive planning based on decompression tables , and the practice and field management of decompression is a significant part of the work of the diving supervisor . 
 Recreational divers are trained in the theory and practice of decompression to the extent that the certifying agency specifies in the training standard for each certification . This may vary from a rudimentary overview sufficient to allow the diver to avoid decompression obligation for entry level divers , to competence in the use of several decompression algorithms by way of personal dive computers , decompression software , and tables for advanced technical divers . The detailed understanding of decompression theory is not generally required of either commercial or recreational divers . 
 The practice of decompression techniques is another matter altogether . Recreational divers are expected not to do decompression dives by most certification organizations , though <unk> and BSAC allow for short decompression dives in some levels of recreational divers . Technical , commercial , military and scientific divers may all be expected to do decompression dives in the normal course of their sport or occupation , and are specifically trained in appropriate procedures and equipment relevant to their level of certification . A significant part of practical and theoretical training for these divers is on the practice of safe and effective decompression procedures and the selection and use of the appropriate equipment . 
 = Banksia integrifolia = 
 Banksia integrifolia , commonly known as coast banksia , is a species of tree that grows along the east coast of Australia . One of the most widely distributed Banksia species , it occurs between Victoria and Central Queensland in a broad range of habitats , from coastal dunes to mountains . It is highly variable in form , but is most often encountered as a tree up to 25 metres ( 82 ft ) in height . Its leaves have dark green upper surfaces and white undersides , a contrast that can be striking on windy days . 
 It is one of the four original Banksia species collected by Sir Joseph Banks in 1770 , and one of four species published in 1782 as part of Carolus Linnaeus the Younger 's original description of the genus . It has had a complicated taxonomic history , with numerous species and varieties ascribed to it , only to be rejected or promoted to separate species . The taxonomy is now largely settled , with three subspecies recognised : B. integrifolia subsp. integrifolia , B. integrifolia subsp. compar and B. integrifolia subsp. monticola . 
 A hardy and versatile garden plant , B. integrifolia is widely planted in Australian gardens . It is a popular choice for parks and streetscapes , and has been used for bush revegetation and stabilisation of dunes . Its hardiness has prompted research into its suitability for use as a rootstock in the cut flower trade , but has also caused concerns about its potential to become a weed outside its natural habitat . 
 = = Names = = 
 Now widely known as coast banksia or coastal banksia , B. integrifolia was previously known by a range of common names . The Checklist of Australian Trees lists four other common names : honeysuckle , white banksia , white bottlebrush and white honeysuckle ; and some older sources refer to it as honeysuckle oak . 
 It was known to Indigenous Australians before its discovery and naming by Europeans ; for example , the Gunai people of Gippsland called it <unk> . Because of its wide range it would have a name in a number of other indigenous languages , but these are now lost . In 2001 , a search of historical archives for recorded indigenous names of Victorian flora and fauna failed to find a single name for the species . 
 = = Description = = 
 B. integrifolia is a highly variable species . It is most often encountered as a tree up to 25 metres ( 80 ft ) in height , but in sheltered locations it can reach 35 metres ( 110 ft ) . In more exposed areas it may grow as a small , gnarled tree , reaching to no more than about 5 metres ( 15 ft ) , and in highly exposed positions , such as on exposed coastal headlands , it may even be reduced to a small shrub . 
 It usually has a single stout trunk , which is often twisted and gnarled , with the rough grey bark characteristic of Banksia . The leaves are dark green with a white underside , and occur in whorls of three to five . Adult leaves have entire margins ; George specifies their dimensions as 4 to 20 centimetres ( 2 – 8 in ) long and 6 to 35 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 2 – 1 @.@ 4 in ) wide , but The Banksia Atlas warns that " Atlas contributors found great variability in these measurements with specimens often falling outside the varietal limits specified by George ( 1981 ) or being intermediate between two varieties . " Juvenile leaves have dentate margins with a few short teeth , and are generally larger than adult leaves . 
 Flowers occur in Banksia 's characteristic " flower spike " , an inflorescence made up of several hundred flowers densely packed in a spiral around a woody axis . This is roughly cylindrical , 10 to 12 centimetres ( 4 – 5 in ) high and five centimetres ( 2 in ) wide . Flowers are usually pale yellow to yellow , but may be greenish or pinkish in bud . Each individual flower consists of a tubular perianth made up of four united tepals , and one long wiry style . Characteristic of the taxonomic section in which it is placed , the styles are straight rather than hooked . The style ends are initially trapped inside the upper perianth parts , but break free at anthesis . This process starts with the flowers at the bottom of the inflorescence , sweeping up the spike at an unusually high rate of between 96 and 390 flowers per 24 hours . 
 The flower spikes are not as prominent as in some other Banksia species , as they arise from two- to three @-@ year @-@ old nodes nested within the foliage . After flowering , old flower parts wither and fall away over a period of several months , revealing the " cone " , a woody axis embedded with many small follicles . The follicles are initially greenish and downy , but gradually fade to dark grey . Each follicle contains one or sometimes two seeds , separated by a thin wooden separator . The seed itself is black , 6 to 10 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 2 – 0 @.@ 4 in ) long with a feathery black ' wing ' 10 to 20 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 4 – 0 @.@ 8 in ) long . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 B. integrifolia was first collected at Botany Bay on 29 April 1770 , by Sir Joseph Banks and Dr Daniel Solander , naturalists on the Endeavour during Lieutenant ( later Captain ) James Cook 's first voyage to the Pacific Ocean . However , the species was not published until April 1782 , when Carolus Linnaeus the Younger described the first four Banksia species in his Supplementum Plantarum . Linnaeus distinguished the species by their leaf shapes , and named them accordingly . Thus the species with entire leaf margins was given the specific name integrifolia , from the Latin integer , meaning " entire " , and folium , meaning " leaf " . The full name for the species is therefore Banksia integrifolia L.f. 
 Then followed around 200 years of confusion over the taxonomic limits of the species , caused by the species ' great variability , similarities with closely related species , and early attempts to classify the species based on dried specimen material alone . A stable Banksia taxonomy did not begin to emerge until 1981 with the publication of Alex George 's landmark monograph The genus Banksia L.f. ( Proteaceae ) . Over the next 18 years , George 's arrangement was gradually refined in the light of new research and the discovery of new material , and there were several changes to B. integrifolia 's infraspecific taxa . These changes culminated in George 's 1999 arrangement , which had broad acceptance until 2005 , when Austin Mast , Eric Jones and Shawn Havery published a phylogeny that did not accord with George 's arrangement . A new taxonomic arrangement was not published at the time , but early in 2007 Mast and Thiele initiated a rearrangement by transferring Dryandra to Banksia , and publishing B. subg . Spathulatae for the species having spoon @-@ shaped cotyledons . They foreshadowed publishing a full arrangement once DNA sampling of Dryandra was complete ; in the meantime , if Mast and Thiele 's nomenclatural changes are taken as an interim arrangement , then B. integrifolia is placed in B. subg . Spathulatae ; indeed , it is the type species for the subgenus . 
 = = = Placement within Banksia = = = 
 The current taxonomic arrangement of the Banksia genus is based on George 's 1999 monograph for the Flora of Australia book series . In this arrangement , B. integrifolia is placed in Banksia subg . Banksia , because its inflorescences take the form of Banksia 's characteristic flower spikes ; Banksia sect . Banksia because of its straight styles ; and Banksia ser . Salicinae because its inflorescences are cylindrical . Kevin Thiele additionally placed it in a subseries Integrifoliae , but this was not supported by George . 
 B. integrifolia 's placement within Banksia may be summarised as follows : 
 Genus Banksia 
 Subgenus Isostylis 
 Subgenus Banksia 
 Section Oncostylis 
 Section Coccinea 
 Section Banksia 
 Series Grandes 
 Series Banksia 
 Series Crocinae 
 Series Prostratae 
 Series Cyrtostylis 
 Series Tetragonae 
 Series Bauerinae 
 Series Quercinae 
 Series Salicinae 
 B. dentata – B. aquilonia – B. integrifolia – B. plagiocarpa – B. oblongifolia – B. robur – B. conferta – B. paludosa – B. marginata – B. canei – B. saxicola 
 = = = Subspecies = = = 
 Although some of the great variability of B. integrifolia can be attributed to environmental factors , much is genetic : George writes that it " gives the impression that it is actively <unk> to fill the many ecological niches through its range " . Three subspecies are currently recognised : B. integrifolia subsp. integrifolia , B. integrifolia subsp. compar , and B. integrifolia subsp. monticola . 
 Banksia integrifolia subsp. integrifolia 
 The nominate subspecies occurs near the coast over most of the species ' range except the far north . It varies little except in northern New South Wales and southern Queensland , where some populations appear to be intermediate with B. integrifolia subsp. compar . 
 Banksia integrifolia subsp. compar 
 This subspecies grows in coastal Queensland as far north as Proserpine . For most of its range it is the only subspecies , but near its southern limit it co @-@ occurs with B. integrifolia subsp. integrifolia . The two subspecies are distinguishable by their leaves , which are larger and glossy with wavy margins on B. integrifolia subsp. compar . 
 Banksia integrifolia subsp. monticola 
 Commonly known as white mountain banksia , it is the only subspecies with a montane distribution ; it occurs in the Blue Mountains of northern New South Wales . It is similar in form to B. integrifolia subsp. integrifolia , but differs in having longer , narrower leaves , and follicles that are more deeply embedded in the old flower spike . 
 = = = Hybrids = = = 
 Presumed natural hybrids have been reported between B. integrifolia and other members of Banksia ser . Salicinae , although no hybrid names have been formally published to date . Presumed hybrids are identified by their intermediate features ; for example those with B. paludosa ( swamp banksia ) , known from Jervis Bay and Green Cape on the coast of southern New South Wales , have a smaller habit , longer , thinner flower spikes , and persistent old flowers on old " cones " , which are otherwise bare on pure B. integrifolia . 
 Presumed hybrids with B. marginata ( silver banksia ) occur on Wilsons Promontory in Victoria ; these are found in localities where both species co @-@ occur , and have features intermediate between the two . Another purported hybrid with B. marginata , thought to be from Cape Paterson on Victoria 's south coast , was first described by Alf Salkin and is commercially available in small quantities . It forms an attractive hardy low @-@ growing plant to 1 metre . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 B. integrifolia is widely distributed , in both geographical and ecological terms . According to Alex George , " it spans a wider geographical and climatic range than any other species . " Thiele and Ladiges make a similar claim : that its distribution " is a broader latitudinal , altitudinal and ecological amplitude than any other species , with the possible exception of B. spinulosa . " 
 It occurs along almost the entire eastern coast of Australia , from Geelong , Victoria to Proserpine , Queensland . There was an isolated population on Long Island , Tasmania in 1999 , and an 1876 record allegedly from King Island , although there has been speculation that that specimen was actually collected in the Furneaux Group . The species no longer occurs at any of these Tasmania locations , and has been declared extinct in Tasmania under that state 's Threatened Species Protection Act 1995 . The range of latitude is thus about 20 to 38 ° S. 
 For most of its distribution , B. integrifolia occurs only within about 50 kilometres ( 30 mi ) of the coast , where it typically occurs on poor quality sandy soils derived from sandstone . It grows near coastal cliffs and headlands , alongside river estuaries , and even on stabilised sand dunes . The temperature range for this area is around 0 – 30 ° C ( 30 – 85 ° F ) , with almost no frosts . The species can occur in pure stands , but is usually associated with other species such as Melaleuca quinquenervia ( broad @-@ leaved paperbark ) . 
 Between Sydney and Brisbane , B. integrifolia is found up to 200 kilometres ( 125 mi ) inland , with B. integrifolia subsp. monticola occurring in the Blue Mountains at altitudes up to 1500 metres ( 5000 ft ) . There it grows on better quality volcanic or rocky soils derived from granites and basalts , and would experience up to 100 frosts per year . In this montane habitat , it occurs in association with Eucalyptus species such as E. viminalis ( manna gum ) and E. pauciflora ( snow gum ) , and also rainforest species such as Nothofagus moorei ( Antarctic beech ) and <unk> excelsa ( prickly ash ) . 
 No other species of tree occurs closer to the coast at Cape Byron , making B. integrifolia the most easterly tree on the Australian mainland . 
 = = Ecology = = 
 Like most other Proteaceae , B. integrifolia has proteoid roots , roots with dense clusters of short lateral rootlets that form a mat in the soil just below the leaf litter . These enhance solubilisation of nutrients , thus allowing nutrient uptake in low @-@ nutrient soils such as the phosphorus @-@ deficient native soils of Australia . Studies on B. integrifolia suggest that its proteoid root mat achieves this by chemically modifying its soil environment . 
 B. integrifolia flowers have an unusually short life span for Banksia species , producing nectar for only about four to twelve days after anthesis . Most nectar is produced during the night and early in the morning , with only small amounts produced during the day . Flowers are produced all through the year , but there is a strong peak in autumn . Little else flowers within its range at this time , so it is a seasonally important source of food for <unk> animals . Surveys have observed a range of animals feeding on the species , including a wide range of insects ; many species of bird including Phylidonyris novaehollandiae ( New Holland honeyeater ) , Anthochaera carunculata ( red wattlebird ) , Anthochaera chrysoptera ( little wattlebird ) , Acanthorhynchus tenuirostris ( eastern spinebill ) and Trichoglossus <unk> ( rainbow lorikeet ) ; and mammals such as Petaurus <unk> ( squirrel glider ) , Petaurus breviceps ( sugar glider ) , Acrobates pygmaeus ( <unk> glider ) and Pteropus poliocephalus ( grey @-@ headed flying fox ) . In some areas such as at <unk> National Park in northern New South Wales , B. integrifolia is the only source of nectar and pollen in the autumn ( March – April ) and late winter ( July ) . The importance of non @-@ flying mammals to pollination of B. integrifolia was demonstrated in 1989 , with a study in Wilsons Promontory National Park showing a reduction of fruit set when measures were taken to exclude them . 
 Unlike most Banksia species , B. integrifolia does not require bushfire to trigger the release of its seed . Rather , seed is released spontaneously on reaching maturity in late summer . The species ' non @-@ reliance on fire for seed dispersal suggests that the exclusion of fire would not affect plant populations , but a number of studies have found the opposite to be true : in areas where fire has been excluded for many years , populations have declined substantially . An investigation into the defoliation and premature death of trees on the <unk> Isthmus in south Victoria reached the tentative conclusion that the absence of fire had created unhealthy surface soil conditions . On the Mornington Peninsula , surveys of an area that had not been burnt since the 1890s found that B. integrifolia densities fell by 77 % between 1977 and 2000 . A subsequent study found the decline to have been caused by extremely high seedling mortality rates , due to grazing by herbivores and intense competition for soil moisture during summer . Despite acknowledging that " the role of fire in these systems remains unclear " , it concluded that " developing fire and / or grazing management regimes will be necessary to conserve the structural integrity of these coastal ecosystems . " 
 These concerns aside , B. integrifolia does not appear to be under threat . It has excellent resistance to Phytophthora cinnamomi dieback , which poses a major threat to many other Banksia species ; and its wide distribution protects against the threat of habitat loss due to land clearing . As a result , it does not appear on the list of threatened Australian plants under the Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999 . 
 = = Cultivation = = 
 Hardy and versatile , B. integrifolia will grow in clay , sand , acid and even alkaline soils , and it shows good resistance to wind and salt , making it suitable for seaside planting . It is therefore highly regarded as a low @-@ maintenance garden tree , although its large size makes it unsuitable for smaller gardens . Its hardiness may however <unk> weed potential , as some evidence of <unk> has been seen in Western Australia and New Zealand . When growing near bushland within its native habitat , it is recommended to obtain local provenance seed or plants if available . 
 The most common form available in commercial nurseries is unimproved Banksia integrifolia subsp. integrifolia . It prefers a sunny aspect without exposure to frosts , and tolerates fairly heavy pruning . Seeds do not require any treatment , and take 5 to 6 weeks to germinate . Flowering begins at around four to six years from seed . The other subspecies are less well known in cultivation , but are obtainable . Cultivation is presumably similar to B. integrifolia subsp. integrifolia , except that B. integrifolia subsp. monticola may be assumed frost @-@ tolerant . Dwarf forms of B. integrifolia are sometimes sold , and a registered prostrate cultivar , Banksia ' Roller Coaster ' , is available . The latter is a vigorous ground @-@ hugging plant that can spread to 4 or 5 metres across yet remains only 50 centimetres high . 
 Because of its high resistance to P. cinnamomi dieback , the feasibility of using B. integrifolia as a rootstock for susceptible Banksia species in the cut flower trade is under investigation . Presently , the success rate for grafting is only 30 – 40 % , and even with successful grafts there is a tendency for the union to fail under stress . More research is needed before the technique will be ready for commercial use . 
 = = Other uses = = 
 The wood of B. integrifolia is pink to red , with inconspicuous rings and conspicuous rays . It is spongy and porous , with a density of around 530 kilograms per cubic metre ( 33 lb / ft3 ) . It is considered highly decorative , but it warps badly on drying , has poor load @-@ bearing qualities , and is susceptible to termite attack ; it is therefore unsuitable for most construction purposes . It is sometimes used for cabinet panelling and in ornamental turnery , and natural bends were once sought after for making boat knees . It is a useful firewood . 
 B. integrifolia produces a dark amber @-@ coloured honey of middling quality and therefore low commercial value . Despite this , the species is highly valued by beekeepers because it produces large amounts of pollen and nectar during autumn and winter , thus helping support hives at a time when little else is flowering . 
 Historically , indigenous Australians obtained nectar from B. integrifolia by stroking the flower spikes then licking their hands , or by steeping flower spikes in a coolamon overnight . They also used the flower spikes as <unk> . Early settlers used the nectar as a syrup for sore throats and colds ; and <unk> would impregnate barren " cones " with fat to make a slow @-@ burning candle . 
 More recently , B. integrifolia has been used in the art of bonsai . Its rangy habit and long internodes are challenging to overcome , but the leaves do reduce with pruning , and unlike the <unk> B. serrata ( saw banksia ) its trunk can become textured with age . 
 It is used as a floral emblem by two local government areas of Queensland : the City of Redcliffe and the City of Logan . In 2000 it was featured on an Australian postage stamp . 
 = Dhoom 2 = 
 Dhoom 2 ( [ ˈd ̪ <unk> ] , English : Blast 2 , also abbreviated and known as D : 2 , D2 and Dhoom 2 : Back In Action ) is a 2006 Indian action film directed by Sanjay Gadhvi and produced by Aditya Chopra and Yash Chopra at an estimated budget of ₹ 350 million ( US $ 5 @.@ 2 million ) under the Yash Raj Films banner . It is the second in the Dhoom series . Abhishek Bachchan and Uday Chopra star as buddy cops Jai Dixit and Ali , respectively . The duo attempt to capture Mr. A ( Hrithik Roshan ) , a professional thief whose passion is to steal rare and valuable collectibles using high @-@ technology gadgets . The film features Bipasha Basu and Aishwarya Rai in lead female roles . Dhoom 2 was shot primarily in India , Durban , and Rio de Janeiro , becoming the first major Hindi film to be shot in Brazil . The distributor , Yash Raj Films , promoted the film by forging associations with Pepe Jeans and Coca @-@ Cola . It premiered on 24 November 2006 in India , where it received the widest release in Indian cinema history with over 1800 prints . It was dubbed simultaneously in Tamil as well as in Telugu . Singer Vijay Prakash dubbed for ACP Jai Dixit in Tamil . 
 Dhoom 2 was generally well received by critics and audiences ; it was accepted well by children and adults . It became the highest @-@ grossing Indian film of 2006 , and was the highest @-@ grossing Bollywood film of all time as well at the time of its release . It is the seventh highest @-@ grossing Bollywood film in overseas markets . After grossing over ₹ 1 @.@ 5 billion ( US $ 22 million ) , Dhoom 2 was elevated to a " blockbuster " rating on Box Office India . It received an 80 % approval rating among critics on Rotten Tomatoes . Critics praised Dhoom 2 for its exotic locales and elaborate action sequences . However , there was an appeal by the Mumbai city police commissioner to censor the fast @-@ paced rash driving scenes due to fears that it would inspire Indian youths to ride their motorcycles rashly , resulting in an increase in the number of road accidents . A sequel titled Dhoom 3 was released on 20 December 2013 , which also went on to become the highest @-@ grossing Bollywood film of all time . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The world 's oldest desert in Namibia ; A solitary railway line & A royal family on a royal journey . <unk> ( Hrithik Roshan ) sky @-@ dives and lands on a train that is carrying the Queen . He steals her crown by disguising himself as the Queen , beats her guards easily and escapes . Newly promoted officer Ali ( Uday Chopra ) and Jai Dixit ( Abhishek Bachchan ) are introduced to Shonali Bose ( Bipasha Basu ) , a special officer assigned to investigate Mr. A 's case , who also happens to be a former classmate of Jai . After the initial investigation , Dixit analyses the underlying trend in Mr. A 's heists . As per his analysis , a theft in one of two famous Mumbai city museums will follow . 
 However , Dixit realizes that the artifact in the museum he is guarding happens to be imperfect . He immediately flees to the other museum when a disguised Mr. A steals a rare diamond and escapes . In a televised challenge to the police , Mr. A announces that he will steal an ancient warrior sword . In response , Dixit , Bose and Khan enforce a strict vigil at the location housing the sword . At night , Mr. A meets his impersonator in the room that holds the sword . The police are alerted , but they manage to steal the sword and escape . The impersonator turns out to be Sunehri ( Aishwarya Rai ) , a woman who idolises Mr. A , and after this they form an alliance . 
 In Rio de Janeiro , Mr. A and Sunehri plan their next heist . As Dixit 's analysis has named Rio the location of Mr. A 's next heist , Jai and Ali travel to the city . There they meet Monali ( Bipasha Basu ) , Shonali 's twin sister and Ali immediately falls for her . Meanwhile , the relationship between Mr. A and Sunehri evolves into romance and he unveils his real identity , Aryan , to her . However , he discovers that Sunehri was actually a spy working for Jai after seeing them together at a theatre and then a parade . Aryan forces Sunehri to play a game of Russian roulette . Sunehri cries and refuses to shoot Aryan because she loves him , but Aryan forces her . However , after six attempted shots from the gun , neither is injured because Aryan had not inserted a bullet into the gun . Sunehri admits she betrayed Aryan and that she loves him . In their final heist , Aryan and Sunehri successfully steal some early Lydian coins while disguised as performing dwarfs . Sunehri indicates that she does not wish to remain allied with Jai , forcing Jai and Ali to go after them . After the chase , all of them end up on the top of a waterfall , where Sunehri is caught by Ali . Sunehri , despite conveying her feelings for Aryan , shoots him . Aryan falls from the waterfall , after which Jai allows Sunehri to go free . 
 After six months , it is revealed that Aryan had survived , and now has opened a restaurant in the Fiji islands with Sunehri . Jai meets Aryan and Sunehri at the restaurant and states that despite their crimes , he does not wish to imprison the couple . Aryan shows him where all the stolen artifacts can be found . Jai is aware of the couple 's feelings towards each other , but warns them against returning to their life of crime . Jai later informs Ali that they should be heading back to India for their next case . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Hrithik Roshan as Aryan / Mr. " A " , a master thief living in disguise . He steals museum pieces such as the first man @-@ made coins , a queen 's crown , ancient sword and more . He only steals at selected museums to mark " A " , the first letter of his name , on the map of the world . 
 Abhishek Bachchan as ACP Jai Dixit , an Assistant Commissioner trying to find Mr. A. Jai is accompanied by inspector Ali and married to Sweety Dixit . 
 Aishwarya Rai as Sunehri , another thief who was blackmailed by Jai Dixit to find out more about Mr. A , because she was a petty thief in Mumbai and was forced to help him or face jail time . 
 Uday Chopra as Ali Akbar Fateh Khan , an assistant to Jai Dixit and an inspector . 
 Bipasha Basu as Shonali Bose and Monali Bose , twins with different personalities . Shonali is a tough assistant commissioner , and an old friend of Jai , while Monali is a joyful girl living in Rio de Janeiro . 
 Rimi Sen in a guest appearance as Sweety Dixit , Jai 's wife . She is pregnant and is suspicious of Jai 's friendship with Shonali . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 The Dhoom series began with the release of Dhoom in 2004 . The film became a commercial box office hit and received generally positive reviews from audiences , but not so much from critics . As a result , producer Yash Chopra announced plans for a sequel , titled Dhoom 2 : Back in Action . John Abraham , portrayer of Kabir Sharma , the villain of the predecessor , was eliminated from the sequel because Chopra did not want Dhoom 2 to repeat the stories featured in its predecessor . Instead , Hrithik Roshan and Aishwarya Rai were introduced into the franchise as the sequel 's main villains . Aishwarya Rai 's character was summarised as Catwoman , a female fictional comic book femme fatale or anti @-@ hero . Rai stated , " All I can tell you is it would be nothing like anything you 've seen me do before . " Producer Aditya Chopra told Rai to lose weight after she gained it for her role in 2004 's Bride & Prejudice . Yash Chopra stated , " But yes , the role does require Aishwarya to convey oodles of sensuality . She has asked for a couple of months to get into shape . We ( at Yash Raj Films ) are very clear about every character in every script and what 's required of the actors . Before Dhoom , Esha Deol was specifically briefed about the look and the attitude she needed to cultivate . She readily agreed , and look at what Dhoom did to her career ! " Roshan also lost twelve pounds of weight at Aditya Chopra 's request . With the exception of Abraham and Esha Deol , all of the other main actors in Dhoom were hired again for Dhoom 2 . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Dhoom 2 was filmed in Mumbai ( India ) , Namibia , Durban ( South Africa ) , and Rio de Janeiro , ( Brazil ) , making it the first Bollywood movie to be shot in Brazil . In total , production lasted eighteen months and cost of ₹ 350 million ( US $ 5 @.@ 2 million ) . To ensure the sequel would be different from the original , which became famous for its brash motorcycle stunts , director Sanjay Gadhvi included very few motorcycles in Dhoom 2 . Nonetheless , Roshan 's role required him to perform several dangerous stunts involving activities such as roller @-@ blading , sand boarding and snow boarding . 
 Dhoom 2 made extensive use of visual effects , which were filmed at Yash Raj Studios . While shooting at Yash Raj Studios , the film suffered from a flood that destroyed the studio sets and delayed production . Fight and action sequences were storyboarded before being shown to Gadhvi and Allan Amin , who would make changes . The scenes were then sketched , given " proper shot list [ s ] " , and shared with Tata Elxsi , who oversaw the pre @-@ visualization of the sequences . Several scenes were filmed with the use of green screen and computer @-@ generated imagery . For example , the stunts Roshan 's performed on a train in the Namib Desert used green screen ; after Roshan recorded the stunts on a set , Gadhvi traveled to the desert to film the background . Other stunts were performed by stuntmen whose faces were later digitally exchanged with the actors ' . 
 The bullet effects and Hrithik 's gadgets and mechanical arm were also computer generated . The scene involving Abhishek Bachchan coming out of a lake using a jet ski was created using a green screen . The stunt came out at 90 degrees , but Sanjay <unk> wanted a 60 degrees jump . So , it was shot with a Super 35 , and hence the angle could be changed . <unk> discussed the use of technology in an interview : 
 We 've done animation and pre @-@ visualization for all the action sequences in Dhoom 2 and that is very important in terms of planning , cost effectiveness and also it 's a new way of preparing for shoot and the film specially which is as set on such a large canvas such as Dhoom 2 . In Dhoom 1 we had all the action sequences broken down and written . In this movie we had very big action sequences so we had all the scenes storyboarded and they would be checked , double checked and triple checked by myself , Alan Amin and Adi and we would then rectify if needed and that would be our level of planning . 
 = = Soundtrack = = 
 The soundtrack of Dhoom 2 was recorded at YRF Studios . The music was composed by Pritam with background score by Salim @-@ Sulaiman . The lyrics were penned by Sameer except " Dhoom Again " by Asif Ali Beg and " Crazy Kiya Re — Remix " was remixed by Bunty Rajput . Although most of the song 's lyrics are primarily written in Hindi with some English , " Dhoom Again " is almost entirely in English . The soundtrack pulled average reviews from critics but higher praise from the public . It became the best selling Bollywood soundtrack of the year . 
 All music composed by Pritam . 
 = = Release = = 
 Dhoom 2 was released on 24 November 2006 in India , where it received the widest release in Indian cinema history at the time with over 1800 prints , including 250 digital copies . Some locations raised ticket prices for the film . 
 It was promoted with several tie @-@ ins . Coca @-@ Cola promoted the film as " Coke <unk> , Dhoom <unk> " . India 's video game producing company <unk> developed a game based on the film . Pepe Jeans sold Dhoom 2 @-@ related garments , including shirts , jeans , <unk> , caps , and metal accessories . Chetan Shah , the country head of Pepe Jeans London , stated : " Pepe Jeans is tremendously excited to be associated with the most awaited movie of the year Dhoom : 2 . The incredible <unk> of Hrithik Roshan , Aishwarya Rai , Abhishek Bachchan , Bipasha Basu and Uday Chopra and the exciting and explosive content of the movie encapsulates everything that the Pepe Jeans brand stands <unk> young , cool , trendy , hip , fashionable and innovative . 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 In India , Dhoom 2 broke several box @-@ office records , mainly those for opening day and opening weekend grosses , including a first week of ₹ 66 million ( US $ 980 @,@ 000 ) in Mumbai and ₹ 179 million ( US $ 2 @.@ 7 million ) for all of India . In Mumbai , distributors received a profit of ₹ 94 million ( US $ 1 @.@ 4 million ) on the first week 's business . Box Office India awarded it a " blockbuster " rating after the film netted ₹ 803 million ( US $ 12 million ) in India and grossed ₹ 1 @.@ 5 billion ( US $ 22 million ) worldwide on a budget of ₹ 350 million ( US $ 5 @.@ 2 million ) . It is currently the 13th highest @-@ grossing film in India ( unadjusted for inflation ) . 
 Dhoom 2 grossed US $ 979 @,@ 000 in North America in 63 theatres over its three @-@ day opening weekend ( $ 1 @.@ 3 million over four days ) , becoming the third largest opening weekend for a Bollywood film in North America . Overall , it was the seventeenth ranked film at the American box office . Box Office Mojo reports it earned a total of $ 2 @,@ 643 @,@ 586 inside the United States and a total of $ 29 @,@ 752 @,@ 841 in other countries , including India . In Dubai , it achieved the highest first day opening for a Bollywood film . 
 Dhoom 2 ranked sixth among opening weekends for international films at the United Kingdom box office with a gross ( average per screen ) of £ 8 @,@ 151 . At the Australian box office , it had the twelfth highest opening and collected approximately A $ 176 @,@ 462 . It grossed approximately NZ $ 51 @,@ 453 on five screens in New Zealand . Dhoom 2 is estimated to have grossed US $ 8 @,@ 750 @,@ 000 total in the overseas markets . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 = = = = India = = = = 
 In India , the film received mostly positive reviews from critics . Taran Adarsh of Bollywood Hungama gave 4 @.@ 5 out of 5 stars , reporting " On the whole , Dhoom 2 is a winner all the way . For Yash Raj , who 've not only produced but also distributed the film , Dhoom 2 should emerge as one of the biggest hits of their career . " Rajesh <unk> of Rediff gave it three and a half stars out of five , calling it " A complete roller @-@ coaster ride which left me completely enthralled and exhausted . Sure , there are faults when you stop to think rationally . But that does not stop you from being dazzled by the film . " Rajeev Masand of CNN @-@ IBN gave it a three star rating , saying that Dhoom 2 is without doubt better than its predecessor , and that Hrithik Roshan is the heart and soul of the film . Vijay <unk> of Planet Bollywood gave it seven out of ten stars ; while complaining about flaws in the plot and Aishwarya Rai ’ s performance , he still called it a good adrenaline @-@ pumping entertainer . 
 = = = = International = = = = 
 Review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes reported 83 % of six critics were positive and gave it a " fresh " certificate . Variety commented , " Loaded with enough attitude , Bollywood <unk> and buff bodies to stop a speeding train , Dhoom 2 has been doing humongous biz since its November 24 worldwide opening , and provides adequate proof that Yash Raj Films is good for more than just family @-@ oriented comedy @-@ dramas . " 
 Rachel Saltz of The New York Times reviewed , " The pleasure principle is palpable in the giddy , slick Dhoom 2 , a satisfying example of the new , thoroughly modern Bollywood . It may represent the newfangled Bollywood , but old @-@ fashioned star power is what animates and elevates it above its occasional narrative flaws and <unk> . " Film Journal International 's Ethan Alter said , " Dhoom 2 has all of the benefits of a big @-@ budget Bollywood production : big @-@ name stars , exotic locales , well @-@ produced musical numbers and elaborate ( by Bollywood standards , anyway ) action sequences . It makes no lasting contributions to world cinema , but if two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half hours of disposable entertainment are all you 're after , you could do far worse . " L.A. Weekly 's David Chute stated the film was , " A movie meal as satisfying as this one can make you feel that nothing else matters . " Jaspreet Pandohar of the BBC gave it a two @-@ star rating , writing " By roping in acclaimed action director Alan Amin to take care of the thrills and spills , you 'd expect Gadhvi to have spent time crafting out a sophisticated storyline instead of simply sending his cast on a cat @-@ and @-@ mouse chase around the globe . It 's only Roshan 's charismatic performance as the criminal mastermind , and the sizzling chemistry he shares with Rai 's sassy cohort , that rescues this adventure from becoming an elongated tourism commercial . " Manish Gajjar , Bollywood Correspondent for BBC Shropshire said , " With its high @-@ powered action sequences matching Hollywood standards , Dhoom 2 is a winner all the way at the box office ! " 
 = = = Controversies = = = 
 The city of Mumbai 's police commissioner called for censoring of the fast @-@ paced rash driving scenes in the film due to fears that it would inspire Indian youths to ride their motorcycles rashly , resulting in an increase in the number of road accidents . Unlike the original , the robberies depicted in Dhoom 2 were not inspired by any real @-@ life crimes . Dhoom 2 , however , inspired the robbery of a man by his nephew , who wore clothing similar to Hrithik 's in the film while committing the crime . 
 = = Accolades = = 
 Dhoom 2 was nominated for several awards that year , but only picked up a few of the major ones . At the Filmfare Awards , Hrithik Roshan won the Best Actor , out of five total nominations for the film . At the International Indian Film Academy Awards ( IIFA ) , the film won for Best Makeup and the Best Costume Design . At the Stardust Awards , Aishwarya Rai won Star of the Year – Female and director Sanjay Gadhvi won the Hottest Young Film Maker title . 
 At the 2007 MTV India Style Awards , however , Dhoom 2 swept nearly all of the movie awards , winning the following : 
 Most Stylish Film : Dhoom 2 
 Most Stylish Actor – Male : Hrithik Roshan 
 Most Stylish Actor – Female : Aishwarya Rai 
 Most Stylish New Look : Hrithik Roshan 
 Most Stylish Body : Hrithik Roshan 
 Most Stylish Couple : Hrithik Roshan & Aishwarya Rai 
 Most Stylish Song in A Film : Shiamak Davar ( choreographer ) 
 Most Stylish Bollywood Designer : <unk> Shroff Adajania 
 = = Home media = = 
 Dhoom 2 was released in DVD format on February 2007 . It was distributed by Yash Raj Films in all regions as a two @-@ disc set and for region 1 as a single @-@ disc set . It was released on Blu @-@ ray in December 2009 . 
 The film is also noteworthy because its soundtrack is the first in Indian cinema to be released in DVD @-@ Audio in addition to other audio formats . The tracks have been mixed in London in 5 @.@ 1 Surround Sound and audiophiles can choose the format from the audio menu . Four bonus tracks from other films are included , and the lyrics of all 10 tracks can be viewed on @-@ screen while the music is playing , enabling karaoke sing @-@ along . 
 = Battle of Ap Bac = 
 The Battle of <unk> Bắc was a major battle fought on January 2 , 1963 , during the Vietnam War . It was fought in Định Tường Province ( now part of Tiền Giang Province ) , South Vietnam . On December 28 , 1962 , US intelligence detected the presence of a radio transmitter along with a sizable force of National Front for the Liberation of South Vietnam ( NLF / Viet Cong ) soldiers , reported to number around 120 , in the hamlet of Ap Tan Thoi in Dinh Tuong Province , home of the Army of the Republic of South Vietnam ( ARVN ) 7th Infantry Division . To destroy the NLF force , the South Vietnamese and their US advisers planned to attack Ap Tan Thoi from three directions by using two provincial Civil Guard battalions and elements of the 11th Infantry Regiment , ARVN 7th Infantry Division . The infantry units would be supported by artillery , M @-@ 113 armored personnel carriers and helicopters . 
 On the morning of January 2 , 1963 , the South Vietnamese Civil Guards spearheaded the attack by marching toward Ap Tan Thoi from the south . However , when they reached the hamlet of Ap Bac , which is situated southeast of Ap Tan Thoi , they were immediately pinned down by elements of the Viet Cong 261st Battalion . Shortly afterwards , three companies of the 11th Infantry Regiment were committed into battle in northern Ap Tan Thoi , but they too could not overcome the NLF soldiers who had entrenched themselves in the area . Just before midday , further reinforcements were flown in from Tan Hiep . The fifteen US helicopters ferrying the troops were riddled by Viet Cong gunfire and five helicopters were lost as a result . 
 The ARVN 4th Mechanized Rifle Squadron was then deployed to rescue the South Vietnamese soldiers and US aircrews who were trapped in the southwestern end of Ap Bac , but its commander was highly reluctant about moving heavy M @-@ 113 carriers across the local terrain . Ultimately , their presence made little difference as the NLF stood their ground and killed more than a dozen South Vietnamese M @-@ 113 crew members in the process . Late in the afternoon , the ARVN 8th Airborne Battalion was dropped onto the battlefield and in a scene that characterized much of the day 's fighting ; the paratroopers were pinned down and could not break the NLF 's line of defense . Under the cover of darkness the Viet Cong withdrew from the battlefield , having won their first major victory . 
 = = Background = = 
 Small @-@ scale military actions , which would eventually escalate into the Vietnam War , started in the late 1950s , when South Vietnamese President Ngo Dinh Diem instituted an anti @-@ Communist campaign aimed at rooting out " left behind " Viet Minh forces . At that time , North Vietnam was hoping for an election , promised under the Geneva Accords of 1954 , that would unite North and South Vietnam . It was also worried about inciting the United States into directly supporting South Vietnam , and had recommended a policy of avoiding battle at all costs . However , Diem 's campaign was too successful to allow them to do nothing , and small @-@ scale actions broke out across the country . North Vietnam remained worried about U.S. involvement and refused any sort of military support , forcing the remaining Viet Minh to retreat into inaccessible areas in the hills and river estuaries . A stalemate of sorts followed , as South Vietnamese forces took so long to reach these areas that the guerilla fighters were able to retreat with little difficulty . 
 Large @-@ scale American support began during the Kennedy Administration in the early 1960s , with the arrival of large numbers of the U.S. Special Forces to help out in the field . The arrival of helicopters changed the nature of the battle considerably ; it enabled South Vietnamese soldiers to quickly fly to almost any point in the country , leaving little time for a retreat . Throughout 1962 , the combined forces were increasingly effective in routing the Viet Cong . These tactics , combined with the use of armored personnel carriers , took a heavy toll on various fledgling Viet Cong units . The lightly armed Viet Cong had no weaponry capable of stopping the armored carriers and inevitably were forced to flee , taking heavy casualties . 
 The most successful South Vietnamese force had been the 7th Infantry Division , then under the command of Colonel Huỳnh Văn Cao . His U.S. adviser was Lieutenant Colonel John Paul Vann , who directed much of the unit 's activity in concert with his planner , Captain Richard Ziegler . They had scored the biggest successes of the military campaigns of 1962 , killing along with the paramilitary and Civil Guard and Self Defense Corps , more than 2 @,@ 000 Viet Cong fighters and leaving thousands of others cut off from supplies . 
 However , South Vietnamese officers were often reluctant to absorb heavy casualties . On several occasions , Cao 's forces were in an excellent position to trap and wipe out whole battalions of Viet Cong , but he would fail to close the trap on one pretext or another and allow the enemy to escape . This behavior initially mystified Vann , who was attempting to build Cao into an aggressive commander . Unknown to Vann , Diem would reprimand or demote any officer who lost too many men , no matter how successful the operation . Diem was more interested in using the military to protect his regime than to take on the Viet Cong . His solution was to fill the ARVN with Catholic political cronies and friends like Cao , Lê Quang Tung , and Tôn Thất Đính , who had little military ability , but were very likely to help stop a coup attempt . After a skirmish on a highway that resulted in a small number of South Vietnamese casualties along with several trucks destroyed , Cao was called to Saigon and reprimanded by Diem . Upon his return , Vann and his group of advisers were forced to end the joint planning sessions that had been so successful earlier , and action essentially wound down in their region . Cao used the excellent military intelligence network they had developed to find areas devoid of the Viet Cong , and planned operations only in those areas . In many other cases , operations were executed on paper only , in order to report an increasing tempo of operations that did not actually exist . 
 In 1962 , Diem decided to split the command of the area in the south around Saigon into two , the former III Corps area being reduced in size to cover the area northeast of Saigon , and the newly created IV Corps taking over the west and southwest . Cao was promoted to general and assumed command of the new IV Corps Tactical Zone , which included the area of operations of his 7th Infantry Division . Command of the 7th was given to Cao 's chief of staff , Colonel Bùi Đình Đạm . Dam expressed concerns about his own abilities when the promotion was first presented to him by Diem . Nevertheless , he took Cao 's former position and welcomed Vann 's advisers back into the planning effort . Despite the change in leadership , the same problems continued to manifest themselves in the 7th Infantry Division . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 In November 1962 , the National Liberation Front 's Military Region 2 ordered the Viet Cong 261st Battalion and the 514th Battalion , the home battalion of Dinh Tuong Province , to destroy the strategic hamlets in their region and at the same time to attack South Vietnamese sweeping operations . Between December 28 and 30 , 1962 , an American aircraft equipped with eavesdropping equipment located a Viet Cong radio transmitter . It intercepted radio signals in the hamlet of Ap Tan Thoi in Dinh Tuong Province where the ARVN 7th Infantry Division was headquartered . The radio intercept and other information obtained by Jim Drummond , Vann 's intelligence officer , indicated that the Viet Cong were using Ap Tan Thoi as a headquarters location . Furthermore , South Vietnamese and American intelligence personnel believed the Viet Cong had deployed a reinforced company of about 120 men to protect the transmitter . Certain that the Viet Cong unit was no larger than the reported number , the ARVN 7th Infantry Division was instructed to attack Ap Tan Thoi . 
 An operational plan suited for an attack on a small enemy formation was drafted by Ziegler , who was an adviser to Dam and the command staff of the 7th Infantry Division . Ziegler 's plan , codenamed Operation Duc Thang I , called for the South Vietnamese to assault Ap Tan Thoi from three different directions ; three rifle companies from the 11th Infantry Regiment , 7th Infantry Division , to move from the north ; the Dinh Tuong Civil Guards Regiment to march northward from the south in separate columns ; and a company of 13 M @-@ 113 armored personnel carriers with an infantry company on board from the southwest . The M @-@ 113 carriers and the infantry company could act as both a mobile reserve and a reaction force , so it was positioned where it could be shifted to the contact area if the Viet Cong began to retreat . In addition , Dam would also deploy two rifle companies at Tan Hiep airfield , which could be brought onto the battlefield by helicopters from the U.S. Army 93rd Transportation Company . 
 On previous occasions , U.S. intelligence had tracked down the location of Viet Cong radio transmitters , but those were often relocated before the South Vietnamese launched their attacks , so Ziegler privately questioned if the Viet Cong had as many as 120 soldiers in Ap Tan Thoi . However , in 1963 , the National Liberation Front had changed their policy , from avoiding the South Vietnamese army to standing and fighting . The 1st Company , 261st Battalion and the 1st Company , 514th Battalion , had a total strength of 320 regular soldiers and were positioned in Ap Bac and Ap Tan Thoi respectively , which were separated by a distance of about 1 @.@ 5 kilometers ( 0 @.@ 93 mi ) . The combined companies were supported by approximately 30 local force soldiers from Chau Thanh District who served as scouts , ammunition bearers , litter carriers , and emergency replacements . Together , elements of the Viet Cong 261st and 514th Battalions in Ap Tan Thoi and Ap Bac formed a ' composite battalion ' , which was placed under the command of Colonel Hai Hoang . 
 Previously , leadership of the 261st Battalion alternated between Hoang , a South Vietnamese revolutionary who had returned from North Vietnam after 1954 , and Tu Khue , who was a native of North Vietnam . Khue was unpopular among the battalion 's soldiers because he was known to be very strict and demanding . However , he was very careful about details . In contrast , Hoang was far more relaxed and commanded a high degree of confidence from the soldiers of the 261st Battalion . Thus , due to his strong leadership skills and popularity , Hoang was selected to take command of Viet Cong forces for operations in Ap Bac . Most of the soldiers under Hoang 's command were equipped with captured U.S.-made weaponry , such as the M1 carbine , BAR light machine guns , .30 caliber machine guns , and a single 60mm mortar . 
 In the days before the battle , Hoang anticipated a major attack from the South Vietnamese government , as Viet Cong intelligence agents in Dinh Tuong had reported the arrival of 71 truckloads of ammunition and other supplies from Saigon , about 65 kilometers ( 40 mi ) to the northeast . In addition , with information provided by Pham Xuan An , a well @-@ connected journalist and undercover Viet Cong agent in Saigon , Hoang 's soldiers conducted last @-@ minute anti @-@ helicopter and anti @-@ M @-@ 113 training by studying U.S.-made weaponry and South Vietnamese plans and manuals . The Viet Cong also took full advantage of the local terrain by taking up positions in Ap Tan Thoi in the north , along a tree @-@ lined creek in the southeast , and Ap Bac in the south . Their positions were well @-@ concealed by trees and shrubs , which made them difficult to see from the air and provided good protection from heavy weaponry . To the south and west of Ap Bac , the Viet Cong dug a series of foxholes in front of an irrigation dike , which afforded them an unobstructed field of fire in the surrounding rice fields . The foxholes were deep enough for one man to stand up , or big enough to accommodate a two @-@ man machine @-@ gun crew . Behind the foxhole line , the irrigation dike enabled Viet Cong units to communicate with each other . In short , the Viet Cong enjoyed a great advantage over any attacking force . 
 = = Battle = = 
 = = = The fight begins = = = 
 At 4 : 00 on the morning of January 2 , Viet Cong scouts around the hamlets of Ap Bac and Ap Tan Thoi reported hearing the sounds of truck and boat engines , so Hoang issued an alert order which prompted his troops to pick up their weapons and hurry to their foxholes . Most of the women , children , and old men in both hamlets fled and hid in the nearby swamps as soon as the order was issued . 
 Thirty CH @-@ 21 Shawnee helicopters were needed to airlift the entire 1st Battalion , ARVN 11th Infantry Regiment , but only ten were available . As a result , Dam could only send one company at a time onto the battlefield . At around 7 : 00 am , the first wave of CH @-@ 21 helicopters offloaded the first group of South Vietnamese soldiers . These troops had to hold their positions until the rest of the battalions had arrived . Because of the delay in the arrival of the regular South Vietnamese army units , two Civil Guard battalions of Task Forces A and B — under the command of Dinh Tuong provincial chief Major Lam Quang Tho — were left to march against enemy positions by themselves . 
 As planned , the first Civil Guard battalion of Task Force A started north towards Ap Bac . Hoang knew the Civil Guard battalions were approaching , so he instructed his company commander in Ap Bac to be ready , as they would fire the first shots of the battle . Viet Cong radio operators , using captured U.S.-made communication equipment , followed the movements of the Civil Guards by monitoring the frequencies the government troops were using . When the leading Civil Guard battalion came within 30 meters ( 98 ft ) of the southern end of Ap Bac , the Viet Cong opened fire from their foxholes and immediately killed the leading company 's commander and wounded the task force commander . Task Force A 's momentum was stopped when the soldiers of the leading Civil Guard battalion sought shelter in a dike , where they tried unsuccessfully to outflank the Viet Cong . During that time , artillery support was ineffective , as Civil Guard forward observers would not stand up to observe the fall of artillery rounds . Consequently , one artillery round after another simply fell behind Viet Cong positions , instead of on their foxhole line . To make matters worse , Tho failed to send his second Civil Guard battalion of Task Force B to rescue the first . 
 North of Ap Tan Thoi , three companies of the ARVN 11th Infantry Regiment fared no better . They marched south in three separate axes towards their objective . Again , well @-@ concealed Viet Cong soldiers of the 514th Battalion allowed their opponents to come within 20 meters ( 66 ft ) before opening fire . Immediately , the South Vietnamese infantrymen were forced to hug the ground . During the next five hours , they managed to launch three major assaults , but failed to break the Viet Cong 's line of defense . By 9 : 30 am , the last of Dam 's reserve companies had been airlifted into Tan Hiep , about two hours late because American aircrews were prevented from landing their CH @-@ 21 helicopters , known as " Flying Bananas " for their shape , in the heavy fog that covered Tan Hiep airfield most of the morning . With the ground attacks in the north and south bogged down , Dam decided to stretch out the defending Viet Cong units by attacking the east and the west . 
 Dam asked Vann , who was circling the battlefield aboard an L @-@ 19 reconnaissance aircraft , to reconnoiter possible landing zones on the east and west sides of Ap Bac , where additional reinforcements could be inserted to launch their attacks . In response , Vann asked his pilot to make low passes over the trees which covered Ap Bac . Although he could not see any Viet Cong positions , Vann knew there was a well @-@ fortified position at the southern end of the hamlet , due to the impact of the Viet Cong 's firepower on the Civil Guards since the very beginning of the battle . As Vann 's L @-@ 19 aircraft flew over the western tree line , the Viet Cong watched from their foxholes , but held their fire because they knew the aircraft was trying to draw fire in order to mark their positions . Although Vann was suspicious , he decided it was a better landing zone because the area was tranquil despite the heavy fighting elsewhere . 
 Vann then ordered his pilot to make contact with the other L @-@ 19 that was leading the ten CH @-@ 21s with the first South Vietnamese reserve company from Tan Hiep . Vann relayed a message to the command pilot of the ten CH @-@ 21 helicopters , which were being escorted by a group of five recently deployed UH @-@ 1 Huey gunships , armed with 7.62mm machine guns and 2 @.@ 75 inch rockets , and instructed him to land the reserve companies about 300 meters ( 980 ft ) from the western and southern tree lines that covered Ap Bac in order to minimize the effectiveness of the Viet Cong 's .30 caliber machine guns . However , in the early phases of the Vietnam conflict , command relationships between U.S. military units were not well @-@ established , and American aircrews had developed a tendency to disregard the instructions of advisors , especially Vann , who was regarded as domineering . Instead of following Vann 's instructions , the command pilot decided to lead his helicopters over southern Ap Tan Thoi and along the creek to Ap Bac . The American pilots landed their helicopters within 200 meters ( 660 ft ) west of Ap Bac , where they were hit multiple times by Viet Cong machine gun and small arms fire . 
 The five UH @-@ 1 gunships immediately strafed Viet Cong positions with 2 @.@ 75 inch rockets , but failed to suppress the enemy fire . After South Vietnamese soldiers had disembarked from the helicopters , one CH @-@ 21 was too severely damaged to get off the ground . A second CH @-@ 21 was sent to rescue the crew , but it too was immobilized as soon as it touched the ground . One of the Hueys returned to pick up the crews of the two downed CH @-@ 21 " Flying Bananas " . As it prepared to land , the main rotor was struck by enemy gunfire . The aircraft flipped over to the right and crashed . Almost simultaneously , a third CH @-@ 21 sustained heavy damage and was forced to land on the rice fields a short distance from the first two helicopters . By 10 : 30 am , all the South Vietnamese soldiers who had landed on the field were under heavy fire from inside Ap Bac and refused to move . Sergeant Arnold Bowers , who had ridden in the first crashed helicopter , raced back and forth to rescue injured American airmen . 
 = = = Arrival of the armored personnel carriers = = = 
 After Bowers had attended to the injured men , he borrowed a field radio from the South Vietnamese to coordinate artillery and air strikes . Later , two AD @-@ 6 Skyraiders arrived over Ap Bac and attacked the thatched houses with conventional bombs and napalm . The South Vietnamese soldiers , who were pinned down on the ground , believed their ordeal was over , so they stood up to see if the Viet Cong were retreating from their positions . The Viet Cong fired on the exposed soldiers and killed several . Vann then radioed Captain James B. Scanlon — senior adviser to the ARVN 2nd Armored Cavalry Regiment — and told him that four U.S. helicopters had either been destroyed or immobilized about 1 @,@ 500 meters ( 4 @,@ 900 ft ) southeast of the regiment 's position . Scanlon was told to get his South Vietnamese counterpart , Captain Ly Tong Ba — commander of the 4th Mechanized Rifle Squadron , 2nd Armored Cavalry Regiment — to rescue the trapped South Vietnamese company and the helicopters . 
 Ba asserted that he would not take orders from Americans . He also argued that sending the 13 M @-@ 113 armored personnel carriers through the Cong Ba Ky Canal would enable the Viet Cong to retreat because it might take too much time . An argument broke out between Vann and Ba . Finally , Vann radioed Ziegler at the command post at Tan Hiep and told him to ask the commander of the ARVN 7th Infantry Division to order Ba to move toward Ap Bac immediately . Shortly afterwards , Ziegler returned with Dam 's permission , and Ba was ordered to move his M @-@ 113 carriers in the direction of the white smoke that were rising from the burning hamlet . The American advisers were quietly confident that Ba 's M @-@ 113s could turn the tide of battle ; on previous occasions , Viet Cong fighters often fled from the battlefield as soon as M @-@ 113 armored personnel carriers turned up . However , in contrast to previous engagements , Viet Cong commander Hoang had ordered the soldiers of the 261st and 514th Battalions to throw everything they had at the South Vietnamese , as retreat through the muddy rice fields would result in certain death . 
 The South Vietnamese M @-@ 113s had no problem crossing the generally shallow streams and rivers typical of the Mekong Delta , but the heavy 10 @-@ ton M @-@ 113s became bogged down in the deeper Cong Ba Ky Canal , forcing the crews and the infantry company on board to cut down brush and trees and fill the canal until it was shallow enough for the M @-@ 113s to cross . The rescue operation was further delayed when Ba tried to obtain proper authorization to advance , because he was under orders not to take commands directly from the American advisers . Vann , who was flying above the armored formation , demanded that Ba advance immediately . Ba replied that he would not take instructions from Americans . When Vann threatened to have Ba shot , he reluctantly continued to advance , although very slowly , toward the entrenched Viet Cong . 
 Meanwhile , a fourth CH @-@ 21 returned to Ap Bac to attempt to rescue the downed helicopter crews , and it too was heavily damaged by ground fire and forced to land on the muddy rice field . The Viet Cong had set a new record : the battle was the first time they had either destroyed or downed five helicopters within a few hours . At 1 : 30 pm , Ba 's M @-@ 113 formation finally closed in on the downed helicopters on the western side of Ap Bac . The M @-@ 113s approached the landing zone in single file instead of in formation , and they were immediately fired upon by Viet Cong inside the hamlet who were able to concentrate their fire on one target at a time . The South Vietnamese M @-@ 113 gun crews were exposed from the waist up , so they were easy targets for snipers ; by the end of the day , fourteen South Vietnamese M @-@ 113 crewmen had been killed due to their exposure . The two leading M @-@ 113s were able to pull up beside the downed helicopters , but one driver was killed while driving with his head outside of the hatch , and Ba was knocked unconscious inside his carrier . 
 Scanlon , with the help of Bowers , ran forward to aid the wounded men and carry them back to the M @-@ 113 formation . At that point , South Vietnamese M @-@ 113 crews backed off while firing their .50 caliber machine guns aimlessly into the sky . When Ba recovered , his company launched a frontal assault on the Viet Cong 's foxhole line . Just when the M @-@ 113 crews closed in on their objective , a Viet Cong squad leader and his men jumped out of their foxholes and tossed grenades at the lead formation of the attack force . Cohesion and morale among the crews of the armored formation quickly deteriorated as South Vietnamese sergeants , who served as both commanders and machine gunners of the carriers , were killed and were replaced by less experienced , poorly trained men . 
 In a last @-@ ditch effort to overrun the Viet Cong 's stronghold , an M @-@ 113 equipped with a flamethrower was sent forward to within 100 meters ( 330 ft ) of the Viet Cong position to fire the western tree line . The flamethrower had a range of up to 200 meters ( 660 ft ) , but when the operator fired the device , the flame died after only 30 meters ( 98 ft ) . It was later discovered that the crew had mixed the incorrect amount of jelling agent with the gasoline . The final attack mounted by the M @-@ 113 company failed . At around 2 : 30 pm , defeated and with their morale broken , the 4th Mechanized Rifle Squadron disengaged from the fight and withdrew . 
 By that stage , Vann was frustrated by the Civil Guard soldiers of Task Force B , because they appeared to be in no hurry to reach Ap Bac , as they searched one house at a time while marching up from the south @-@ western flank of the battlefield . In his final effort to defeat the Viet Cong , Vann flew into Tan Hiep and asked Cao to deploy an airborne battalion on the eastern side of Ap Bac , the most logical retreat route for the Viet Cong . Vann hoped to trap the Viet Cong inside the hamlets by blocking their retreat routes on all sides , and annihilate them using an elite battalion of South Vietnamese paratroopers . To Vann 's disappointment , Cao strongly opposed the idea and decided to drop one of his airborne battalions behind the M @-@ 113 formation on the western side instead . Vann accused Cao of wanting to let the Viet Cong escape in order to avoid further South Vietnamese casualties . However , Cao argued that a surrounded and well @-@ entrenched enemy would fight more fiercely than a retreating one , so he wanted the Viet Cong units inside the hamlets of Ap Bac and Ap Tan Thoi to expose themselves by retreating through the eastern side of the battlefield , where he could destroy them with artillery and airpower . Cao had also lost confidence in Vann , because Cao felt Vann had placed the lives of many South Vietnamese soldiers at risk to save the lives of a handful of Americans . Major @-@ General Tran Thien Khiem , Chief of the ARVN Joint General Staff , was present during the argument . He did not object to Cao 's plan because it was consistent with President Diem 's objective to save Vietnamese lives through the Rural Revolutionary Development and Chieu Hoi Programs , which encouraged Viet Cong fighters to join the South Vietnamese military . 
 = = = Insertion of the airborne battalion = = = 
 Believing it was useless to continue arguing with Cao , Vann climbed back into his L @-@ 19 reconnaissance aircraft and left Tan Hiep . Throughout the afternoon , he continued to press Cao to quickly deploy the South Vietnamese paratroopers . He was fearful that the battle would turn out to be the largest defeat of South Vietnamese forces up to that point of the war . Cao promised to deploy the second Civil Guard battalion which had just arrived on the south @-@ western flank of Ap Bac , and to drop the ARVN 8th Airborne Battalion at around 4 : 00 pm behind Ba 's armored personnel carriers . Late in the afternoon , a flight of C @-@ 123 Providers , with about 300 South Vietnamese paratroopers aboard , closed in on their objective and quickly drew machine gun fire from the hamlet . The C @-@ 123 pilots changed course to avoid the ground fire , but either the South Vietnamese <unk> or the American flight leader did not compensate for the change . As a result , the paratroopers landed right in front of the entrenched Viet Cong positions , instead of behind the 4th Mechanized Rifle Squadron and the Civil Guards . 
 The Viet Cong were able to pick off one South Vietnamese paratrooper after another , some as they descended and others when their parachutes became stuck in the trees . Those paratroopers that reached the ground and survived tried to move forward , but the Viet Cong soldiers in <unk> position fired on the paratroopers exposed in the open rice paddies . Undeterred , the ARVN 8th Airborne Battalion launched small @-@ unit attacks , but on each occasion they were repelled , and sporadic fighting continued until sundown . By the end of the day , the airborne battalion had lost 19 soldiers killed in action and another 33 wounded . American advisers Captain Fletcher Ware and Sergeant Russell <unk> , who had parachuted in with the South Vietnamese , were also wounded . As night fell , Hoang knew that South Vietnamese forces were closing in from three directions . The eastern flank remained open , and he ordered both elements of the 261st and 514th Battalions , exhausted and low on ammunition , to assemble at the southern end of Ap Tan Thoi . They evacuated through the rice fields , taking their dead and wounded comrades . 
 Vann wanted to use a C @-@ 47 flare plane to illuminate the rice fields on the eastern flank of Ap Bac and Ap Tan Thoi . He wanted to hit the Viet Cong with 500 rounds of artillery and destroy them as they retreated . Cao would not approve the use of flares because it could expose the airborne battalion 's night defensive positions , and instead ordered 100 rounds of artillery to be fired at a rate of four shells per hour . At 10 : 00 pm , Viet Cong commander Hoang led his two companies out of Ap Tan Thoi and headed for their base camp in the Plain of Reeds , while the local force units left by a different route for their hideouts in the local area . The 1st Company , 261st Battalion , led the column , followed by litter carriers carrying the dead and wounded . The 1st Company , 514th Battalion , covered the tail of the formation , with one of their platoons acting as a rear guard . The wounded Viet Cong soldiers were transferred onto sampans at the canal on the eastern side of Ap Tan Thoi , while the rest of the formation marched on . At 7 : 00 am on January 3 , Hoang 's men successfully reached their destination without being detected . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 On January 3 , a team of Western journalists toured the deserted Ap Bac hamlet with the American advisors . When reporter Neil Sheehan asked Brigadier General Robert York what had happened , the general replied : " What the hell 's it look like happened , boy ? They got away , that 's what happened " ! Shortly afterward , more than 18 hours too late , the South Vietnamese hit Ap Bac with an artillery barrage . The artillery rounds killed another five South Vietnamese soldiers and wounded 14 others . Vann , who had made key decisions during the early phases of the battle , blamed the South Vietnamese for the debacle . " It was a miserable damn performance , just like it always is . These people won 't listen . They make the same mistake over and over again in the same way " . According to Moyar ( 2008 ) , in blaming the South Vietnamese , Vann wanted to conceal the Americans ' flawed intelligence and poor leadership . He hoped to pressure the South Vietnamese to accept future changes he favored . 
 General Paul D. Harkins , commander of the Military Assistance Command , Vietnam ( MACV ) , had a far more optimistic assessment of the battle . He considered the operation to be a major success : after the Viet Cong abandoned their positions , the South Vietnamese units captured the hamlets of Ap Bac and Ap Tan Thoi . Harkins ' evaluation of the battle 's success were based on U.S. military doctrine from World War II , in which two armies fought a conventional combined arms battle with the goal to control territory . However , the Viet Cong were far more interested in exposing the weaknesses of Diem 's regime and its military . Thus , Moyar ( 2008 ) argues that Harkins ' optimistic and misdirected doctrine detracted from the long @-@ term performance of the South Vietnamese military and the American advisers attached to them . He refused to acknowledge the flawed system under which the South Vietnamese commanders and their American counterparts operated . Because of his attitude , neither the South Vietnamese or the Americans learned important lessons from the battle . 
 The South Vietnamese units that participated in the battle took heavy losses in their failed attempt to destroy the Viet Cong forces . South Vietnamese casualties included 83 killed in action and at least 100 wounded . The American participants , who included advisors and aircrews , counted three dead and eight wounded . Of the fifteen American helicopters sent to support the operation , only one escaped undamaged , and five were either downed or destroyed . 
 For the Viet Cong , the Battle of Ap Bac marked the first time they decided to stand and fight a large South Vietnamese formation , although outnumbered by more than five to one . Against overwhelming odds , the Viet Cong achieved their first major victory . They successfully stopped the well @-@ equipped South Vietnamese army , supported by a combination of artillery and armored units as well as American airpower . The Viet Cong casualties were just 18 soldiers killed and 39 wounded , despite the fact that the fighters were hit by more than 600 rounds of artillery , napalm and other ordnance released by 13 warplanes and five UH @-@ 1 gunships . 
 Ap Bac had many as yet undefined consequences for the South Vietnamese government and the American involvement in Vietnam . The battle was a significant milestone for the Viet Cong as a fighting force . For individual Viet Cong soldiers , the battle proved that they could defeat the superior South Vietnamese forces , equipped with modern military hardware and significant support and funding from the United States . Militarily , the morale and confidence of Viet Cong commanders and soldiers , who had experienced serious setbacks during the previous year , were significantly boosted . Politically , the Viet Cong 261st and 514th Battalions were able to exercise greater influence in their areas of operations because of the prestige of defeating the soldiers of Diem 's unpopular regime . 
 Despite the initial success of the Strategic Hamlet Program and the intensified military operations of 1962 , the events at Ap Bac placed additional pressure on Diem 's government because it showed it could not cope with the resurgence of the Viet Cong , particularly in the regions surrounding the Mekong River . 
 = Battle of Green Spring = 
 The Battle of Green Spring took place near Green Spring Plantation in James City County , Virginia during the American Revolutionary War . On July 6 , 1781 United States Brigadier General " Mad " Anthony Wayne , leading the advance forces of the Marquis de Lafayette , was ambushed near the plantation by the British army of Earl Charles Cornwallis in the last major land battle of the Virginia campaign prior to the Siege of Yorktown . 
 Following a month of marching and <unk> in central Virginia by Cornwallis and Lafayette , Cornwallis in late June moved to Williamsburg , where he received orders to move to Portsmouth and send some of his army to New York City . Lafayette followed Cornwallis fairly closely , emboldened by the arrival of reinforcements to consider making attacks on the British force . On July 4 , Cornwallis departed Williamsburg for Jamestown , planning to cross the James River en route to Portsmouth . Lafayette believed he could stage an attack on Cornwallis 's rear guard during the crossing . 
 Cornwallis anticipated Lafayette 's idea , and laid an elaborate trap . General Wayne 's forces were very nearly caught in the trap , and only a bold bayonet charge against the numerically overwhelming British enabled his forces to retreat . Cornwallis did not follow the victory with pursuit , instead following his plan to cross the river . The action reinforced the perception among contemporaries that justified the moniker " Mad " to describe Wayne , although opinion on the merits of his actions was divided . The battlefield has been partially preserved , and reenactments are sometimes staged . 
 = = Background = = 
 In May 1781 , Earl Charles Cornwallis arrived in Petersburg , Virginia after a lengthy campaign through North and South Carolina . In addition to his 1 @,@ 400 troops , he assumed command of another 3 @,@ 600 troops that had been under the command of the turncoat Benedict Arnold , and was soon thereafter further reinforced by about 2 @,@ 000 more troops sent from New York . These forces were opposed by a much smaller Continental Army force led by the Marquis de Lafayette , then located at Richmond . Following orders originally given to Arnold 's predecessor in command , William Phillips ( who died a week before Cornwallis 's arrival ) , Cornwallis worked to eliminate Virginia 's ability to support the revolutionary cause , giving chase to Lafayette 's army , which numbered barely 3 @,@ 000 and included a large number of inexperienced militia . 
 Lafayette successfully avoided engaging Cornwallis , who used his numerical advantage to detach forces for raids against economic , military , and political targets in central Virginia . After about one month of this activity , Cornwallis turned back to the east , marching for Williamsburg . Lafayette , whose force grew to number about 4 @,@ 000 with the arrival of Continental Army reinforcements under General Anthony Wayne and additional experienced militiamen under William Campbell , followed Cornwallis . Buoyed by the increase in his troop strength , Lafayette also became more aggressive in his tactics , sending out detachments of his force to counteract those that Cornwallis sent on forage and raiding expeditions . One such foray led to a clash at Spencer 's Ordinary , a crossroads not far from Williamsburg , in late June . 
 When Cornwallis arrived at Williamsburg , he received orders from General Sir Henry Clinton to go to Portsmouth and prepare a detachment of troops to return to New York City . Pursuant to these orders , Cornwallis began moving south on the Virginia Peninsula on July 4 , planning to cross the wide James River at the Jamestown ferry . Lafayette followed , with advance units and most of his Continentals reaching Norrell 's Mill , about 8 miles ( 13 km ) from the ferry on July 5 . 
 Lafayette saw an opportunity to attack the British force as it made the difficult crossing of the James . Cornwallis also recognized the possibility , and decided to lay a trap , hoping to capture a portion of Lafayette 's army . He only sent his baggage train and John Graves Simcoe 's Queen 's Rangers across the river , and concealed his main force near the crossing . Cornwallis also sent men to " desert " to the Americans with information that most of the British force had crossed , leaving only a rear guard on the north side of the river . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 The position where Cornwallis hid his army was well @-@ chosen . To the left , impassable swampy terrain sloped down toward the river . To the right , there was more marshy ground and a few ponds . The access from the rest of the mainland toward the ferry was via a 400 @-@ yard ( 370 m ) causeway from the Green Spring Plantation that was surrounded by marshlands that an advancing army would have to negotiate . The earl arranged his army in two lines , with the 76th and 80th regiments along with part of the 43rd and Banastre Tarleton 's British Legion on the left , and the Brigade of Guards , and Hessian auxiliaries on the right . Both wings also included light infantry companies . Cornwallis left a small company of German jägers and a few men from the Legion to give the appearance of a rear guard picket , and gave them specific orders to resist the American advance as much as possible . 
 Brigadier General " Mad " Anthony Wayne led Lafayette 's advance company , about 500 men , out early on July 6 from Norrell 's Tavern . When Wayne reached Green Spring , he surveyed the terrain and noted the presence of the British guards . When Lafayette came up with his main force , the two men decided to go ahead with the attack , but Lafayette ordered more troops forward from Norrell 's Tavern around 1 pm . Some minor skirmishing took place while they awaited these troops . Wayne 's 500 soldiers included 200 Virginia riflemen under Majors John Willis and Richard Call backed by additional light infantry led by John Francis Mercer , William Galvan , and McPherson . Colonel Walter Stewart 's Pennsylvania Continental battalion formed the reserve . Lafayette sent forward two Pennsylvania Continental battalions under Colonels Richard Butler and Richard <unk> , and Major John P. Wyllys ' light infantry battalion . Beginning to suspect something was amiss , Lafayette held back the light infantry battalions of Colonels Francis Barber and Joseph Vose . The three @-@ battalion reinforcement increased the size of the force Wayne ordered into the swamps around 3 : 00 pm to between eight and nine hundred men . Wayne 's force now consisted of two companies of riflemen , one of dragoons , and most of the Pennsylvania Line , and included three pieces of field artillery . As they moved out , Lafayette rode out toward a spit of land on the riverbank from which he might observe the action . 
 = = Battle = = 
 Wayne 's advance force and the British pickets then began an extended skirmish lasting nearly two hours . The British forces slowly retreated , suffering significant casualties under the persistent American advance . Wayne 's riflemen performed particularly well , picking off several of the British commanding officers . However , the tables turned around 5 pm when the Americans reached an " abandoned " gun that Cornwallis had left in the road . Their seizure of the gun was the signal for the British counterattack , which began with a barrage of canister and grape shot , and was followed by an infantry charge . 
 Lafayette , from his vantage point on the river , had spotted the main British force and realized that Wayne was entering a trap . However , he was not able to reach Wayne in time to recall him . He immediately began moving additional troops forward in an attempt to prevent the trap from closing on Wayne . In the meantime , the British charge had thrown the Americans into some confusion , and Wayne was concerned that a retreat would turn into a disorderly rout . Wayne reformed his line , ordered his artillery to fire a blast of grape shot , and then had the line charge the numerically overwhelming British with bayonets fixed . 
 Wayne 's audacious charge worked ; it successfully halted the British advance long enough for Lafayette 's covering force to approach . Lafayette rode forward to assist in managing the American retreat , which began to crumble after Cornwallis personally led a countercharge . During the retreat , two of the American guns had to be abandoned because their horses were shot , and Lafayette was also unhorsed . As the sun was beginning to set , Cornwallis chose not to pursue the Americans , who retreated to Green Spring . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 British reports of casualties in the battle listed 5 officers and 70 enlisted men killed or wounded . American casualties were reported to number about 140 , including 28 killed . Cornwallis , satisfied with the victory , did not to pursue the retreating Americans , and instead crossed the James as planned and moved on to Portsmouth . There his arrangements to embark troops were countermanded by new orders from Clinton that instead ordered him to use his force to establish a fortified naval station . This Cornwallis chose to do at Yorktown , where he was compelled to surrender after a brief siege in October 1781 . 
 Lafayette , in his dispatches and reports throughout the later stages of the Virginia campaign , painted Cornwallis 's movements to Williamsburg and Portsmouth as a retreat . These reports bolstered Lafayette 's reputation , and the battle , although a tactical setback , did not harm that reputation . General Wayne wrote of his decision to charge the full British force that it was " one of those prudent , tho ' daring manoeuvers which seldom fail of producing the desired effect ; the result in this Instance fully Justified it . " Lafayette publicly lauded Wayne 's performance , but recorded privately that Wayne made tactical mistakes and the battle read well " in a gazette " . Militia general Peter Muhlenberg blamed the loss on " the impetuosity of our brother Brigadier . " Wayne biographer Paul Nelson opines that Americans of the day could " hardly decide after the battle whether to admire Wayne for his brave and impetuous character or to condemn him as a foolhardy adventurer . " 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Portions of the Green Spring Plantation were purchased in 1966 by the National Park Service , and are now part of the Colonial National Historical Park . These holdings were added to the National Register of Historic Places in 1978 , and are , as of June 2010 , open only by special arrangement . 
 = The Distrest Poet = 
 The Distrest Poet is an oil painting produced sometime around 1736 by the British artist William Hogarth . Reproduced as an etching and engraving , it was published in 1741 from a third state plate produced in 1740 . The scene was probably inspired by Alexander Pope 's satirical poem The Dunciad . It depicts a scene in a small , dingy attic room where a poet sits at his desk in the dormer and , scratching his head , stares at the papers on the desk before him , evidently looking for inspiration to complete the poem he is writing . Near him sits his wife darning clothes , surprised by the entrance of a milkmaid , who impatiently demands payment of debts . 
 = = Background = = 
 The engraving of The Distrest Poet in its third state was issued on 15 December 1741 as a companion piece to The Enraged Musician , a comic scene of a violinist driven to distraction by the noise from the street outside his practice room . The initial plate for The Distrest Poet was produced soon after Hogarth had completed the oil painting , but the third state plate was not completed until late in 1740 at which time Hogarth advertised his intention to issue a three @-@ image set : The Provok 'd Musician , The Distrest Poet , and a third image on the subject of " Painting " . The Provok 'd Musician ( renamed The Enraged Musician ) was produced in 1741 but the third image was never completed . 
 = = Picture = = 
 The scene is set in a small and messy garret , sparsely furnished by a few pieces of crude furniture . The room is poorly kept , with cracking plaster , a broken window and uneven floor , and a bare cupboard . In this way , Hogarth underlines the desperate circumstances of the occupants and the poverty of the family . 
 Starved of inspiration and suffering writer 's block , the poet sits on the end of his bed in his night gown , quill in hand , scratching his head . A copy of Edward Bysshe 's The Art of English Poetry , a guide to composition published in 1702 , lies open on the table . A copy of Popes 's satirical Grub Street Journal lies on the floor near his feet . 
 A few feet to his right sits his wife , darning the clothes on her lap and those sprawled on the floor , while a crying infant , who is upset and hungry , goes unattended in the only bed . Next to the poet 's wife , by the open door , an angry milkmaid presents her substantial bill , demanding payment for milk , underlining the poet 's refusal to provide for his family by getting himself a proper job . The cupboard stands open and empty , save for a mouse ; near the door , a dog steals the last of the family 's food from a plate . 
 Other , less obvious , elements of the painting reveal more about the poet 's personality and ideas . The poem he is attempting to write is entitled " Upon Riches " , which suggests that the poet lives in a fantasy world , while his wife and child go hungry . Ned Ward 's first published poem in 1691 was The Poet 's Ramble After Riches , which satirised his own struggles as an impoverished aspiring poet , and Hogarth may have had this in mind when he produced the picture . Earlier impressions showed the poem as " Poverty , A Poem " , which hinted at a connection to Theobald who had written " The Cave of Poverty , A Poem , Written in Imitation of Shakespeare " in 1714 . The poet 's dreams of riches are further suggested by the map that hangs over his head , entitled " A View of the Gold Mines of Peru " , replacing the image of Pope that appears in the earlier states of the print . The poet 's self @-@ interest is hinted by the presence of his pipe and tobacco on the window sill , the mug of beer sitting on the chair in the back of the room , the lace cuffs drying by the fire , his ill @-@ fitting wig , and gentleman 's sword lying at his feet ; it may be that despite his family 's circumstances , he refuses to forgo his own personal pleasures and effects . Alternatively , his fantasy of earning a fortune from his art may require that he keeps his gentlemanly accoutrements around him , as they will be required when his fantasies are realized . 
 = = = Alexander Pope = = = 
 The scene shown in The Distrest Poet was probably inspired by Alexander Pope 's satirical poem The Dunciad , most likely by the prefatory matter of the second version , the Dunciad <unk> which had been published in 1735 , and in which Pope confirmed his authorship of the original . The painting and early states of the print included a quotation from Pope 's work : 
 <unk> he sate , with all his books around , 
 Sinking from thought to thought , a vast profound : 
 <unk> for his sense , but found no bottom there ; 
 Then wrote and flounder 'd on , in mere despair . 
 The bill stuck to the wall above the poet 's head originally featured a reference to Pope in which he was <unk> mocked as " His Holiness Pope Alexander " , depicted as an ape wearing a papal tiara with an ass as his Prime Minister . The initial states of the print kept the quotation but replaced the genuine bill with a representation ( which appears to have been entirely invented by Hogarth rather than copied from a real bill ) of Pope clashing with Edmund Curll over the unauthorised publication of the poet 's correspondence . Although Hogarth and Pope had never met , this literary inspiration led to speculation as to the identity of Hogarth 's poet as one of the targets of Pope 's satire . Ned Ward , the author of The London Spy was a strong contender , as was Lewis Theobald , to whom the lines quoted from Pope in Hogarth 's original print referred . 
 How far Hogarth sympathised with Pope is questionable . The original bill mocked him , but it featured in an image that , at the least , poked fun at the poor poet who was the subject . Hogarth may have been suggesting either that poet was showing contempt for Pope or that he placed Pope 's image above his head as a model to which to aspire . In the second image , which shows Pope and Curll locked in battle , it is not clear who has the upper hand , and by the time the print was issued the direct reference to Pope had been removed completely . Ronald Paulson , the preeminent modern authority on Hogarth , suggests that Hogarth would have viewed Pope , through his Roman Catholicism , as having been implicitly tied to the continental influences that Hogarth despised , and would have seen Pope 's refusal to accept the patronage of the great men of the time , while still cultivating them as friends and still reaping the rewards they had to offer , as hypocritical . Pope was part of the circle that included William Kent and Richard Boyle , 3rd Earl of Burlington who had displaced Hogarth 's father @-@ in @-@ law James Thornhill from commissions , and Hogarth also had ties to Lewis Theobald , a possible target of the satire , through illustrations he had produced for Theobald 's Perseus and Andromeda , and through his subscription to Theobald 's edition of the works of Shakespeare . Paulson suggests that the real " villain " of The Distrest Poet may be Pope , unseen but representing the successful " Great Poet " whom the deluded aspiring artist hopes to emulate , rather than the distressed poet himself . Hogarth had featured Pope picking John Gay 's pocket in the foreground of <unk> Print on the South Sea Scheme , an early print he had produced on the theme of the South Sea Bubble ( both Pope and Gay had invested money in the scheme ) . At the same time , within the satire of the painting , the poet who is distressed is going to be one of Pope 's dunces . 
 The lines by Pope , though referring to Theobald , the hero of The Dunciad , are a characterisation of a Grub Street hack , a stereotype popular in the 1730s denoting a man of limited writing ability who lived in poverty but nevertheless determinedly pursued a career in literature ; , Therefore , the particular <unk> depicted in the painting would be one of this fraternity of " <unk> " who banded together to protest Pope 's poem . In this context it would make sense , therefore , for the poet to have the scabrous anti @-@ Pope print , or an emblem of Pope 's fight with the hack writers ' patron , above him . Just as Moll Hackabout has a picture of Macheath on her wall in A Harlot 's Progress , this aspiring and witless poet would have a picture of his hero , Edmund Curll , and an anti @-@ Pope print . The emblem , in other words , identifies the poet 's " side " in the battle between dunces and men of wit . 
 Hogarth was well acquainted with the struggles of the Grub Street hack though , through the travails of his own father , Richard , who had been unable to make a living as writer and had eventually ended up at the Fleet Prison as a bankrupt . Hogarth may have been more than sympathetic to the dunce struggling with his rhymes . Jenny Uglow in her biography of Hogarth , posits that the gradual alteration of the prints above the poet 's head could suggest a slow softening of attitudes towards Pope and his attack on the class of writer to which Hogarth 's father had belonged , and perhaps evidence of Hogarth making his own compromises in his endeavours to become successful . 
 = Real Irish Republican Army = 
 The Real Irish Republican Army or Real IRA , also referred to as the New IRA ( since the 2012 merger ) , is an Irish republican paramilitary organisation which aims to bring about a united Ireland . It formed in 1997 following a split in the Provisional IRA by dissident members , who rejected the <unk> ' ceasefire that year . Like the Provisional IRA before it , the RIRA sees itself as the only rightful successor to the original Irish Republican Army and styles itself as " the Irish Republican Army " in English or Óglaigh na hÉireann in Irish . It is an illegal organisation in the Republic of Ireland and designated as a terrorist organisation in the United Kingdom and the United States . 
 Since its formation , RIRA has waged a campaign in Northern Ireland against the Police Service of Northern Ireland ( PSNI ) — formerly the Royal Ulster Constabulary ( RUC ) — and the British Army . The RIRA is the largest and most active of the " dissident republican " paramilitary groups operating against the British security forces . It has targeted security forces in gun attacks and bombings , and with grenades , mortars and rockets . The organisation has also been responsible for a number of bombings in Northern Ireland and England with the goal of causing economic harm and / or disruption . The most notable of these was the 15 August 1998 Omagh bombing , which killed 29 people . After that bombing the RIRA went on ceasefire , but began operations again in 2000 . In March 2009 it claimed responsibility for an attack on Massereene Barracks that killed two British soldiers , the first to be killed in Northern Ireland since 1997 . 
 The Real IRA has also been involved in vigilantism , mainly against alleged drug dealers and organized crime gangs . In Dublin in particular it has been accused of extortion and engaging in feuds with these gangs . In July 2012 it was reported that Republican Action Against Drugs ( RAAD ) and other small republican militant groups were merging with the Real IRA . As before , the group continues to refer to itself as " the Irish Republican Army " , but the new group has been referred as the " New IRA " in the press . 
 = = Origins = = 
 In July 1997 the Provisional IRA called a ceasefire . On 10 October 1997 a Provisional IRA General Army Convention was held in <unk> , County Donegal . At the convention , Provisional IRA Quartermaster General Michael McKevitt — also a member of the 12 @-@ person Provisional IRA Executive — denounced the leadership and called for an end to the group 's ceasefire and to its participation in the Northern Ireland peace process . He was backed by his partner and fellow Executive member Bernadette Sands McKevitt . The two dissidents were outmanoeuvred by the leadership and were left isolated . The convention backed the pro @-@ ceasefire line , and on 26 October McKevitt and Sands McKevitt resigned from the Executive along with other members . 
 In November 1997 McKevitt and other dissidents held a meeting in a farmhouse in Oldcastle , County Meath , and a new organisation , styling itself Óglaigh na hÉireann , was formed . The organisation attracted disaffected Provisional IRA members from Derry and the republican stronghold of South Armagh , and from other areas including Dublin and Belfast cities and Counties Limerick , Tipperary , Louth , Tyrone , Monaghan and Kerry . 
 The name " Real IRA " entered common usage when members set up a roadblock in Jonesborough , County Armagh and told motorists " We 're from the IRA . The real IRA " . 
 = = Objectives = = 
 The RIRA 's objective is a united Ireland by forcing the end of British sovereignty over Northern Ireland through the use of physical force . The organisation rejects the Mitchell Principles and the Good Friday Agreement , comparing the latter to the 1921 Anglo @-@ Irish Treaty which resulted in the partition of Ireland . The organisation aims to uphold an uncompromising form of Irish republicanism and opposes any political settlement that falls short of Irish unity and independence . 
 Bernadette Sands McKevitt , sister of hunger striker Bobby Sands and a founder of the RIRA 's political wing , the 32 County Sovereignty Movement , said in an interview that her brother " did not die for cross @-@ border bodies with executive powers . He did not die for nationalists to be equal British citizens within the Northern Ireland state " . The RIRA adopted a tactic of bombing town centres to damage the economic infrastructure of Northern Ireland . The organisation also attacks members of the security forces using land mines , home @-@ made mortars and car bombs , and has also targeted England using incendiary devices and car bombs to " spread terror and disruption " . 
 = = Campaign = = 
 = = = Early campaign = = = 
 The organisation 's first action was an attempted bombing in Banbridge , County Down on 7 January 1998 . The intention was to explode a 300 lb ( 140 kg ) car bomb , but this was thwarted when the bomb was defused by security forces . The RIRA continued its campaign in late February with bombings in Moira , County Down and Portadown , County Armagh . On 9 May the organisation announced its existence , in a coded telephone call to Belfast media claiming responsibility for a mortar attack on a police station in <unk> , County Fermanagh . 
 The RIRA also carried out attacks in <unk> and Newry , and a second attack in Banbridge on 1 August injured 35 people and caused £ 3 @.@ 5 million of damage when a 500 lb ( 230 kg ) car bomb exploded . Despite these attacks the organisation lacked a significant base and was heavily infiltrated by informers . This led to a series of high @-@ profile arrests and seizures by the Garda Síochána in the first half of 1998 ; these involved the death of RIRA member <unk> Mac Lochlainn who was shot dead trying to escape from police , following an attempted robbery of a security van in County Wicklow . 
 = = = Omagh bombing = = = 
 On 15 August 1998 the RIRA left a car containing 500 lb of home @-@ made explosives in the centre of Omagh , County Tyrone . The bombers could not find a parking space near the intended target of the courthouse , and the car was left 400 metres away . As a result , three inaccurate telephone warnings were issued , and the Royal Ulster Constabulary ( RUC ) believed the bomb was actually located outside the courthouse . They attempted to establish a security cordon to keep civilians clear of the area , which inadvertently pushed people closer to the actual location of the bomb . Shortly after , the bomb exploded killing 29 people and injuring 220 others , in what became the single deadliest strike of the Troubles . 
 The bombing caused a major outcry throughout the world , and the Irish and British governments introduced new legislation in an attempt to destroy the organisation . The RIRA also came under pressure from the Provisional IRA , when Provisional IRA members visited the homes of 60 people connected with the RIRA and ordered them to disband and stop interfering with Provisional IRA arms dumps . With the organisation under intense pressure , which included McKevitt and Sands @-@ McKevitt being forced from their home after the media named McKevitt in connection with the bombing , the RIRA called a ceasefire on 8 September . 
 = = = Ceasefire = = = 
 Following the declaration of the ceasefire the RIRA began to regroup , and by the end of October had elected a new leadership and were planning their future direction . In late December Irish government representative Martin Mansergh held a meeting with McKevitt in Dundalk , in an attempt to convince McKevitt to disband the RIRA . McKevitt refused , stating that members would be left defenceless to attacks by the Provisional IRA . In 1999 the RIRA began preparations for a renewed campaign , and in May three members travelled to Split in Croatia to purchase arms , which were smuggled back to Ireland . On 20 October , ten people were arrested when Gardaí raided a RIRA training camp near <unk> , County Meath . 
 Officers found a firing range inside a disused wine cellar being used as an underground bunker , and seized weapons including an assault rifle , a submachine gun , a semi @-@ automatic pistol and an RPG @-@ 18 rocket launcher . An earlier version of the rocket launcher , the RPG @-@ 7 , had been in the possession of the Provisional IRA from as early as 1972 , but this was the first time the RPG @-@ 18 had been found in the possession of a paramilitary organisation in Ireland . Among those convicted were Alan Ryan , who was on bail for possession of a loaded revolver at his home in Dublin . 
 = = = Return to activity = = = 
 On 20 January 2000 the RIRA issued a call @-@ to @-@ arms in a statement to the Irish News . The statement condemned the Northern Ireland Executive , and stated : " Once again , Óglaigh na hÉireann declares the right of the Irish people to the ownership of Ireland . We call on all volunteers loyal to the Irish Republic to unite to uphold the Republic and establish a permanent national parliament representative of all the people . " The RIRA launched its new campaign on 25 February with an attempted bombing of Shackleton Army Barracks in Ballykelly . The bombers were disturbed as they were assembling the device , which would have caused mass murder if detonated , according to soldiers . 
 On 29 February a rocket launcher similar to one seized in the 1999 raid was found near an army base in Dungannon , County Tyrone , and on 15 March three men were arrested following the discovery of 500 lb of home @-@ made explosives when the RUC searched two cars in Hillsborough , County Down . On 6 April a bomb attack took place at <unk> Barracks in Derry . RIRA members lowered a device consisting of 5 lb of homemade explosives over the perimeter fence using ropes , and the bomb subsequently exploded damaging the fence and an unmanned guardhouse . 
 = = = = Bombings in England = = = = 
 After the Omagh bombing , the RIRA leadership were unwilling to launch a full @-@ scale campaign in Northern Ireland due to the possibility of civilians being killed . Instead they decided to launch a series of attacks in England , in particular London , which they hoped would attract disenchanted Provisional IRA members to join the RIRA . On 1 June 2000 a bomb damaged Hammersmith Bridge ; a symbolic target for Irish republican paramilitary groups . The bridge had been targeted by the Irish Republican Army on 29 March 1939 as part of its Sabotage Campaign , and by the Provisional IRA on 24 April 1996 . 
 On 19 July , security forces carried out a controlled explosion on a bomb left at Ealing Broadway station and public transport was disrupted when the Metropolitan Police closed Victoria and Paddington train stations and halted services on the London Underground . On 21 September a rocket @-@ propelled grenade was fired at the MI6 headquarters using an RPG @-@ 22 rocket launcher , which generated headlines around the world . On 21 February 2001 a bomb disguised as a torch ( flashlight ) left outside a Territorial Army base in Shepherd 's Bush seriously injured a 14 @-@ year @-@ old cadet , who was blinded and had his hand blown off . A second attack in Shepherd 's Bush , the 4 March BBC bombing , injured a civilian outside the BBC Television Centre . The explosion was captured by a BBC cameraman , and the footage was broadcast on TV stations worldwide , and gained mass publicity for the group . On 14 April a bomb exploded at a postal sorting office in Hendon , causing minor damage but no injuries . Three weeks later on 6 May a second bomb exploded at the same building , causing slight injuries to a passer @-@ by . The 3 August Ealing bombing injured seven people , and on 3 November a car bomb containing 60 lb of home @-@ made explosives was planted in the centre of Birmingham . The bomb did not fully detonate and no one was injured . 
 = = = = Renewed campaign in Northern Ireland = = = = 
 The successful attack on Hammersmith Bridge encouraged the RIRA leadership to launch further attacks in Northern Ireland . On 19 June 2000 a bomb was found in the grounds of Hillsborough Castle , home of Secretary of State for Northern Ireland Peter Mandelson . On 30 June a bomb exploded on the Dublin @-@ to @-@ Belfast railway line near the village of <unk> in County Armagh . The explosion damaged the tracks , and caused disruption to train services . On 9 July a car bomb damaged buildings in <unk> , County Tyrone including an RUC station , and on 10 August an attack in Derry was thwarted by the RUC after a van containing a 500 lb bomb failed to stop at a police checkpoint . Following a car chase the bombers escaped across the Irish border , and the Irish Army carried out a controlled explosion on the bomb after the van was found abandoned in County Donegal . On 13 September two 80 lb bombs were planted at the <unk> army camp in County Londonderry , one of which was planted in a wooden hut and partially exploded when a soldier opened the door to the hut . The second bomb was found during a follow @-@ up search and made safe by bomb disposal experts . On 11 November the RUC and British Army prevented a mortar attack after stopping a van near <unk> , County Fermanagh , and the RUC prevented a further attack on 13 January 2001 when an 1100 lb bomb was found in Armagh — the largest bomb found in several years according to the RUC . 
 On 23 January the RIRA attacked <unk> Army Barracks in Derry for a second time , firing a mortar over a perimeter fence . A mortar similar to the one used in the attack was found by Gardaí near <unk> on 13 February , and British army bomb disposal experts made safe another mortar found between Dungannon and <unk> on 12 April . On 1 August a 40 lb bomb was discovered in a car at the long @-@ stay car park of Belfast International Airport following a telephone warning , and was made safe with two controlled explosions by bomb disposal experts . In December a six @-@ day security operation ended when a 70 lb bomb found under railway tracks at Killeen Bridge near Newry was defused . The operation began following a number of telephone warnings , and the road and railway line connecting Newry to Dundalk were closed due to security alerts . A pipe bomb was discovered at a police officer 's home in <unk> , County Down on 3 January 2002 , and two teenage boys were injured in County Armagh on 2 March when a bomb hidden in a traffic cone exploded . On 29 March 2002 the RIRA targeted a former member of the Royal Irish Regiment from Sion Mills , County Tyrone , with a bomb attached to his car that failed to explode . On 1 August 2002 a civilian worker was killed by an explosion at a Territorial Army base in Derry . The man , a 51 @-@ year @-@ old former member of the Ulster Defence Regiment , was the thirtieth person killed by the RIRA . 
 = = = Arrests = = = 
 Despite the RIRA 's renewed activity , the organisation was weakened by the arrest of key members and continued infiltration by informers . McKevitt was arrested on 29 March 2001 and charged with membership of an illegal organisation and directing terrorism , and remanded into custody . In July 2001 , following the arrests of McKevitt and other RIRA members , British and Irish government sources hinted that the organisation was now in disarray . Other key figures were jailed , including the RIRA 's Director of Operations , Liam Campbell , who was convicted of membership of an illegal organisation , and Colm Murphy who was convicted of conspiring to cause the Omagh bombing , although this conviction was overturned on appeal . 
 On 10 April 2002 <unk> <unk> , from <unk> , Dublin , was jailed for three years for membership of the RIRA . During a search of his home a list of names and home addresses of members of the Gardaí 's Emergency Response Unit was found . Five RIRA members were also convicted in connection with the 2001 bombing campaign in England , and received sentences varying from 16 years to 22 years imprisonment . In October 2002 , McKevitt and other RIRA members imprisoned in Portlaoise Prison issued a statement calling for the organisation to stand down . After a two @-@ month trial , McKevitt was sentenced to twenty years imprisonment in August 2003 after being convicted of directing terrorism . 
 = = = 2002 – 2007 = = = 
 After McKevitt 's imprisonment , the RIRA regrouped . The RIRA claimed responsibility for a series of firebomb attacks against premises in Belfast in November 2004 , and an attack on a Police Service of Northern Ireland ( PSNI ) patrol in Ballymena during March 2006 was attributed to the RIRA by the Independent Monitoring Commission ( IMC ) . On 9 August 2006 , fire bomb attacks by the RIRA hit businesses in Newry , County Down . Buildings belonging to JJB Sports and <unk> were destroyed , and ones belonging to MFI and TK Maxx were badly damaged . On 27 October 2006 , a large amount of explosives was found in <unk> , Mount Leinster , County Carlow by police , who believe the RIRA were trying to derail the peace process with a bomb attack . The IMC believe the RIRA were also responsible for a failed mortar attack on Craigavon PSNI Station on 4 December 2006 . The IMC 's October 2006 report stated that the RIRA remains " active and dangerous " and that it seeks to " sustain its position as a terrorist organisation " . The RIRA has stated it has no intention of calling a ceasefire unless a declaration of intent to withdraw from Northern Ireland is made by the British Government . 
 In a lengthy interview with An <unk> newspaper in 2003 , the leadership of the Provisional IRA said that the RIRA had " no coherent strategy " . 
 The Real IRA were suspected of complicity in the murder in December 2006 of drug @-@ dealer Martin ' Marlo ' Hyland . Hyland was shot dead at his Dublin home , along with a plumber , Anthony Campbell , who was carrying out work at the house . The organisation was embroiled in a feud with Hyland 's gang at the time . 
 = = = 2007 – 2013 = = = 
 On 8 November 2007 two RIRA members shot an off @-@ duty PSNI officer as he sat in his car on Bishop Street in Derry , causing injuries to his face and arm . On 12 November another PSNI member was shot by RIRA members in Dungannon , County Tyrone . On 7 February 2008 , the RIRA stated that , after experiencing a three @-@ year period of reorganisation , it intends to " go back to war " by launching a new offensive against " legitimate targets " . It also , despite having apologised for the Omagh bombing , denied any large scale involvement with the attack and said that their part had only gone as far as their codeword being used . On 12 May 2008 the RIRA seriously injured a member of the PSNI when a booby trap bomb exploded underneath his car near <unk> , County Tyrone . On 25 September 2008 the RIRA shot a man in the neck in St Johnston , near the Derry border . The same man was targeted in a pipe bomb attack on his home on 25 October , the RIRA did not claim responsibility for the attack , but security forces believe they were responsible for it . 
 On 7 March 2009 the RIRA claimed responsibility for the 2009 Massereene Barracks shooting . This shooting occurred outside the Massereene Barracks as four soldiers were receiving a pizza delivery . Two soldiers were killed , and the other two soldiers and two deliverymen were injured . On 3 April 2009 the RIRA in Derry claimed responsibility for carrying out a punishment shooting of a man who was awaiting sentencing for raping a 15 @-@ year @-@ old girl . The RIRA were also blamed for orchestrating rioting in the Ardoyne area of Belfast on 13 July 2009 as an Apprentice Boys parade was passing . Several PSNI officers were injured in the rioting and at least one shot was fired at police . In early November , the Independent Monitoring Commission released a report stating that the threat from the RIRA and other dissident republicans was at its most serious level since the 1998 Good Friday Agreement . 
 When drug dealer Sean Winters was shot dead in <unk> , north Dublin in September 2010 , the Real IRA " emerged as the chief suspects " . They were also suspected of shooting dead drugs gang leader Michael Kelly in <unk> in September 2011 . 
 On 5 October 2010 , a car bomb exploded outside a branch of the Ulster Bank on <unk> Road in Derry . Two police officers were slightly injured in the blast , which also damaged a hotel and other businesses . Several telephone warnings were received an hour prior to the blast allowing police to cordon off the area . The RIRA later claimed responsibility in a telephone call to the Derry Journal . 
 A large Real IRA explosives dump and arms cache were discovered in <unk> , County Louth by Gardaí in October 2010 , following a weekend of searches and arrests in the east of the country . In addition , two Real IRA men were charged in Dublin 's non @-@ jury Special Criminal Court of membership of an illegal organisation . The Real IRA claimed responsibility for kidnapping and shooting dead of one of their members , Kieran Doherty , for alleged drug dealing . Further significant seizures of Real IRA arms and explosives were made by the Gardaí during 2012 and 2013 , leading to the arrest of over a dozen persons . In 2011 Michael Campbell , brother of Liam , was found guilty in Vilnius , Lithuania , of trying to purchase arms and explosives and was sentenced to twelve years in jail . In October 2013 Campbell was freed on appeal , only to have the Supreme Court of Lithuania order a retrial in June 2014 . Campbell has maintained his innocence , accusing British intelligence of attempting to frame him . In June 2013 Gardaí arrested eight people after a Real IRA meeting and uncovered a massive haul of the plastic explosive Semtex in two raids in Dublin . In October 2013 the Real IRA claimed responsibility for " executing " an alleged leading cocaine dealer in north Belfast . 
 = = = 2012 – present : Since the merger ( " New IRA " ) = = = 
 On 26 July 2012 , it was reported that Republican Action Against Drugs ( RAAD ) and other small republican militant groups were merging with the Real IRA . As before , the group would continue to refer to itself as " the Irish Republican Army " . It issued the following statement : 
 The leadership of the Irish Republican Army remains committed to the full realisation of the ideals and principles enshrined in the Proclamation of 1916 . 
 In recent years the establishment of a free and independent Ireland has suffered setbacks due to the failure among the leadership of Irish nationalism and fractures within republicanism . The root cause of conflict in our country is the subversion of the nation 's inalienable right to self @-@ determination and this has yet to be addressed . Instead the Irish people have been sold a phoney peace , rubber @-@ stamped by a token legislature in Stormont . 
 Non @-@ conformist republicans are being subjected to harassment , arrest and violence by the forces of the British crown ; others have been interned on the direction of an English overlord . It is Britain , not the IRA , which has chosen provocation and conflict . 
 The IRA 's mandate for armed struggle derives from Britain 's denial of the fundamental right of the Irish people to national self @-@ determination and sovereignty -- so long as Britain persists in its denial of national and democratic rights in Ireland the IRA will have to continue to assert those rights . 
 The necessity of armed struggle in pursuit of Irish freedom can be avoided through the removal of the British military presence in our country , the dismantling of their armed militias and the declaration of an internationally observed timescale that details the dismantling of British political interference in our country . 
 After the merger , the media began to refer to the group as the " New IRA " . As well as RAAD , the alliance includes an east Tyrone group thought to be responsible for killing PSNI officer Ronan Kerr in 2011 , and a Belfast group who badly wounded PSNI officer Peadar Heffron in 2010 . The Continuity IRA , and the group often referred to as <unk> , remain independent . The PSNI reckoned that the new group has a membership of " between 250 and 300 military activists , backed up by associates " . In November 2012 it claimed responsibility for shooting dead a Prison Officer near Lurgan , the first prison officer to be killed since 1993 . 
 On 3 September 2012 prominent Real IRA member Alan Ryan was shot dead in Dublin . Gardaí believed that he had been involved in a feud with major crime gangs from whom he was trying to extort money . Following Ryan 's death an internal feud developed in the Real IRA . Ryan 's replacement as leader and another associate were shot and wounded in November 2012 , allegedly on the orders of the Northern leadership . In March 2013 , another prominent former Real IRA member , Peter <unk> from <unk> , was shot dead ; three Dublin men , allegedly from the Alan Ryan faction , were charged with his murder and Real IRA membership . 
 In February 2014 the group sent seven letter bombs to British Army recruitment offices in south @-@ east England ; the first time republicans had struck in Britain since 2001 . The following month , a PSNI <unk> was hit by an explosively formed projectile in Belfast . A civilian car was also hit by debris , but there were no injuries . The Real IRA claimed responsibility . In November 2014 , a PSNI armoured jeep was hit by another ' horizontal mortar ' in Derry , and in Belfast a PSNI <unk> was attacked with a homemade rocket @-@ propelled grenade ( RPG ) launcher . 
 In April – May 2015 , there were two Real IRA bomb attacks in Derry . One exploded at the Probation Board offices , and two partially exploded at the perimeter fence of a British Army Reserve base . Later in May , four men , one an alleged associate of Real IRA leader Michael McKevitt , were reportedly arrested during an explosives seizure by police in Northern Ireland . In August , a firebomb exploded in a post van parked inside Palace Barracks , <unk> , a British military base which is home to MI5 in Northern Ireland . The firebomb destroyed the van and set nearby vehicles and garages on fire . On Halloween morning , three men were arrested and charged with IRA membership in addition to firearm offences . In November , a PSNI vehicle in Belfast was riddled with automatic gunfire , fired from an AK @-@ 47 . On Christmas Day in North Belfast , police came under fire again but were not injured . The attacker was charged with attempted murder . Days later , on 27 November 2015 , police in West Belfast came under heavy fire yet again . No officers were wounded because of the armour @-@ plating and bullet @-@ proof glass . The Real IRA or another dissident Republican group was suspected to be behind the attack . 
 On March 4 , 2016 , a prison officer ( Adrian Ismay ) had a heart attack and died in a hospital . He had received serious wounds following a booby @-@ trap bomb detonating under his van on Hillsborough Drive , East Belfast 11 days earlier . The wounds he received from the bombing were directly responsible for the heart attack that killed him . The ' New ' IRA claimed responsibility and said it was a response to the alleged mistreatment of republican prisoners at <unk> Prison . It added that the officer was targeted because he trained prison officers at <unk> . 
 In April 2016 , Gardaí arrested two significant members of the New IRA and seized € 10 @,@ 000 . In April , 2016 , explosives linked to the New IRA were found in Dublin and several people were questioned by police . The New IRA declared that all criminals were legitimate targets after Alan Ryan 's brother , Vincent Ryan , was shot dead . In April 2016 , the New IRA were blamed for badly injuring a man in a punishment shooting in Derry , shortly after a man had been killed by a dissident Republican attack in Ardoyne . In May 2016 three men were shot in paramilitary style attacks in republican areas of Belfast during a 24 @-@ hour period , leaving two injured and one dead . On 25 April a New IRA member , Michael Barr was shot dead in west Dublin . Gardaí suspected Barr was shot dead because it was believed by the <unk> cartel he provided a “ safe house ” to one of the gunmen in the Regency Hotel attack . Fifteen people were arrested in Northern Ireland following a paramilitary funeral for him . 
 The terrorist threat level in Great Britain was upgraded to " substantial " on 11 May 2016 , with the New IRA 's continuing threats being part of the reason by Home Secretary Theresa May and MI5 . 
 On 16 May 2016 a ' terrorist hide ' was found by civilians in <unk> Forest near Larne , Antrim , possibly belonging to the New IRA . It was a very substantial cache . 
 In June 2016 it was revealed that a five @-@ man New IRA hit team were in Dublin 's north inner city looking to murder two leading gangsters after one of their associates was shot dead in a gangland feud . Sources said the murder squad from the North spent several days and nights looking for their targets in the streets . 
 = = Structure and status = = 
 The RIRA has a command structure similar to the Provisional IRA , with a seven @-@ member Army Council consisting of a chief of staff , quartermaster general , director of training , director of operations , director of finance , director of publicity , and adjutant general . The rank @-@ and @-@ file members operate in active service units of covert cells to prevent the organisation from being compromised by informers . As of June 2005 , the organisation is believed to have a maximum of about 150 members , according to a statement by the Irish Minister for Justice , Equality and Law Reform , Michael McDowell . 
 The RIRA also has a political wing , the 32 County Sovereignty Movement ( formerly the 32 County Sovereignty Committee ) , led by Francis Mackey . The RIRA is distinct from the Continuity IRA , another Provisional IRA splinter group founded in 1986 , although the two groups have been known to co @-@ operate at a local level . The Provisional IRA has been hostile to the RIRA and issued threats to RIRA members , and in October 2000 was alleged to be responsible for the fatal shooting of Belfast RIRA member Joe O 'Connor according to O 'Connor 's family and 32 County Sovereignty Movement member Marian Price . 
 Organisations called " Irish Republican Army " are illegal in both UK law and Irish law ; both proscriptions have been held to apply to the RIRA as to other groups of the name . Membership in the organisation is punishable by a sentence of up to ten years imprisonment under UK law . In 2001 the United States government designated the RIRA as a " Foreign Terrorist Organization " ( <unk> ) . This makes it illegal for Americans to provide material support to the RIRA , requires American financial institutions to freeze the group 's assets , and denies suspected RIRA members visas into the United States . 
 = = Funding = = 
 In 2014 , Forbes magazine estimated the group 's annual turnover at $ 50 million . According to the police in Northern Ireland , the main sources of the Real IRA 's funding are illegal fuel operations and various smuggling activities . 
 = = Weaponry = = 
 The RIRA initially took small amounts of materiel from Provisional IRA arms dumps under the control of McKevitt and other former Provisional IRA members , including the plastic explosive Semtex , Uzi submachine guns , AK @-@ 47 and AK @-@ 74 assault rifles , handguns , shotguns , detonators , and timing devices . The defection of senior Provisional IRA members also gave the RIRA the ability to manufacture home @-@ made explosives and improvised mortars , including the Mark 15 mortar capable of firing a 200 lb shell . 
 In 1999 the organisation supplemented its equipment by importing arms from Croatia , including military explosive <unk> , CZ Model 25 submachine guns , modified AK @-@ 47 assault rifles with a folding stock , and RPG @-@ 18 and RPG @-@ 22 rocket launchers . But a July 2000 attempt to smuggle a second consignment of arms was foiled by Croatian police , who seized seven RPG @-@ 18s , AK @-@ 47 assault rifles , detonators , ammunition , and twenty packs of <unk> . 
 In 2001 RIRA members travelled to Slovakia to procure arms , and were caught in a sting operation by the British security agency MI5 . The men attempted to purchase five tonnes of plastic explosives , 2 @,@ 000 detonators , 500 handguns , 200 rocket @-@ propelled @-@ grenades , and also wire @-@ guided missiles and sniper rifles . Three men from County Louth were arrested and extradited to the UK and subsequently imprisoned for 30 years each after pleading guilty to conspiring to cause explosions and other charges . 
 In June 2006 , the PSNI made a number of arrests following an MI5 sting operation targeting a dissident republican gun smuggling plot . The RIRA had attempted to procure arms from France including Semtex and C @-@ 4 plastic explosives , SA @-@ 7 surface @-@ to @-@ air missiles , AK @-@ 47s , rocket launchers , heavy machine guns , sniper rifles , pistols with silencers , anti @-@ tank weapons and detonators . On 30 June 2010 , two of those arrested were found guilty following a trial by judge in Belfast . On 1 October 2010 one man was sentenced to 20 years imprisonment for attempting to import weapons and explosives , while the other was sentenced to 4 years imprisonment for making a Portuguese property available for the purpose of terrorism . 
 = Tropic Thunder = 
 Tropic Thunder is a 2008 American action comedy film co @-@ written , produced , directed by , and starring Ben Stiller . The film also stars Robert Downey , Jr. and Jack Black . The main plot revolves around a group of prima donna actors who are making a fictional Vietnam War film . When their frustrated director decides to drop them in the middle of a jungle , they are forced to rely on their acting skills in order to survive the real action and danger . Written by Stiller , Justin Theroux and Etan Cohen , the film was produced by Red Hour Films and distributed by Paramount Pictures through DreamWorks Pictures . 
 Stiller 's idea for the film originated while playing a minor role in Empire of the Sun , and he later enlisted Theroux and Cohen to help complete the script . After the film was green @-@ lit in 2006 , filming took place in 2007 on the Hawaiian island of Kaua 'i over thirteen weeks and was later deemed the largest film production in the island 's history . The film had an extensive marketing promotion , including faux websites for the three main characters and their fictional films , airing a fictional television special , and selling the energy drink advertised in the film , " Booty Sweat " . 
 The film received generally positive reviews , with critics praising the film 's characters , story , faux trailers , and the performances of Stiller , Downey , and Tom Cruise , though the depiction of the mentally handicapped proved controversial . The film 's soundtrack and score debuted on August 5 , 2008 , before the film 's theatrical release . In its North American opening weekend , the film earned US $ 26 million and retained the number one position for the first three weekends of release . Downey received Academy Award , BAFTA Award , and Screen Actors Guild Award nominations for his performance , with both him and Cruise receiving nominations for a Golden Globe Award for Best Supporting Actor – Motion Picture . The film grossed more than $ 188 million worldwide before its release on home video on November 18 , 2008 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Hook @-@ handed Vietnam veteran Staff Sergeant John " Four Leaf " Tayback 's ( Nick Nolte ) memoir , Tropic Thunder , is being made into a film . With the exception of newcomer supporting actor Kevin Sandusky ( Jay Baruchel ) , the cast — fading action hero Tugg Speedman ( Ben Stiller ) , five @-@ time Academy Award @-@ winning Australian method actor Kirk Lazarus ( Robert Downey , Jr . ) , rapper Alpa Chino ( Brandon T. Jackson ) , and drug @-@ addicted comedian Jeff Portnoy ( Jack Black ) — behave unreasonably . Rookie director Damien Cockburn ( Steve Coogan ) cannot control them during filming of a large battle scene , and production is reported to be one month behind schedule a mere week into production . Studio executive Les Grossman ( Tom Cruise ) orders Cockburn to resume filming as planned , or risk its cancellation . 
 Acting on Four Leaf 's advice , Damien drops the actors into the middle of the jungle , with hidden cameras and rigged special effects explosions to film " guerrilla @-@ style " . The actors have guns that fire blanks , along with a map and scene listing that will lead to a helicopter waiting at the end of the route . Unknown to the actors and production , the group have been dropped in the middle of the Golden Triangle , the home of the heroin @-@ producing Flaming Dragon gang . Just as the group are about to set off , Damien inadvertently steps on an old land mine and is blown up , stunning the actors . Tugg , believing Damien faked his death to encourage the cast to give better performances , persuades the others that Damien is alive and that they are still shooting the film . Lazarus is unconvinced but joins them in their trek through the jungle . 
 When Four Leaf and pyrotechnics operator Cody Underwood ( Danny McBride ) try to locate the dead director , they are captured by Flaming Dragon , at which point Four Leaf reveals that he fabricated his memoir , was never in the Army , and has hands . As the actors continue through the jungle , Kirk and Kevin discover that Tugg is leading them in the wrong direction . The four actors , tired of walking and hoping to be rescued , leave Tugg , who goes off by himself and is captured by Flaming Dragon . Taken to their heroin factory , Tugg believes it is a POW camp from the script . The gang discovers he is the star of their favorite film , the box office bomb Simple Jack , and forces him to reenact it several times a day . Meanwhile in Los Angeles , Tugg 's agent Rick ' Pecker ' Peck ( Matthew McConaughey ) is trying to negotiate with Les an unfulfilled term in Tugg 's contract that entitles him to a TiVo . Flaming Dragon calls the two and demands a ransom for Tugg , but Les instead berates the gang . Despite the threats , Les expresses no interest in rescuing Tugg and tries to convince Rick about the benefits of allowing Tugg to die and collecting the insurance . Les also offers Rick a Gulfstream V jet and money in return for his cooperation . 
 Kirk , Alpa , Jeff , and Kevin discover Flaming Dragon 's heroin factory . After witnessing Tugg being tortured , they plan a rescue attempt based on the film 's script . Kirk impersonates a farmer towing a captured Jeff on the back of a water buffalo , distracting the armed guards so Alpa and Kevin can locate the captives . After the gang 's leader ( Brandon Soo Hoo ) notices inconsistencies in Kirk 's story , the actors , knowing their cover has been blown , begin firing , temporarily subduing the gang . Their control of the gang falls apart when Jeff grabs the leader and heads for the drugs , and the gang regains their guns and begin firing . 
 The four actors locate Four Leaf , Cody , and Tugg and cross a bridge rigged to explode to get to Underwood 's helicopter . Tugg asks to remain behind with the gang which he considers his family , but quickly returns when Flaming Dragon fires in pursuit . Four Leaf detonates the bridge allowing Tugg to reach safety , but as the helicopter takes off , the gang fires a rocket @-@ propelled grenade at the helicopter . Rick unexpectedly stumbles out of the jungle carrying a TiVo box and throws it in the path of the grenade , saving them . The crew return to Hollywood , where footage from the hidden cameras is compiled into a feature film , Tropic Blunder , which becomes a major critical and commercial success . The film wins Tugg his first Academy Award , which Kirk presents to him at the ceremony . 
 In a mid @-@ credits scene , Rick is on a plane back to Hollywood with his estranged son . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Ben Stiller as Tugg Speedman : Once the highest @-@ paid , highest @-@ grossing action film star ever due to his Scorcher franchise , his career has stalled , and he now has a reputation for appearing in nothing but box office bombs . After a failed attempt at portraying a serious role in Simple Jack , in which he plays a mentally @-@ challenged farm boy , he takes the role of Four Leaf Tayback in an attempt to save his career . The first faux trailer at the film 's start is a preview for Scorcher VI : Global Meltdown , the latest in his series . 
 Jack Black as Jeff Portnoy : A drug @-@ addicted comedian @-@ actor well known for portraying multiple parts in films that rely on toilet humor , particularly jokes about flatulence . In the film @-@ within @-@ a @-@ film , he plays a raspy @-@ voiced soldier named Fats . He fears he is only considered an actor because of his comical delivery and nothing else . Portnoy 's faux trailer for The <unk> : Fart 2 , about a family ( with each member played by Portnoy ) which enjoys passing gas , spoofs Eddie Murphy 's portrayal of multiple characters in films such as Nutty Professor II : The Klumps . 
 Robert Downey , Jr. as Kirk Lazarus : An immensely talented Australian method actor , Lazarus had a controversial " pigmentation alteration " surgery to darken his skin for his portrayal of the black character Staff Sergeant Lincoln Osiris . Lazarus refuses to break character until he has recorded the DVD commentary for a part and only speaks in his character 's African American Vernacular English . Lazarus 's faux trailer , Satan 's Alley , is about two gay monks in a 12th @-@ century Irish monastery , parodying art house films like Brokeback Mountain and Downey 's own scenes with Tobey Maguire ( who in a cameo portrays the other monk ) in Wonder Boys . 
 Steve Coogan as Damien Cockburn : The inexperienced British film director who is unable to control the actors in the film . 
 Jay Baruchel as Kevin Sandusky : A respectful novice actor , he is the only cast member to have read the script and book and attended the assigned boot camp prior to the film . Sandusky plays a young soldier named Brooklyn in the film @-@ within @-@ a @-@ film . Brooklyn and Sandusky each occupy the position of straight man in character in the film @-@ within @-@ a @-@ film and its cast , being the only actor without an internal conflict or deep @-@ seated insecurity . He often serves as a mediator when tensions between the cast get high . 
 Danny McBride as Cody Underwood : The film 's explosives expert and helicopter pilot . He is a pyromaniac . 
 Brandon T. Jackson as Alpa Chino : A closeted homosexual rapper who is attempting to cross over into acting , portraying a soldier named Motown , while promoting his " Bust @-@ A @-@ Nut " candy bar and energy drink , " Booty Sweat " . He feels his image as a rapper would not allow him to be open as gay . His name is a play on Al Pacino . Before the faux trailers , a faux commercial for " Booty Sweat " and " Bust @-@ A @-@ Nut " appears , accompanied by the song " I Love Tha Pussy " and the slogan " Pop An Ass Open ! " . 
 Bill Hader as Rob <unk> : Grossman 's assistant and right @-@ hand man . 
 Nick Nolte as Sergeant John " Four Leaf " Tayback : The author of Tropic Thunder , a fake memoir of his war experiences on which the film @-@ within @-@ a @-@ film is based . He suggests the idea of dropping the actors in the middle of the jungle to get them looking and feeling like soldiers lost in a foreign land . 
 Matthew McConaughey as Rick " Pecker " Peck : Speedman 's extremely devoted agent and best friend . 
 Brandon Soo Hoo as Tran : The 12 @-@ year @-@ old young leader of the Flaming Dragon gang . The character was compared to Karen National Union guerrilla leaders Johnny and Luther <unk> . 
 Reggie Lee as <unk> : The second @-@ in @-@ command of the Flaming Dragon gang . 
 Tom Cruise as Les Grossman : The profane , ill @-@ tempered studio executive producing Tropic Thunder . 
 Various actors and celebrities portray themselves , including Tobey Maguire , Tyra Banks , Maria Menounos , Martin Lawrence , The Mooney Suzuki , Jason Bateman , Lance Bass , Jennifer Love Hewitt , Alicia Silverstone , and Jon Voight . Christine Taylor ( Stiller 's wife ) , Mini Anden , Anthony <unk> , Rachel Avery , and Yvette Nicole Brown have roles as minor characters in the film . Co @-@ writer Justin Theroux appears in two brief roles as a UH @-@ 1 Huey gunner and the disc jockey from Zoolander ( shown in a deleted scene ) . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Script = = = 
 Stiller developed the premise for Tropic Thunder while shooting Empire of the Sun , in which he played a small part . Stiller wanted to make a film based on the actors he knew who , after taking part in boot camps to prepare for war film roles , became " self @-@ important " and " self @-@ involved " and appeared to believe they had been part of a real military unit . 
 Co @-@ writer Theroux revealed that the initial script concept was to have actors go to a mock boot camp and return with posttraumatic stress disorder . The final script was developed to satirize Vietnam War films such as Apocalypse Now , Rambo , Missing in Action , Platoon , Full Metal Jacket , Hamburger Hill , and The Deer Hunter . Theroux pointed out that since viewers had an increased awareness of the inner workings of Hollywood due to celebrity websites and Hollywood news sources , the script was easier to write . Dialogue for unscripted portions of the storyboard was developed on set by the actors or was improvised . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Etan Cohen created the role of Kirk Lazarus as a way of lampooning the great lengths that some method actors go to depict a role . Downey was approached by Stiller about the part while on vacation in Hawaii . Downey said on CBS ' The Early Show that his first reaction was , " This is the stupidest idea I 've ever heard ! " and that Stiller responded , " Yeah , I know — isn 't it great ? " In another interview , Downey said that he accepted the part but , having no idea where or even how to start building the character of Lazarus , eventually settled on a jive @-@ esque speech pattern and a ragged bass voice ; he then auditioned Lazarus ' voice over the phone to Stiller , who approved the characterization immediately . Downey revealed that he modeled the character on actors Russell Crowe , Colin Farrell , and Daniel Day @-@ Lewis . The initial script was written for Downey 's character to be Irish , but was altered after Downey stated he could improvise better as an Australian ( he had previously played a similar outlandish Australian character in the film Natural Born Killers ) . Downey 's practice of remaining in character between takes and even off the film set was also written into the script for his character to perform . Downey required between one and a half to two hours of make @-@ up application . According to Downey , " One makeup artist would start on one side of my face and a second makeup artist would start on the other side , and then they 'd meet in the middle . " 
 Downey acknowledged the potential controversy over his role : " At the end of the day , it 's always about how well you commit to the character . If I didn 't feel it was morally sound , or that it would be easily misinterpreted that I 'm just C. Thomas Howell [ in Soul Man ] , I would 've stayed home . " Jackson stated : " When I first read the script , I was like : What ? Blackface ? But when I saw him [ act ] he , like , became a black man ... It was just good acting . It was weird on the set because he would keep going with the character . He 's a method actor . " Stiller commented on Downey 's portrayal of a white actor playing a black man : " When people see the movie — in the context of the film , he 's playing a method actor who 's gone to great lengths to play a black guy . The movie is skewering actors and how they take themselves so seriously . " Stiller previewed the film before the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People , and several black journalists reacted positively to the character . 
 Cruise was initially set to cameo as Stiller 's character 's agent , Rick Peck . Instead , Cruise suggested adding a studio head character , and the idea was incorporated into the script . Stiller and Cruise worked together to create the new character , Les Grossman , as a middle @-@ aged businessman . The role required that Cruise don a fatsuit , large prosthetic hands , and a bald cap . It was Cruise 's idea to give the character large hands and dance to " Low " . Stiller intended to keep Cruise 's role a secret until the film 's release . In addition , Paramount Pictures refused to release promotional pictures of Cruise 's character to the media . In November 2007 , images of Cruise wearing a bald headpiece and a fatsuit appeared on Inside Edition , as well as on the Internet . Cruise 's attorneys threatened a lawsuit if photos showing Cruise in costume were published . They approached various sites that were hosting the image and quickly had it removed . A representative for Cruise stated : " Mr. Cruise 's appearance was supposed to be a surprise for his fans worldwide . Paparazzi have ruined what should have been a fun discovery for moviegoers . " The photography agency INF , who debuted the image , responded with a statement : " While these pictures were taken without breaking any criminal or civil laws , we 've decided to pull them from circulation effective immediately . " 
 Serving as a last @-@ minute replacement , Tobey Maguire was only available to be on set for two hours to film his scenes in Satan 's Alley . Downey said he was amazed Maguire would agree to do the film and felt like they were creating a " karmic pay @-@ off " for their scenes together in the 2000 film Wonder Boys , where Downey 's character has a one @-@ night stand with Maguire 's character . After Cruise vacated the role of Rick Peck , Owen Wilson was cast to play the part . Following his suicide attempt in August 2007 , Wilson dropped out of the film and was replaced by Matthew McConaughey . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Although Southern California and Mexico were considered for the main unit filming , the Hawaiian island of Kaua 'i ( where Stiller has a home ) was selected for the majority of the shooting . Kaua 'i was chosen over Mexico because a tax credit for in @-@ state spending was negotiated with the Kaua 'i Film Commission . John Toll , the cinematographer , stated the island was also selected for its similarity to Vietnam , based on its dense foliage , variety of terrains , and weather . Kaua 'i was first scouted as a possible location to film Tropic Thunder in 2004 . Stiller spent more than 25 hours over 6 weeks exploring the island , using all @-@ terrain vehicles , boats , and helicopters . After the film was greenlit by DreamWorks in 2006 , pre @-@ production lasted for six months , most of this time spent on scouting additional locations for filming . Filming for the Los Angeles and interior scenes occurred on sets at Universal Studios in Hollywood . 
 Tropic Thunder was the first major studio production on Kaua 'i in five years . After filming was completed , it was deemed the largest production filmed on the island to date , and contributed more than $ 60 million to the local economy . Tim Ryan , the executive editor of Hawaii Film & Video Magazine , commented on the filming on the island : " I think Tropic Thunder will give Kaua 'i much needed and long idled publicity in the production arena ... It should put Kaua 'i back on the production consideration radar . " Preliminary production crews were on the island starting in December 2006 and principal photography began in July 2007 , with filming lasting thirteen weeks over seven separate locations on the island . Much of the filming took place on private land as well as conservation status designated areas . Casting calls on the island sought 500 residents to portray the villagers in the film . Two units shot simultaneously on the island from the ground , and an aerial unit shot from helicopters . Many of the sets and the bridge used for one of the final scenes were built in three months . The island 's erratic weather hampered filming with rain and lighting issues . The crew also faced complications in moving the equipment and cast due to the difficult terrain . 
 The film advising company Warriors Inc. was enlisted to ensure the war scenes , including the attire worn by the actors , looked authentic . Former members of the U.S. military taught the actors how to handle , fire , and reload their weapons , as well as perform various tactical movements . The opening war scene was filmed over three weeks and required fifty stuntmen . <unk> were used to map out the necessary camera angles for filming . 
 = = = Effects = = = 
 Six companies working on different scenes and elements created 500 shots of visual effects in the film . These were at times altered weekly due to the reactions of test audiences in screenings . CIS Visual Effects Group assisted with the Scorcher VI faux trailer and twenty additional shots for the home media release . To expand on the comedy in the film , some of the explosions and crashes were embellished to look more destructive . The visual effects supervisor Michael Fink reflected on the exaggerated explosions : " We worked really hard to make the CG crashing helicopter in the hot landing sequence look real . Ben was adamant about that , but at the same time he wanted the explosion to be huge . When you see it hit the ground , it was like it was filled with gasoline ! It was the same thing with Ben 's sergeant character , who almost intercepts a hand grenade ... Now , I was in the Army for three years and no hand grenade would make an explosion like that ... But it was a big dramatic moment and it looks really cool ... and feels kind of real . " 
 Filming the large napalm explosion in the opening scene of the film required a 450 @-@ foot ( 137 @-@ meter ) row of explosive pots containing 1 @,@ 100 gallons ( 4 @,@ 165 liters ) of gasoline and diesel fuel . All the palm trees used in the explosion were moved to the specific location after the crew determined the impact of the lighting and necessary camera angles . Due to the size and cost of the 1 @.@ 25 @-@ second explosion , it was only performed once and was captured by twelve cameras . For the safety of the crew and cast , the detonators were added one hour before the explosion and nobody was allowed to be within 400 feet ( 120 m ) during detonation . The explosion was made up of twelve individual explosions and resulted in a mushroom cloud that reached 350 feet ( 110 m ) in the air . For the scene in the film , Danny McBride 's character , Cody Underwood , was the only actor shown in the shot of the explosion . All the other characters were added digitally . The explosion of the bridge in one of the final scenes used nine cameras to capture the shot , and the crew was required to be 3 @,@ 000 feet ( 910 m ) away for their safety . 
 = = Promotion = = 
 A trailer for the film was released in April 2008 . The Calgary Herald gave it a rating of 3 / 5 , commenting : " This could either be good or very , very bad . " Gary Susman of Entertainment Weekly questioned whether the film would " ... turn into precisely the kind of bloated action monstrosity that it 's making fun of . " The trailer received the " Best Comedy Trailer " award at the 9th annual Golden Trailer Awards . DreamWorks also released a red band trailer , the first of its kind used by the studio to promote one of its films . 
 Stiller , Downey , and Black appeared on the seventh season finale of American Idol in a sketch as The Pips performing with Gladys Knight ( via archival footage ) . The three actors also later performed a sketch at the 2008 MTV Movie Awards which featured the actors attempting to create a successful viral video to promote the film with awkward results . In September 2008 , Stiller and Downey attended the San Sebastián International Film Festival to promote the film . A screening was shown , but it was not chosen to compete against the other films at the festival . 
 Between April 2008 and the film 's commercial release in August 2008 , the film had over 250 promotional screenings . On August 3 , 2008 , Stiller , Downey , and Black visited Camp Pendleton , a U.S. Marine Corps base in California , to present a screening to over a thousand military members and their families . The screening was on behalf of the United Service Organizations and included the actors heading to the screening by helicopter and Humvees . On August 8 , 2008 , a special 30 @-@ minute fictional E ! True Hollywood Story aired about the making of Tropic Thunder . In video games , a themed scavenger hunt was incorporated into Tom Clancy 's Rainbow Six : Vegas 2 , and Stiller allowed his likeness to be used in the online Facebook application game based on the film . 
 As a tie @-@ in for the film 's release , Paramount announced it would market the energy drink known in the film as " Booty Sweat " . Michael Corcoran , Paramount 's president of consumer products , commented on the release : " We 're very excited , because it has the potential to live for quite a while , well beyond the film . " The drink was sold in college bookstores , on Amazon.com , and at other retailers . 
 = = = Faux websites and mockumentary = = = 
 Several faux websites were created for the main characters and some of their prior film roles . A website for Simple Jack , a faux film exhibited within the film , was removed by DreamWorks on August 4 , due to protests from disability advocates . In addition , other promotional websites were created for " Make Pretty Skin Clinic " , the fictitious company that performed the surgery of the film 's character Kirk Lazarus , along with one for the energy drink " Booty Sweat " . 
 In mid @-@ July 2008 , a faux trailer for the mockumentary Rain of Madness was released . The mockumentary was a parody of Hearts of Darkness : A Filmmaker 's Apocalypse . It follows co @-@ writer Justin Theroux as a fictitious documentarian named Jan Jürgen documenting the behind @-@ the @-@ scenes aspects of the film within the film . Marketing for the faux documentary included a movie poster and an official website prior to Tropic Thunder 's release . The mockumentary was released on the iTunes Store after the film 's release and was also included on the home video release . Amy Powell , an advertising executive with Paramount , reflected on the timing of the release of Madness : " We always thought that people would be talking about Tropic Thunder at the water cooler , and that 's why we decided to release Rain of Madness two weeks into Tropic 's run — to keep this positive buzz going . " 
 = = Release = = 
 = = = Theatrical release = = = 
 Tropic Thunder premiered on August 11 , 2008 , at the Mann Village Theatre in Westwood , California , two days before its wide release . Members of several disability groups picketed before the premiere , protesting at the portrayal of mental retardation shown in the film . The groups revealed that it was the first time that they had ever protested together at an event . As a result of the protest , the normally unobstructed views of the red carpet leading to the premiere were blocked off by 10 @-@ foot ( 3 @-@ m ) -high fences and there was an increase in the number of security personnel present . No protests were held at the United Kingdom 's September premiere . 
 The North American release was scheduled for July 11 , 2008 , but was delayed until August 15 , before being brought forward to August 13 . As a result of the move from July , 20th Century Fox moved its family comedy Meet Dave in the open slot . The August 13 release date was also the opening weekends for the animated family film Star Wars : The Clone Wars and the horror film Mirrors . Studios consider the third week of August to be a weaker performing period than earlier in the summer because of students returning to school . Previous R @-@ rated comedies such as The 40 @-@ Year @-@ Old Virgin and Superbad were released in mid @-@ August and performed well at the box office . Reacting to Tropic Thunder 's release date , Rob Moore , vice chairman of Paramount Pictures , stated : " For a young person at the end of summer , you want to have some fun and forget about going back to school . What better than a crazy comedy ? " 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 Tropic Thunder received positive reviews from critics . The review aggregation website Rotten Tomatoes gives the film a rating of 83 % , based on 221 reviews , with an average rating of 7 @.@ 1 / 10 . The site 's critical consensus reads , " With biting satire , plenty of subversive humor , and an unforgettable turn by Robert Downey , Jr . , Tropic Thunder is a triumphant late summer comedy . " Metacritic , which assigns a weighted average score from reviews by mainstream critics , gave a film score of 71 out of 100 , based on 39 critics , indicating " generally favorable reviews " . 
 After attending an industry screening in April 2008 Michael <unk> from The New York Times stated that the film was " ... shaping up as one of [ DreamWorks ] ' s best prospects for the summer . " Claudia Puig of USA Today gave the film a positive review , writing " There are some wildly funny scenes , a few leaden ones and others that are scattershot , with humorous satire undercut by over @-@ the @-@ top <unk> . Still , when it 's funny , it 's really funny . " A review in Variety by Todd McCarthy was critical : " Apart from startling , out @-@ there comic turns by Robert Downey Jr. and Tom Cruise , however , the antics here are pretty thin , redundant and one @-@ note . " Rick Groen of The Globe and Mail gave the film a negative review , calling it " ... an assault in the guise of a comedy — watching it is like getting mugged by a clown . " J.R. Jones of Chicago Reader stated " The rest of the movie never lives up to the hilarity of the opening , partly because the large @-@ scale production smothers the gags but mostly because those gags are so easy to smother . " Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun @-@ Times gave 3 @.@ 5 / 4 and wrote , " The movie is , may I say , considerably better than Stiller ’ s previous film , Zoolander ( 2001 ) . It ’ s the kind of summer comedy that rolls in , makes a lot of people laugh and rolls on to video . " 
 The faux trailers before the film also received mixed reviews . David Ansen of Newsweek approved of the trailers , writing " Tropic Thunder is the funniest movie of the summer — so funny , in fact , that you start laughing before the film itself has begun . " Christy Lemire , writing for the Associated Press , called the trailers " ... the best part of the trip . " Robert Wilonsky of The Village Voice was critical , saying that the trailers ' comedy " ... resides in the land of the obvious , easy chuckle . " 
 Downey was repeatedly singled out for praise by numerous critics , claiming that he " stole the show " , was " ... off @-@ the @-@ charts hilarious ... " , and would bring viewers " ... the fondest memories of [ his ] work . " Scott Feinberg , of the Los Angeles Times , criticized the concept of Downey 's portrayal of an African @-@ American , writing " ... I just can 't imagine any circumstance under which a blackface performance would be acceptable , any more than than [ sic ] I can imagine any circumstance under which the use of the N @-@ word would be acceptable . " Sara <unk> said Cruise did " ... an astonishingly funny and surprising supporting performance . " Logan Hill of New York argued against Cruise 's cameo saying that it " ... just makes him look a little lost and almost pathetic — shucking and <unk> , trying to appeal to the younger moviegoers who are abandoning him . " 
 Several critics commented on the controversy over lines in the film talking about the mentally disabled . Duane Dudek of the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel wrote that the film " ... is just sophomoric enough to offend . And while it is also funny , it is without the empathy or compassion to cause us to wonder why we are laughing . " Christian Toto of The Washington Times argued against the opposition , " Tropic Thunder is drawing fire from special interest groups for ... its frequent use of the word ' retard ' , but discerning audiences will know where the humor is targeted . And they 'll be laughing too hard to take offense . " Kurt Loder of MTV contrasted the opposition to the lines with Downey character portrayal of an African American , " The scene in which the derisive Alpa Chino [ Brandon T. Jackson ] nails Lazarus ' recitation of black @-@ uplift homilies as nothing more than the lyrics to the Jeffersons theme is funny ; but the one in which Lazarus quietly explains to Speedman that his Simple Jack character failed because he made the mistake of going ' full retard ' — rather than softening his character with cuteness in the manner of Forrest Gump — is so on @-@ the @-@ nose accurate , it takes your breath away . " 
 = = = Critics ' lists = = = 
 In January 2009 , Entertainment Weekly included Tropic Thunder in its list " 25 Great Comedies From the Past 25 Years " for its " spot @-@ on skewering of Hollywood . " The film also appeared on several critics ' top ten lists of the best films of 2008 . Stephen King placed it at the fourth position , calling the film " the funniest , most daring comedy of the year . " The Oregonian 's Marc Mohan , placed it sixth , and several critics placed it seventh : Elizabeth Weitzman of the New York Daily News , Premiere magazine , Mike Russell of The Oregonian , as well as Peter Hartlaub of the San Francisco Chronicle . David Ansen of Newsweek placed it eighth and Lisa Schwarzbaum of Entertainment Weekly included the film in the tenth position . 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 Stacey Snider , the chief executive of DreamWorks , suggested that the film would earn around $ 30 million in its opening weekend and go on to be as successful as Borat : Cultural Learnings of America for Make Benefit Glorious Nation of Kazakhstan , which earned $ 129 million in the U.S. and Canada and $ 260 million worldwide . The Dark Knight had been the number one film at the box office for the four weeks prior to the release of Tropic Thunder . Bob Thompson , a writer for the National Post , speculated that Tropic Thunder 's opening weekend would outperform The Dark Knight for the weekend . In a list compiled prior to the summer 's film releases , Entertainment Weekly predicted that the film would be the tenth highest grossing film of the summer at the American box office with $ 142 @.@ 6 million . 
 Tropic Thunder opened in 3 @,@ 319 theaters and , for its first five days of American and Canadian release , earned $ 36 @,@ 845 @,@ 588 . The film placed first in the weekend 's box office with $ 25 @,@ 812 @,@ 796 , surpassing Star Wars : The Clone Wars and Mirrors , which debuted the same weekend . Reacting to the film 's opening receipts , DreamWorks spokesman Chip Sullivan stated " We 're thrilled , quite frankly . It played out exactly how we hoped . " In foreign markets for the film 's opening weekend , it was released in 418 Russian and 19 United Arab Emirates locations earning $ 2 @.@ 2 million and $ 319 @,@ 000 , respectively . 
 The film maintained its number one position at the American and Canadian box office for the following two weekends , making it the second film in 2008 ( after The Dark Knight ) to hold the number @-@ one position for more than two consecutive weekends . The film 's widest release was in 3 @,@ 473 theaters , placing it in the top 25 widest releases in the U.S. for 2008 . For 2008 , the film was the fifth @-@ highest @-@ grossing domestic R @-@ rated film . The film 's U.S. and Canada gross of over $ 110 million made Tropic Thunder Stiller 's most successful film as a director . The film has had gross receipts of $ 110 @,@ 515 @,@ 313 in the U.S. and Canada and $ 77 @,@ 557 @,@ 336 in international markets for a total of $ 188 @,@ 072 @,@ 649 worldwide . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 In October 2008 , Paramount chose to put end @-@ of @-@ year award push funds behind Tropic Thunder , and began advertising for Downey to receive a nomination by the Academy Awards for Best Supporting Actor . In a November 2008 issue by Entertainment Weekly , Downey 's film role was considered one of the three contenders for Best Supporting Actor . As a way of extending the film @-@ within @-@ a @-@ film " universe " into real life , there have also been at least two online " For Your Consideration " ads touting Downey 's character , Kirk Lazarus , for Best Supporting Actor ; one of these contains " scenes " from Satan 's Alley that were not in the trailer as released in theaters . At least one of the ads was produced by Paramount Pictures and intended for early For Your Consideration awareness for Downey 's role . On January 22 , 2009 , the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences nominated Downey for Best Supporting Actor . At the 81st Academy Awards , Downey lost to Heath Ledger for his role as The Joker in The Dark Knight . 
 With the onset of the annual Hollywood film award season at the end of 2008 , Tropic Thunder began receiving nominations and awards starting with a win for " Hollywood Comedy of the Year Award " at the 12th annual Hollywood Film Festival on October 27 , 2008 . The film was nominated for Best Motion Picture , Comedy or Musical , for the Satellite Awards . In addition , Downey was nominated for Best Actor in a Supporting Role . The Broadcast Film Critics Association nominated Downey for Best Supporting Actor and awarded Tropic Thunder Best Comedy Movie at the <unk> 's Critics ' Choice Awards . Both Downey and Cruise received nominations from the Hollywood Foreign Press Association for Golden Globes for Best Supporting Actor . The Boston Society of Film Critics recognized the cast with its Best Ensemble award . Downey was also nominated by both the Screen Actors Guild and the British Academy of Film and Television Arts for Best Supporting Actor awards . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 Tropic Thunder was released in the United States on DVD and Blu @-@ ray on November 18 , 2008 , three months after its release and a week after the end of its theatrical run in the U.S. and Canada . The film was released on home video on January 26 , 2009 in the United Kingdom . Special features include an unrated director 's cut of the film , audio commentaries ( including one featuring Stiller , Downey , and Black , with Downey providing his commentary as Lincoln Osiris , a nod to a joke in the film that Lazarus never breaks character until he completes the DVD commentary ) , several featurettes , deleted scenes , an alternate ending , and the Rain of Madness mockumentary . 
 For the film 's first week of release , Tropic Thunder placed on several video charts . It reached second place on the Nielsen VideoScan First Alert sales chart and Nielsen 's Blu @-@ ray Disc chart , earning $ 19 @,@ 064 @,@ 959 ( not including Blu @-@ ray sales ) . In rentals , it placed first on the Home Media Magazine 's video rental chart . The DVD sales in 2008 totaled $ 42 @,@ 271 @,@ 059 , placing it in 28th for DVD sales for the year . By September 2009 , 2 @,@ 963 @,@ 000 DVD units have been sold , gathering revenue of $ 49 @,@ 870 @,@ 248 . 
 = = Controversy = = 
 Tropic Thunder was criticized by the disability advocacy community . The website for Simple Jack was withdrawn on August 4 amid several groups ' concerns over its portrayal of mental retardation . A spokesman for DreamWorks said , " We heard their concerns , and we understand that taken out of context , the site appeared to be insensitive to people with disabilities . " A coalition of more than 20 disability advocacy groups , including the Special Olympics and the Arc of the United States , objected to the film 's repeated and excessive use of the word " retard " . DreamWorks offered to screen the film for the groups on August 8 to determine if it still offended them . The screening was postponed to the same day of the premiere on August 11 . After representatives for the groups attended the private screening and were offended by its content , the groups picketed outside the film 's premiere . Timothy Shriver , the chairman of the Special Olympics , stated , " This population struggles too much with the basics to have to struggle against Hollywood . We 're sending a message that this hate speech is no longer acceptable . " 
 Disability advocates and others who previewed the film reported that the offensive treatment of individuals with mental disabilities was woven throughout the film 's plot . Disability advocates urged people not to see the film , claiming it is demeaning to individuals with mental disabilities and would encourage bullying . Stiller defended the film , stating " We screened the movie so many times and this didn 't come up until very late ... in the context of the film I think it 's really clear , they were making fun of the actors and actors who try to use serious subjects to win awards . " Co @-@ writer Etan Cohen echoed Stiller 's rationale : " Some people have taken this as making fun of handicapped people , but we 're really trying to make fun of the actors who use this material as fodder for acclaim . " He went on to state that the film lampoons actors who portray mentally retarded / autistic characters such as Dustin Hoffman in Rain Man , Tom Hanks in Forrest Gump , and Sean Penn in I Am Sam . A DreamWorks spokesman did not directly respond to the criticism , claiming that Tropic Thunder " ... is an R @-@ rated comedy that satirizes Hollywood and its excesses , makes its point by featuring inappropriate and over @-@ the @-@ top characters in ridiculous situations . " The film 's advertising was altered , but none of the scenes in the film were edited as a result of the opposition . In response to the controversy , the director 's cut of the DVD ( but not the Blu @-@ ray ) includes a public service announcement in the special features that discourages use of the word " retard " . 
 = = Music = = 
 Tropic Thunder 's score and soundtrack were released on August 5 , 2008 , the week before the film 's theatrical release . The score was composed by Theodore Shapiro and performed by the Hollywood Studio Symphony . William Ruhlmann of allmusic gave the score a positive review , stating it is " ... an affectionate and knowing satire of the history of Hollywood action movie music , penned by an insider . " Thomas Simpson of SoundtrackNet called it " ... a mixture of fun , seriousness , rock n ' roll and great scoring . " 
 Five songs , " Cum On Feel the Noize " by Quiet Riot , " Sympathy for the Devil " by The Rolling Stones , " For What It 's Worth " by Buffalo Springfield , " Low " by Flo Rida and T @-@ Pain , and " Get Back " by Ludacris , were not present on the soundtrack , yet did appear in the film . The soundtrack features songs from The Temptations , MC Hammer , Creedence Clearwater Revival , Edwin Starr , and other artists . The single " Name of the Game " by The Crystal Method featuring Ryu has an exclusive remix on the soundtrack . The soundtrack debuted 20th on Billboard 's Top Soundtracks list and peaked at 39th on its Top Independent Albums list . James Christopher Monger of allmusic compared the music to other film 's soundtracks such as Platoon , Full Metal Jacket , and Forrest Gump and called it " ... a fun but slight listen that plays out like an old late- ' 70s K @-@ Tel compilation with a few bonus cuts from the future . " 
 = = Spin @-@ off = = 
 Cruise reprised his character Les Grossman for the 2010 MTV Movie Awards . On June 9 , 2010 , it was announced that a spin @-@ off film would be developed centering on Grossman . A script has been written by Michael Bacall ( Scott Pilgrim vs. the World , Project X ) . In March 2012 , Bacall gave an update on the long @-@ rumored Les Grossman spin @-@ off movie , revealing that the film will attempt to uncover where Grossman 's well @-@ documented anger issues originated . 
 = Italian ironclad Conte Verde = 
 Conte Verde was the third of three Principe di Carignano @-@ class ironclads built for the Italian Regia Marina ( Royal Navy ) , though she differed in several respects from her sisters . Unlike the other two members of her class , she did not receive complete iron armor , instead relying on partial plating at her bow and stern . She was laid down in February 1863 , she was launched in July 1867 , and she was completed in December 1871 . Conte Verde was a broadside ironclad armed with a battery of four 8 @-@ inch ( 200 mm ) guns and eighteen 164 @-@ millimeter ( 6 @.@ 5 in ) guns . Her career was limited , owing to the emergence of more modern ironclads and a severe reduction in the Italian naval budget following their defeat at the Battle of Lissa in 1866 . She was discarded in 1880 and sold to ship breakers to help pay for new ironclads then under construction . 
 = = Design = = 
 Conte Verde was 73 @.@ 7 meters ( 242 ft ) long between perpendiculars ; she had a beam of 15 @.@ 3 m ( 50 ft ) and an average draft of 6 @.@ 5 m ( 21 ft ) . She displaced 3 @,@ 514 metric tons ( 3 @,@ 459 long tons ; 3 @,@ 874 short tons ) normally and up to 3 @,@ 866 t ( 3 @,@ 805 long tons ; 4 @,@ 262 short tons ) at full load . She had a crew of 572 . Her propulsion system consisted of one single @-@ expansion steam engine that drove a single screw propeller , with steam supplied by six coal @-@ fired , cylindrical fire @-@ tube boilers . Her engine produced a top speed of 10 @.@ 2 knots ( 18 @.@ 9 km / h ; 11 @.@ 7 mph ) from 1 @,@ 968 indicated horsepower ( 1 @,@ 468 kW ) , making her the fastest member of her class . She could steam for about 1 @,@ 200 nautical miles ( 2 @,@ 200 km ; 1 @,@ 400 mi ) at a speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . To supplement her steam engine , the ship was barque @-@ rigged . 
 Conte Verde was a broadside ironclad , and she was armed with a main battery of four 72 @-@ pounder 8 in ( 200 mm ) guns and eighteen 164 mm ( 6 @.@ 5 in ) rifled muzzle @-@ loading guns . The ship was equipped with a spur @-@ shaped ram at the bow . Unlike her two sisters , Conte Verde did not have complete iron armor on her sides . She instead had wrought iron armor that covered only parts of her bow and stern . The rest of the ship received traditional timber armor . 
 = = Service history = = 
 The keel for Conte Verde was laid down at the San Rocco shipyard in Livorno on 2 February 1863 . She was launched on 29 July 1867 , and was completed in December 1871 . The ship did not have a long or particularly active career ; rapidly surpassed first by central battery and then turret ships , the first generation of ironclads with traditional broadside quickly became obsolete . In addition , the Italian government lost confidence in the fleet after its defeat in 1866 at the Battle of Lissa and drastically reduced the naval budget . The cuts were so severe that the fleet had great difficulty in mobilizing its ironclad squadron to attack the port of Civitavecchia in September 1870 , as part of the wars of Italian unification . Instead , the ships were laid up and the sailors conscripted to man them were sent home . 
 As a result , Conte Verde was not used in any significant way in her nine years in service . The ship was stricken from the naval register in 1880 , but was not actually broken up for scrap until 1898 . The Navy discarded both of her sisters , along with the ironclad Re di Portogallo between 1875 and 1880 to remove the cost of maintaining them from the naval budget , as part of an effort to reduce the financial impact of the new Caio Duilio and Italia @-@ classes then under construction . 
 = Brioni Agreement = 
 The Brioni Agreement or Brioni Declaration ( Croatian : <unk> deklaracija , Serbian : <unk> deklaracija , Slovene : <unk> deklaracija ) is a document signed by representatives of Slovenia , Croatia and the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia under the political sponsorship of the European Community ( EC ) on the Brijuni Islands on 7 July 1991 . The agreement sought to create an environment in which further negotiations on the future of Yugoslavia could take place . However , ultimately it isolated the federal prime minister Ante Marković in his efforts to preserve Yugoslavia , and effectively stopped any form of federal influence over Slovenia . This meant the Yugoslav People 's Army ( JNA ) would focus on combat in Croatia , creating a precedent of redrawing international borders and staking the EC 's interest in resolving the Yugoslav crisis . 
 The agreement put an end to hostilities between the JNA and Slovene forces in the Ten @-@ Day War . Slovenia and Croatia agreed to suspend activities stemming from their 25 June declarations of independence for a period of three months . The document also resolved border control and customs inspection issues regarding Slovenia 's borders , resolved air @-@ traffic control responsibility and mandated an exchange of prisoners of war . The Brioni Agreement also formed the basis for an observer mission to monitor implementation of the agreement in Slovenia . Eleven days after the agreement was made , the federal government pulled the JNA out of Slovenia . Conversely , the agreement made no mitigating impact on fighting in Croatia . 
 = = Background = = 
 On 23 June 1991 , as Slovenia and Croatia prepared to declare their independence during the breakup of Yugoslavia , the European Community ( EC ) foreign ministers decided the EC member states would not extend diplomatic recognition to the two states . The EC viewed the declarations as unilateral moves and offered assistance in negotiations regarding the future of the SFR Yugoslavia instead . At the same time , the EC decided to suspend direct talks with Slovenia and Croatia . The move was welcomed by the Yugoslav federal government . Slovenia and Croatia declared independence on 25 June , and the Yugoslav People 's Army ( JNA ) units began to deploy from its bases in Slovenia the next day . On 27 June , armed conflict broke out as the JNA and the Territorial Defence Force of Slovenia ( TDS ) began fighting over control of Slovenia 's border posts , in what became the Ten @-@ Day War . 
 A three @-@ strong EC delegation made three visits to the region in late June and early July to negotiate a political agreement which would facilitate further negotiations . The delegation consisted of the foreign ministers of Luxembourg , as the incumbent holder of the EC presidency , and Italy and the Netherlands , as the previous and future holders of that office . The delegation members were Jacques <unk> ( Luxembourg ) , Gianni de <unk> ( Italy ) , and Hans van den Broek ( Netherlands ) . Prior to the delegation 's arrival in Belgrade , <unk> told reporters that the EC would take charge of the crisis . There , the delegation was met by Serbian president Slobodan Milošević who dismissed the prospect of Croatia leaving the Yugoslav federation because its population contained 600 @,@ 000 Serbs . 
 On 29 June , Croatia and Slovenia agreed to suspend their declarations of independence to allow time for a negotiated settlement . The EC delegation appeared to make progress when Serbia responded to the move by ceasing their opposition to the appointment of a Croatian member of the federal presidency , Stjepan Mesić , as the body 's chairman on 30 June . The appearance of a success was reinforced when the JNA ordered its troops posted in Slovenia to return to their barracks . On 1 July , de <unk> was replaced by João de Deus Pinheiro , the Portuguese foreign minister , to maintain the formula of current , former and future EC presidencies comprising the EC delegation as the Netherlands took over the presidency from Luxembourg , while Portugal was scheduled to assume the presidency after the Dutch . 
 = = Conference at Brijuni = = 
 A further result of the EC delegation 's mission were talks attended by representatives of the EC , Croatia , Slovenia , Serbia and the Yugoslav government . The talks were held at Brijuni Islands on 7 July . Besides the EC delegation , headed by van den Broek , five out of eight members of the federal presidency attended the talks — Mesić , <unk> <unk> , Janez Drnovšek , Branko Kostić and Vasil <unk> . The Yugoslav federal prime minister Ante Marković was also present , as were the Yugoslav federal foreign minister <unk> <unk> , interior minister Petar <unk> and the deputy defence minister Vice Admiral Stane <unk> . Croatia was represented by President Franjo Tuđman while President Milan Kučan attended on behalf of Slovenia . Serbia was represented by Borisav Jović , a former Serbian member of the federal presidency who had resigned from the position on 15 June , instead of Milošević who refused to attend . Starting at 8 am , the EC delegation held separate talks with Kučan and his assistants , then with Tuđman and his assistants , and finally with Jović . In the afternoon , a plenary meeting was held with the federal , Slovene and Croatian delegations in attendance , while Jović reportedly left dissatisfied with the talks . 
 The agreement was prepared at the EC council of ministers in The Hague on 5 July . It consisted of a Joint Declaration , and two annexes detailing the creation of an environment suitable to further political negotiations and guidelines for an observer mission to Yugoslavia . The agreement , which became known as the Brioni Declaration or the Brioni Agreement , required the JNA and the TDS to return to their bases , and stipulated that Slovene officials were to control Slovenia 's borders alone and that both Slovenia and Croatia were to suspend all activities stemming from their declarations of independence for three months . The observer mission set out by the Brioni Agreement materialised as the European Community Monitor Mission ( ECMM ) tasked with monitoring the disengagement of the JNA and the TDS in Slovenia , and ultimately the withdrawal of the JNA from Slovenia . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Even though little was agreed upon and the agreement was later interpreted differently by its signatories , the Brioni Agreement established the EC 's interest in the region and the first EC Ministerial Conference on Yugoslavia was held in The Hague on 10 July . The ECMM helped calm several standoffs around military barracks in Slovenia and facilitated negotiations between Slovene authorities and the JNA regarding the withdrawal of the JNA from Slovenia . In Croatia , armed combat continued and the JNA shelled the city of Osijek the same evening the agreement was signed . The federal presidency ordered the complete withdrawal of the JNA from Slovenia on 18 July in response to Slovene actions in breach of the Brioni Agreement . The ECMM 's scope of work was expanded to include Croatia on 1 September . By mid @-@ September , the war had escalated as the Croatian National Guard and police blockaded the JNA barracks and the JNA embarked on a campaign against Croatian forces . 
 The Brioni Agreement isolated Marković who tried to preserve the federation , but was ignored by van den Broek who appeared not to comprehend issues presented before him , and the EC delegation tacitly encouraged the dissolution of Yugoslavia . The agreement diminished the authority of part of the JNA 's leadership who fought for the preservation of the Yugoslav federation . The agreement was also unfavourable for Croatia because it was left to defend against the JNA and Serb forces . By effectively removing Slovenia from influence of the federal authorities , especially the JNA , the agreement fulfilled one of the Serbian nationalists ' goals , allowing the redrawing of international borders . Sabrina Ramet noted that Kučan and Milošević reached an agreement in January 1991 in which Milošević gave his assurances that Slovenia 's independence bid would not be opposed by Serbia . In return , Kučan expressed his understanding for Milošević 's interest to create a Greater Serbia . 
 At the time , the EC viewed the agreement as a method of defusing the crisis and failed to attribute the lull which coincided with the Brioni Agreement to a shift in Serbian strategy instead . The EC delegation 's failure to respond to Jović 's departure before the plenary meeting and the EC foreign ministers ' declaration of 10 July indicating the EC would withdraw from mediation if the Brioni Agreement was not implemented only encouraged Serbia which , unlike Slovenia , Croatia , or the Yugoslav federation , had nothing to lose if the EC pulled out . In the end , the EC took credit for a rapid resolution of the armed conflict in Slovenia without realising that its diplomatic efforts had little to do with the situation on the ground . 
 = <unk> shark = 
 The pigeye shark or Java shark ( Carcharhinus amboinensis ) is an uncommon species of requiem shark , in the family Carcharhinidae , found in the warm coastal waters of the eastern Atlantic and western Indo @-@ Pacific . It prefers shallow , murky environments with soft bottoms , and tends to roam within a fairly localised area . With its bulky grey body , small eyes , and short , blunt snout , the pigeye shark looks almost identical to ( and is often confused with ) the better @-@ known bull shark ( C. leucas ) . The two species differ in vertebral count , the relative sizes of the dorsal fins , and other subtle traits . This shark typically reaches lengths of 1 @.@ 9 – 2 @.@ 5 m ( 6 @.@ 2 – 8 @.@ 2 ft ) . 
 The pigeye shark is an apex predator that mostly hunts low in the water column . It has a varied diet , consisting mainly of bony and cartilaginous fishes and also including crustaceans , molluscs , sea snakes , and cetaceans . This species gives birth to live young , with the developing embryos sustained to term via a placental connection to their mother . Litters of three to thirteen pups are born after a gestation period of nine or twelve months . Young sharks spend their first few years of life in sheltered inshore habitats such as bays , where their movements follow tidal and seasonal patterns . The pigeye shark 's size and dentition make it potentially dangerous , though it has not been known to attack humans . The shark is infrequently caught in shark nets protecting beaches and by fisheries , which use it for meat and fins . The IUCN presently lacks adequate data to assess the conservation status of this species . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 German biologists Johannes Müller and Jakob Henle described the pigeye shark and named it Carcharias ( Prionodon ) amboinensis in their 1839 Systematische Beschreibung der Plagiostomen . Later authors reassigned it to the genus Carcharhinus . The type specimen is a stuffed female 74 cm ( 29 in ) long , originally caught off Ambon Island in Indonesia , from which the specific epithet is derived . Several junior synonyms are known for this species , among them Triaenodon obtusus , which was based on a near @-@ birth pigeye shark foetus . 
 = = Phylogeny and evolution = = 
 Since the pigeye shark so strongly resembles the bull shark , morphology @-@ based phylogenetic studies have considered the two species to be closely related . Neither this nor any other arrangement is strongly supported by molecular phylogenetic research , which to date has been inconclusive regarding this shark 's evolutionary relationship to other Carcharhinus species . 
 Genetic analysis of pigeye sharks across northern Australia suggest that the evolutionary history of this species was affected by coastline changes during the Pleistocene epoch ( 2 @.@ 6 million to 12 @,@ 000 years ago ) . The patterns of diversity found in its mitochondrial DNA are consistent with the repeated splitting and merging of its populations as geographical barriers were alternately formed and inundated . The most recent of these barriers was a land bridge across the Torres Strait that reopened only some 6 @,@ 000 years ago ; as a result , significant genetic separation exists between the sharks found off Western Australia and the Northern Territory and those found off Queensland . 
 = = Description = = 
 The pigeye shark is a very robust @-@ bodied species with a short , broad , and rounded snout . The small and circular eyes are equipped with nictitating membranes . The anterior rims of the nostrils bear medium @-@ sized flaps of skin . The mouth forms a wide arch and has barely noticeable furrows at the corners . There are 11 – 13 ( usually 12 ) upper and 10 – 12 ( usually 11 ) lower tooth rows on each side ; in addition , there are single rows of tiny teeth at the upper and lower symphyses ( jaw midpoints ) . The teeth are broad and triangular with serrated edges ; those in the lower jaw are slightly narrower , more upright , and more finely serrated than those in the upper . The five pairs of gill slits are of moderate length . 
 The first dorsal fin is large and triangular , with a pointed apex and a concave trailing margin ; it originates roughly over the posterior insertions of the pectoral fins . The second dorsal fin is less than a third as high as the first , and originates ahead of the anal fin . There is no midline ridge between the dorsal fins . The long pectoral fins are broad and slightly falcate ( sickle @-@ shaped ) , becoming narrow and pointed at the tips . The anal fin has a sharply notched trailing margin . The caudal peduncle has a deep notch on its upper surface at the caudal fin origin . The caudal fin is asymmetrical , with a well @-@ developed lower lobe and a longer upper lobe with a notch in the trailing margin near its tip . 
 The skin is covered by rather large dermal denticles , which become more tightly packed and overlapping with age ; each denticle bears three to five horizontal ridges and five posterior teeth . This species is grey above and white below , with a faint pale band on the flanks . The second dorsal fin and lower caudal fin lobe darken at the tips , particularly in juveniles . An albino individual was caught off Queensland in 1987 , which was the first known example of albinism in a requiem shark . An adult pigeye shark typically measures 1 @.@ 9 – 2 @.@ 5 m ( 6 @.@ 2 – 8 @.@ 2 ft ) long , while the largest individuals reach 2 @.@ 8 m ( 9 @.@ 2 ft ) long . 
 The pigeye shark can be most reliably distinguished from the bull shark by the number of precaudal ( before the caudal fin ) vertebrae ( 89 – 95 in C. amboinensis versus 101 – 123 in C. leucas ) . Externally , it has a greater size difference between its dorsal fins ( first @-@ to @-@ second height ratio > 3 @.@ 1 : 1 versus ≤ 3 @.@ 1 : 1 in C. leucas ) and the notch in its anal fin margin forms an acute angle ( versus a right angle in C. leucas ) . This species also usually has fewer tooth rows in the lower jaw ( 10 – 12 on each side versus 12 – 13 in C. leucas ) . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 Though widely distributed in the tropical and subtropical marine waters of Eurasia , Africa , and Oceania , the pigeye shark does not appear to be common anywhere . Existing records are patchy , and the full extent of its range may be obscured by confusion with the bull shark . In the eastern Atlantic , it is found off Cape Verde and Senegal , and from Nigeria to Namibia ; there is a single Mediterranean record from off <unk> , Italy . It occurs all along the continental periphery of the Indian Ocean , from eastern South Africa to the Arabian Peninsula ( including Madagascar , the Seychelles , and Mauritius ) , to Southeast Asia and northern Australia . Its range extends into the Pacific , northward to the Philippines and southern China , and eastward to New Guinea and some Micronesian islands . Tagging and genetic data indicate that pigeye sharks , particularly juveniles , are not strongly migratory and tend to remain in a local area . The longest recorded distance covered by an adult is 1 @,@ 080 km ( 670 mi ) . 
 The pigeye shark inhabits coastal waters down to a depth of 150 m ( 490 ft ) , favouring environments with fine sediment and murky water . It sometimes enters estuaries , but unlike the bull shark , it does not ascend rivers and avoids brackish water . The movements and habitat usage of juvenile pigeye sharks have been extensively studied in Cleveland Bay in northeastern Queensland . Young sharks live in the bay year @-@ round , staying mostly in the eastern side where the input from three rivers produces strong currents and high turbidity . Individual home ranges are relatively small , averaging 30 km2 ( 12 sq mi ) , and increase in size with age . The juveniles generally stay in water less than 40 m ( 130 ft ) deep , with the youngest sharks spending the most time in the shallowest parts of the bay . They swim into the intertidal zone with the rising tide and depart as the tide recedes ; this movement may relate to exploiting foraging opportunities on the submerged mud flats , or to avoiding predation or competition by staying out of the deeper waters occupied by larger sharks . There is also an annual movement cycle where the juveniles move closer to the river mouths during the dry season and farther from them during the wet season ; since the rainy season brings a higher flow of fresh water into the bay , the sharks may be responding directly or indirectly to the resultant decrease in salinity and dissolved oxygen levels . 
 = = Biology and ecology = = 
 The pigeye shark is a largely solitary animal , though occasionally several individuals may be found at the same location . In the Mozambique Channel , it outnumbers the bull shark on the east side while the opposite is true on the west side , suggesting there may be competitive exclusion between these similar species . Parasites documented from the pigeye shark include the myxosporean Kudoa carcharhini , the copepods Pandarus smithii and P. cranchii , and the tapeworms Callitetrarhynchus gracilis , <unk> sp . , Floriceps <unk> , Heteronybelinia australis , Otobothrium <unk> , O. <unk> , and <unk> sp . Young pigeye sharks are potentially vulnerable to predation by larger sharks . The natural mortality for juveniles in Cleveland Bay has been measured at no more than 5 % per year ; this rate is comparable to that in juvenile bull sharks , and is much lower than in juvenile blacktip sharks ( C. limbatus ) or lemon sharks ( Negaprion brevirostris ) . 
 = = = Feeding = = = 
 Though the pigeye shark will take prey from anywhere in the water column , it tends to hunt close to the sea floor . An apex predator , it feeds mainly on teleost fishes such as croakers , flatfishes , and <unk> , and to a lesser extent on cartilaginous fishes , cephalopods , and decapod crustaceans . It has also been recorded eating gastropods , sea snakes , dolphins , and whale carrion . Other sharks and rays figure much more prominently in the diets of South African pigeye sharks than those from other regions ; the types consumed include requiem sharks , catsharks , angel sharks , guitarfishes , stingrays , and eagle rays . 
 = = = Life history = = = 
 The pigeye shark is viviparous ; like in other requiem sharks , after the developing embryo depletes its supply of yolk , it is sustained to term by its mother through a placental connection formed from the empty yolk sac . Mature females have a single functional ovary and two functional uteruses . Reproductive details vary among regions : off South Africa , the gestation period lasts about 12 months , with mating and birthing both occurring in late summer . The litters range from three to seven pups ( average five ) and the newborns are around 75 – 79 cm ( 30 – 31 in ) long . Off northern Australia , the gestation period lasts 9 months , with birthing taking place in November and December . The litters range from six to 13 pups ( average 9 ) and the newborns are around 59 – 66 cm ( 23 – 26 in ) long . 
 Young sharks can be found in shallow inshore environments such as bays until at least three years of age , suggesting this species uses these sheltered habitats as nurseries . As the sharks grow older , they venture farther from land into deeper water , more and more often , until they eventually disperse . This is a long @-@ lived , slow @-@ growing species ; males grow faster and reach a smaller ultimate size than females . Sexual maturity is attained at around 2 @.@ 1 m ( 6 @.@ 9 ft ) long and 12 years of age for males , and 2 @.@ 2 m ( 7 @.@ 2 ft ) long and 13 years of age for females . The maximum lifespan is at least 26 years for males and 30 years for females . 
 = = Human interactions = = 
 Large and formidably toothed , the pigeye shark is regarded as potentially dangerous to humans , though it has not been implicated in any attacks . This species is caught infrequently on longlines and in gillnets , and is used for meat and fins . As a predator , though , the shark can accumulate ciguatera toxins produced by dinoflagellates within its tissues . In November 1993 , some 500 people in Manakara , Madagascar , were poisoned , 98 of them fatally , after eating meat from a pigeye shark . This was the first recorded mass ciguatera outbreak caused by a shark , as well as the first with a significant death toll . The IUCN has listed the pigeye shark overall as Data Deficient , while noting that its rarity may render it susceptible to overfishing . In KwaZulu @-@ Natal , South Africa , small numbers of pigeye sharks are caught in shark nets set up to protect beaches . The catch rate and the average size of sharks caught both decreased between 1978 and 1998 , leading to concerns that the local population may be depleted . Thus , the IUCN has given this species a regional assessment of Near Threatened in the southwestern Indian Ocean . 
 = Talking to the Moon ( song ) = 
 " Talking to the Moon " is the seventh track from American singer @-@ songwriter Bruno Mars ' debut studio album , Doo @-@ Wops & Hooligans ( 2010 ) . The song was first unveiled on Mars ' debut extended play , It 's Better If You Don 't Understand ( 2010 ) , as its last track . It was written by Bruno Mars , Philip Lawrence , Ari Levine , Albert Winkler , and Jeff Bhasker , while production was handled by The Smeezingtons in collaboration with Bhasker . " Talking to the Moon " remains a pop song with power ballad influences , and its lyrics are about a failed relationship , solitude , and sadness . Instrumentally , the track relies on drum percussion and piano . 
 The song received mixed to positive reviews from critics who praised its slow pace and lyrics ; however , it was criticized for its overwhelming production . The song was officially released as a single only in Brazil through Warner Music Brasil , following its appearance on the soundtrack of the Brazilian telenovela Insensato Coração ( Irrational Heart ) from 2011 . As a result , the track charted on the Brasil Hot 100 Airplay , and on the Billboard Brasil Hot Pop & Popular , where it spent several weeks at number one , respectively . The song was performed many times during Mars ' debut world tour , The Doo @-@ Wops & Hooligans Tour ( 2010 @-@ 2012 ) , as the fourteenth track on its set list . 
 = = Background and production = = 
 " Talking to the Moon " was first recorded by Mars for his debut EP , It 's Better If You Don 't Understand , which was released on May 11 , 2010 under Elektra Records . When asked about the lyrical content of the record , Mars stated that " [ he ] just [ writes ] songs that [ he ] strongly believe in and that are coming from inside . There 's no tricks . It 's honesty with big melodies . And [ he is ] singing the s * * * out of them . " During an interview , Mars explained that after writing and producing songs for other artists , he thought that he could write a song for himself . He started writing the lyrics of " Talking To The Moon " while playing the piano . The track was included five months later on his debut studio album , Doo @-@ Wops & Hooligans , released on October 4 , 2010 under the Elektra and Atlantic labels . Mars also recorded an acoustic piano version included on the deluxe edition of the album . Ari Levine of The Smeezingtons stated that " Talking To The Moon " was one of his favorite songs on the album and described how the song was conceived in an interview for Sound on Sound : 
 " Talking to the Moon " was written by Albert Winkler , Jeff Bhasker , Bruno Mars , Philip Lawrence , and Ari Levine , and produced by Mars , Lawrence , and Levine , while Bhasker co @-@ produced the song . Levine and Mars played all the instruments on the track and recorded them ; Levine was as well responsible for engineering the song at Levcon Studios in California . The mixing of the track was done at Larrabee Sound Studios in North Hollywood by Manny Marroquin , with Christian Plata and Erik Madrid serving as assistants . Stephen Marcussen mastered the song at Marcussen Mastering in California . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Talking to the Moon " remains a pop and power ballad that lasts for 3 minutes and 7 seconds , with a stripped @-@ down production , and instrumentation consisting primarily of drums and piano , along with several synthesizers . According to the digital sheet music published by Sony / ATV Music Publishing , the song was written in the key of C # minor and was set in a four @-@ four time signature with a ballad tempo of 73 beats per minute . Mars ' vocal range spans from G ♯ 3 to C ♯ 5 , and the song follows the chord progression E @-@ G ♯ 7 @-@ C ♯ m @-@ B @-@ A. His vocals on the hook of the record have been described as unusual for a pop song . The initial 30 seconds of the track give away its opening using a soft piano . 
 The song 's lyrics describe feelings of loneliness , loss , and hope in the chorus : " Talking to the moon / Try to get to you / In hopes you 're on the other side / Talking to me , too " . As the song continues , it shows the singer 's vulnerable side with soft , sincere lyrics about a lost love that has now gone , according to Alex Young of Consequence of Sound . A similar opinion was shared by Dan Pardalis of <unk> , noticing that Mars hopes " his message will somehow make its way to a lost former lover " . Sherri Thornhill of Yahoo ! , believed the lyrics reveal the singer 's hope that " his former flame is talking to the moon just as he is . " 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 The song received mixed to positive reviews from music critics on the release of the album . Alex Young of Consequence of Sound gave the song a positive review writing that the song " may be the best of this collection [ album ] " , adding that " this track is primed for radio ; a soft , sincere piano @-@ driven song about a lost love that has now gone [ ... ] belts the vulnerable Mars . " Yahoo ! ' s music critic , Sherri Thornhill , praised the song , calling it a " beauty " and " relatable " , since the lyrics show the " heartbroken lover [ ' s ] " wish that his former lover is doing the same as he is - talking to the moon . The Seattle Post @-@ Intelligencer 's reviewer , Tyrone S. Reid , considered the song " beautifully written , waxing poetic about love and longing – a forte that the singer employs with great results in his work . " In a similar review , Leah Greenblatt of Entertainment Weekly felt that the debut studio album " aptly applies Mars ’ studio talents ... in his own <unk> way " , calling " Talking to the Moon " " <unk> " , adding that " a malt @-@ shop heart beats beneath [ its ] digital skin " . Emily Yang of The Signal stated that Mars " focuses on the slow pace of the drums and piano to convey his sorrow . He sings of loneliness which is almost palpable in the chorus . " Harris Decker of The Truth About Music , while reviewing his EP It 's Better If You Do 't Understand , called the song opening " spectacular " , while stating that it " just gets better from there " . The review concluded that , " with an over the top production , the chorus features a great hook and perfect balance " . Bill Lamb of About.com confessed about the recording that it " is possibly the weakest track simply because the heavy production threatens to overwhelm the centerpiece of Bruno Mars ' singing because it is a big power jazz ballad that would work well from the stage . " In the same vein , Mike Diver of BBC Music considered the song " a ballad devoid of detectable emotion " . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 Following the track 's inclusion on the soundtrack of Insensato Coração , which generated most of the song 's success and resulted its extensive airplay on Brazilian radio stations , Warner Music Brasil decided to release it as an official single there . After its release , " Talking to the Moon " charted on two Brazilian charts – Billboard Brasil Hot Pop & Popular and the Brasil Hot 100 Airplay with it reaching the top position in both cases . The song spent nine weeks at number one on both charts . It became the fourth song with the most weeks spent at the top of Billboard Brasil Hot Pop & Popular and on Brasil Hot 100 Airplay it ranked seventh with the most weeks at number one as of 2012 . 
 = = Usage in media = = 
 The song was used on the soundtrack of Brazilian telenovela Insensato Coração . It was also used in the movie , A Turtle 's Tale : Sammy 's Adventures , with it being as well included on the movie soundtrack as a bonus song . An acoustic piano version of " Talking to the Moon " was included on the charity compilation album , Songs for Japan , released on March 25 , 2011 . " Talking to the Moon " was featured in the movie Think Like A Man , released in 2012 , where the song was attributed to Mars in the final credits . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Recording 
 Mixed at Larrabee Sound Studios , Hollywood , California . 
 Mastered at Marcussen Mastering , Hollywood , California 
 Engineered at Levcon Studios , Hollywood , California . 
 Personnel 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of Doo @-@ Wops & Hooligans . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Rova of Antananarivo = 
 The Rova of Antananarivo / <unk> / ( Malagasy : <unk> 'i Manjakamiadana [ <unk> <unk> ̥ nə ] ) is a royal palace complex ( rova ) in Madagascar that served as the home of the sovereigns of the Kingdom of Imerina in the 17th and 18th centuries , as well as of the rulers of the Kingdom of Madagascar in the 19th century . Its counterpart is the nearby fortified village of Ambohimanga , which served as the spiritual seat of the kingdom in contrast to the political significance of the Rova in the capital . Located in the central highland city of Antananarivo , the Rova occupies the highest point on Analamanga , formerly the highest of Antananarivo 's many hills . Merina king Andrianjaka , who ruled Imerina from around 1610 until 1630 , is believed to have captured Analamanga from a Vazimba king around 1610 or 1625 and erected the site 's first fortified royal structure . Successive Merina kings continued to rule from the site until the fall of the monarchy in 1896 , frequently restoring , modifying or adding royal structures within the compound to suit their needs . 
 Over time , the number of buildings within the site varied . Andrianjaka founded the Rova with three buildings and a dedicated tomb site in the early 17th century . The number of structures rose to approximately twenty during the late 18th @-@ century reign of King Andrianampoinimerina . By the late 20th century , the Rova 's structures had been reduced to eleven , representing various architectural styles and historical periods . The largest and most prominent of these was Manjakamiadana , also known as the " Queen 's Palace " after Queen Ranavalona I , for whom the original wooden palace was built between 1839 – 1841 by Frenchman Jean Laborde . In 1867 the palace was encased in stone for Queen Ranavalona II by Scotsman James Cameron , an artisan missionary of the London Missionary Society . The neighbouring Tranovola , a smaller wooden palace constructed in 1819 by Creole trader Louis Gros for King Radama I , was the first multi @-@ storey building with verandas in the Rova . The model offered by Tranovola transformed architecture throughout the highlands over the course of the 19th century , inspiring a widespread shift toward two @-@ storey houses with verandas . The Rova grounds also contained a cross @-@ shaped wooden house ( Manampisoa ) built as the private residence of Queen Rasoherina , a stone Protestant chapel ( Fiangonana ) , nine royal tombs , and a number of named wooden houses built in the traditional style reserved for the andriana ( nobles ) in Imerina . Among the most significant of these were Besakana , erected in the early 17th century by Andrianjaka and considered the throne of the kingdom , and Mahitsielafanjaka , a later building which came to represent the seat of ancestral spiritual authority at the Rova . 
 A fire on the night of 6 November 1995 destroyed or damaged all the structures within the Rova complex shortly before it was due to be inscribed on the list of UNESCO World Heritage Sites . Although officially declared an accident , rumours persist that politically motivated arson may have been the actual cause of the fire . The chapel and tombs , as well as Besakana and Mahitsielafanjaka , have since been fully restored with bilateral government donations , state funds and grants from intergovernmental and private donors . Completion of the reconstruction of the Manjakamiadana exterior is estimated for 2012 , while interior restoration work will continue until at least 2013 . Once the building is fully restored , Manjakamiadana will serve as a museum showcasing royal artefacts saved from destruction in the fire . 
 = = Background = = 
 Madagascar 's central highlands were first inhabited between 200 BCE – 300 CE by the island 's earliest settlers , the Vazimba , who appear to have arrived by pirogue from southeastern Borneo and established simple villages in the island 's dense forests . By the 15th century the Merina ethnic group from the southeastern coast had gradually migrated into the central highlands where they established hilltop villages interspersed among existing Vazimba settlements ruled by local kings . In the mid @-@ 16th century these royal Merina villages ( <unk> ) — now fortified with stone walls , gateways and deep defensive trenches — were united under the rule of King Andriamanelo ( 1540 – 1575 ) , who initiated the first military campaigns to expel or assimilate the Vazimba population by force . Villages inhabited by the andriana ( noble ) class established by Andriamanelo typically contained a rova or palace compound . 
