 Barney Gumble , after being humiliated while working as a mascot for a baby supply store , asks how he can be a success as well . Homer advises him go out and be the best Barney he can be . The next day it is revealed that Barney has purchased an even bigger plow , and has started a rival company under the title of " Plow King " . Barney creates his own commercial , with Linda Ronstadt involved in singing the jingle , which defames and slanders Homer . Homer pays an agency to make him a new commercial , which turns out to be completely nonsensical . Homer loses his success to Barney , and Mayor Quimby retrieves the key to the city from Homer and gives it to Barney . 
 To get revenge and regain his customers , Homer tricks Barney into plowing a driveway on Widow 's Peak , a large treacherous mountain outside of town . Homer begins to plow driveways again , but sees a news report showing that Barney has been trapped in an avalanche . Homer immediately drives to the mountain and rescues Barney . The friends resolve their differences and agree to work together in the plow business , claiming that " When two best friends work together not even God himself can stop them ! " . Angered , God sarcastically says " Oh , no ? " and promptly retaliates by causing a heat wave , melting all the snow and effectively putting them both out of business . Since Homer can no longer make the snow plow payments his plow is soon repossessed , and things return to normal . However , Homer retains the Mr. Plow jacket as a memento of his job , and Marge asks him to wear it to bed . 
 = = Production = = 
 When the episode was being written , many writers ' contracts had just expired , so there was a small number of writers at the annual story retreat . Al Jean was very nervous about how they could write a whole new season with such a small crew . In addition , there were several scenes added after the animatic , making the schedule even tighter . However , Jon Vitti was very committed to this episode and pitched almost the entire plot by himself . Vitti 's inspiration for the episode was when he noticed that very few TV shows portray snow outside of Thanksgiving or Christmas , so he wanted to do an episode with snow involved . From this idea he developed the " friends in competition with each other " plot , which led to Homer getting the plow from a car show . 
 From this came Vitti 's plan ; have Adam West be at the car show , so then they could hire him for the voice acting and Vitti could finally meet him . The other writers agreed because they were all big fans of Batman when they were children and also wanted to meet Adam West . Matt Groening said that West was one of the most popular people to ever come to the studio . Linda Ronstadt was recorded in San Francisco . Jon Vitti was tasked with recording Ronstadt and he enjoyed it immensely . He remarked the most beautiful thing he has ever heard is Ronstadt singing the Spanish Plow King jingle . 
 Two more script changes that put extra pressure on the episode were a post @-@ animatic rewrite and a complete character change . In the original script for the episode , Lenny was going to be Homer 's rival as the Plow King . The idea was quickly dropped because it did not seem to fit in . The post @-@ animatic rewrite was to include the joke in which Homer uses the radio dial to tip the precariously balanced plow back onto the road . This joke was created by Conan O 'Brien , and the writers liked it so much that they included it in the episode . 
 The Simpsons team encountered trouble with the network censors in the scene where Homer answers the phone and pretends to be Tony Dow from Leave it to Beaver . After a brief pause Homer replies to an inquiry by the person on the phone with " Yeah , they were gay . " The censors refused to allow the line to be aired fearing legal recourse for libel . The Simpsons crew protested , arguing that no one in particular was being implied , and that the " they " could be anybody . After numerous phone calls and arguments , the censors allowed the joke to air . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 This episode contains several references that Al Jean referred to as " very obscure " . Examples of this include the scene where Homer drives through the treacherous mountain roads , a parody of a scene in Sorcerer , and the scene in which Kent Brockman reports Barney 's accident , in which his attire ( including glasses ) , camera angles and facial expressions are in reference to the manner of Walter Cronkite 's reporting of the Kennedy shooting . 
 The revamped " Mr. Plow commercial " is a parody of a similar perfume commercial that aired at the time of the episode 's production . The fast moving clouds were taken from Koyaanisqatsi , a documentary film . The music that was used in the commercial was from " Casta Diva " from Vincenzo Bellini 's Norma because the Simpsons crew would not have to pay for it . At the time the episode was made , Russia did not abide by American copyright laws . In return , America did not respect Russia 's copyright laws . Homer 's original jingle , " Call Mr. Plow , that 's my name , that name again is Mr. Plow ! " , is based on a radio jingle for the Roto @-@ Rooter , which had a similar tune , " Call Roto @-@ Rooter , that 's the name , and away go troubles down the drain . " 
 Other references include the Carnival of the Stars television show seen at the start of the episode . This is a parody of Circus of the Stars , an annual special that aired on CBS from 1976 – 1994 , featuring celebrities performing circus acts . The scene where Barney gradually degrades into a drunk is a parody of the transformation sequence in the 1941 film Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde . The scene where Bart is pelted with snowballs is a reference to the Sonny Corleone tollbooth shooting scene in the film The Godfather . The snowmen melting during the heatwave is a reference to the melting Nazi soldiers in the film Raiders of the Lost Ark . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original broadcast , " Mr. Plow " finished 23rd in ratings for the week of November 16 – 22 , 1992 , with a Nielsen rating of 14 @.@ 6 , equivalent to approximately 13 @.@ 6 million viewing households . It was the highest @-@ rated show on the Fox network that week , beating Married ... with Children . 
 In 2003 , the episode was placed sixth on Entertainment Weekly 's top 25 The Simpsons episode list . In June 2009 , Robert Canning of IGN gave the episode a score of 9 @.@ 8 out of 10 and said it was " a fantastic episode that told an engaging story and was laugh @-@ out @-@ loud funny from start to finish . [ ... ] There was a fun , engaging story , great guest stars poking fun at themselves , flashbacks , songs , cutaways and opportunities to highlight characters outside the series ' namesake family . " 
 In January 2010 , Michael Moran of The Times ranked the episode as the second best in the show 's history . Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood , the authors of the book I Can 't Believe It 's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide , enjoyed the episode . They said that it is : " A good one . The highlights ; the TV show Carnival of Stars , featuring Angela Lansbury walking on hot coals ( ' Excitement , she wrote ! ' ) , Homer 's flashback to all he 's done for Barney , and best of all , the McMahon & Tate ad agency 's arty commercial for Mr. Plow . " In June 2012 , Nathan Rabin of The A.V. Club stated that the episode " isn ’ t just spectacularly funny and filled with classic bits : it also foretells the future . Not bad for an animated cartoon from the 1990s . " 
 When asked to pick his favourite season out of The Simpsons seasons one through twenty , Paul Lane of the Niagara Gazette picked season four and highlighted " Brother from the Same Planet " and " Mr. Plow " which he called " excellent " , along with " the sweetly funny " " Lisa 's First Word " , and " Homer the Heretic " . The episode 's reference to The Godfather was named the 37th greatest film reference in the history of the show by Total Film 's Nathan Ditum . Ditum also ranked West 's performance as the seventh best guest appearance in the show 's history . 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 In 1993 , Dan Castellaneta won an Emmy Award for " Outstanding Voice @-@ Over Performance " for his performance as Homer in this episode . It was his second Emmy , as he had also won in the same category the previous year . In 1993 , " Mr. Plow " and " A Streetcar Named Marge " were submitted for the Primetime Emmy Award for " Outstanding Comedy Series " . The Simpsons ' staff had previously submitted episodes for " Outstanding Animated Program " , winning twice , but that season they took a chance with the main comedy category . However , the Emmy voters were hesitant to pit cartoons against live action programs , and The Simpsons did not receive a nomination . The Simpsons ' crew submitted episodes for Outstanding Comedy Series the next season , but again these were not nominated . Since then , the show has submitted episodes in the animation category and has won eight times . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 On December 17 , 2015 , Google and YouTube modernized the episode and its " Mr. Plow " jingle for use in a commercial in which Lisa uses the website on her computer to place Homer 's ad onto its YouTube campaign . 
 = HMS Canopus ( 1798 ) = 
 HMS Canopus was an 84 @-@ gun third rate ship of the line of the British Royal Navy . She had previously served with the French Navy as the Tonnant @-@ class Franklin , but was captured after less than a year in service by the British fleet under Rear Admiral Horatio Nelson at the Battle of the Nile in 1798 . Having served for less than six months for the French from her completion in March 1798 to her capture in August that year , she would eventually serve for 89 years for the British . 
 Her career began as the flagship of Rear @-@ Admiral Armand Blanquet du Chayla , second in command at the Battle of the Nile , where she distinguished herself with her fierce resistance before being forced to surrender with over half her crew dead or wounded , and most of her guns disabled . Taken into British service she was refitted and served as the flagship of several admirals . Commanded by Francis Austen Canopus was Rear @-@ Admiral Thomas Louis 's flagship in the Mediterranean under Nelson , and narrowly missed the fighting at Trafalgar . She saw action with Duckworth 's fleet at the Battle of San Domingo , and remained with him during the attempt to force the Dardanelles , and the operations in support of the Alexandria expedition in 1807 . She remained active against the French in the Mediterranean for the rest of the Napoleonic Wars , helping to drive ashore two large French ships of the line in a notable incident in 1809 . Canopus remained in service after the end of the wars , serving as a flagship into the mid @-@ nineteenth century , but as sail gave way to steam , she was relegated to support duties in Devonport , becoming a receiving ship , tender and a mooring hulk . She was eventually sold for breaking up in 1887 , after nearly ninety years in British service . 
 = = Construction and French career = = 
 Franklin was built to a design by Jacques @-@ Noël Sané at the Toulon shipyard between November 1794 and March 1798 , having been launched on 25 June 1797 . She was named after the American scientist and politician Benjamin Franklin . Commanded by Captain Maurice Gillet and flying the flag of Rear @-@ Admiral Armand Blanquet du Chayla , Franklin was one of the ships that accompanied Vice Admiral François @-@ Paul Brueys 's fleet , carrying Napoleon Bonaparte and the French troops to invade <unk> was anchored with Brueys 's fleet in Aboukir Bay on 1 August , when they were discovered in the evening by a British fleet under Rear @-@ Admiral Horatio Nelson . Nelson ordered his fleet to attack immediately , with the British forces moving on the French van , doubling their line . Brueys was taken by surprise , having expected the British to attack his rear and centre , where he had consequently placed his heaviest ships , including the Franklin . Franklin did not therefore enter the engagement until later that evening , as the French van surrendered and the British ships moved down the line to engage the remaining ships . 
 = = = Franklin 's fight = = = 
 Franklin , positioned just ahead of Brueys 's flagship , the 120 @-@ gun Orient , and astern of the 74 @-@ gun Peuple Souverain , came under fire from HMS Orion , HMS Majestic and HMS Defence . The British ships and the French centre exchanged a heavy fire , with the British being joined by the newly arrived HMS Swiftsure , HMS Alexander and HMS Leander . As Du Chayla later recalled ' The action in this part then became extremely warm . ' The two sides were intensely engaged for the next hour , during which the Peuple Souverain was forced out of the line , and the Orient caught fire . As the fire on Orient raged out of control , the nearby French and British ships scrambled to escape the anticipated explosion . Orient 's magazine blew up at 9 : 37 p.m. , obliterating her and sending burning debris raining down on the nearby ships . Large amounts fell upon the Franklin , starting fires which caused the arms locker to explode and set fire to the poop and quarterdeck . 
 For a while it seemed that Franklin would also be burnt , but her crew were able to put out the fires . With Brueys killed aboard Orient , Du Chayla now became commander . Both he and Captain Gillet had been seriously wounded and taken below , but he continued to order the attack . The brief quiet that had resulted from the explosion of the Orient was broken by Franklin 's guns , and the battle resumed . She fought for another hour , but by then she had lost her main and mizzenmasts , nearly all of her cannons had been knocked out , and over half her crew were dead or wounded . She finally struck her colours . 
 = = British service = = 
 = = = Mediterranean and San Domingo = = = 
 The Franklin was one of nine ships captured by the British at the Nile , and she was taken into service with the Royal Navy , being registered under the name HMS Canopus on 9 December 1798 . She was sent back to Britain under the command of Captain Bartholomew James , and arrived at Plymouth on 17 July 1799 . She briefly became the flagship of Admiral Philip Affleck for service off Lisbon , but was paid off into ordinary in August that year . She began a refit at Plymouth in August 1801 , but the work was suspended incomplete in November that year , and was only completed in January 1803 . She recommissioned in April that year under the command of Captain John Conn , and became the flagship of Rear @-@ Admiral George Campbell . 
 Canopus was sent in August 1803 to join the Mediterranean Fleet , based off Toulon under Nelson . Conn was succeeded in February 1805 by Captain Francis Austen , and Canopus became the flagship of Rear @-@ Admiral Thomas Louis . Canopus narrowly missed being present at the Battle of Trafalgar , having been sent to Gibraltar with Louis 's squadron to resupply . She returned to Britain in mid @-@ 1806 , where she was taken in hand at Plymouth for repairs , which were completed in August at a cost of £ 31 @,@ 804 . In January 1806 she joined Vice @-@ Admiral Sir John Thomas Duckworth 's squadron in the pursuit of Corentin Urbain Leissègues , and took part in the Battle of San Domingo on 6 February , engaging the 74 @-@ gun Diomède among other ships . Canopus sustained casualties of eight dead and 22 wounded . Thomas Shortland became captain of Canopus in July 1806 , and sailed to the Mediterranean with Duckworth 's squadron , still flying Louis 's flag . She took part in the attempt to force the Dardanelles on 19 January , and in subsequent operations in support of the Alexandria expedition , during which nine Turkish vessels were captured or destroyed . 
 Shortland was succeeded by Captain Charles Inglis in 1808 , and became the flagship of Rear @-@ Admiral George Martin . Canopus was attached to the Mediterranean Fleet under Admiral Cuthbert Collingwood and in October 1809 was part of the fleet that gave chase to a French convoy and their escorts under Rear @-@ Admiral François Baudin in the Gulf of Lyons . The French were chased into the mouth of the Rhone , where the 80 @-@ gun <unk> and the 74 @-@ gun Lion were driven aground , and after attempts to salvage them had failed , the French were forced to burn them . Canopus became the flagship of Rear @-@ Admiral Charles Boyles between 1811 and 1812 , after which she was paid off into ordinary again . 
 = = = Postwar = = = 
 A large repair was carried out at Plymouth Dock ( i.e. Devonport ) for the sum of £ 78 @,@ 909 between March 1814 and March 1816 , but with the end of the Napoleonic Wars she was laid up for a number of years . Canopus was fitted for sea at Devonport in May 1834 , and underwent further repairs between December 1839 and May 1842 . She was prepared for sea again in early 1845 , spending time under the command of Fairfax Moresby , before being laid up at Devonport in 1848 . She was fitted out there as a receiving ship between June and October 1862 , and served as a tender to HMS Indus , the Devonport guardship . Canopus became a mooring hulk in 1869 , with her masts being removed in April 1878 . She was finally sold after 89 years service with the Royal Navy in October 1887 to J. Pethick , and was broken up . 
 = Hands Across Hawthorne = 
 Hands Across Hawthorne was a rally held at the Hawthorne Bridge in Portland , Oregon , on May 29 , 2011 , in response to an attack on a gay couple one week prior for holding hands while walking across the bridge . According to the couple and the Portland Police Bureau , a group of five men followed Brad Forkner and Christopher Rosevear along the bridge before they were attacked . The assault was condemned by Portland 's openly gay mayor , Sam Adams , and its police chief , Mike Reese , and news of the attack spread throughout the Pacific Northwest and the United States . The attack prompted volunteers from the Q Center , a nonprofit organization that supports the LGBT community , to form street patrols as a means of monitoring Portland 's downtown area . 
 Several LGBT and human rights organizations sponsored Hands Across Hawthorne in response to the attack . With the purpose of linking hands across the entire span of the Hawthorne Bridge , more than 4 @,@ 000 people attended the rally , even though it was only publicized by a single Facebook page just 72 hours prior . Forkner , Rosevear , Mayor Adams , and other community leaders spoke at the rally . The event received attention throughout the United States , and Instinct magazine acknowledged Portland 's ability to gather a crowd of 4 @,@ 000 in support of the LGBT community despite rainy weather . On June 5 , residents of Spokane , Washington , held a similar hand @-@ holding rally called " Hands Across Monroe " , crossing the Monroe Street Bridge in Riverfront Park . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Hate crimes in Portland = = = 
 Police bureau statistics show a decrease in the number of " bias crime assaults " from 26 in 2007 to 15 in 2009 . In 2010 , however , 20 ( of more than 50 ) hate crimes relating to gender or sexual orientation occurred in Portland , far outweighing racial hate crimes . In May , a group of men in drag were harassed and assaulted by a group of five men . The filing of a police report resulted in a community forum at Portland 's Q Center ( a nonprofit organization supporting the LGBT community ) , which was attended by more than 100 city residents , Portland Police Chief Mike Reese , Mayor Sam Adams , and Deputy District Attorney Rod Underhill . The attacks led to the formation of the Queer Patrol ( or Q Patrols ) in July 2010 , which consisted of foot patrols specifically designed to protect the LGBT community in downtown Portland . Sarah <unk> of The Portland Mercury attributed the rise in the number of crimes related to gender or sexual identity in 2010 to an increased number of filed police reports , due in part to the Q Patrols . Not all hate crimes were prevented for the remainder of the year , however ; in November 2010 , a man perceived to be gay was severely beaten and left unconscious while walking home in southeast Portland . According to Portland Police , eight bias crimes were reported between January 1 and April 30 , 2011 , half the number reported during the same period in 2010 . 
 = = = Assault = = = 
 Brad Forkner and Christopher Rosevear ( aged 23 and 24 , respectively ) were attacked on the Eastbank Esplanade on May 22 , 2011 , after holding hands while walking across the Hawthorne Bridge in Portland , Oregon . Details of the attack were released by Portland Police on May 24 . Forkner and Rosevear said a group of five men followed them from Tom McCall Waterfront Park across the bridge then beat them as they came down a ramp along the Esplanade . According to the description released by Portland Police , " as [ the couple ] walked they knew several men were behind them talking , laughing and pointing but they were not sure it was directed at them . " Three of the five men attacked the couple from behind . Forkner was pushed into a railing and punched multiple times before breaking away to call 9 @-@ 1 @-@ 1 . The attackers reportedly stopped hitting Rosevear on the head , face , back and ribs once Forkner was able to call police . Forkner later recalled that he did not hear clearly homophobic remarks , but believed the attackers may have been yelling in a foreign language . He had swelling on his face , but Rosevear required stitches in his lip . The victims claimed several witnesses were nearby , but did not offer help in any form . Police immediately began investing the case as a " bias crime " , noting the couple 's lack of provocation . The five men who attacked Forkner and Rosevear have not been arrested . 
 The attack was reported by newspapers in the Pacific Northwest and by gay @-@ oriented media outlets nationwide . Sam Adams , Portland 's openly gay mayor , and Police Chief Mike Reese both spoke out against the attack . According to Reese , " Portland is an open and welcoming city where everyone should feel safe . " Adams expressed similar sentiments : " We seek to be the city of the most equal opportunity , and we can only be that city if all people are safe and have a sense of safety on our streets and in our parks . " Cascade AIDS Project , where Forkner was the Pivot Center Coordinator at the time , launched a Facebook campaign following the attack called " Holding Hands , In Solidarity " , encouraging people to post pictures of hand @-@ holding . The Q Center also condemned the attack . The assault once again prompted Q Center volunteers to form Q Patrols as a means of monitoring the streets and reporting hate crimes to police . Initial plans were to have Q Patrols available between 11 pm and 3 am until the weekend of Halloween . 
 = = Rally = = 
 Sponsored by Basic Rights Oregon ( BRO ) , Cascade AIDS Project , Pride Northwest , the Q Center , and local churches , the rally was publicized by a single Facebook page just 72 hours prior . This campaign , created separately from Cascade AIDS Project 's hand @-@ holding photo gallery , was specifically to promote the rally . Stephen Cassell , event organizer and Q Center board member , reportedly " thought of the action plan in the middle of the night and quickly posted the idea on Facebook . " The organization Progressive Oregon , which advocates for progressivism within that state , also advertised the event . The purpose of the event , which began at 7 : 30 pm , was to link hands spanning the length of the bridge . 
 More than 4 @,@ 000 people attended the event . Members of the Community of Welcoming Congregations , a coalition of more than 100 congregations in Oregon that welcome members of the gay community , and the Portland chapter of the Human Rights Campaign , also attended the rally . As demonstrators gathered at the west side of the bridge , the rally began with speeches by Forkner and Rosevear . Forkner described the attack and said the following of discrimination : 
 This is not the first time I have feared for my safety or my life and , sadly , I don 't expect it to be the last . What I want to talk about is a much larger cultural issue we have with making different people feel like they 're worth less than normal people , as if there is such a thing as " normal " . In this instance , it was because we are gay ... Thousands of people walk the streets of America and yes , even Portland , feeling like they are less than human , that their life is not as valued by society as their other , supposedly more " normal " , peers . The effects of this internalized hatred are endless . They contribute to gang violence , to depression , to self @-@ medicating via alcohol and drug abuse , to sexuality that people feel must be kept secret , explored in dark alleys and bathhouses rather than openly and safely . How can we talk about keeping ourselves safe , about being healthy , about being loved , if we are doing so in secret , if we are hurting in silence ? 
 Following Forkner 's speech , Basic Rights Oregon executive director <unk> <unk> thanked the couple , spoke of the symbolism of the hand @-@ holding rally , and encouraged supporters to volunteer for the Q Patrol . During the rally the crowd sang The Beatles ' " I Want to Hold Your Hand " . 
 According to Cassell , Hands Across Hawthorne marked one of the first instances where Portland 's major LGBT rights organizations worked together on an event other than the Portland Pride Festival . Details of the rally were reported by various gay @-@ oriented national publications . Instinct magazine noted Portland 's ability to gather a crowd of 4 @,@ 000 in support of the LGBT community despite dreary weather . The Huffington Post contributor Chuck Currie , a church minister from Portland , used the attack and rally to question the impact of conservative evangelical religion and other anti @-@ gay rights organizations . Progressive Oregon and Just Out ( an LGBT newspaper in Portland ) noted the failure of the city 's largest newspaper , The Oregonian , to cover the rally ; the former sent a letter and petition to the paper 's publisher N. Christian Anderson III in response , requesting " fair and balanced " coverage . Peter Bhatia , editor for The Oregonian , responded to the criticism and petition signed by more than 1 @,@ 400 people , by saying the paper 's lack of coverage was a " mistake " caused by " human error " . 
 One week after the rally , Mayor Sam Adams and his staff linked hands in solidarity . On June 5 , residents of Spokane , Washington , held a similar hand @-@ holding rally in solidarity with the Portland community called " Hands Across Monroe " , crossing the Monroe Street Bridge in Riverfront Park . The event was sponsored by The LGBT Center . 
 = Conscience @-@ in @-@ Media Award = 
 The Conscience @-@ in @-@ Media Award is presented by the American Society of Journalists and Authors ( ASJA ) to journalists that the society deems worthy of recognition for their distinctive contributions . The award is not given out often , and is awarded to those journalists which the ASJA feels have demonstrated integrity to journalistic values , while enduring personal costs to themselves . Candidates are decided by an initial vote of the ASJA 's First Amendment Committee , which must then be confirmed by a separate vote of the ASJA 's Board of Directors . 
 The award has been presented a total of twelve times since the first award was given out in 1975 . Notable recipients have included Jonathan Kozol , for work researching homelessness while writing his book Rachel and Her Children , Richard Behar and Paulette Cooper , for separate pieces investigating the Church of Scientology , and Anna Rosmus , for her investigation into the Nazi history of her hometown in Passau , Germany . In 2005 , the committee voted to present the Award to Judith Miller , but this vote was later overturned by a unanimous decision of the board not to honor Miller with the award . 
 = = History = = 
 The award is given by the ASJA , to recognize " distinctive contributions by any journalist in any medium " . The first award was given to Jerald F. terHorst in 1975 , and in total the award has been presented twelve times . The award criteria are stringent . The American Society of Journalists and Authors maintains that those honored must have knowingly taken risks in the course of researching their story , going beyond the normal call of duty . Specifically , the award is given : " for singular commitment to the highest principles of journalism at notable personal cost " . 
 Jonathan Kozol was honored with the 1988 Award , for work done on his book Rachel and Her Children : Homeless Families in America . In order to research the plight of homeless people in New York City , Kozol spent the majority of a winter season at the Martinique Hotel in Manhattan , where he grew close with the residents of the government subsidized shelter . During his time spent learning about the experiences of the homeless , he most empathized with homeless mothers - who constantly fear that sickness , poverty or intervention from the state of New York will result in the loss of their children . Kozol attempted to analyze the causes of homelessness , and to provide an estimate of what the future would be for the homeless . 
 1992 was the only time in ASJA history in which two writers were honored in the same year . The <unk> had already decided to honor investigative journalist Richard Behar , for his Time magazine article about the Church of Scientology : " The Thriving Cult of Greed and Power " . Paulette Cooper , a longtime member of the ASJA , had also written about Scientology in her book The Scandal of Scientology , and was the subject of a " Fair Game " tactic that the Church of Scientology Guardian 's Office called " Operation Freakout " . As the award was not in existence at the time Cooper wrote her book , the ASJA decided that recognizing Cooper at the same time as Behar emphasized the commitment and courage both writers imbued in the face of risk to themselves . 
 Anna Rosmus received the 1994 award , in honor of work related to her research on the Nazi past of her hometown in Bavaria . Rosmus researched anti @-@ Semitism , and opposed neo @-@ Nazis and the extreme right in Germany . She also located and published artwork of Jews that had once lived in her hometown of Passau , Germany . As a result of her work , Rosmus endured threats against her life . In a 1996 Yom HaShoah ceremony , Rosmus recounted threats she faced after conducting her research : " Once @-@ friendly neighbors threatened me openly - on the telephone , in person , in letters ... They threatened to kill me and kidnap my children . Some even attacked me physically , a room where I was to speak in Munich was bombed just before I was to be there , and several times I was sued . Nobody ever claimed I had said anything false or made mistakes . They just claimed all this would damage their reputations . " Rosmus was profiled on 60 Minutes , and her story was the subject of the 1990 West German drama film , The Nasty Girl . Rosmus was presented with the Conscience @-@ in @-@ Media Award in a special ceremony at the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum . 
 In 2005 , the ASJA 's First Amendment Committee narrowly voted to present Judith Miller with the award , in recognition of her dedication to protecting sources . However , the full board of the ASJA later voted not to accept the decision of its committee , due to its opinion that her career as a whole and her actions in the Valerie Plame CIA leak case had cast doubt on her merits . ASJA president Jack El @-@ Hai stated that the ASJA board 's vote to reject the committee 's recommendation had been unanimous . This decision sparked controversy , and Jack El @-@ Hai received correspondence both praising the board for its decision , and accusing it of various political motives . 
 In 2015 three freelance journalists , James Foley , Steven <unk> , and Austin Tice were honored with the award , presented at the National Press Club . " These three men represent the highest values of journalism : courage , sacrifice and a firm commitment to the truth , " said Randy Dotinga , president of ASJA . " Their bravery and dedication are especially inspiring to us as fellow independent writers . " 
 = = Award recipients = = 
 2015 - James Foley , Steven <unk> , Austin Tice , freelance journalists killed or captured in the <unk> East 
 1994 - Anna Rosmus , real @-@ life heroine of the film The Nasty Girl . 
 1992 - Richard Behar , associate editor , TIME and author , " Scientology : The Cult of Greed " ( TIME , May 6 , 1991 ) . 
 1992 - Paulette Cooper , ASJA member and author , The Scandal of Scientology 
 1988 - Jonathan Kozol , author , Rachel and Her Children . 
 1981 - Jacobo <unk> , former Argentine editor @-@ publisher 
 1981 - Erwin Knoll , editor , The Progressive 
 1978 - Donald Woods , South African expatriate journalist 
 1977 - Investigative Reporters and Editors 
 1977 - Don Bolles ( posthumous award ) 
 1976 - I.F. Stone 
 1975 - Jerald F. terHorst 
 Additional source 
 = Adventure Time ( season 6 ) = 
 The sixth season of American animated television series Adventure Time , created by Pendleton Ward , began airing on Cartoon Network in the United States following the series ' fifth season . The series is based on a short produced for Frederator 's Nicktoons Network animation incubator series Random ! Cartoons . The season debuted on April 21 , 2014 and finished on June 5 , 2015 . The season follows the adventures of Finn , a human boy , and his best friend and adoptive brother Jake , a dog with magical powers which allow him to shapeshift at will . Finn and Jake live in the post @-@ apocalyptic Land of Ooo . Along the way , they interact with the other main characters of the show : Princess Bubblegum , The Ice King , and Marceline the Vampire Queen . 
 The season was storyboarded and written by Andy Ristaino , Cole Sanchez , Tom Herpich , Steve Wolfhard , Seo Kim , Somvilay Xayaphone , Graham Falk , Derek Ballard , Jesse Moynihan , Masaaki Yuasa , Adam Muto , Kent Osborne , Emily Partridge , Bert Youn , Madeleine Flores , Jillian Tamaki , Sam Alden , Sloane Leong , Brandon Graham , and David Ferguson . The season also featured Yuasa and Ferguson as guest animators for the episodes " Food Chain " and " Water Park Prank " , respectively . This season was the last to feature Sanchez and Ristaino as storyboard artists ; the former took a directing job on the mini @-@ series Long Live the Royals , and the latter became an Adventure Time background designer . 
 The season premiered with two episodes , " Wake Up " and " Escape from the Citadel " , which together were viewed by 3 @.@ 32 million viewers . This marked a significant increase in ratings from the previous season finale . The season concluded with the two @-@ part finale " Hot Diggity Doom " and " The Comet " , which was viewed by 1 @.@ 55 million viewers . The season was met with largely positive critical reception . The episode " Food Chain " was nominated for several Annie Awards , as well as an Annecy International Animated Film Festival Award . The episode " Jake the Brick " won a Primetime Emmy Award for Short @-@ format Animation at the 67th Primetime Emmy Awards , and Tom Herpich won an Emmy for his work on " Walnuts & Rain " . Furthermore , " The Diary " and " Walnuts and Rain " were nominated for Annie Awards , and the show itself won a Peabody Award . The season was produced by Cartoon Network Studios and Frederator Studios . In addition , several compilation DVDs that contain episodes from the season have been released . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Concept = = = 
 The season follows the adventures of Finn the Human , a human boy , and his best friend Jake , a dog with magical powers to change shape , grow , and shrink at will . Finn and Jake live in the post @-@ apocalyptic Land of Ooo . Along the way , they interact with the other main characters of the show : Princess Bubblegum , The Ice King , and Marceline the Vampire Queen . Common storylines revolve around Finn and Jake discovering strange creatures , dealing with the antagonistic but misunderstood Ice King , and battling monsters in order to help others . This season 's main story arc , however , deals with Finn discovering the true identity of his human father , and his subsequent attempts to reconnect with him . 
 = = = Production = = = 
 On January 28 , 2013 , during the middle of the show 's fifth season , Cartoon Network officially announced that the show had been renewed for a sixth season . In July 2013 , storyboard artist Jesse Moynihan revealed that production for the sixth season had begun . This season 's episodes were produced in a process similar to previous seasons ' episodes . First , all of the episodes began as simple two @-@ to @-@ three @-@ page outline that contained the necessary plot information . These outlines were then handed off to storyboard artists , who would then expand the rough outline into a full storyboard . The episodes ' design and coloring were done in Burbank , California . Animation was handled overseas in South Korea , either by Rough Draft Korea or by Saerom Animation . While almost all of the animation for the show is done through these studios , two episodes were written and animated entirely by guest animators . The first , " Food Chain " , was helmed by noted Japanese animator Masaaki Yuasa , and was entirely animated by Yuasa 's own studio . The second , " Water Park Prank " , was directed by David Ferguson . 
 The season was storyboarded and written by Andy Ristaino , Cole Sanchez , Tom Herpich , Steve Wolfhard , Seo Kim , Somvilay Xayaphone , Graham Falk , Derek Ballard , Moynihan , Yuasa , Adam Muto , Kent Osborne , Emily Partridge , Bert Youn , Madeleine Flores , Jillian Tamaki , Sam Alden , Sloane Leong , Brandon Graham , and David Ferguson . " The Prince Who Wanted Everything " marked the return of Youn — a storyboarder during the show 's first , third , and fourth seasons — to the series . He had left after the first season for mandatory military service in his native South Korea , and returned during the third season . He once again left the series after the conclusion of its fourth season to focus his attention on Studio <unk> in Seoul , South Korea . However , Youn returned to work on " The Prince Who Wanted Everything " , although it was a " one @-@ off gig " , and he subsequently took a job working on Over the Garden Wall . The sixth season of Adventure Time also marked the final season that both Andy Ristaino and Cole Sanchez worked as storyboard artists . Ristaino revealed in a podcast that , once the season was finished , he was " burnt out " . He did , however , return as a background designer for the seventh season . Sanchez , on the other hand , left the series to become a supervising director on Long Live the Royals . 
 This was the last season of Adventure Time to feature Nick Jennings as the series ' art director ; he had originally been brought on at the start of the first season at the behest of Cartoon Network , and had served as the sole art director for five and a half seasons . Following the show 's sixth season , he left to work on the 2016 reboot of the Powerpuff Girls . He was replaced by Sandra Lee — also known as Sandra <unk> — who had previously been the series ' background paint supervisor . Both Jennings and Lee were credited as co @-@ art directors starting with the thirty @-@ third episode , " Jermaine " . 
 = = Cast = = 
 The voice actors include voice acting veterans John DiMaggio ( who portrays Jake the Dog ) , Tom Kenny ( who plays The Ice King ) , and Hynden Walch ( who voices Princess Bubblegum ) . In addition , Jeremy Shada portrays the voice of Finn the Human , and Olivia Olson portrays Marceline the Vampire Queen . Ward himself provides the voice for several minor characters , including Lumpy Space Princess . Former storyboard artist Niki Yang voices the sentient video game console BMO in English , as well as Jake 's girlfriend Lady Rainicorn in Korean . Polly Lou Livingston , a friend of Pendleton Ward 's mother , Bettie Ward , plays the voice of the small elephant Tree Trunks . Jessica DiCicco voices Flame Princess , Finn 's former romantic interest . Several episodes also feature The Lich , the series ' principal antagonist . The Lich is portrayed by Ron Perlman in his demonic form , and by Ethan Maher as a large baby after the events of the season premiere . Finn 's father , Martin , first introduced in " Escape from the Citadel " , is voiced by Stephen Root . The Adventure Time cast records their lines together in group recordings as opposed to different recording sessions with each voice actor . This is to record more natural sounding dialogue among the characters . Hynden Walch has described these group recordings as akin to " doing a play reading — a really , really out there play . " 
 In addition to the regular cast members , episodes feature guest voices from many ranges of professions , including actors , musicians , and artists . The season openers , " Wake Up " and " Escape from the Citadel " , feature the return of Kumail Nanjiani as Prismo , M. Emmet Walsh as the Cosmic Owl , and Miguel Ferrer as Death and one of the heads of Grob Gob Glob Grod . Nanjiani would return again in the episodes " Is That You ? " and " Hoots " ; Ferrer , along with Kenny , Tom Gammill , and Melissa Villasenor , would reprise their role as Grob Gob Glob Grod in " Astral Plane " ; and Walsh would reappear in " Hoots " . " James II " features Andy Merrill reprising his role as James . The A.V. Club columnist Cameron Esposito lends her voice to Carroll the cloud woman . " Sad Face " features both Andy Milonakis reprising his role as the Never @-@ Ending Pie Throwing Robot ( N.E.P.T.R. ) . , and Brett Gelman as the bug ringleader . Milonakis would also return in " Furniture & Meat " . Comedian Melinda Hill reprises her role as Doctor Princess in the episode " Breezy " , which also features the vocal talents of Ashly Burch as the titular character . Burch would also voice a blacksmith in " Little Brother " , and the Super <unk> spokesperson Cheryl in " Dark Purple " . Regular Show writer and voice actor Minty Lewis voices Erin the caterpillar in " Food Chain " . " The Prince Who Wanted Everything " features both Madeleine Martin as Fionna and Roz Ryan as Cake , as well as Peter Serafinowicz , who voices Lumpy Space Prince , the gender @-@ switched version of Lumpy Space Princess . Prolific voice actor Alan Oppenheimer also voices Darren and the Sun in " Something Big " , and actress Jill Talley also reprises her role as Maja . " Something Big " also sees the return of Keith Ferguson as Colonel Candy Corn ; he would also reprise this role in several other season six episodes . James Urbaniak plays both <unk> and the Rat King in " Little Brother " , and Thurop Van Orman , a former supervising producer and writer for the series during its second season , also appears in the aforementioned episode , playing the part of Kent . Kristen Schaal and Dan Mintz reprise their roles as Jake Jr. and T.V. , respectively , in " Ocarina " , and the episode also sees the introduction of Marc Evan Jackson and Paget Brewster as Kim Kil Whan and Viola , respectively . Duncan Trussell , Steve Little , Dana Snyder , and series storyboard artist Cole Sanchez , return in " Thanks for the <unk> , Giuseppe ! " , playing the roles of Ron James , Abracadaniel , the Ancient Sleeping Magi of Life Giving , and Little Dude , respectively . 
 Grey DeLisle returns to voice Breakfast Princess in " Princess Day " . Rainn Wilson reprises his role as <unk> in " Nemesis " , and also voices the new character Peace Master . Billy West voices Goose , Dr. Erik <unk> , and the Mayor in " Everything 's Jake " , and Tress MacNeille appears in the same episode , playing the part of Dr. Erik <unk> 's father . In " Dentist " , Collin Dean reprises his role as Tiffany , Lucy Lawless guest stars as the Queen of the Ants , and Andy Daly plays Lieutenant Gamergate . Daly also reprises his role as the King of Ooo in " Gold Stars " and the first part of the season finale , " Hot Diggity Doom " . Brody Stevens voices a character in " The Cooler " . " Evergreen " guest stars Pamela Adlon , Alan Tudyk , and Keith David as Gunter , <unk> , and Balthus , respectively . " Gold Stars " sees the introduction of Paul Scheer as Toronto , a character who would also appear in " Hot Diggity Doom " . " The Mountain " features prolific voice actor Jim Cummings as Matthew . Jackie Buscarino returns as Susan Strong in " Dark Purple " . In " The Diary " , Dan Mintz voices T.V. , Alia Shawkat voices the younger version of Nurse <unk> , and Clark Duke plays both Justin <unk> and Jawbreaker guy . " Walnuts & Rain " sees the introduction of the bear Seven , voiced by Chris Isaak . The episode also features Matt L. Jones , an actor who first appeared in the first season episode " Memories of Boom Boom Mountain " voicing the crying Mountain , lending his voice to King Huge . " Friends Forever " guest stars Tipper Newton as Lamp and Brent <unk> as Bass Drum . Newton would later reappear in " On the Lam " , voicing the alien emperor . Jon Wurster voices the demon Bryce , and Tom Scharpling voices Jermaine in the episode of the same name . " Chips & Ice Cream " guest stars Ron Livingston , Riki Lindhome , and Kate Micucci ; the latter two comprise the comedy band Garfunkel and Oates . Lindhome had previously appeared in the season five episode " The Party 's Over , Isla de Señorita " , playing the Island Lady , and Micucci had previously appeared in the season two episode " Heat Signature " , playing Wendy , one of Marceline 's ghost friends . Emo Philips reprises his role as Cuber in the episode " Graybles 1000 + " , and the episode also features musician Janet Klein as Tuber , the sister of Cuber . Kay Lenz voices Gunter 's dream manifestation in " Hoots " . Lena Dunham returns in " You Forgot Your <unk> " , reprising her role as Betty , and Gillian Jacobs appears , voicing the role of <unk> Matt Gourley and Melissa <unk> guest star in " <unk> " as alien elders . The catalyst comet in " The Comet " was voiced by Tig Notaro . 
 Various minor and background characters are voiced by Tom Kenny , Dee Bradley Baker , Maria Bamford , Steve Little , and Kent Osborne . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 The season debuted on April 21 , 2014 , with the two @-@ part episode " Wake Up " / " Escape from the Citadel " . Together , both episodes were viewed by 3 @.@ 321 million viewers and scored a 0 @.@ 7 Nielsen rating in the 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ old demographic . Nielsen ratings are audience measurement systems that determine the audience size and composition of television programming in the United States , which means that the episodes were seen by 0 @.@ 7 percent of all households aged 18 to 49 years old were watching television at the time of the episode 's airing . This marked a slight decrease in viewers when compared to the previous season premiere " Finn the Human " / " Jake the Dog " , which was seen by 3 @.@ 44 million viewers , but it marked a massive increase of almost one million viewers when compared with the previous season finale , " Billy 's Bucket List " . The premiere was also the most @-@ watched Cartoon Network telecast at the time of its airing among children aged 2 – 11 and 9 – 14 , as well as with boys 2 – 11 and 9 – 14 . It also marked a 153 percent increase in overall demographic ratings when compared to the same time the previous year . The season hit its nadir with the seventeenth episode , " Ghost Fly " , which was seen by only 1 @.@ 3 million viewers and scored a 0 @.@ 2 percent adult 18 @-@ 49 Nielsen rating , meaning that it was seen by only 0 @.@ 2 percent of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds watching television at the time of the episode 's airing . The season concluded with the two @-@ part episode " Hot Diggity Doom " / " The Comet " , which , together , were seen by 1 @.@ 55 million viewers . The episodes scored a of 0 @.@ 4 percent adult 18 @-@ 49 Nielsen rating . 
 For the first five and a half seasons , the show aired on Monday nights . However starting with " Breezy " , the show began to air on different days ; following " Breezy " , many episodes aired on Thursdays , although the season 's seventeenth episode , " Ghost Fly " , aired on a Tuesday night as a Halloween special . Following several months without new episodes , four installments — " Everything 's Jake " , " Is That You " , " Jake the Brick " , and " Dentist " — aired back @-@ to @-@ back on November 24 , 25 , 26 , and 28 , respectively . Likewise , the final six episodes of the season aired during the week of June 1 , with the two @-@ part season finale airing on June 5 . 
 In addition , several episodes aired internationally prior to their domestic debut : " Evergreen " was broadcast on November 10 by Cartoon Network in Brazil , " Astral Plane " was uploaded onto Cartoon Network 's Brazilian website on December 24 , 2014 , " The Visitor " first aired on February 3 , 2015 on Cartoon Network in South Korea , and both " Friends Forever " and " Jermaine " aired on Cartoon Network in Latin America on April 6 , 2015 and April 13 , 2015 respectively . 
 = = = Reviews and accolades = = = 
 The season received largely positive critical reviews . Eric Kohn of IndieWire applauded the two @-@ part season opener , " Wake Up " and " Escape from the Citadel " , for taking a darker turn in regards to the series ' storytelling . Furthermore , he noted that the storyline concerning " Finn 's cursed sword arm — an ingredient that has festered in the sidelines for weeks — reaches a beguiling new state . " Likewise , Oliver Sava of The A.V. Club complimented the episodes for being full of harsh realizations concerning Finn 's father and the vulnerability of his body ; he ultimately concluded that " the developments of these two episodes dramatically alter the series ' status quo to give this season an added boost of momentum from the very beginning . " Each episode was also graded by The A.V. Club with a different letter grade ; the season received two " C " grade entries , twenty @-@ two " B " grade installments , and seventeen " A " grade episodes . 
 The A.V. Club named the series the 27th best television series of 2014 , noting that , " The ongoing sixth season has ventured into even more dangerous emotional territory : parenthood . Coupled with deep dives into the history of Ooo and the increasing visual confidence of episodes like the surreal , breathtaking ' Food Chain , ' Adventure Time appears ready to use its considerable heft and years of laying narrative foundations to do some of TV 's finest storytelling about grappling with the past and accepting the responsibilities of adulthood . " The site selected " Food Chain " and " Breezy " as stand @-@ out episodes from 2014 , and it later named the season finale " The Comet " one of the best TV episodes of 2015 . 
 Masaaki Yuasa and <unk> Choi were both nominated for an " Outstanding Achievement , Directing in an Animated TV / Broadcast Production " Annie Award for their work on " Food Chain " . " Food Chain " was later selected for competition at the 2015 Annecy International Animated Film Festival , On April 23 , 2015 , it was announced that the series had won a Peabody Award for Best Children 's Programming . At the 67th Primetime Emmy Awards in 2015 , the episode " Jake the Brick " won a Primetime Emmy Award for Short @-@ format Animation , and Tom Herpich won an Outstanding Individual Achievement in Animation Emmy for his work on " Walnuts & Rain " . At the 2016 Annie Awards , the writing staff for " The Diary " was nominated for an Outstanding Achievement , Writing in an Animated TV / Broadcast Production award , and Herpich was nominated for an Outstanding Achievement , Storyboarding in an Animated TV / Broadcast Production award . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 Warner Home Video released several DVD compilations that contained episodes from the sixth season . The first of these , entitled " Princess Day " , was released on July 29 , 2014 . The release was notable because it marked the first time that an episode — in this case , the eponymous " Princess Day " — had been released on DVD before it had officially aired on Cartoon Network . Several other DVD compilations , including Finn the Human , Frost & Fire , The Enchiridion , and Card Wars were also released that contained episodes from the sixth season . All DVD releases can be purchased on the Cartoon Network Shop , and the individual episodes can be downloaded from both the iTunes Store and Amazon.com. 
 = = Episodes = = 
 = Amanita atkinsoniana = 
 Amanita atkinsoniana is a species of fungus in the Amanitaceae family . It is found in the northeastern , southeastern , and southern United States as well as southern Canada , where it grows solitarily or in small groups on the ground in mixed woods . The fruit body is white to brownish , with caps that measure up to 12 @.@ 5 cm ( 4 @.@ 9 in ) in diameter , and stems up to 20 cm ( 7 @.@ 9 in ) long and 2 @.@ 5 cm ( 1 @.@ 0 in ) thick . The surface of the cap is covered with reddish @-@ brown to grayish @-@ brown conical warts . The stem has a bulbous base covered with grayish @-@ brown scales . The fruit bodies smell faintly like bleaching powder . Although not known to be poisonous , the mushroom is not recommended for consumption . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The species was first described by American botanist William Chambers Coker in 1917 , in his monograph of Amanitas of the eastern United States . Coker 's description was based on several specimens he had collected from various locations in North Carolina in September and October 1914 . The specific name honors George Atkinson , a Cornell University mycologist who collected and described mushrooms in the southern and eastern United States in the late 19th century . In 1952 , Marcel <unk> chose to place it in the genus Armillaria as Armillaria atkinsoniana , but this change was not adopted by later authors . 
 Amanita atkinsoniana is classified in the stirps <unk> of subsection Solitariae , in the section Lepidella of the genus Amanita . Species in the subsection Solitariae are distinguished by several characteristics : a volva composed of cellular structures of varying shape ; rows of large cylindrical to slender club @-@ shaped cells that are never dominant ; a stem that typically has a bulbous base and remnants of the volva on the surface that are concentrated towards the base ; the volva is not membranous nor nearly membranous , never forming a limb at the base of the stem , and never forming patches on the surface of the cap , where the outer layer consists of hyphae pressed against the surface . 
 = = Description = = 
 The cap of A. atkinsoniana is 6 – 12 @.@ 5 cm ( 2 @.@ 4 – 4 @.@ 9 in ) wide , and depending on its age , ranges in shape from convex to flattened , sometimes with a shallow central depression . Its color can vary from whitish to yellowish @-@ white , brownish @-@ gray , brownish @-@ orange to grayish @-@ brown , and is lighter on the margin . The cap surface is covered with the remnants of the universal veil as small reddish @-@ brown to grayish @-@ brown , easily removable , conical warts . Approaching the edge of the cap , the warts gradually become small , woolly patches . The cap margin is smooth or has faint grooves mirroring the underlying gills , and has partial veil remnants hanging along the edge . The gills are free from attachment to the stem , close to crowded together , moderately broad , yellowish @-@ white , and occasionally have a slight reddish stain . The lamellulae ( short gills that do not extend completely from the cap margin to the stem ) are truncate ( cut off sharply ) to attenuate . The stem is 8 – 20 cm ( 3 @.@ 1 – 7 @.@ 9 in ) long and 1 – 2 @.@ 5 cm ( 0 @.@ 4 – 1 @.@ 0 in ) wide , equal or tapering slightly toward apex , whitish , and floccose to smooth . The basal bulb is club @-@ shaped , ventricose @-@ fusiform or turnip @-@ shaped , rounded or pointed , usually covered with rings of reddish @-@ brown scales or warts of universal veil remains , often extending up the stem for a short distance . The universal veil on the stem base is quite unusual in Amanita , because it forms warts that extend nearly to the very bottom of the bulb . The stem often roots into the soil beneath the bulb with an elongated cord of mycelium known as a pseudorhiza . The partial veil forms an ring that is somewhat membranous , fragile to moderately persistent , and yellowish @-@ white to pale yellow . Eventually , as the mushroom matures , it collapses on the stem as a thin membrane . The flesh is white , with a weak odor of bleaching powder . 
 = = = Microscopic characteristics = = = 
 The spore print is white . The spores are ellipsoid to elongated , hyaline ( translucent ) , thin @-@ walled , and have dimensions of 9 – 12 @.@ 5 by 5 @.@ 5 – 8 µm . They are amyloid , meaning they will absorb iodine when stained with Melzer 's reagent . The basidia ( spore @-@ bearing cells ) are 35 – 60 by 7 – 13 @.@ 5 µm , club @-@ shaped , four @-@ spored , with clamps at their bases . The cheilocystidia ( cystidia found on the edge of the gill ) are 15 – 45 by 10 – 30 µm , ellipsoid to club @-@ shaped , and abundant . The cap cuticle is up to 165 µm thick , and is made of interwoven to radial hyphae , 2 @.@ 5 – 8 µm diameter , which is slightly to strongly gelatinized . The universal veil on the cap consists of mainly roughly spherical to ellipsoid but also club @-@ shaped and elongated cells , up to 75 by 40 µm , arranged in short , terminal chains and relatively sparse hyphae , measuring 3 – 7 @.@ 5 µm in diameter . At the base of the stem the universal veil tissue is very similar to that on the cap . Clamp connections are present in the hyphae . 
 = = = Edibility = = = 
 Pomerleau ( 1980 ) considers the mushroom as " <unk> edible " , while Orson and Hope Miller , in their field guide to North American mushrooms , list it as " possibly poisonous " ( although they also indicate that no specific reports of toxins have been reported from the species ) , and recommend that in general , no species in Amanita subgenus Lepidella should be consumed . 
 = = = Similar species = = = 
 Because of the colored volva , A. atkinsoniana resembles A. onusta , which differs from A. atkinsoniana by the small to medium @-@ sized fruit bodies with a grayish veil as dark gray to brownish gray warts and a basal bulb which is usually somewhat rooting . Sometimes the fruit bodies of A. atkinsoniana are confused with A. <unk> which can be distinguished by the presence of reddish @-@ brown to grayish @-@ brown volval remnants and the rooting bulb of A. atkinsoniana . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The fruit bodies of Amanita atkinsoniana grow on the ground in mixed coniferous and deciduous forests . They have been collected in Alabama , Georgia , Massachusetts , Maryland , Michigan , North Carolina , New Jersey , New York , Pennsylvania , Tennessee , Texas , Virginia , Vermont , and West Virginia . One field guide notes a preference for association with oak where there is ground cover of blueberry ( Vaccinium ) bushes . The mushroom has also been collected in Quebec , Canada . The southern extent of its range extends to the Mexican state of Michoacán . The mushroom fruits most commonly during late summer and fall after heavy rains . 
 = Hammerfest Airport = 
 Hammerfest Airport ( Norwegian : Hammerfest lufthavn ; IATA : <unk> , ICAO : <unk> ) is a regional airport at <unk> in Hammerfest , Norway . It is operated by the state @-@ owned Avinor and handled 145 @,@ 396 passengers in 2014 , making it the third @-@ busiest regional airport in the country . The airport has a 880 @-@ meter ( 2 @,@ 890 ft ) runway aligned 05 / 23 . Services are provided by Widerøe using the Dash 8 @-@ 100 . Up to eight daily flights are provided to Tromsø and public service obligation flights are flown eastwards to other airports in Finnmark . The airport is the base for offshore helicopter services operated by Bristow Norway and CHC Helikopter Service . An estimated 40 @,@ 000 people from Hammerfest Airport 's catchment area annually use Alta Airport for flights to Oslo . 
 Hammerfest was served from 1935 by scheduled seaplanes at a water aerodrome at <unk> . Services were interrupted by World War II , but resumed in 1945 , lasting until the 1963 opening of Alta Airport . Hammerfest Airport opened on 1 August 1974 , along with four other regional airport in Finnmark and Troms , and was originally served with de Havilland Canada Twin Otters . The de Havilland Canada Dash 7 was introduced in 1983 and a helicopter base was established in 1989 . The Dash 8 was introduced in 1995 and the airport was nationalized two years later . A Dash 8 was damaged beyond repair after a hard landing in 2005 . Because of the limited space for expansion and unfavorable wind conditions , there is a proposal to build a new airport at Grøtnes . 
 = = History = = 
 The first plans for serving Hammerfest with an airline route was launched in a government plan from 1933 . It proposed that flights in Northern Norway be carried out using seaplanes , and proposed Hammerfest as one of several stops on a route from Trondheim to Vadsø . Norwegian Air Lines ( DNL ) received the concession to operate all routes in Norway from 1935 , resulting in the coastal route from Bergen to Tromsø commencing . The following year a connecting route from Tromsø via Hammerfest to Honningsvåg was subcontracted to Widerøe . The water aerodrome in Hammerfest was located at <unk> and consisted of a buoy where the aircraft parked ; passengers were transported to the aircraft in a boat . All flights were terminated in 1939 and remained so until the end of World War II in 1945 . 
 DNL resumed the Hammerfest route in 1946 , connecting the town to Tromsø , Vadsø and Kirkenes with a Junkers Ju 52 . The route later also served Alta and made part of the coastal route to Bergen . The segment north of Tromsø was taken over by Widerøe in 1954 , and two years later Widerøe also started a route from Hammerfest via Alta to Bardufoss Airport , which allowed for a transfer to an Oslo @-@ bound aircraft . Widerøe mostly used Noorduyn Norseman and de Havilland Canada Otters on the routes . Alta Airport and two other primary airports in Finnmark opened in 1963 and Widerøe decided to terminate its seaplane routes in the county . At the time a bus trip from Hammerfest to Alta took four hours . Unlike the seaplane routes , the landplane routes from Alta were able to operate during winter . Norving established an air ambulance base at Hammerfest in 1961 . With the opening of Alta Airport , Norving applied for permission and subsidies to operate a feeder service from Hammerfest to Alta , but the application was rejected by the government . 
 The mid @-@ 1960s saw several proposals for regional airports in Finnmark . A committee appointed by Finnmark County Council proposed , in 1966 , Hammerfest as one of six suitable sites for a simple airfield to serve air ambulance and air taxi services . At the same time the government was working on plans to build a national network of short take @-@ off and landing airport . The plans eventually called for six airports in northern Troms and Finnmark , a plan passed by Parliament in 1972 . Both Widerøe and Norving applied to operate the subsidized routes in Finnmark , and the contract was awarded to Widerøe , which operated the subsidized routes in the rest of the country . The airport opened on 1 August 1974 with Hammerfest Municipality as the owner and operator . The same day four other airports in Finnmark and Troms commenced operations . These were all originally served using Widerøe 's de Havilland Canada Twin Otter aircraft . The airline established its technical base for Finnmark at Hammerfest . 
 Widerøe introduced the de Havilland Canada Dash 7 on the route from Tromsø Airport to Hammerfest in 1983 , the same year as Norving started flights from Hammerfest to Hasvik Airport . The Hasvik <unk> was taken over by Widerøe in 1990 . Helikopter Service established a helicopter base at Hammerfest Airport in 1989 to serve the offshore petroleum industry which was searching for oil in the Barents Sea . Widerøe introduced the Dash 8 on the Finnmark routes in 1995 . The airport was taken over by the state and the Civil Aviation Administration ( later renamed Avinor ) on 1 January 1997 . The state paid Hammerfest Municipality 19 @.@ 5 million Norwegian krone ( NOK ) in compensation . The routes eastwards were made subject to public service obligations with the Ministry of Transport and Communications from 1 April 1997 . The routes to Tromsø had a sufficient patronage that they were operated without subsidies . 
 The helicopter operations were taken over by Norsk <unk> ( later renamed Bristow Norway ) when they opened their base on 11 November 2004 . Airport security was introduced on 1 January 2005 . Hammerfest was the second airport to receive SCAT @-@ I , a Global Positioning System @-@ based landing system , when it was installed in 2007 . SCAT @-@ I allows aircraft with the system installed to make a safer and less fuel @-@ consuming landings using a gliding instead of step @-@ down approach . This was followed up with an upgrade to the runway safety area and runway lights in 2008 and 2009 . 
 = = Facilities = = 
 The terminal has a capacity for 250 passengers per hour . It includes a separate area for helicopter traffic , but this is not in use , and helicopter passengers instead use the regular part of the terminal . There is a separate operations and fire station building , which includes the control tower . The asphalt runway measures 880 by 30 meters ( 2 @,@ 887 by 98 ft ) and aligned 05 – 23 . There are no possibilities of extending the runway , largely because of the terrain at the east end . The tarmac has room for five aircraft the size of Dash 8 , in addition to helicopters . The airport is six to seven minutes ' drive from the town center and has parking , taxis and car rental . Forty @-@ five people work at the airport . 
 = = Airlines and destinations = = 
 The main route at Hammerfest is Widerøe 's service to Tromsø , which is operated up to eight times per day using Dash 8 @-@ 100 aircraft . Widerøe also operates flights eastwards to other communities in Finnmark on public service obligations with the Ministry of Transport and Communications . Two helicopter operators have bases at the airport : Bristow Norway , which operates two Eurocopter EC225 Super Pumas , and CHC Helikopter Service , which operates a Sikorsky S @-@ 92 . Both companies operate flights to offshore installations . One of the Super Pumas is used for search and rescue operations for the petroleum industry and when the Royal Norwegian Air Force 's Westland Sea Kings based at Station Group Banak are not available , for instance if they are on another mission or the aircraft are being maintained . 
 Forty @-@ two percent of the airport 's traffic is generated from routes to Oslo and abroad , while twenty @-@ nine percent is to Tromsø . The airport served 145 @,@ 396 passengers , 13 @,@ 822 aircraft movements and handled 16 tonnes of cargo in 2014 . This included 21 @,@ 216 passengers and 1 @,@ 827 aircraft movements which flew offshore . Hammerfest is the third @-@ busiest regional airport in Norway . Patronage since the 2000s has varied with the activity in the petroleum industry . Each year , an estimated 40 @,@ 000 passengers from the Hammerfest area chose Alta Airport over Hammerfest Airport , as Alta provides direct flights to Oslo . Alta is located 138 kilometers ( 86 mi ) by road from Hammerfest . The catchment area of Hammerfest Airport covers the municipalities of Hammerfest and Kvalsund , although residents in Kvalsund largely use Alta Airport instead . 
 = = Accidents and incidents = = 
 The Widerøe Dash 8 @-@ 103 aircraft LN @-@ <unk> underwent a hard landing on 1 May 2005 . The aircraft , on route from Tromsø , was landing on Runway 05 when it experienced a veering wind which changed direction , resulting in an increased tail wind . The pilot attempted to counteract the increased descent rate by increasing to full throttle . This was not sufficient and the aircraft carried out a hard landing just inside the threshold , with the starboard landing gear collapsing . The aircraft slid on its belly along the runway for 650 meters ( 2 @,@ 130 ft ) and was damaged beyond repair . Widerøe permitted aircraft to land in the maximum certified wind conditions , a cross @-@ wind of 18 meters per second ( 36 knots ) and 5 meters per second ( 10 knots ) tail wind . Twenty @-@ five passengers and the three crew members were all transported to hospital , although there were no serious injuries . Widerøe enforced its strictest wind restrictions of any airport at Hammerfest after the accidents . 
 = = Future = = 
 Avinor is considering building a new airport at Grøtnes , which would be built as reclaimed land 15 kilometers ( 9 mi ) from Hammerfest . The terminal would be located on a peninsula while the runway would be built on a filling in the fjord . Avinor has studied two possible runway lengths , 1 @,@ 199 meters ( 3 @,@ 934 ft ) and 1 @,@ 550 meters ( 5 @,@ 090 ft ) . The former would cause operational problems during winter for 50 @-@ passenger aircraft , while the longer alternative would allow for operation of 70 @-@ seat turboprops , such as the Dash 8 @-@ Q400 and the ATR 72 . Neither lengths would allow jetliners to operate from the airport , thus hindering flights to Oslo because of the high per @-@ seat costs and limited range of turboprops . Avinor estimated in 2012 the costs of a new airport with a short runway to NOK 1 @.@ 6 billion and of a longer runway to NOK 2 @.@ 2 billion . Avinor 's calculations give a negative net present value for society of between NOK 1 @.@ 2 and 1 @.@ 4 billion . The main gain comes from that the use of slightly larger aircraft will allow for cheaper flights . 
 A 2008 report from the Institute of Transport Economics , financed by Hammerfest and Kvalsund Municipalities , looked into two possible runway lengths of an airport at Grøtnes : 1 @,@ 199 meters ( 3 @,@ 934 ft ) and 1 @,@ 999 meters ( 6 @,@ 558 ft ) . It concluded that the former would have a negative cost for society , while the latter would break even . The report concluded that the latter could allow for three daily direct flights to Oslo , and estimated the 2013 traffic , if airport had been built , at 190 @,@ 000 , of which 99 @,@ 000 would have been generated by the petroleum industry . A major uncertainty in the model is the unknown activity of the petroleum industry in the future . A report by the Norwegian Meteorological Institute the same year concluded that the weather at Grøtnes was well @-@ suited for an airport . 
 Avinor 's proposal for National Transport Plan 2014 – 2023 discards building an airport at Grøtnes . One of Avinor 's main concerns is that runway capable of Oslo flights could cannibalize the market for Alta Airport and Lakselv Airport , Banak and reduce traffic to a level that there would not be sufficient patronage at any airport to allow for two airlines to compete on the Oslo route . Instead Avinor recommends improving the road to Alta airport ( 138 kilometers ( 86 mi ) driving distance ) . Such a road improvement , costing 440 M kr , is now scheduled for 2014 @-@ 2016 . 
 = Life of Samuel Johnson ( 1787 ) = 
 The Life of Samuel Johnson or Life of Samuel Johnson , LL . D. was written by John Hawkins in 1787 . It was the first full biography of Samuel Johnson — with Thomas Tyers 's A Biographical Sketch of Dr Samuel Johnson being the first short postmortem biography . Hawkins was a friend of Johnson , but many in Johnson 's circle did not like him . After Johnson 's death , Hawkins was approached to produce a biography on Johnson and an edition of his works . His biography described Johnson 's life , including previously unknown details about his writing career , but it was plagued by digressions into unrelated topics . Hawkins 's Life of Samuel Johnson came under swift attack from critics , from friends of Johnson , and from his literary rival , James Boswell immediately after its publication . Many of the critics attacked Hawkins for his lack of strict focus on Johnson 's life or for his unfavourable depiction of Johnson in various circumstances . 
 = = Background = = 
 Sir John Hawkins , according to Bertram Davis , is " the author of the first full @-@ length <unk> of Samuel Johnson " but that " many remember him as the man Johnson once described as ' <unk> ' . " Although " <unk> " reflects Hawkins 's relationship with others of Johnson 's circle , Johnson and Hawkins had a close friendship as Miss Reynolds describes : " As we were returning from the meadows that day , I remember we met Sir John Hawkins , whom Dr. Johnson seemed much rejoiced to see ; and no wonder , for I have often heard him speak of Sir John in terms expressive of great esteem and much cordiality of friendship " Their relationship began around 1739 and they were both involved with The Gentleman 's Magazine . Later , Hawkins was , in 1749 , a member of Johnson 's first club : the Ivy Lane club . 
 After joining the Ivy Lane club , he married Sidney Storer , heir to a 20 @,@ 000 pound fortune with Hawkins receiving an addition 10 @,@ 000 pound dowry , in 1753 and his career started to quickly pick up : he bought a home on the Thames at Twickenham near Horace Walpole ; he published Izaak Walton 's The Compleat Angler in 1760 ; he was appointed as a magistrate in 1761 ; in 1765 became Chairman of the Quarter Sessions for the County of Middlesex ; and wrote a A General History of the Science and Practice of <unk> 1776 . He was knighted in 1772 , and served as Chairman of the Quarter Session . 
 Even with all the success , or because of it , he was resented among some of Johnson 's circle . Hawkins , member of Johnson 's second club , the Literary Club established 1764 , resigned over a dispute with others of Johnson 's circle . The relationship between Hawkins and the rest of Johnson 's friends became so tense that many criticised Johnson for choosing Hawkins in 1784 as one of his executors for his will . However , within hours of Johnson 's death , Thomas Cadell and William Strahan asked Hawkins to write a biography and an edition of Johnson 's literary works . 
 On 16 December 1784 , St. James 's Chronicle stated Hawkins and Boswell were both writing biographies . However , Thomas Tyers published before them when his A Biographical Sketch of Dr Samuel Johnson , the first postmortem biographical work on Johnson but not a full length biography , ran in the December 1784 issue of the The Gentleman 's Magazine . This did not deter Hawkins and by 21 December 1784 , he began advertising his " <unk> " life of Johnson . This provoked an anonymous articles in St. James 's Chronicle started attacking Hawkins : " It is evident from the Conduct of the late Dr. Johnson , that he designed Mr. Boswell for the sole Writer of his Life . Why else did he furnish him with such Materials for it as were withheld from every other Friend ... Little indeed did he suppose that a Person whom he had made one of his <unk> would have instantly claimed the Office of his Biographer . Still less could he have imagined that this Self @-@ Appointment would have been precipitately confirmed by the Booksellers . " 
 The source of the attack was George Steevens , who worked with Johnson on an edition of Shakespeare 's plays and was a constant critic of Hawkins . He , along with others , began to spread rumours about Hawkins : some claimed that he stole Johnson 's belongings after his death , and others claimed that Hawkins wanted to slander Johnson in his biography . Hawkins house burned down on 23 February 1785 , and he was barely able to preserve his notes and Johnson 's diaries , which were the foundations for his Life . The work was published in March 1787 . St. James 's Chronicle and London Chronicle published excerpts for " several weeks " with the Universal Magazine and the Political Magazine following later . A second edition was published mid @-@ April 1787 . 
 = = Biography = = 
 The biography is a standard biography describing incidents of Johnson 's life . One of the unique features that made Hawkins 's Life special was its ability to provide information on Johnson 's contributions to The Gentleman 's Magazine . The biography revealed details about the events surrounding the early years of the magazine and events that happened between employees , which provided insights into the literary magazine not published before . 
 Boswell was unable to publish his Life until 1791 , but when he did he introduced his work with a summary of what he felt Hawkins 's biography contained : 
 Since my work was announced , several Lives and Memoirs of Dr. Johnson have been published , the most voluminous of which is one compiled for the booksellers of London , by Sir John Hawkins , Knight , a man , whom , during my long intimacy with Dr. Johnson , I never saw in his company , I think but once , and I am sure not above twice . Johnson might have esteemed him for his decent , religious demeanour , and his knowledge of books and literary history ; but from the rigid formalities of his manners , it is evident that they never could have lived together with companionable ease and familiarity ; nor had Sir John Hawkins that nice perception which was necessary to mark the finer and less obvious parts of Johnson 's character . His being appointed one of his executors , gave him an opportunity of taking possession of such fragments of a diary and other papers as were left ; of which , before delivering them up to the residuary legatee , whose property they were , he endeavoured to extract the substance . In this he has not been very successful , as I have found upon a perusal of those papers , which have been since transferred to me . Sir John Hawkins 's ponderous labours , I must acknowledge , exhibit a farrago , of which a considerable portion is not devoid of entertainment to the lovers of literary <unk> ; but besides its being swelled out with long unnecessary extracts from various works , ( even one of several leaves from Osborne 's Harleian Catalogue , and those not compiled by Johnson , but by Oldys , ) a very small part of it relates to the person who is the subject of the book ; and , in that , there is such an inaccuracy in the statement of facts , as in so solemn an authour is hardly excusable , and certainly makes his narrative very unsatisfactory . But what is still worse , there is throughout the whole of it a dark uncharitable cast , by which the most unfavourable construction is put upon almost every circumstance in the character and conduct of my illustrious friend ; who , I trust , will , be a true and fair delineation , be vindicated both from the injurious misrepresentation of this authour , and from the slighter aspersions of a lady who once lived in great intimacy with him . " 
 Hawkins and Hester Thrale , in Boswell 's mind , were rivals to " what he considered his domain " . That is not to say that he was wrong about Hawkins 's Life because it does contain many digressions , such as a discussion of sixteenth century breakfast habits written in Latin and a discussion on the history of taverns among others . Hawkins also included long extracts from Johnson 's works . 
 = = Critical response = = 
 The Monthly Review , the Critical Review , the English Review , and the European Magazine contained reviews that , in the words of Bertram Davis , characterised the biography as " a malevolent and spiteful account of Johnson 's life , grossly inaccurate , and rendered utterly ridiculous by its pompous legalisms and its digressions on every conceivable subject . The book , if they were to be believed , was less a biography than a polemic , less a work of art than a collection of senile gossip . " In particular , the Critical Review said , " we often lose Dr. Johnson ... The knight sinks under the weight of his subject , and is glad to escape to scenes more congenial to his disposition , and more suitable to his talents , the <unk> of a literary old man . " 
 Arthur Murphy anonymously wrote in the Monthly Review : " Sir John most probably acquired his notions of language at his master 's desk : he admired the phraseology of deeds and parchments , whereof , to speak in his own manner , he read so much , that in consequence thereof , he has been chiefly conversant therein and by the help of the parchments aforesaid , missed the elegance above mentioned , and uses works , that in them we sometimes meet with , and being bred and attorney , he caught the language of the said trade , whereof he retains so much , that he is now rendered an incompetent critic thereby , and in consequence thereof . " Steevens , under the name " Philo Johnson " claimed in the European Magazine : " the great solid principle that secures its condemnation , is the spirit of malevolence to the dead , which breathes all through it . Sir John Hawkins , with all the humanity and very little of the dexterity of a Clare @-@ Market butcher , has raised his blunt axe to deface the image of his friend . " 
 A later review in the St Jame 's Chronicle joked : " it was false ' that Mrs. Hobart had an intention of reading Sir John Hawkins ' book . The late hours at which people of rank go to bed , renders it wholly unnecessary to force a sleep in public places . " This followed with a joke in a later journal : a " gentleman , lately arrived in town , has been for several days past afflicted with a lethargy , owing to the perusal of three chapters in Hawkins 's Life of Johnson . " A third stated : the branches of willow trees planted in Lichfield " should be lopped off , and tied in bundles , ... and properly applied to the naked backs of his various biographers , taking care , that the largest bundle be appropriated unto the use and behoof of Sir John Hawkins , Knight . " 
 = Hurricane Maria ( 2011 ) = 
 Hurricane Maria was a Category 1 hurricane that made landfall on the island of Newfoundland during September 2011 . Originating from a tropical wave over the central Atlantic on September 6 , Maria moved toward the west and slowly strengthened . While approaching the northern Leeward Islands , however , the system entered a region of higher vertical wind shear and cooler sea surface temperatures , causing it to degenerate into a low @-@ pressure area . It slowly curved toward the north and northeast around the western periphery of the subtropical ridge , and regained tropical storm status on September 10 . Maria further strengthened to attain hurricane status while making its closest approach to Bermuda . The cyclone attained peak winds of 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) on September 16 , but weakened thereafter because of an increase in wind shear and cooler sea surface temperatures . Maria made landfall on the southeastern coast of Newfoundland during the afternoon hours of September 16 before becoming absorbed by a frontal system later on that same day . 
 Despite its poor organization , Maria brought heavy rainfall to portions of the east Caribbean , notably Puerto Rico . Numerous roadways and homes were flooded , and as the storm passed through the extreme northeastern Caribbean , over 15 @,@ 000 people went without power . In addition , tropical storm @-@ force winds were observed on many of the U.S. Virgin Islands . As the system passed west of Bermuda , brief tropical storm @-@ force sustained winds were recorded , along with higher gusts ; rainfall on the island , however , was minimal . In Newfoundland , strong winds were recorded , but rainfall totals were relatively minimal . There were no deaths reported in association with Maria , although the storm caused $ 1 @.@ 3 million ( 2011 USD ) in damage . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 The origins of Hurricane Maria can be traced back to a tropical wave — an elongated area of low pressure oriented north to south — that moved westward from Nigeria to Senegal on September 1 . The wave entered the eastern tropical Atlantic early the following day and slowly strengthened . By September 6 , it had developed a sufficient amount of convection to be designated as Tropical Depression Fourteen , while it was about 700 mi ( 1100 km ) west @-@ southwest of the southern Cape Verde Islands . By this time , it had also developed well @-@ established outflow within the western semicircle of the low @-@ pressure center . The depression continued to increase in strength , and it was upgraded to a tropical storm six hours after formation , receiving the name Maria . 
 Early on September 7 , the National Hurricane Center ( NHC ) noted that although Maria was in an area of favorable atmospheric conditions , most intensity guidance models did not anticipate any strengthening . The system changed little in organization over the next 24 hours as it moved rapidly toward the west @-@ northwest around the southern periphery of the subtropical ridge . Though visible satellite imagery depicted a well @-@ organized circulation center , it was displaced from the strongest convection due to increased vertical wind shear . The system reached an initial peak intensity with maximum sustained winds of 50 mph ( 85 km / h ) on September 8 before the unfavorable environment began to impede the system 's organization . Following a reconnaissance flight into the system early on September 9 , it was noted that Maria had degenerated into a non @-@ tropical disturbance , despite reports of tropical storm @-@ force winds in the northern Leeward Islands . Operationally , however , the NHC kept the system classified as a tropical cyclone and never downgraded it to a disturbance . When the system approached the northern Leeward Islands on September 10 , satellite imagery and surface observations revealed an increase in its organization ; a subsequent reconnaissance aircraft into the disturbance revealed that the remnants of Maria had regenerated into a tropical cyclone about 40 mi ( 65 km ) east @-@ southeast of Antigua . 
 After reaching the southwestern periphery of the subtropical ridge , Maria turned to the north as its forward motion slowed considerably . Strong vertical wind shear over the system began to relax by September 14 , allowing Maria to slowly restrengthen as the convection redeveloped near its center . At 1800 UTC on September 15 , Maria reached Category 1 hurricane status on the Saffir – Simpson Hurricane Scale while located roughly 135 mi ( 215 km ) northwest of Bermuda . Embedded within increasing atmospheric flow , the hurricane 's forward motion accelerated towards the northeast . At 0000 UTC on September 16 , Maria attained its peak intensity with winds of 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) and a minimum barometric pressure of 983 mbar ( 29 @.@ 03 inHg ) . Continuing on a northeastward course , Maria began to move over an area with cooler sea surface temperatures and higher vertical wind shear . Around 1800 UTC , Maria weakened to a tropical storm and made landfall near Cape St. Mary 's , Newfoundland at 1830 UTC with winds of 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) . Shortly thereafter , the cyclone 's circulation was absorbed by a frontal system over the Avalon Peninsula of Newfoundland . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 = = = Caribbean = = = 
 Before Maria 's arrival , tropical storm watches were issued for most of the Lesser Antilles on September 8 ; the watches were upgraded to tropical storm warnings at 2230 UTC . On the following day , Puerto Rico and many of the U.S. Virgin Islands and British Virgin Islands were placed under a tropical storm watch . The watches and warnings for the islands were discontinued around 1500 UTC on September 10 , after the strong thunderstorms diminished from Maria 's center . The storm 's effects on the island of Puerto Rico were primarily in the form of heavy rainfall . Flood waters near Patillas , Puerto Rico , destroyed several homes and bridges , causing $ 1 @.@ 3 million ( 2011 USD ) in damage . In the surrounding city of Yabucoa , Puerto Rico , heavy rainfall flooded and damaged around 150 homes . Many people were forced to relocate after rainfall and mud filled their homes . Near the city of Naguabo , Puerto Rico , the car of a 60 @-@ year @-@ old woman was swept away by flood waters on a road . After becoming tangled in bushes , the woman was able to get out of her car and pulled to safety . Nearly a month after the storm , U.S. president Barack Obama announced that federal disaster aid would be available to the island due to Maria . 
 = = = Bermuda = = = 
 Following Maria 's regeneration into a tropical cyclone , a tropical storm watch was issued for the island of Bermuda on September 13 . The watch was upgraded to a warning later that day , and at 1200 UTC the following day , it was replaced by a hurricane watch . All watches and warnings for the island were discontinued by September 15 . When Maria bypassed Bermuda on September 15 , its outer bands briefly produced tropical storm @-@ force winds across the island . At Commissioners Point , sustained winds reached 52 mph ( 83 km / h ) , with gusts as high as 69 mph ( 111 km / h ) , and winds of 36 mph ( 60 km / h ) were reported at L.F. Wade International Airport at 1500 UTC on September 15 . 
 = = = Newfoundland and Labrador = = = 
 In anticipation of Maria , Environment Canada declared a tropical storm watch for the coast of Newfoundland on September 15 , which stretched from Arnolds Cove to <unk> South . Three hours later , it was upgraded to a hurricane watch , while a tropical storm watch was put into effect from Arnolds Cove to Jones Harbor . At 0600 UTC the following day , the watches and warnings were replaced by a hurricane warning , and areas between <unk> South and <unk> , Newfoundland were placed under a tropical storm warning . All tropical cyclone watches and warnings were discontinued at 2100 UTC on September 16 . While becoming absorbed by a front on September 16 , Maria made landfall on the southern tip of the Avalon Peninsula of Newfoundland , where winds of 64 mph ( 103 km / h ) were recorded . Offshore , winds reached up to 77 mph ( 124 km / h ) . The capital city of St. John 's experienced heavy rain , though not to the extent that had been forecast , as the storm moved through the peninsula faster than predicted . 
 = Mendip Hills = 
 The Mendip Hills ( commonly called the Mendips ) is a range of limestone hills to the south of Bristol and Bath in Somerset , England . Running east to west between Weston @-@ super @-@ Mare and Frome , the hills overlook the Somerset Levels to the south and the Chew Valley and other tributaries of the Avon to the north . The hills give their name to the local government district of Mendip , which administers most of the area . The higher , western part of the hills , covering 198 km2 ( 76 sq mi ) has been designated an Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty ( AONB ) , which gives it a level of protection comparable to a national park . 
 The hills are largely formed from Carboniferous Limestone , which is quarried at several sites . Three nationally important semi @-@ natural habitats are characteristic of the area : ash – maple woodland , calcareous grassland and mesotrophic grassland . With their temperate climate these support a range of flora and fauna including birds , butterflies and small mammals . The dry stone walls that divide the pasture into fields are of botanical importance as they support important populations of the nationally scarce wall <unk> ( Draba muralis ) . 
 The origin of the name " Mendip " is unclear , but it is known that there has been human habitation since Palaeolithic and Mesolithic times with a range of artefacts being recovered from caves . Neolithic , Iron Age , and Bronze Age features such as barrows are numerous with over 200 scheduled ancient monuments recorded . There is evidence of mining in the Mendips dating back to the late Bronze Age , which increased after the Roman invasion , particularly for lead and silver around Charterhouse . The difficult conditions in the area were noted by William Wilberforce in 1789 , which inspired Hannah More to begin her work improving the conditions of the Mendip miners and agricultural workers . In the 18th and early 19th centuries 7 @,@ 300 ha ( 18 @,@ 000 acres ) of the common heathland on the hills were enclosed . In World War II a bombing decoy was constructed on top of Black Down at Beacon Batch . More recently , the mast of the Mendip transmitting station , micro @-@ hydroelectric turbines and a wind turbine have been installed . 
 There are still several quarries on the Mendip Hills . Some of the stone is still carried by Mendip Rail ; the other railways in the area closed in the 1960s . Although the Roman Fosse Way crossed the hills , the main roads generally avoid the higher areas and run along the bottom of the scarp slope on the north and south of the hills . The western end of the hills is crossed by the M5 motorway and A38 . Further east , and running almost north to south , are the A37 and A39 . A wide range of outdoor sports and leisure activities take place in the Mendips , many based on the particular geology of the area . The hills are recognised as a national centre for caving and cave diving , as well as being popular with climbers , hillwalkers and natural historians . Wookey Hole Caves and some of the caves in Cheddar Gorge are open as show caves ; however , many of the caves of the Mendip Hills are only accessible to members of caving clubs . Long distance footpaths include the Mendip Way and Limestone Link . 
 = = Toponymy = = 
 Several explanations for the name " Mendip " have been suggested . Its earliest known form is <unk> in 1185 . One suggestion is that it is derived from the medieval term " <unk> @-@ <unk> " . Others suggest it derives from Celtic <unk> , meaning mountain or hill , with an uncertain second element , perhaps Old English <unk> in the sense of upland or plateau . 
 A third explanation is that the name is cognate with <unk> ( Welsh <unk> ) , a Brythonic term for upland moorland . The suffix may be a contraction of the Old English hop , meaning a valley . Possible further meanings have been identified . The first is ' the stone pit ' from the Celtic <unk> and <unk> in reference to the collapsed cave systems of Cheddar . The second is " mighty and awesome " from the Old English <unk> and <unk> . 
 = = Geology = = 
 The Mendip Hills are the most southerly Carboniferous Limestone upland in Britain . The rock strata known as the Carboniferous Limestone were laid down during the early Carboniferous Period , about 320 – 350 million years ago . Subsequently , much of northwestern Europe underwent continental collision throughout the late Paleozoic Era , culminating in the final phases of the Variscan orogeny near the end of the Carboniferous , 300 million years ago . This tectonic activity produced a complex suite of mountain and hill ranges across what is now southern Ireland , south @-@ western England , Brittany , and elsewhere in western Europe . 
 As a result of the Variscan mountain @-@ building , the Mendip area now comprises at least four anticlinal fold structures , with an east @-@ west trend , each with a core of older Devonian sandstone and Silurian volcanic rocks . The latter are quarried for use in road construction and as a concrete aggregate . The Mendips were considerably higher and steeper 200 to 300 million years ago , and subsequent erosion has resulted in a range of surface features including gorges , dry valleys , screes , <unk> and others typical of karst landscapes . These are complemented underground by a large number of caves both beneath the plateau and at the base of the southern escarpment . Wookey Hole is one example of the caves of the area . There are also areas of limestone pavement and other karst features . Dissolution of the limestone produced many of the gorges including Cheddar Gorge and Burrington Combe . Springs are a common feature of the eastern part of the hills , a number of which have associated tufa deposits . 
 The Devonian and Silurian rocks are generally more resistant to weathering than the limestone , and form some of the highest points on the hills , including the highest at Beacon Batch on Black Down , 325 metres ( 1068 ft ) above sea level . Black Down is a moorland area , with its steeper slopes covered in bracken ( Pteridium ) and its flatter summit in heather ( Calluna ) and grasses rather than the pasture which covers much of the plateau . The main body of the range is an extended plateau , 6 – 8 km ( 4 – 5 miles ) wide and generally about 240 metres ( 800 ft ) above sea level . 
 In some areas the limestone and the dolomitic conglomerate have been mineralised with lead and zinc ores . From the time of Roman Britain until 1908 , the hills were an important source of lead . These areas were the centre of a major mining industry in the past and this is reflected in areas of contaminated rough ground known locally as " <unk> " . The word " <unk> " is thought to derive from the grooves that were formed where the lead ore was extracted from veins near the surface . Other commodities obtained included calamine ( zinc ore ) , manganese , iron , copper and baryte . The eastern area reaches into parts of the Somerset Coalfield . 
 North and east of the Mendips the Carboniferous Limestone layers are found in the subsurface and are exposed in Avon Gorge , and are overlain by younger strata in Dundry Hill and the Cotswolds , where oolitic limestone of Jurassic age is found at the surface . West of the main Mendip plateau the Carboniferous Limestone continues in Bleadon Hill and Brean Down , and on the islands of Steep Holm and Flat Holm in the Bristol Channel . 
 The hills gave their name to the rare mineral mendipite , an <unk> of lead with chlorine with formula <unk> which was first described in the area . A sample of mendipite was found at the head of Ebbor Gorge . 
 = = Climate = = 
 Along with the rest of South West England , the Mendip Hills have a temperate climate that is generally wetter and milder than the rest of England . The annual mean temperature is about 10 ° C ( 50 ° F ) with seasonal and diurnal variations , but the modifying effect of the sea restricts the range to less than that in most other parts of the United Kingdom . January is the coldest month , with mean minimum temperatures between 1 ° C ( 34 ° F ) and 2 ° C ( 36 ° F ) . July and August are the warmest , with mean daily maxima around 21 ° C ( 70 ° F ) . In general , December is the dullest month and June the sunniest . The south @-@ west of England enjoys a favoured location , particularly in summer , when the Azores High extends its influence north @-@ eastwards towards the UK . 
 Cumulus cloud often forms inland , especially near hills , and reduces exposure to sunshine . The average annual sunshine is about 1 @,@ 600 hours . Rainfall tends to be associated with Atlantic depressions or with convection . In summer , convection caused by solar surface heating sometimes forms shower clouds , and a large proportion of the annual precipitation falls from showers and thunderstorms at this time of year . Average rainfall is around 800 – 900 mm ( 31 – 35 in ) . About 8 – 15 days of snowfall is typical . November to March have the highest mean wind speeds , with June to August having the lightest ; the prevailing wind direction is from the south @-@ west . 
 A combination of the rainfall and geology leads to an estimated average daily runoff from springs and boreholes of some 330 @,@ 000 m3 ( 72 million imperial gallons ) . Bristol Waterworks Company ( now Bristol Water ) recognised the value of this resource and between 1846 and 1853 created a series of underground tunnels , pipes , and aqueducts called the " Line of Works " , which still carry approximately 18 @,@ 200 m3 ( 4 million imperial gallons ) of water a day to Barrow Gurney Reservoirs for filtration and then on to Bristol and the surrounding areas . This collection and conveyance of water from the Chewton Mendip and East and West Harptree areas is accomplished by the effect of gravity on the runoff . Water from the Mendips is also collected in Cheddar Reservoir , which was constructed in the 1930s and takes water from the springs in Cheddar Gorge . 
 = = Ecology = = 
 Three nationally important semi @-@ natural habitats are characteristic of the area : ash – maple woodland ( Fraxinus spp. and Acer spp . ) often with abundant small @-@ leaved lime ( Tilia cordata ) , calcareous grassland and mesotrophic grassland . 
 Much of the Mendips is open calcareous grassland , supporting a wide variety of flowering plants and insects . Some parts are deciduous ancient woodland , and some have been used intensively for arable agriculture , particularly since World War I. As the demand for arable land in Britain declined , some areas were returned to grassland , but the use of fertilisers and herbicides has reduced its biodiversity . Grazing by rabbits ( Oryctolagus cuniculus ) , sheep ( Ovis aries ) and cattle ( Bos taurus ) maintains the grassland habitat . 
 Of the many bird species found in the Mendips , the peregrine falcon ( Falco peregrinus ) , which has gradually recolonised the area since the 1980s , is particularly significant . It breeds on sea and inland cliffs and on the faces of active and disused quarries . The upland heaths of the west Mendips have recently increased in ornithological importance due to colonisation by the Dartford warbler ( Sylvia <unk> ) , which can be found at Black Down and Crook Peak . In Britain , this species is usually associated with lowland heath . The woodlands at Stock Hill are a breeding site for nightjars ( Caprimulgus europaeus ) and long @-@ eared owls ( Asio otus ) . The Waldegrave Pool , part of Priddy <unk> , is an important site for dragonflies , including downy emerald ( <unk> <unk> ) and four @-@ spotted chaser ( Libellula <unk> ) . Waldegrave Pool is the only Mendip breeding site for downy emerald dragonflies . In 2007 the first confirmed sighting of a red kite ( <unk> <unk> ) on the Mendips was made at Charterhouse . 
 A range of important small mammals are found in the area , including the hazel dormouse ( Muscardinus <unk> ) and bats . The hazel dormouse is restricted largely to coppice woodland and scrub , while the bats , including the nationally rare lesser ( Rhinolophus hipposideros ) and greater horseshoe bats ( Rhinolophus ferrumequinum ) , have a number of colonies in buildings , caves , and mines in the area . A rare and endangered species , the greater horseshoe bat is protected under the Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981 and is listed in Annex II of the 1992 European Community Habitats Directive . Amphibians such as the great crested newt ( Triturus cristatus ) have a wide distribution across the Mendips and are often found in flooded disused quarries . 
 Several rare butterflies are indigenous to the area , including the nationally scarce pearl @-@ bordered fritillary ( Boloria euphrosyne ) , Duke of Burgundy ( <unk> <unk> ) , and white @-@ letter hairstreak ( Satyrium w @-@ album ) . The large blue butterfly ( Maculinea arion ) became extinct in the hills in the late 1970s , since when a research project has been undertaken into its ecology and reintroduction . The white @-@ clawed crayfish is also nationally rare and is a declining species with small populations in a tributary of the Mells River and the River Chew . 
 The dry stone walls that divide the pasture into fields are a well @-@ known feature of the Mendips . Constructed from local limestone in an " A frame " design , the walls are strong yet contain no mortar ; many have been neglected and allowed to disintegrate , or have been replaced or contained by a mix of barbed wire and sheep fencing . These dry @-@ stone walls are of botanical importance as they support important populations of the nationally scarce wall <unk> ( Draba muralis ) . Amongst the plants which occur in the area are the Cheddar pink ( Dianthus gratianopolitanus ) , purple <unk> ( Lithospermum purpurocaeruleum ) , white rock @-@ rose ( Helianthemum <unk> ) , Somerset hair @-@ grass ( <unk> <unk> ) , and starved wood @-@ sedge ( Carex depauperata ) . 
 = = History = = 
 Twenty Palaeolithic sites have been identified in the Mendips , of which eleven represent faunal remains and lithic artefacts recovered from caves . The remaining eight sites refer to surface lithic discoveries , and the artefacts found include points , scrapers , and handaxes . Twenty @-@ seven Mesolithic finds are represented by flint and chert lithics . Large numbers of artefacts have been found near Neolithic , Iron Age , and Bronze Age features , such as the barrows and forts around Priddy and at Dolebury Warren . The caves of Cheddar Gorge have yielded many archaeological remains , as flood waters have washed artefacts and bones into the caves and preserved them in silt . The Cheddar Man , Britain 's oldest complete skeleton , was found in Gough 's Cave , part of the Cheddar Complex . 
 Within the Mendip Hills AONB , good evidence exists for 286 definite examples of round barrows , including the Priddy Nine Barrows and Ashen Hill Barrow Cemeteries . The Historic England Archive holds over 1 @,@ 200 entries for the area , and there are over 600 listed buildings , in addition to over 200 scheduled ancient monuments . These protected monuments range from prehistoric barrows and hillforts to the Black Down bombing decoy from the Second World War . 
 Settlement on the Mendip Hills appears to fall into two types . The first , apparent in the Neolithic and Bronze Age Britain periods , and repeated on a small scale in the Middle Ages and post @-@ medieval era , comprised occupation by self @-@ sufficient groups in small communities or isolated farms . The second was represented in the Iron Age Britain and Roman periods by large sites with specialist functions , existing by virtue of their ability to exert power over lowland producers . From the Iron Age onward the ownership of land took on increasing importance , with large landholdings based on the mines or on stock grazing , denying settlers access to the plateau or forcing them off the hills . 
 There is evidence of mining dating back to the late Bronze Age , when there were technological changes in metal @-@ working indicating the use of lead . The Roman invasion , and possibly the preceding period of involvement in the internal affairs of the south of England , was inspired , in part , by the mineral wealth of the Mendips . Much of the attraction of the lead mines may have been the potential for the extraction of silver ; the Latin " EX ARG <unk> " stamps on the Mendip lead pigs specify a de @-@ silvering process and cast silver ingots have been found . The silver coinage of the Dobunni and Durotriges is also likely to reflect the availability of silver from the mines . 
 By the end of the medieval period a complex body of customary law had come into existence dealing with the four " Mendip <unk> " . That the medieval control was in the hands of the monastic foundations may indicate some continuity of tenure of large @-@ scale holdings , focused on the mines , from the Roman period . 
 William Wilberforce 's visit to Cheddar in 1789 , during which he saw the poor circumstances of the locals , inspired Hannah More to begin her work improving the conditions of the Mendip miners and agricultural workers . Under her influence , schools were built and children were formally instructed in reading and Christian doctrine . Between 1770 and 1813 some 7 @,@ 300 ha ( 18 @,@ 000 acres ) of land on the hills were enclosed , mainly with dry stone walls that today form a key part of the landscape . In 2006 funding was obtained to maintain and improve the walls , which had steadily deteriorated over the years . 
 Over 300 " Mendip Motor Cars " were built by an engineering works based in Chewton Mendip in the years immediately before and after World War I. In World War II a bombing decoy was constructed on top of Black Down at Beacon Batch in an attempt to confuse bombers aiming to damage the city of Bristol , and piles of stones ( known as cairns ) were created to prevent enemy aircraft using the hilltop as a landing site . 
 In the 1960s , the tallest mast in the region at 293 metres ( 961 ft ) above ground level , the Mendip UHF television transmitter , was installed on Pen Hill near Wells , one of the highest points of the Mendips . The transmitter 's antenna rises to almost 589 metres ( 1 @,@ 932 ft ) above sea level . Since 2003 , arguments have raged over plans to erect a wind turbine near Chewton Mendip . The proposal was initially rejected by Mendip District Council , which enjoyed the support of a range of local groups and organisations , on the grounds that the environmental impact on the edge of the AONB outweighed the nominal amount of electricity which would be generated . In April 2006 , however , a planning enquiry gave <unk> permission to build a 102 m ( 335 ft ) turbine during the following year . 
 The Mendip Power Group are installing micro @-@ hydroelectric turbines in a number of historic former watermills . The first to start electricity generation was <unk> Mill , on the River Frome , which began operating in 2006 and produces 50 – 55 kW . Other mills in the Group , together with initial assessments of their capacity , include : Stowford Mill ( 37 kW ) and Shawford Mill ( 31 kW ) , <unk> Iron Works ( 10 kW ) , <unk> House ( 5 @.@ 8 kW ) , <unk> Mill ( 5 @.@ 2 kW ) , Bleadney Mill ( 5 @.@ 4 kW ) , <unk> Mill ( 6 @.@ 6 kW ) , Old Mill ( 5 @.@ 2 kW ) and <unk> Mill ( 9 @.@ 9 kW ) . 
 = = Government and politics = = 
 The western end of the Mendip Hills has , since 1972 , been designated an Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty ( AONB ) under the National Parks and Access to the Countryside Act 1949 . The Mendip Society , which was formed in 1965 , helps to raise awareness of this designation and protect the area . The society now has 700 members and runs a programme of guided walks and educational presentations . The society also has a small grants fund to assist communities with the conservation and enhancement of the landscape and to encourage its enjoyment and celebration . 
 As their landscapes have similar scenic qualities , AONBs may be compared to the national parks of England and Wales . AONBs are created under the same legislation as the national parks , the National Parks and Access to the Countryside Act 1949 . In contrast to national parks , which have their own authorities and legal power to prevent unsympathetic development , very few statutory duties are imposed on the local authorities within an AONB . However , further regulation and protection of AONBs was added by the Countryside and Rights of Way Act 2000 . 
 In 2009 proposals were being prepared by the Mendip AONB in an attempt to get the Mendips designated as a Geopark , which is defined by the United Nations Educational , Scientific and Cultural Organization ( UNESCO ) in its UNESCO Geoparks International Network of Geoparks programme as " A territory encompassing one or more sites of scientific importance , not only for geological reasons but also by virtue of its archaeological , ecological or cultural value . " 
 The Mendip Hills Partnership , which performs an administrative role , includes the five local authorities that cover the AONB , statutory bodies such as the Countryside Agency and English Nature , together with parish councils and other organisations and groups that have an interest in the conservation and care of the area . The Mendip Hills AONB staff unit of the partnership is based at the Charterhouse Centre in the heart of the AONB . The AONB Unit consists of four staff : a manager , project officer , support officer and part @-@ time planning officer . They are supported by 20 volunteer rangers . In 2005 a proposal was submitted to the Countryside Agency to extend the Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty to Steep Holm and Brean Down in the west and towards Frome in the east . 
 Many of the villages on the Mendips have their own parish councils , which have some responsibility for local issues . Local people also elect councillors to district councils or to unitary authorities . The 198 km2 ( 76 sq mi ) of the AONB are split across four districts : Mendip District Council 87 @.@ 67 km2 ( 33 @.@ 8 sq mi ) , Sedgemoor District Council 34 @.@ 03 km2 ( 13 @.@ 1 sq mi ) , Bath and North East Somerset Council 36 @.@ 95 km2 ( 14 @.@ 3 sq mi ) , and North Somerset Council 39 @.@ 35 km2 ( 15 @.@ 2 sq mi ) . Each of the villages is also part of a parliamentary constituency : Wells , Weston @-@ super @-@ Mare or North East Somerset . The area is also part of the South West England European Parliament constituency . Avon and Somerset Constabulary provides police services to the area . 
 = = Demographics = = 
 The population on the higher plateau is widely dispersed in small farms and hamlets , but , rather than working in agriculture or forestry , most people now commute to employment in surrounding cities and towns . The largest village on the plateau on the western Mendips is Priddy , which had a population of 624 people at the time of the 2011 census along with the smaller hamlet of Charterhouse . The larger villages and towns are on the lower slopes of the western hills , often in river valleys . Axbridge , with a population of 2 @,@ 057 , and Cheddar ( population 5 @,@ 755 ) , both within the Sedgemoor district and the Mendip town of Shepton Mallet ( 10 @,@ 369 ) , and the city of Wells ( 10 @,@ 636 ) are along the southern border of the hills . The North Somerset parishes of Blagdon ( 1 @,@ 116 ) , and the parishes of Compton Martin ( 508 ) , East Harptree ( 644 ) and West Harptree ( 439 ) , lie along the northern edge . 
 Further east are the towns of Midsomer Norton and Radstock and the village of Paulton ( population 5 @,@ 302 ) within the unitary authority of Bath and North East Somerset . 
 = = Transport and communications = = 
 In the middle of the 1st century , ancient tracks across the hills were superseded by the Roman Fosse Way , from Bath to Ilchester , a branch of which served the Charterhouse lead mines . Stratton @-@ on @-@ the @-@ Fosse and Lydford @-@ on @-@ Fosse , two villages of the Mendips , reflect the arrival of this new road . Much of the high plateau , however , remained uncultivated and unenclosed until the 18th century , resulting in many roads remaining as narrow winding lanes between high banks and hedges or stone walls . Where the tracks had their origins as drovers roads , they typically become open roads with wide verges . The roads tend to follow the line of gorges and valleys , as at Cheddar Gorge . 
 The more major of the current roads often started as turnpikes in the 16th century . These avoid the highest areas of the hills . To the north of the western part of the Mendips , the A368 separates the hills from the Chew Valley , while on the southern edge the A371 similarly runs along the bottom of the scarp slope between the hills and the Somerset Levels . The western end of the hills is crossed by the M5 motorway and A38 . Further east , and running almost north to south , are the A37 and A39 . 
 During the late 19th and early 20th century , the Bristol and North Somerset Railway ran roughly parallel to the A37 . Further south and west , the Cheddar Valley Line and Wrington Vale Light Railway , branches of the Bristol and Exeter Railway , served towns and villages from Cheddar to Wells . In the east , the Somerset and Dorset Joint Railway ran south from Bath into Dorset , and also served Wells . These have all now closed , but Mendip Rail has freight lines to carry limestone from the quarries of the Mendip Hills . The Somerset Coal Canal reached some of the pits of the Somerset Coalfield in the eastern end of the Mendips . 
 = = Quarrying = = 
 In recent centuries the Mendips , like the Cotswolds to the north , have been quarried for stone to build the cities of Bath and Bristol , as well as smaller towns in Somerset . The quarries are now major suppliers of road stone to southern England , among them producing around twelve million tonnes of limestone every year , employing over two thousand people , and turning over approximately £ 150 million per annum . 
 There are two main rock types on the Mendips : the Devonian sandstones visible around Blackdown and <unk> and the Carboniferous <unk> , which dominate the hills and surround the older rock formations . There are nine active quarries and a host of disused sites , several of which have been designated as geological Sites of Special Scientific Interest by English Nature . Because of the effect quarrying has on the environment and local communities , a campaign has been started to halt the creation of any new quarries and to restrict the activities and expansion of the existing ones . 
 = = Sport , leisure , and tourism = = 
 The Mendips are home to a wide range of outdoor sports and leisure activities , including hunting , caving , climbing , and abseiling . The rich variety of fauna and flora also makes it attractive for hillwalking and those interested in natural history . 
 = = = Caving and cave diving = = = 
 Large areas of limestone on the Mendips have been worn away by water , making the hills a national centre for caving . Some of the caves have been known about since the establishment of the Mendip lead mining industry in Roman times . However , many have been discovered or explored only in the 20th century . Specialist equipment and knowledge is required to visit the vast majority of the caves , but Cheddar Gorge and Wookey Hole Caves are two show caves which are easily accessible to the public . The active Mendip Caving Group and other local caving organisations organise trips and continue to discover new caverns . 
 The Hills conceal the largest underground river system in Britain ; attempts to move from one cave to another through the underground rivers led to the development of cave diving in Britain . The first cave dive was attempted at Swildon 's Hole in 1934 , and the first successful dive was achieved the following year at Wookey Hole Caves , which has the deepest sump in Britain at 76 m ( 250 ft ) . The cave complexes at St. Dunstan 's Well Catchment , Lamb Leer , and Priddy Caves have been identified as Sites of Special Scientific Interest . The deepest cave in the Mendip Hills is Charterhouse Cave with a vertical range of 220 m ( 722 ft ) . 
 Many caves in the Mendip area were excavated for archaeological and natural history studies by pioneer explorer Herbert E. Balch and were expertly photographed by <unk> Harry Savory early in the 20th century using huge cameras , glass plates and flash powder . 
 = = = Walking = = = 
 Several sites on the Mendips are designated as open access land , and there are many footpaths and bridleways that are generally clearly marked . 
 The Limestone Link is a 58 @-@ kilometre ( 36 mi ) long @-@ distance footpath from the Mendips to the Cotswolds , and the Mendip Way covers 80 km ( 50 mi ) from Weston @-@ super @-@ Mare to Frome . The western section runs from the Bristol Channel at Uphill Cliff , affording views over the Somerset Levels , crosses the central Mendip plateau leading down to Cheddar Gorge , and then continues to Wells and Frome . The much longer Monarch 's Way runs for 990 km ( 620 mi ) , from Worcester to Shoreham @-@ by @-@ Sea in West Sussex . It closely follows the route taken by Charles II after his defeat at the Battle of Worcester in 1651 . The route enters Somerset near Chewton Mendip and crosses the Mendip Hills heading for Wells . A shorter local path , the 72 @-@ kilometre ( 45 mi ) long Mendip Pub Trail , connects six pubs owned by <unk> Brewery . The trail runs from Hinton Blewett through Priddy , Axbridge , Bleadon , Rowberrow , and Compton Martin . 
 = = = Motor Sport = = = 
 Various forms of oval short @-@ track racing , including F1 and F2 stock cars , have taken place at Mendips Raceway since 1969 . The track is located on Warrens Hill Road , on the rim of Batts Combe quarry between Shipham and Charterhouse . 
 = = Mendips in the arts = = 
 Thomas Hardy described the Mendips as " a range of limestone rocks stretching from the shores of the Bristol Channel into the middle of Somersetshire " , and several of his books refer to the Mendips or sites on the hills . According to legend , Augustus Montague <unk> was inspired to write the words of the hymn " Rock of Ages " while sheltering under a rock in Burrington Combe during a thunderstorm in 1763 ; there is a metal plaque marking the site . 
 = Rutherford B. Hayes = 
 Rutherford Birchard Hayes ( October 4 , 1822 – January 17 , 1893 ) was the 19th President of the United States ( 1877 – 81 ) . As president , he oversaw the end of Reconstruction , began the efforts that led to civil service reform , and attempted to reconcile the divisions left over from the Civil War and Reconstruction . 
 Hayes , an attorney in Ohio , became city solicitor of Cincinnati from 1858 to 1861 . When the Civil War began , he left a fledgling political career to join the Union Army as an officer . Hayes was wounded five times , most seriously at the Battle of South Mountain ; he earned a reputation for bravery in combat and was promoted to the rank of major general . After the war , he served in the U.S. Congress from 1865 to 1867 as a Republican . Hayes left Congress to run for Governor of Ohio and was elected to two consecutive terms , from 1868 to 1872 , and then to a third term , from 1876 to 1877 . 
 In 1876 , Hayes was elected president in one of the most contentious elections in national history . He lost the popular vote to Democrat Samuel J. Tilden but he won an intensely disputed electoral college vote after a Congressional commission awarded him twenty contested electoral votes . The result was the Compromise of 1877 , in which the Democrats acquiesced to Hayes 's election and Hayes ended all U.S. military involvement in Southern politics . 
 Hayes believed in meritocratic government , equal treatment without regard to race , and improvement through education . He ordered federal troops to crush the Great Railroad Strike of 1877 . He implemented modest civil service reforms that laid the groundwork for further reform in the 1880s and 1890s . He vetoed the Bland – Allison Act , which would have put silver money into circulation and raised prices , insisting that maintenance of the gold standard was essential to economic recovery . His policy toward Western Indians anticipated the assimilationist program of the Dawes Act of 1887 . 
 Hayes kept his pledge not to run for re @-@ election , retired to his home in Ohio , and became an advocate of social and educational reform . Biographer Ari <unk> says his greatest achievement was to restore popular faith in the presidency and to reverse the deterioration of executive power that had set in after Abraham Lincoln 's death . Although supporters have praised his commitment to civil service reform and defense of civil rights , Hayes is generally listed among the bottom half in historians ' rankings of U.S. presidents . 
 = = Family and early life = = 
 = = = Childhood and family history = = = 
 Rutherford Birchard Hayes was born in Delaware , Ohio , on October 4 , 1822 , the son of Rutherford Hayes , Jr. and Sophia Birchard . Hayes 's father , a Vermont storekeeper , took the family to Ohio in 1817 . He died ten weeks before Rutherford 's birth . Sophia took charge of the family , bringing up Hayes and his sister , Fanny , the only two of their four children to survive to adulthood . She never remarried ; Sophia 's younger brother , Sardis Birchard , lived with the family for a time . He was always close to Hayes and became a father figure to him , contributing to his early education . 
 Through both his father and mother , Hayes was of New England colonial ancestry . His earliest American ancestor emigrated to Connecticut from Scotland in 1625 . Hayes 's great @-@ grandfather , Ezekiel Hayes , was a militia captain in Connecticut in the American Revolutionary War , but Ezekiel 's son ( Hayes 's grandfather , also named Rutherford ) left his Branford home during the war for the relative peace of Vermont . His mother 's ancestors arrived in Vermont at a similar time , and most of his close relatives outside Ohio continued to live there . John Noyes , an uncle by marriage , had been his father 's business partner in Vermont and was later elected to Congress . His first cousin , Mary Jane Noyes Mead , was the mother of sculptor Larkin Goldsmith Mead and architect William Rutherford Mead . John Humphrey Noyes , the founder of the Oneida Community , was also a first cousin . He became a member of the Sons of the American Revolution based on his descent from Daniel Austin and Elias Birchard . 
 = = = Education and early law career = = = 
 Hayes attended the common schools in Delaware , Ohio , and enrolled in 1836 at the Methodist Norwalk Seminary in Norwalk , Ohio . He did well at Norwalk , and the following year transferred to a preparatory school in Middletown , Connecticut , where he studied Latin and Ancient Greek . Returning to Ohio , Hayes entered Kenyon College in Gambier in 1838 . He enjoyed his time at Kenyon , and was successful scholastically ; while there , he joined several student societies and became interested in Whig politics . He graduated with highest honors in 1842 and addressed the class as its valedictorian . 
 After briefly reading law in Columbus , Ohio , Hayes moved east to attend Harvard Law School in 1843 . Graduating with an LL.B , he was admitted to the Ohio bar in 1845 and opened his own law office in Lower Sandusky ( now Fremont ) . Business was slow at first , but he gradually attracted a few clients and also represented his uncle Sardis in real estate litigation . In 1847 , Hayes became ill with what his doctor thought to be tuberculosis . Thinking a change in climate would help , he considered enlisting in the Mexican – American War , but on his doctor 's advice he instead visited family in New England . Returning from there , Hayes and his uncle Sardis made a long journey to Texas , where Hayes visited with Guy M. Bryan , a Kenyon classmate and distant relative . Business remained meager on his return to Lower Sandusky , and Hayes decided to move to Cincinnati . 
 = = = Cincinnati law practice and marriage = = = 
 Hayes moved to Cincinnati in 1850 , and opened a law office with John W. Herron , a lawyer from Chillicothe . Later , Herron joined a more established firm and Hayes formed a new partnership with William K. Rogers and Richard M. <unk> . He found business better in Cincinnati , and enjoyed the social attractions of the larger city , joining the Cincinnati Literary Society and the Odd Fellows Club . He also attended the Episcopal Church in Cincinnati but did not become a member . 
 Hayes courted his future wife , Lucy Webb , during his time there . His mother had encouraged him to get to know Lucy years earlier , but Hayes had believed she was too young and focused his attention on other women . Four years later , Hayes began to spend more time with Lucy . They became engaged in 1851 and married on December 30 , 1852 , at the house of Lucy 's mother . Over the next five years , Lucy gave birth to three sons : Birchard Austin ( 1853 ) , Webb Cook ( 1856 ) , and Rutherford Platt ( 1858 ) . Lucy , a Methodist , was a teetotaler and abolitionist . She influenced her husband 's views on those issues , although he never formally joined her church . 
 Hayes had begun his law practice dealing primarily with commercial issues but won greater prominence in Cincinnati as a criminal defense attorney , defending several people accused of murder . In one case , he used a form of the insanity defense that saved the accused from the gallows ; the woman was instead confined to a mental institution . Hayes also defended slaves who had escaped and were accused under the recently enacted Fugitive Slave Act of 1850 . As Cincinnati was just across the Ohio River from Kentucky , a slave state , it was a destination for escaping slaves and many such cases were tried in its courts . A staunch abolitionist , Hayes found his work on behalf of fugitive slaves personally gratifying as well as politically useful , as it raised his profile in the newly formed Republican party . 
 His political reputation rose with his professional plaudits . Hayes declined the Republican nomination for a judgeship in 1856 . Two years later , some Republicans proposed Hayes to fill a vacancy on the bench and he considered accepting the appointment until the office of city solicitor also became vacant . The city council elected Hayes as city solicitor to fill the vacancy , and he won a full two @-@ year term from the voters in April 1859 with a larger majority than other Republicans on the ticket . 
 = = Civil War = = 
 = = = West Virginia and South Mountain = = = 
 As the Southern states started to secede after Lincoln 's election to the Presidency in 1860 , Hayes was lukewarm on the idea of a civil war to restore the Union . Considering that the two sides might be irreconcilable , he suggested that the Union " [ l ] et them go . " Although Ohio had voted for Lincoln in 1860 , the Cincinnati voters turned against the Republican party after secession . Its residents included many from the South , and they voted for the Democrats and Know @-@ Nothings , who combined to sweep the city elections in April 1861 , ejecting Hayes from the city solicitor 's office . 
 Returning to private practice , Hayes formed a very brief law partnership with Leopold Markbreit , lasting three days before the war began . After the Confederates had fired on Fort Sumter , Hayes resolved his doubts and joined a volunteer company composed of his Literary Society friends . That June , Governor William Dennison appointed several of the officers of the volunteer company to positions in the 23rd Regiment of Ohio Volunteer Infantry . Hayes was promoted to major , and his friend and college classmate Stanley Matthews was appointed lieutenant colonel . Joining the regiment as a private was William McKinley , another future president . 
 After a month of training , Hayes and the 23rd Ohio set out for western Virginia in July 1861 as a part of the Kanawha Division . They passed the next few months out of contact with the enemy until September , when the regiment encountered Confederates at Carnifex Ferry in present @-@ day West Virginia and drove them back . In November , Hayes was promoted to lieutenant colonel ( Matthews having been promoted to colonel of another regiment ) and led his troops deeper into western Virginia , where they entered winter quarters . The division resumed its advance the following spring , and Hayes led several raids against the rebel forces , on one of which he sustained a minor injury to his knee . That September , Hayes 's regiment was called east to reinforce General John Pope 's Army of Virginia at the Second Battle of Bull Run . Although Hayes and his troops did not arrive in time for the battle , they joined the Army of the Potomac as it hurried north to cut off Robert E. Lee 's Army of Northern Virginia , which was advancing into Maryland . Marching north , the 23rd was the lead regiment encountering the Confederates at the Battle of South Mountain on September 14 . Hayes led a charge against an entrenched position and was shot through his left arm , fracturing the bone . He had one of his men tie a handkerchief above the wound in an effort to stop the bleeding , and continued to lead his men in the battle . While resting , he ordered his men to meet a flanking attack , but instead his entire command moved backward , leaving Hayes lying in between the lines . 
 Eventually , his men brought Hayes back behind their lines , and he was taken to hospital . The regiment continued on to Antietam , but Hayes was out of action for the rest of the campaign . In October , he was promoted to colonel and assigned to command of the first brigade of the Kanawha Division as a brevet brigadier general . 
 = = = Army of the Shenandoah = = = 
 The division spent the following winter and spring near Charleston , Virginia ( present @-@ day West Virginia ) , out of contact with the enemy . Hayes saw little action until July 1863 , when the division skirmished with John Hunt Morgan 's cavalry at the Battle of Buffington Island . Returning to Charleston for the rest of the summer , Hayes spent the fall encouraging the men of the 23rd Ohio to re @-@ enlist , and many did so . In 1864 , the Army command structure in West Virginia was reorganized , and Hayes 's division was assigned to George Crook 's Army of West Virginia . Advancing into southwestern Virginia , they destroyed Confederate salt and lead mines there . On May 9 , they engaged Confederate troops at Cloyd 's Mountain , where Hayes and his men charged the enemy entrenchments and drove the rebels from the field . Following the rout , the Union forces destroyed Confederate supplies and again successfully skirmished with the enemy . 
 Hayes and his brigade moved to the Shenandoah Valley for the Valley Campaigns of 1864 . Crook 's corps was attached to Major General David Hunter 's Army of the Shenandoah and soon back in contact with Confederate forces , capturing Lexington , Virginia on June 11 . They continued south toward Lynchburg , tearing up railroad track as they advanced . Hunter believed the troops at Lynchburg were too powerful , however , and Hayes and his brigade returned to West Virginia . Hayes thought that Hunter lacked aggression , writing in a letter home that " General Crook would have taken Lynchburg . " Before the army could make another attempt , Confederate General Jubal Early 's raid into Maryland forced their recall to the north . Early 's army surprised them at Kernstown on July 24 , where Hayes was slightly wounded by a bullet to the shoulder . Hayes also had a horse shot out from under him , and the army was defeated . Retreating into Maryland , the army was reorganized again , with Major General Philip Sheridan replacing Hunter . By August , Early was retreating up the valley , with Sheridan in pursuit . Hayes 's troops fended off a Confederate assault at <unk> and advanced to Opequon Creek , where they broke the enemy lines and pursued them farther south . They followed up the victory with another at Fisher 's Hill on September 22 , and one more at Cedar Creek on October 19 . At Cedar Creek , Hayes sprained his ankle after being thrown from a horse and was struck in the head by a spent round , which did not cause serious damage . Hayes 's leadership and bravery drew the attention of his superiors , with Ulysses S. Grant later writing of Hayes that " [ h ] is conduct on the field was marked by conspicuous gallantry as well as the display of qualities of a higher order than that of mere personal daring . " 
 Cedar Creek marked the end of the campaign . Hayes was promoted to brigadier general in October 1864 and brevetted major general . Around this time , Hayes learned of the birth of his son , George Crook Hayes . The army went into winter quarters once more , and in spring 1865 the war quickly came to a close with Lee 's surrender to Grant at Appomattox . Hayes visited Washington , D.C. that May and observed the Grand Review of the Armies , after which he and the 23rd Ohio returned to their home state to be mustered out of the service . 
 = = Post @-@ war politics = = 
 = = = Congressman = = = 
 While serving in the Army of the Shenandoah in 1864 , Hayes was nominated by Republicans to run for the House of Representatives from Ohio 's 2nd congressional district . Asked by friends in Cincinnati to leave the army to campaign , Hayes refused , saying that an " officer fit for duty who at this crisis would abandon his post to <unk> for a seat in Congress ought to be scalped . " Instead , Hayes wrote several letters to the voters explaining his political positions and was elected by a 2 @,@ 400 @-@ vote majority over the incumbent Democrat Alexander Long . 
 When the 39th Congress assembled in December 1865 , Hayes was sworn in as a part of a large Republican majority . Hayes identified with the moderate wing of the party , but was willing to vote with the radicals for the sake of party unity . The major legislative effort of the Congress was the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution , for which Hayes voted and which passed both houses of Congress in June 1866 . Hayes 's beliefs were in line with his fellow Republicans on Reconstruction issues : that the South should be restored to the Union , but not without adequate protections for freedmen and other black southerners . President Andrew Johnson , who succeeded to office following Lincoln 's assassination , to the contrary wanted to re @-@ admit the seceded states quickly without first ensuring that they adopted laws protecting the newly freed slaves ' civil rights ; he also granted pardons to many of the leading former Confederates . Hayes , along with congressional Republicans , disagreed . They worked to reject Johnson 's vision of Reconstruction and to pass the Civil Rights Act of 1866 . 
 Re @-@ elected in 1866 , Hayes returned to the lame @-@ duck session to vote for the Tenure of Office Act , which ensured that Johnson could not remove administration officials without the Senate 's consent . He also unsuccessfully pressed for a civil service reform bill that attracted the votes of many reform @-@ minded Republicans . Hayes continued to vote with the majority in the 40th Congress on the Reconstruction Acts , but resigned in July 1867 to campaign for governor of Ohio . 
 = = = Governor of Ohio = = = 
 A popular Congressman and former Army officer , Hayes was considered by Ohio Republicans to be an excellent standard @-@ bearer for the 1867 election campaign . Hayes 's political views were more moderate than the Republican party 's platform , although he agreed with the proposed amendment to the Ohio state constitution that would guarantee suffrage to black male Ohioans . Hayes 's opponent , Allen G. Thurman , made the proposed amendment the centerpiece of the campaign , and both men campaigned vigorously , making speeches across the state , mostly focusing on the suffrage question . The election was mostly a disappointment to Republicans , as the amendment failed to pass and Democrats gained a majority in the state legislature . Hayes thought at first that he , too , had lost , but the final tally showed that he had won the election by 2 @,@ 983 votes of 484 @,@ 603 votes cast . 
 As a Republican governor with a Democratic legislature , Hayes had a limited role in governing , especially since Ohio 's governor had no veto power . Despite these constraints , Hayes oversaw the establishment of a school for deaf @-@ mutes and a reform school for girls . He endorsed the impeachment of President Andrew Johnson and urged his conviction , which failed by one vote in the United States Senate . Nominated for a second term in 1869 , Hayes campaigned again for equal rights for black Ohioans and sought to associate his Democratic opponent , George H. Pendleton with disunion and racism . Hayes was re @-@ elected with an increased majority , and the Republicans took the legislature , ensuring Ohio 's ratification of the Fifteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution , which guaranteed black ( male ) suffrage . With a Republican legislature , Hayes 's second term was more enjoyable . Suffrage was expanded and a state Agricultural and Mechanical College ( later to become The Ohio State University ) established . He also proposed a reduction in state taxes and reform of the state prison system . Choosing not to seek re @-@ election , Hayes looked forward to retiring from politics in 1872 . 
 = = = Private life and return to politics = = = 
 As Hayes prepared to leave office , several delegations of reform @-@ minded Republicans urged him to run against the incumbent Republican , John Sherman , for United States Senate . Hayes declined the offers , preferring to preserve party unity and retire to private life . Hayes especially looked forward to spending time with his children , two of whom ( daughter Fanny and son Scott ) had been born in the past five years . Initially , Hayes tried to promote railway extensions to his hometown , Fremont . He also managed some real estate he had acquired in Duluth , Minnesota . Not entirely removed from politics , Hayes held out some hope of a cabinet appointment , but was disappointed to receive only an appointment as assistant U.S. treasurer at Cincinnati , which he turned down . He agreed to be nominated for his old House seat in 1872 but was not disappointed when he lost the election to Henry B. Banning , a fellow Kenyon College alumnus . In 1873 , Lucy gave birth to another son , Manning Force Hayes . That same year , the Panic of 1873 hurt business prospects across the nation , including Hayes 's . Sardis Birchard died that year and the Hayes family moved into Spiegel Grove , the grand house Birchard had built with them in mind . 
 Hayes hoped to remain out of politics in order to pay off the debts he had incurred during the Panic , but when the Republican state convention nominated him for governor in 1875 , he accepted . The campaign against Democratic nominee William Allen focused primarily on Protestant fears of the possibility of state aid to Catholic schools . Hayes was against such funding and , while he was not known to be personally anti @-@ Catholic , he allowed anti @-@ Catholic fervor to contribute to the enthusiasm for his candidacy . The campaign was a success , and Hayes was returned to the governorship by a 5 @,@ 544 @-@ vote majority . 
 = = Election of 1876 = = 
 = = = Republican nomination and campaign against Tilden = = = 
 Hayes 's success in Ohio immediately elevated him to the top ranks of Republican politicians under consideration for the presidency in 1876 . The Ohio delegation to the 1876 Republican National Convention was united behind him , and Senator John Sherman did all in his power to bring Hayes the nomination . In June 1876 , the convention assembled with James G. Blaine of Maine as the favorite . Blaine started with a significant lead in the delegate count but could not muster a majority . As he failed to gain votes , the delegates looked elsewhere for a nominee and settled on Hayes on the seventh ballot . The convention then selected Representative William A. Wheeler of New York for Vice President , a man about whom Hayes had recently asked , " I am ashamed to say : who is Wheeler ? " 
 The Democratic nominee was Samuel J. Tilden , the Governor of New York . Tilden was considered a formidable adversary who , like Hayes , had a reputation for honesty . Also like Hayes , Tilden was a hard @-@ money man and supported civil service reform . In accordance with the custom of the time , the campaign was conducted by surrogates , with Hayes and Tilden remaining in their respective home towns . The poor economic conditions made the party in power unpopular and made Hayes suspect that he might lose the election . Both candidates focused their attention on the swing states of New York and Indiana , as well as the three southern states — Louisiana , South Carolina , and Florida — where Reconstruction governments still barely ruled , amid recurring political violence . The Republicans emphasized the danger of letting Democrats run the nation so soon after southern Democrats provoked the Civil War and , to a lesser extent , the danger a Democratic administration would pose to the recently won civil rights of southern blacks . Democrats , for their part , trumpeted Tilden 's record of reform and contrasted it with the corruption of the incumbent Grant administration . 
 As the returns were tallied on election day , it was clear that the race was close : Democrats had carried most of the South , as well as New York , Indiana , Connecticut , and New Jersey . In the Northeast , an increasing number of immigrants and their descendants voted Democratic . The popular vote also favored Tilden , but Republicans realized that if they held the three unredeemed southern states together with some of the western states , they would emerge with an electoral college majority . 
 = = = Disputed electoral votes = = = 
 On November 11 , three days after election day , Tilden appeared to have won 184 electoral votes : one short of a majority . Hayes appeared to have 166 votes , with the 19 votes of Florida , Louisiana , and South Carolina still in doubt . Republicans and Democrats each claimed victory in the three latter states , but the results in those states were rendered uncertain because of fraud by both parties . To further complicate matters , one of the three electors from Oregon ( a state Hayes had won ) was disqualified , reducing Hayes 's total to 165 , and raising the disputed votes to 20 . If either candidate could be awarded the 20 disputed votes , he would be elected president . 
 There was considerable debate about which person or house of Congress was authorized to decide between the competing slates of electors , with the Republican Senate and the Democratic House each claiming priority . By January 1877 , with the question still unresolved , Congress and President Grant agreed to submit the matter to a bipartisan Electoral Commission , which would be authorized to determine the fate of the disputed electoral votes . The Commission was to be made up of five representatives , five senators , and five Supreme Court justices . To ensure partisan balance , there would be seven Democrats and seven Republicans , with Justice David Davis , an independent respected by both parties , as the fifteenth member . The balance was upset when Democrats in the Illinois legislature elected Davis to the Senate , hoping to sway his vote . Davis disappointed Democrats by refusing to serve on the Commission because of his election to the Senate . As all of the remaining Justices were Republicans , Justice Joseph P. Bradley , believed to be the most independent @-@ minded of them , was selected to take Davis 's place on the Commission . The Commission met in February and the eight Republicans voted to award all 20 electoral votes to Hayes . Democrats were outraged by the result and attempted a filibuster to prevent Congress from accepting the Commission 's findings . 
 As the March 4 inauguration day neared , Republican and Democratic Congressional leaders met at Wormley 's Hotel in Washington to negotiate a compromise . Republicans promised concessions in exchange for Democratic acquiescence in the Committee 's decision . The primary concession Hayes promised would be the withdrawal of federal troops from the South and an acceptance of the election of Democratic governments in the remaining " unredeemed " states of the South . The Democrats agreed , and on March 2 , the filibuster was ended . Hayes was elected , but Reconstruction was finished . On April 3 , Hayes ordered the Secretary of War George W. McCrary to withdrawal federal troops stationed at the South Carolina State House to their barracks . Finally on April 20 , Hayes ordered the Secretary of War to send the federal troops stationed at the St. Louis Hotel in New Orleans to Jackson Barracks . 
 = = Presidency 1877 – 1881 = = 
 = = = Inauguration = = = 
 Because March 4 , 1877 fell on a Sunday , Hayes took the oath of office privately on Saturday , March 3 , in the Red Room of the White House , the first president to do so in the Executive Mansion . He took the oath publicly on the following Monday on the East Portico of the United States Capitol . In his inaugural address , Hayes attempted to soothe the passions of the past few months , saying that " he serves his party best who serves his country best " . He pledged to support " wise , honest , and peaceful local self @-@ government " in the South , as well as reform of the civil service and a full return to the gold standard . Despite his message of conciliation , many Democrats never considered Hayes 's election legitimate and referred to him as " <unk> " or " His <unk> " for the next four years . 
 = = = The South and the end of Reconstruction = = = 
 Hayes had been a firm supporter of Republican Reconstruction policies throughout his political career , but the first major act of his presidency was an end to Reconstruction and the return of the South to " home rule " . Even without the conditions of the Wormley 's Hotel agreement , Hayes would have been hard @-@ pressed to continue the policies of his predecessors . The House of Representatives in the 45th Congress was controlled by a majority of Democrats that refused to appropriate enough funds for the army to continue to garrison the South . Even among Republicans , devotion to continued military Reconstruction was fading in the face of persistent Southern insurgency and violence . Only two states were still under Reconstruction 's sway when Hayes assumed the Presidency and , without troops to enforce the voting rights laws , these soon fell . 
 Hayes 's later attempts to protect the rights of southern blacks were ineffective , as were his attempts to rebuild Republican strength in the South . He did , however , defeat Congress 's efforts to curtail federal power to monitor federal elections . Democrats in Congress passed an army appropriation bill in 1879 with a rider that repealed the Enforcement Acts , which had been used to suppress the Ku Klux Klan . Those Acts , passed during Reconstruction , made it a crime to prevent someone from voting because of his race . Hayes was determined to preserve the law protecting black voters , and he vetoed the appropriation . The Democrats did not have enough votes to override the veto , but they passed a new bill with the same rider . Hayes vetoed this as well , and the process was repeated three times more . Finally , Hayes signed an appropriation without the offensive rider , but Congress refused to pass another bill to fund federal marshals , who were vital to the enforcement of the Enforcement Acts . The election laws remained in effect , but the funds to enforce them were curtailed for the time being . 
 Hayes tried to reconcile the social mores of the South with the recently passed civil rights laws by distributing patronage among southern Democrats . " My task was to wipe out the color line , to abolish sectionalism , to end the war and bring peace , " he wrote in his diary . " To do this , I was ready to resort to unusual measures and to risk my own standing and reputation within my party and the country . " All of his efforts were in vain ; Hayes failed to convince the South to accept the idea of racial equality and failed to convince Congress to appropriate funds to enforce the civil rights laws . 
 = = = Civil service reform = = = 
 Hayes took office determined to reform the system of civil service appointments , which had been based on the spoils system since Andrew Jackson was president . Instead of giving federal jobs to political supporters , Hayes wished to award them by merit according to an examination that all applicants would take . Immediately , Hayes 's call for reform brought him into conflict with the Stalwart , or pro @-@ spoils , branch of the Republican party . Senators of both parties were accustomed to being consulted about political appointments and turned against Hayes . Foremost among his enemies was New York Senator Roscoe Conkling , who fought Hayes 's reform efforts at every turn . 
 To show his commitment to reform , Hayes appointed one of the best @-@ known advocates of reform , Carl Schurz , to be Secretary of the Interior and asked Schurz and William M. Evarts , his Secretary of State , to lead a special cabinet committee charged with drawing up new rules for federal appointments . John Sherman , the Treasury Secretary , ordered John Jay to investigate the New York Custom House , which was stacked with Conkling 's <unk> . Jay 's report suggested that the New York Custom House was so overstaffed with political appointees that 20 % of the employees were expendable . 
 Although he could not convince Congress to outlaw the spoils system , Hayes issued an executive order that forbade federal office holders from being required to make campaign contributions or otherwise taking part in party politics . Chester A. Arthur , the Collector of the Port of New York , and his subordinates Alonzo B. Cornell and George H. Sharpe , all Conkling supporters , refused to obey the president 's order . In September 1877 , Hayes demanded the three men 's resignations , which they refused to give . He submitted appointments of Theodore Roosevelt , Sr. , L. Bradford Prince , and Edwin Merritt — all supporters of Evarts , Conkling 's New York rival — to the Senate for confirmation as their replacements . The Senate 's Commerce Committee , which Conkling chaired , voted unanimously to reject the nominees , and the full Senate rejected Roosevelt and Prince by a vote of 31 – 25 , confirming Merritt only because Sharpe 's term had expired . 
 Hayes was forced to wait until July 1878 when , during a Congressional recess , he sacked Arthur and Cornell and replaced them by recess appointments of Merritt and Silas W. Burt , respectively . Conkling opposed the appointees ' confirmation when the Senate reconvened in February 1879 , but Merritt was approved by a vote of 31 – 25 , as was Burt by 31 – 19 , giving Hayes his most significant civil service reform victory . For the remainder of his term , Hayes pressed Congress to enact permanent reform legislation and fund the United States Civil Service Commission , even using his last annual message to Congress in 1880 to appeal for reform . While reform legislation did not pass during Hayes 's presidency , his advocacy provided " a significant precedent as well as the political impetus for the Pendleton Act of 1883 , " which was signed into law by President Chester Arthur . Hayes allowed some exceptions to the ban on assessments , permitting George Congdon Gorham , secretary of the Republican Congressional Committee , to solicit campaign contributions from federal office @-@ holders during the Congressional elections of 1878 . In 1880 , Hayes quickly forced Secretary of Navy Richard W. Thompson to resign office after Thompson had accepted a $ 25 @,@ 000 salary for a nominal job offered by French engineer Ferdinand de Lesseps to promote a French canal in Panama . 
 Hayes also dealt with corruption in the postal service . In 1880 , Schurz and Senator John A. Logan asked Hayes to shut down the " star route " rings , a system of corrupt contract profiteering in the Postal Service , and to fire Second Assistant Postmaster @-@ General Thomas J. Brady , the alleged ring leader . Hayes stopped granting new star route contracts , but let existing contracts continue to be enforced . Democrats accused Hayes of delaying proper investigation so as not to injure Republican chances in the 1880 elections but did not press the issue in their campaign literature , as members of both parties were implicated in the corruption . As historian Hans L. Trefousse later wrote , Hayes " hardly knew the chief suspect [ Brady ] and certainly had no connection with the [ star route ] corruption . " Although Hayes and the Congress both investigated the contracts and found no compelling evidence of wrongdoing , Brady and others were indicted for conspiracy in 1882 . After two trials , the defendants were found not guilty in 1883 . 
 = = = Great Railroad Strike = = = 
 In his first year in office , Hayes was faced with the United States ' largest labor disturbance to date , the Great Railroad Strike of 1877 . In order to make up for financial losses suffered since the panic of 1873 , the major railroads cut their employees ' wages several times in 1877 . In July of that year , workers from the Baltimore & Ohio Railroad walked off the job in Martinsburg , West Virginia , to protest their reduction in pay . The strike quickly spread to workers of the New York Central , Erie , and Pennsylvania railroads , with the strikers soon numbering in the thousands . Fearing a riot , Governor Henry M. Mathews asked Hayes to send federal troops to Martinsburg , and Hayes did so , but when the troops arrived there was no riot , only a peaceful protest . In Baltimore , however , a riot did erupt on July 20 and Hayes ordered the troops at Fort McHenry to assist the governor in its suppression ; by the time they arrived , the riot had dispersed . Pittsburgh next exploded into riots , but Hayes was reluctant to send in troops without the governor first requesting them . Other discontented citizens joined the railroad workers in rioting . After a few days , Hayes resolved to send in troops to protect federal property wherever it appeared to be threatened and gave Major General Winfield Scott Hancock overall command of the situation , marking the first use of federal troops to break a strike against a private company . The riot spread further , to Chicago and St. Louis , where strikers shut down railroad facilities . By July 29 , the riots had ended and federal troops returned to their barracks . Although no federal troops had killed any of the strikers , or been killed themselves , clashes between state militia troops and strikers resulted in deaths on both sides . The railroads were victorious in the short term , as the workers returned to their jobs and some wage cuts remained in effect . But , the public blamed the railroads for the strikes and violence , and they were compelled to improve working conditions and make no further cuts . Business leaders praised Hayes , but his own opinion was more equivocal ; as he recorded in his diary : " The strikes have been put down by force ; but now for the real remedy . Can 't something [ be ] done by education of strikers , by judicious control of capitalists , by wise general policy to end or diminish the evil ? The railroad strikers , as a rule , are good men , sober , intelligent , and industrious . " 
 = = = Currency debate = = = 
 Hayes confronted two issues regarding the currency , the first of which was the coinage of silver , and its relation to gold . In 1873 , the Coinage Act of 1873 stopped the coinage of silver for all coins worth a dollar or more , effectively tying the dollar to the value of gold . As a result , the money supply contracted and the effects of the Panic of 1873 grew worse , making it more expensive for debtors to pay debts they had contracted when currency was less valuable . Farmers and laborers , especially , clamored for the return of coinage in both metals , believing the increased money supply would restore wages and property values . Democratic Representative Richard P. Bland of Missouri proposed a bill that would require the United States to coin as much silver as miners could sell the government , thus increasing the money supply and aiding debtors . William B. Allison , a Republican from Iowa offered an amendment in the Senate limiting the coinage to two to four million dollars per month , and the resulting Bland – Allison Act passed both houses of Congress in 1878 . Hayes feared that the Act would cause inflation that would be ruinous to business , effectively impairing contracts that were based on the gold dollar , as the silver dollar proposed in the bill would have an intrinsic value of 90 to 92 percent of the existing gold dollar . Further , Hayes believed that inflating the currency was an act of dishonesty , saying " [ e ] <unk> and justice both demand an honest currency . " He vetoed the bill , but Congress overrode his veto , the only time it did so during his presidency . 
 The second issue concerned United States Notes ( commonly called greenbacks ) , a form of fiat currency first issued during the Civil War . The government accepted these notes as valid for payment of taxes and tariffs , but unlike ordinary dollars , they were not redeemable in gold . The Specie Payment Resumption Act of 1875 required the treasury to redeem any outstanding greenbacks in gold , thus retiring them from circulation and restoring a single , gold @-@ backed currency . Sherman agreed with Hayes 's favorable opinion of the Act , and stockpiled gold in preparation for the exchange of greenbacks for gold . Once the public was confident that they could redeem greenbacks for specie ( gold ) , however , few did so ; when the Act took effect in 1879 , only $ 130 @,@ 000 out of the $ 346 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 outstanding dollars in greenbacks were actually redeemed . Together with the Bland – Allison Act , the successful specie resumption effected a workable compromise between <unk> and hard money men and , as the world economy began to improve , agitation for more greenbacks and silver coinage quieted down for the rest of Hayes 's term in office . 
 = = = Foreign policy = = = 
 Most of Hayes 's foreign policy concerns involved Latin America . In 1878 , following the Paraguayan War , he arbitrated a territorial dispute between Argentina and Paraguay . Hayes awarded the disputed land in the Gran Chaco region to Paraguay , and the Paraguayans honored him by renaming a city ( Villa Hayes ) and a department ( Presidente Hayes ) in his honor . Hayes was also perturbed over the plans of Ferdinand de Lesseps , the builder of the Suez Canal , to construct a canal across the Isthmus of Panama , which was then owned by Colombia . Concerned about a repetition of French adventurism in Mexico , Hayes interpreted the Monroe Doctrine firmly . In a message to Congress , Hayes explained his opinion on the canal : " The policy of this country is a canal under American control ... The United States cannot consent to the surrender of this control to any European power or any combination of European powers . " 
 The Mexican border also drew Hayes 's attention . Throughout the 1870s , " lawless bands " often crossed the border on raids into Texas . Three months after taking office , Hayes granted the Army the power to pursue bandits , even if it required crossing into Mexican territory . Porfirio Díaz , the Mexican president , protested the order and sent troops to the border . The situation calmed as Díaz and Hayes agreed to jointly pursue bandits and Hayes agreed not to allow Mexican revolutionaries to raise armies in the United States . The violence along the border decreased , and in 1880 Hayes revoked the order allowing pursuit into Mexico . 
 Outside of the Western hemisphere , Hayes 's biggest foreign policy concern dealt with China . In 1868 , the Senate had ratified the Burlingame Treaty with China , allowing an unrestricted flow of Chinese immigrants into the country . As the economy soured after the Panic of 1873 , Chinese immigrants were blamed for depressing workmen 's wages . During the Great Railroad Strike of 1877 , anti @-@ Chinese riots broke out in San Francisco , and a third party , the Workingman 's Party , was formed with an emphasis on stopping Chinese immigration . In response , Congress passed a Chinese Exclusion Act in 1879 , abrogating the 1868 treaty . Hayes vetoed the bill , believing that the United States should not abrogate treaties without negotiation . The veto drew praise among eastern liberals , but Hayes was bitterly denounced in the West . In the subsequent furor , Democrats in the House of Representatives attempted to impeach him , but narrowly failed when Republicans prevented a quorum by refusing to vote . After the veto , Assistant Secretary of State Frederick W. Seward suggested that both countries work together to reduce immigration , and he and James Burrill Angell negotiated with the Chinese to do so . Congress passed a new law to that effect , the Chinese Exclusion Act of 1882 , after Hayes left office . 
 = = = Indian policy = = = 
 Interior Secretary Carl Schurz carried out Hayes 's American Indian policy , beginning with preventing the War Department from taking over the Bureau of Indian Affairs . Hayes and Schurz carried out a policy that included assimilation into white culture , educational training , and dividing Indian land into individual household allotments . Hayes believed that his policies would lead to self @-@ sufficiency and peace between Indians and whites . The allotment system was favored by liberal reformers at the time , including Schurz , but instead proved detrimental to American Indians . They lost much of their land through later sales to unscrupulous white speculators . Hayes and Schurz reformed the Bureau of Indian Affairs to reduce fraud and gave Indians responsibility for policing their understaffed reservations . 
 Hayes dealt with several conflicts with Indian tribes . The Nez Perce , led by Chief Joseph , began an uprising in June 1877 when Major General Oliver O. Howard ordered them to move on to a reservation . Howard 's men defeated the Nez Perce in battle , and the tribe began a 1700 @-@ mile retreat into Canada . In October , after a decisive battle at Bear Paw , Montana , Chief Joseph surrendered and General William T. Sherman ordered the tribe transported to Kansas , where they were forced to remain until 1885 . The Nez Perce war was not the last conflict in the West , as the Bannock rose up in Spring 1878 and raided nearby settlements before being defeated by Howard 's army in July of that year . War with the Ute tribe broke out in 1879 when the Utes killed Indian agent Nathan Meeker , who had been attempting to convert them to Christianity . The subsequent White River War ended when Schurz negotiated peace with the Ute and prevented the white Coloradans from taking revenge for Meeker 's death . 
 Hayes also became involved in resolving the removal of the Ponca tribe from Nebraska to Indian Territory ( present @-@ day Oklahoma ) because of a misunderstanding during the Grant Administration . The tribe 's problems came to Hayes 's attention after their chief , Standing Bear , filed a lawsuit to contest Schurz 's demand that they stay in Indian Territory . <unk> Schurz , Hayes set up a commission in 1880 that ruled Ponca were free to return to Nebraska or stay on their reservation in Indian Territory . The Ponca were awarded compensation for their land rights , which had been previously granted to the Sioux . In a message to Congress in February 1881 , Hayes insisted he would " give to these injured people that measure of redress which is required alike by justice and by humanity . " 
 = = = Great Western Tour of 1880 = = = 
 In 1880 Hayes embarked on a 71 @-@ day tour of the American West , becoming the first sitting President to travel west of the Rocky Mountains . Hayes ' traveling party included his wife and General William Tecumseh Sherman , who helped organize the trip . Hayes began his trip in September 1880 , departing from Chicago on the transcontinental railroad . He journeyed across the continent , ultimately arriving in California , stopping first in Wyoming and then Utah and Nevada , reaching Sacramento and San Francisco . By railroad and stagecoach , the party traveled north to Oregon , arriving in Portland , and from there to Vancouver , Washington . Going by steamship , they visited Seattle , and then returned to San Francisco . Hayes then toured several southwestern states before returning to Ohio in November , in time to cast a vote in the 1880 Presidential Election . 
 = = = Hayes 's White House = = = 
 Hayes and his wife Lucy were known for their policy of keeping an alcohol @-@ free White House , giving rise to her nickname " Lemonade Lucy . " The first reception at the Hayes White House included wine . However , Hayes was dismayed at drunken behavior at receptions hosted by ambassadors around Washington , leading him to follow his wife 's temperance leanings . Alcohol was not served again in the Hayes White House . Critics charged Hayes with parsimony , but Hayes spent more money ( which came out of his personal budget ) after the ban , ordering that any savings from eliminating alcohol be used on more lavish entertainment . His temperance policy also paid political dividends , strengthening his support among Protestant ministers . Although Secretary Evarts quipped that at the White House dinners , " water flowed like wine , " the policy was a success in convincing prohibitionists to vote Republican . 
 = = = Administration and Cabinet = = = 
 = = = Judicial appointments = = = 
 Hayes appointed two Associate Justices to the Supreme Court . The first vacancy occurred when David Davis resigned to enter the Senate during the election controversy of 1876 . On taking office , Hayes appointed John Marshall Harlan to the seat . A former candidate for governor of Kentucky , Harlan had been Benjamin Bristow 's campaign manager at the 1876 Republican convention , and Hayes had earlier considered him for Attorney General . Hayes submitted the nomination in October 1877 , but it aroused some dissent in the Senate because of Harlan 's limited experience in public office . Harlan was nonetheless confirmed and served on the court for thirty @-@ four years , in which he voted ( usually in the minority ) for an aggressive enforcement of the civil rights laws . In 1880 , a second seat became vacant upon the resignation of Justice William Strong . Hayes nominated William Burnham Woods , a carpetbagger Republican circuit court judge from Alabama . Woods served six years on the Court , ultimately proving a disappointment to Hayes as he interpreted the Constitution in a manner more similar to that of Southern Democrats than to Hayes 's own preferences . 
 Hayes attempted , unsuccessfully , to fill a third vacancy in 1881 . Justice Noah Haynes Swayne resigned with the expectation that Hayes would fill his seat by appointing Stanley Matthews , who was a friend of both men . Many Senators objected to the appointment , believing that Matthews was too close to corporate and railroad interests , especially those of Jay Gould , and the Senate adjourned without voting on the nomination . The following year , when James A. Garfield entered the White House , he re @-@ submitted Matthews 's nomination to the Senate , which this time confirmed Matthews by one vote , 24 to 23 . Matthews served for eight years until his death in 1889 . His opinion in Yick Wo v. Hopkins in 1886 advanced his and Hayes ' views on the protection of ethnic minorities ' rights . 
 = = Later life and death = = 
 Hayes declined to seek re @-@ election in 1880 , keeping his pledge that he would not run for a second term . He was gratified with the election of fellow Ohio Republican James A. Garfield to succeed him , and consulted with him on appointments for the next administration . After Garfield 's inauguration , Hayes and his family returned to Spiegel Grove . In 1881 , he was elected a companion of the Military Order of the Loyal Legion of the United States . He served as commander @-@ in @-@ chief ( national president ) of the Loyal Legion from 1888 until his death in 1893 . Although he remained a loyal Republican , Hayes was not too disappointed in Grover Cleveland 's election to the Presidency in 1884 , approving of the New York Democrat 's views on civil service reform . He was also pleased at the progress of the political career of William McKinley , his army comrade and political protégé . 
 Hayes became an advocate for educational charities , advocating federal education subsidies for all children . He believed that education was the best way to heal the rifts in American society and allow individuals to improve themselves . Hayes was appointed to the Board of Trustees of The Ohio State University , the school he helped found during his time as governor of Ohio , in 1887 . He emphasized the need for vocational , as well as academic , education : " I preach the gospel of work , " he wrote , " I believe in skilled labor as a part of education . " He urged Congress , unsuccessfully , to pass a bill written by Senator Henry W. Blair that would have allowed federal aid for education for the first time . Hayes gave a speech in 1889 encouraging black students to apply for scholarships from the Slater Fund , one of the charities with which he was affiliated . One such student , W. E. B. Du Bois , received a scholarship in 1892 . Hayes also advocated better prison conditions . 
 In retirement , Hayes was troubled by the disparity between the rich and the poor , saying in an 1886 speech that " free government cannot long endure if property is largely in a few hands and large masses of people are unable to earn homes , education , and a support in old age . " The following year , Hayes recorded his thoughts on that subject in his diary : 
 In church it occurred to me that it is time for the public to hear that the giant evil and danger in this country , the danger which transcends all others , is the vast wealth owned or controlled by a few persons . Money is power . In Congress , in state legislatures , in city councils , in the courts , in the political conventions , in the press , in the pulpit , in the circles of the educated and the talented , its influence is growing greater and greater . Excessive wealth in the hands of the few means extreme poverty , ignorance , vice , and wretchedness as the lot of the many . It is not yet time to debate about the remedy . The previous question is as to the danger — the evil . Let the people be fully informed and convinced as to the evil . Let them earnestly seek the remedy and it will be found . Fully to know the evil is the first step towards reaching its eradication . Henry George is strong when he portrays the rottenness of the present system . We are , to say the least , not yet ready for his remedy . We may reach and remove the difficulty by changes in the laws regulating corporations , descents of property , wills , trusts , taxation , and a host of other important interests , not omitting lands and other property . 
 Hayes was greatly saddened by his wife 's death in 1889 . He wrote that " the soul had left [ Spiegel Grove ] " when she died . After Lucy 's death , Hayes 's daughter Fanny became his traveling companion , and he enjoyed visits from his grandchildren . In 1890 , he chaired the Lake Mohonk Conference on the Negro Question , a gathering of reformers that met in upstate New York to discuss racial issues . Hayes died of complications of a heart attack at his home on January 17 , 1893 . His last words were " I know that I 'm going where Lucy is . " President @-@ elect Grover Cleveland and Ohio Governor William McKinley led the funeral procession that followed Hayes 's body until he was interred in Oakwood Cemetery . 
 = = Legacy and honors = = 
 Following the donation of his home to the state of Ohio for the Spiegel Grove State Park , he was re @-@ interred there in 1915 . The following year the Hayes Commemorative Library and Museum , the first presidential library in the United States , was opened on the site , funded by contributions from the state of Ohio and Hayes ' family . 
 An 1878 dispute between Argentina and Paraguay which Hayes had arbitrated and decided in favor of Paraguay , giving Paraguay 60 percent of its current territory later motivated a province in the region to be named after him : Presidente Hayes province ( capital : Villa Hayes ) ; an official holiday : Nov. 12 , the anniversary of the decision , celebrated in Presidente Hayes province ; a local soccer team : Presidente Hayes soccer club , based in the national capital , Asuncion ( also known as " Los <unk> " ) ; a postage stamp the design of which was chosen in a contest run by the U.S. Embassy ; and even a young girl 's wish : a girl who came out of a coma got her fondest wish — a trip to the Hayes Presidential Center in Fremont , Ohio . 
 = Paul Krichell = 
 Paul Bernard Krichell ( December 19 , 1882 – June 4 , 1957 ) was a Major League Baseball catcher , best known for being the head scout for the New York Yankees for 37 years until his death . Krichell 's talent evaluations and signings played a key role in building up the Yankees ' run of success from the Murderers ' Row teams of the 1920s to the 1950s teams led by Casey Stengel . 
 Krichell began his professional career in the minor leagues , playing as the reserve catcher for the St. Louis Browns before a serious injury threatened his career . He continued to play in the minor leagues and began to move into coaching before Yankees manager Ed Barrow signed him as a scout in 1920 . Considered one of the greatest scouts in baseball history , Krichell signed over 200 players who later played professional baseball , including future Baseball Hall of Famers Lou Gehrig , Hank Greenberg , Phil Rizzuto , Whitey Ford , and Tony Lazzeri . His recommendation of Stengel as the Yankees manager was instrumental in Stengel 's appointment in 1948 . Barrow called Krichell " the best judge of baseball players he ever saw " . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Krichell was born in Paris , France , the son of a German cabinetmaker and youngest of nine children . He grew up in The Bronx , near Yankee Stadium . Krichell made his professional baseball debut in 1903 as a catcher with the Ossining , New York club in the Hudson River League 's inaugural season . He moved to the Hartford Senators of the Connecticut League in 1906 and spent most of the following three years with the Newark Indians of the Eastern League . For the latter part of the 1909 season and the whole of 1910 , Krichell played for the Montreal Royals at third base . In 1910 , he played 102 games for the team , achieving a batting average of .249 and hitting 14 doubles . Krichell began his long association with manager Ed Barrow that year when the latter took charge of the Royals . 
 = = Playing and managing career = = 
 In 1911 , Krichell joined the St. Louis Browns as a reserve catcher , playing 28 games with a .232 batting average , 19 hits and 8 runs batted in during 82 at bats . The following year , he managed 59 games while sharing catching duties with Jim Stephens . In 161 at bats , Krichell achieved 35 hits and a .217 batting average . His fielding percentage was <unk> that season . Ty Cobb of the Detroit Tigers stole second , third , and home plate in the same inning of a game while Krichell was catching . In a later game , Krichell 's arm was almost detached from his shoulder when Cobb spiked his arm with his cleats during a play at home plate . The injury effectively ended Krichell 's major league career . 
 After the 1912 season , the Browns released Krichell , but after recovering from his injury , he played six seasons in the minor leagues . He was the starting catcher for the Buffalo Bisons in 1914 when Babe Ruth made his professional debut with the Baltimore Orioles , hitting a double and a single against his pitching . From 1917 to 1918 , Krichell served as manager for Bridgeport of the Eastern League , making several playing appearances over the two seasons . He resigned on June 27 , 1918 , after two wins were forfeited when he used a player not under contract . He worked in the shipyards during the First World War . During the offseason , Krichell became the owner of a saloon popular with players in the Bronx , before Prohibition forced Krichell to close and return to baseball . For the 1919 season , he coached the New York University baseball team , and after the season ended , he signed with Ed Barrow to become a coach and scout for the Boston Red Sox in the following season . 
 = = Scouting career = = 
 Prior to the 1921 season , Barrow was appointed general manager of the New York Yankees and requested that Krichell join him as a full @-@ time scout . At the time , the Yankees had a two @-@ man scouting rotation , and Barrow believed the appointment of Krichell would improve the scouting staff . The first player signed by Krichell was Hinkey Haines , an outfielder from Penn State University . He signed catcher Benny Bengough from Buffalo of the International League , and Charlie Caldwell , a Princeton University graduate . Caldwell was used mainly as a batting practice pitcher , appearing in just three games in his major league career . During one practice , Caldwell fractured Wally Pipp 's skull with a high fastball , allowing Lou Gehrig to assume Pipp 's place in the starting lineup . 
 = = = Discovery of Gehrig = = = 
 Early in the 1923 season , while traveling to New Brunswick , New Jersey for a baseball game between Columbia University and Rutgers University , Krichell shared a train with the manager of the Columbia squad , Andy Coakley . They discussed Lou Gehrig , a left @-@ handed pitcher on his squad who could also hit , and later that day , Gehrig hit two home runs in three at @-@ bats . Following the game , Krichell spoke with Barrow , saying he had found the " next Babe Ruth " . Skeptical , Barrow sent Krichell to watch Columbia 's next game against New York University , where Gehrig hit a home run that reportedly went out of the stadium . After the game , Krichell persuaded Gehrig to sign for the Yankees for $ 2 @,@ 000 ( $ 30 @,@ 000 in 2010 ) for the remainder of 1923 , with a $ 1 @,@ 500 bonus ( $ 20 @,@ 000 in 2010 ) . Krichell also asked Gehrig to give up pitching to focus on being a hitter . 
 After joining up with the team for batting practice in June 1923 , Gehrig was sent by Yankees manager Miller Huggins to the Hartford Senators . After a good start , Gehrig went through a long slump and suffered depression which led him to consider quitting baseball . Upon hearing this , Krichell was sent to Hartford to speak with the star player . He discovered that Gehrig was drinking , boosted his confidence and gave him batting advice , including one of Ty Cobb 's batting tricks . Gehrig started hitting again , and eventually joined the Yankees . 
 = = Later signings = = 
 = = = 1920s = = = 
 Before the 1925 New York Yankees season , Babe Ruth collapsed at a train station in Asheville , North Carolina . Krichell 's actions may have saved Ruth 's life . On the instructions of Huggins , Krichell drove Ruth to hospital , before traveling with Ruth by train to New York , where Ruth had emergency surgery for an " intestinal abscess " that left him hospitalized for six weeks . 
 The same year , Krichell went to Hartford , Connecticut to sign shortstop Leo Durocher for a $ 7 @,@ 500 bonus ( $ 90 @,@ 000 in 2010 ) . When the deal was concluded , Barrow sent Krichell to Salt Lake City to watch young second baseman Tony Lazzeri , who played for the Salt Lake Bees of the Pacific Coast League and hit 60 home runs and achieved over 200 RBIs the previous season . The Bees were asking for $ 50 @,@ 000 ( $ 620 @,@ 000 in 2010 ) , but several scouts placed his value ten times lower . The Chicago Cubs were given the option to sign him for a discounted rate , but declined because he had epilepsy . Krichell saw promise in the player and convinced Barrow to buy him . Around the same time , he helped acquire shortstop Mark Koenig from the Minneapolis Millers . These Krichell signings formed part of the 1927 New York Yankees team , considered by many to be the greatest team ever assembled . Four of the starters in this squad were signed by Krichell , including three @-@ quarters of its infield and Mike Gazella , its main backup , who signed for $ 500 in 1923 ( $ 10 @,@ 000 in 2010 ) . The Yankees took just four games to defeat the Pittsburgh Pirates and win the 1927 World Series . 
 To assist at practice for the 1927 season , Krichell signed Billy Werber from Duke University . He left the team after a month , but re @-@ signed after graduating in 1930 . During that time , Krichell was involved in what is considered one of the worst deals from the era . Barrow asked him to travel to Durham , North Carolina to negotiate with the Durham Bulls for an outfielder named Dusty Cooke . Neither Krichell nor Barrow had seen Cooke ; he was believed to be a great hitter , even though he had hardly played for the Bulls . The Yankees signed him for $ 15 @,@ 000 ( $ 200 @,@ 000 in 2010 ) , beating the Cleveland Indians ' offer of $ 12 @,@ 500 ( $ 160 @,@ 000 in 2010 ) and an unnamed player in exchange . Cooke turned out to be an injury @-@ prone backup outfielder , and the Yankees gave up on both Cooke and Werber . After the 1933 season , the two were traded to the Boston Red Sox for cash considerations . 
 In the summer of 1929 , Krichell discovered Hank Greenberg while on a scouting trip in Massachusetts . Krichell believed Greenberg would be the next Lou Gehrig . Krichell offered Greenberg a $ 10 @,@ 000 contract ( $ 130 @,@ 000 in 2010 ) on the spot based on his potential and knowing the Yankees were looking for Jewish players to increase their Jewish fanbase . Greenberg discussed the deal with his father but declined it because he knew his opportunities would be limited by the presence of Gehrig as first baseman . Subsequently , he signed with the Detroit Tigers . 
 = = = 1930s = = = 
 In the early 1930s , Krichell focused on Ivy League pitchers , saying he preferred signing pitchers who could think . From Harvard University , he signed Charlie Devens later saying he could have been great had he continued to play baseball , and from Yale University , he scouted pitcher Johnny <unk> who seemed to be heading for stardom after winning 12 games in his first three seasons with the Yankees , but suddenly retired to become a professional boxer . In 1935 , a local scout who worked with Krichell placed Long Island University pitcher Marius Russo in a semi @-@ professional team . When Krichell deemed Russo ready , he signed with the Yankees for $ 750 , twice becoming a 14 @-@ game winner and being an All @-@ Star in 1941 before injuring his arm . Other Krichell signings from this period included Johnny Murphy , Hank <unk> and Johnny Allen . Murphy , a relief pitcher and four time saves leader , was signed while still in high school in the Bronx and at Krichell 's behest , the Yankees followed Murphy 's education at Fordham University , where he gained baseball experience . Krichell signed <unk> from Fordham University for $ 8 @,@ 500 and the player later became the ace for the Yankees during the wartime era . Krichell supposedly discovered Allen by a chance encounter when Allen worked as a desk clerk at a Sanford hotel . The story said he recognized Krichell as a scout , told him that he was a pitcher , and that he wanted to try out . Krichell agreed , and impressed by Allen 's ability , signed him to a minor league contract . However , in an interview with J. G. Taylor Spink of The Sporting News , Krichell said while he signed Allen , he did not discover him . 
 Aside from his Ivy League pitcher focus , Krichell also unearthed several position players . He signed Charlie Keller , a highly touted prospect playing for the University of Maryland . To encourage Keller to sign , Krichell met and had dinner with his family . In 1937 , Krichell signed shortstop Phil Rizzuto , who had tried out with the Brooklyn Dodgers and the New York Giants , but was dismissed by them on the grounds that he was too small . Even so , Krichell decided to look at the infielder and was impressed by the way Rizzuto accomplished double plays ; his technique reminded Krichell of Leo Durocher , one of his favorite players . He signed Rizzuto for $ 75 a month and sent him to the Yankees ' farm club in Bassett , Virginia . 
 = = = 1940s – 1950s = = = 
 Krichell 's next target was second baseman Snuffy <unk> from the University of North Carolina . He initially tried to convince him to bypass football for baseball , but the player refused until his father 's death soon after his college graduation altered his priorities , leaving him as the sole supporter of his mother and younger brother . Krichell signed him to a contract soon afterwards . In a mass tryout for the Yankees team , Krichell scouted first baseman Whitey Ford . Krichell realised Ford had a strong arm , and recommended he tried pitching . Developing an effective fast curveball , Ford helped his team win the New York City sandlot ball championship , and was signed by Krichell for $ 7 @,@ 000 in 1947 ( $ 70 @,@ 000 in 2010 ) . Ford later became a Hall of Famer and an ace of the Yankees for most of the 1950s and 1960s . 
 Krichell played a factor in signing future All @-@ Star Tommy Byrne . He was referred by one of his scouts , Gene McCann , to see Byrne pitch for Wake Forest University . Impressed with what he saw , Krichell signed him for $ 10 @,@ 000 ( $ 160 @,@ 000 in 2010 ) . He also signed Red Rolfe and Vic Raschi . Krichell oversaw the expansion of the New York Yankees scouting staff from two men to more than twenty part @-@ time scouts by 1957 . Among the scouts he hired for the Yankees were former players Babe Herman , Atley Donald , Jake Flowers and Johnny <unk> . As he hired more scouts , Krichell reduced his own role , becoming the chief scout and regional scout for the New England area . 
 In 1948 , Krichell was involved in a minor scandal . Harry Nicolas was a high school baseball star in Long Island . The Yankees sent Krichell to scout him and offered him a contract with a blank check , being willing pay up to $ 20 @,@ 000 for his services . As Nicolas was still in high school , the Yankees were fined $ 500 by Happy Chandler , the Commissioner of Baseball . Nicolas never reached the Majors . However , Krichell 's recommendation of Casey Stengel for manager of the Yankees in 1948 was instrumental in their front office hiring him . 
 = = Final days = = 
 In 1954 , Krichell was honored by the Baseball Writers ' Association of America ( BBWAA ) with the William J. Slocum Memorial Award . Named after the former head sportswriter of the New York Journal American and president of the BBWAA , the award honored his longevity in baseball . The final players Krichell signed were two bonus babies : infielder Tom Carroll from Notre Dame University and Frank Leja , an 18 @-@ year @-@ old first baseman . Krichell advised the Yankees staff to sign Carroll for $ 30 @,@ 000 ( $ 240 @,@ 000 in 2010 ) and he thought Leja could be the next Gehrig , but both flopped . By the time he retired , he was the most experienced employee still working for the Yankees . 
 Krichell died on June 4 , 1957 at his home in the Bronx after a lengthy illness . He had surgery for Crohn 's disease in 1955 after losing 60 pounds in 60 days . His wife of 50 years , Mary , died earlier in the year . He had one daughter , Caroline , and four grandchildren at the time of his death . 
 = = Scouting style = = 
 When he first started his scouting career , Krichell followed the example of early baseball scouts . He traveled with the Yankees for spring training to view his signees playing baseball . When the Yankees traveled north to begin their season , Krichell usually followed . He also scouted the local newspapers to look for games in which potential prospects were playing . 
 Later , his style of scouting was used as a blueprint by scouts to evaluate players . He usually ignored the obvious tools such as ability to hit , size , speed , and human power , saying that " any dope " could see it . When he scouted a prospect , his top priority was checking that the subject could handle the pressure of playing Major League Baseball . When he got word of a promising player , he went to see him play . If Krichell liked what he saw , he discussed the player 's goals and motivation with him and his family . He decided whether the player was ready for the Yankees or one of their farm teams to use . He tended to take a risk with players passed by other teams . He discounted some of a player 's weaknesses if their remaining skills were up to par , for example with Tony Lazzeri , who was a poor fielder . Krichell also was one of the first to notice that intelligence mattered in a game filled with uneducated people . Most of his signings were college graduates who Krichell believed could take advantage of their ability to think . 
 At other times , Krichell collected some of the best prospects in an area , normally 300 or more , and put them through a four @-@ day workout . It normally consisted of practice in the morning and a full game in the afternoon . There , Krichell and his staff sorted though players they believed could become useful in the organization , and dropped those they thought lacked motivation . The few players who survived the workout were assigned by Krichell to the Yankees Minor League hierarchy . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Krichell is considered one of the greatest scouts in baseball history . Birdie Tebbetts , a member of the Veterans Committee in the 1980s , led a campaign to have Krichell , along with fellow scouts Charlie Barrett and Hugh Alexander , inducted to the Baseball Hall of Fame . Under Hall of Fame rules , scouts are not eligible for induction . Tibbets appealed to the Hall of Fame Board of Directors every year from 1981 to 1986 to make the three scouts members of the Hall of Fame , but with no success . In The Bill James Historical Baseball Abstract , James awards the Paul Krichell Talent Scout Award to an example of a team that has a good chance of signing a player who later becomes a star , who they end up passing on as the result of poor scouting . 
 = History of cannon = 
 The history of the cannon spans several hundred years . First used in China , they were among the earliest forms of gunpowder artillery , and over time replaced siege engines — among other forms of aging weaponry — on the battlefield . The first cannon in Europe were probably used in Iberia , during the Islamic wars against Spain , in the 13th century ; their use was also first documented in the Middle East around this time . English cannon were first used during the Hundred Years ' War , at the Battle of Crécy , in 1346 . It was during this period , the Middle Ages , that cannon became standardized , and more effective in both the anti @-@ infantry and siege roles . After the Middle Ages , most large cannon were abandoned , in favor of greater numbers of lighter , more maneuverable pieces . In addition , new technologies and tactics were developed , making most defenses obsolete ; this led to the construction of star forts , specifically designed to withstand bombardment from artillery . 
 Cannon also transformed naval warfare : the Royal Navy , in particular , took advantage of their firepower . As rifling became more commonplace , the accuracy of cannon was significantly improved , and they became deadlier than ever , especially to infantry . In World War I , a considerable majority of all deaths were caused by cannon ; they were also used widely in World War II . Most modern cannon are similar to those used in the Second World War , including autocannon — with the exception of naval guns , which are now significantly smaller in caliber . 
 = = Development in China = = 
 Prior to the invention of the cannon , projectile weapons existed using compressed air and steam . The invention of the cannon , driven by gunpowder , was first developed in China . Like firearms , cannon are a descendant of the fire @-@ lance , a gunpowder @-@ filled tube used as a flamethrower . Shrapnel was sometimes placed in the barrel , so that it would fly out along with the flames . Eventually , the paper and bamboo of which fire lance barrels were originally constructed came to be replaced by metal . The earliest known depiction of a firearm is a sculpture from a cave in Sichuan , dating to the 12th century , that portrays a figure carrying a vase @-@ shaped bombard , firing flames and a cannonball . The oldest surviving gun , dated to 1288 , has a muzzle bore diameter of 2 @.@ 5 cm ( 1 in ) ; the second oldest , dated to 1332 , has a muzzle bore diameter of 10 @.@ 5 cm ( 4 in ) . 
 The first documented battlefield use of gunpowder artillery took place on 28 January 1132 , when Song General Han Shizhong used <unk> to capture a city in Fujian . The world 's earliest surviving hand cannon is the Heilongjiang hand cannon dated 1288 , which was found in Mongol @-@ held Manchuria . The first known illustration of a cannon is dated to 1326 . In his 1341 poem , The Iron Cannon Affair , one of the first accounts of the use of gunpowder artillery in China , Xian Zhang wrote that a cannonball fired from an eruptor could " pierce the heart or belly when it strikes a man or horse , and can even transfix several persons at once . " 
 Joseph Needham suggests that the proto @-@ shells described in the Huolongjing may be among the first of their kind . The Chinese also mounted over 3 @,@ 000 bronze and iron cast cannon on the Great Wall of China , to defend themselves from the Mongols . The weapon was later taken up by both the Mongol conquerors . Chinese soldiers fighting under the Mongols appear to have used hand cannon in Manchurian battles during 1288 , a date deduced from archaeological findings at battle sites . 
 Early Chinese artillery had vase @-@ like shapes . This includes the " long range awe inspiring " cannon dated from 1350 and found in the 14th century Ming Dynasty treatise Huolongjing . With the development of better metallurgy techniques , later cannons abandoned the vase shape of early Chinese artillery . This change can be seen in the bronze " thousand ball thunder cannon , " an early example of field artillery . 
 The Red Turban Rebellion saw the application of early , arrow @-@ firing cannon to both siege and naval warfare in the Southern area of conflict . Following the ascendancy of the Ming Dynasty , cannon were restricted at first to operations pacifying the southern border , including a resounding victory over a band of war @-@ elephants in the 1380s . Cannon made their way to the northern border by 1414 , where their noise had great effect on the Oirats , in addition to reportedly killing several hundred Mongols . 
 In the 1593 Siege of Pyongyang , 40 @,@ 000 Ming troops deployed a variety of cannon to bombard an equally large Japanese army . Despite both forces having similar numbers , the Japanese were defeated in one day , due to the Ming advantage in firepower . Throughout the Seven Year War in Korea , the Chinese coalition used artillery widely , in both land and naval battles . 
 = = Islamic world = = 
 Ahmad Y. al @-@ Hassan claims that the Battle of Ain Jalut in 1260 saw the Mamluks use against the Mongols in " the first cannon in history " gunpowder formulae which were almost identical with the ideal composition for explosive gunpowder , which he claims were not known in China or Europe until much later . However , <unk> Alam Khan states that it was invading Mongols who introduced gunpowder to the Islamic world and cites Mamluk antagonism towards early riflemen in their infantry as an example of how gunpowder weapons were not always met with open acceptance in the Middle East . 
 The earliest surviving documentary evidence for the use of the hand cannon , considered the oldest type of portable firearm and a forerunner of the handgun , are from several Arabic manuscripts dated to the 14th century . Al @-@ Hassan argues that these are based on earlier originals and that they report hand @-@ held cannon being used by the Mamluks at the Battle of Ain Jalut in 1260 . 
 Al @-@ Hassan interprets Ibn Khaldun as reporting the use of cannon as siege machines by the Marinid sultan Abu Yaqub Yusuf at the siege of Sijilmasa in 1274 . Super @-@ sized bombards were used by the troops of Mehmed II to capture Constantinople , in 1453 . Urban , a Hungarian cannon engineer , is credited with the introduction of this cannon from Central Europe to the Ottoman realm . It could fire heavy stone balls a mile , and the sound of their blast could reportedly be heard from a distance of 10 miles ( 16 km ) . 
 A piece of slightly later date , the Dardanelles Gun ( see picture ) , was cast in bronze and made in two parts : the chase and the breech , which , together , weighed 18 @.@ 4 tonnes . The two parts were screwed together using levers to facilitate the work . Created by Munir Ali in 1464 , the Dardanelles Gun was still present for duty more than 300 years later in 1807 , when a Royal Navy force appeared and commenced the Dardanelles Operation . Turkish forces loaded the ancient relics with propellant and projectiles , then fired them at the British ships . The British squadron suffered 28 dead through this bombardment . 
 = = Medieval Europe = = 
 In Europe , the first mention of gunpowder 's composition in express terms appeared , in Roger Bacon 's " De <unk> <unk> " at Oxford , published in 1216 . Later , in 1248 , his " Opus Maior " describes a recipe for gunpowder and recognized its military use : 
 We can , with saltpeter and other substances , compose artificially a fire that can be launched over long distances ... By only using a very small quantity of this material much light can be created accompanied by a horrible fracas . It is possible with it to destroy a town or an army ... In order to produce this artificial lightning and thunder it is necessary to take saltpeter , sulfur , and [ finely powdered charcoal ] ... 
 The Andalusians used Moorish cannon at the sieges of Seville , in 1248 , and Niebla , in 1262 . By this time , hand guns were probably in use , as <unk> — " gun bearers " — were mentioned in conjunction with crossbowmen , in 1281 . In Spain , the " first artillery @-@ masters on the Peninsula " were enlisted , at around the same time . 
 The first metal cannon was the pot @-@ de @-@ fer . Loaded with an arrow @-@ like bolt that was probably wrapped in leather to allow greater thrusting power , it was set off through a touch hole with a heated wire . This weapon , and others similar , were used by both the French and English , during the Hundred Years ' War , when cannon saw their first real use on the European battlefield . Even then , cannon were still a relatively rare weapon . 
 " Ribaldis , " which shot large arrows and simplistic grapeshot , were first mentioned in the English Privy Wardrobe accounts during preparations for the Battle of Crécy , between 1345 and 1346 . The Florentine Giovanni Villani recounts their destructiveness , indicating that by the end of the battle , " the whole plain was covered by men struck down by arrows and cannon balls . " Similar cannon were also used at the Siege of Calais , in the same year , although it was not until the 1380s that the " ribaudekin " clearly became mounted on wheels . 
 The first cannon appeared in Russia around 1380 , though they were used only in sieges , often by the defenders . Around the same period , the Byzantine Empire began to accumulate its own cannon to face the Ottoman threat , starting with medium @-@ sized cannon 3 feet ( 0 @.@ 91 m ) long and of 10 in caliber . The first definite use of artillery in the region was against the Ottoman siege of Constantinople , in 1396 , forcing the Ottomans to withdraw . They acquired their own cannon , and laid siege to the Byzantine capital again , in 1422 , using " falcons " , which were short but wide cannon . Before the siege of Constantinople , it was known that the Ottomans had the ability to cast medium @-@ sized cannons , but the range of some pieces they were able to field far surpassed the defenders ' expectations . Instrumental to this Ottoman advancement in arms production was a somewhat mysterious figure by the name of Orban ( Urban ) , a Hungarian ( though some suggest he was German ) . One cannon designed by Orban was named " Basilica " and was 27 feet ( 8 @.@ 2 m ) long , and able to hurl a 600 lb ( 272 kg ) stone ball over a mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) . 
 The master founder initially tried to sell his services to the Byzantines , who were unable to secure the funds needed to hire him . Orban then left Constantinople and approached Mehmed II , claiming that his weapon could blast ' the walls of Babylon itself ' . Given abundant funds and materials , the Hungarian engineer built the gun within three months at Edirne , from which it was dragged by sixty oxen to Constantinople . In the meantime , Orban also produced other cannons instrumental for the Turkish siege forces . 
 Orban 's cannon had several drawbacks however : it took three hours to reload ; cannonballs were in very short supply ; and the cannon is said to have collapsed under its own recoil after six weeks ( this fact however is disputed , being reported only in the letter of Archbishop Leonardo di <unk> and in the later and often unreliable Russian chronicle of Nestor Iskander ) . Having previously established a large foundry about 150 miles ( 240 km ) away , Mehmed now had to undergo the painstaking process of transporting his massive artillery pieces . Orban 's giant cannon was said to have been accompanied by a crew of 60 oxen and over 400 men . 
 = = Early modern period = = 
 By the 16th century , cannon were made in a great variety of lengths and bore diameters , but the general rule was that the longer the barrel , the longer the range . Some cannon made during this time had barrels exceeding 10 ft ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) in length , and could weigh up to 20 @,@ 000 pounds ( 9 @,@ 100 kg ) . Consequently , large amounts of gunpowder were needed , to allow them to fire stone balls several hundred yards . By mid @-@ century , European monarchs began to classify cannon to reduce the confusion . Henry II of France opted for six sizes of cannon , but others settled for more ; the Spanish used twelve sizes , and the English sixteen . Better powder had been developed by this time as well . Instead of the finely ground powder used by the first bombards , powder was replaced by a " corned " variety of coarse grains . This coarse powder had pockets of air between grains , allowing fire to travel through and ignite the entire charge quickly and uniformly . 
 The end of the Middle Ages saw the construction of larger , more powerful cannon , as well their spread throughout the world . As they were not effective at breaching the newer fortifications resulting from the development of cannon , siege engines — such as siege towers and trebuchets — became less widely used . However , wooden " battery @-@ towers " took on a similar role as siege towers in the gunpowder age — such as that used at siege of Kazan in 1552 , which could hold ten large @-@ caliber cannon , in addition to 50 lighter pieces . Another notable effect of cannon on warfare during this period was the change in conventional fortifications . Niccolò Machiavelli wrote , " There is no wall , whatever its thickness that artillery will not destroy in only a few days . " Although castles were not immediately made obsolete by cannon , their use and importance on the battlefield rapidly declined . Instead of majestic towers and merlons , the walls of new fortresses were thicker , <unk> , and sloped , while towers became lower and stouter ; increasing use was also made of earthen , brick , and stone breastworks and redoubts . These new defenses became known as " star forts , " after their characteristic shape . A few of these featured cannon batteries , such as the Tudors ' Device Forts , in England . Star forts soon replaced castles in Europe , and , eventually , those in the Americas , as well . 
 By end of the 15th century , several technological advancements were made , making cannon more mobile . Wheeled gun carriages and trunnions became common , and the invention of the limber further facilitated the transportation of artillery . As a result , field artillery became viable , and began to emerge , often used alongside the larger cannon intended for sieges . The better gunpowder , improved , cast @-@ iron projectiles , and the standardization of calibers meant that even relatively light cannon could be deadly . In The Art of War , Niccolò Machiavelli observed that " It is true that the arquebuses and the small artillery do much more harm than the heavy artillery . " This was the case at Flodden , in 1513 : the English field guns outpaced the Scottish siege artillery , firing twice , or even thrice , as many rounds . Despite the increased maneuverability , however , cannon were still much slower than the rest of the army : a heavy English cannon required 23 horses to transport , while a culverin , nine , yet , even with this many animals transporting them , they still moved at a walking pace . Due to their relatively slow speed , and lack of organization , discipline , and tactics , the combination of pike and shot still dominated the battlefields of Europe . 
 Innovations continued , notably the German invention of the mortar , a thick @-@ walled , short @-@ barreled gun that blasted shot upward at a steep angle . Mortars were useful for sieges , as they could fire over walls and other defenses . This cannon found more use with the Dutch , who learned to shoot bombs filled with powder from them . However , setting the bomb fuse in the mortar was a problem . " Single firing " was the first technique used to set the fuse , where the bomb was placed with the fuse down against the propelling charge . This practice often resulted in the fuse being blown into the bomb , causing it to blow up in front of the mortar . Because of this danger , " double firing " was developed , where the fuse was turned up and the gunner lighted the fuse and the touch hole simultaneously . This , however , required much skill and timing , and was especially dangerous when the gun failed to fire , leaving a lighted bomb in the barrel . Not until 1650 was it accidentally discovered that double @-@ lighting was a superfluous process : the heat of firing was enough to light the fuse . 
 Gustavus Adolphus of Sweden emphasized the use of light cannon and mobility in his army , and created new formations and tactics that revolutionized artillery . He discontinued using all 12 pounder — or heavier — cannon as field artillery , preferring , instead , to use cannon that could be manned by only a few men . One gun , called the " <unk> , " could be serviced by only two persons , but was abandoned , replaced by 4 pounder and 9 pounder demi @-@ culverins . These could be operated by three men , and pulled by only two horses . Also , Adolphus 's army was the first to use a special cartridge that contained both powder and shot , which sped up loading , and therefore increased the rate of fire . Additionally , he pioneered the use of canister shot against infantry , which was essentially a can , filled with musket balls . At the time , for each thousand infantrymen , there was one cannon on the battlefield ; Gustavus Adolphus increased the number of cannon in his army so dramatically , that there were six cannon for each one thousand infantry . Each regiment was assigned two pieces , though he often decided to arrange his artillery into batteries , instead . These were to decimate the enemy 's infantry , while his cavalry outflanked their heavy guns . At the Battle of Breitenfeld , in 1631 , Adolphus proved the effectiveness of the changes made to his army , in particular his artillery , by defeating Johann <unk> , Count of Tilly . Although severely outnumbered , the Swedes were able to fire between three and five times as many volleys of artillery without losing ground , due to their infantry 's linear formations . Battered by cannon fire , and low on morale , Tilly 's men broke rank , and fled . 
 Around this time also came the idea of aiming the cannon to hit a target . Gunners controlled the range of their cannon by measuring the angle of elevation , using a " gunner 's quadrant . " Cannon did not have sights , therefore , even with measuring tools , aiming was still largely guesswork . 
 In the latter half of the 17th century , the French engineer Vauban introduced a more systematic and scientific approach to attacking gunpowder fortresses , in a time when many field commanders " were notorious dunces in siegecraft . " Careful sapping forward , supported by enfilading ricochet fire , was a key feature of this system , and it even allowed Vauban to calculate the length of time a siege would take . He was also a prolific builder of star forts , and did much to popularize the idea of " depth defense " in the face of cannon . These principles were followed into the mid @-@ 19th century , when changes in armaments necessitated greater depth defense than Vauban had provided for . It was only in the years prior to World War I that new works began to break radically away from his designs . 
 = = 18th and 19th centuries = = 
 The lower tier of 17th @-@ century English ships of the line were usually equipped with demi @-@ cannon , guns that fired a 32 @-@ pound ( 15 kg ) solid shot , and could weigh up to 3 @,@ 400 pounds ( 1 @,@ 500 kg ) . Demi @-@ cannon were capable of firing these heavy metal balls with such force , that they could penetrate more than a meter of solid oak , from a distance of 90 m ( 300 ft ) , and could dismast even the largest ships at close range . Full cannon fired a 42 lb ( 19 kg ) shot , but were discontinued by the 18th century , as they were too unwieldy . By the end of the century , principles long adopted in Europe specified the characteristics of the Royal Navy 's cannon , as well as the acceptable defects , and their severity . The United States Navy tested guns by measuring them , firing them two or three times , — termed " proof by powder " — and using pressurized water to detect leaks . 
 The carronade was adopted by the Royal Navy in 1779 ; the lower muzzle velocity of the round shot when fired from this cannon was intended to create more wooden splinters when hitting the structure of an enemy vessel , as they were believed to be deadly . The carronade was much shorter , and weighed between a third to a quarter less than an equivalent long gun ; for example , a 32 pounder carronade weighed less than a ton , compared with a 32 pounder long gun , which weighed over 3 tons . The guns were , therefore , easier to handle , and also required less than half as much gunpowder , allowing fewer men to crew them . Carronades were manufactured in the usual naval gun calibers , but were not counted in a ship of the line 's rated number of guns . As a result , the classification of Royal Navy vessels in this period can be misleading , as they often carried more cannon than were listed . 
 In the 1810s and 1820s , greater emphasis was placed on the accuracy of long @-@ range gunfire , and less on the weight of a broadside . The carronade , although initially very successful and widely adopted , disappeared from the Royal Navy in the 1850s , after the development of jacketed steel cannon , by William George Armstrong and Joseph Whitworth . Nevertheless , carronades were used in the American Civil War . 
 The Great Turkish Bombards of the Siege of Constantinople , after being on display for four centuries , were used to battle a British fleet in 1807 , in the Dardanelles Operation . The artillery hit a British ship with two 700 lb ( 320 kg ) cannonballs , killing 60 sailors ; in total , the cannon claimed over 100 lives , prompting the British to retreat . In 1867 , Sultan Abdul Aziz gifted Queen Victoria the 17 @-@ ton " Dardanelles Gun , " one of the cannon used at the siege of Constantinople . 
 In contrast to these antiquated weapons , Western cannon during the 19th century became larger , more destructive , more accurate , and could fire at longer range . One example is the American 3 in ( 76 mm ) wrought @-@ iron , muzzle @-@ loading howitzer , used during the American Civil War , which had an effective range of over 1 @.@ 1 mi ( 1 @.@ 8 km ) . Another is the smoothbore 12 pounder Napoleon , which was renowned for its sturdiness , reliability , firepower , flexibility , relatively light weight , and range of 1 @,@ 700 m ( 5 @,@ 600 ft ) . 
 Cannon were crucial in Napoleon Bonaparte 's rise to power , and continued to play an important role in his army in later years . During the French Revolution , the unpopularity of the Directory led to riots and rebellions . When over 25 @,@ 000 of these royalists — led by General Danican — assaulted Paris , Paul François Jean Nicolas , vicomte de Barras was appointed to defend the capital ; outnumbered five to one and disorganized , the Republicans were desperate . When Napoleon arrived , he reorganized the defenses , while realizing that without cannon , the city could not be held . He ordered Joachim Murat to bring the guns from the <unk> artillery park ; the Major and his cavalry fought their way to the recently captured cannon , and brought them back to Napoleon . When Danican 's poorly trained men attacked , on 13 Vendémiaire , 1795 — 5 October 1795 , in the calendar used in France , at the time — Napoleon ordered his cannon to fire grapeshot into the mob , an act that became known as the " " whiff of grapeshot . " The slaughter effectively ended the threat to the new government , while , at the same time , made Bonaparte a famous — and popular — public figure . Among the first generals to recognize that artillery was not being used to its full potential , Napoleon often massed his cannon into batteries , and introduced several changes into the French artillery , improving it significantly , and making it among the finest in Europe . Such tactics were successfully used by the French , for example , at the Battle of Friedland , when sixty @-@ six guns fired a total of 3 @,@ 000 roundshot , and 500 grapeshot , inflicting severe casualties to the Russian forces , whose losses numbered over 20 @,@ 000 killed and wounded , in total . At the Battle of Waterloo , — Napoleon 's final battle — the French army had many more artillery pieces than either the British or Prussians . As the battlefield was muddy , recoil caused cannon to bury themselves into the ground after firing , resulting in slow rates of fire , as more effort was required to move them back into an adequate firing position ; also , roundshot did not ricochet with as much force from the wet earth . Despite the drawbacks , sustained artillery fire proved deadly during the engagement , especially during the French cavalry attack . The British infantry , having formed infantry squares , took heavy losses from the French guns , while their own cannon fired at the cuirassiers and lancers , when they fell back to regroup . Eventually , the French ceased their assault , after taking heavy losses from the British cannon and musket fire . 
 The practice of rifling — casting spiraling lines inside the cannon 's barrel — was applied to artillery more frequently by 1855 , as it gave cannon gyroscopic stability , which improved their accuracy . One of the earliest rifled cannon was the Armstrong gun — also invented by William George Armstrong — which boasted significantly improved range , accuracy , and power than earlier weapons . The projectile fired from the Armstrong gun could reportedly pierce through a ship 's side , and explode inside the enemy vessel , causing increased damage , and casualties . The British military adopted the Armstrong gun , and was impressed ; the Duke of Cambridge even declared that it " could do everything but speak . " Despite being significantly more advanced than its predecessors , the Armstrong gun was rejected soon after its integration , in favor of the muzzle @-@ loading pieces that had been in use before . While both types of gun were effective against wooden ships , neither had the capability to pierce the armor of ironclads ; due to reports of slight problems with the breeches of the Armstrong gun , and their higher cost , the older muzzle @-@ loaders were selected to remain in service , instead . Realizing that iron was more difficult to pierce with breech @-@ loaded cannon , Armstrong designed rifled muzzle @-@ loading guns , which proved successful ; The Times reported : " even the fondest believers in the invulnerability of our present ironclads were obliged to confess that against such artillery , at such ranges , their plates and sides were almost as <unk> as wooden ships . " 
 The superior cannon of the Western world brought them tremendous advantages in warfare . For example , in the Opium War in China , during the 19th century , British battleships bombarded the coastal areas and fortifications from afar , safe from the reach of the Chinese cannon . Similarly , the shortest war in recorded history , the Anglo @-@ Zanzibar War of 1896 , was brought to a swift conclusion by shelling from British battleships . The cynical attitude towards recruited infantry in the face of ever more powerful field artillery is the source of the term cannon fodder , first used by François @-@ René de Chateaubriand , in 1814 ; however , the concept of regarding soldiers as nothing more than " food for powder " was mentioned by William Shakespeare as early as 1598 , in Henry IV , Part 1 . 
 = = 20th and 21st centuries = = 
 Cannon in the 20th and 21st centuries are usually divided into sub @-@ categories , and given separate names . Some of the most widely used types of modern cannon are howitzers , mortars , guns , and autocannon , although a few <unk> — extremely large , custom @-@ designed cannon — have also been constructed . Modern artillery is used in a variety of roles , depending on its type . According to NATO , the general role of artillery is to provide fire support , which is defined as " the application of fire , coordinated with the maneuver of forces to destroy , neutralize , or suppress the enemy . " 
 When referring to cannon , the term gun is often used incorrectly . In military usage , a gun is a cannon with a high muzzle velocity and comparatively flat trajectory , as opposed to other types of artillery , such as howitzers or mortars , which have lower muzzle velocities , and usually fire indirectly . 
 = = = Artillery = = = 
 By the early 20th century , infantry weapons became more powerful and accurate , forcing most artillery away from the front lines . Despite the change to indirect fire , cannon still proved highly effective during World War I , causing over 75 % of casualties . The onset of trench warfare after the first few months of World War I greatly increased the demand for howitzers , as they fired at a steep angle , and were thus better suited than guns at hitting targets in trenches . Furthermore , their shells carried larger amounts of explosives than those of guns , and caused considerably less barrel wear . The German army took advantage of this , beginning the war with many more howitzers than the French . World War I also marked the use of the Paris Gun , the longest @-@ ranged gun ever fired . This 200 mm ( 8 in ) caliber gun was used by the Germans to bombard Paris , and was capable of hitting targets more than 122 km ( 76 mi ) away . 
 The Second World War sparked new developments in cannon technology . Among them were sabot rounds , hollow @-@ charge projectiles , and proximity fuses , all of which were marginally significant . The World War II @-@ era " legend " of the dreaded German 88 mm gun was launched during the Battle of Arras on May 21 , 1940 when Generalmajor Erwin Rommel first ordered their use against Allied armor , devastating British Matilda II tanks , a well @-@ armored design . The proximity fuse emerged on the battlefields of Europe in late December 1944 . They became known as the American artillery 's " Christmas present " for the German army , and were employed primarily in the Battle of the Bulge . Proximity fuses were effective against German personnel in the open , and hence were used to disperse their attacks . Also used to great effect in anti @-@ aircraft projectiles , proximity fuses were used in both the European and Pacific Theaters of Operations , against V @-@ 1 flying bombs and kamikaze planes , respectively . Anti @-@ tank guns were also tremendously improved during the war : in 1939 , the British used primarily 2 pounder and 6 pounder guns . By the end of the war , 17 pounders had proven much more effective against German tanks , and 32 pounders had entered development . Meanwhile , German tanks were continuously upgraded with better main guns , in addition to other improvements . For example , the Panzer III was originally designed with a 37 mm gun , but was mass @-@ produced with a 50 mm cannon . To counter the threat of the Russian T @-@ 34s , another , more powerful 50 mm gun was introduced , only to give way to a larger 75 mm cannon . Despite the improved guns , production of the Panzer III was ended in 1943 , as the tank still could not match the T @-@ 34 , and was , furthermore , being replaced by the Panzer IV and Panther tanks . Following the 88 mm FlaK 36 's initial anti @-@ tank success in 1940 and through the German forces ' battles in North Africa and the Soviet Union , in 1944 , its improved tank @-@ mounted version , the 8 @.@ 8 cm KwK 43 , — and its multiple variations — entered service , used by the Wehrmacht , and was adapted to be both a tank 's main gun , and the PaK 43 anti @-@ tank gun . One of the most powerful guns to see service in World War II , it was capable of destroying any Allied tank at very long ranges . 
 Despite being designed to fire at trajectories with a steep angle of descent , howitzers can be fired directly , as was done by the 11th Marine Regiment at the Battle of Chosin Reservoir , during the Korean War . Two field batteries fired directly upon a battalion of Chinese infantry ; the Marines were forced to brace themselves against their howitzers , as they had no time to dig them in . The Chinese infantry took heavy casualties , and were forced to retreat . 
 The tendency to create larger caliber cannon during the World Wars has been reversed in more recent years . The United States Army , for example , sought a lighter , more versatile howitzer , to replace their aging pieces . As it could be towed , the M198 was selected to be the successor to the World War II @-@ era cannon used at the time , and entered service in 1979 . Still in use today , the M198 is , in turn , being slowly replaced by the M777 <unk> howitzer , which weighs nearly half as much , and can be transported by helicopter — as opposed to the M198 , which requires a C @-@ 5 or C @-@ 17 to airlift . Although land @-@ based artillery such as the M198 are powerful , long @-@ ranged , and accurate , naval guns have not been neglected , despite being much smaller than in the past , and , in some cases , having been replaced by cruise missiles . However , the Zumwalt @-@ class destroyer 's planned armament includes the Advanced Gun System ( AGS ) , a pair of 155 mm guns , which fire the Long Range Land @-@ Attack Projectile . The warhead , which weighs 24 pounds ( 11 kg ) , has a circular error of probability of 50 m ( 160 ft ) , and will be mounted on a rocket , to increase the effective range to 100 nmi ( 190 km ) — a longer range than that of the Paris Gun . The AGS 's barrels will be water cooled , and will be capable of firing 10 rounds per minute , per gun . The combined firepower from both turrets will give Zumwalt @-@ class destroyers the firepower equivalent to 18 conventional M @-@ 198 howitzers . The reason for the re @-@ integration of cannon as a main armament in United States Navy ships is because satellite @-@ guided munitions fired from a gun are far less expensive than a cruise missile , and are therefore a better alternative to many combat situations . 
 = = = Autocannon = = = 
 An autocannon is a cannon with a larger caliber than a machine gun , but smaller than that of a field gun . Autocannon have mechanisms to automatically load their ammunition , and therefore have a faster rate of fire than artillery , often approaching — and , in the case of Gatling guns , surpassing — that of a machine gun . The traditional minimum bore for autocannon — indeed , for all types of cannon , as autocannon are the lowest @-@ caliber pieces — has remained 20 mm , since World War II . 
 Most nations use these rapid @-@ fire cannon on their light vehicles , replacing a more powerful , but heavier , tank gun . A typical autocannon is the 25 mm " Bushmaster " chain gun , mounted on the LAV @-@ 25 and M2 Bradley armored vehicles . 
 Autocannon have largely replaced machine guns in aircraft , due to their greater firepower . The first airborne cannon appeared in World War II , but each airplane could carry only one or two , as cannon are heavier than machine guns , the standard armament . They were variously mounted , often in the wings , but also high on the forward fuselage , where they would fire through the propeller , or even through the propeller hub . Due both to the low number of cannon per aircraft , and the lower rate of fire of cannon , machine guns continued to be used widely early in the war , as there was a greater probability of hitting enemy aircraft . However , as cannon were more effective against more heavily armored bomber aircraft , they were eventually integrated into newer fighters , which usually carried between two and four autocannon . The Hispano @-@ Suiza HS.404 , Oerlikon 20 mm cannon , MG FF , and their numerous variants became among the most widely used autocannon in the war . Nearly all modern fighter aircraft are armed with an autocannon , and most are derived from their counterparts from the Second World War . The largest , heaviest , and most powerful airborne cannon used by the military of the United States is the GAU @-@ 8 / A Avenger Gatling @-@ type rotary cannon ; it is surpassed only by the specialized artillery pieces carried on the AC @-@ 130 gunship . 
 Although capable of generating a high volume of fire , autocannon are limited by the amount of ammunition that can be carried by the weapons systems mounting them . For this reason , both the 25 mm Bushmaster and the 30 mm <unk> are deliberately designed with relatively slow rates of fire , to extend the amount of time they can be employed on a battlefield before requiring a resupply of ammunition . The rate of fire of modern autocannon ranges from 90 rounds per minute , to 1 @,@ 800 rounds per minute . Systems with multiple barrels — Gatling guns — can have rates of fire of several thousand rounds per minute ; the fastest of these is the GSh @-@ 6 @-@ <unk> , which has a rate of fire of over 6 @,@ 000 rounds per minute . 
 = The Rhodes Not Taken = 
 " The Rhodes Not Taken " is the fifth episode of the American television series Glee . It premiered on the Fox network on September 30 , 2009 and was written by series co @-@ creator Ian Brennan and directed by John Scott . The episode features glee club director Will Schuester ( Matthew Morrison ) recruiting former star April Rhodes ( Kristin Chenoweth ) , hoping to improve the club 's chances in the wake of Rachel 's ( Lea Michele ) defection to the school musical . Finn ( Cory Monteith ) flirts with Rachel in an attempt to convince her to return , and although Rachel is angry when she discovers Finn 's girlfriend is pregnant , she ultimately rejoins the club . 
 Special guest star Kristin Chenoweth played April , and performed on three of the episode 's six musical tracks . Studio recordings of four of the songs performed in the episode were released as singles , available for digital download , and two appear on the album Glee : The Music , Volume 1 . 
 The episode was watched by 7 @.@ 32 million U.S. viewers . It received mostly positive reviews from critics , with Chenoweth 's appearance and the performance of Queen cover " Somebody to Love " in particular receiving praise . Raymund Flandez for The Wall Street Journal , Mike Hale of the New York Times and Denise Martin for the Los Angeles Times all deemed " Somebody to Love " the show 's best musical number since the staging of Journey 's " Don 't Stop Believin ' " in the pilot episode . 
 = = Plot = = 
 With lead singer Rachel Berry ( Lea Michele ) no longer part of New Directions , the McKinley High glee club , director Will Schuester ( Matthew Morrison ) grows concerned about the club 's forthcoming performance at Invitationals . He discovers that April Rhodes ( Kristin Chenoweth ) , a member of the club during his own high school days , never actually graduated , and convinces her to return to school in order to get her diploma and join the glee club . Having failed to achieve her Broadway dreams , April is now an alcoholic , and goes about winning the favor of the existing club members by unconventional means , including getting Kurt ( Chris Colfer ) drunk and teaching Mercedes ( Amber Riley ) and Tina ( Jenna Ushkowitz ) to shoplift . After guidance counselor Emma Pillsbury ( Jayma Mays ) warns Will that April is corrupting the students , Will asks April to become sober , and she vows to do so . 
 Club member Finn ( Cory Monteith ) is concerned for his future , having been told by his girlfriend Quinn ( Dianna Agron ) that she is pregnant with his child . Emma suggests that instead of aiming to attend college on a football scholarship , Finn should utilize his musical talent . Believing Rachel 's participation to be the glee club 's only chance at success at Invitationals , Finn feigns romantic interest in Rachel and takes her on a date . Rachel , realizing she is unhappy performing in the school musical and excited over Finn 's interest in her , returns to the glee club . Meanwhile , Kurt , Mercedes and Tina are informed of Quinn 's pregnancy by Puck ( Mark Salling ) , who pretends Finn fathered the child though he is the actual father . Finding out about Quinn , Rachel becomes furious with Finn and confronts him , asking if he is actually attracted to her at all . Finn insists the kiss they shared was honest , but Rachel is unconvinced and defects from glee club once again , returning to the school musical , where she is given full artistic control . At Invitationals , a drunk April , accompanied by the glee club , performs Carrie Underwood 's " Last Name " for a packed auditorium and receives the standing ovation she always dreamed of . Because she had performed drunk , Will tells April during intermission that she is no longer in the glee club . She accepts , telling him that she has realized that it is the kids , not her , who are the ones that should get the spotlight . This leaves New Directions without a lead singer for their next number , but Rachel offers to go on in April 's place — she has quit the musical , and wants to rejoin the club — and they all perform Queen 's " Somebody to Love " . 
 = = Production = = 
 Chenoweth guest starred in the episode as former glee club member April Rhodes . April is an " alcoholic and bad influence on the glee club members " , described by Chenoweth as someone who never graduated , but was " kind of the deal " in her high school glee club . She explained that April didn 't become the " big star " everyone expected her to , and so is brought back by Will to become part of the glee club again . 
 Chenoweth was previously acquainted with Glee creator Ryan Murphy , having appeared in his 2006 film Running with Scissors . Murphy commented that he loves writing for Chenoweth , and enjoyed pitching songs she had never sung before . She found singing in three different styles , as required by the role , to be " fun and challenging " , and though she had never before sung " Maybe This Time " , after singing it on Glee , she went on to use it in shows as her opening number . Chenoweth stated that she would love to return to Glee in the future , a sentiment shared by Murphy . She commented : " they are all working hard to figure out stories all the time . It 'd be great for it to make sense for her to come back . This part is like nothing I 've had the chance to do on TV . " It was confirmed in October 2009 that Chenoweth would reprise the role , which she did in " Home " . 
 Asked to explain Finn 's actions in flirting with Rachel to entice her back into the glee club , Monteith explained : " Finn is not only strangely attracted to Rachel , but he respects what she chases after in her life . He 's walking a thin line and trying to be somebody for everybody , and she 's an example of someone truly following her dreams and that 's attractive . " 
 The episode features cover versions of " Don 't Stop Believin ' " by Journey , " Maybe This Time " and " Cabaret " from Cabaret , " Alone " by Heart , " Last Name " by Carrie Underwood and " Somebody to Love " by Queen . Studio recordings of " Maybe This Time " , " Alone " , " Last Name " and " Somebody to Love " were released as singles , available for digital download . " Maybe This Time " charted at number 100 in Australia , and 88 in the US , " Alone " charted at number 94 in Australia , 58 in Canada and 51 in the US , and " Somebody to Love " charted at number 65 in Australia , 33 in Canada and 28 in the US . " Maybe This Time " , " Alone " and " Somebody to Love " also feature on the album Glee : The Music , Volume 1 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The episode was watched by 7 @.@ 32 million U.S. viewers and attained a 3 @.@ 2 / 9 rating / share in the 18 – 49 demographic . It was the most viewed episode of the season since its fall return with " Showmance " . It was the twenty @-@ sixth most watched show in Canada for the week of broadcast , with 1 @.@ 45 million viewers . In the UK , the episode was watched by 1 @.@ 89 million viewers ( 1 @.@ 48 million on E4 , and 410 @,@ 000 on E4 + 1 ) , becoming the most @-@ watched show on cable for the week , as well as the most @-@ watched episode of the series at the time . 
 The episode received mostly positive reviews from critics . Robert Bianco for USA Today wrote of Chenoweth 's guest appearance : " Her presence may not make much sense , but that 's probably all right . If it means hearing Chenoweth sing , we can put up with any explanation the show cares to offer . " Raymund Flandez for The Wall Street Journal was equally positive regarding Chenoweth 's role , praising her " powerful voice " , " kittenish mien " and " commanding presence " . Flandez deemed the performance of " Somebody to Love " the show 's best number since " Don 't Stop Believin ' " debuted in the pilot episode . Mike Hale of the New York Times similarly stated that " The Rhodes Not Taken " was " the best episode musically since the pilot " , calling the performance of " Somebody to Love " " truly rousing " . TV Guide included the renditions of " Somebody To Love " and " Maybe This Time " in its list of Glee 's best performances so far . Jarett Wieselman for the New York Post called the episode : " the smartest , funniest , heart @-@ <unk> , song @-@ tastic @-@ est episode of the show yet . " 
 The Los Angeles Times 's Denise Martin also enjoyed the episode , writing : " I don 't know how Glee keeps topping itself — it just does ! " Martin too praised the performance of " Somebody to Love " , writing : " Love or hate Queen , when New Directions sings it , it 's magical . And it 's the first time since ' Don 't Stop Believin ' ' that I got goosebumps . Something about kids singing songs , raising all those arms , makes everyone — can 't just be me ! — giddy and hopeful . They 're not as technically skilled as [ rival glee club ] Vocal Adrenaline — yet — but that only makes their underdog story more real . " Tim Stack of Entertainment Weekly also called " The Rhodes Not Taken " the best episode of Glee so far , deeming all the musical numbers " fantastic " . Eric Goldman for IGN rated the episode 8 @.@ 5 / 10 . He felt that Chenoweth was " terrific " as April , and that the character was a " hysterical creation " . Goldman assessed that the episode " soared " musically , though felt that its resolution was " rushed " and " forced " , suggesting that the series has yet to find the right balance between music , comedy and drama . 
 = U.S. Route 301 in Delaware = 
 U.S. Route 301 ( US 301 ) is a US Highway that passes through the state of Delaware , running 14 @.@ 93 mi ( 24 @.@ 03 km ) from the Maryland border southwest of Middletown north to its northern terminus at US 40 in Glasgow , where the highway continues north toward Newark as Delaware Route 896 ( DE 896 ) . US 301 runs through the western part of New Castle County in the northern part of the state , passing through Middletown and crossing the Chesapeake and Delaware Canal on the Summit Bridge . Through the state , US 301 varies between 2 and 4 lanes in width , with some portions a divided highway . US 301 is concurrent with multiple state routes , including DE 15 and DE 299 southwest of Middletown , DE 71 from Middletown to Summit Bridge , and DE 896 from Mount Pleasant to the northern terminus in Glasgow . 
 The current alignment of US 301 was built as a state highway in the 1920s and 1930s and was initially designated as DE 4 ( now DE 299 ) southwest of Middletown , DE 71 between Middletown and Summit Bridge , and DE 896 north of Summit Bridge . In the 1950s , DE 71 was rerouted to the Maryland border and DE 896 extended south on the alignment to Middletown . US 301 was extended into Delaware from Maryland in 1959 . At that time , it ran from the Maryland border north to an interchange with Interstate 295 ( I @-@ 295 ) / US 40 and US 13 / US 202 in Farnhurst . The route followed its current routing to Middletown , where it split into US 301N and US 301S . US 301N followed DE 299 and US 13 to Tybouts Corner while US 301S followed DE 71 north . Upon rejoining , US 301 followed US 13 and US 13 / US 40 to Farnhurst . In 1971 , US 301 was rerouted to head north from Middletown to Summit Bridge along DE 71 / DE 896 , where US 301N followed DE 896 and US 40 to State Road and US 301S followed DE 71 and US 13 north . US 301 was rerouted in 1985 at Mount Pleasant to follow DE 896 east to Boyds Corner and US 13 north to Farnhurst . US 301 was rerouted to its current northern terminus in 1992 . Plans have existed since the 1950s to build a freeway along the US 301 corridor in Delaware . Plans were made for this freeway in 2005 , which would be a toll road and run from the Maryland border northeast to DE 1 in St. Georges . Construction on the US 301 freeway began in 2016 with the freeway to be completed in 2018 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 US 301 enters Delaware from Maryland to the east of Warwick , Maryland , where it narrows from the four @-@ lane , divided Blue Star Memorial Highway in Maryland to the two @-@ lane undivided Middletown Warwick Road in Delaware . The road heads through a mix of farms and woods , with a northbound weigh station prior to an intersection with DE 299 . At this point , DE 299 forms a concurrency with US 301 , with the road passing through more agricultural areas with some development and widening into a four @-@ lane divided highway . The road comes to an intersection with DE 15 , where that route joins US 301 / DE 299 . The road enters Middletown and heads into commercial areas . At an intersection , the three routes split , with DE 15 heading northwest on Bunker Hill Road , DE 299 heading east on Main Street , and US 301 continuing north along Middletown Warwick Road . 
 US 301 passes more businesses before heading north on Summit Bridge Road . The road narrows into a two @-@ lane undivided road and passes through a mix of fields and residential and commercial development as it runs immediately to the west of Norfolk Southern 's Delmarva Secondary railroad line , reaching an intersection with DE 71 . Here , DE 71 heads north concurrent with US 301 , with the road passing near some businesses and a housing development before leaving Middletown . The road runs a short distance to the west of the Norfolk Southern rail line as it continues farmland with some scattered residential and commercial development . In Mount Pleasant , DE 896 joins US 301 / DE 71 from the east and the road widens from a two @-@ lane undivided road to a four @-@ lane divided highway . The road passes a few businesses before heading between the Summit Airport to the west and housing developments to the east . US 301 / DE 71 / DE 896 heads to the northwest through farm fields before turning to the west and passing a residential subdivision to the south . In the unincorporated community of Summit Bridge , the road intersects the northern terminus of DE 15 . Past this intersection , US 301 / DE 71 / DE 896 turns north and crosses over the Chesapeake and Delaware Canal on the Summit Bridge . 
 Past the Summit Bridge , the road passes through woods and crosses under Chesapeake City Road near the Delaware Veterans Memorial Cemetery . DE 71 splits from US 301 / DE 896 by heading to the southeast on Red Lion Road . US 301 / DE 896 continues north between residential neighborhoods to the west and wooded Lums Pond State Park to the east . The road passes near more suburban homes with some fields before reaching Glasgow , where it curves northeast to bypass Glasgow to the east with DE 896 Bus. heading north into Glasgow . US 301 / DE 896 heads to the east of Hodgson Vo @-@ Tech High School and curves northwest to intersect US 40 , where US 301 comes to its northern terminus and DE 896 continues to the north toward Newark . 
 US 301 in Delaware has an annual average daily traffic count ranging from a high of 38 @,@ 941 vehicles at the northern terminus at US 40 to a low of 14 @,@ 254 vehicles at the Peterson Road intersection in Middletown . The entire length of US 301 in Delaware is part of the National Highway System . 
 = = History = = 
 What is now US 301 in Delaware was originally an unnumbered county road by 1920 . The roadway was paved by 1924 . It was upgraded to a state highway between Mt . Pleasant and Summit Bridge a year later . The roadway between Middletown and Mt . Pleasant became a state highway in 1930 . As part of this improvement , a connecting road was built between the Middletown @-@ Mt . Pleasant road and the road leading towards Warwick that passed to the west of Middletown to avoid a pair of railroad crossings . On July 1 , 1935 , the portion of present @-@ day US 301 between Summit Bridge and Glasgow was taken over by the state . What is now US 301 was designated as DE 4 between the Maryland border and Middletown , DE 71 between Middletown and Summit Bridge , and DE 896 between Summit Bridge and Glasgow by 1938 . By 1957 , DE 4 was renumbered to DE 299 and DE 71 was realigned to follow DE 299 west of Middletown before splitting onto a new alignment to the Maryland border that connected to Maryland Route 71 ( MD 71 ) . In addition , DE 896 was designated concurrent with DE 71 between north of Middletown and Summit Bridge . 
 The US 301 designation was extended north into Delaware from Maryland by 1959 . When first designated , the route entered Maryland from MD 71 and followed DE 71 and DE 299 to Middletown . Here , the route split into US 301N and US 301S . US 301N followed DE 299 east to Odessa , where it turned north on US 13 and followed that route across the Chesapeake and Delaware Canal on the St. Georges Bridge . US 301S headed north along DE 71 / DE 896 to the Summit Bridge over the canal . Past the canal , US 301S headed northeast along DE 71 to Tybouts Corner , where it intersected US 13 and rejoined US 301N . From Tybouts Corner , US 301 continued north concurrent with US 13 and US 13 / US 40 to its northern terminus at an interchange in Farnhurst , where US 13 and US 202 continued north to Wilmington and US 40 headed east along I @-@ 295 towards the Delaware Memorial Bridge . US 301S was realigned to a new Summit Bridge a short distance to the west in 1960 , following new roads that led to the bridge . As a result of this , US 301S / DE 71 was designated onto a former piece of DE 896 between the new alignment and Red Lion Road to the east , with the rest of the former alignment becoming a dead end road south to the canal and the former alignment south of the canal becoming a local road serving the community of Summit Bridge . In 1971 , the American Association of State Highway Officials ( AASHO , now the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials or AASHTO ) approved realigning US 301 to head north from Middletown to Summit Bridge along DE 71 / DE 896 , where it would split . US 301N was realigned to follow DE 896 north to Glasgow and US 40 east from Glasgow to US 13 at State Road while US 301S continued to follow DE 71 from Summit Bridge to Tybouts Corner and US 13 from Tybouts Corner to State Road . 
 In 1983 , AASHTO approved for the realignment of US 301 to follow a newly aligned DE 896 east from Mount Pleasant to Boyds Corner , where it would continue north along US 13 to the I @-@ 295 / US 40 interchange in Farnhurst ; this change was implemented in 1985 . The concurrency with DE 71 between the Maryland border and Summit Bridge was removed by 1987 . By 1990 , US 301 became concurrent with DE 71 again between Middletown and Mount Pleasant . AASHTO approved for US 301 to be realigned to follow DE 896 between Mount Pleasant and US 40 in Glasgow , US 40 between Glasgow and State Road , and US 13 / US 40 between State Road and I @-@ 295 in Farnhurst in 1992 . However , US 301 is only signed up DE 896 to US 40 in Glasgow . By 1996 , US 301 and DE 896 were rerouted to bypass Glasgow to the east , with the former alignment becoming DE 896 Bus . In July 2008 , a widening project began on US 301 / DE 299 between United Drive and the east end of the concurrency . This widening to four lanes was completed in November 2010 . 
 = = Planned upgrade = = 
 The U.S. Route 301 Project is a future upgrade , which will replace the current alignment of US 301 in Delaware with a 17 @.@ 4 @-@ mile ( 28 @.@ 0 km ) , four @-@ lane limited @-@ access toll road connecting the existing US 301 at the Maryland border near Warwick , Maryland to the DE 1 toll road near St. Georges . The road will serve as a high @-@ speed bypass around the cities of Middletown and Newark . 
 The main highway itself will consist of a four @-@ lane , limited access toll road and will have a diamond interchange at an extended Levels Road serving as a realigned DE 299 ( connecting to current US 301 / DE 299 and DE 15 ) , a northbound exit and southbound entrance for a spur to the Summit Bridge , a diamond interchange at Armstrong Corner Road connecting to the current alignment of US 301 ( also known as DE 71 ) north of Middletown , and a diamond interchange at Jamison Corner Road before merging into northbound DE 1 between the Biddles Corner toll plaza and the Chesapeake and Delaware Canal Bridge . A mainline toll plaza will be located near the state line and there will be ramp tolls on the southbound exits and northbound entrances at the three diamond interchanges . Upon opening , tolls are planned to be $ 4 for cars and $ 11 for trucks , with toll rates to rise about 3 @.@ 5 percent annually . The US 301 freeway will utilize all @-@ electronic tolling . A two @-@ lane limited access spur will branch from the main highway northwest of Middletown and head north to an interchange with DE 71 / DE 896 and the northern terminus of DE 15 near Summit Bridge . At the northern terminus of the spur , the spur will merge into northbound DE 71 / DE 896 onto the Summit Bridge while a southbound exit and northbound entrance just south of the terminus will serve the northern terminus of DE 15 . 
 = = = History = = = 
 Plans for a four @-@ lane superhighway connecting the New Jersey Turnpike ( via the Delaware Memorial Bridge ) with the Washington , D.C. metro area dates back to the opening of the Chesapeake Bay Bridge in the 1950s . In December 1950 , a report was prepared for the Delaware State Highway Department that recommended a route running between the Maryland border near Warwick , where it was to connect to a proposed expressway on the other side of the state line , and the Delaware Memorial Bridge approach in Farnhurst . The route was to follow DE 4 ( now DE 299 ) to Middletown , where it would head north and parallel DE 71 to the Summit Bridge before continuing northeast to US 40 between Glasgow and Bear . From here , the highway was to follow US 40 northeast to State Road and then run to the east of US 13 in the New Castle area before reaching the bridge approach . Interchanges were to be located at DE 4 southwest of Middletown , DE 71 in Summit Bridge , DE 71 / DE 896 north of Summit Bridge , US 40 and US 13 in State Road , and DE 41 ( now DE 141 ) near New Castle . Legislation to build this freeway was requested to the Delaware General Assembly in 1951 ; it was not approved . 
 From the 1960s to the early 1990s , DelDOT planned for a freeway along the US 301 corridor . The freeway would bypass Middletown to the west and continue north to Glasgow , where it would head northeast to an interchange with I @-@ 95 ( Delaware Turnpike ) . The northern terminus of US 301 would have been at exit 2 of I @-@ 95 . DelDOT had purchased land at US 40 east of Glasgow for an interchange along this freeway . Over the years , plans for the freeway progressed slowly , with priority given to other road projects in the state . As a result , through traffic traveling from I @-@ 95 to US 301 in Maryland was forced to use two @-@ lane roads such as DE 896 . By 1992 , six corridors were proposed for this freeway . One followed DE 896 , one ran from Middletown to DE 1 , another ran north to the Summit Bridge and followed two corridors between Glasgow and I @-@ 95 , another ran near the Delaware @-@ Maryland state line and crossed the existing Summit Bridge , and the other ran to the east of Middletown . The proposal near the state line was dropped because of impact on wetlands and stream crossings while the proposal to the east of Middletown was eliminated because it would impact too many agricultural areas . In 1994 , plans resurfaced for capacity improvements to the US 301 corridor , with options for a new freeway , widening the current route , or adding interchanges along DE 896 . Three alignments were proposed for the freeway : one running northeast from US 40 at Glasgow to I @-@ 95 , one bypassing Summit Airport to the west , and another running to the west of Middletown and the Summit Bridge . Nothing came from these plans as state officials could not come to an agreement . In 1998 , plans were made again to expand capacity along US 301 , with five options . One option called for a US 301 freeway between the Maryland border and I @-@ 95 , another called for commuter rail linking Middletown to Newark and Wilmington , another plan called for high @-@ occupancy vehicle lanes on I @-@ 95 , DE 1 , and DE 896 , another idea was to widen US 301 and DE 1 , and the last idea called for an express road between US 301 in Middletown and DE 1 . At the time , the option for a US 301 freeway cost $ 205 million . Of all the ideas suggested , the freeway proposal received the most support . 
 In 2005 , plans for a freeway along the US 301 corridor surfaced once again . DelDOT proposed several options for this freeway : yellow route , brown route , green route + spur , purple route + spur , and no build . On November 13 , 2006 , DelDOT announced that it had chosen the " green route + spur " option to build the new US 301 . The " green + spur " option is the lowest cost , and will have minimum impact on property acquisition ( 35 residential and business properties total , mostly farmland ) and would not allow for the demolishing of two local churches . In 2008 , the Federal Highway Administration ( FHWA ) approved the selected alternative and allowed for right @-@ of @-@ way acquisition to begin . Right @-@ of @-@ way acquisition , completing the final design of the freeway , construction contracts , and utility relocations for the project occurred . Bids for construction of the US 301 toll road were issued in 2015 . In 2016 , construction began on the portion of the road between Levels Road and DE 71 and between DE 896 and DE 1 . A groundbreaking ceremony was held on February 5 , 2016 near the Maryland border , with Governor Jack Markell , FHWA administrator Gregory G. Nadeau , and DelDOT secretary Jennifer Cohan in attendance . Completion of construction is planned for December 2018 . The expected cost of the project is $ 600 million , and DelDOT sought a federal loan to pay for a third of the costs , which was approved in August 2015 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in New Castle County . 
 = Liebster Jesu , mein Verlangen , BWV 32 = 
 Liebster Jesu , mein Verlangen ( Dearest Jesus , my desire ) , BWV 32 , is a church cantata by Johann Sebastian Bach . He composed the dialogue cantata ( Concerto in Dialogo ) in Leipzig for the first Sunday after Epiphany and first performed it on 13 January 1726 . 
 Bach composed the cantata in his third year as Thomaskantor on a text which Georg Christian Lehms , a court poet in Darmstadt , had published already in 1711 . Lehms derived from the prescribed gospel , the finding in the Temple , a dialogue . Instead of a parent missing a son , as in the gospel , an allegorical Soul ( soprano ) misses Jesus ( bass ) . The motifs of the story , the loss and anxious search , are placed in a more general situation in which the listener can identify with the Soul . As Lehms did not provide a closing chorale , Bach chose the twelfth and final stanza of Paul Gerhardt 's hymn " Weg , mein Herz , mit den Gedanken " . 
 Bach structured the cantata in six movements , first alternating arias and recitative , then uniting the voices in recitative and aria , finally a chorale . The two soloists are supported by an intimate Baroque instrumental ensemble of oboe , strings and continuo . The oboe accompanies the soprano , a solo violin the bass , both play when the voices are united . 
 = = History and words = = 
 Bach composed the cantata in his third year as Thomaskantor ( director of church music ) in Leipzig for the First Sunday after Epiphany . The prescribed readings for the Sunday were taken from the Epistle to the Romans , speaking of the duties of a Christian ( Romans 12 : 1 – 6 ) , and from the Gospel of Luke , the finding in the Temple ( Luke 2 : 41 – 52 ) . Bach composed a text written by Georg Christian Lehms , court poet in Darmstadt , who published it in 1711 . Bach had set texts by Lehms already when he composed cantatas for the Weimar court from 1714 to 1717 . He had set a similar work by Lehms a few weeks earlier , Selig ist der Mann , BWV 57 for the second day of Christmas . 
 Lehms treated the Gospel to an allegorical dialogue of Jesus and the Soul . In the Concerto in Dialogo ( Concerto in dialogue ) , Bach assigned the Soul to the soprano voice and gave the words of Jesus to the bass as the vox Christi , the voice of Christ , disregarding that the Jesus in the Gospel is still a boy . Lehms imagines not a parent searching for a missing son , but more generally the Christian Soul " with whom we are expected to identify " , as John Eliot Gardiner notes . The Bach scholar Klaus Hofmann comments that the poet " takes up the general motifs of the story : the loss , the search for Jesus and his rediscovery , and places them in the context of the believer ’ s relationship with Jesus " . The dialogue also refers to medieval mysticism and to imagery of the Song of Songs . Lehms did not provide a closing chorale ; Bach added the twelfth and final stanza of Paul Gerhardt 's hymn " Weg , mein Herz , mit den Gedanken " ( 1647 ) . It is sung to the melody of " <unk> dich sehr , o meine Seele " , which was codified by Louis Bourgeois when setting the Geneva Psalm 42 in his collection of <unk> <unk> trios de David ( Geneva , 1551 ) . Bourgeois seems to have been influenced by the secular song Ne l <unk> je dire contained in the <unk> de Bayeux published around 1510 . 
 Bach led the first performance of the cantata on 13 January 1726 . 
 = = Scoring and structure = = 
 Bach structured the cantata in six movements , four movements of alternating arias and recitatives , then the voices united in a duet and finally a closing chorale . He scored the intimate dialogue for soprano and bass soloist , a four @-@ part choir only in the chorale , and a Baroque instrumental ensemble of oboe ( Ob ) , two violins ( Vl ) , viola ( Va ) and basso continuo . The duration is given as 22 minutes . 
 In the following table of the movements , the scoring follows the Neue Bach @-@ Ausgabe . The keys and time signatures are taken from the book on all cantatas by the Bach scholar Alfred Dürr , using the symbols for common time ( 4 / 4 ) and alla breve ( 2 / 2 ) . The continuo , playing throughout , is not shown . 
 = = Music = = 
 The dialogue , set in arias and recitatives for a solo voice and in duets , shows that Bach was familiar with Italian contemporary opera . 
 = = = 1 = = = 
 The dialogue is opened by the soprano as the Soul in an aria in E minor , marked lento , " Liebster Jesu , mein Verlangen " ( Dearest Jesus , my desire ) , The voice is complemented by an obbligato oboe , described by John Eliot Gardiner as " a solo oboe as her accomplice in spinning the most ravishing <unk> in the manner of one of Bach ’ s concerto slow movements " . Julian Mincham distinguishes in the oboe line two different " ideas " , in the first five measures a " sense of striving , effort and stretching upwards " , then " garlands " of content in achieving a union , as the last lines of the text say " Ach ! mein Hort , <unk> mich , laß dich <unk> vergnügt <unk> " ( Ah ! My treasure , bring me joy , let me embrace You with greatest delight ) . 
 = = = 2 = = = 
 The bass answers in a short recitative , " Was <unk> , daß du mich <unk> ? " ( How is it , that you sought Me ? ) , a paraphrase of Jesus saying in the gospel that he has to be in his Father 's place . 
 = = = 3 = = = 
 He expands the reasoning in a da capo aria in B minor , " Hier , in meines <unk> <unk> " ( Here , in My Father 's place ) . embellished by a solo violin , which " encircles the voice with triplets and trills " . The words " <unk> Geist ( troubled spirit ) appear whenever mentioned in " minor @-@ mode colourings in the melody and harmony " . 
 = = = 4 = = = 
 In the following dialogue recitative , " Ach ! <unk> und großer Gott " ( Ah ! Holy and great God ) , the soul answers with a paraphrase of the opening line of Psalm 84 , " Wie <unk> ist doch deine <unk> " ( How amiable is Thy dwelling ) , which both Heinrich Schütz and Johannes Brahms set to music , Brahms as the central movement of Ein deutsches Requiem . Bach sets the text as an " evocative arioso with a pulsating string accompaniment " . The two voices never sing at the same time . 
 = = = 5 = = = 
 A duet , " Nun <unk> alle <unk> " ( Now all trouble disappears ) , finally unites both voices and also their " associated obbligato instruments ( oboe and violin ) , so far heard only separately " . Gardiner writes : " It is one of those duets … in which he seems to throw caution to the winds , rivalling the <unk> fine conclusions to the operas of his day , but with far more skill , substance and even panache " . 
 = = = 6 = = = 
 A four @-@ part setting of Paul Gerhardt 's hymn , " Mein Gott , <unk> mir die <unk> " ( My God , open the gates ) , " returns the cantata – also in terms of style – to the sphere of reverence appropriate for a church service " . 
 = = Selected recordings = = 
 The selection is taken from the listing on the Bach @-@ Cantatas website . Choirs and orchestras are roughly marked as large by red background ; instrumental groups playing period instruments in historically informed performances are highlighted green under the header Instr .. 
 = She of Little Faith = 
 " She of Little Faith " is the sixth episode of The Simpsons thirteenth season . It first aired in the United States on the Fox network on December 16 , 2001 . In the episode , Bart Simpson and his father Homer accidentally launch a model rocket into the Springfield church , causing the church council to accept funding plans from Mr. Burns for reparation . Discontent with how commercialized the rebuilt church has become , Lisa abandons Christianity and seeks out to follow a new religion . 
 The episode was directed by Steven Dean Moore and written by Bill Freiberger , whom executive producer and show runner Al Jean had met while working on the television series Teen Angel . The plot idea for the episode was pitched by Jean , who wanted to expand on Lisa 's personality , even though some of the Simpsons writers were concerned over the episode 's originality . Lisa has remained a Buddhist since this episode . The episode features actor Richard Gere , who agreed to star as long as Buddhism was portrayed accurately , and as long as Lisa would say " Free Tibet " . 
 The episode was nominated for the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Animated Program ( For Programming less than One Hour ) in 2002 , which it ultimately lost to the Futurama episode , " Roswell That Ends Well " . Following the thirteenth season 's release on DVD and Blu @-@ ray , the episode received mostly positive reviews from critics . 
 = = Plot = = 
 While watching a 1950s science fiction movie , Bart and Lisa see a commercial for a model rocket kit and Bart orders it by using Homer 's credit card number . Homer helps Bart and Milhouse build it , but it blows up before launching . Jealous that Ned Flanders built a superior rocket , Homer enlists the help of his former nerdy college roommates , Gary , Doug , and Benjamin , to build a rocket piloted by the hamster Nibbles . The rocket lifts off successfully , but it develops complications and Nibbles bails out . However , Homer makes an attempt to shoot down the rocket with a 12 gauge shotgun , but the rocket crashes into the church . The church council meets up to decide how to come up with money to fund the repairs to the church , and with no other aid available they accept help from Mr. Burns and Lindsay Naegle . The two rebuild the church as a commercial monstrosity , complete with advertising signs , a Lard Lad statue , and a Jumbotron . Lisa is appalled at this and abandons the church , feeling her religion has lost its soul . 
 That night , Lisa prays to God and assures him she has not turned her back on him , but plans to seek a new path to him . While on a walk around town passing many sacrilegious signs , she finds Springfield 's Buddhist temple . Inside she sees Lenny and Carl meditating , and Hollywood actor Richard Gere teaches the core concepts of Buddhism to her . An intrigued Lisa takes a pamphlet on Buddhism and studies it at home . It convinces her of the virtues of the faith , and Lisa announces out her window she has become , and forever will be , a Buddhist . Lisa plants her own bodhi tree in the back yard and begins to meditate , but Marge grows increasingly worried about Lisa 's soul and tries to convince her to come back to Christianity . 
 At the church council , Reverend Lovejoy tells Marge to use Christmas to bribe her back . Marge bakes cookies , decorates the home , and has Ralph and Milhouse dress as a pony in wrapping paper to tempt her , but Lisa runs from the home when she realizes what is happening . At the Buddhist temple she tells Richard Gere her family tried to trick her , but Gere informs her that while Buddhism is about one finding inner peace , it is also about respecting the diversity of other religions based on love and compassion - thus , Lisa is free to celebrate any holiday with her family including Christmas . Lisa goes back home , falling asleep beside the Christmas tree and tells everyone that she will be celebrating Christmas with them and continue paying lip service to Christianity while practicing Buddhism for the rest of her life . As Marge takes her to the kitchen to get some cookies for her , Lisa asks about her pony , and Marge tries unsuccessfully to change the subject as Lisa calls out for her gift . 
 = = Production and themes = = 
 " She of Little Faith " was directed by Steven Dean Moore and was the only episode Bill Freiberger wrote for The Simpsons . It was first broadcast on Fox in the United States on December 16 , 2001 . 
 Before returning to work full @-@ time on The Simpsons , Jean had worked on a television series called Teen Angel together with Mike Reiss and Freiberger . While working on Teen Angel , Freiberger suggested that , if Jean was ever to run The Simpsons , he should hire Freiberger as a writer on the series . For the thirteenth season , Jean became show runner and assigned Freiberger to write the episode . Freiberger wrote the first draft as a freelance script at his parents ' barn in Pennsylvania , and when he returned to the writing staff to rewrite the story , Freiberger took so many notes that the script became 106 pages long . As a result , Freiberger spent more time editing down the script rather than writing it . The episode 's main plot , in which Lisa becomes a Buddhist , was pitched by Jean , who wanted to expand Lisa 's personality . When he pitched the plot idea to the Simpsons writing staff , they became concerned about the episode 's originality . They argued that the series had already explored religious themes in earlier episodes , but Jean assured them that the episode would be about Lisa first @-@ and @-@ foremost , rather than Buddhism . Unlike several other episodes in the series in which a character undergoes a change in their personality , Lisa has remained a Buddhist since this episode , much like her conversion to vegetarianism in " Lisa the Vegetarian " . 
 Freiberger pitched the subplot involving the model rockets in the beginning of the episode . He based it on a real @-@ life experience , in which he , as a child , accidentally launched a model rocket into a window in his house . A scene from this subplot was removed from the episode following the September 11 attacks . The scene would show a man named Hassan Jay Salam being arrested by policemen ( who tells them to call his cousin Casey Kasem ) , who think the rocket Bart and Homer launched was launched by him ( The rocket bears the abbreviation <unk> , which stands for Homer J Simpson ) . After the attacks , the scene was considered too offensive by the Fox censors , so the scene was removed . Originally , the subplot would involve Marge trying to get Homer to build model rockets with Bart. Homer would not want to at first , but after Marge convinces him , he would soon get more into it than Bart. The plot idea was encouraged by some of the writers who thought that Marge had " gotten short shrift , " and , according to Freiberger , Marge would have had a " really big part motivating the story " had the subplot remained intact . 
 The renovated church in the episode is built like a mall ; several stores and merchandising is located inside , and Reverend Lovejoy plugs products and television programs during his sermons . The scene is used to satirize the so @-@ called " <unk> " and the commercialization sometimes associated with these institutions . The episode also argues that , even if Christmas has lost most of its meaning , it is more important to " keep these thoughts to oneself in order to make the family happy . " It also comments on what the writers believe to be the " all or nothing , we 're right , you 're all going to hell mentality " of some Christian movements . Even though " She of Little Faith " is a Christmas episode , the holiday is not mentioned until the episode 's third act . Jean stated in the DVD audio commentary for the episode that the writers did not want to make a conventional Christmas episode , and instead wanted to " slide into " the subject . 
 The episode features actor Richard Gere as himself . Gere agreed to guest star under two conditions , the first being that Buddhism should be portrayed accurately , and his second and strongest request being that Lisa should say " Free Tibet " in the episode . Jean agreed , but Richard Gere ended up with the line . However , Lisa did yell out " Free Tibet " in an episode in the following season . Gere 's lines were recorded in New York by Jean who , in the DVD audio commentary for the episode , stated that Gere was " great " and that he " didn 't mind being made fun of " in the episode . He also mentioned that Gere was one of the only guest @-@ stars they had that " looked handsome <unk> . " 
 = = Release = = 
 In 2002 , " She of Little Faith " was nominated for the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Animated Program ( For Programming less than One Hour ) , but it ultimately lost to the Futurama episode Roswell That Ends Well . Matt Groening , creator of both series , joked that the award " gave [ him ] a chance to be bitter either way " . On August 24 , 2010 , the episode was released as part of The Simpsons : The Complete Thirteenth Season DVD and Blu @-@ ray set . 
 Following its home video release , " She of Little Faith " received mostly positive reviews from critics . Dominic von <unk> of <unk> considered the episode to be a " comedy gem " and Casey Burchby of DVD Talk wrote that it " offers its fair share of laughs " . Stuart O ' Conner of Screen Jabber was also favorable , calling it a " first @-@ rate " episode . Writing for Obsessed With Film , Adam Rayner derided Gere 's performance as being " bland and dreary " , however he went on to write that it couldn 't ruin the episode , which he described as " great " . He especially liked Flanders ' line " My Satan sense is tingling . " Jennifer Malkowski , who gave the episode a B- , wrote that the episode 's " highlight " was a scene in which " Milhouse mourns his ' beautiful eyebrows ' " that were burned off by Bart and Homer 's model rocket . In 2007 , Simon Crerar of The Times listed Gere 's performance as one of the thirty @-@ three funniest cameos in the history of the show . 
 On the other hand , giving the episode a negative review , Nate Boss of Project : Blu wrote that the episode is " Sometimes on point , sometimes dragging ass " , and that it " has the right idea " , but " just falls short " . Ron Martin of 411Mania , who consider episodes about Lisa to be " traditional channel changers " , wrote that it " offers one of the worst ‘ Lisa episodes ’ " of the series . Colin Jacobsson of DVD Movie Guide criticized the episode for being " little more than a retread " of earlier episodes of the series . He argued that the episode borrows plot elements from both " Lisa the Vegetarian " , " Lisa 's Pony " and " Grift of the Magi " , and went on to write that the episode is " a pretty unoriginal piece of work " . He concluded his review by writing that the episode " fails to deliver more than a chuckle or two " . 
 = Beautiful People ( Chris Brown song ) = 
 " Beautiful People " is a song by American recording artist Chris Brown featuring Italian DJ Benny Benassi , released as the third single from Brown 's fourth studio album F.A.M.E. on March 11 , 2011 . It was written by Brown , Jean Baptiste , Marco Benassi and Allessandro Benassi , and was produced by the latter two . Musically , " Beautiful People " is an uptempo song which draws from the genres of electro house , dancehall and Europop , and contains influences of R & B. The song 's lyrics revolve around Brown encouraging " everyone on the dance floor to keep their heads up and discover the beauty inside . " 
 " Beautiful People " received generally positive reviews from critics , who praised its production and lyrics . In the United States , the song peaked at number one on the Hot Dance Club Songs chart , and became the first number @-@ one single for both Brown and Benassi . It also reached the top ten in Australia , Ireland , New Zealand and the United Kingdom , and the top twenty in Belgium and Denmark . The accompanying music video was released on March 22 , 2011 , and features personal footage of Brown 's everyday life . The video also features appearances from several of Brown 's famous friends , including Diddy , Bow Wow , T @-@ Pain , Nelly , Timbaland , among others . Brown promoted the song with live performances on Dancing with the Stars ( U.S. ) , the 2011 MTV Video Music Awards , and the 54th Grammy Awards . It was also included on the set list of his 2011 F.A.M.E. Tour . 
 = = Background and composition = = 
 " Beautiful People " was written by Brown , Jean Baptiste , Benny Benassi and Alle Benassi , with the latter two also handling its production . It was recorded at The Record Plant — a studio in Los Angeles , California . Before the release of F.A.M.E. , the song leaked online on January 16 , 2011 . The single cover was unveiled on February 2 , 2011 , showing Brown strapping a gas mask onto his face as he peers up at the camera . The song 's title is spelled out in ransom note effect , with Brown 's name graffitied onto the bottom right corner . " Beautiful People " was released for digital download on March 11 , 2011 . An extended play , featuring additional remixes of the song , was made available for download in the United Kingdom and the United States on April 19 , 2011 . " Beautiful People " was later included on Benassi 's fifth studio album , <unk> ( 2011 ) , as track four . 
 " Beautiful People " is an uptempo electro house , dancehall and Europop song with R & B influences . According to James Dean Wells from AOL Radio , the song is " comprised of pulsing synths that build under Benassi and Brown 's staccato and auto @-@ tuned melodies . " " Beautiful People " is set in common time with a moderate tempo of 126 beats per minute . It is composed in the key of Eb major with Brown 's vocal range spanning from the note of Eb4 to the note of F5 . The song is positive and uplifting with lyrics such as : " Everywhere that I 've been / The only thing that I see is beautiful people ... / Don 't you know / Don 't you know / You 're beautiful . " According to Rap @-@ Up , on the song , Brown encourages " everyone on the dance floor to keep their heads up and discover the beauty inside . " When speaking about " Beautiful People " , Brown told Jayson Rodriguez from MTV News that " it wasn 't a selfish record , it wasn 't me bragging or boasting or talking about cars or money or girls . It was me being able to inspire people with dance music . We have a lot of tragic things going on and the world needs to come together as a whole and stop the negativity . " 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " Beautiful People " received generally positive reviews from music critics . Margaret Wappler from Los Angeles Times wrote that " Beautiful People " sounds almost like a Kylie Minogue song " with its powdered @-@ sugar synths and dance floor positivity " . Jon Caramanica from The New York Times wrote that the song " has the clanging , swelling synths that are the hallmark of <unk> . " Editors from Idolator wrote " We like the song , though we don 't see anything inherently ' Chris Brown ' about this track — it really could have been recorded by anybody with similar results . " Ed Easton Jr. from WNOW @-@ FM wrote that the song " is a softer and sensitive side of Chris Brown as its lyrics are supposed to be meant to inspire others . " Joanne Dorken from MTV UK wrote that " Brown 's vocals are unrecognisable on this Ibiza @-@ dance scene floor filler , which you can ’ t help but move to . " James Montgomery from MTV News praised Benassi 's production skills , and wrote " It 's not a stretch to call ' Beautiful People ' not only one of the year 's most unexpected singles , but also one of the best . " Robert Copsey from Digital Spy awarded " Beautiful People " five out of five stars , and called it a " dancehall thumper about equality and believing in yourself . " 
 Nick Levine from BBC Music wrote that Brown is at his most ingratiating when he unites with Benassi " for the electronic throb of " Beautiful People " " . Jamie Horne of The Border Mail wrote that the song " is another thumping four @-@ on @-@ the @-@ floor anthem . " Tom Howard from Yahoo ! Music called the song " <unk> euphoric ... a single just in time to gain some momentum before the high season in Ibiza . " Sean Fennessey from The Washington Post gave " Beautiful People " a mixed review , writing , " When Brown dabbles in shamelessly au courant <unk> , such as in ' Beautiful People ' featuring and produced by the Italian pop @-@ house staple Benny Benassi , that voice is nearly swallowed whole by wall @-@ to @-@ wall production . " James Montgomery from MTV News placed " Beautiful People " at number 18 on his list of the " 25 Best Songs of 2011 " . He wrote that " this single represents his biggest reinvention to date . A slippery , shiny club track helmed by Benny Benassi , like most of Breezy 's work it is undeniably sexy , but it 's also subtly smart too . And that 's where he made his biggest strides . " " Beautiful People " was nominated for Best R & B / Urban Dance Track at the 27th Annual International Dance Music Awards . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 In the issue dated March 12 , 2011 , " Beautiful People " debuted at number 37 on the US Hot Dance Club Songs chart . The song peaked at number one in the issue dated May 21 , 2011 , and became the first number @-@ one single for both Brown and Benassi . In the issue dated September 17 , 2011 , " Beautiful People " debuted and peaked on the US Billboard Hot 100 chart at number 43 . In Canada , the song debuted at number 90 on the Canadian Hot 100 chart dated May 7 , 2011 . It later peaked at number 22 , and spent 10 weeks on the chart . On the Australian Singles Chart , " Beautiful People " debuted at number 14 on March 21 , 2011 , and peaked at number seven on May 2 , 2011 . The song was certified double platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) , denoting sales of 140 @,@ 000 copies . 
 On the New Zealand Singles Chart , " Beautiful People " debuted at number 40 on March 21 , 2011 , and peaked at number six on April 18 , 2011 . It was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of New Zealand ( RIANZ ) , denoting sales of 7 @,@ 500 copies . In Ireland , " Beautiful People " debuted at number 39 on March 31 , 2011 , and peaked at number three on May 5 , 2011 . In the United Kingdom , " Beautiful People " debuted at number 95 on the UK Singles Chart dated April 9 , 2011 . After several weeks of climbing up the chart , it peaked at number four on May 7 , 2011 , where it remained for two consecutive weeks . Overall , it is Brown 's fifth UK top ten single as a lead artist . " Beautiful People " also charted on the UK Dance Chart at number two . As of January 2012 , the song has sold 588 @,@ 000 copies in the UK . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The accompanying music video for " Beautiful People " premiered on MTV 's The Seven on March 22 , 2011 . The video features cameo appearances from Brandy , Tyga , Game , Big Sean , Ryan Leslie , Bow Wow , Pharrell Williams , Swizz Beatz , T @-@ Pain , Estelle , Teyana Taylor , Omarion , Diddy , Kevin McCall , Nelly , and Timbaland . The video opens showing Brown and his dance crew , The Rej3ctz , riding scooters during the night in the streets , before switching to various scenes of Brown singing and dancing in the backseat of a car and hanging out in a recording studio with several famous friends listening to " Beautiful People " . The video is also intercut with scenes of Brown and Benassi performing at separate concerts , and Brown in the studio dancing with T @-@ Pain . More scenes feature Brown at the club with Teyana Taylor , Brandy , and Omarion . The video ends by showing Brown standing in front of a wall that has the words ' Beautiful People ' graffitied on it . 
 Becky Bain from Idolator stated that the video was " basically a four @-@ minute statement that Brown still has a bunch of friends on his side . " Ann Lee from Metro thought his dancing in the video was " better than his singing but it 's still pleasant enough . " Tanner Stransky from Entertainment Weekly wrote that the video had a " nice concept " , and noted it was " a departure from Brown ’ s trademark glossy clips " . Ed Easton Jr. from WXRK called it a " feel @-@ good journey through his everyday life " , and wrote " the visuals [ in the video ] are supposed to show the human side of Chris and his friends enjoying themselves and leaving the stresses of the world behind to be free from criticism . " 
 = = Live performances and cover versions = = 
 A pre @-@ taped performance of Brown performing a medley of " Beautiful People " and " Forever " was shown on the American version of Dancing with the Stars on March 29 , 2011 . For the performance Brown wore a black and white suit , and was accompanied by a group of robotic dancers dressed in all @-@ white suits adorned with LED lighting for a futuristic Tron @-@ like affect . Prior to the performance some of the show 's cast were unhappy that Brown was going to perform because of the domestic violence assault that occurred with his then @-@ girlfriend Rihanna in 2009 . Brown was sentenced to five years of probation , ordered to complete more than 1 @,@ 400 hours of community service and was given a restraining order which required him to stay away from Rihanna . Professional dancer Cheryl Burke told Extra , " As a victim of domestic violence , I don 't agree with him coming on the show , but it 's out of my control " , while host Tom Bergeron told the On Air with Ryan Seacrest radio show that , " I did tell the producers it may be to their advantage to not have me interview him , because my natural tendency would be to say something . So don 't put me in a position where you are asking me to not say something , because I really won 't do that . " 
 On August 28 , 2011 , Brown performed a medley of " Beautiful People " and " Yeah 3x " at the 2011 MTV Video Music Awards . He opened the performance with " Yeah 3x " and was dressed in a white formal suit , accompanied by " full @-@ skirted dancers " . Brown was eventually joined onstage by tuxedo @-@ clad dancers and began dancing to the 1993 Wu @-@ Tang Clan single " Protect Ya Neck " . His dance routine then moved into 1991 , where he danced to Nirvana 's " Smells Like Teen Spirit " . Brown 's performance then came back to the future , where he began to sing " Beautiful People " . While performing the song , he was suspended in the air , and then lowered to another stage where he continued to perform the song . Brown then went back in the air , where he did splits and back @-@ flips . " Beautiful People " was also added to the set list of Brown 's F.A.M.E. Tour in Australia and North America . On October 8 , 2011 , Nu Vibe sang " Beautiful People " on the eighth series of The X Factor ( UK ) . On December 3 , 2011 , British singer @-@ songwriter Labrinth covered " Beautiful People " during his set at the Jingle Bell Ball , which was held at the O2 Arena in London . 
 On February 12 , 2012 , Brown performed a medley of " Beautiful People " and " Turn Up the Music " at the 54th Grammy Awards , which took place at the Staples Center in Los Angeles , California . He was dressed in a white and gray varsity jacket , white pants and sparkling sneakers . Brown and his backup dancers performed heavily @-@ choreographed routines to " Turn Up the Music " atop a collection of blocks , which changed from red to blue to yellow and green . He then sang " Beautiful People " as he jumped across the blocks , while his backup dancers followed in a high @-@ flying routine . The performance ended when Brown saluted to the audience before he took a bow . Rob Markman from MTV News noted that the blocks " resembled the 1980s arcade game Q * bert " , while Evelyn McDonnell from Los Angeles Times noted that Brown lip @-@ synched his performance . Andrew Martin from Prefix magazine wrote that it was one of the worst performances at the Grammy Awards due to the fact that he lip @-@ synched . The performance was made available for download via the iTunes Store in the United States on February 15 , 2012 . 
 When Steps re @-@ formed in 2011 and announced they would go on tour during Spring in 2012 , Lisa Scott @-@ Lee performed a medley as her solo featuring Heaven , Beautiful People and Lately . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Digital download 
 " Beautiful People " featuring Benny Benassi ( Main version ) – 3 : 45 
 " Beautiful People " featuring Benny Benassi ( Club version ) – 5 : 57 
 Digital Remix EP 
 " Beautiful People " ( Felix <unk> Club Remix ) – 4 : 31 
 " Beautiful People " ( The Knocks Club Remix ) – 4 : 38 
 " Beautiful People " ( Ultimate High Radio Remix ) – 3 : 45 
 " Beautiful People " ( Lenny B Radio Mix ) – 3 : 19 
 " Beautiful People " ( Cosmic Dawn Club Remix ) – 6 : 20 
 " Beautiful People " ( Tonal Radio Remix ) – 4 : 03 
 Digital download – Live at the 54th Grammy Awards 
 " Turn Up the Music " / " Beautiful People " – 4 : 07 
 " Turn Up the Music " / " Beautiful People " ( Video ) – 4 : 07 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Chris Brown – songwriter , lead vocals 
 Marco " Benny " Benassi – songwriter , producer 
 Allessandro " Alle " Benassi – songwriter , producer 
 Jean Baptiste – songwriter 
 Serban Ghenea – audio mixing 
 John Hanes – engineering 
 Tim Roberts – assistant engineering 
 Source : 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = = Radio and release history = = 
 = Sutton Court = 
 Sutton Court is an English house remodelled by Thomas Henry Wyatt in the 1850s from a manor house built in the 15th and 16th centuries around a 14th @-@ century fortified pele tower and surrounding buildings . The house has been designated as Grade II * listed building . 
 The house is at Stowey in the Chew Valley in an area of Somerset now part of Bath and North East Somerset , near to the village of Bishop Sutton . The house is surrounded by an extensive estate , laid out as a Ferme <unk> , part of which is now the Folly Farm nature reserve . 
 Since the early modern period the house has been the country seat of several prominent families including the St <unk> one of whom married Bess of Hardwick . They lived at Sutton Court and expanded the property in the second half of the 16th century . Throughout the 18th and 19th centuries it was owned by the Strachey baronets and their descendants until it was sold in 1987 and converted into apartments . In the Early 1980 's the house was used as a film location for the BBC Look and Read series ' Dark Towers ' , a series very popular to this day in Primary schools . 
 = = History = = 
 The original tower of a fortified house , which forms a central part of the current building was built in the 14th century by Walter de Sutton . It was later purchased by the St Loe family of Newton St Loe Castle who expanded the hall , and established a small deer park of around 200 acres ( 81 ha ) which covered the site now occupied by Folly Farm . A length of the original embattled wall , which was built in the 14th century , survives . 
 G.W. and J.H. Wade , suggest that Bishop Hooper , Anglican Bishop of Gloucester and Worcester , found asylum at Sutton Court around 1550 during the Marian Persecutions when the house was owned by the Protestant sympathiser Sir John St Loe , Member of Parliament ( MP ) and High Sheriff of Somerset . Sir John St Loe was a friend and neighbour of John Locke a philosopher and physician regarded as one of the most influential of Enlightenment thinkers and widely known as the Father of Classical Liberalism . Locke who lived in <unk> , Pensford approximately 3 miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) from Sutton Court . John St Loe was buried at the local Church of St Andrew , Chew Magna . 
 About 1558 , according to a date on a fireplace , Bess of Hardwick and her third husband , Sir John 's son Sir William St Loe , added a north east wing with a parlour and chapel , which includes Tudor buttresses . Sir William St Loe was a soldier , politician and courtier . His official positions included Captain of the Yeomen of the Guard , Chief Butler of England and Member of Parliament for Derbyshire . He died suddenly without male issue in 1564 / 5 , which Mary S. Lovell suggests may have been as a result of poisoning by his younger brother . All his property was left Bess , to the detriment of his daughters and brother . When Bess died in 1608 the house was left to her son Charles Cavendish . 
 In the early 17th century it was the seat of Richard Jones and his son Sir William Jones , the Attorney General of England . In the 1650s the estate was bought by the Baber family . 
 The house became the seat of the Strachey family including John Strachey , the geologist , who inherited estates including Sutton Court from his father in 1674 at three years of age . He introduced a theory of rock formations known as <unk> , based on a pictorial cross @-@ section of the geology under the estate and coal seams in nearby coal works of the Somerset Coalfield . He projected them according to their measured thicknesses and attitudes into unknown areas between the coal workings . The purpose was to enhance the value of his grant of a coal @-@ lease on parts of his estate . This work was later developed by William Smith . 
 Henry Strachey , the grandson of the geologist and a senior civil servant , was created a baronet in 1801 . When he inherited the house in the 18th century the house had been mortgaged , however the mortgage was paid by Strachey 's employer Clive of India . 
 Henry Strachey , the 2nd Baronet , was appointed High Sheriff of Somerset in 1832 and Edward Strachey the 3rd Baronet High Sheriff in 1864 . In 1858 much of the house was remodelled for the 3rd Baronet by Thomas Henry Wyatt . 
 The 4th Baronet who was also Edward Strachey , a Liberal politician , was returned to Parliament for Somerset South at the 1892 general election . He served under Sir Henry Campbell @-@ Bannerman and later H. H. Asquith as Treasurer of the Household from 1905 to 1909 and under Asquith as Parliamentary Secretary to the Board of Agriculture and Fisheries from 1909 to 1911 . He was raised to the Peerage as Baron <unk> in 1911 . During the 1970s major restoration work was undertaken to deal with dry rot and replace wiring which resulted in the removal of several ceilings and decorations from many of the rooms . 
 Maurice Towneley @-@ O 'Hagan the 3rd Baron O 'Hagan married Edward Strachey 's daughter , the Hon. Frances Constance Maddalena and thereby gained Sutton Court . When he died it passed to his grandson , Tory MEP Charles Strachey , 4th Baron O 'Hagan . He sold it in 1987 for conversion into flats . 
 The building is now private apartments set in fifteen acres ( 3 ha ) of communal grounds , including a trout lake and tennis court . It is run by a management company made up of the residents . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 Sutton Court is built of squared and coursed sandstone rubble throughout with freestone and ashlar dressings , copings , slate roofs . The north front comprises a central three @-@ storey fourteenth century pele tower with a taller circular stair turret and two @-@ storey ranges linking it to the 1558 ' Bess of Hardwick Building ' to the left and a four bay 1858 – 1860 servants ' wing of three storeys to the right . Windows to the pele tower and right @-@ hand linking range are 15th century , of two cusped lights with hood moulds , some of which have been renewed , and some relocated from other areas . The doorway to the tower dates from 1858 – 60 . The windows to the left @-@ hand linking range and the ' Hardwick Building ' are four and six lights , with chamfered mullions . The two @-@ storey ' Hardwick ' range has diagonal offset buttresses . There are eighteenth @-@ century battlements to the pele tower , with tall octagonal ashlar stacks . 
 To the north of the servants wing are old stables and stable yard with a coach house and groom 's cottage along with the laundry and wash house , which was once a brew house . 
 A curtain wall to the north of the house with a gazebo is also designated as a listed building . It includes 14th century masonry at the bottom of the wall ; however most of the structure as it is now dates from the 18th and 19th centuries . The corner gazebo was built in the 19th century . 
 The gate lodge , gates and gatepiers were built around 1820 . 
 = = Estate = = 
 During the late 18th and early 19th centuries a ferme <unk> was established , with planting of various tress and the damming of streams to form ponds with paths and seating around them . Tenant farmers leased the majority of the land and during most of the 20th century it was used for dairy cattle , sheep and pigs . Much of the estate was sold in 1987 to the Avon Wildlife Trust who established their Folly Farm nature reserve on the site . 
 = Pakrac clash = 
 The Pakrac clash , known in Croatia as the Battle of Pakrac ( Croatian : Bitka za Pakrac ) , was a bloodless skirmish that took place in the Croatian town of Pakrac in March 1991 . The clash was a result of deteriorating ethnic tensions in Croatia during the breakup of Yugoslavia . It was one of the first serious outbreaks of violence in what became the Croatian War of Independence . 
 The clash began after rebel Serbs seized the town 's police station and municipal building and harassed Croatian government officials . The Croatian government carried out a counterstrike against the rebels , sending Interior Ministry special police to re @-@ establish control . Fighting broke out between the two sides . Despite an attempted intervention by the Yugoslav National Army ( Jugoslovenska Narodna Armija – JNA ) , the Croatian government reasserted its control over the town . After a standoff with the JNA , an agreement to pull out the special police and the JNA was reached , restoring the town to conditions before the Serb attempt to seize control of the police there . 
 = = Background = = 
 In 1990 , following the electoral defeat of the government of the Socialist Republic of Croatia by the Croatian Democratic Union ( Croatian : Hrvatska demokratska zajednica , HDZ ) , ethnic tensions between Croats and Serbs worsened . The Yugoslav People 's Army ( Jugoslovenska Narodna Armija – JNA ) confiscated Croatia 's Territorial Defence ( Teritorijalna obrana - TO ) weapons to minimize resistance . On 17 August , the tensions escalated into an open revolt of the Croatian Serbs , centred on the predominantly Serb @-@ populated areas of the Dalmatian hinterland around Knin , parts of the Lika , Kordun , Banovina , and eastern Croatia . The Croatian Serbs established the Serbian National Council in July 1990 to coordinate opposition to Croatian President Franjo Tuđman 's policy of pursuing independence . Milan Babić , a dentist from the southern town of Knin , was elected president and Knin 's police chief Milan Martić established paramilitary militias . The two men eventually became the political and military leaders of the Republic of Serb Krajina ( RSK ) , a self @-@ declared state incorporating the Serb @-@ inhabited areas of Croatia . 
 In the beginning of 1991 , Croatia had no regular army . To bolster its defence , Croatia doubled police personnel to about 20 @,@ 000 . The most effective part of the force was 3 @,@ 000 @-@ strong special police deployed in twelve battalions adopting military organisation . There were also 9 @,@ 000 – 10 @,@ 000 regionally organised reserve police , which was organized in 16 battalions and 10 companies but lacked weapons . According to the Croatian 1991 census , Serbs were the largest ethnic group in the municipality of Pakrac ( 46 @.@ 4 % ) , followed by Croats ( 35 @.@ 8 % ) . Serb Democratic Party politician Veljko Džakula became the political leader of Croatian Serbs in western Slavonia . He held a view that Serbs should secede from Croatia . 
 On 22 February , the municipal council controlled by Džakula voted to join the Serbian Autonomous Oblast of Krajina ( later renamed the RSK ) and subordinate the Pakrac police station to the Ministry of Internal Affairs of Krajina . The vote was annulled by the Constitutional Court of Croatia on 28 February . 
 = = Timeline = = 
 In February 1991 , Babić and Martić directed Serb paramilitaries to take over the town 's police station and municipal buildings . On 1 March , the paramilitaries disarmed the town 's 16 Croatian policemen and subjected local Croatian officials to a campaign of vilification and intimidation . The police in Pakrac were commanded by Jovo Vezmar , who sided with Babić and Martić . 
 In response , President Tuđman ordered the Croatian Interior Ministry to restore the government 's authority over the town . At 04 : 30 on 2 March 1991 , the first part of a 200 @-@ strong Croatian police force entered Pakrac . A company of the " Omega " special police unit , dispatched from Bjelovar , approached via the village of <unk> , where a number of Croatian civilians followed the force towards Pakrac . A barricade outside Pakrac was cleared with no resistance , and the Croatian police secured the town 's police station unopposed . Several hours later , shots were fired at the police station frm a nearby hill by a force commanded by Vezmar . Soon afterwards , a second Croatian special police unit , the Lučko Anti @-@ Terrorist Unit , arrived from Zagreb . Vezmar retreated east towards the villages of <unk> and Bučje on the Psunj Mountain . The special police , commanded by Marko Lukić and Mladen Markač , arrested 180 ethnic @-@ Serb rebels , including 32 ethnic @-@ Serb policemen , without either side sustaining deaths or injuries . Vezmar was replaced by Stjepan <unk> as the Pakrac police chief . 
 The Croatian action prompted an intervention from the federal Yugoslav government . Borisav Jović , the Serbian representative on the collective Presidency of Yugoslavia , supported a request by Yugoslav Defence Minister Veljko Kadijević to send the JNA to the scene . The first ten JNA tanks arrived in Pakrac late in the evening of 1 March and took positions in various parts of the town ; most of them were stationed near the town hospital . The next afternoon , an additional JNA unit led by Colonel Milan Čeleketić arrived in Pakrac , taking positions close to the Croatian special police . Čeleketić was acting on the orders of Major General <unk> Cokić , commander of the 32nd ( Varaždin ) Corps . Cokić authorised deployment of three companies of the armoured battalion of the 265th Mechanised Brigade based in Bjelovar . 
 The arrival of JNA tanks in Pakrac came too late to stop the Croatian special police from retaking the town . However , it prompted the remaining Serb rebels to begin shooting at the town from the surrounding hills . Shots were fired at a police vehicle on patrol . The policemen shot back at men retreating towards a JNA position , and the JNA shot at the police vehicle in return . The shooting ended when talks between Croatian member of the federal presidency Stjepan Mesić and JNA Colonel Aleksandar Vasiljević produced an agreement that the Croatian police would be allowed to retain control of the town . The JNA planned to retake control of Pakrac from the special police by force . The attack , codenamed Pakrac @-@ 91 , was cancelled when the Croatian authorities agreed to withdraw the special police by the evening of 3 March . The JNA withdrew from Pakrac following a decision of the Yugoslav Presidency , abandoning the northern approaches to the town on 12 March , and pulling out completely seven days later . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The agreement to withdraw the special police and the JNA largely restored status quo ante bellum . 17 of the 32 arrested policemen returned to service by 5 March ; charges were eventually filed against five , including Vezmar . The incident had a lasting significance because it was the first serious skirmish in what would become a the Croatian War of Independence — a full @-@ scale war between Croatia and its rebel Serb population supported by Serbia and the JNA . The Serbian government used the Pakrac clash to strengthen nationalist propaganda claims that Croatia was committing genocide against its Serb population . Up to 40 deaths from the clash were reported by Serbian and Montenegrin media outlets . In an indication of the confused and highly inaccurate nature of the reporting , the Belgrade daily newspaper Večernje novosti reported on its front page that the town 's Orthodox priest had been killed , on its second page that he had been wounded , and on its third page it printed a statement from him . The Yugoslav presidency finally issued a statement that nobody had been killed in Pakrac . 
 In Serbia , the ruling Socialist Party of Serbia ( SPS ) , led by Slobodan Milošević , condemned the Croatian police action as a " brutal attack by the Croatian government on the population of Pakrac [ using ] violent and fascist methods " — a statement that was carried prominently by the state @-@ controlled Radio Television Belgrade . The SPS urged Serbs to attend " protest meetings against the violent behaviour of the Croatian HDZ government " . Milošević used the Pakrac clash to demand that the JNA be authorised to forcibly disarm Croatia . The request , specifically demanding the granting of wartime powers to the JNA and the introduction of a state of emergency , was made through Kadijević at a Presidency session of 11 – 15 May . The request was refused , and Milošević declared that he no longer recognised the authority of the federal presidency . 
 The police intervention prompted Serb political leaders in Okučani to urge the local population to erect barricades around the town in to pre @-@ empt another intervention — stating that police forces were moving in from Kutina and Novska . The barricades were guarded by armed civilians . In Pakrac , approximately 500 Serb protesters gathered in front of the municipal council building to the demand the removal of the flag of Croatia . 
 = Jay Park = 
 Jay Park ( Korean name : Park Jae @-@ <unk> , Hangul : <unk> , <unk> : <unk> ; born April 25 , 1987 ) is an American rapper , dancer , record producer , model , choreographer , entrepreneur , and actor . He is a member of the Seattle @-@ based b @-@ boy crew , Art of Movement ( AOM ) , and founder and co @-@ CEO of the independent hip hop record label AOMG . As Park grew up as a b @-@ boy and dancer , he has become known for these skills , as well as his charismatic performances and stage presence . Park was described as a " born entertainer " by Korean pop singer Patti Kim , and The New York Times quoted the president of digital music distributor <unk> <unk> describing Park as " not just an artist , but also his own PR agent , fan club president , and TV network . " Park also branched out into entrepreneurship where he became the founder and CEO of the AOMG a Korean independent record label specializing in hip hop . 
 Park initially rose to fame as the leader of South Korean boy band 2PM , formed by record label JYP Entertainment in 2008 , after having previously been a trainee for four years . In September 2009 , Park returned home to Seattle after comments he wrote about Korea in 2005 as a teenager were publicized by the Korean media ; Park officially left the group in early 2010 . In March 2010 , Park uploaded a cover video of B.o.B 's hit " Nothin ' on You " , with his own rap and lyrics , to YouTube , which went viral and reached over 2 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 views in less than 24 hours , leading to the release of Park 's first EP , Count on Me ( Korean : <unk> ; Revised Romanization : <unk> ) in July 2010 , which debuted at number one on the Gaon chart . Park returned to South Korea in June 2010 for the filming of Hype Nation , while being represented by Digital Media Wire 's CEO and entertainment attorney Ned Sherman , and in July 2010 , Park signed a contract with SidusHQ , one of the largest agencies in South Korea , re @-@ debuting as a solo singer and an actor . 
 Park 's first mini album , Take a Deeper Look , released in 2011 , went multi @-@ platinum in South Korea . Park became the first ever artist crowned winner on a debut stage by winning on KBS ' Music Bank with " Abandoned " , and was the only solo artist to win " Record of the Year " at the 2011 Golden Disk Awards . Later in 2011 , Park released singles " Demon " , " Girlfriend " , and " Star " , co @-@ starred in the Korean movie , Mr. Idol , and joined the cast of KBS ' Immortal Songs 2 . At the end of 2011 , Park released an EP , New Breed Part 1 ; the precursor to Park 's first full @-@ length album . 
 In February 2012 , Jay Park released his first full @-@ length album , New Breed , quickly topping charts in South Korea and internationally , and went multi @-@ platinum in less than a week . Park also released an English mixtape , Fresh Air : Breathe It , which became the first mixtape by an Asian artist to have gold status by surpassing 100 @,@ 000 downloads on <unk> . Following the release of New Breed in 2012 , Park successfully held his first solo concert in Seoul , as well as embarking on tours around Asia and Australia . Park headlined the Verizon APAHM Tour in the USA , and was the closing act at MTV World Stage Live in Malaysia 2012 . Also in 2012 , Park returned to KBS ' Immortal Songs 2 , became a fixed panel member on MBC 's Come to Play , and hosted tvN 's Saturday Night Live Korea . Park became a permanent cast member of Saturday Night Live Korea in early 2013 . In 2014 , Jay Park performed 2014 South by Southwest ( SXSW ) as a Korean representative pop singer . Jay Park released his album <unk> in November 2015 . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early years = = = 
 Born in Edmonds , Washington , in the Seattle metropolitan area , Park showed great interest in hip hop music and breakdancing at a young age . Park attended Edmonds Woodway High School , where he spent most of his break and lunch times practicing dance with friends . Park started listening to hip hop and rap music in his early teens , and spent time learning and writing raps himself during high school . In 2003 , Park became one of the first members of the Seattle @-@ based b @-@ boy crew Art of Movement ( AOM ) . In 2004 , Park 's mother , seeing how her son spent more time breakdancing than studying , suggested he audition for Korea @-@ based JYP Entertainment , which brought him to Korea in January 2005 to receive further training in dancing , rapping , singing , and the Korean language . Park has stated he couldn 't converse with all the new people he met , due to not being able to speak the language very well , and he didn 't know what to eat . Park says he cried everyday for the first two weeks he was in Korea , but decided to work hard even though he wanted to go back home , to not disappoint his parents . Jay Park eventually completed his university education at <unk> University . 
 = = = 2008 – 2009 : 2PM = = = 
 Park first appeared through Mnet 's Hot Blood Men , a documentary @-@ style reality program that showed the future members of One Day , split as idol groups 2AM and 2PM , in training . Park , finishing at the top spot with the most fan votes , became the leader of 2PM . On September 4 , 2008 , 2PM debuted with the song " 10 Out of 10 " ( Korean : <unk> <unk> <unk> ; Revised Romanization : Ship <unk> <unk> Ship <unk> ) on the music program M ! Countdown after the release of their first mini @-@ album , Hottest Time of the Day , a few days prior . Aside from 2PM 's music activities , Park created the song " Jeong " ( Korean : <unk> ) with <unk> of the Wonder Girls for the original soundtrack of the television drama Conspiracy in the Court , and featured on <unk> 's " To Luv ... " . He also participated in special stage performances , such as Navi 's " Heart Damage " ( Korean : <unk> <unk> ; Revised Romanization : <unk> <unk> ) on May 3 , 2009 , and <unk> 's " One Drop per Second " ( Korean : <unk> <unk> ; Revised Romanization : Il Choe <unk> ) on June 20 , 2009 . In addition to Idol Show and Wild Bunny with fellow 2PM members , he also became a regular cast member in several variety programs , including Star King and Introducing a Star 's Friend . In August 2009 , he and Kara band member , Nicole Jung , became the new hosts for a cultural variety show called <unk> . 
 On September 4 , 2009 , unfavorable comments towards Korea were found on Park ’ s personal Myspace account from 2005 . The comments , written in English to a friend , were translated by Korean media , quickly spreading across hundreds of news articles . Park expressed deep remorse and shame over his forgotten words and issued an official apology , explained the unhappiness that he experienced during his early days as a trainee in an unfamiliar country where he lacked family , the ability to easily communicate , and an understanding of the culture . Although outraged protesters demanded that Park should be removed from 2PM , JYP Entertainment 's CEO , Park Jin @-@ young , stated on September 7 , 2009 , that he was going to continue as a part of the group . The following day , Park announced on his official <unk> that he would be leaving the group to calm the situation and return to his hometown , Seattle , Washington . He also apologized to the other 2PM members , and promised that he would " come back a better person " . However , Park Jin @-@ young suddenly confirmed that 2PM would continue as a six @-@ member group . Additionally , due to the sensitive topic of Park 's departure , all 2PM members were withdrawn from their regular appearances on variety shows , and the final episode of their reality show , Wild Bunny , was postponed indefinitely . Park 's vocals would not be removed from the older songs he promoted with 2PM , but he would be absent from the newer tracks , and the remaining six members of 2PM re @-@ filmed their music video for " Heartbeat " without Park on October 31 , 2009 . 
 2PM 's first official album was titled 1 : <unk> , to symbolize Park 's absence , according to the six remaining members . Through their acceptance speeches at end @-@ of @-@ year award shows for " Again & Again " , the members thanked Park and reiterated their wish for his return . At the Mnet Asian Music Awards , the group paid homage to him during their performance of " Again & Again " with a spotlight shown over his usual position in the dance formation and his lines left unsung . 
 = = = 2010 : YouTube , solo career , and Count on Me ( Nothin ' on You ) = = = 
 Soon after Park returned to the United States , the South Korean public changed their perspective on the matter when they realized that his Myspace messages had been severely mistranslated and taken out of context , in addition to strong fan support for Park 's return . Park was seen at b @-@ boy battles with fellow Art of Movement members during his time in Seattle . However , on February 25 , with Park 's comeback looking more and more likely , JYP suddenly announced that Jay Park 's contract with them had been terminated , citing a separate " personal mistake " that Park had made in 2009 . JYP would make reference to this unknown event several times in 2010 , but would never elaborate on any details . This termination had been agreed by all 6 members of 2PM and led to the fans boycotts on 2PM @-@ endorsed products . Protests for Park 's return to the group began to take place , not only in South Korea , but internationally as well . Various Jay Park @-@ dedicated forums and fansites all over the world organized silent protests and flash dance mobs . Fans also hired a plane with a banner showing " J , what time is it now ? " to fly over Seattle , and was broadcast on Seattle @-@ based radio stations . 
 On several instances , Park was the number one trending topic on Twitter , even topping the Oscars on March 8 . Park 's fans revealed plans to release a self @-@ produced album in his honor on March 27 to commemorate the 200th day anniversary of his departure from Korea . However , because the album had been in preparation since January and public opinion on 2PM had since changed , the fans decided it would be in the best interest to not release the CD , and instead , mailed 10 – 20 copies to Seattle , Park 's hometown . 
 Park created his own YouTube channel on March 15 , " <unk> " , with the first upload being his own version of " Nothin ' on You " , which went viral and reached over 2 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 views in less than 24 hours . In Korea , the original song by B.o.B and Bruno Mars topped the Cyworld music chart in a matter of hours upon the video 's release . " Nothin ' on You " also reached number 1 on other music sites such as <unk> , Melon , Mnet , Bugs , and Soribada , making $ 300 @,@ 000 in sales through the effect of Park 's video . On June 15 , 2010 , B.o.B released " Nothin ' on You " featuring Park , in South Korea , where he replaces Bruno Mars ' vocals . His YouTube cover helped contribute to much of the song 's success in Korea , with more than 5 million copies sold . Park subsequently thanked his fans for their support and continued to urge them not to hate remaining 2PM members . 
 He appeared with fellow Art of Movement members at an annual Korean @-@ American festival event called Project Korea III : KSA Cinderella Story at Rutgers University , New Jersey on April 3 , along with <unk> and Clara C. Videos of the event were uploaded onto internet portal sites , where footage of Park acting as an MC and dancing to Beyoncé 's " Single Ladies ( Put a Ring on It ) " on stage drew much positive interest . On April 24 , <unk> released a free collaboration track featuring Park and Clara Chung on his website , titled " Clouds " . 
 Los Angeles @-@ based entertainment attorney Ned Sherman , CEO of Digital Media Wire , announced on May 28 that he was representing Park as his legal representative . Sherman and his wife <unk> reached out to Park , after seeing Park 's story and feeling bad about what happened to him during the MySpace controversy . The Shermans and Park worked on a lot of projects together , including his movie deal for Hype Nation , an endorsement deal with dENiZEN , Levi Strauss & Co . ' s new brand , and others . 
 Park returned to Korea on June 18 at Incheon International Airport , to the biggest crowd ever seen at the airport , for the filming of Hype Nation . " Park <unk> has returned " became the biggest headline in Korea that day , and " <unk> " shot up immediately on the trending topics on Twitter on June 18 at 9 : 30 AM GMT . Pictures of Park in Hype Nation were released on July 2 , and Park was able to meet with the Korean media for interviews for the first time , talking about his current activities . It was also revealed that his single " Demon " would be included in Hype Nation 's original soundtrack . 
 It was reported on July 8 that Park would sign a contract with SidusHQ for his domestic Korean activities in terms of acting and singing ; his management stated that he planned to <unk> as a rookie artist , and the contract with SidusHQ was finalized on July 16 . Park released an EP titled Count on Me ( Korean : <unk> ; Revised Romanization : <unk> ) containing 3 tracks , including a rearranged Korean version of " Nothin ' on You " , on July 13 . The English and Korean lyrics were written by Park himself . The song immediately reached number 1 on Cyworld and Bugs music charts , and also on other music sites such as <unk> , Soribada , <unk> , and Melon within the hour of its release . The EP sold 21 @,@ 989 physical copies on the first day of release , coming in at number 1 in sales and number 7 in the overall ranking of albums released from January to July 13 . Without any promotion on music shows , more than 41 @,@ 316 copies sold , and the EP placed at number 32 on Gaon 's year end chart , earning Park approximately 700 million . 
 Park began working with singer , producer , and fellow AOM member , Cha Cha Malone , releasing " <unk> " in both Korean and English , and a duet titled " Speechless " . Also in 2010 , Park began collaborations and forming close ties with rappers Dok2 and The <unk> of <unk> Records , titling the partnership " AOM & <unk> " . On September 5 , Park participated in the 3rd International Secret Agents Los Angeles concert held in Cerritos , California , together with well @-@ known YouTube celebrities such as Ryan Higa , KevJumba , AJ Rafael , Alyssa Bernal , Far East Movement , and America 's Best Dance Crew Season 5 champions , <unk> . Park 's performance drew many positive responses . 
 Park was cast for the 2011 Korean movie Mr. Idol , starring alongside friend and fellow SidusHQ actor , Kim Su @-@ ro . Park was also one of the performers , alongside <unk> , Taeyang and Musiq Soulchild , at the Seoul Soul Festival held at the War Memorial of Korea on October 10 . Park and Musiq Soulchild also performed the latter 's song " Love " at the festival . Park held a charity concert in December called the " White Love Party Concert " , with Supreme Team and Dok2 making appearances . Park and Art of Movement performed at " Fever Seoul Live " alongside <unk> , David Choi , and several international b @-@ boys . 
 = = = 2011 : Take a Deeper Look and rise as a solo artist = = = 
 On January 6 , Park was announced as the winner in " Best Web Video " Category around the globe for his song " Nothin ' on You " at the Mashable Awards , and was also nominated in the " Must Follow Personality " category , finishing 2nd . At the beginning of February , Park was featured in two music videos of girl group , <unk> , called " Lips Stains " and " It 's You " . Park was chosen to be the sole opener for Ne @-@ Yo in his first concert in Seoul for the " 2011 Hyundai Mall 40th Anniversary Concert " held on March 29 . He also cooperated with Ne @-@ Yo for a charity event for children dreaming to become musicians on March 28 at the Dream Academy in Seoul . On March 28 , Park was a finalist and received the most votes in the special category " Connecting People Award " , a joint venture between Shorty Awards and Nokia . Park also was a finalist in the " Celebrity " category at the same event . 
 Park released his first Korean mini @-@ album , Take a Deeper Look , in April , with the lead single " Abandoned " . Take a Deeper Look debuted at number 3 in the Billboard World Album Charts and ranked number 26 on the Billboard Heatseekers Albums Chart . Park also made his debut as a solo artist on Korean music shows such as KBS ' Music Bank , Mnet 's M ! Countdown , MBC 's Music Core and SBS ' Inkigayo , returning for the first time in two years . Park made history as the first artist crowned winner at a debut stage , as he won Music Bank on May 6 and won again a week later on May 13 . 
 On August 6 , Park participated in his first KBS Immortal Songs 2 episode , performing " Candy " by Korean boy band <unk> with its leader Moon Hee @-@ joon . Park followed up with his own R & B rendition of " <unk> " by Kim Soo @-@ hee on the next episode , which was well received . On his third episode of Immortal Songs 2 , Park performed " Tell me the Truth " by <unk> with <unk> , Jang Hyuk and Kim Su @-@ ro , and was the victor for that episode , allowing him to choose the order for the next episode . For his fourth episode , Park again made his own R & B version of " Feel Good Day " by Kim Wan @-@ sun . On his fifth episode , Park performed a remixed version of " Look Back at Me " by Deux with a b @-@ boy dance break . On his sixth episode and final appearance on the show , he performed " Dear , Do Not Change " by Nam Jin and won the trophy for his last performance , before leaving the show to focus on his next album 's preparations . It was revealed that Park would return to Immortal Songs 2 for a special episode " King of Kings " with other singers that have claimed the number 1 spot . This special episode was recorded on November 7 at the KBS Open Hall and aired on November 19 . 
 The single " Demon " was released on September 5 through various Korean digital music websites . The music video was also released on the same day , and Park apologized for its low quality , saying he had no control over the release of both the music video and the song . " Demon " peaked at number 14 on the Gaon Chart and at number 8 on the iTunes R & B / Soul Chart . 
 Park returned to the US on October 1 to perform at the International Secret Agents Los Angeles concert . On October 29 , Park delivered a performance to over 25 @,@ 000 fans as he headlined the MTV EXIT ( End Exploitation and Trafficking ) Live in Manila Concert held at the SM Mall of Asia . The concert also featured Californian alternative rock band , <unk> , and international singer / songwriter , Jason Mraz . 
 Park released his single " Girlfriend " , along with the music video via his YouTube channel on November 3 . Park performed his single on the same day at the 2011 Style Icon Awards , following a recording of tvN 's Taxi . The movie Mr. Idol in which Park starred in was also released on November 3 . The single peaked at number 28 on the Gaon chart . Park released Part 1 of his first full @-@ length Korean album , New Breed , with the lead single " Star " ( Korean : <unk> ; Revised Romanization : <unk> ) on December 28 . " Star " peaked at number one on various sites like Bugs , <unk> Music , and Soribada while being on the top of other charts of music sites . The first part of New Breed also reached the top of charts of various music sites including <unk> Music , Bugs , Soribada and Daum . " Star " peaked at number 17 on the Gaon Chart . 
 = = = 2012 : New Breed and Fresh Air : Breathe It = = = 
 Park received the Disk Bonsang for his mini album Take a Deeper Look on January 11 , on the first day of the 26th Golden Disk Awards , which was held in Osaka . He was the only solo artist to receive the Disk Bonsang among the other Bonsang winners . On January 18 , he received the Popular Artist Award of the Asia Model Awards , which was held in Seoul . 
 Several songs composed and written by Park for other artists were released in 2012 . Jay Park produced and composed a song with Cha Cha Malone for Korean @-@ American singer Brian Joo , titled " Can 't Stop " . Park wrote the Korean version of the song , while Joo wrote the English Version . On April 25 , Jay Park 's 25th birthday , idol group U @-@ KISS released their 6th mini @-@ album , <unk> , including the track " 4U " written and composed by Jay . Park also produced and composed a song for the girl group Tiny @-@ G , entitled " Polaris " ; the lyrics were written by actress Lee Si @-@ young . They worked together through MBC 's Music and Lyrics . On July 3 , Korean pop singer <unk> released her fourth Korean album , Supersonic , including the track " Driver " written by Park . He also featured in the song , providing rap verses . 
 He released his first full @-@ length Korean album , New Breed , in February , with the lead single " Know Your Name " . The album reached number 1 twice on the Gaon Weekly album chart in South Korea , and also reached number 1 on the <unk> Weekly chart by <unk> more than 80 @,@ 000 copies offline in 10 days . New Breed debuted at number 4 on the Billboard World Album Charts and ranked number 16 on the Billboard Heatseekers Albums Chart . Park made his comeback stage on Korean music shows on February 16 . He won Music Bank on February 24 , one week after his comeback . On April 27 , Park began Asian promotions for the Asian version release of his album New Breed , and visited 5 countries : Singapore , the Philippines , Indonesia , Malaysia and Japan . On April 28 , Jay performed at the 2012 Star Awards in Singapore . On June 13 , he released the Japan editions of his albums Take a Deeper Look and New Breed through Universal J. The regular edition of New Breed includes the English version of " I Love You " and the acoustic version of " Know Your Name " as bonus tracks . 
 Jay Park held his first solo concert , New Breed Live in Seoul , on March 3 at the Olympic Hall of Seoul Olympic Park . Park successfully held a second concert New Breed Asia Tour in Seoul in Seoul on August 18 at the Olympic Hall of Seoul Olympic Park , and unlike the first , which was held in March , this one did not have a 19 + age restriction . Park was selected as the 2012 R @-@ 16 Korea ambassador by the Korea Tourism Organization on April 23 . 
 He headlined the APAHM tour organized by Verizon in the USA in May , including concerts in Washington , D.C. , New York , San Francisco and Los Angeles . On May 16 , Park released his first mixtape , Fresh A ! r : Breathe ! t , containing songs he performed for the tour . The mixtape was certified Gold by <unk> within a month since its release , meaning it was downloaded over 100 @,@ 000 times . Jay Park became the first artist of Asian origin to achieve this result on <unk> . 
 Park was the closing act at the MTV World Stage Live in Malaysia , along with Canadian pop singer Justin Bieber , Korean girl band Kara , and Malaysian singer Mizz Nina , on July 14 . Park also performed his song " Carefree " , which was included on the New Breed Red Edition repackaged album , and also showed his self @-@ choreographed dance break to " Dirty Bass " by Far East Movement featuring Tyga , which he later shared on YouTube . Park also held his own concerts in Sydney and Melbourne at the end of September 2012 . Also in July , Park started a web series , Jay Park TV , through his YouTube channel , filmed and edited by <unk> , Park 's friend and fellow Art of Movement member . The web series shows Park 's daily life with his friends , behind @-@ the @-@ scenes of concerts and filming , and the fun and games that he gets up to . 
 In August , Jay Park released a music video for " New Breed " , from the album of the same name , which was recorded during the album 's photo shoot with Park featuring Rick Genest @-@ inspired make @-@ up . Park also uploaded a practice video to " I Love You " , showing the complex choreography that he and Prepix members were practising for his upcoming concert . On August 22 , Park was announced to be a fixed panel member on MBC 's Come to Play , along with Kim <unk> @-@ soo and Kwon Oh @-@ <unk> . He joined as a part of a new corner on the show , titled the " Trueman Show " . MBC suddenly axed the show after several months , with no prior warning to the cast nor producers . 
 Later in September , Park performed for the first time in Australia , successfully holding concerts in Sydney and Melbourne . Park returned to Immortal Songs 2 for a " King of Kings " special in October , where he performed " The Woman in Rain " by Shin Jung @-@ <unk> . In a flying visit to Los Angeles , Jay Park made a last @-@ minute appearance in a YouTube sketch by David So , which parodies Wong Fu Productions ' The Last . 
 In November , he featured on " If You Love Me " , a digital single by NS Yoon @-@ G. Although Park does not make an appearance in the official music video , he performed on stage with Yoon @-@ G on music shows , with the first being Mnet 's M ! Countdown , and also makes an appearance in the behind @-@ the @-@ scenes music video , showing NS Yoon @-@ G and Park in the studio recording the song . A practice video of the choreography was released soon after . Park was the host of the December 1 episode of Saturday Night Live Korea , garnering attention for his R @-@ rated skits , acting , and a parody music video of Eminem 's Love the Way You Lie , bringing in the highest ratings of the season for the show . 
 = = = 2013 : " Joah " , SNL Korea , and launch of hip hop label , AOMG = = = 
 On January 18 , Park held a showcase in Singapore , making the city @-@ state the location in which he has held the most performances , after Korea . In Singapore , Park gave an interview with his fansite , Jay Park Network , revealing he would be shooting 11 music videos this year , and gave a short teaser of an upcoming single . 
 On February 6 , it was announced that Park will be joining the cast of Saturday Night Live Korea , having previously hosted an episode in late 2012 . On Valentine 's Day , February 14 , Park released a song and music video , " <unk> " , available for free download on SoundCloud , produced by friend and fellow Art of Movement member , Cha Cha Malone . On the first episode of Saturday Night Live Korea , Park garnered attention for his skit parodying the film Holiday with Korean actor and host of the episode , Choi Min @-@ soo , and for his ad lib during a skit with Shin Dong @-@ yup and Kim Seul @-@ <unk> which ended up with the cast trying to hold in their laughter . In mid @-@ February , Mizz Nina 's single , " Around the World " , which is written by and features Park , and produced by Cha Cha Malone , was played on <unk> before public release . The single was officially released on February 25 , and had been in the works since Park and Mizz Nina performed at MTV World Stage Live in Malaysia 2012 . On February 28 , Park received the " Musician of the Year " award at the 2013 Korean Music Awards , and his 2012 album , New Breed , was nominated in the " Best R & B and Soul album " category . 
 Jay Park featured on the cover of the March edition of Men 's Health Korea magazine , and the cover was subsequently chosen by staff as the best in the magazine 's 7 @-@ year history . On March 25 , Park uploaded the 5th episode of Jay Park TV to his YouTube channel . On March 26 , the music video for Mizz Nina 's " Around The World " , featuring Park , was released , and was filmed in Korea in December 2012 . On March 28 , it was revealed that Park would be rejoining the cast of KBS ' Immortal Songs 2 for a third time , with the first episode featuring Park airing on April 20 . 
 Following on from the success of the Jay Park 's March edition of Men 's Health Korea , the same cover was used for the April edition of Men 's Health China , which was also the magazine 's 10th anniversary edition , and included large promotional posters across the country . In collaboration with Ustream Korea , Park held an official <unk> event titled " Fan & Music Live " on April 2 , and revealed the titles of the 3 songs from his upcoming single ; " Joah " ( Korean : <unk> ; Revised Romanization : <unk> ) , " 1 Hunnit " ( Korean : <unk> ; Revised Romanization : <unk> ) , and " Welcome " . The title track , " Joah " , was revealed to be a mellow feel @-@ good song similar to " Girlfriend " produced by Cha Cha Malone and instrumentals by Saturday Night Live Korea in @-@ session band Common Ground , " 1 Hunnit " a rap track featuring Dok2 , and " Welcome " a sexy and provocative R & B track . On April 5 , Park released the music video of " 1 Hunnit " on his YouTube Channel , featuring Dok2 and a variety of Park 's friends , including dancers and b @-@ boys . On April 9 , Park appeared on tvN 's Taxi with fellow Saturday Night Live Korea cast member , Kim Seul @-@ gi . On April 10 , Park released his single album " Joah " , along with the music video for the title track . The feel @-@ good song features an upbeat melody with the music video filmed in Park 's hometown of Seattle earlier in the year starring Korean actress Clara Lee . Members of Park 's b @-@ boy crew , Art of Movement , also feature in the music video , including a short scene at The Beacon , the dance studio of fellow Seattle @-@ based b @-@ boy crew , Massive Monkees . On April 16 , Park appeared on SBS ' <unk> – Controller of the Heart , the sequel of Strong Heart . On the April 20 episode of Immortal Songs 2 , Park sang Sim Soo @-@ bong 's " Men Are Ships , Women Are Harbors " . On the April 20 episode on Saturday Night Live , Park 's digital short with host and singer , Lee Soo @-@ young , parodied American rapper Jay @-@ Z 's " Run This Town " , and received attention due to scenes with Park dressed in a bikini . On April 25 , Park 's 26th birthday , Park released a music video for " Welcome " on his YouTube channel . The 19 + video starred Oh Cho @-@ hee opposite Park , who garnered attention himself due to the shirtless and sensual scenes . Immediately after the release of the music video , attention was drawn to various female models and actresses that have starred in all of Park 's previous music videos . Also on April 25 , the DVD , New Breed Live in Seoul , of Park 's 2012 concerts was released . He performed Lee Moon @-@ sae 's " Sunset Glow " with friend and R & B singer Crush of VV : D on the April 27 episode of Immortal Songs 2 . Park 's skit on the April 27 episode of Saturday Night Live with <unk> of <unk> gained attention for Park 's character mistakenly saying inappropriate and sexual words in Korean , and featured a return of Park 's in @-@ character ad lib as the camera 's failed to cut away at the end of the skit . 
 On May 3 , it was revealed that Park will be participating in the soundtrack of M. Night Shyamalan 's 2013 American science @-@ fiction thriller film , After Earth , having been personally contacted by Will Smith and Jaden Smith . The song , titled " I Like 2 Party " , is intended for the ending theme of the film and is written and composed by Park himself , and produced by friend and fellow Art of Movement member , Cha Cha Malone . During the same week , Park was announced to be the official ambassador of international b @-@ boy tournament and cultural festival , R @-@ 16 Korea , for the third year in a row . Park released a 30 @-@ second snippet of " I Like 2 Party " with a short trailer of After Earth that day . On May 7 , Park attended the After Earth red carpet premiere in Korea along with Will and Jaden Smith . On May 11 , Immortal Songs 2 's 100th episode , Park performed " Everyday Day With You " by <unk> , remixed with Park 's latest single , " Joah " , impressing the audience with his singing ability even after dancing and tumbling on stage . Later that month , Jay made a guest appearance at Mizz Nina 's concert in Kuala Lumpur , Malaysia , where they performed their hit single , " Around the World " for the first time . Although not in Korea for the live broadcast , Park 's pre @-@ recorded shenanigans in a skit with Jason Mraz on the May 18 episode of Saturday Night Live Korea drew attention from viewers of the late @-@ night sketch comedy show . Two days after this event , Park appeared on Let 's Go Dream Team ! Season 2 and travelled to Singapore to launch a collaboration between himself and local capsule speaker company , X @-@ mini . Following these events , on May 30th , a song for Korean drama , She is Wow titled " Rude Girl " , by Kim Seul @-@ <unk> and Park was released with a music video . 
 Information regarding the official anthem of R @-@ 16 Korea , " Respect 16 " , along with the music video to be filmed live during the 2013 international b @-@ boy event was released on June 17th by Park . The next day , Park released the sixth episode of Jay Park TV , showing behind the scenes of filming for television shows , photo shoots , and the music video of his single " Joah " . 
 Jay Park renewed his contract with SidusHQ early in July , after much public speculation of him signing with other labels . He was to perform at the Hennessy Artistry event early in July in Guangzhou , China , alongside B.o.B , but the event was cancelled at the last moment due to technical difficulties . On July 10 , Park released a four @-@ track EP , I Like 2 Party , containing the songs " I Like 2 Party " , " Hot " , " Secret " and " Let 's Make Up " , and also released a music video for the title track " I Like 2 Party " which was filmed in Los Angeles . On November 30 , Park served as the emcee for the Red Bull BC One . 
 = = = 2014 — present : Growth of AOMG and Evolution = = = 
 In April 2014 , Park was chosen as a dance master for Season 2 of " Dancing 9 , " Korea 's first dance survival show . Park 's team on Dancing nine the blue eye won that season . In September 1 , 2014 , his second full @-@ length album came out called Evolution . Evolution holds 17 songs , including a remix of his single release after New Breed and new tracks . Jay Park participated as a judge on Mnet 's Show Me the Money 4 . In 2015 he released an extensive list of songs including “ Lotto , ” “ All I Got Time For , ” “ On It , ” “ Want It , ” " <unk> ” and “ Sex Trip . ” He released " My Last " featuring <unk> and Gray in July 17 , 2015 . Jay Park released his album <unk> in November 2015 . In March 2016 Jay Park released a new song titled " The Truth Is " . 
 = = Artistry = = 
 = = = Influences = = = 
 Park 's music takes its roots in R & B and hip hop , more especially from the 90 's . He is influenced by the work of American artists he grew up listening to , such as Usher , Michael Jackson , Ne @-@ Yo , Chris Brown , Ginuwine , Musiq Soulchild , Justin Timberlake , Eminem , Jay @-@ Z , Nas , Tupac , Dr. Dre , and Canibus . Park credits Usher as his idol and as one of his biggest influences , to whom he started listening since 6th grade . He also cites Michael Jackson as his role model , as " he is the best " . He cites both Usher and Michael Jackson as singers and dancers who influence him vocally and in dance , as he wanted to dance like them , looking at their music videos . Park also cites Chris Brown as an inspiration , and wants " to be a singer who can be good at both singing and rapping like [ him ] " . Park began listening to hip hop music when he was in second grade , after one of his cousins let him listen to Warren G 's " Regulate " . In general , Park stated he " doesn 't really listen to music to get inspiration , I listen to music because I listen to music , but I do get inspired when I listen to music , it definitely helps " . 
 For his dance , Park cites Art of Movement , Skill Methods , and Massive Monkees as b @-@ boy crews that influence him . He also cites Andrew <unk> from <unk> Cru ; Movement Lifestyle 's members <unk> Madrid , Lyle <unk> , and Shaun Evaristo ; Ian Eastwood ; and Twitch . Park is also inspired by Taiwanese @-@ American NBA player Jeremy Lin , saying that Lin " was off the radar and now he ’ s playing with the best of the best . People can ’ t hate on him even though they want to because he ’ s so good . That ’ s how a K @-@ pop star has to be over in America if they want to succeed . They have to be so good in every single way that even if people hate , they can ’ t really say anything " . 
 = = = Musical style = = = 
 Jay Park 's music is generally contemporary R & B and hip hop , but he also incorporates pop , dance , soul , electronic and acoustic into his songs . Prior to debuting with 2PM , Park was coached vocally by former <unk> member and renowned R & B artist Kim Jo @-@ han , also known to be the vocal coach of many idols in the industry . Kim went on to say that " [ Park ] has an appealing and unique voice " and " definitely stood out amongst the rest " . Park began to write rap lyrics since eighth grade . Since becoming a solo artist , he has complete creative control over his music : he writes and composes his own songs , produces his albums , chooses the people he wants to work with , and participates in the mastering and mixing of his songs , something almost unheard @-@ of for a singer in the Korean music industry . More than making hit songs , Park says he wants people to hear to his style of music , to make them listen to " Jay Park @-@ sounding " music . Being fluent in both English and Korean , Park writes songs in these two languages . He admits that he is more at ease when writing songs in English than in Korean , as he started learning Korean in his late teens . Having grown up listening to music of American artists , he admits his music sounds more " American " than K @-@ Pop , saying it is the style of music he wants to make , while still being recognized as K @-@ Pop . His musical process starts by listening to a lot of beats sent by various producers , while thinking of what kind of song he wants to write , and eventually short @-@ listing a selection of potential beats to work with . Then , Park works on the melody of the song , along with ideas and lyrics . He writes the hook of the song first , and finally the verses . Park is inspired by everything when writing songs : " just listening to good songs , seeing a good live performance , having good conversations with people . Just everyday life " . Some songs Park wrote are influenced by songs from other artists , for example , his song " Turn Off Your Phone " ( Korean : <unk> <unk> ; Revised Romanization : <unk> <unk> ) from his album New Breed was inspired by <unk> 's hit single " Turn Off the TV ... " ( Korean : <unk> <unk> … ; Revised Romanization : TV <unk> ) from their 7th album Asura <unk> . 
 = = Endorsements = = 
