 = = Formats and track listing = = 
 CD Single 
 " Honey " ( LP Version ) – 4 : 59 
 " Honey " ( Bad Boy Remix ) – 5 : 32 
 US CD Maxi Single 
 " Honey " ( LP Version ) – 4 : 59 
 " Honey " ( Bad Boy Remix ) – 5 : 32 
 " Honey " ( Classic Mix ) – 8 : 05 
 " Honey " ( So So Def Mix ) – 5 : 11 
 " Honey " ( Classic Instrumental ) – 7 : 32 
 UK CD Single Pt.1 
 " Honey " ( LP Version ) – 4 : 59 
 " Honey " ( Bad Boy Remix ) – 5 : 32 
 " Honey " ( Smooth Version With Intro ) – 4 : 47 
 " Honey " ( So So Def Mix ) – 5 : 11 
 UK CD Single Pt.2 
 " Honey " ( LP Version ) – 4 : 59 
 " Honey " ( Classic Mix ) – 8 : 05 
 " Honey " ( Morales Club Dub ) – 11 : 01 
 " Honey " ( Mo ' Honey Dub ) – 7 : 24 
 " Honey " ( Classic Instrumental ) – 7 : 32 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from the Butterfly liner notes . 
 Mariah Carey – vocals , songwriting , co @-@ producing 
 Puff Daddy – songwriting , co @-@ producing 
 Stevie J. – songwriting , co @-@ producing 
 Q @-@ Tip – songwriting , co @-@ producing 
 Bobby Robinson – songwriting 
 Stephen Hague – songwriting 
 Ronald Larkins – songwriting 
 Malcolm McLaren – songwriting 
 Larry Price – songwriting 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = = Chart successions = = 
 = Confederate war finance = 
 Confederate war finance refers to the various means , fiscal and monetary , through which the Confederate States of America financed their war effort during the American Civil War . As the war lasted for virtually the entire existence of the nation , it dominated national finance . 
 Early on in the war , the Confederacy relied mostly on tariffs on imports and taxes on exports . However , with the imposition of a voluntary self @-@ embargo in 1861 ( intended to " starve " Europe of cotton and force diplomatic recognition of the Confederacy ) , as well as the blockade of Southern ports enforced by the Union Navy , the revenue from taxes on international trade became smaller and smaller . Likewise , the financing obtained through early voluntary donations of coins and bullion from private individuals in support of the Confederate cause , which early on were quite substantial , dried up by the end of 1861 . As a result , the Confederate government was forced to resort to other means of financing its military operations . A " war @-@ tax " was enacted but proved difficult to collect . Likewise , the appropriation of Union property in the South and the forced repudiation of debts owned by Southerners to Northerners failed to raise substantial revenue . The subsequent issuance of government debt and substantial printing of the Confederate dollars contributed to high inflation which plagued the Confederacy until the end of the war , although the military setbacks in the field also played a role by causing loss of confidence and fueling inflationary expectations . 
 At the beginning of the war , the Confederate dollar cost 90 ¢ worth of gold ( Union ) dollars . By the war 's end , its price had dropped to only <unk> ¢ . Overall , the price level in the south increased by over 9000 % during the war . The Secretary of the Treasury of the Confederate States , Christopher Memminger , was keenly aware of the economic problems posed by inflation and loss of confidence . However , political considerations limited internal taxation ability , and as long as the voluntary embargo and the Union blockade were in place , it was impossible to find adequate alternative sources of finance . 
 = = Tax finance = = 
 The South financed a much lower proportion of its expenditures through direct taxes than the North . The share of direct taxes in total revenue for the North was about 20 % , while for the South the same share was only about 8 % . A major part of the reason why tax revenue did not play as large a role for the Confederacy was the individual states ' opposition to a strong central government and the belief in states ' rights which precluded giving too much taxing power to the government in Richmond . Another factor for not extending the tax system more broadly was the belief , present in both the North and the South , that the war would be of limited duration , and hence there was no compelling reason to increase the tax burden . 
 However , the realities of the prolonged war , the necessity of paying interest on existing debt , and the drop in revenues from other sources , eventually forced both the central Confederate government and the individual states to agree to an imposition of a " War Tax " by the middle of 1861 . The law itself was passed on August 15 , 1861 and covered property of more than $ 500 ( Confederate ) in value and several luxury items . The tax was also levied on ownership of slaves . However , the tax proved very difficult to collect — in 1862 , only 5 % of total revenue came from these direct taxes , and it was not until 1864 that this amount reached the still @-@ low level of 10 % . 
 Taking account of difficulty of collection , the Confederate Congress passed a " Tax in Kind " in April 1863 , which was set at one tenth of all agricultural product by state . This tax was directly tied to the provisioning of the Confederate Army and , despite the fact that it also ran into some collection problems , it was mostly successful . After its implementation it accounted for about half of total revenue , if converted into currency equivalent . 
 = = Monetary finance and inflation = = 
 The financing of war expenditures by the means of currency issues ( printing money ) was by far the major avenue resorted to by the Confederate government . Between 1862 and 1865 , more than 60 % of total revenue was created in this way . While the North doubled its money supply during the war , the money supply in the South increased twenty times over . 
 The extensive reliance on the money @-@ printing press to finance the war contributed significantly to the high inflation the South experienced over the course of the war , although fiscal matters and negative war news also played a role . Estimates of the extent of inflation vary by source , method used , estimation technique , and definition of the aggregate price level . According to a classic study by Eugene Lerner in 1956 , a standard price index of commodities rose from 100 at the beginning of the war to more than 9200 by the war 's de facto end in April 1865 . By October 1864 , the price index was at 2800 , which implies that a very large portion of the rise in prices occurred in the last six months of the war . This drop in the demand for money , the corresponding increase in " velocity of money " ( see next paragraph ) and the resulting rapid increase in the price level has been attributed the loss of confidence in Southern military victory or the success of the South 's bid for independence . 
 Lerner used the quantity theory of money to decompose the inflation in the Confederacy during the war into that resulting from increases in money supply , changes in the velocity of money , and the change in real output of the Southern economy . According to the equation of exchange : 
 <formula> 
 where M is the money supply , V is the velocity of money ( related to people 's demand for money ) , P is the price level and Y is real output . If it is assumed that real incomes remained constant in the South during the war ( Lerner actually concluded that they fell by about 40 % ) then the equation implies that for the price level to increase 92 times in the presence of a 20 times increase in money supply , the velocity of money must have increased 4 @.@ 6 times over ( 92 / 20 = 4 @.@ 6 ) , reflecting a very significant drop in the demand for money . 
 The problems of money @-@ caused inflation were exacerbated by the influx of counterfeit bills from the North . These were plentiful because Southern " <unk> " were fairly crude and easy to copy as the Confederacy lacked modern printing equipment . One of the largest and most famous of the Northern counterfeiters was Samuel C. Upham from Philadelphia . By one calculation Upham 's notes made up between 1 and 2 @.@ 5 percent of all of the Confederate money supply between June 1862 and August 1863 . Jefferson Davis placed a $ 10 @,@ 000 bounty on Upham , though the " Yankee <unk> " , as he was known in the South , evaded capture by Southern agents . Counterfeiting was a problem for the North as well , and the United States Secret Service was formed to deal with this problem . 
 On April 1 , 1864 , the Currency Reform Act of 1864 went into effect . This decreased the Southern money supply by one @-@ third . However , because of Union control of the Mississippi River , until January 1865 the law was effective only east of the Mississippi . 
 A fairly peculiar economic phenomenon occurred during the war in that the Confederate government issued both regular money notes and interest @-@ bearing money , although the United States did issue Interest Bearing Notes during the war that were legal tender for most financial transactions . The circulation of the interest @-@ bearing money and the convertibility of one kind of money into the other was enforced by fiat and Southern banks were threatened with a return to the gold standard if they did not cooperate . Because of the amount of Southern debt held by foreigners , to ease currency convertibility , in 1863 the Confederate Congress decided to adopt the gold standard , although actual convertibility was not to come into effect until 1879 ( hence the law never went into effect , being supplanted by the Coinage Act of 1873 and the end of the Confederacy ) . 
 = = Debt finance = = 
 Issued loans accounted for roughly 21 % of the finance of Confederate war expenditure . In fact , initially the South was more successful in selling debt than the North , partially because New Orleans was a major financial center , whose financiers bought up two @-@ fifths of a 15 million dollar loan in early 1861 . 
 The two main types of loans issued by the South during the war were " Cotton Bonds " , denominated in pounds sterling and sold in London , and high risk <unk> loans sold in the Netherlands . The Cotton Bonds were also convertible directly into bales of cotton , with a caveat , included as a means of political pressure on European countries to recognize the Confederacy , that any such shipments needed to be picked up by the bondholder in one of the blockaded Southern ports ( mostly New Orleans ) . Cotton Bonds initially were very popular and in high demand among the British ; William Ewart Gladstone , who at the time was the Chancellor of the Exchequer , was supposedly one of the buyers . The Confederate government managed to honor the Cotton Bonds throughout the war , and in fact their price rose steeply until the fall of Atlanta to Sherman , reflecting the increase in the underlying cotton prices and perhaps the possibility that George B. McClellan might get elected as US President on a peace platform . In contrast , the price of the Dutch @-@ issued high risk loans fell throughout the war , and the South selectively defaulted on servicing these obligations . 
 = = Revenue from international trade = = 
 In the beginning of the war , the majority of finance for the Southern government came via duties on international trade . The import tariff , enacted in May 1861 , was set at 12 @.@ 5 % and it roughly matched in coverage the previously existing Federal tariff , the Tariff of 1857 . Between February 17 and May 1 of 1861 , 65 % of all government revenue was raised from the import tariff . However , revenue from the tariffs all but disappeared after the Union imposed its blockade of Southern coasts . By November 1861 the proportion of government revenue coming from custom duties had dropped to one @-@ half of one percent . Secretary of Treasure Memminger had expected that the tariff would bring in about 25 million dollars in revenue in the first year alone . In fact , the total revenue raised in this way during the entire war was only about $ 3 @.@ 4 million . 
 A similar source of funds was to be the tax on exports of cotton . However , in addition to the difficulties associated with the blockade , the self @-@ imposed embargo on cotton meant that for all practical purposes the tax was completely ineffective as a fund raiser . Initial optimistic estimates of revenue to be collected through this tax ran as high as 20 million dollars , but in the end only $ 30 thousand was collected . 
 = = Other sources of revenue = = 
 The Confederate government also tried to raise revenue through unorthodox means . Early on ( in the first half of 1861 ) , when the support for the separation from the Union and the military effort was running strong , the donation of coins and gold to the government accounted for about 35 % of all sources of government funds . This source , however , dried up over time as individuals and institutions in the South both ran down their personal holdings of bullion and became more unwilling to make donations as war @-@ weariness set in . As a consequence , by the summer of 1862 , the share of government revenue coming from these donations fell to less than 1 % . Over the course of the entire war this source of revenue contributed only 0 @.@ 2 % of total wartime expenditure . 
 Another potential source of finance could be found in the property and physical capital owned by Northerners in the South , and the debts owed by individuals in a parallel manner . The Sequestration Act of 1861 provided for confiscation of all Union " lands , tenements , goods and chattels , right and credits " and the transfer of debt obligation on the part of Confederate citizens from Northern creditors directly to the Confederate government . However , many Southerners proved unwilling to transfer their debt obligations . Furthermore , what exactly constituted " Northern property " proved hard to define in practice . As a result , the share of this source of revenue in government funding never exceeded 0 @.@ 34 % and ultimately contributed only 0 @.@ 25 % to the overall financial war effort . 
 = = Expenditures = = 
 While , unsurprisingly , military spending constituted the largest part of the national government 's budget over the course of the war , over time the payment of interest and principal on acquired debt grew as a share of the Confederate government 's expenditure . While initially , in early 1861 , war expenditure was 95 % of the budget , by October 1864 that share fell to 40 % , with the majority of the rest ( 56 % overall ) being accounted for by debt service . Civilian expenditures and spending on the Navy ( recorded separately from general war expenditures in Confederate records ) never exceeded 10 % of the budget . 
 = Swimming at the 1980 Summer Olympics – Men 's 4 × 100 metre medley relay = 
 The men 's 4 × 100 metre medley relay event at the 1980 Summer Olympics was held in Moscow , Soviet Union on 24 July 1980 in the <unk> Sports Complex . A total of 13 teams participated in the event . These were split over two heats held in the morning of that day , and the eight fastest teams qualified for the finals held in the evening of the same day . 
 The United States , the winner of all previous editions of this event , was boycotting the games in response to the Soviet war in Afghanistan . As a result , the Soviet Union , Great Britain , and Sweden were expected to win . Australia 's Quietly Confident Quartet , however , composed of backstroker Mark Kerry , breaststroker Peter Evans , butterflyer Mark Tonelli , and freestyler Neil Brooks , surprisingly won the final in 3 : 45 @.@ 70 . They were followed by the silver medalists Soviet Union , 0 @.@ 22 seconds in arrears , and the bronze medalists Great Britain , as favorites Sweden had been disqualified in the heats . This was the only time a team other than United States won the gold medal in the event . 
 = = Preview = = 
 The 1980 Summer Olympic Games were notable for a large number of boycotting countries as a result of the host country invading Afghanistan in 1979 . As a result , several medal favorites for the men 's 4 × 100 metre medley relay race were absent . The most notable absence was the United States , who had won the event every time since its inception at the 1960 Games , invariably by large margins , and would go on to win the event at all subsequent Games . Furthermore , they had also obtained the gold medal at the previous World Championships , just two years before the Olympiad . This , together with the boycott of the silver and bronze medallists from the previous edition , West Germany — who won the silver medal also at the World Championships — and Canada respectively , meant that the field had opened . 
 Sweden , Great Britain , and the Soviet Union were the most heavily favoured teams . Another ten National Olympic Committees were able to send teams to Moscow : Angola , Australia , Brazil , Bulgaria , East Germany , France , Hungary , Netherlands , Spain , and Vietnam . Favorites Soviet Union boasted the silver medalists in the 100 m finals hosted several days earlier in backstroke and breaststroke ( Viktor Kuznetsov and Arsens Miskarovs respectively ) , while their butterflyer ( Yevgeny Seredin ) and freestyler ( Sergey Kopliakov ) had come fifth and fourth in their respective 100 m events . The British team included the 100 m breaststroke gold medallist ( Duncan Goodhew ) , and fifth @-@ place finisher in the 100 m backstroke ( Gary Abraham ) . Sweden 's butterflyer ( Pär Arvidsson ) and backstroker ( Bengt Baron ) had won their respective 100 m events , and their freestyle swimmer ( Per <unk> ) had come second in the 100 m , while their lowest ranked swimmer , the breaststroker ( Peter Berggren ) , had come ninth in the 100 m event . 
 The Australians were regarded as an outside chance for a medal , but were not seen as the main threats , as they were ranked seventh coming into the Olympics out of the 13 competing countries . In the five times the event had been contested , Australia had only won a silver in the inaugural race in Rome , and a bronze medal in Tokyo in 1964 . On paper , Australia 's team appeared much weaker than those of the other favorites : Peter Evans was the only individual medalist in the distance , claiming bronze in the 100 m breaststroke , while Neil Brooks , the freestyler , and Mark Kerry , the backstroker , had been eliminated in their respective semifinals , and Mark Tonelli was swimming as a makeshift butterflyer . 
 = = Competition = = 
 = = = Heats = = = 
 The medley relay was scheduled in the <unk> Sports Complex for Thursday , 24 July , the fifth day of swimming competition , with heats from 11 am , and the final from 9 pm . In the morning Sweden was disqualified in the first heat , while Australia and the Soviet Union competed in the second heat . With their superior depth , the home team was able to rest their entire first @-@ choice quartet in the heats , while Australia was only willing to rest Kerry , with Glenn Patching swimming the backstroke leg in his place . The hosts led the Australians from the start and extended their margin over each of the first three legs . Brooks reclaimed 1 @.@ 34 s on the freestyle leg , but the Australians fell 0 @.@ 13 s short to come second in their heat . Nevertheless , the Australians qualified in second place overall , as they and the Soviets were almost 2 s faster than the third @-@ placed Hungarians . In any case , the home team , despite resting all of their first @-@ choice quartet , were still faster than the Australians , who had rested only one . The winners of the first heat , Great Britain , had obtained a time slower than even the fourth @-@ place finisher of the second heat , East Germany , and slower than the Soviets ' by almost 3 seconds . 
 = = = Final = = = 
 The Australian Evans took the opportunity to attempt to regain the psychological ascendancy from the Briton Goodhew , confronting him privately and stating that " we will win it " , before noting that Goodhew was astounded by his posturing . Tonelli , the eldest swimmer in the Australian quartet at the age of 23 , convened the team as its de facto leader , and asked his team @-@ mates to commit to swimming their legs in a certain time ; Kerry vowed to swim the backstroke in 57 s , Evans the breaststroke in 63 s flat , Tonelli the butterfly in 54 s and Brooks promised to anchor the team in 49 @.@ 8 s , even though he had never gone faster than 51 s in his career . Tonelli named the foursome as the Quietly Confident Quartet , and they exhibited a silent assurance as they lined up for the race . Whereas most of the other teams were " psyching up " in the marshalling area , the Australians were remaining light @-@ hearted , convinced that they could perform in the final . 
 Kerry led off the Australian team in a faster time than he had clocked in the individual event , but it was still two seconds slower than his personal best time . Kerry finished in a time of 57 @.@ 87 s , leaving Australia in fourth place at the end of the first leg . Kuznetsov gave the Soviets the lead with a leadoff leg of 56 @.@ 81 s with Hungary and Great Britain in second and third place . France was last to reach the 100 m mark , posting a time of 58 @.@ 84 s . Evans then swam a personal best of 63 @.@ 01 s , the fastest split among the breaststrokers by 0 @.@ 63 s . His leg moved Australia into second place at the halfway mark , just 0 @.@ 45 s behind the hosts and roughly half a second ahead of the British and the Hungarians . The remainder of the teams had been dropped , with a two @-@ second gap back to the fifth @-@ placed East Germans . Tonelli then swam his leg in 54 @.@ 94 s , almost two seconds faster than he had done over the distance . Tonelli began to lose ground in the last 50 m and was a body length behind until a late surge brought him to within a metre by the end of his leg . Tonelli 's butterfly leg was such that if he had swum the same time in the individual event , he would have claimed the silver medal . Although he lost 0 @.@ 36 s to Seredin , he had minimised his loss and Australia were within 0 @.@ 81 s going into the final leg . Furthermore , the Australians were now more than a second clear of the third placed Great Britain . 
 Brooks then made a powerful , well @-@ timed dive and surfaced almost even with his Soviet counterpart Kopliakov . He had drawn level halfway through his leg and made a superior turn to take the lead as they headed home . The Soviet freestyler pulled level with 25 m to go before Brooks sprinted away again to seal an Australian victory by 0 @.@ 22 s . He did not breathe in the last ten metres , and claimed to be laughing for the final five metres , confident that his opponent could not pass him . Brooks had finished his leg in 49 @.@ 86 s as he had vowed to his team mates . In doing so , he recorded the fastest freestyle split in the relay , even faster than the individual 100 m freestyle gold medallist , Jörg <unk> of East Germany . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The time of 3 m 45 @.@ 70 s sealed Australia 's first ever win in a medley relay at the Olympics , for men or women , and it still remains the only time that the United States did not win the men 's event . After the race , the team made a celebratory dive into the water and performed a poolside interview . Tonelli remarked that " I was totally stunned . After all the hassle , and my being the athletes ' mouthpiece , we 'd come through and done it " . Australia 's women 's captain Lisa Forrest hailed the win as " a gold medal that should never have been " . Evans said of the relay , " It was unbelievable , but it was all so logical . I was so deliriously happy that I couldn 't stop talking , " as Brooks dedicated his win to his mother , who had died from cancer the previous Christmas . 
 The quartet had been under significant political pressure from the Government of Australia to boycott the 1980 Games , but under media pressure and criticism , the Prime Minister did eventually send a congratulatory telegram . In 2000 , Evans quipped that " We 're the Vietnam vets of the Olympic movement " . 
 Upon returning to Australia , Evans and Brooks were raucously received in their hometown of Perth . They were denied a civic reception by the Lord Mayor Perth because of his stance on Afghanistan , but the Lord Mayor of Fremantle hosted one instead . Evans also received congratulations from Prime Minister Malcolm Fraser . After being greeted as a hero , Brooks considered retiring as he felt that his gold had diminished his hunger for further success . 
 The quartet did not compete again as a unit following the Moscow Olympics , as Tonelli retired from swimming immediately after the Games . Australia came third in the 1984 Olympics in the medley relay as the Americans returned to the Olympic fold , with only Evans and Kerry of the original four swimming in the final , while Brooks swam in the heats . Evans and Kerry both retired after the 1984 Olympics , and after Brooks retired in 1986 , the last of the Quietly Confident Quartet had departed the Australian swimming scene . 
 = = Results = = 
 = = = Heats = = = 
 = = = Final = = = 
 = = = General = = = 
 <unk> i Sport , ed . ( 1981 ) . 1980 Moscow Volume 3 ( PDF ) . Participants and results ( Official Report of the Organising Committee of the Games of the XXII Olympiad ed . ) . Moscow : Progress <unk> pp. 452 – 513 . Retrieved 2010 @-@ 01 @-@ 27 . 
 " Swimming at the 1980 Moskva Summer Games : Men 's 4 × 100 metres Medley Relay " . The <unk> . Sports Reference LLC . Retrieved 2008 @-@ 09 @-@ 17 . 
 " XXII Olympic Games — Moscow ( URS ) — Long Course ( 50m ) — 19 Jul - 3 Aug 1980 " . European Swimming Federation . <unk> AS , Berne , Switzerland . Retrieved 2010 @-@ 01 @-@ 12 . 
 Andrews , Malcolm ( 2000 ) . Australia at the Olympic Games . Sydney , New South Wales : ABC Books . ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ <unk> @-@ 8 . 
 Forrest , Lisa ( 2008 ) . Boycott . Sydney , New South Wales : Australian Broadcasting Corporation . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ <unk> @-@ 2 . 
 Gordon , Harry ( 1994 ) . Australia and the Olympic Games . St Lucia , Queensland : University of Queensland . ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 2627 @-@ 0 . 
 Howell , Max ( 1986 ) . Aussie Gold . Albion , Queensland : Brooks Waterloo . ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 680 @-@ 0 . 
 = = = Specific = = = 
 = R U Professional = 
 " R U Professional " is a 2009 satirical song by the American indie rock band The Mae Shi , inspired by a July 2008 outburst by actor Christian Bale on the set of Terminator Salvation . Bale was filming with actress Bryce Dallas Howard when he berated director of photography , Shane Hurlbut , for walking into his line of sight . An audio recording of the incident appeared on website TMZ on February 2 , 2009 . The Mae Shi composed and recorded the song later in the same day , and released it the next day . The group stated that the piece was created to honor Bale . The song parodies Bale by sampling his voice from the 2008 diatribe . The chorus incorporates Bale 's use of the word professional from his flare @-@ up . The lyrics reference several films the actor starred in , including Newsies , Swing Kids , American Psycho , and The Dark Knight . 
 The song was made available on YouTube and via download on MediaFire the next day . " R U Professional " received a generally positive reception , and was praised as an effective parody of Bale 's on @-@ set disturbance . MTV compared its style to new wave groups like Devo . The Los Angeles Times described it as a lively pop music tribute to the actor . USA Today categorized the song as fun dance music and called it creatively motivated . The Toronto Sun wrote positively of its creative lyrics and use of audio from the Bale oration . El País classed the piece as an electropop song that contributed to the viral spread of the Bale rant online . Dose placed the song within the genre of an electro jam session . Publications including The A.V. Club and Pitchfork Media were impressed with the group 's ability to compose and release the song twenty @-@ four hours after the audio of the incident appeared online . The Irish Independent wrote that they thought the group may have used a melody they already had and adapted it for the song to release it so quickly . 
 = = Background = = 
 In July 2008 , actor Christian Bale was immersed in shooting a scene for the film Terminator Salvation in New Mexico . While performing with actress Bryce Dallas Howard , Bale shouted at the film 's director of photography , Shane Hurlbut , for walking into his line of sight . Hurlbut responded calmly , apologized to Bale , and continued shooting for seven hours after the incident . 
 An audio recording of the incident appeared on the website TMZ on February 2 , 2009 . During the four @-@ minute audio recording , Bale can be heard shouting and swearing at Hurlbut and threatening to quit the film if Hurlbut did it again and was not fired . Prior to releasing the audio on the internet , TMZ had reported on the incident on their website in July 2008 . TMZ reported that film executives for Terminator Salvation had sent a copy of the audio recording to the film 's insurance company in case Bale quit the film . 
 In a statement to Los Angeles radio station KROQ @-@ FM on February 6 , 2009 , Bale said he had behaved inappropriately , and that he and Hurlbut had talked after the incident and fully resolved the issue . Bale acknowledged that the two worked together for several hours after the incident , and for a month afterwards as well . He noted that he had viewed a draft version of the film and praised the cinematography work done by Hurlbut . 
 = = Inspiration and composition = = 
 The Mae Shi explained the group 's inspiration to write the song in a statement . The group felt Bale 's outburst was irrational and was motivated to write a piece about it . The Mae Shi emphasized in their statement that this was not a traditional song associated with their group 's normal work , but rather a homage to Bale . 
 The Mae Shi drummer Brad Breeck commented in an interview that the band decided to make a song about the incident late in the evening of February 2 , 2009 . Breeck noted that they listened to the audio of the Bale diatribe and put together their tribute piece within a span of two hours before putting it online . Jacob Cooper , another drummer in the band , commented to The Arizona Daily Star that he was surprised how popular their piece became when they had devoted relatively little time to composing and recording it . 
 The lyrics of the song include references to films Bale appeared in including Newsies , Swing Kids , American Psycho , and The Dark Knight . The song begins with the phrase , " He is the Dark Knight , he is professional . " The piece incorporates audio clips from the incident through the use of sampling . The chorus of the song references Bale 's use of the word professional in his altercation : " Oh , whoo wow / He is professional / But I think he 's lost control " . Lyrics include : " Swing Kid with a violent streak " , " Step back , stay out of his light / Better not try to put up a fight / Newsies will get you tonight / ' Cause they 're professional ! " , and " Don 't look too deep in his eyes / he can 't hide what 's inside of his mind / and it might get a little bit ugly / and you might meet an American Psycho " . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 " R U Professional " was made available on YouTube and MediaFire on February 3 , 2009 . The video description on YouTube by the group stated , " Song By The Mae Shi celebrating the life and work of <unk> Bale . Bale 's performance as John Connor in the upcoming Terminator 4 ' Redemption ' Film will no doubt be one of the greatest of all time . He will win every Oscar for his performance , even the special effects and animation ones . " The Independent reported that the band would appear at a music festival , " The Fans Strike Back " , and requested they perform " R U Professional " . 
 Several media outlets attempted to place the work within a particular genre . MTV compared the song 's style to the group Devo and new wave music . El País described the piece as an electropop song that contributed to the viral spread of the Christian Bale rant after its release on the Internet . Dose described it as an electro jam session which made adept use of sampling from the audio of Bale 's rhetoric . The Los Angeles Times called the piece a lively pop music tribute to the actor . USA Today called the song fun dance music and creatively motivated . The Toronto Sun praised its original lyrics and use of audio from the incident , and described the piece as a fusion of electro @-@ pop styles and a good song for dancing . New Musical Express recommended the piece , and described it as electro @-@ rock which astutely sampled Bale throughout the song . The St. Louis Post @-@ Dispatch described the piece as a form of new wave music which used the most spasmodic segments of the incident , and commented that the end product was comedic . The Arizona Daily Star described the piece as a pop music dance song . 
 Multiple sources remarked upon the speed with which The Mae Shi were able to put the song together and release it . The A.V. Club highlighted the song among Internet memes inspired by the Bale melee , and wrote that though the piece was put together quickly it was quite entertaining and inventive . The Irish Independent was surprised at the speed multiple different satirical adaptations of the Bale commotion audio including " R U Professional " were put together . The newspaper questioned whether the song was composed in one day , and speculated that the melody might have been written by the group previously and modified to use with audio from the Bale incident . Pitchfork Media was impressed that " R U Professional " was made in twenty @-@ four hours . 
 Various websites commented that the song was a unique way to pay tribute to Christian Bale and his body of work . Boing Boing called the song an amusing homage to Bale . <unk> commented that the song was hilarious and dedicated to Bale 's odd behavior . The Celebrity Cafe wrote that the piece was better than " Bale Out " by RevoLucian which also dealt with the incident . <unk> wrote that the song by The Mae Shi was their favorite of the Christian Bale remixes . Chico News & Review called the piece a caring accolade to Bale 's on @-@ set tirade . 
 = Bobcat = 
 The bobcat ( Lynx rufus ) is a North American cat that appeared during the Irvingtonian stage of around 1 @.@ 8 million years ago ( AEO ) . Containing 12 recognized subspecies , it ranges from southern Canada to central Mexico , including most of the continental United States . The bobcat is an adaptable predator that inhabits wooded areas , as well as semidesert , urban edge , forest edges , and swampland environments . It remains in some of its original range , but populations are vulnerable to local extinction ( " extirpation " ) by coyotes and domestic animals . The bobcat is vital for controlling pest populations . With a gray to brown coat , whiskered face , and black @-@ tufted ears , the bobcat resembles the other species of the mid @-@ sized Lynx genus . It is smaller on average than the Canada lynx , with which it shares parts of its range , but is about twice as large as the domestic cat . It has distinctive black bars on its forelegs and a black @-@ tipped , stubby tail , from which it derives its name . 
 Though the bobcat prefers rabbits and hares , it will hunt anything from insects , chickens , geese and other birds and small rodents to deer . Prey selection depends on location and habitat , season , and abundance . Like most cats , the bobcat is territorial and largely solitary , although with some overlap in home ranges . It uses several methods to mark its territorial boundaries , including claw marks and deposits of urine or feces . The bobcat breeds from winter into spring and has a gestation period of about two months . 
 Although bobcats have been hunted extensively by humans , both for sport and fur , their population has proven resilient though declining in some areas . The elusive predator features in Native American mythology and the folklore of European settlers . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 There had been debate over whether to classify this species as Lynx rufus or Felis rufus as part of a wider issue regarding whether the four species of Lynx should be given their own genus , or be placed as a subgenus of Felis . The Lynx genus is now accepted , and the bobcat is listed as Lynx rufus in modern taxonomic sources . 
 Johnson et al. reported Lynx shared a clade with the puma , leopard cat ( Prionailurus ) , and domestic cat ( Felis ) lineages , dated to 7 @.@ 15 million years ago ( mya ) ; Lynx diverged first , approximately 3 @.@ 24 million years ago . 
 The bobcat is believed to have evolved from the Eurasian lynx , which crossed into North America by way of the Bering Land Bridge during the Pleistocene , with progenitors arriving as early as 2 @.@ 6 million years ago . The first wave moved into the southern portion of North America , which was soon cut off from the north by glaciers . This population evolved into modern bobcats around 20 @,@ 000 years ago . A second population arrived from Asia and settled in the north , developing into the modern Canada lynx . Hybridization between the bobcat and the Canada lynx may sometimes occur . 
 = = = Subspecies = = = 
 Thirteen bobcat subspecies are currently recognized : 
 L. rufus rufus ( Schreber ) – eastern and midwestern United States 
 L. r. gigas ( Bangs ) – northern New York to Nova Scotia and New Brunswick 
 L. r. floridanus ( Rafinesque ) – southeastern United States and inland to the Mississippi valley , up to southwestern Missouri and southern Illinois 
 L. r. <unk> ( Peterson & Downing ) – western Great Lakes area , including upper Michigan , Wisconsin , southern Ontario , and most of Minnesota 
 L. r. baileyi ( Merriam ) – southwestern United States and northwestern Mexico 
 L. r. californicus ( Mearns ) – California west of the Sierra Nevada 
 L. r. <unk> ( <unk> ) – Mojave Desert of California 
 L. r. <unk> ( J. A. Allen ) – central Mexico , with a northern extension along the west coast to southern Sonora 
 L. r. fasciatus ( Rafinesque ) – Oregon , Washington west of the Cascade Range , northwestern California , and southwestern British Columbia 
 L. r. <unk> ( Goodwin ) – Oaxaca 
 L. r. pallescens ( Merriam ) – northwestern United States and southern British Columbia , Alberta , and Saskatchewan 
 L. r. <unk> ( Thomas ) – Baja California 
 L. r. texensis ( Mearns ) – western Louisiana , Texas , south central Oklahoma , and south into Tamaulipas , Nuevo León , and Coahuila 
 The subspecies division has been challenged , given a lack of clear geographic breaks in their ranges and the minor differences between subspecies . 
 = = Physical characteristics = = 
 The bobcat resembles other species of the Lynx genus , but is on average the smallest of the four . Its coat is variable , though generally tan to grayish @-@ brown , with black streaks on the body and dark bars on the forelegs and tail . Its spotted patterning acts as camouflage . The ears are black @-@ tipped and pointed , with short , black tufts . There is generally an off @-@ white color on the lips , chin , and underparts . Bobcats in the desert regions of the southwest have the lightest @-@ colored coats , while those in the northern , forested regions are darkest . Kittens are born well @-@ furred and already have their spots . A few melanistic bobcats have been sighted and captured in Florida . They appear black , but may still exhibit a spot pattern . 
 The face appears wide due to ruffs of extended hair beneath the ears . Bobcat eyes are yellow with black pupils . The nose of the bobcat is pinkish @-@ red , and it has a base color of gray or yellowish- or brownish @-@ red on its face , sides , and back . The pupils are round , black circles and will widen during nocturnal activity to maximize light reception . The cat has sharp hearing and vision , and a good sense of smell . It is an excellent climber , and will swim when it needs to , but will normally avoid water . Though there have been recorded cases of bobcats swimming long distances across lakes . 
 The adult bobcat is 47 @.@ 5 to 125 cm ( 18 @.@ 7 to 49 @.@ 2 in ) long from the head to the base of the tail , averaging 82 @.@ 7 cm ( 32 @.@ 6 in ) ; the stubby tail adds 9 to 20 cm ( 3 @.@ 5 to 7 @.@ 9 in ) and its " bobbed " appearance gives the species its name . An adult stands about 30 to 60 cm ( 12 to 24 in ) at the shoulders . Adult males can range in weight from 6 @.@ 4 to 18 @.@ 3 kg ( 14 to 40 lb ) , with an average of 9 @.@ 6 kg ( 21 lb ) ; females at 4 to 15 @.@ 3 kg ( 8 @.@ 8 to 33 @.@ 7 lb ) , with an average of 6 @.@ 8 kg ( 15 lb ) . The largest bobcat accurately measured on record weighed 22 @.@ 2 kg ( 49 lb ) , although unverified reports have them reaching 27 kg ( 60 lb ) . Furthermore , a June 20 , 2012 report of a New Hampshire roadkill specimen listed the animal 's weight at 27 kg ( 60 lb ) . The largest @-@ bodied bobcats are from eastern Canada and northern New England of the subspecies ( L. r. gigas ) , while the smallest are from the southeastern subspecies ( L. r. floridanus ) , particularly those in the southern Appalachians . The bobcat is muscular , and its hind legs are longer than its front legs , giving it a bobbing gait . At birth , it weighs 0 @.@ 6 to 0 @.@ 75 lb ( 270 to 340 g ) and is about 10 in ( 25 cm ) in length . By its first birthday , it will reach about 10 lb ( 4 @.@ 5 kg ) . 
 The cat is larger in its northern range and in open habitats . A morphological size comparison study in the eastern United States found a divergence in the location of the largest male and female specimens , suggesting differing selection constraints for the sexes . 
 = = Behavior = = 
 The bobcat is crepuscular . It keeps on the move from three hours before sunset until about midnight , and then again from before dawn until three hours after sunrise . Each night it will move from 2 to 7 mi ( 3 @.@ 2 to 11 @.@ 3 km ) along its habitual route . This behavior may vary seasonally , as bobcats become more diurnal during fall and winter in response to the activity of their prey , which are more active during the day in colder months . 
 = = = Social structure and home range = = = 
 Bobcat activities are confined to well @-@ defined territories , which vary in size depending on gender and the distribution of prey . The home range is marked with feces , urine scent , and by clawing prominent trees in the area . In its territory , the bobcat will have numerous places of shelter , usually a main den , and several auxiliary shelters on the outer extent of its range , such as hollow logs , brush piles , thickets , or under rock ledges . Its den smells strongly of the bobcat . 
 The sizes of bobcats ' home ranges vary significantly ; a World Conservation Union ( IUCN ) summary of research suggests ranges from 0 @.@ 23 to 126 sq mi ( 0 @.@ 60 to 326 @.@ 34 km2 ) . One study in Kansas found resident males to have ranges of roughly 8 sq mi ( 21 km2 ) , and females less than half that area . Transient bobcats were found to have both larger ( roughly 22 sq mi ( 57 km2 ) ) and less well @-@ defined home ranges . Kittens had the smallest range at about 3 sq mi ( 7 @.@ 8 km2 ) . Research has shown dispersal from the natal range is most pronounced with males . 
 Reports on seasonal variation in range size have been equivocal . One study found a large variation in male range sizes , from 16 sq mi ( 41 km2 ) in summer up to 40 sq mi ( 100 km2 ) in winter . Another found that female bobcats , especially those which were reproductively active , expanded their home range in winter , but that males merely shifted their range without expanding it , which was consistent with numerous earlier studies . Other research in various American states has shown little or no seasonal variation . 
 Like most felines , the bobcat is largely solitary , but ranges will often overlap . Unusual for cats , males are more tolerant of overlap , while females rarely wander into others ' ranges . Given their smaller range sizes , two or more females may reside within a male 's home range . When multiple male territories overlap , a dominance hierarchy is often established , resulting in the exclusion of some transients from favored areas . 
 In line with widely differing estimates of home range size , population density figures are divergent , from one to 38 bobcats per 10 sq mi ( 26 km2 ) in one survey . The average is estimated at one bobcat per 5 square miles ( 13 km2 ) . A link has been observed between population density and sex ratio . One study noted a dense , <unk> population in California had a sex ratio of 2 @.@ 1 males per female . When the density decreased , the sex ratio skewed to 0 @.@ 86 males per female . Another study observed a similar ratio , and suggested the males may be better able to cope with the increased competition , and this would help limit reproduction until various factors lowered the density . 
 = = = Hunting and diet = = = 
 The bobcat is able to survive for long periods without food , but will eat heavily when prey is abundant . During lean periods , it will often prey on larger animals it can kill and return to feed on later . The bobcat hunts by stalking its prey and then ambushing it with a short chase or pounce . Its preference is for mammals weighing about 1 @.@ 5 to 12 @.@ 5 lb ( 0 @.@ 68 to 5 @.@ 67 kg ) . Its main prey varies by region . In the eastern United States , it is the eastern cottontail species , and in the north it is the snowshoe hare . When these prey species exist together , as in New England , they are the primary food sources of the bobcat . In the far south , the rabbits and hare are sometimes replaced by cotton rats as the primary food source . Birds up to the size of a swan are also taken , along with their fledglings and eggs . The bobcat is an opportunistic predator that , unlike the more specialized Canada lynx , will readily vary its prey selection . Diet diversification positively correlates to a decline in numbers of the bobcat 's principal prey ; the abundance of its main prey species is the main determinant of overall diet . 
 The bobcat hunts animals of different sizes , and will adjust its hunting techniques accordingly . With small animals , such as rodents ( including squirrels ) , birds , fish , including small sharks , and insects , it will hunt in areas known to be abundant in prey , and will lie , crouch , or stand , and wait for victims to wander close . It will then pounce , grabbing its prey with its sharp , retractable claws . For slightly larger animals , such as geese , rabbits and hares , it will stalk from cover and wait until they come within 20 to 35 ft ( 6 @.@ 1 to 10 @.@ 7 m ) before rushing in to attack . Less commonly , it will feed on larger animals , such as young ungulates and other carnivores such as fishers ( primarily female ) , foxes , minks , skunks , small dogs and domesticated cats . Bobcats are considered the major predatory threat to the endangered whooping crane . Bobcats are also occasional hunters of livestock and poultry . While larger species , such as cattle and horses , are not known to be attacked , bobcats do present a threat to smaller ruminants , such as sheep and goats . According to the National Agricultural Statistics Service , bobcats killed 11 @,@ 100 sheep in 2004 , comprising 4 @.@ 9 % of all sheep predator deaths . However , some amount of bobcat predation may be misidentified , as bobcats have been known to scavenge on the remains of livestock kills by other animals . 
 It has been known to kill deer , especially in winter when smaller prey is scarce , or when deer populations become more abundant . One study in the Everglades showed a large majority of kills ( 33 of 39 ) were fawns , but prey up to eight times the bobcat 's weight could be successfully taken . It stalks the deer , often when the deer is lying down , then rushes in and grabs it by the neck before biting the throat , base of the skull , or chest . On the rare occasions a bobcat kills a deer , it eats its fill and then buries the carcass under snow or leaves , often returning to it several times to feed . 
 The bobcat prey base overlaps with that of other <unk> predators of a similar ecological niche . Research in Maine has shown little evidence of competitive relationships between the bobcat and coyote or red fox ; separation distances and territory overlap appeared random among simultaneously monitored animals . However , other studies have found bobcat populations may decrease in areas with high coyote populations , with the more social inclination of the canid giving them a possible competitive advantage . With the Canada lynx , however , the interspecific relationship affects distribution patterns ; competitive exclusion by the bobcat is likely to have prevented any further southward expansion of the range of its felid relative . 
 = = = Reproduction and life cycle = = = 
 The average Bobcat lifespan is 7 years long and rarely exceeds 10 years . The oldest wild Bobcat on record was 16 years old , and the oldest captive Bobcat lived to be 32 . 
 Bobcats generally begin breeding by their second summer , though females may start as early as their first year . Sperm production begins each year by September or October , and the male will be fertile into the summer . A dominant male will travel with a female and mate with her several times , generally from winter until early spring ; this varies by location , but most mating takes place during February and March . The pair may undertake a number of different behaviors , including bumping , chasing , and ambushing . Other males may be in attendance , but remain uninvolved . Once the male recognizes the female is receptive , he grasps her in the typical felid neck grip and mates with her . The female may later go on to mate with other males , and males will generally mate with several females . During courtship , the otherwise silent bobcat may let out loud screams , hisses , or other sounds . Research in Texas has suggested establishing a home range is necessary for breeding ; studied animals with no set range had no identified offspring . The female has an estrous cycle of 44 days , with the estrus lasting five to ten days . Bobcats remain reproductively active throughout their lives . 
 The female raises the young alone . One to six , but usually two to four , kittens are born in April or May , after roughly 60 to 70 days of gestation . Sometimes a second litter is born as late as September . The female generally gives birth in an enclosed space , usually a small cave or hollow log . The young open their eyes by the ninth or tenth day . They start exploring their surroundings at four weeks and are weaned at about two months . Within three to five months , they begin to travel with their mother . They will be hunting by themselves by fall of their first year , and usually disperse shortly thereafter . In Michigan , however , they have been observed staying with their mother as late as the next spring . 
 = = Tracks = = 
 Bobcat tracks show four toes without claw marks , due to their retractable claws . The tracks can range in size from 1 to 3 in ( 2 @.@ 5 to 7 @.@ 6 cm ) ; the average is about 1 @.@ 8 inches . When walking or trotting , the tracks are spaced roughly 8 to 18 in ( 20 to 46 cm ) apart . The bobcat can make great strides when running , often from 4 to 8 ft ( 1 @.@ 2 to 2 @.@ 4 m ) . 
 Like all cats , the bobcat ' directly registers ' , meaning its hind prints usually fall exactly on top of its fore prints . Bobcat tracks can be generally distinguished from feral or house cat tracks by their larger size : about 2 @.@ 0 in2 ( 13 cm ² ) versus 1 @.@ 5 in2 ( 10 cm ² ) . 
 = = Ecology = = 
 The adult bobcat has few predators other than humans , although it may be killed in interspecific conflict . Cougars and gray wolves will kill adult bobcats , a behavior repeatedly observed in Yellowstone National Park . Coyotes have killed adult bobcats and kittens . There is at least one confirmed observation of a bobcat and an American black bear ( Ursus americanus ) fighting over a carcass . Bobcat remains have occasionally been found in the resting sites of male fishers . 
 Kittens may be taken by several predators , including owls , eagles , and foxes , as well as other adult male bobcats ; when prey populations are not abundant , fewer kittens are likely to reach adulthood . Golden eagles ( Aquila chrysaetos ) have been reportedly observed preying on adult bobcats . 
 Diseases , accidents , hunters , automobiles , and starvation are the other leading causes of death . Juveniles show high mortality shortly after leaving their mothers , while still perfecting their hunting techniques . One study of 15 bobcats showed yearly survival rates for both sexes averaged 0 @.@ 62 , in line with other research suggesting rates of 0 @.@ 56 to 0 @.@ 67 . Cannibalism has been reported ; kittens may be taken when prey levels are low , but this is very rare and does not much influence the population . 
 The bobcat may have external parasites , mostly ticks and fleas , and will often carry the parasites of its prey , especially those of rabbits and squirrels . Internal parasites ( endoparasites ) are especially common in bobcats . One study found an average infection rate of 52 % from Toxoplasma gondii , but with great regional variation . One mite in particular , <unk> <unk> , has to date been found only on the bobcat . Parasites ' and diseases ' role in the mortality of the bobcat is still unclear , but they may account for greater mortality than starvation , accidents , and predation . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The bobcat is an adaptable animal . It prefers woodlands — deciduous , coniferous , or mixed — but unlike the other Lynx species , it does not depend exclusively on the deep forest . It ranges from the humid swamps of Florida to desert lands of Texas or rugged mountain areas . It will make its home near agricultural areas , if rocky ledges , swamps , or forested tracts are present ; its spotted coat serves as camouflage . The population of the bobcat depends primarily on the population of its prey ; other principal factors in the selection of habitat type include protection from severe weather , availability of resting and den sites , dense cover for hunting and escape , and freedom from disturbance . 
 The bobcat 's range does not seem to be limited by human populations , as long as it can find a suitable habitat ; only large , intensively cultivated tracts are unsuitable for the species . The animal may appear in back yards in " urban edge " environments , where human development intersects with natural habitats . If chased by a dog , it will usually climb up a tree . 
 The historical range of the bobcat was from southern Canada , throughout the United States , and as far south as the Mexican state of Oaxaca , and it still persists across much of this area . Range maps typically show a pocket of territory in the US Midwest and parts of the Northeast , where it is no longer thought to exist , including southern Minnesota , eastern South Dakota and much of Missouri , mostly due to habitat changes from modern agricultural practices . While thought to no longer exist in western New York and Pennsylvania , multiple confirmed sightings of bobcats ( including dead specimens ) have been recently reported in New York 's Southern Tier and in central New York . In addition , bobcat sightings have been confirmed in northern Indiana , and one was recently killed near Albion , Michigan . In early March , 2010 , a bobcat was sighted ( and later captured by animal control authorities ) in a parking garage in downtown Houston , TX . In August and September , 2010 , a number of sightings were reported in the Houston suburbs of <unk> and Friendswood . 
 Its population in Canada is limited due to both snow depth and the presence of the Canadian lynx . The bobcat does not tolerate deep snow , and will wait out heavy storms in sheltered areas ; it lacks the large , padded feet of the Canadian lynx and cannot support its weight on snow as efficiently . The bobcat is not entirely at a disadvantage where its range meets that of the larger felid : displacement of the Canadian lynx by the aggressive bobcat has been observed where they interact in Nova Scotia , while the clearing of coniferous forests for agriculture has led to a northward retreat of the Canadian lynx 's range to the advantage of the bobcat . In northern and central Mexico , the cat is found in dry scrubland and forests of pine and oak ; its range ends at the tropical southern portion of the country . 
 = = Conservation = = 
 It is listed in Appendix II of the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora ( CITES ) , which means it is not considered threatened with extinction , but hunting and trading must be closely monitored . The animal is regulated in all three of its range countries , and is found in a number of protected areas of the United States , its principal territory . Estimates from the US Fish and Wildlife Service placed bobcat numbers between 700 @,@ 000 and 1 @,@ 500 @,@ 000 in the US in 1988 , with increased range and population density suggesting even greater numbers in subsequent years ; for these reasons , the U.S. has petitioned CITES to remove the cat from Appendix II . Populations in Canada and Mexico remain stable and healthy . The IUCN lists it as a species of " least concern " , noting it is relatively widespread and abundant , but information from southern Mexico is poor . The species is considered endangered in Ohio , Indiana , and New Jersey . It was removed from the threatened list of Illinois in 1999 and of Iowa in 2003 . In Pennsylvania , limited hunting and trapping are once again allowed , after having been banned from 1970 to 1999 . The bobcat also suffered population decline in New Jersey at the turn of the 19th century , mainly because of commercial and agricultural developments causing habitat fragmentation ; by 1972 , the bobcat was given full legal protection , and was listed as endangered in the state in 1991 . L. r. <unk> , the subspecies found in Mexico , was for a time considered endangered by the US Fish and Wildlife Service , but was delisted in 2005 . 
 The bobcat has long been valued both for fur and sport ; it has been hunted and trapped by humans , but has maintained a high population , even in the southern United States , where it is extensively hunted . In the 1970s and 1980s , an unprecedented rise in price for bobcat fur caused further interest in hunting , but by the early 1990s , prices had dropped significantly . Regulated hunting still continues , with half of mortality of some populations being attributed to this cause . As a result , the rate of bobcat deaths is skewed in winter , when hunting season is generally open . 
 Urbanization can result in the fragmentation of contiguous natural landscapes into patchy habitat within an urban area . Animals that live in these fragmented areas often have reduced movement between the habitat patches , which can lead to reduced gene flow and pathogen transmission between patches . Animals such as the bobcat are particularly sensitive to fragmentation because of their large home ranges . A study in coastal Southern California has shown bobcat populations are affected by urbanization , creation of roads , and other developments . The populations may not be declining as much as predicted , but instead the connectivity of different populations is affected . This leads to a decrease in natural genetic diversity among bobcat populations . For bobcats , preserving open space in sufficient quantities and quality is necessary for population viability . Educating local residents about the animals is critical , as well , for conservation in urban areas . 
 = = Mythology = = 
 There is archeological evidence that the bobcat was revered by members of the Hopewell culture . Grave artifacts from dirt domes excavated in the 1980s along the Illinois River revealed a complete skeleton of a young bobcat along with a collar made of bone pendants and shell beads . The type and place of burial indicate mythological relevance or possibly domestication . The bones were initially identified as remains of a puppy , but dogs were usually buried close to the village and not in the mounts themselves . 
 In Native American mythology , the bobcat is often twinned with the figure of the coyote in a theme of duality . Lynx and coyote are associated with the fog and wind , respectively — two elements representing opposites in Amerindian folklore . This basic story , in many variations , is found in the native cultures of North America ( with parallels in South America ) , but they diverge in the telling . One version , which appears in the Nez Perce folklore for instance , depicts lynx and coyote as opposed , antithetical beings . However , another version depicts them with equality and <unk> . Claude Lévi @-@ Strauss argues the former concept , that of twins representing opposites , is an inherent theme in New World mythologies , but they are not equally balanced figures , representing an open @-@ ended dualism rather than the symmetric duality of Old World cultures . The latter notion then , Lévi @-@ Strauss suggests , is the result of regular contact between Europeans and native cultures . Additionally , the version found in the Nez Perce story is of much greater complexity , while the version of equality seems to have lost the tale 's original meaning . 
 In a Shawnee tale , the bobcat is outwitted by a rabbit , which gives rise to its spots . After trapping the rabbit in a tree , the bobcat is persuaded to build a fire , only to have the embers scattered on its fur , leaving it singed with dark brown spots . The Mohave believed dreaming habitually of beings or objects would afford them their characteristics as supernatural powers . Dreaming of two deities , cougar and lynx , they thought , would grant them the superior hunting skills of other tribes . European settlers to the Americas also admired the cat , both for its ferocity and its grace , and in the United States , it " rests prominently in the anthology of ... national folklore . " 
 = Grammy Award for Best Soul Gospel Performance , Male or Female = 
 The Grammy Award for Best Soul Gospel Performance , Male or Female was an award presented at the 32nd Annual Grammy Awards in 1990 for quality soul gospel performances . The Grammy Awards , an annual ceremony that was established in 1958 , and originally called the Gramophone Awards , are presented by the National Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences of the United States to : " honor artistic achievement , technical proficiency and overall excellence in the recording industry , without regard to album sales or chart position " . 
 Prior to the Grammy Award for Best Soul Gospel Performance , Male or Female , there were two categories separated by gender ( Best Soul Gospel Performance , Female and Best Soul Gospel Performance , Male ) , both of which were first presented in 1984 . The first gender @-@ neutral award was presented to Al Green in 1990 for his performance of " As Long as We 're Together " . In 1991 , another category restructure resulted in the soul gospel categories being divided into awards for Best Contemporary Soul Gospel Album and Best Traditional Gospel Album , both of which lasted until the 53rd Grammy Awards in 2011 . 
 = = Background = = 
 Prior to the category Best Soul Gospel Performance , Male or Female there were two categories separated by gender : Best Soul Gospel Performance , Female and Best Soul Gospel Performance , Male . Both awards were presented from 1984 to 1989 . The first gender @-@ neutral award was presented in 1990 . In 1991 , another category restructure resulted in the soul gospel categories being divided into awards for Best Contemporary Soul Gospel Album and Best Traditional Gospel Album ( previously known as Best Soul Gospel Performance , Contemporary and Best Soul Gospel Performance , Traditional from 1978 to 1983 ) , both of which lasted until the 53rd Grammy Awards in 2011 . 
 = = Nominees = = 
 Nominees for Best Soul Gospel Performance , Male or Female included : Al Green for " As Long as We 're Together " , Albertina Walker for My Time Is Not Over , Beau Williams for Wonderful , Daniel Winans for " You Got a Choice to Make " , and Vickie Winans for Total Victory . The " new jack swing remix " of " As Long as We 're Together " was done by Al B. Sure ! and Kyle West and appeared on Green 's 1989 album I Get Joy , which reached peak positions of number 60 and number 13 on Billboard magazines ' R & B Albums and Top Gospel Albums charts , respectively . Allmusic 's Jason Elias criticized the remix for having " too much hardware " . My Time Is Not Over , recorded in Tennessee , contained 1960 's soul music " propelled by a choir 's call @-@ and @-@ response " and reached number 33 on the Top Gospel Albums chart . Wonderful reached number 22 and number 2 on Billboards ' Top Contemporary Christian and Top Gospel Albums charts , respectively , and earned Williams a Gospel Music Association ( GMA ) Dove Award for Best Traditional Black Gospel Recorded Song of the Year . Daniel Winans , a member of the Winans family , was also nominated for , and won , the Grammy Award for Best Soul Gospel Performance by a Duo or Group , Choir or Chorus for Let Brotherly Love Continue . Total Victory also charted on the Top Contemporary Christian and Top Gospel Albums charts , reaching peak positions of number 31 and number 7 , respectively . 
 = = Recipient = = 
 The award was presented to Green , who has received a total of eleven Grammy awards during his lifetime . In 1982 , Green was presented the award for Best Soul Gospel Performance , Traditional for The Lord Will Make a Way , followed by awards for Best Soul Gospel Performance , Contemporary and Best Soul Gospel Performance , Traditional in 1983 for Higher Plane and Precious Lord , respectively . Green earned three awards for Best Soul Gospel Performance , Male : the first in 1984 for I 'll Rise Again , another in 1987 for " Going Away " ( from the album He Is the Light ) , and a third in 1988 for " Everything 's Gonna Be Alright " ( from the album Soul Survivor ) . The song " Sailin ' on the Sea of Your Love " earned Shirley Caesar and Green the award for Best Soul Gospel Performance by a Duo or Group , Choir or Chorus in 1985 . Green has earned three Grammy awards since his 1990 recognition for " As Long as We 're Together " ; in 1995 he and Lyle Lovett earned the first Grammy Award for Best Pop Collaboration with Vocals for " Funny How Time Slips Away " , and in 2009 he was presented awards for Best Traditional R & B Vocal Performance for " You 've Got the Love I Need " and Best R & B Performance by a Duo or Group with Vocals for " Stay with Me ( By the Sea ) " . Of the other Best Soul Gospel Performance nominees for 1990 , only Walker eventually earned a Grammy award ( Best Traditional Soul Gospel Album in 1995 for Songs of the Church : Live in Memphis ) . 
 = Stylidium = 
 Stylidium ( also known as <unk> or trigger plants ) is a genus of dicotyledonous plants that belong to the family <unk> . The genus name Stylidium is derived from the Greek <unk> or <unk> ( column or pillar ) , which refers to the distinctive reproductive structure that its flowers possess . Pollination is achieved through the use of the sensitive " trigger " , which comprises the male and female reproductive organs fused into a floral column that snaps forward quickly in response to touch , harmlessly covering the insect in pollen . Most of the approximately 300 species are only found in Australia , making it the fifth largest genus in that country . Triggerplants are considered to be protocarnivorous or carnivorous because the glandular trichomes that cover the scape and flower can trap , kill , and digest small insects with protease enzymes produced by the plant . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 The majority of the Stylidium species are perennial herbs of which some are geophytes that utilize bulbs as their storage organ . The remaining small group of species consists of ephemeral annuals . 
 Members of the genus are most easily identified by their unique floral column , in which the stamen and style are fused . The column — also commonly called a " trigger " in this genus — typically resides beneath the plane of the flower . Stylidium flowers are zygomorphic , which means they are only symmetrical in one plane . Flowers usually bloom in the late spring in Australia . 
 = = = Morphology = = = 
 Species of the genus Stylidium represent a very diverse selection of plants . Some are only a few centimeters tall , while others can grow to be 1 @.@ 8 meters ( 5 @.@ 9 feet ) tall ( S. <unk> ) . One typical plant form is a dense rosette of leaves close to the ground that gives rise to the floral spike in the center . Plant forms range from wiry , creeping mats ( S. scandens ) to the bushy S. <unk> . 
 Flower morphology differs in details , but ascribes to a simple blueprint : four petals , zygomorphic in nature , with the trigger protruding from the " throat " of the flower and resting below the plane of the flower petals . Flower size ranges from many species that have small 0 @.@ 5 cm ( 0 @.@ 20 in ) wide flowers to the 2 – 3 cm ( 1 – 1 in ) wide flowers of S. <unk> . Flower color can also vary from species to species , but most include some combination of white , cream , yellow , or pink . Flowers are usually arranged in a spike or dense raceme , but there is at least one exception to the rule : S. <unk> , as its name suggests , produces a single flower per inflorescence . 
 Leaf morphology is also very diverse in this large genus . Some leaves are very thin , almost needle @-@ like ( S. affine ) , while others are short , stubby , and arranged in rosettes ( S. <unk> ) . Another group of species , such as S. scandens ( climbing <unk> ) form scrambling , tangled mats typically propped up on aerial roots . 
 = = = Pollination mechanism = = = 
 The column typical of the genus Stylidium is sensitive and responds to touch . The change in pressure when a pollinating insect lands on a Stylidium flower causes a physiological change in the column turgor pressure by way of an action potential , sending the column quickly flying toward the insect . Upon impact , the insect will be covered in pollen and stunned , but not harmed . Because the column comprises the fused male and female reproductive organs of the flower , the stamen and stigma take turns in dominating the function of the column — the anthers develop first and then are pushed aside by the developing stigma . This delayed development of the stigma prevents self @-@ pollination and ensures that cross pollination will occur between individuals of a population . Different species have evolved the trigger mechanism in different locations , with some attacking the pollinating insect from above and others from below ( a " punch in the gut " to the insect ) . 
 The response to touch is very quick in Stylidium species . The column can complete its " attack " on the insect in as little as 15 milliseconds . After firing , the column resets to its original position in anywhere from a few minutes to a half hour , depending on temperature and species @-@ specific qualities . The column is able to fire many times before it no longer responds to stimuli . The response time is highly dependent upon ambient temperature , with lower temperatures relating to slower movement . Stylidium species are typically pollinated by small solitary bees and the nectar @-@ feeding bee flies ( Bombyliidae ) . 
 = = = Carnivory = = = 
 Stylidium species with glandular trichomes on their sepals , leaves , flower parts , or scapes have been suggested to be protocarnivorous ( or paracarnivorous ) . The tip of the trichome produces a sticky mucilage — a mixture of sugar polymers and water — that is capable of attracting and suffocating small insects . The ability to trap insects may be a defensive mechanism against damage to flower parts . However , trichomes of S. fimbriatum have been shown to produce digestive enzymes , specifically proteases , like other carnivorous plants . Adding species of Stylidium to the list of plants that engage in carnivory would significantly increase the total number of known carnivorous plants . 
 The insects captured by the glandular trichomes are too small to serve any role in pollination . It is unclear , however , whether these plants evolved the ability to trap and kill insects as an adaptation to low environmental nutrient availability or simply a defensive mechanism against insects damaging flower parts . 
 There is also a correlation between location of Stylidium species and proximity of known carnivorous species , like sundews ( Drosera ) , <unk> ( Utricularia ) , the Albany pitcher plant ( <unk> <unk> ) , and the rainbow plant ( Byblis ) . While this alone does not prove that Stylidium species are themselves carnivorous , the hypothesis is that the association arose because Stylidium species and the known carnivorous plants obtain scarce nutrients using the same source , namely captured insects . Preliminary proof is given that the trapping mechanisms of two associated plants are the same ( the tentacles of Byblis and Drosera ) , though this may be only a coincidence and further research must be done . 
 = = = Distribution and habitat = = = 
 Most Stylidium species are endemic to Australia . In Western Australia alone , there are more than 150 species , at least 50 of which are in the area immediately around Perth . There are at least four species of Stylidium that are not confined to the Australian continent : S. <unk> is found in Myanmar , Melaka , and Tonkin ; S. <unk> in Bengal and Myanmar ; S. <unk> in Queensland , Sri Lanka , and the south coast of China ; and S. <unk> in Queensland and the Philippines . The cladistic group Stylidium contains more than 230 individual species ( more than 300 species exist , but many specimens have not yet been formally described ) , making it the fifth largest genus in Australia . 
 Stylidium habitat includes grassy plains , open heaths , rocky slopes , sandplains , forests , and the margins of creeks and water holes . Somes species , such as S. <unk> , can even be found in disturbed areas like near roads and under powerlines . Others ( i.e. S. <unk> ) are sensitive to disturbance and are considered rare because of their extremely specific habitat . 
 Even though many species of Stylidium may coexist in the same location , natural hybrids between species have not often been reported . Both natural hybridisation in the field and artificial hybridisation in cultivation are rare . The first natural hybrid , S. <unk> × S. <unk> , was reported by Sherwin <unk> in 1969 between Capel and <unk> in Western Australia . 
 = = Botanical history = = 
 Discovery and description of new Stylidium species has been occurring since the late 18th century , the first of which was discovered in Botany Bay in 1770 by Joseph Banks and Daniel Solander during their travels in the Pacific with James Cook aboard the Endeavour . Seven species were collected by Banks and Solander , some of which were sketched by Sydney Parkinson on board the Endeavour and were later engraved in preparation for publication in Banks ' <unk> . Later , in the early 19th century , the French botanist Charles François Antoine <unk> wrote one of the first descriptions of the <unk> anatomy , illustrated by many botanical artists including Ferdinand Bauer . Around the same time , British botanist Robert Brown described ( or " authored " ) several Stylidium species , including S. <unk> and S. repens . More species began to be described as more botanists explored Australia more thoroughly . 
 In 1958 , Rica Erickson wrote Triggerplants , describing habitat , distribution , and plant forms ( ephemeral , creeping , leafy @-@ stemmed , rosette , tufted , scale @-@ leaved , and tropical ) . It was Erickson that began placing certain species into these morphologically @-@ based groups , which may or may not resemble true taxonomic divergences . It was not until the 1970s and 1980s that research of the trigger physiology was begun in the lab of Dr. Findlay of Flinders University . Douglas Darnowski added to the growing library of knowledge on Stylidium when he published his book Triggerplants in 2002 , describing an overview of habitat , plant morphology , carnivory , and research done to date . Following its publication , he co @-@ founded the International <unk> Society . 
 As of 2002 , only 221 Stylidium species were known . There are now over 300 species , many of which are awaiting formal description . 
 = = Cultivation = = 
 Most Stylidium species tend to be hardy species and can be easily cultivated in greenhouses or gardens . They are drought resistant , hardy to cold weather , and the species diversity in this genus gives gardeners a wide variety of choices . Most species that are native to Western Australia will be cold hardy to at least -1 to -2 ° C. The few that can be found all over Australia , like S. <unk> , will tolerate a wider range of habitat since their native ranges includes a great diversity of ecoregions . Some species of <unk> are suitable for cultivation outdoors outside of the Australian continent including most of the United Kingdom and as far north as New York City or Seattle in the United States . 
 Cultivation from seed may be difficult or easy , depending on the species . The more difficult species to grow include the ones that require a period of dormancy or smoke treatment to simulate a bushfire . Stylidium specimens should be grown in a medium that is kept moist and has a relatively low concentration of nutrients . It should also be noted that they appear to be sensitive to disturbance of their root systems . Minimization of such disturbance will likely result in healthier plants . 
 = Garry Moore = 
 Garry Moore ( January 31 , 1915 – November 28 , 1993 ) was an American entertainer , game show host , and comedian best known for his work in television . He began his career as a radio personality in the 1940s and was a television host on several game and variety shows from the 1950s , 1960s , and 1970s . 
 After dropping out of high school , Moore found success as a radio host and then moved on to the television industry . He hosted The Garry Moore Show , and the game shows I 've Got a Secret and To Tell the Truth . He became known for his bow ties and his crew cut , though he refrained from both fashions later in his career . 
 After being diagnosed with throat cancer in 1976 , Moore retired from the television industry , making a few rare television appearances . He spent the last years of his life in Hilton Head , South Carolina and at his summer home in Maine . He died on November 28 , 1993 . 
 = = Early life and radio career = = 
 Moore was born Thomas Garrison Morfit , III on January 31 , 1915 , in Baltimore , Maryland , the son of Mason P. Morfit and Mary L. ( née Harris ) Morfit . He attended Baltimore City College ( actually a high school ) , but dropped out to pursue a career in radio and writing . Starting in 1937 , he worked for Baltimore radio station WBAL as an announcer , writer , and actor / comedian . He used his birth name until 1940 , when , while on the air announcing Club Matinee hosted by Ransom Sherman at NBC , Chicago , Sherman held a radio contest to find a more easily <unk> one . " Garry Moore " was the winning entry , which was submitted by a woman from Pittsburgh who received a prize of $ 100 . It was on Club Matinee where he met his long @-@ time friend and broadcasting partner Durward Kirby . 
 Moore headed Talent , Ltd . , a variety program on Sunday afternoons in 1941 . In the years that followed , Moore appeared on numerous network radio shows . He started out as an announcer and then as support for broadcast personalities , one of whom was Jimmy Durante . From 1943 – 1947 , Durante and Moore had a joint show , with Moore as the straight man . Impressed with his ability to interact with audiences , CBS offered him his own show . Starting in 1949 , the one @-@ hour daytime variety show The Garry Moore Show aired on CBS . Moore briefly returned to radio as host of NBC 's Monitor in 1969 . 
 = = Television career = = 
 Between 1947 and 1950 , Moore began to make tentative steps into the new medium as a panelist and guest host on quiz and musical shows . On June 26 , 1950 , he was rewarded with his own 30 @-@ minute CBS early @-@ evening talk @-@ variety TV program , The Garry Moore Show , which was a shorter version of his radio show . Until September 1950 , it was also simulcast on radio . During 1950 and 1951 , he hosted prime @-@ time variety hour summer replacements for Arthur Godfrey and his Friends . He appeared as a guest star on other programs , too , including CBS 's Faye Emerson 's Wonderful Town . 
 During his run as a variety @-@ show host , Moore was tapped to host CBS ' weekly prime @-@ time TV panel show I 've Got a Secret . It premiered on June 19 , 1952 . On this show , Moore began his friendships with comedian Henry Morgan and game show host and panelist Bill Cullen , with whom he also had a long working relationship . Morgan later stated that Moore had helped him to keep his job as a celebrity panelist on the show . Moore became known for his involvement in the variety of stunts and demonstrations of the show 's contestants . The popularity of I 've Got a Secret led to a cameo in the 1959 film It Happened to Jane . In the film , Doris Day 's character was a contestant on the show , with Moore , as well as the panel playing themselves . 
 Moore 's variety program was moved to the daytime slot , where it ran until June 27 , 1958 . Within three months of the end of the daytime show , his longtime colleague Durward Kirby and he moved the revived The Garry Moore Show into prime time as a Tuesday night comedy and variety hour that ran from September 30 , 1958 , to June 14 , 1964 . 
 Although the show was a bigger hit in prime time , Moore always preferred the daytime housewife audience . He thought that it gave the lonely housewives something to listen to and watch while they worked . The show provided a break into show business for many performers , including Alan King , Jonathan Winters , Carol Burnett , and Dorothy Loudon . The Garry Moore Show featured regular supporting cast members Durward Kirby , Marion Lorne , Denise Lor , and Ken Carson , as well as a mixture of song @-@ and @-@ dance routines and comedy skits , and introduced the public to comedian Carol Burnett . After the show ended , Burnett became a star in her own right , hosting The Carol Burnett Show for many years . 
 The Garry Moore Show was cancelled in 1964 , and in the summer of that year , after having been on radio and television for 27 uninterrupted years , Moore decided to retire , saying he had " said everything [ he ] ever wanted to say three times already . " He gave up hosting I 've Got A Secret and was replaced by comedian Steve Allen , who would host the show until the end of its run in 1967 ( although Moore had ended his retirement before I 've Got A Secret left the air , he never returned to the series to host and Allen helmed a subsequent , one @-@ season syndicated revival in 1972 ) . Moore 's main activity during his hiatus was a trip around the world with his wife . 
 After two years , The Garry Moore Show returned to the CBS prime @-@ time lineup in the fall of 1966 . The week of the premiere , Moore appeared as the celebrity guest on I 've Got A Secret to promote it . The new show was canceled mid @-@ season because of low ratings against NBC 's highly rated western Bonanza . The successful Smothers Brothers Comedy Hour replaced The Garry Moore Show in the CBS time slot . Moore then made sporadic guest television appearances , appearing as a panelist on various game shows , before Mark Goodson asked him to host another show . 
 That show was a revival of To Tell the Truth , which had ended its run on CBS in 1968 . Moore was asked to host a revival of the series for syndication , which launched in September 1969 . When To Tell the Truth was planned to be revived for syndication , producers Mark Goodson and Bill Todman originally wanted Bud Collyer to once again host the show . However , when they called Collyer , he declined , citing his poor health . When Goodson and Todman called Moore about the job , he immediately contacted Collyer , who said to Moore that " I am just not up to it . " Moore often took part in the show 's silly and goofy stunts , as he had done on I 've Got a Secret , performing magic tricks and cooking . This led to this version of To Tell the Truth being labeled similar to I 've Got a Secret . Moore hosted the series from its premiere until the midway point of the 1976 – 77 season , the revival 's eighth . 
 = = Recording = = 
 In 1956 , Moore recorded a Columbia LP record album for children . It featured tales by Rudyard Kipling , including " The Elephant 's Child " and " How the Camel Got His Hump . " Also in 1956 , Moore recorded a Columbia LP record album titled " Garry Moore Presents My Kind Of Music , " with contributions by jazz musicians George Barnes , Ernie Caceres , Wild Bill Davison , Randy Hall , Mel Henke , and Sonny Terry . 
 = = Retirement and death = = 
 Moore became ill in 1976 and was diagnosed with throat cancer . He left To Tell the Truth shortly before Christmas 1976 to undergo surgery , turning the show over to panelist Bill Cullen . <unk> panelist Joe Garagiola also acted as the host for several weeks , claiming he was " pinch @-@ hitting " for Moore . Moore returned in September 1977 to begin To Tell the Truth 's ninth season , to explain his sudden absence and to announce his permanent retirement , explaining that while recovering from his surgery , he believed that his throat cancer was a sign that continuing beyond his 42 @-@ year career would be " just plain greed " . Joe Garagiola hosted the program for the rest of the season , which proved to be its last . 
 Moore retired to Hilton Head , South Carolina , where he spent his time sailing , and also at his summer home in Northeast Harbor , Maine . He made two rare television appearances during his retirement , in a 1984 special on game @-@ show bloopers hosted by William Shatner and in a late 1980s television tribute to Carol Burnett . Moore recounted the time circumstances forced Burnett and him to share a dressing room for one show . After many years , Moore said he had a confession to make : " I peeked . " Burnett replied , " So did I. " 
 Moore died of emphysema at Hilton Head on November 28 , 1993 , at the age of 78 . He was buried at Forest Hill Cemetery in Northeast Harbor , Maine . He was named one of the 15 greatest game @-@ show hosts of all time by Time . 
 = Nephrops norvegicus = 
 Nephrops norvegicus , known variously as the Norway lobster , Dublin Bay prawn , langoustine ( compare <unk> ) or scampi , is a slim , orange @-@ pink lobster which grows up to 25 cm ( 10 in ) long , and is " the most important commercial crustacean in Europe " . It is now the only extant species in the genus Nephrops , after several other species were moved to the closely related genus Metanephrops . It lives in the north @-@ eastern Atlantic Ocean , and parts of the Mediterranean Sea , but is absent from the Baltic Sea and Black Sea . Adults emerge from their burrows at night to feed on worms and fish . 
 = = Description = = 
 Nephrops norvegicus has the typical body shape of a lobster , albeit narrower than the large Homarus species . It is pale orange in colour , and grows to a typical length of 18 – 20 centimetres ( 7 – 8 in ) , or exceptionally 25 cm ( 10 in ) long , including the tail and claws . A carapace covers the animal 's cephalothorax , while the abdomen is long and segmented , ending in a broad tail fan . The first three pairs of legs bear claws , of which the first are greatly elongated and bear ridges of spines . Of the two pairs of antennae , the second is the longer and thinner . There is a long , spinous rostrum , and the compound eyes are kidney @-@ shaped , providing the name of the genus , from the Greek roots <unk> ( <unk> , " kidney " ) and ops ( " eye " ) . 
 = = Distribution = = 
 Nephrops norvegicus is found in the north @-@ eastern Atlantic Ocean and North Sea as far north as Iceland and northern Norway , and south to Portugal . It is not common in the Mediterranean Sea except in the Adriatic Sea , notably the north Adriatic . It is absent from both the Black Sea and the Baltic Sea . Due to its ecological demands for particular sediments , N. norvegicus has a very patchy distribution , and is divided into over 30 populations . These populations are separated by inhospitable terrain , and adults rarely travel distances greater than a few hundred metres . 
 = = Ecology = = 
 Nephrops norvegicus adults prefer to inhabit muddy seabed sediments , with more than 40 percent silt and clay . Their burrows are semi @-@ permanent , and vary in structure and size . Typical burrows are 20 to 30 centimetres ( 8 to 12 in ) deep , with a distance of 50 to 80 centimetres ( 20 to 31 in ) between the front and back entrances . Norway lobsters spend most of their time either lying in their burrows or by the entrance , only leaving their shelters to forage or mate . 
 = = = Diet = = = 
 Nephrops norvegicus is a scavenger and predator that makes short foraging excursions , mainly during periods of subdued light . They feed on active prey , including worms and fish , which they capture with their chelipeds and walking legs , and food is conveyed to the mouth using the anterior walking legs , assisted by the maxillipeds . 
 = = = Parasites and symbionts = = = 
 Nephrops norvegicus is the host to a number of parasites and symbionts . A number of sessile organisms attach to the exoskeleton of N. norvegicus , including the barnacle Balanus <unk> and the <unk> <unk> , but overall Nephrops suffers fewer infestations of such epibionts than other decapod crustaceans do . In December 1995 , the commensal <unk> <unk> was discovered attached to the mouthparts of Nephrops norvegicus , and was found to be the first member of a new phylum , <unk> , a finding described by Simon Conway Morris as " the zoological highlight of the decade " . S. <unk> has been found in many populations of N. norvegicus , both in the north Atlantic and in the Mediterranean Sea . Individuals may be found on most segments of the lobster 's mouthparts , but are generally concentrated on the central parts of the larger mouthparts , from the mandible to the third maxilliped . 
 The most significant parasite of N. norvegicus is a dinoflagellate of the genus Hematodinium , which has caused epidemic infection in fished populations of N. norvegicus since the 1980s . Hematodinium is a genus that contains major pathogens of a wide variety of decapod crustaceans , although its internal taxonomy is poorly resolved . The species which attacks N. norvegicus causes a syndrome originally described as " post @-@ moult syndrome " , in which the carapace turns opaque and becomes highly pigmented , the haemolymph becomes milky white , and the animal appears moribund . Other parasites of N. norvegicus include the gregarine protozoan <unk> <unk> , the trematode <unk> <unk> and the polychaete <unk> <unk> . 
 = = Life cycle = = 
 The typical life span of N. norvegicus is 5 – 10 years , reaching 15 years in exceptional cases . Its reproductive cycle varies depending on geographical position : " the periods of hatching and spawning , and the length of the incubation period , vary with latitude and the breeding cycle changes from annual to biennial as one moves from south to north " . Incubation of eggs is temperature @-@ dependent , and in colder climates , the duration of the incubation period increases . This means that , by the time hatching occurs , it may be too late for the females to take part in that year 's breeding cycle . In warmer climates , the combined effects of recovery from moulting and ovary maturation mean that spawning can become delayed . This , in turn , has the effect of the female missing out a year of egg carrying . 
 Adult male Nephrops norvegicus moult once or twice a year ( usually in late winter or spring ) and adult females moult up to once a year ( in late winter or spring , after hatching of the eggs ) . In annual breeding cycles , mating takes place in the spring or winter , when the females are in the soft , post @-@ moult state . The ovaries mature throughout the spring and summer months , and egg @-@ laying takes place in late summer or early autumn . After spawning , the berried ( egg @-@ carrying ) females return to their burrows and remain there until the end of the incubation period . Hatching takes place in late winter or early spring . Soon after hatching , the females moult and mate again . 
 During the planktonic larval stage ( typically 1 to 2 months in duration ) the nephrops larvae exhibit a diel vertical migration behaviour as they are dispersed by the local currents . This complex biophysical interaction determines the fate of the larvae ; the overlap between <unk> pathway destination and spatial distributions of suitable benthic habitats must be favourable in order for the larvae to settle and reach maturity . 
 = = Fisheries = = 
 The muscular tail of Nephrops norvegicus is frequently eaten , and its meat is known as scampi . N. norvegicus is eaten only on special occasions in Spain and Portugal , where it is less expensive than the common lobster , Homarus gammarus . N. norvegicus is an important species for fisheries , being caught mostly by trawling . Around 60 @,@ 000 tonnes are caught annually , half of it in the United Kingdom 's waters . 
 In the North East Atlantic individual biological stocks of nephrops are identified as functional units . A number of functional units make up the sea areas over which a total allowable catch ( TAC ) is set annually by the EU Council of Ministers . For example , the TAC set for North Sea nephrops is based on the aggregate total tonnage of removals recommended by science for nine separate functional unit areas . This method has attracted criticism because it can promote the over @-@ exploitation of a specific functional unit even though the overall TAC is under @-@ fished . In 2016 , the UK has implemented a package of emergency technical measures aimed at recovering the <unk> stock in the Farn ( e ) Deeps off North East England which is close to collapse . 
 <unk> from Nephrops fishery may account for up to 37 % of the energy requirements of certain marine scavengers , such as the hagfish <unk> glutinosa . Boats involved in Nephrops fishery also catch a number of fish species such as plaice and sole , and it is thought that without that revenue , Nephrops fishery would be economically unviable . 
 = = Taxonomic history = = 
 Nephrops norvegicus was one of the species included by Carl Linnaeus in his 1758 10th edition of Systema Naturae , the starting point for zoological nomenclature . In that work , it was listed as Cancer <unk> , with a type locality of in Mari <unk> ( " in the Norwegian sea " ) . In choosing a lectotype , <unk> Holthuis restricted the type locality to the Kattegat at the <unk> Peninsula in southern Sweden ( 56 ° 18 ′ N 12 ° 28 ′ E ) . Two synonyms of the species have been published – " Astacus rugosus " , described by the eccentric zoologist Constantine Samuel Rafinesque in 1814 from material collected in the Mediterranean Sea , and " <unk> <unk> " , described by Charles Spence Bate and Joshua Brooking Rowe in 1880 . 
 As new genera were erected , the species was moved , reaching its current position in 1814 , when William Elford Leach erected the genus Nephrops to hold this species alone . Seven fossil species have since been described in the genus . 
 Populations in the Mediterranean Sea are sometimes separated as " Nephrops norvegicus var. meridionalis <unk> , 1935 " , although this taxon is not universally considered valid . 
 = SMS Wien = 
 SMS Wien ( " His Majesty 's Ship Vienna " ) was one of three Monarch @-@ class coastal defense ships built for the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy in the 1890s . After her commissioning , the ship participated in an international blockade of Crete during the Greco @-@ Turkish War of 1897 . Wien and the two other Monarch @-@ class ships made several training cruises in the Mediterranean Sea in the early 1900s . They formed the 1st Capital Ship Division of the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy until they were replaced by the newly commissioned Habsburg @-@ class predreadnought battleships at the turn of the century . In 1906 the three Monarchs were placed in reserve and only recommissioned for annual summer training exercises . After the start of World War I , Wien was recommissioned and assigned to 5th Division together with her sisters . 
 The division was sent to Cattaro in August 1914 to attack Montenegrin and French artillery that was bombarding the port and they remained there until mid @-@ 1917 . Wien and her sister Budapest were sent to Trieste in August 1917 and bombarded Italian fortifications in the Gulf of Trieste . On the night of 9 – 10 December , while Wien and Budapest were at anchor in Trieste , two Italian torpedo boats managed to penetrate the harbor defenses undetected and fired several torpedoes at the two ships . Budapest was not hit , but Wien was struck by two torpedoes and sank in less than five minutes with the loss of 46 of her crew . The wreck was salvaged sometime during the 1920s by the Italians . 
 = = Description and construction = = 
 At only 5 @,@ 785 tonnes ( 5 @,@ 694 long tons ) maximum displacement , the Monarch class was less than half the size of the battleships of other major navies at the time and were officially designated as coast defense ships . The Austro @-@ Hungarian government believed that the role of its navy was solely to defend her coast . 
 Wien had an overall length of 99 @.@ 22 meters ( 325 ft 6 in ) , a beam of 17 meters ( 55 ft 9 in ) and a draft of 6 @.@ 4 meters ( 21 ft 0 in ) . Her two 4 @-@ cylinder vertical triple @-@ expansion steam engines produced a total of 8 @,@ 500 indicated horsepower ( 6 @,@ 300 kW ) using steam from five cylindrical boilers . These gave the ship a maximum speed of 17 @.@ 5 knots ( 32 @.@ 4 km / h ; 20 @.@ 1 mph ) . Wien 's maximum load of 500 metric tons ( 490 LT ) of coal gave her a range of 3 @,@ 500 nautical miles ( 6 @,@ 500 km ; 4 @,@ 000 mi ) at a speed of 9 knots ( 17 km / h ; 10 mph ) . She was manned by 26 officers and 397 enlisted men , a total of 423 personnel . 
 The armament of the Monarch class consisted of four 240 @-@ millimeter ( 9 @.@ 4 in ) Krupp K / 94 guns mounted in two twin @-@ gun turrets , one each fore and aft of the superstructure . The ships carried 80 rounds for each gun . Their secondary armament was six 150 @-@ millimeter ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) Škoda guns located in casemates in the superstructure . Defense against torpedo boats was provided by ten quick @-@ firing ( QF ) 47 @-@ millimeter ( 1 @.@ 9 in ) Škoda guns and four 47 @-@ millimeter QF Hotchkiss guns . The ships also mounted two 450 @-@ millimeter ( 18 in ) torpedo tubes , one on each broadside . Each torpedo tube was provided with two torpedoes . 
 The ship 's nickel @-@ steel waterline armor belt was 120 – 270 millimeters ( 4 @.@ 7 – 10 @.@ 6 in ) thick and the gun turrets were protected by 250 millimeters ( 9 @.@ 8 in ) of armor . The casemates had 80 millimeters ( 3 @.@ 1 in ) thick sides while the conning tower had 220 millimeters ( 8 @.@ 7 in ) of armor . Wien 's deck armor was 40 millimeters ( 1 @.@ 6 in ) thick . 
 The Monarch @-@ class ships were ordered in May 1892 with Budapest and Wien to be built at the Stabilimento Tecnico Triestino shipyard in Trieste . Both ships were laid down on 16 February 1893 , the first ships in the class to be laid down . Wien was launched on 7 July 1895 by Countess <unk> , wife of the Governor of Lower Austria , and commissioned on 13 May 1897 . 
 = = Service history = = 
 = = = Peace time = = = 
 After her commissioning , Wien took part in Queen Victoria 's Diamond Jubilee International Fleet Review at Spithead on 26 June 1897 , as well as an international blockade of Crete during the Greco @-@ Turkish War of 1897 . She was back at Pola on 16 April 1898 . Wien and her sisters formed the Navy 's 1st Capital Ship Division ( I. Schwere Division ) in 1899 and the division made a training cruise to the Eastern Mediterranean where they made port visits in Greece , Lebanon , Turkey and Malta later that year . In early 1902 they made another training cruise to the Western Mediterranean with port visits in Algeria , Spain , France , Italy , Corfu , and Albania . The ship was fitted with a Siemens @-@ Braun radio early the following year . The ships of the division were inspected by Archduke Franz Ferdinand , the heir to the throne , in March 1903 at Gravosa . Shortly afterwards , Wien , Budapest , the battleship Habsburg and the destroyer Magnet made a cruise to the Eastern Mediterranean . Wien served as flagship of the division until she was posted at Salonica , Greece on 13 May to support Austro @-@ Hungarian interests there after several terrorist acts against Austro @-@ Hungarian citizens . She returned to Pola on 10 June and resumed her assignment as flagship . In 1904 , the Monarch @-@ class ships formed the 2nd Capital Ship Division and they took part in the 1904 cruise of the Adriatic and Mediterranean Seas as well as training exercises in which the three Habsburg @-@ class battleships engaged the Budapest and her sisters in simulated combat . Those maneuvers marked the first time two homogeneous squadrons consisting of modern battleships operated in the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy . In 1905 , Wien made a cruise of the Levant and visited ports in Greece , Turkey , Egypt and Albania . Later that summer , the ship ran aground during a night exercise off <unk> Island ; it took two tries by Budapest and Habsburg to pull her off . She had to be dry @-@ docked for repairs . 
 The Monarchs were relegated to the newly formed Reserve Squadron on 1 January 1906 and were only recommissioned for the annual summer exercises . They participated in a fleet review by Archduke Franz Ferdinand in September conducted in the <unk> Channel near Šipan . The ships were briefly recommissioned at the beginning of 1913 as the 4th Division after the start of the Second Balkan War , but were decommissioned again on 10 March . 
 = = = World War I = = = 
 With the beginning of World War I the three Monarchs were recommissioned as the 5th Division . They were sent down to the Cattaro in August 1914 to attack Montenegrin artillery batteries on Mount Lovćen bombarding the Austro @-@ Hungarian naval base at Cattaro and the fortifications defending it . Budapest and her sisters arrived on 13 August , but their guns could not elevate sufficiently enough to engage all of the enemy artillery , which was reinforced by eight French guns on 19 October . The battleship Radetzky was summoned to deal with the guns two days later and she managed to knock out several French guns and forced the others to be withdrawn by 27 October . The Monarchs remained at Cattaro until mid @-@ 1917 to deter any further attacks . In August , Budapest and Wien were transferred to Trieste to serve as guard ships against Italian commando raids . Each ship was fitted with a 66 @-@ millimeter ( 2 @.@ 6 in ) anti @-@ aircraft gun after their arrival on 26 August to counter constant Italian air attacks . Wien was damaged by a near miss on 5 September and both ships withdrew to Pola on 12 September . 
 They returned to Trieste on 30 October and sortied into the Gulf of Trieste on 16 November to attack Italian coastal defenses at <unk> , near the mouth of the Piave River . Budapest and Wien opened fire at 10 : 35 at a range of about 9 – 10 kilometers ( 5 @.@ 6 – 6 @.@ 2 mi ) and knocked out most of the Italian guns after about a half @-@ hour . Their bombardment was interrupted by several unsuccessful Italian air attacks before a more coordinated attack was made by five MAS torpedo boats and five aircraft around 13 : 30 . This was also unsuccessful and the last Italian coast defense gun was knocked out an hour later . Wien was hit seven times in the superstructure and only lightly damaged ; none of her crewmen were wounded . 
 Anxious to revenge themselves against the Austro @-@ Hungarians , the Regia Marina ( Royal Italian Navy ) made plans for a sneak attack on the two ships in their berths in the Bay of Muggia , near Trieste , by MAS launches . On the night of 9 / 10 December , two MAS boats managed to penetrate the harbor defenses undetected , and fired torpedoes at Wien and Budapest at 02 : 32 . The torpedoes fired at Budapest missed , but Wien was hit by two torpedoes fired by MAS 9 , commanded by Lieutenant Commander ( <unk> di <unk> ) Luigi Rizzo , that blew a hole 10 @.@ 5 @-@ meter ( 34 ft ) wide abreast the boiler rooms . All of the watertight doors were open on board the Wien and the ship capsized in five minutes despite an attempt to counter her growing list by flooding the trim tanks on the opposite side . The attack killed 46 members of the crew . Both Italian boats escaped without being detected and Rizzo was awarded the Gold Medal of Military Valor . 
 Wien was buried in the mud of the harbor bottom at a depth of 16 @.@ 5 meters ( 54 ft ) and salvage of the ship was ordered on 14 December . That same day the navy convened a court @-@ martial of Vice Admiral Alfred Freiherr von Koudelka , commander of the naval district , the captains of both ships , and the commander of the naval defenses of Trieste . On 16 January 1918 , the court convicted all four individuals for failing to take all possible precautions to protect the ships and failing to ensure that the precautions were taken . As punishment the court recommended that Koudelka and the two ship captains be retired and the commander of the naval defenses of Trieste to be returned to his former reserve status . Emperor Karl approved the recommendations on 23 January . 
 The navy ordered that the salvage of Wien be stopped on 7 June and the wreck was ultimately salvaged by the Italians sometime during the 1920s . A section of the ship 's bow is on display at the Museo <unk> Navale in Venice . 
 = Italian ironclad Messina = 
 Messina was the second of three Principe di Carignano @-@ class ironclads built for the Italian Regia Marina ( Royal Navy ) in the 1860s . She was laid down in September 1861 , her hull was launched in December 1864 , and she was completed in February 1867 . Messina was a broadside ironclad armed with a battery of four 8 @-@ inch ( 200 mm ) guns and eighteen 164 @-@ millimeter ( 6 @.@ 5 in ) guns . Her career was limited , owing to the emergence of more modern ironclads and a severe reduction in the Italian naval budget following their defeat at the Battle of Lissa in 1866 . She was discarded in 1875 and sold to ship breakers to help pay for new ironclads then under construction . 
 = = Design = = 
 Messina was 72 @.@ 8 meters ( 239 ft ) long between perpendiculars ; she had a beam of 15 @.@ 1 m ( 50 ft ) and an average draft of 7 @.@ 27 m ( 23 @.@ 9 ft ) . She displaced 3 @,@ 868 metric tons ( 3 @,@ 807 long tons ; 4 @,@ 264 short tons ) normally and up to 4 @,@ 245 t ( 4 @,@ 178 long tons ; 4 @,@ 679 short tons ) at full load . She had a crew of 572 . Her propulsion system consisted of one single @-@ expansion steam engine that drove a single screw propeller , with steam supplied by six coal @-@ fired , cylindrical fire @-@ tube boilers . Her engine produced a top speed of 11 @.@ 4 knots ( 21 @.@ 1 km / h ; 13 @.@ 1 mph ) from 1 @,@ 968 indicated horsepower ( 1 @,@ 468 kW ) , making her the fastest member of her class . She could steam for about 1 @,@ 200 nautical miles ( 2 @,@ 200 km ; 1 @,@ 400 mi ) at a speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . To supplement her steam engine , the ship was barque @-@ rigged . 
 Messina was a broadside ironclad , and she was armed with a main battery of four 72 @-@ pounder 8 in ( 200 mm ) guns and eighteen 164 mm ( 6 @.@ 5 in ) rifled muzzle @-@ loading guns . The ship was equipped with a spur @-@ shaped ram at the bow . The ship 's hull was sheathed with wrought iron armor that was 4 @.@ 75 in ( 121 mm ) thick . 
 = = Service history = = 
 Messina was laid down at the Regio Cantiere di Castellammare di Stabia ( Royal Dockyard in Castellammare di Stabia ) on 28 September 1861 . She was launched on 20 December 1864 and completed in February 1867 . This was too late to see action during the Third Italian War of Independence , which had ended the previous August ; Principe di Carignano was the only member of her class to have been completed in time for the war . The conflict nevertheless had a significant effect on Messina 's career . The government lost confidence in the fleet after the defeat at the Battle of Lissa and drastically reduced the naval budget . The cuts were so severe that the fleet had great difficulty in mobilizing its ironclad squadron to attack the port of Civitavecchia in September 1870 , as part of the wars of Italian unification . Instead , the ships were laid up and the sailors conscripted to man them were sent home . In addition , Messina was rapidly surpassed first by central battery and then turret ships , which rendered the first generation of ironclads with traditional broadside obsolete . As a result , Messina was not used in any significant way in her ten years in service . 
 In around 1870 , the ship 's armament was revised to six 10 in ( 250 mm ) guns , four 8 in guns , and eight 164 mm guns . In 1880 , the Navy struck Messina from the list of ships and broke her up for scrap . The Navy discarded both of her sisters , along with the ironclad Re di Portogallo between 1875 and 1880 to remove the cost of maintaining them from the naval budget , as part of an effort to reduce the financial impact of the new Caio Duilio and Italia @-@ classes then under construction . 
 = Tate Forcier = 
 Robert Patrick " Tate " Forcier ( born August 7 , 1990 ) is an American football quarterback who is currently a free agent . He most recently attended training camp with the Hamilton Tiger @-@ Cats of the Canadian Football League . He was a starting quarterback for the 2009 Michigan Wolverines football team ahead of Denard Robinson , and Robinson 's back up for the 2010 Michigan Wolverines football team before he lost the starting job and left the program in January 2011 when head coach Rich Rodriguez was replaced by Brady Hoke . He missed the January 1 , 2011 Gator Bowl after being ruled academically ineligible and was no longer enrolled at the university when the new term began following the semester break . On February 9 , 2011 , Forcier announced his transfer to the University of Miami . He originally intended to redshirt the 2011 season and play for the Miami Hurricanes football team in the 2012 and 2013 season but instead transferred to San Jose State University to play for the Spartans football team . He soon withdrew from the San Jose State football program . 
 Forcier is from a family of quarterbacks with two older brothers who played Pacific @-@ 10 Conference football and a father who also played quarterback in college . His oldest brother , Jason , played briefly for Michigan before transferring to Stanford University . Following in the footsteps of his brothers and father , Forcier has been a quarterback since his Junior <unk> Pop Warner Football days . 
 = = Youth career = = 
 Forcier began working with athletic training guru Marv Marinovich as a third @-@ grader . In 2001 , Forcier quarterbacked the Carlsbad Charging Lancers to the four @-@ team National Pop Warner Football Championship at the Disney 's Wide World of Sports Complex in Orlando , Florida in the Junior <unk> division . On December 5 , Carlsbad defeated the Dorchester ( Boston , Massachusetts ) 15 – 12 in the national semifinals . Then Carlsbad lost to the Oak Grove Rage ( San Jose , California ) 34 – 6 on December 9 . 
 The youngest and smallest of three quarterback brothers , Tate , whose real name is Robert , acquired his nickname from the movie Little Man Tate . While he was in middle school , the family moved 60 miles ( 97 km ) from San Diego to San Clemente , after football powerhouse Mater Dei High School , which is Matt Leinart 's alma mater , recruited his oldest brother , Jason . Meanwhile , the family ran the San Diego Bus and Limousine Company , the family business in San Diego . With the parents commuting Robert was often on his own as the little man of the house . The lack of academic attention left Tate with poor study skills and by his sophomore year he had to enroll at Charter School of San Diego . 
 = = = High school = = = 
 As a freshman he and his brother Chris , who was then a junior , played high school football for St. Augustine High School , but Tate was expelled as a sophomore . During his sophomore year Forcier began attending high school at the Charter School of San Diego , which did not have a football team , making him eligible to play for Scripps Ranch High School , where he completed 529 @-@ of @-@ 760 passes ( 69 @.@ 6 <unk> . ) for 7 @,@ 448 yards and 61 touchdowns in his career . As a sophomore , he and Chris were opposing quarterbacks for a game . That season , Tate led his team to the San Diego Section Division II playoffs , and <unk> named him to the state All @-@ sophomore team . As a junior , he led his team back to the San Diego Section Division II playoffs where they won their first game . <unk> named him to the state All @-@ junior team . While he was in high school , he visited his brother Jason at Michigan about a half dozen times and got to know many of the players . 
 During May 2008 , which was prior to his senior season , he was a nominee to play in the January 3 , 2009 U.S. Army All @-@ American Bowl at the Alamodome . That June , The Oklahoman described him as " a San Diego quarterback who holds [ scholarship ] offers from just about everyone " . He made news by posting his Oregon Ducks football scholarship letter from Mike Bellotti as well as other letters on his <unk> website . The text of the Bellotti letter that was on his website said that the " offer is made in good faith , " but that , " If this offer is not accepted by a date which is agreeable to us , the agreement may have to be altered with additional scholarships . " He is considered the first high school football player to post his scholarship offer letters on the internet . Over 25 scanned letters were included . Later in June , he was among the highest scorers at the Elite 11 regional camp attended by the likes of Nick Montana ( son of Joe Montana ) and Jack Lomax ( son of Neil Lomax ) . In August , he was listed on the ESPNU 150 Class of 2009 football prospect list as well as the SuperPrep preseason All @-@ America team . He was regarded as one of the top five dual @-@ threat quarterback recruits of the 2009 class . On August 30 , 2008 , he attended the game between the Michigan Wolverines and the Utah Utes , and he became the 17th verbal commitment on August 31 . After a junior season with a 77 % pass completion rate , Rivals.com ranked him as the most accurate passer in the nation , and as he entered his Division II semifinal playoff game , he was the nation 's leader in passing yards . Although his team lost in the San Diego Section Division II semifinals , he finished the season as a third team all @-@ state selection by Cal @-@ Hi Sports . 
 = = College career = = 
 = = = Michigan = = = 
 = = = = 2009 season = = = = 
 Forcier , at the encouragement of his brother , Jason , enrolled early during the winter 2009 semester at the University of Michigan . He was one of seven 2009 recruits to enroll early , according to the university directory , along with Vladimir <unk> , Brandin Hawthorne , Vincent Smith , Anthony LaLota and Michael Jones who began classes on January 7 and William Campbell , who was expected to join them soon thereafter . Forcier was awarded the starting job before Michigan 's season opener against Western Michigan , becoming only the third true freshman to start a season opener at quarterback for Michigan . He eventually became the regular starting quarterback . After his first season , he was named part of the All @-@ Freshman Big Ten team . Tate 's freshman year started 4 – 0 before ending the season 5 – 7 overall . 
 = = = = 2010 season = = = = 
 Though Forcier started each game in the 2009 season , he was a member of the second @-@ string offense during the annual Michigan Spring Game . Fellow sophomore quarterback , Denard Robinson , started in place of Forcier on the first @-@ team offense . On September 4 , 2010 , he began the season third on the quarterback depth chart , behind Robinson and true freshman Devin Gardner . 
 On September 25 , while playing against Bowling Green , Forcier set a Michigan record for pass completion percentage ( with a minimum of 10 attempts ) by throwing a perfect 12 for 12 . In Michigan 's 67 – 65 triple overtime victory over Illinois on November 6 , Forcier led the team to a game @-@ tying fourth @-@ quarter touchdown drive and three overtime touchdown @-@ scoring drives , including a pass for the game @-@ winning two @-@ point conversion . The game gave Michigan its sixth victory , clinching bowl game eligibility . 
 Forcier was deemed academically ineligible for the January 1 , 2011 Progressive Gator Bowl . 
 = = = Transfer = = = 
 In athletic director David Brandon 's announcement of the University of Michigan 's new head football coach , Brady Hoke , it was also reported that Forcier was no longer with the program . On January 20 , 2011 , Forcier announced in a press release issued over Twitter that he intended to transfer . He did not identify the school to which he intended to transfer . His initial list of schools included FBS schools Miami , Washington , Baylor , San Diego State , Middle Tennessee State and New Mexico as well as lower division schools such as Montana , South Carolina State and Florida A & M. On February 9 , Forcier announced that he would be transferring to the University of Miami after narrowing his list to Kansas State , Washington , Arizona , Miami and Montana . In May 2011 , sources reported that he would not be transferring to Miami . Although he had signed a financial aid agreement , he never matriculated at the university . By July , he was considering the Hawaii Warriors football team and planned a visit . 
 = = = San Jose State = = = 
 On July 26 , 2011 , Forcier announced that he had committed to play football at San Jose State University and would have been eligible to play there in 2012 . On January 9 , 2012 , however , Forcier withdrew from the San Jose State football program . Although he was expected to be the starting quarterback for the 2012 Spartans , academics played a role in his leaving the program . 
 = = = Statistics = = = 
 = = Professional career = = 
 = = = Hamilton Tiger @-@ Cats = = = 
 On May 17 , 2012 , it was announced that Forcier had signed with the Hamilton Tiger @-@ Cats . On June 15 , 2012 , he was released by the Tiger @-@ Cats . 
 = = Family = = 
 Forcier 's oldest brother , Jason , redshirted in 2005 , and was the backup quarterback behind Chad Henne in 2006 at Michigan before transferring in May 2007 to play for Stanford during the 2008 season . Jason , a graduate student at the time of his youngest brother 's Michigan enrollment , was Tate 's first year roommate . Tate 's other brother , Chris , transferred from UCLA to Furman University in 2009 after Rick Neuheisel took over as head coach at UCLA and recruited Kevin Craft to be his starting quarterback . Chris had run the UCLA scout team as a redshirt , but lost the starting quarterback battle . The Forcier brothers ' parents , Mike and Sue Forcier , are both lifelong Michigan Wolverines fans . They work for the San Diego Limo Buses , which is a family owned bus and limousine company . Mike was once a quarterback with modest achievements at San Diego City College and the University of San Diego . 
 = Genetic code = 
 The genetic code is the set of rules by which information encoded within genetic material ( DNA or mRNA sequences ) is translated into proteins by living cells . Translation is accomplished by the ribosome , which links amino acids in an order specified by mRNA , using transfer RNA ( tRNA ) molecules to carry amino acids and to read the mRNA three nucleotides at a time . The genetic code is highly similar among all organisms and can be expressed in a simple table with 64 entries . 
 The code defines how sequences of nucleotide triplets , called codons , specify which amino acid will be added next during protein synthesis . With some exceptions , a three @-@ nucleotide codon in a nucleic acid sequence specifies a single amino acid . Because the vast majority of genes are encoded with exactly the same code ( see the RNA codon table ) , this particular code is often referred to as the canonical or standard genetic code , or simply the genetic code , though in fact some variant codes have evolved . For example , protein synthesis in human mitochondria relies on a genetic code that differs from the standard genetic code . 
 While the " genetic code " determines a protein 's amino acid sequence , other genomic regions determine when and where these proteins are produced according to a multitude of more complex " gene regulatory codes " . 
 = = Discovery = = 
 Serious efforts to understand how proteins are encoded began after the structure of DNA was discovered in 1953 . George Gamow postulated that sets of three bases must be employed to encode the 20 standard amino acids used by living cells to build proteins . With four different nucleotides , a code of 2 nucleotides would allow for only a maximum of 42 
 = 16 amino acids . A code of 3 nucleotides could code for a maximum of 43 = 
 64 amino acids . 
 The Crick , Brenner et al. experiment first demonstrated that codons consist of three DNA bases ; Marshall Nirenberg and Heinrich J. Matthaei were the first to elucidate the nature of a codon in 1961 at the National Institutes of Health . They used a cell @-@ free system to translate a poly @-@ uracil RNA sequence ( i.e. , <unk> ... ) and discovered that the polypeptide that they had synthesized consisted of only the amino acid phenylalanine . They thereby deduced that the codon <unk> specified the amino acid phenylalanine . This was followed by experiments in Severo Ochoa 's laboratory that demonstrated that the poly @-@ adenine RNA sequence ( AAAAA ... ) coded for the polypeptide poly @-@ lysine and that the poly @-@ cytosine RNA sequence ( <unk> ... ) coded for the polypeptide poly @-@ proline . Therefore , the codon AAA specified the amino acid lysine , and the codon CCC specified the amino acid proline . Using different copolymers most of the remaining codons were then determined . Subsequent work by Har Gobind Khorana identified the rest of the genetic code . Shortly thereafter , Robert W. Holley determined the structure of transfer RNA ( tRNA ) , the adapter molecule that facilitates the process of translating RNA into protein . This work was based upon earlier studies by Severo Ochoa , who received the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine in 1959 for his work on the enzymology of RNA synthesis . 
 Extending this work , Nirenberg and Philip Leder revealed the triplet nature of the genetic code and deciphered the codons of the standard genetic code . In these experiments , various combinations of mRNA were passed through a filter that contained ribosomes , the components of cells that translate RNA into protein . Unique triplets promoted the binding of specific tRNAs to the ribosome . Leder and Nirenberg were able to determine the sequences of 54 out of 64 codons in their experiments . In 1968 , Khorana , Holley and Nirenberg received the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine for their work . 
 = = Features = = 
 = = = Reading frame = = = 
 A codon is defined by the initial nucleotide from which translation starts and sets the frame for a run of uninterrupted triplets , which is known as an " open reading frame " ( ORF ) . For example , the string <unk> , if read from the first position , contains the codons GGG , AAA , and CCC ; and , if read from the second position , it contains the codons <unk> and AAC ; if read starting from the third position , GAA and ACC . Every sequence can , thus , be read in its 5 ' → 3 ' direction in three reading frames , each of which will produce a different amino acid sequence ( in the given example , <unk> @-@ Lys @-@ Pro , <unk> @-@ <unk> , or Glu @-@ Thr , respectively ) . With double @-@ stranded DNA , there are six possible reading frames , three in the forward orientation on one strand and three reverse on the opposite strand . The actual frame from which a protein sequence is translated is defined by a start codon , usually the first AUG codon in the mRNA sequence . 
 In eukaryotes , <unk> in exons are often interrupted by introns . 
 = = = Start / stop codons = = = 
 Translation starts with a chain initiation codon or start codon . Unlike stop codons , the codon alone is not sufficient to begin the process . Nearby sequences such as the Shine @-@ Dalgarno sequence in E. coli and initiation factors are also required to start translation . The most common start codon is AUG , which is read as methionine or , in bacteria , as formylmethionine . Alternative start codons depending on the organism include " <unk> " or " UUG " ; these codons normally represent valine and leucine , respectively , but as start codons they are translated as methionine or formylmethionine . 
 The three stop codons have been given names : UAG is amber , UGA is opal ( sometimes also called umber ) , and UAA is ochre . " Amber " was named by discoverers Richard Epstein and Charles Steinberg after their friend Harris Bernstein , whose last name means " amber " in German . The other two stop codons were named " ochre " and " opal " in order to keep the " color names " theme . Stop codons are also called " termination " or " nonsense " codons . They signal release of the nascent polypeptide from the ribosome because there is no cognate tRNA that has <unk> complementary to these stop signals , and so a release factor binds to the ribosome instead . 
 = = = Effect of mutations = = = 
 During the process of DNA replication , errors occasionally occur in the polymerization of the second strand . These errors , called mutations , can affect the phenotype of an organism , especially if they occur within the protein coding sequence of a gene . Error rates are usually very low — 1 error in every 10 – 100 million bases — due to the " proofreading " ability of DNA polymerases . 
 Missense mutations and nonsense mutations are examples of point mutations , which can cause genetic diseases such as sickle @-@ cell disease and <unk> respectively . Clinically important missense mutations generally change the properties of the coded amino acid residue between being basic , acidic , polar or non @-@ polar , whereas nonsense mutations result in a stop codon . 
 Mutations that disrupt the reading frame sequence by indels ( insertions or deletions ) of a non @-@ multiple of 3 nucleotide bases are known as frameshift mutations . These mutations usually result in a completely different translation from the original , and are also very likely to cause a stop codon to be read , which truncates the creation of the protein . These mutations may impair the function of the resulting protein , and are thus rare in in vivo protein @-@ coding sequences . One reason inheritance of frameshift mutations is rare is that , if the protein being translated is essential for growth under the selective pressures the organism faces , absence of a functional protein may cause death before the organism is viable . <unk> mutations may result in severe genetic diseases such as Tay @-@ Sachs disease . 
 Although most mutations that change protein sequences are harmful or neutral , some mutations have a beneficial effect on an organism . These mutations may enable the mutant organism to withstand particular environmental stresses better than wild type organisms , or reproduce more quickly . In these cases a mutation will tend to become more common in a population through natural selection . Viruses that use RNA as their genetic material have rapid mutation rates , which can be an advantage , since these viruses will evolve constantly and rapidly , and thus evade the defensive responses of e.g. the human immune system . In large populations of asexually reproducing organisms , for example , E. coli , multiple beneficial mutations may co @-@ occur . This phenomenon is called clonal interference and causes competition among the mutations . 
 = = = Degeneracy = = = 
 Degeneracy is the redundancy of the genetic code . This term was given by <unk> and Nirenberg . The genetic code has redundancy but no ambiguity ( see the codon tables below for the full correlation ) . For example , although codons GAA and <unk> both specify glutamic acid ( redundancy ) , neither of them specifies any other amino acid ( no ambiguity ) . The codons encoding one amino acid may differ in any of their three positions . For example , the amino acid leucine is specified by <unk> or <unk> ( <unk> , UUG , <unk> , CUC , CUA , or CUG ) codons ( difference in the first or third position indicated using IUPAC notation ) , while the amino acid serine is specified by <unk> or <unk> ( <unk> , UCG , UCC , <unk> , <unk> , or AGC ) codons ( difference in the first , second , or third position ) . A practical consequence of redundancy is that errors in the third position of the triplet codon cause only a silent mutation or an error that would not affect the protein because the hydrophilicity or hydrophobicity is maintained by equivalent substitution of amino acids ; for example , a codon of <unk> ( where N 
 = any nucleotide ) tends to code for hydrophobic amino acids . <unk> yields amino acid residues that are small in size and moderate in hydropathy ; <unk> encodes average size hydrophilic residues . The genetic code is so well @-@ structured for hydropathy that a mathematical analysis ( Singular Value Decomposition ) of 12 variables ( 4 nucleotides x 3 positions ) yields a remarkable correlation ( C = 
 0 @.@ 95 ) for predicting the hydropathy of the encoded amino acid directly from the triplet nucleotide sequence , without translation . Note in the table , below , eight amino acids are not affected at all by mutations at the third position of the codon , whereas in the figure above , a mutation at the second position is likely to cause a radical change in the physicochemical properties of the encoded amino acid . 
 = = = Codon usage bias = = = 
 The frequency of codons , also known as " codon usage bias " , can vary from species to species with functional implications for the control of translation . The following codon usage table is for the human genome . 
 Human genome codon frequency : 
 = = = Variation = = = 
 While slight variations on the standard code had been predicted earlier , none were discovered until 1979 , when researchers studying human mitochondrial genes discovered they used an alternative code . Many slight variants have been discovered since then , including various alternative mitochondrial codes , and small variants such as translation of the codon UGA as tryptophan in Mycoplasma species , and translation of CUG as a serine rather than a leucine in yeasts of the " <unk> clade " ( Candida albicans is member of this group ) . Because viruses must use the same genetic code as their hosts , modifications to the standard genetic code could interfere with the synthesis or functioning of viral proteins . However , some viruses ( such as <unk> ) have adapted to the genetic code modification of the host . In bacteria and archaea , <unk> and UUG are common start codons , but in rare cases , certain proteins may use alternative start codons not normally used by that species . 
 In certain proteins , non @-@ standard amino acids are substituted for standard stop codons , depending on associated signal sequences in the messenger RNA . For example , UGA can code for selenocysteine and UAG can code for pyrrolysine . Selenocysteine is now viewed as the 21st amino acid , and pyrrolysine is viewed as the 22nd . Unlike selenocysteine , pyrrolysine encoded UAG is translated with the participation of a dedicated aminoacyl @-@ tRNA synthetase . Both selenocysteine and pyrrolysine may be present in the same organism . Although the genetic code is normally fixed in an organism , the <unk> prokaryote <unk> <unk> can expand its genetic code from 20 to 21 amino acids ( by including pyrrolysine ) under different conditions of growth . 
 Despite these differences , all known naturally @-@ occurring codes are very similar to each other , and the coding mechanism is the same for all organisms : three @-@ base codons , tRNA , ribosomes , reading the code in the same direction and translating the code three letters at a time into sequences of amino acids . 
 Variant genetic codes used by an organism can be inferred by identifying highly conserved genes encoded in that genome , and comparing its codon usage to the amino acids in homologous proteins of other organisms . For example , the program <unk> infers a genetic code by searching which amino acids in homologous protein domains are most often aligned to every codon . The resulting amino acid probabilities for each codon are displayed in a genetic code logo , that also shows the support for a stop codon . 
 = = RNA codon table = = 
 A The codon AUG both codes for methionine and serves as an initiation site : the first AUG in an mRNA 's coding region is where translation into protein begins . 
 = = DNA codon table = = 
 The DNA codon table is essentially identical to that for RNA , but with U replaced by T. 
 = = Origin = = 
 The origin of the genetic code is a part of the question of the origin of life . Under the main hypothesis for the origin of life , the RNA world hypothesis , any model for the emergence of genetic code is intimately related to a model of the transfer from ribozymes ( RNA enzymes ) to proteins as the principal enzymes in cells . In line with the RNA world hypothesis , transfer RNA molecules appear to have evolved before modern aminoacyl @-@ tRNA synthetases , so the latter cannot be part of the explanation of its patterns . 
 A consideration of a hypothetical random genetic code further motivates a biochemical or evolutionary model for the origin of the genetic code . If amino acids were randomly assigned to triplet codons , there would be 1 @.@ 5 × 1084 possible genetic codes to choose from . This number is found by calculating how many ways there are to place 21 items ( 20 amino acids plus one stop ) in 64 bins , wherein each item is used at least once . [ 2 ] In fact , the distribution of codon assignments in the genetic code is <unk> . In particular , the genetic code clusters certain amino acid assignments . For example , amino acids that share the same biosynthetic pathway tend to have the same first base in their codons . This could be an evolutionary relic of early simpler genetic code with fewer amino acids , that later diverged to code for a larger set of amino acids . It could also reflect steric and chemical properties that had and other effect on the codon during its evolution . Amino acids with similar physical properties also tend to have similar codons , reducing the problems caused by point mutations and mistranslations . 
 Given the non @-@ random genetic triplet coding scheme , it has been suggested that a tenable hypothesis for the origin of genetic code should address multiple aspects of the codon table such as absence of codons for D @-@ amino acids , secondary codon patterns for some amino acids , secondary codon patterns for some amino acids , confinement of synonymous positions to third position , a limited set of only 20 amino acids instead of a number closer to 64 , and the relation of stop codon patterns to amino acid coding patterns . 
 There are three main ideas for the origin of the genetic code , and many models belong to either one of them or to a combination thereof : 
 " Frozen accident " : the genetic code has been randomly created . For example , early tRNA @-@ like ribozymes may have had different affinities for amino acids , with codons emerging from another part of the ribozyme which exhibited random variability . Once enough peptides were coded for , any major random change in the genetic code would have been lethal , hence it is " frozen " . 
 <unk> affinity : the genetic code is a result of a high affinity between each amino acid and its codon or anti @-@ codon ; the latter option implies that pre @-@ tRNA molecules matched their corresponding amino acids by this affinity . Later during evolution , this matching has been gradually replaced with the one performed today by aminoacyl @-@ tRNA synthetases . 
 <unk> : the genetic code continued to evolve after its initial creation , so that the current code reflects adaptation that maximizes some fitness function , usually some kind of error minimization . 
 Hypotheses for the origin of the genetic code have addressed a variety of scenarios : 
 Chemical principles govern specific RNA interaction with amino acids . Experiments with <unk> showed that some amino acids have a selective chemical affinity for the base triplets that code for them . Recent experiments show that of the 8 amino acids tested , 6 show some RNA triplet @-@ amino acid association . 
 <unk> expansion . The standard modern genetic code grew from a simpler earlier code through a process of " biosynthetic expansion " . Here the idea is that primordial life " discovered " new amino acids ( for example , as by @-@ products of metabolism ) and later incorporated some of these into the machinery of genetic coding . Although much circumstantial evidence has been found to suggest that fewer different amino acids were used in the past than today , precise and detailed hypotheses about which amino acids entered the code in what order have proved far more controversial . 
 Natural selection has led to codon assignments of the genetic code that minimize the effects of mutations . A recent hypothesis suggests that the triplet code was derived from codes that used longer than triplet codons ( such as <unk> codons ) . Longer than triplet decoding would have higher degree of codon redundancy and would be more error resistant than the triplet decoding . This feature could allow accurate decoding in the absence of highly complex translational machinery such as the ribosome and before cells began making ribosomes . 
 Information channels : Information @-@ theoretic approaches model the process of translating the genetic code into corresponding amino acids as an error @-@ prone information channel . The inherent noise ( that is , the error ) in the channel poses the organism with a fundamental question : how can a genetic code be constructed to withstand the effect of noise while accurately and efficiently translating information ? These “ rate @-@ distortion ” models suggest that the genetic code originated as a result of the interplay of the three conflicting evolutionary forces : the needs for diverse amino @-@ acids , for error @-@ tolerance and for minimal cost of resources . The code emerges at a coding transition when the mapping of codons to amino @-@ acids becomes <unk> . The emergence of the code is governed by the topology defined by the probable errors and is related to the map coloring problem . 
 Game theory : Models based on signaling games combine elements of game theory , natural selection and information channels . Such models have been used to suggest that the first polypeptides were likely short and had some use other than enzymatic function . Game theoretic models have also suggested that the organization of RNA strings into cells may have been necessary to prevent " deceptive " use of the genetic code , i.e. preventing the ancient equivalent of viruses from overwhelming the RNA world . 
 Stop codons : <unk> for translational stops are also an interesting aspect to the problem of the origin of the genetic code . As an example for addressing stop codon evolution , it has been suggested that the stop codons are such that they are most likely to terminate translation early in the case of a frame shift error . In contrast , some <unk> molecular models explain the origin of stop codons as " <unk> " . 
 = = Expanded genetic codes ( synthetic biology ) = = 
 Since 2001 , 40 non @-@ natural amino acids have been added into protein by creating a unique codon ( recoding ) and a corresponding transfer @-@ RNA : aminoacyl – tRNA @-@ synthetase pair to encode it with diverse physicochemical and biological properties in order to be used as a tool to exploring protein structure and function or to create novel or enhanced proteins . 
 H. Murakami and M. <unk> have extended some codons to have four and five bases . Steven A. Benner constructed a functional 65th ( in vivo ) codon . 
 = 2008 AMP Energy 500 = 
 The 2008 AMP Energy 500 was the 30th stock car race of the 2008 NASCAR Sprint Cup Series and the fourth in the ten @-@ race , season @-@ ending Chase for the Sprint Cup . It was held on October 5 , 2008 at Talladega Superspeedway , in Talladega , Alabama before a crowd of 145 @,@ 000 . The 190 @-@ lap race was won by Tony Stewart of the Joe Gibbs Racing team after he started from 34th position ; Paul Menard finished second , David Ragan came in third . 
 Travis Kvapil , who had the pole position , held the lead until he was passed by Carl Edwards on lap nine . The race was first stopped 63 laps later when a multi @-@ car collision was triggered by Brian Vickers , and was restarted 17 minutes later , with Dale Earnhardt , Jr. leading the field . A second red @-@ flag period was triggered after Edwards ran into teammate Greg Biffle starting a chain @-@ reaction accident involving a further ten drivers . Stewart led the field for the remainder of the race , until Regan Smith passed him below the yellow line ( out of bounds line ) on the final lap . Stewart was therefore handed the victory , and Smith was demoted from second to 18th . The race had a total of ten cautions , and 64 lead changes among 28 different drivers , setting a new Sprint Cup Series record . 
 It was Stewart 's first victory of the season , his first at Talladega Superspeedway , and the 33rd of his career . The result advanced him to seventh in the Drivers ' Championship , 232 behind leader Jimmie Johnson who extended his lead to 72 points over Edwards . Toyota extended its lead in the Manufacturers ' Championship , twelve points ahead of Ford in second place . Chevrolet remained in third with a 41 @-@ point advantage over Dodge with six races left in the season . The race attracted 7 @.@ 44 million television viewers . 
 = = Report = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 The 2008 AMP Energy 500 was the 30th of 36 scheduled stock car races of the 2008 NASCAR Sprint Cup Series , and the fourth in the ten @-@ race season @-@ ending Chase for the Sprint Cup . It was held on October 5 , 2008 at Talladega , Alabama at Talladega Superspeedway , one of six superspeedways to hold NASCAR races ; the others are : Daytona International Speedway , Auto Club Speedway , Indianapolis Motor Speedway , Pocono Raceway and Michigan International Speedway . The standard track at the speedway is a four @-@ turn superspeedway that is 2 @.@ 66 miles ( 4 @.@ 28 km ) long . The track 's turns are banked at thirty @-@ three degrees , while the front stretch , the location of the finish line , is banked at 16 @.@ 5 degrees . The back stretch has a two @-@ degree banking . 
 Before the race , Jimmie Johnson led the Drivers ' Championship with 5 @,@ 575 points , with Carl Edwards in second , and Greg Biffle in third . Jeff Burton and Kevin Harvick rounded out the top five , and Jeff Gordon , Clint Bowyer , Dale Earnhardt , Jr . , Matt Kenseth , Denny Hamlin , Tony Stewart and Kyle Busch rounded out the top twelve drivers competing in the 2008 Chase for the Sprint Cup . In the Manufacturers ' Championship , Toyota was leading with 172 points , seven points ahead of their nearest rival Ford in second . Chevrolet was third with 159 points , with Dodge a further 39 points behind in fourth . Gordon was the race 's defending champion . 
 Second @-@ place championship driver Edwards said he expected the top three points leaders to remain together during the race , " I 'll probably be glued to Jimmie , no matter where he 's at . If him and Greg and I can just stay together , and make sure we either all avoid or either all get in the same wrecks , then we 'll probably be all right . " Earnhardt said he aimed to achieve his sixth victory at Talladega Superspeedway ( where he had a large amount of fan support ) in an effort to move ahead in the championship standings . Gordon , who had not won so far during 2008 , felt that he could win the race , and employed a strategy where he would attempt to avoid being caught up in a multi @-@ car collision . Johnson felt the AMP Energy 500 would be " interesting " and " a turning point in the chase " . 
 There were two changes of driver before the race . Red Bull Racing Team announced regular driver A.J. Allmendinger would be replaced by Mike Skinner who would drive at Talladega , and by former Scuderia Torro Rosso , Formula One driver Scott Speed who would drive in the seven remaining races of the season . Red Bull Racing vice president and general manager Jay Frye said this change would allow the Red Bull Racing Team to continue its development for the future . Kenny Wallace took over from Michael McDowell in the No. 00 Michael Waltrip Racing car at Talladega , because the team decided to regroup after he failed to qualify the previous race weekend at Kansas Speedway . Richard Childress Racing fielded a fourth car driven by Nationwide Series driver Mike Wallace . 
 = = = Practice and qualifying = = = 
 Two practice sessions were held before the Sunday race , both on Friday . The first practice session ran for 75 minutes , the second lasted 45 minutes . Burton was fastest in the first practice session with a time of 48 @.@ 887 seconds ; Elliott Sadler was second , and Brian Vickers third . Robby Gordon was fourth , and Harvick placed fifth . Kasey Kahne , Biffle , Jamie McMurray , Skinner and Ryan Newman rounded out the session 's top ten drivers . Earnhardt 's engine failed , and his team installed a new one . David Ragan did the same between the two practice sessions . Later that day , Vickers paced the final practice session ( where thirty @-@ seven drivers competed ) with a time of 49 @.@ 694 seconds , ahead of Kahne and Bobby Labonte . Casey Mears was fourth @-@ fastest , ahead of Harvick , Scott Riggs and David Gilliland . Earnhardt , a Chase for the Sprint Cup driver , was eighth , with Skinner and Stewart rounding out the top ten ahead of qualifying . Earnhardt 's right @-@ rear tire exploded while leading a pack of cars at the exit of turn two , nine minutes after the session started , beginning a chain @-@ reaction accident involving cars driven by Gilliland , Stewart , David Reutimann , Hamlin , Clint Bowyer and Kahne , resulting in the session being stopped for 30 minutes . No drivers were injured , but Earnhardt and Gilliland were checked at the infield medical center and later released . Earnhardt , Bowyer , Kahne , Gilliland and Reutimann switched to back @-@ up cars . 
 Although forty @-@ five cars were entered in the qualifier , according to NASCAR 's qualifying procedure , only forty @-@ three could race . Each driver ran two laps , with the starting order determined by the competitor 's fastest times . Travis Kvapil clinched the first pole position of his career with a time of 51 @.@ 109 seconds . He was joined on the grid 's front row by Mears in his best qualifying performance of the season . Aric Almirola qualified third , his Dale Earnhardt , Inc. teammate Regan Smith was fourth , and Paul Menard started fifth . Mike Wallace , Joe Nemechek , Tony Raines , Vickers and Martin Truex , Jr. rounded out the top ten qualifiers . Of the other drivers in the Chase , Edwards was twelfth , Burton 17th and Johnson 20th . The two drivers that failed to qualify were Sam Hornish , Jr. and Patrick Carpentier . After the qualifier Kvapil said , " Definitely qualifying doesn 't really mean much as far as your chances to win the race after 500 miles , but we got a good pit selection and we 'll have less chance to get caught up in a wreck early on in the race . It doesn 't take long to get shuffled to the back and I 'm sure I 'll be shuffled in and out throughout the field . But the first few laps we 'll be up front and hopefully keeping it clean . " He also stated the pole was " special " , and this was the first time Ford had occupied that position at Talladega Superspeedway since 1997 . 
 = = = Race = = = 
 Live television coverage of the race , began at 1 : 00 p.m. EST in the United States on ABC . At the start of the race , weather conditions were sunny . Fred Cook of Alabama Raceway Ministries began pre @-@ race ceremonies with an invocation . Brad Arnold , the lead singer of rock band 3 Doors Down performed the national anthem , and Pepsi employees Antonio Clements , John Foster , Richard Stuckey , Daniel Harris , Demetrius Blackmon , Reginald Thomas , Kenneth Goodwin , and Raymond Castleberry , who serve in the National Guard commanded the drivers to start their engines . During the pace laps , Earnhardt and Ragan moved to the rear of the field because they had changed their engines ; Johnson did the same because his team made adjustments to his engine outside of the impound . 
 The race started at 2 : 23 p.m. Kvapil maintained his pole position advantage on the first lap , as the field ran three and four abreast during the lap . Mike Wallace led the cars on the outside lane and challenged Kvapil for the lead on lap four , but was unable to get ahead . Edwards and Vickers drove on the outside lane to move to the front on lap nine , and the two exchanged the lead on the backstretch , before Edwards pulled clear of Vickers . Kvapil fell to seventh place by the same lap . Vickers regained the first position on the next lap , after Edwards drove down the track . On the 14th lap , Almirola and his teammate Menard gave each other assistance , and Almirola passed Vickers on the backstretch to take over the lead . Ragan , with assistance from Kvapil , passed Almirola for first place by taking the outside lane three laps later . After falling down the field earlier in the race , Gordon had moved back up to seventh by lap 18 . Earnhardt moved into the lead eight laps later , but Kvapil reclaimed the position on lap 30 , after receiving assistance from Gordon . Earnhardt retook the lead two laps later , and Johnson had moved to fourth after dropping down the field earlier in the race . Mike Wallace claimed the lead on lap 33 . The first caution was triggered on the next lap when debris was spotted on the track . Most of the leaders , including Mike Wallace , made pit stops for tires and car adjustments . 
 Gordon led on the lap @-@ 38 restart , followed by Truex and Burton . One lap later , Burton , with assistance from Johnson , passed Gordon for the lead . Kenseth claimed first position on lap 40 after driving on the outside lane . Vickers followed Johnson on the inside line to reclaim the lead on the following lap , before Sadler passed Vickers around the outside for the lead on the 44th lap . On lap 45 , Mears led after passing Sadler , and debris was located on the backstretch , triggering a second caution . All drivers , including Mears , elected to make pit stops . Sadler reclaimed first position and led the field back up to speed at the lap @-@ 49 restart , ahead of Mears and Kyle Busch . Hamlin and Kyle Busch led the cars driving on the outside lane , with Busch claiming the lead on lap 51 , pulling away from the rest of the field . Kurt Busch , with help from Vickers , got ahead of Kyle Busch to move into first place . 
 Jamie McMurray took the lead by the 53rd lap , when a third caution was deployed after Reutimann 's right @-@ rear tire blew on the backstretch , causing Gordon to take evasive action by turning right and heavily damaged the nose of his car when he collided with the outside wall . Reutimann 's tire broke Johnson 's front splitter brace . All drivers , including McMurray , chose to make pit stops . Vickers elected to stay on the track and led the field at the restart on lap 58 , ahead of Kvapil and Skinner . Two laps later , Hamlin used the draft to take over the lead , with Labonte moving into second . Kahne used the outside lane to claim first position , before Reed Sorenson also drove on the outside lane to claim first place on the next lap . The pack drove three abreast on lap 63 , as Truex moved into first place on the 64th lap . McMurray reclaimed the first position when he got ahead of Truex at the start @-@ finish line on lap 65 , and Kahne dropped to 26th position by the same lap . Truex retook the lead from McMurray at the start of the following lap , and Harvick moved into first on lap 67 . 
 Earnhardt moved back into the lead on lap 68 , when Vickers ' right @-@ front tire blew in the tri @-@ oval on the same lap , starting a multi @-@ car accident involving Gilliland , Truex , Kahne , Skinner , McMurray , Terry Labonte , Raines and Almirola . A fourth caution was triggered initially because of the accident before a red @-@ flag was shown shortly afterward to stop the race to allow officials to clear the track of debris . The race resumed seventeen minutes later as the field elected to make pit stops . Earnhardt led on the lap @-@ 72 restart , followed by Menard , Burton , Harvick and Montoya . By lap 74 , Montoya had the lead before Hamlin passed him at the start @-@ finish line to lead the lap . Johnson moved to the front of the field two laps later , before losing the lead to teammate Earnhardt on lap 78 as the pack ran three abreast at the start @-@ finish line . 
 Johnson moved back into the lead on lap 80 , after receiving assistance from Earnhardt , before losing it to Stewart around the inside two laps later after Stewart was helped by Mike Wallace . On the 81st lap , Mike Wallace 's right @-@ rear tire blew causing a fifth caution to be displayed ; Wallace regained control of his car but his tire struck Michael Waltrip 's car forcing him to pit for repairs . Most of the field , including Stewart , elected to make pit stops for tires and fuel . Kyle Busch gained the lead after the pit stops , and led the field back up to speed at the lap @-@ 86 restart , followed by Earnhardt . On lap 89 , Labonte led the outside lane after he was helped by Earnhardt . Hamlin , Earnhardt and Kenseth traded the first position over the next seven laps . Hamlin 's right @-@ front tire exploded in turn two on lap 98 and crashed heavily into the turn two outside wall , triggering a sixth caution . The leaders , including Kyle Busch , who took the lead before the caution , made pit stops for tires and fuel . 
 Hamlin was extracted from his car , and placed on a stretcher and transported to a local hospital for further evaluation . Riggs led the field back up to speed at the restart on lap 104 , ahead of Menard . On the following lap , Riggs lost the draft allowing Menard to move into the lead . The field went three abreast , as Menard lost the lead to Stewart on the 107th lap , but Menard reclaimed the position one lap later . Stewart retook the lead on lap 112 after he received assistance from Montoya . Burton challenged Stewart for the lead on lap 115 as both drivers ran side @-@ by @-@ side at the start @-@ finish line , before Burton moved in front of Stewart two laps later . Harvick moved back into the lead on lap 120 , after running on the inside lane . Harvick , Ragan and Stewart formed a single line , as the rest of the field ran in double @-@ file . 
 A seventh caution was triggered on lap 138 when Gordon had smoke and fluid coming out of his car , ending his race . Most of the field , including Harvick , elected to pit under caution . Edwards spun after he left pit road but avoided damage to his car . During the pit stop period , the record for the most leaders in a Sprint Cup Series race was broken when Nemechek led one lap ( the 27th race leader ) before pitting . Kyle Busch led on the lap @-@ 144 restart , followed by Ragan , Kvapil , Stewart and Johnson . Four laps later , Johnson dropped from fifth to the rear of the field , as part of a strategy to run at the rear until the race ended . Kyle Busch lost the draft on lap 151 , allowing Earnhardt to retake first place . Burton , with assistance from Richard Childress Racing teammates Bowyer , Harvick and Mike Wallace , moved back into the lead on lap 156 . Ragan took over the lead on lap 160 , after he was helped by Earnhardt . 
 Waltrip took over the lead on lap 163 , and an eighth caution was necessitated when Biffle made contact with Ragan , who hit Harvick , who spun heading into turn three but avoided hitting the barriers or other cars . Some drivers , including Waltrip , chose to pit for fresh tires and fuel during the caution . Montoya elected not to pit , and led the field at the restart on lap 169 . The top six drivers quickly began to pull away from the rest of the field , as Stewart ran fourth and Harvick 16th by lap 172 . Stewart and Montoya ran alongside each other at the line on lap 173 , before Stewart moved in front for the lead one lap later . On the same lap , a second multi @-@ car accident occurred necessitating a ninth caution when Edwards made contact with teammate Biffle going into turn three , and collected , Earnhardt , Harvick , Kyle Busch , Nemechek , Sorenson , Kenseth , Kvapil , <unk> , Dave Blaney and Montoya . The second red @-@ flag of the race was shown shortly afterward to allow officials to clear debris from the track . The race was restarted twelve minutes later , as some drivers made pit stops . 
 Stewart led the field back up to speed at the lap @-@ 178 restart , ahead of Nemechek and Sadler . Stewart and Nemechek pulled away from the rest of the field , but Nemechek lost the draft on the next lap and fell behind Sadler . The field formed into a single file , and remained this way until a tenth and final caution of the race was deployed because McMurray had his right @-@ rear tire go down on lap 185 . The race restarted on lap 188 , for a green @-@ white @-@ checker finish ( extending the race to 190 laps ) with Stewart leading Smith . The field again formed a single line , with most drivers remaining in that formation for the rest of the race . On the final lap , Smith passed Stewart on the frontstretch below the yellow line , and crossed the start @-@ finish line ahead of Stewart . NASCAR determined that Smith was out of track bounds , handing Stewart the victory with Smith provisionally in second . The race had a total of ten cautions and 64 lead changes by 28 drivers . Stewart led four different times for a total of 24 laps , more than any other competitor . 
 = = = Post @-@ race comments = = = 
 Stewart , who earned $ 270 @,@ 136 for the victory , appeared in victory lane to celebrate his first win of the season , and his first at Talladega Superspeedway , in front of a crowd of 145 @,@ 000 . He was delighted to take the victory : " It 's one thing to get back to Victory Lane , but to do it at Talladega wow . " " I 've wanted to win here for so long . This hasn 't been one of my favorite places on the fan side . People haven 't always liked me here . But this was for those guys up in the stands today . " Second @-@ place finisher Menard was pleased with his result , saying he had a good car throughout the duration of the race : " Car had speed in it all day . Didn 't make any chassis adjustments , just did a little bit of air pressure after the first run to free it up . It was just all track position really . " In the post @-@ race press conference , third @-@ place finisher Ragan said that he felt that he had a car which could have secured the victory under the right circumstances , but believed it was a good day for his team : " We always seem to be pretty fast here on the superspeedway track , so that just goes to show you how much effort our Roush Fenway team is putting into this program . " 
 NASCAR officials reviewed video evidence of Smith 's pass of Stewart on the final lap with Smith and Dale Earnhardt , Inc. president Max Siegel in attendance , and declared the manoeuvre illegal ; Smith was issued a pass @-@ through penalty which dropped him from second to 18th . Smith argued that he was forced down below the yellow line : " I was always told that the rule is if you get forced down there , then you are the winner of the race , and on the last lap , anything goes . That ’ s what I was going with . I had a nose inside of him and I could have piled up the whole field . " Ninth @-@ place finisher Johnson said there were rumors that drivers were allowed to go below the yellow line on the last lap of the previous day 's Craftsman Truck Series race which were circulated on the day of the AMP Energy 500 : " I didn ’ t know what to really think about it , or understood it , or had seen it . It ’ s ironic how it played out today . ” 
 NASCAR spokesperson Jim Hunter however insisted Smith was not forced below the yellow line , and stated drivers were warned beforehand in the pre @-@ race drivers ' meeting about gaining a position illegally . Earnhardt felt Smith deserved to win the race , saying there was a lack of clarity over what going below the yellow line meant . Smith stated he did not ask for clarification of the rule because of his low @-@ profile status . NASCAR president Mike Helton stated that race officials had correctly awarded the penalty to Smith , and clarified that no driver would be allowed to advance their position by going below the yellow line at any time during a race . Similarities were also made between Smith 's overtake , and Earnhardt 's pass of Kenseth below the yellow line at Talladega at the 2003 Aaron 's 499 . 
 Hamlin was kept in hospital overnight for further evaluation , but complained of a headache and favored his right foot after exiting his car . His crew chief Mike Ford revealed Hamlin 's right @-@ rear tire had been cut on the run before his crash which Hamlin later attributed to running over debris on track . Vickers described his right @-@ front tire failure saying : " It sounded like a bomb exploded . " Goodyear 's product manager Rick Heinrich said the tires used in the race were the same from the Aaron 's 499 , and conducted an analysis of the tire failures at their plant in Akron , Ohio . Edwards admitted he was at fault for causing the crash between himself and teammate Biffle on lap 174 , and apologized to the drivers caught up in the incident . Biffle revealed he was unable to steer his Ford away from the incident . 
 The result kept Johnson in the lead of the Drivers ' Championship , seventy @-@ two points ahead of Edwards . Biffle and Burton maintained third and fourth positions , while Bowyer moved up to fifth . Harvick moved up into sixth , with Stewart 's victory advancing him from eleventh to seventh place . Gordon , Kenseth , Earnhardt , Kyle Busch and Hamlin rounded out the top twelve . In the Manufacturers ' Championship , Toyota extended their lead over Ford to twelve points . Chevrolet remained in third with 165 , 41 points ahead of Dodge . The race attracted a television audience of 7 @.@ 44 million people . It took three hours , thirty @-@ six minutes and ten seconds to complete the event , and the margin of victory was 0 @.@ 052 seconds . 
 = = Results = = 
 = = = Qualifying = = = 
 = = = Race = = = 
 = = Standings after the race = = 
 = Parson Street railway station = 
 Parson Street railway station serves the western end of Bedminster in Bristol , England . It also serves other surrounding suburbs including Bishopsworth , Ashton Vale and Ashton Gate , along with Bristol City FC . It is 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) from Bristol Temple Meads , and 120 miles ( 193 km ) from London Paddington . Its three letter station code is PSN . It was opened in 1927 by the Great Western Railway , and was rebuilt in 1933 . The station , which has two through @-@ lines and two platforms , plus one freight line for traffic on the Portishead Branch Line , has minimal facilities . As of 2012 , it is managed by Great Western Railway , which is the sixth company to be responsible for the station , and the third franchise since privatisation in 1997 . They provide all train services at the station , mainly an hourly service between Bristol Parkway and Weston @-@ super @-@ Mare . 
 There is local support for the line to be electrified , as an extension of the planned electrification of the London to Bristol route , and the level of service will be increased by two trains per hour between Portishead and Bristol when the Portishead Branch Line reopens to passengers in 2019 . 
 = = Description = = 
 The station is built in a cutting in the western end of Bedminster , on the Bristol to Exeter Line 120 miles 16 chains ( 193 @.@ 44 km ) from London Paddington and 1 mile 65 chains ( 2 @.@ 92 km ) from Bristol Temple Meads . It is the second station along the line from Bristol Temple Meads . The surrounding area is mostly residential , with some industrial buildings to the north @-@ east . There are two island platforms , each 210 yards ( 190 m ) long , but only the first 100 yards ( 91 m ) are in use , the rest fenced off . The platforms are on an alignment of roughly 60 degrees , with a slight curve . The southern island 's northern face , platform 1 , is for westbound trains ; and the southern face of the northern island , platform 2 , is for eastbound trains . The track on the southern side of the southern island has been removed , while the track to the northern side of the northern island is only accessible to trains to or from the Portishead Branch Line and Liberty Lane Freightliner terminal – no passenger trains use this . The speed limit through the station is 90 miles per hour ( 140 km / h ) on the main lines and 25 miles per hour ( 40 km / h ) on the freight line . 
 The station is surrounded on all sides by the A38 road , which splits the carriageways at this point , with the station in between . The line runs under the road at both ends of the station . Access between the platforms is via steps to the A38 at the east end of the platforms . There is no disabled access . 
 Facilities at the station are minimal – there is a metal and glass shelter on each of the two islands as well as on the bridge . The station is completely unstaffed , and there are no facilities for buying tickets . There are customer help points , giving next train information for both platforms . There is no car park or taxi rank , nor is there any cycle storage available . There are several bus stops nearby . 
 Just to the west of the station is Parson Street Junction , where the Portishead Branch diverges from the main line , heading north . The South Liberty Lane goods depot is adjacent to the junction , in the triangle between the main line , the Portishead Branch and the now @-@ disused western connection between the branch and the main line . 
 = = Services = = 
 The station is managed by Great Western Railway , who also operate all rail services from the station . As of the December 2011 timetable , the basic service from Monday to Friday consists of one train in each direction per hour , between Bristol Parkway and Weston @-@ super @-@ Mare , calling at all stations . Some trains working between Cardiff and Taunton or Exeter St Davids call at peak hours and in the evening . All trains at Parson Street also stop at Nailsea and Backwell westbound and Bedminster eastbound . On Saturday there is a similar pattern , but with no services beyond Bristol Parkway or Weston @-@ super @-@ Mare except during the early morning and late evening . Sunday sees a reduced service , with only three trains westbound and two eastbound , all after 4pm . 
 Services are formed by a mix of Class 150 , 153 and 158 diesel multiple @-@ unit trains . Until 2012 , Class 143 Pacer units were a regular sight , but these have mostly been moved south to work in Devon and Cornwall following a cascade of Class 150 / 1 units from London Midland and London Overground . CrossCountry services between Scotland and the South West pass non @-@ stop throughout the day , with Great Western Railway services between London Paddington and Weston @-@ super @-@ Mare passing through during the morning and evening peaks . 
 The typical journey time to Bristol Temple Meads is 7 minutes , while to Weston @-@ super @-@ Mare takes 31 minutes . 
 The adjacent bus stop is served by the First Bristol number 76 bus , between Hengrove and Henbury . 
 = = History = = 
 The first section of the Bristol and Exeter Railway 's main line opened on 14 June 1841 between Bristol and Bridgwater . Engineered by Isambard Kingdom Brunel , the line was originally built as 7 ft ( 2 @,@ 134 mm ) broad @-@ gauge , but had been reconstructed as a mixed gauge line to accommodate local 4 ft 8 1 ⁄ 2 in ( 1 @,@ 435 mm ) -gauge traffic by 1 June 1875 . Broad gauge trains ceased operation on 20 May 1892 . The Portishead Branch Line , which diverged from the Bristol to Exeter Line at Parson Street Junction , the other side of a road bridge west of where the station would be built , had opened on 12 July 1867 . It was only in 1871 , with the opening of a station at Bedminster that there was a stop between the junction and Bristol Temple Meads . 
 As Bristol expanded in the early 20th century , the need for a new station to serve the outskirts grew , and on 29 August 1927 , the Great Western Railway opened a station at Parson Street , named Parson Street Halt . There were two platforms , one on each side of the two running lines . There was a wooden shelter on the westbound platform , and a metal shelter on the eastbound platform . The platforms were made of wood , with access from the main road via steps . No goods facilities were provided . 
 The station was rebuilt in the early 1930s to cope with the relaying of the line west from Temple Meads with four tracks instead of two . Considerable engineering works were needed to cope with the widening of the station , including the removal of a short tunnel to the west of the station . The two new island platforms opened on 21 May 1933 , and the station name was changed to simply Parson Street in November 1933 . The new station included covered waiting shelters , and a booking office on the road bridge . Again , no goods facilities were provided . 
 Parson Street railway station served a dual purpose : as well as serving local suburban developments for commuter and excursion traffic , it also acted as a minor interchange for passengers on the Portishead Branch Line . When Parson Street opened in 1927 , there were 21 services each weekday along the branch , operated by the Great Western Railway at half @-@ hour intervals from Temple Meads . There were 8 trains on Sundays . 
 Following the Second World War , service levels dropped dramatically along the Portishead branch . When the railways were nationalised in 1948 , services at Parson Street came under the auspices of the Western Region of British Railways , and by the time the branch was closed to passengers in 1964 , there were only six trains each weekday , and none on Sundays . With the closure of the branch , Parson Street lost its interchange status , and in January 1971 the station buildings were demolished . Some special services did continue along the branch to Ashton Gate , carrying fans to Bristol City FC games at the nearby Ashton Gate Stadium . These ceased in 1977 , and Parson Street became the arrival and departure point for these trains . 
 The Bristol Area <unk> Scheme in the 1970s saw the Down Relief line , the most southern of the four running lines , converted to a siding linking Malago Vale carriage sidings to the east with the West Depot carriage sidings to the west . At the same time , Parson Street Junction was reworked , requiring trains to first cross from the Down Main line to the Up Main line before they were able to access the Portishead Branch . The Down Relief line was removed altogether when West Depot closed sometime after the opening of a new depot at St Philips Marsh to service High Speed Trains . 
 British Rail was split into business @-@ led sectors in the 1980s , at which time operations at Bedminster passed to Regional Railways . Local services were franchised to Wales & West when the railway was privatised in 1997 , which was in turn succeeded by Wessex Trains , an arm of National Express , in 2001 . The Wessex franchise was amalgamated with the Great Western franchise into the Greater Western franchise from 2006 , and responsibility passed to First Great Western , a subsidiary company of FirstGroup . The franchise was rebranded Great Western Railway in 2015 . 
 In recent years , there has been a marked increase in passengers travelling to and from Parson Street . In the 2002 / 03 financial year , less than 4 @,@ 000 passengers used the station ; and in 2005 , only six eastbound and eight westbound trains called at Parson Street each day , with 14 @,@ 293 passengers using the station during the 2005 / 06 financial year . Since then , service levels have increased to 21 westbound trains and 18 eastbound per weekday , and passenger levels have more than quadrupled , to 102 @,@ 654 in 2013 / 14 . 
 The campaign group Friends of Suburban Bristol Railways held a celebration in 2009 to mark the increase in passenger numbers . They were joined by pupils from Parson Street Primary School who had provided artwork to brighten up the station . This was done as part of the Severnside Schools Community Stations Programme , organised by the Severnside Community Rail Partnership . The Severnside CRP also installed plant displays in 2008 , and in 2011 distributed leaflets advertising train services to local residents , in association with Bristol City Council and Passenger Focus . 
 In 2000 / 01 , the track towards Portishead were relaid to allow rail access to Royal Portbury Docks . In 2010 , another section of track was reinstated to allow the reopening of South Liberty Lane depot to handle Trans Ocean 's wine import business , reducing road traffic . Seven trains terminate at the depot every week . The depot had closed in 1990 due to lack of demand for its facilities . 
 = = Future = = 
 First Great Western declined a contractual option to continue the Greater Western passenger franchise ( of which services at Parson Street are a part ) beyond 2013 , citing a desire for a longer @-@ term contract due to the impending upgrade to the Great Western Main Line . The franchise was put out to tender , but the process was halted and later scrapped due to the fallout from the collapse of the InterCity West Coast franchise competition . A two @-@ year franchise extension until September 2015 was agreed in October 2013 , and subsequently extended until March 2019 . 
 With the coming upgrade to the Great Western Main Line , the main line from London to Bristol is due to be electrified by 2016 . However , the electrification will not extend beyond Bristol to Weston @-@ super @-@ Mare , so Parson Street will continue to be served by diesel trains . The group Friends of Suburban Bristol Railways supports the electrification continuing to Weston , as does MP for Weston @-@ super @-@ Mare John Penrose . " Sprinter " units , which currently operate the train service , are expected to be replaced by Class 165 and 166 " Turbo " units . 
 Parson Street is on the Weston @-@ super @-@ Mare / Yate corridor , one of the main axes of MetroWest , a rail transport plan which aims to enhance transport capacity in the Bristol area . As part of this scheme , the Portishead Branch Line , which runs along the south side of the River Avon from a junction just beyond Parson Street , will be reopened . The line was built in the 1860s , but closed to passenger traffic in 1964 , leaving Portishead as one of Britain 's largest towns without a railway station . The line was reopened for freight traffic to serve Royal Portbury Docks in 2002 . The scheme was given the go @-@ ahead in July 2012 as part of the City Deal , whereby local councils would be given greater control over money by the government . A consultation on the plans was held between 22 June and 3 August 2015 to gather views from the community and stakeholders before moving on to detailed designs . The detailed proposals will be subject to a second consultation before the plans are finalised . Due to the additional capital costs , the line will not be electrified , however the design will include passive provision for future electrification . Trains along the reopened line will operate between Portishead and Bristol Temple Meads , with two trains per hour in each direction . Services would call at Pill and Parson Street , with aspirations to also call at Bedminster and a reopened Ashton Gate . Trains could also be extended on to the Severn Beach Line . The line will be operated as part of the Greater Western passenger franchise , with services due to start in Spring 2019 . 
 The Down Relief line between Bristol Temple Meads and Parson Street is to be partially reinstated as part of the MetroWest scheme in order to ease congestion . According to the Great Western Route Utilisation Strategy , in the December 2007 timetable period , the line through Parson Street was running at over 75 % capacity in the morning peak between 8 and 9am . It was predicted that by 2019 , trains working the line would be completely full during peak hours . While the three tracks could cope with traffic generated by the reopening of the Portishead Line , campaigners note it would leave little room for growth . Parson Street Junction will also be upgraded during the works . 
 = = Incidents = = 
 There have been several railway incidents in the Parson Street area over the years . On 19 November 2002 , a Wessex Trains diesel multiple unit suffered an axle problem near Parson Street while operating a westbound service , causing the line to be blocked for four hours . Delays all along the line to Taunton have been caused by trackside cabling being stolen , affecting signalling between Nailsea and Backwell and Bedminster . Notable occurrences of this type happened in October 2006 and May 2012 . Theft of personal property has also occurred on the station . In 2009 , a gang of teenagers robbed a group of four 12- to 15 @-@ year @-@ old boys of their bikes at Parson Street . The robbers followed their targets off the train , having got on at Weston @-@ super @-@ Mare , and attacked the boys as the train pulled away . 
 = Proserpine ( play ) = 
 Proserpine is a verse drama written for children by the English Romantic writers Mary Shelley and her husband Percy Bysshe Shelley . Mary wrote the blank verse drama and Percy contributed two lyric poems . Composed in 1820 while the Shelleys were living in Italy , it is often considered a partner to the Shelleys ' play Midas . Proserpine was first published in the London periodical The Winter 's Wreath in 1832 . Whether the drama was ever intended to be staged is a point of debate among scholars . 
 The drama is based on Ovid 's tale of the abduction of Proserpine by Pluto , which itself was based on the Greek myth of Demeter and Persephone . Mary Shelley 's version focuses on the female characters . In a largely feminist retelling from Ceres 's point of view , Shelley emphasises the separation of mother and daughter and the strength offered by a community of women . Ceres represents life and love , and Pluto represents death and violence . The genres of the text also reflect gender debates of the time . Percy contributed in the lyric verse form traditionally dominated by men ; Mary created a drama with elements common to early nineteenth @-@ century women 's writing : details of everyday life and empathetic dialogue . 
 Proserpine is part of a female literary tradition which , as feminist literary critic Susan Gubar describes it , has used the story of Ceres and Proserpine to " re @-@ define , to re @-@ affirm and to celebrate female consciousness itself " . However , the play has been both neglected and marginalised by critics . 
 = = Background = = 
 In March 1818 the Shelleys moved to Italy , where their two young children , Clara and William , soon died . Mary entered into a deep depression and became alienated from Percy . She recovered to some extent with the birth of Percy Florence later in 1819 . 
 Between 1818 and 1820 , she absorbed a considerable amount of drama , reading many of William Shakespeare 's plays , some with Percy . Percy believed that Mary had a talent for dramatic writing , and convinced her to study the great English , French , Latin , and Italian plays as well as dramatic theory . He even sought her advice on his play The Cenci , and she transcribed the manuscript of his drama Prometheus Unbound . The Shelleys also attended operas , ballets , and plays . Percy also encouraged Mary to translate Vittorio Alfieri 's play Mirra ( 1785 ) , a tragedy about father @-@ daughter incest which influenced her own novel Mathilda . 
 Mary Shelley 's studies were broad during these years . She began to learn Greek in 1820 and read widely . She had also been reading Ovid 's Metamorphoses since at least 1815 and continued to do so in 1820 . Her other reading included Jean @-@ Jacques Rousseau 's philosophical treatise , Emile ( 1762 ) and his sentimental novel , La Nouvelle Héloïse ( 1761 ) , as well as Thomas Day 's children 's book The History of Sandford and Merton ( 1783 – 89 ) . Critic <unk> <unk> notes that her reading around the time she was composing Proserpine included " educational treatises and children 's literature , replete with <unk> concerning gendered behaviors " , as well as her mother Mary Wollstonecraft 's , Thoughts on the Education of Daughters ( 1787 ) and Original Stories from Real Life ( 1788 ) . These latter were part of the conduct book tradition that challenged the gender roles of women . 
 = = Composition and publication = = 
 Mary Shelley composed Proserpine in 1820 , finishing it on 3 April according to her journal . Percy Shelley contributed two lyric poems : " Arethusa " and " Song of Proserpine While Gathering Flowers on the Plain of Enna " . A fragment of the manuscript survives , housed in the Pforzheimer Collection at the New York Public Library , and demonstrates the couple working side @-@ by @-@ side on the project . According to their friend Thomas Medwin , Percy enjoyed the play , sometimes altering the manuscript as he was reading . In her biography of Mary Shelley , Miranda Seymour speculates that both Midas and Proserpine were written for two young girls Mary Shelley met and befriended , Laurette and Nerina Tighe , daughters of friends of the Shelleys in Italy . Their mother was also a former pupil of Mary Wollstonecraft , Mary Shelley 's mother . That same year , Mary Shelley wrote the children 's story Maurice for Laurette . 
 In 1824 Mary Shelley submitted Proserpine for publication to The Browning Box , edited by Bryan Walter Procter , but it was rejected . The play was first published in 1832 in the London periodical The Winter 's Wreath . She cut one @-@ fifth of the play — about 120 lines — for this version , deleting some of the stories from the first act , including Percy 's poem " Arethusa " , and rewrote individual lines . ( She included " Arethusa " in her collection of Posthumous Poems of Percy Shelley in 1824 . ) Mary Shelley also added an ominous dream to the play , foreshadowing Proserpine 's abduction . Her efforts to publish the play in these periodicals and journal entries written during the play 's composition suggest that Proserpine was meant to be children 's literature . 
 = = Plot summary = = 
 Act I begins with Ceres leaving her daughter Proserpine in the protection of two nymphs , Ino and <unk> , warning them not to wander . Proserpine asks Ino to tell her a story , and she recites the tale of Arethusa . After the story , the group gathers flowers . The two nymphs wander off , seeking ever more flowers , and lose sight of Proserpine . When they return , she is gone . They search for her in vain . Ceres returns , angry and frightened at the loss of her child : 
 Act II begins some time later . Ino laments : " How all is changed since that unhappy eve ! / Ceres forever weeps , seeking her child / And in her rage has struck the land with blight " . Arethusa comes , to tell Ceres that she saw Pluto make off with Proserpine . Ceres appeals to Jove for assistance , and Iris appears , saying that Proserpine 's fate is fixed . However , Jove agrees that if Proserpine does not eat the food of the Underworld , she can return . The group leaves to fetch Proserpine , who believes she has not consumed any tainted food , but she is reminded by Ascalaphus , a shade of the Underworld , of some pomegranate seeds that she ate . Ceres , Ino , and Arethusa volunteer to exile themselves to the Underworld , taking their treasures , such as fertility , with them . However , their sacrifice is not permitted . Iris relates Jove 's decision regarding Proserpine 's fate : 
 Ceres promises that only during the time when Proserpine lives with her will the earth be fertile . 
 = = Genre = = 
 Proserpine is a verse drama in blank verse by Mary Shelley which includes two lyric poems by Percy Shelley . In the early nineteenth century , lyric poetry was associated with male poets , and quotidian poetry ( i.e. , the poetry of the everyday ) with female poets . The division of labour in Proserpine reflects this trend . Percy 's poems help emphasise the mythic nature of Proserpine 's story ; he continued this transcendental description of Proserpine in his Prometheus Unbound . Mary 's drama consists of carefully described objects , such as flowers . Furthermore , her characters do not speak in soliloquy — except in Percy 's poems — rather , " nearly every speech is directed <unk> toward another character and is typically concerned with describing another 's emotional state , and / or eliciting an emotional reaction . " Dialogue in Proserpine is founded on empathy , not the conflict more typical of drama . Mary Shelley also refused to embrace the visual sensationalism of early nineteenth @-@ century theatre , focusing instead on " scenes of heightened emotion " . 
 Scholars have disputed whether or not Mary Shelley intended her play to be staged . Most concur that it was never meant for performance , agreeing with Romanticist Alan Richardson that the play is " lyrical drama " or " mental theater " in the style of Romantic closet drama " with its emphasis on character over plot , on reaction over action , and its turn away from the theater " . However , eighteenth @-@ century theatrical scholar Judith Pascoe challenges this conclusion , pointing to detailed stage directions in the manuscript : " Ceres and her companions are ranged on one side in eager expectation ; from the cave on the other , enter Proserpine , attended by various dark & gloomy shapes bearing torches ; among which Ascalaphus . Ceres & Persephone embrace ; – her nymphs surround her . " From this evidence , she argues that Shelley intended her play to be staged . 
 Literary scholar Jeffrey Cox has argued that Proserpine , along with Midas , Prometheus Unbound and other plays written by the Leigh Hunt circle , were " not a rejection of the stage but an attempt to remake it " . Turning from the traditional genres of tragedy and comedy of manners , these writers reinvented drama by writing masques and pastoral dramas . He argues that Midas and Proserpine are a pair of mythological dramas that demonstrate " the forces of oppression " . For him , Proserpine " celebrates a pastoral world ... threatened by male sexual violence and the tyranny of a sky god " . 
 = = Themes = = 
 Mary Shelley expanded and revised the Roman poet Ovid 's story of Proserpine , which is part of his larger Metamorphoses . The tale is based on the Greek myth of Demeter and Persephone , which explains the change of the seasons through Persephone 's visits to the Underworld : when she is confined to Hades 's realm , autumn and winter cover the earth , and when she returns to live with her mother , spring and summer bloom . The myth depicts the victory of male violence over female procreation . Like Percy Shelley , John Keats , and Lord Byron , Mary Shelley was interested in rewriting the classical myths ; however , like other Romantic women writers , she was particularly interested in challenging their patriarchal themes . In revising the Proserpine myth , she placed women and their power at the centre of the narrative . For example , Ovid represents Proserpine as " an <unk> child , willfully straying after flowers in infantile abandon " while " Shelley portrays Proserpine as a thoughtful , empathetic adolescent " who wants to find flowers for her mother . Ovid 's version of the myth focuses on violence , particularly the abduction and rape of Proserpine , while Shelley 's play focuses on the suspenseful search for Proserpine . Her version highlights Ceres and the nymphs ’ grief and Proserpine 's own desire to escape from the Underworld instead of the rape ( the rape happens offstage ) . In contrast , other nineteenth @-@ century adaptations often expanded the rape scene , romanticising it and turning it into a scene of courtship . 
 Women and women 's issues dominate Mary Shelley 's drama — no male characters appear , with the brief exception of Ascalaphus . However , as Romanticist <unk> <unk> argues , there is a strong masculine presence in the play even without male characters , suggesting " the ubiquitous presence of patriarchal power in the domestic sphere " . Although the myth is fundamentally about rape and male tyranny , Shelley transforms it into a story about female solidarity and community — these women are storytellers and <unk> who determine their own fate . Ceres 's love — a mother 's love — challenges the power of the gods . Shelley tells the story almost entirely from Ceres 's point of view ; " her play <unk> praises female creativity and fecundity as ‘ Leaf , and blade , and bud , and blossom . ’ " Shelley writes active , rather than passive , roles for Proserpine and Ceres . For example , it is Ceres 's anger , not her grief , that brings " winter 's blight " . However , Proserpine 's abduction is prefigured in the story of Arethusa and , as literary scholar Julie Carlson points out , the women can only join together after Proserpine has been abducted . 
 In Shelley 's version of the myth , paradise is lost not through the fault of women but through the interference of men . Pluto 's " egotistical , predatory violence " is juxtaposed with Ceres 's " loving kindness , her willingness to sustain life , [ and ] her unswerving devotion to her child " . Sex , in this myth , is represented as a separation from the feminine and a forced surrender to the masculine . Pluto 's domination of Proserpine symbolises " a culture based on acquisition and brutality , a culture that covertly justifies ( when it does not overtly celebrate ) male mastery " . 
 Proserpine and Midas are often seen as a pair of contrasting plays . Proserpine is a play of female bonding , while Midas is a male @-@ dominated drama ; male poets participate in a contest in Midas while in Proserpine female characters participate in communal storytelling ; " where Midas lives in his golden palace imagining himself at the center of an all @-@ powerful court , Ceres laments leaving the pastoral enclave she shares with Proserpine for Jove 's court " ; Midas focuses on gold , while the women in Proserpine enjoy flowers ; and " where the society of Midas is marked by egotism , greed , and strife , the female society of Proserpine values community , gift @-@ giving , and love " . 
 = = Legacy and reception = = 
 As feminist literary critic Susan Gubar argues , Mary Shelley 's drama is part of a female literary tradition , including Elizabeth Barrett Browning , H.D. , Toni Morrison , Margaret Atwood , and Doris Lessing , which has responded to the story of Ceres and Proserpine . These writers use the myth as a " way of dealing with their experience of themselves as daughters growing up into womanhood and potential motherhood .... they use the myth of Demeter and Persephone to re @-@ define , to re @-@ affirm and to celebrate female consciousness itself . " Poets such as Dorothy Wellesley , Rachel <unk> Taylor , Babette Deutsch , and Helen Wolfert as well as Mary Shelley portray the procreative mother as a heroine who creates an arena for nurturing relationships that challenge " the divisions between self and other " that rest at the centre of patriarchy . Feminist poet Adrienne Rich writes that " the loss of the daughter to the mother , the mother to the daughter , is the essential female tragedy " , and it is this tragedy that Mary Shelley discusses in her play . 
 When A. <unk> first published a transcription of Proserpine in 1922 , he argued " that the little classical fancies which Mrs. Shelley never ventured to publish are quite as worthy of consideration as her more ambitious prose works " . However , his " Introduction " to the play speaks mostly of Percy Shelley and his contribution to Mary Shelley 's works . In fact , as he explains , he decided to publish to contribute to the Percy Shelley centenary . Since their original publication , neither Midas nor Proserpine has received much critical attention . Critics have either paid attention only to Percy Shelley 's poems , or have ignored the plays altogether . Literary critic Elizabeth Nitchie writes that the plays are " distinguished only by the lyrics that [ Percy ] Shelley wrote for them " , and Sylvia Norman contends that they " do not really call for analytical and comparative study " . While Frankenstein has remained a powerful cultural force since its publication , Mary Shelley 's other works have rarely been reprinted and scholars have focused almost exclusively on Mary Shelley , author of Frankenstein , and Mary Shelley , wife of Percy Bysshe Shelley . However , with the publication of works by Mary Poovey and Anne K. Mellor in the 1980s and The Other Mary Shelley in 1993 , more attention has been paid to Mary Shelley 's " other " works , such as her dramas . 
 = We Found Love ( music video ) = 
 The music video for Barbadian singer Rihanna 's 2011 single " We Found Love " was directed by Melina Matsoukas . It was filmed on September 26 – 28 , 2011 , in the New Lodge area of Belfast and Bangor , County Down , Northern Ireland . People driving around the location of the set informed BBC that traffic in the area was congested as drivers wanted to see the singer . The video premiered on October 19 , 2011 , and was made available to download digitally three days later on October 22 . As of June 2016 , the video has amassed over 610 million views on YouTube . 
 The video begins with a monologue given by fashion model Agyness Deyn . Scenes of Rihanna with her romantic interest ( Dudley O 'Shaughnessy ) in both love and hate scenarios intersperse , as they experience mounting difficulties in their relationship . After enduring the overwhelming effects of recreational drugs and physical violence , she finds her boyfriend unconscious on the floor of his apartment , and leaves him , having had enough of the relationship . Images of the song 's producer and featured artist Calvin Harris appear in outdoor DJ scenes , while the video has regular references to popular culture , such as themes of films and content of other singers ' videos . 
 Many critics noted that the video resembled a short film , and compared it to the films Trainspotting and Requiem for a Dream . Some critics also compared the thematic content to those of Rihanna 's videos for " S & M " and " Man Down " . Despite that , the video caused much controversy among activist groups . Christian youth pastor Brandon Ward , John Colonnello and the Ulster Cancer Foundation criticized the video for Rihanna 's portrayal of her character having sex while under the influence of illegal drugs and smoking heavily . Consequently , the video was banned from being shown before 10 pm on French television . It won the Grammy Award for Best Short Form Music Video and MTV 's VMA for Video of the Year . The video further managed to peak at number one on the Polish Top Airplay TV Chart . 
 = = Development = = 
 The music video for " We Found Love " was shot on September 26 – 28 , 2011 , in County Down , Northern Ireland . It was filmed in a field in the town of Bangor , County Down , ahead of Rihanna 's <unk> on the European leg of the Loud Tour ( 2011 ) , and the New Lodge area of North Belfast . It was directed by Melina Matsoukas , who had previously directed the videos for " Rude Boy " ( 2010 ) , and the controversial " S & M " ( 2011 ) . During the filming , people driving around the location of the set informed the BBC that traffic in the area was congested as drivers tried to see the singer . Pictures showing Rihanna wearing a red bandana top , long flannel shirt , and " dirty denim " , similar to the clothing she wore for the song 's artwork , were leaked onto the internet the same day . She filmed scenes while wearing a bikini with the pattern of the US flag , and a denim vest and ripped jeans . The owner of the field , farmer and North Down Borough Council Democratic Unionist Party councillor Alan Graham , expressed distaste after seeing Rihanna topless on his field , saying : " When the filming did become to my mind unacceptable I requested the filming to stop ... it became apparent to me that the situation was becoming inappropriate and I requested them to stop and they did " . On September 28 , 2011 , the shoot location was moved to a closed set in Titanic Quarter , Belfast where both photographers and fans were barred from watching the singer . 
 Extras for the shoot were not told what was expected of them until the last minute , in order to keep the content of the video as secret as possible . Regarding the video 's content , Rihanna posted a message on Twitter that read : " I really can 't stop thinking about this video we just shot ! <unk> the BEST video I 've done thus far ! " Rihanna elaborated on the concept of the video : " We 've never done a video like this before . This is probably one of the deepest videos I 've ever done ... it 's all about love and love being like a drug , you definitely get that from this . " The male love interest in the video is Dudley O 'Shaughnessy , a model and former boxer . Upon the release of the video , Matsoukas explained the content of the video in an interview with MTV : 
 We love , obviously , to do provocative imagery ... we always try to definitely push the limits ... I think because , in the end , it 's not really at all about domestic violence . It 's really just about it being toxic , and they 're on this drug trip and that definitely plays a part , but I think it 's also about being triumphant over those weaknesses , and she leaves him . It 's not trying to glorify that type of relationship . The bad parts of it , that 's what you don 't want . In the end , her leaving , it represents her getting that out of her life . The drugs and the addiction and the toxic — that 's what brings her downfall and brings a lot of harm . 
 The director went on to explain the content with regard to Rihanna 's domestic violence case against former boyfriend Chris Brown in February 2009 , saying that it is not a reenactment of what happened between Rihanna and Brown , but rather that Rihanna is acting in the video . Matsoukas said : 
 [ The song 's ] totally rave @-@ y ... and that 's the feeling , just music rushing over you , and then I started thinking about drugs and addiction and love and how that 's an addiction ... we 've all lived the ups and downs of being in a toxic relationship . It 's really about the obstacles of trying to let it go , but at the same time how great it makes you feel , so it 's hard to let it go . Again , it goes back to a story that we all can relate to ... It 's not Rihanna 's story ; it 's her story in the video , and she 's acting . But everybody 's [ as well ] . Obviously , there 's a lot of comparisons to her real life , and that 's not at all the intention . It 's just that I guess people naturally go there because art imitates life , and it 's a story we all relate to and we 've all experienced . Like , it 's based on my life ; it 's based on her life ; it 's based on your life , like , everybody . 
 In an interview with Pitchfork Media , Matsoukas said that she was surprised with the professional standard of Rihanna 's acting . The inspiration for Rihanna acting in the video came from when Matsoukas saw the clip for " Man Down " in April 2011 ; the director stated that she was taken aback at how Rihanna realistically re @-@ enacted a rape scenario . Matsoukas described the process for choosing O 'Shaughnessy as the male love interest , stating that Rihanna had asked her to find a man she could " fake fuck " while filming . The director said that she telephoned a boxer her friend had told her about , and asked him to make a tape of himself using the description of how the male love interest should act . When asked if any of the video was improvised , Matsoukas revealed that she would create a scenario and then it was left to Rihanna and O 'Shaughnessy to elaborate upon what the director had given them . Matsoukas jokingly said that the scene in which O 'Shaughnessy draws a tattoo on Rihanna 's buttock cheek was not part of the video 's treatment , and that O 'Shaughnessy improvised it . Upon the video 's release , multiple media outlets and music critics compared the content of the video to a reenactment of Rihanna and Brown 's physical altercation . When asked about this , Matsoukas clarified that the video was not linked to Brown in any circumstance , and said , " [ O 'Shaughnessy ] doesn 't even really look like Chris Brown to me . " 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 The video begins with a monologue by fashion model Agyness Deyn about love and heartbreak : 
 It 's like you 're screaming but no one can hear . You almost feel ashamed that someone could be that important , that without them , you feel like nothing . No one will ever understand how much it hurts . You feel hopeless , like nothing can save you . And when it 's over and it 's gone , you almost wish that you could have all that bad stuff back so you can have the good . 
 During the narration , Rihanna and her lover are depicted in both love and hate scenarios . Before the song begins to play , lightning bolts are projected onto a wall in which Rihanna stands in front of . She and her lover are depicted as enamored with each other , and enjoying activities such as fairground rides and eating in fast food restaurants . During the chorus , images of drugs , pills , and dilated pupils are shown , while brief scenes of Rihanna and her boyfriend preparing to have sex are shown . 
 The chorus continues and the video cuts to a scene in which Rihanna and other people dance at an outside rave ; Calvin Harris features as the DJ . As the second chorus begins , Rihanna and her boyfriend are happily running amok in a supermarket , pushing each other in a shopping cart and spraying canned drinks at each other . However , they begin arguing in a car . The video then shows the couple experiencing mounting difficulties in their relationship . They eventually begin to physically abuse one another . During the final chorus , Rihanna is seen vomiting streamers ; she is also seen unconscious on the street while her boyfriend tries to revive her . After finding the boyfriend unconscious on the floor of his apartment , Rihanna decides she has had enough of the relationship and leaves him . The video ends with Rihanna curled up in the corner of a room , crying . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 The video for " We Found Love " premiered on the website <unk> on October 19 , 2011 . Critics were divided on their opinions of the video ; some praised its cinematic feel and others criticized the glorification of drug abuse . Chris Coplan of Consequence of Sound praised the production of the video , noting its cinematic feel and that it shows the " ins and outs [ and ] ups and downs " of love . Coplan compared the video to the film Blue Valentine due to its sexualized content and a narrative that consists of a couple in a turbulent relationship . Erika Ramirez of Billboard magazine called the video artful and poignant , and noted that it shows " neon colors , explicit sex , bathtub embraces and painful arguments of the couple 's world " . Jocelyn Vena of MTV commented that although the song is upbeat and carefree , the video represents the antithesis , depicting " a dark look at love and substance abuse " . Vena , like Coplan , noted that the song has a cinematic feel , calling it a " mini @-@ movie " . She compared the video to the films Trainspotting and Requiem for a Dream , with regard to its opening monologue , which Vena thought foreshadowed the video . 
 Matthew Perpetua of Rolling Stone wrote , " the footage looks like a remake of Trainspotting , and , [ " We Found Love " ] matches its thumping rave beat to footage that often looks like a remake of Trainspotting " . Amanda Dobbins of New York magazine was more critical of the video ; she criticized Rihanna 's undressing in a farmer 's field as " the least of its provocations " and listed the activities the couple partake in : " smoking , drinking , dancing on fast @-@ food tables , dancing at raves , heavy petting , stealing groceries , drunk wheelies , and bathing while fully clothed [ and ] candy @-@ colored drugs " . Dobbins noted that the list of illicit and frowned upon activities may aggravate parents and committees because of the explicit nature of the video , which caused controversy for Rihanna in her videos for " S & M " and " Man Down " . Charlotte Cowles of the same publication commented that the voice @-@ over provided by Deyn at the start of the video sounded " incredibly depressing " . 
 Leah Greenblatt of Entertainment Weekly described the video as " a Trainspotting @-@ meets @-@ Drugstore Cowboy portrait of wasted youth and finding love in an apparently very pharmaceutical place " . Greenblatt continued her review in a more negative manner , asking if it " paint [ s ] a too @-@ glamorous portrait of crazy , stupid love for her young fans ? Or is it [ Rihanna ] ' s prerogative to push the boundaries of dilated pupils , couch sex , and how many cigarettes two people can conceivably smoke simultaneously ? " Jamie Lewis of the International Business Times noted that the video is likely to cause controversy among sections of the public due to the " multitude of illicit and illegal acts " , and condemned the activities that the singer appeared to be partaking in , writing , " Rihanna can be seen swallowing unmarked pills , smoking what looks like marijuana , publicly stripping , stealing goods and vandalising " . Lewis also wrote that Rihanna had received mixed reactions from her fans via her Twitter and Facebook feeds . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 The video was included on many lists of the best music videos of 2011 . Out of 50 videos , " We Found Love " ranked at number 21 on NME 's Best Music Videos of 2011 . A reviewer for NME called it , " an artful mini @-@ movie of a promo , an ode to crazy , youthful love . " It ranked at number 12 out of 25 on Slant Magazine 's Top 2011 Music Videos . A reviewer for Slant Magazine praised Matsoukas ' directorial skills , writing , " Melina Matsoukas 's video projects ( literally and figuratively ) the fleeting rush of both young love and drugs — and the often fatal cocktail that 's produced when the two are combined . " The video was included on The Guardian 's 2011 list , entitled " The best pop videos of 2011 " . As of January 2015 , Billboard named the video as the second best music video of the 2010s ( so far ) . The video received three MTV Video Music Award nominations , including Best Pop Video , and won the award for Video of the Year . The video received the Grammy Award for Best Short Form Music Video at the 55th Grammy Awards which was held on February 10 , 2013 at the Staples Center , Los Angeles . 
 = = Controversy = = 
 In the UK , The Rape Crisis Centre , an organization that helps victims of sexual abuse and sexual violence , criticized the video . Eileen Kelly , a representative of the group , stated that the video sends " out an inappropriate message " and told The Daily Star that the clip " is a disgrace . It sends the message that she is an object to be possessed by men , which is disturbingly what we see in real violence cases " . The video was also criticized by Brandon Ward , a youth pastor of Oasis Christian Center in Staten Island , New York , for " damaging the moral and self @-@ worth of young impressionable teens . " Ward wrote how he thought the video affects females ' sense of self @-@ worth : 
 The real issue is that it moves the moral center more towards the obscene . That it becomes more normal to be more sexually promiscuous , because they are bombarded with imagery that is loaded with innuendo , and that is seen as normal , even preferred ... if girls and women find their identity and self @-@ worth in the approval of people , they will do whatever it takes to become popular and loved . When stars like Rihanna , who blast sexuality , are thrust into the limelight , girls tend to think that is the way for them to be valuable . God tells us that we are fearfully and wonderfully made ... bearing His image . Rihanna is selling a lie . 
 John Colonnello , a youth pastor from Athens , Alabama , criticized Rihanna 's failure as a role model for young girls and women who look up to her . <unk> said that Rihanna is promoting the importance of one 's physical appearance , and unhealthy sex : " the message should be that it 's about who you are on the inside and your character . That you should be honest , trustworthy , faithful , kind , loving , compassionate and more . " The video is the third by Rihanna in 2011 to receive a negative reaction from organizations ; " S & M " was banned from eleven countries due to its explicit sexual content , while " Man Down " attracted media attention when the Parents Television Council ( PTC ) criticized Rihanna for depicting a " cold , calculated execution of murder " in the video and for portraying a scenario of rape . On November 23 , 2011 , the music video for " We Found Love " was banned from broadcast before 10 pm in France , owing to its violent , dangerous , and sexually suggestive nature . Ulster Cancer Foundation , an anti @-@ smoking organization , condemned Rihanna for smoking in the music video . Doreen <unk> , a spokesperson for the organization , commented on the singer 's decision to include smoking as part of her promotional image , saying : 
 Three @-@ quarters of adult smokers start the habit as teenagers , which is why it is so irresponsible of Rihanna to influence her young fan base in this way ... After so much hype around the filming of the video it was very disappointing to see Rihanna so blatantly smoking throughout it ... Artists such as Rihanna are held in high esteem and regarded as role models by millions of young people . 
 = = Comparisons = = 
 = = = Chris Brown = = = 
 After the release of the video , critics commented on the resemblance between Rihanna 's ex @-@ boyfriend Chris Brown and her fictional love interest in the video , Dudley O 'Shaughnessy , and how the video 's content appeared to be somewhat of a reenactment of the assault upon Rihanna by Brown on the evening of the 2009 Grammy Awards . Chris <unk> of Consequence of Sound said that O 'Shaughnessy strongly resembled Brown in his appearance . Amanda Dobbins of New York magazine concurred with <unk> , and wrote that O 'Shaughnessy has short blond hair like Brown once had . Erika Ramirez of Billboard magazine also thought that O 'Shaughnessy 's character is a depiction of Brown , especially in relation to the scene which features the couple in a car , with O 'Shaughnessy driving recklessly and Rihanna begging him to stop . William Goodman of Spin provided an analysis of the video with regard to the Brown comparisons . Like many reviewers , he noted the resemblance between Brown and O 'Shaughnessy , writing " The clip stars a dead ringer for Brown , complete with dyed hair and bulging biceps " . Goodman commented upon the video 's opening narration , which was actually voiced by Agyness Deyn , " The video opens with a Rihanna voice @-@ over that warns , ' You almost feel ashamed that someone could be that important . No one will ever understand how much it hurts ... you almost wish that you could have all that bad stuff back , so that you have the good ' . " In conclusion , Goodman commented that the scene showing an altercation in a car is reminiscent of Brown 's assault on Rihanna , which occurred inside a car . Goodman wrote : " during a heated argument between the couple in a muscle car , the Brown look @-@ alike gives the Barbadian beauty a slap on the face . Convinced yet ? " 
 = = = Britney Spears ' " Criminal " = = = 
 The video also received comparisons to Spears ' " Criminal " , which was released two days before " We Found Love " , on October 17 , 2011 . Critics noted that both videos were filmed in the United Kingdom and caused controversy there , both contain scenes of sex , violence , and crime , and both featured " bad boy " stereotypes and evoke the personal lives of the artists . Katherine St Asaph of PopDust noted that although most pop stars release videos that draw from their personal lives , they do not make the viewer uncomfortable . The same cannot be said for Spears and Rihanna , regardless of whether they have moved on from past situations , because the discussion about them has not . St Asaph also expressed that neither Spears nor Rihanna said much about the parallels to their lives , but that they do not need to — their videos are much more effective than anything the singers could reveal in an interview . Rae Alexandra of the SF Weekly wrote that both videos feature an anti @-@ British sentiment and that the villains in the video , Rihanna 's boyfriend and Spears ' policemen , are British , whereas Spears ' savior in her video is an American criminal . Alexandra noted that Spears and Rihanna chose to film their grittiest videos in a country with a lower crime rate than the United States . According to her , the videos continue with a tradition of xenophobic portrayals of British people as villains by American film and video directors . 
 = = Credits = = 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Operation Mallard = 
 Operation Mallard was the codename for an airborne forces operation which was conducted by the British Army on 6 June 1944 , as part of the Normandy landings during World War II . 
 The mission 's objective was to airlift glider infantry of the 6th Airlanding Brigade and divisional troops to reinforce the British 6th Airborne Division on the left flank of the British invasion beaches . Using two landing zones , one to the west of the Caen canal and the other to the east of the River Orne , Mallard was the third airborne operation involving units of the division on D @-@ Day . The first , Operation Deadstick , had captured what are now known as the Pegasus and Horsa Bridges . Operation Tonga followed , dropping the division 's two parachute brigades near Caen to the east . 
 Mallard proved successful with 246 of the 256 gliders towed by aircraft from No. 38 Group RAF and No. 48 Group , arriving safely at their landing zones . The landings included the first Tetrarch tanks to be delivered into combat by air . 
 = = Background = = 
 Plans for the Normandy invasion included five assault landings from the sea , supported by airborne landings on both flanks by British and American airborne divisions . In what would be its first action , the 6th Airborne Division was chosen to land on the left flank of the British landing zone . Its primary objective on day one was to capture intact two bridges over the Caen canal and the River Orne . The division 's secondary objective was the destruction of the Merville gun battery , which could engage ships landing nearby at Sword beach . To prevent German reinforcements approaching the invasion area from the east , 6th Airborne also had to destroy the bridges crossing the River Dives then dig in around Ranville and hold the left flank of the advance . 
 The two bridges were captured during Operation Deadstick , a glider infantry assault by a reinforced company from the 2nd Battalion Oxfordshire and Buckinghamshire Light Infantry . As part of Operation Tonga , the division 's secondary objectives involved its two parachute brigades . The 5th Parachute Brigade provided a defence in depth for the captured bridges , deploying to the east and west of the canal and river . The 3rd Parachute Brigade destroyed the Merville gun battery along with the bridges crossing the Dives , then fell back to form a defensive line to the east of 5th Parachute Brigade . 
 The strength of the airborne division 's third formation , the 6th Airlanding Brigade , almost equalled that of the two parachute brigades . The constant shortage of transport aircraft meant that the airlanding brigade could not be transported to Normandy at the same time as the rest of the division . Each of the brigade 's three infantry battalions consisted of 806 men in four rifle companies , made up of four platoons along with a support company consisting of two Anti @-@ tank platoons both armed with four 6 pounder guns , two mortar platoons each with six 3 inch mortars , and two Vickers machine gun platoons . There was no fixed plan for troops arriving as part of Operation Mallard – all would depend on how well the preceding units of the 6th Airborne Division and those landing at Sword beach had done during the day . But if all had gone to plan they were to cross both waterways and expand the divisions position to the south . 
 = = = Gliders = = = 
 Planes returning from the first missions were refuelled and repaired where required and made ready to tow the gliders that evening . The airlift included 226 Airspeed Horsa gliders , each piloted by two men from the Glider Pilot Regiment . With a wingspan of 88 feet ( 27 m ) and a length of 67 feet ( 20 m ) , the Horsa had a maximum load capacity of 15 @,@ 750 pounds ( 7 @,@ 140 kg ) as well as space for two pilots , a maximum of twenty @-@ eight troops or two jeeps , one jeep and an artillery gun or one jeep with a trailer . The division 's heavier equipment was carried in thirty General Aircraft Hamilcar gliders . Twenty of these would carry Tetrarch light tanks and their crews belonging to 6th Airborne Armoured Reconnaissance Regiment , four more carried three Rota trailers carrying fuel supplies without crews , another three transported , Universal Carriers with their crews . The last three carried two Universal Carriers converted to accommodate a 3 @-@ inch mortar , one Universal Carrier equipped with a slave battery , sixteen motorcycles and a jeep . 
 = = = German forces = = = 
 The coastal area was guarded by the 716th Infantry <unk> comprising eight infantry battalions deployed to defend 21 miles ( 34 km ) of the Atlantic wall . Poorly equipped with a mixture of foreign weapons , the unit was manned by conscripts from Poland , Russia and France under a German officer and senior Non commissioned officers . 
 A second division , the 21st Panzer , moved into the area in May 1944 with its battalions positioned at Vimont just east of Caen , and at Cairon to the west of the Caen canal bridge . The 21st Panzer Division was a new formation based on the former Africa Korps unit destroyed in North Africa . Although equipped with an assortment of older tanks and other armoured vehicles , the division 's officers were veterans and 2 @,@ 000 men from the old division filled its ranks . Further afield were the 12th SS Panzer Division at Lisieux and the Panzer Lehr Division at Chartres , both less than a day 's march from the area . 
 = = Mallard = = 
 In response to the initial airborne and naval landings , just after noon on 6 June , 21st Panzer Division received permission to attack . The commanders were informed by General Erich Marcks of <unk> Army Corps that : 
 " if you don 't succeed in throwing the British back into the sea , we shall have lost the war . " 
 East of the River Orne , the 125th Panzergrenadier Regiment headed towards the captured bridges . The column was quickly spotted and engaged for the next two hours by Allied artillery and aircraft causing heavy losses . At 16 : 00 , to the west of the Caen canal , 1st Battalion , 192nd Panzergrenadier Regiment and the 100th Panzer Regiment successfully reached the coast between the British Sword and the Canadian Juno Beaches . Here they linked up with the 736th Infantry Regiment , which had been defending Lion sur Mer . The German units gathered their strength on the beaches and waited for further orders from divisional commander Generalmajor Edgar Feuchtinger . 
 Back in England , 256 Operation Mallard gliders carrying the remaining men and equipment of the 6th Airborne Division took off . Fifteen squadrons of fighter aircraft were deployed by the RAF to escort the gliders and towing aircraft . The force crossed the English channel unhindered , and arrived in Normandy at 21 : 00 . As it was still daylight , previous navigation problems that had affected the earlier operations were absent . As the gliders approached the two landing areas they met with anti @-@ aircraft fire from German defenders on the ground . 
 The gliders headed for two landing areas , Landing Zone ' W ' ( LZW ) to the east of Saint @-@ Aubin @-@ d <unk> and Landing Zone ' N ' ( LZN ) to the north of Ranville . The remaining troops of the 2nd Battalion , Oxfordshire and Buckinghamshire Light Infantry and ' A ' Company , 12th Battalion , Devonshire Regiment landed at LZW . Given the limited availability of aircraft , even two lifts did not provide capacity to transport all of the Devonshire battalion , the rest of whom arrived by sea on 7 June . The 6th Airlanding Brigade headquarters , 1st Battalion , Royal Ulster Rifles and the 6th Airborne Armoured Reconnaissance Regiment landed at LZN , the latter equipped with the Tetrarch light tank – the first time that any tank had been flown into battle by air . Watching the arriving gliders , Major @-@ General Richard Nelson Gale later wrote : 
 " It is impossible to say with what relief we watched this reinforcement arrive . " 
 German reaction to the second airborne landings involved mortar barrages and small arms fire , but casualties were negligible . Generalmajor Feuchtinger of 21st Panzer Division watched the gliders descending and , believing the arriving force would threaten his lines of communication , ordered those elements of the division that had reached the beaches to withdraw to the north of Caen . The gliders ' arrival had inadvertently stopped the only German armoured attack on D @-@ Day . 
 Moving off LZN the 1st Battalion , Royal Ulster Rifles headed south to capture the villages of Longueval and Sainte Honorine . The 211th Battery , 53rd ( Worcester Yeomanry ) Airlanding Light Regiment , Royal Artillery then arrived at LZN equipped with eight 75 mm Pack Howitzers and were engaging German targets less than thirty minutes after landing . The 2nd Battalion , Oxfordshire and Buckinghamshire Light Infantry , who were the furthest away at LZW , crossed the Caen canal and River Orne bridges . These had been captured twenty @-@ one hours earlier by their own ' D ' Company who were now headed towards <unk> and Escoville . By midnight , the 6th Airborne Division was the only Allied formation to have seized all of its D @-@ Day objectives . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Reinforcement by the 6th Airlanding Brigade strengthened the 6th Airborne Division 's weak position . Most of the parachute battalions , because of their scattered parachute drops , were well under strength . 
 By 11 : 00 on 7 June , 2nd Battalion , Oxfordshire and Buckinghamshire Light Infantry had occupied Escoville 3 miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) to the south of Ranville . The 1st Battalion , Royal Ulster Rifles , occupied Longueval 2 @.@ 5 miles ( 4 @.@ 0 km ) south @-@ west of the Bas de Ranville unopposed . Ordered to advance another 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) to Sainte @-@ Honorine , the battalion was caught in the open by German artillery and by mistake the guns of HMS Arethusa . While unable to proceed , the battalion remained in control of Longueval . The 12th Battalion , Devonshire Regiment arrived in the evening of 7 June and took over defence of the Bas de Ranville . 
 D @-@ Day had cost the 6th Airborne Division 821 dead , 2 @,@ 709 wounded and 927 missing . The division remained holding the Orne bridgehead , only taking part in patrols and small scale local attacks until the 17 August when it crossed the River Dives . By 27 August , the division had reached Berville sur Mer , where it halted and remained until the beginning of September when it was withdrawn back to England . 
 = ARA Almirante Brown ( 1880 ) = 
 ARA Almirante Brown was a central battery ironclad of the Argentine Navy built in the 1880s by Samuda Brothers in London . Almirante Brown displaced 4 @,@ 200 long tons ( 4 @,@ 300 t ) and had a top speed of 14 knots ( 26 km / h ; 16 mph ) . The ship was protected by a belt of nine @-@ inch ( 230 mm ) steel @-@ faced armor and she carried a main battery of eight breech @-@ loading guns . She was among the first major warships in the world to use steel armor , and remained the largest vessel in the Argentine fleet for nearly two decades . Almirante Brown had a peaceful career in the fleet during the 1880s and 1890s . By the 1920s , she was reduced to a coastal defense ship , and remained in service until the early 1930s . She was stricken from the naval register in November 1932 and sold for scrapping . 
 = = Design = = 
 = = = General characteristics and machinery = = = 
 Almirante Brown was 240 feet ( 73 m ) long between perpendiculars , and had a beam of 50 ft ( 15 m ) and a draft of 20 ft 6 in ( 6 @.@ 25 m ) . She displaced up to 4 @,@ 200 long tons ( 4 @,@ 300 t ) with a combat load . Her hull was steel @-@ built , with a wood and zinc sheathing . The hull included a double bottom and a ram bow . She was fitted with two pole masts . The ship had a crew of 520 officers and men . 
 Her propulsion system consisted of two compound steam engines that drove a pair of propellers . Steam for the engines was provided by eight coal @-@ fired , cylindrical water @-@ tube boilers . The boilers were split into four separate , watertight boiler rooms , and both of the steam engines were in individual engine rooms . The engines were rated at 5 @,@ 400 indicated horsepower ( 4 @,@ 000 kW ) and produced a top speed of 14 knots ( 26 km / h ; 16 mph ) . Almirante Brown had the capacity to store up to 650 metric tons ( 640 long tons ; 720 short tons ) of coal for the boilers . In addition to her steam engines , Almirante Brown was fitted with a sailing rig for auxiliary cruising . The sail plan had an area of 10 @,@ 000 square feet ( 930 m2 ) . 
 = = = Armament and armor = = = 
 Almirante Brown was equipped with a main battery of eight 8 @-@ inch ( 200 mm ) BLR Armstrong guns , all mounted individually in casemates . Six were in a central battery , and the other two were in the bow and stern . These breech @-@ loading guns were a new development , which rendered Almirante Brown a significantly more powerful vessel than even those that had been completed a few years earlier . She also carried six 4 @.@ 7 in ( 120 mm ) guns , also in single mounts , all on the upper deck . Four were mounted forward , and two were located aft , on either side of the 8 @-@ inch stern @-@ chaser . Close @-@ range defense against small craft was provided by a pair of 9 @-@ pounder guns and a pair of 7 @-@ pounder guns . 
 The ship was protected with compound armor with a steel face manufactured by the German firm Siemens ; the use of steel armor was a new development in naval technology , and permitted significant weight savings . The main armored belt was 9 in ( 230 mm ) thick amidships , and reduced to 7 @.@ 5 in ( 190 mm ) at the bow and stern . Below the main belt was a strake of armor that was 6 in ( 150 mm ) thick amidships and 1 @.@ 5 in ( 38 mm ) on either end of the ship . The central battery was protected by 8 in of armor plate in the lower strake , and 6 in of armor in the upper strake . Atop the central battery , the armored deck was .625 in ( 15 @.@ 9 mm ) thick , while the deck fore and aft of the battery was 1 @.@ 5 in ( 38 mm ) thick . The conning tower also had 8 in thick sides . 
 = = Service history = = 
 In 1878 , Argentina made inquiries in Britain to buy a new , ocean @-@ going capital ship for its navy , which to that point , had consisted of only coastal and riverine forces , centered on the two small La Plata @-@ class coastal defense ships . Almirante Brown , the first large ironclad of the Argentine Navy , was ordered from the Samuda Brothers shipyard of London . She was launched on 6 October 1880 , and cost the Argentine government £ 270 @,@ 000 . On 14 June 1881 , she conducted speed trials on the Maplin Mile , and achieved her designed speed of 14 knots at full power . Upon her delivery to Argentina , she was the largest vessel in the Argentine fleet , and remained so until the four Garibaldi @-@ class armored cruisers were acquired in the late 1890s . Almirante Brown was present during the ceremonies for the opening of the south basin in the harbor of Buenos Aires on 28 January 1889 . 
 On 13 July 1892 , the ship was thought to be lost in a storm that claimed the torpedo boat Rosales . The protected cruiser Veinticinco de Mayo was also believed to have sunk in the storm , though both survived . In the following year , Almirante Brown , along with most of the heavy units in the Argentine Navy , took part in putting down the naval defections in the revolution of 1893 . In 1897 , Almirante Brown went into dry dock at the La Seyne shipyard in Toulon for modernization . Her main battery guns were replaced with ten 5 @.@ 9 in ( 150 mm ) 50 @-@ caliber quick @-@ firing Canet guns ; six replaced the guns in the central battery , and the other four were mounted in pairs in place of the bow and stern guns . In addition , the old 4 @.@ 7 @-@ inch guns were replaced with new quick @-@ firing models . Her crew was reduced to 380 officers and men . By the 1920s , Almirante Brown had been reduced to a coastal defense and training ship , having long since been rendered obsolete by the dreadnought battleships Moreno and Rivadavia . On 17 December 1921 , crewmen from Almirante Brown rowed ashore to defeat a group of about 250 brigands based in Mata <unk> . The ship remained in service until the early 1930s . On 17 November 1932 , Almirante Brown was stricken from the naval register and subsequently discarded . 
 = Tithonus ( The X @-@ Files ) = 
 " Tithonus " is the tenth episode of the sixth season of the American science fiction television series The X @-@ Files . It premiered on the Fox network on January 24 , 1999 . The episode was written by Vince Gilligan , and directed by Michael W. Watkins . The episode is a " Monster @-@ of @-@ the @-@ Week " story , unconnected to the series ' wider mythology . " Tithonus " earned a Nielsen household rating of 9 @.@ 2 , being watched by 15 @.@ 90 million people in its initial broadcast . The episode received positive reviews . 
 The show centers on FBI special agents Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) who work on cases linked to the paranormal , called X @-@ Files . Mulder is a believer in the paranormal , while the skeptical Scully has been assigned to debunk his work . In this episode , Scully learns that she , but not Mulder , is being given a chance to prove her worth at the FBI , and — paired with a new partner — she investigates a crime scene photographer with an uncanny knack for arriving just in time to see his victims ' final moments . What she does not expect , however , is for Death to play a role himself . 
 Vince Gilligan wrote " Tithonus " in an attempt to create a story wherein immortality is portrayed as scary . The episode was based on three real aspects of history : Arthur Fellig , the Greek myth of Tithonus , and the yellow fever epidemic . In addition , several of the scenes were filmed on the sets from NYPD Blue , whose sets were located just across from The X @-@ Files studios . The character of Alfred Fellig in " Tithonus " has thematically been compared to the Tithonus in Alfred , Lord Tennyson 's dramatic monologue of the same name . In addition , themes of immortality and escaping death were revisited in the eighth season episode " The Gift " . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In New York City , a man with a camera follows a woman from an elevator through a corridor to another elevator , where all the people appear to be gray . He gets off on a floor before the woman 's and runs down the stairs . Lights flicker and the elevator cable snaps . As the man reaches the basement , the cab crashes and its door spills open to reveal the woman 's wrist , covered with blood . The man begins to snap photos . Later , in Washington , D.C. , FBI Assistant Director Alvin Kersh ( James Pickens , Jr . ) assigns Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) , along with Agent Peyton Ritter from New York , to the case . Scully 's partner Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) looks at the material on Scully 's desk and points out that the case looks like an X @-@ file — and that Kersh is obviously splitting them up . 
 Scully and Ritter soon discover that their prime suspect , Alfred Fellig , who has worked as a police photographer since 1964 , has not aged at all in any of his official photos on his renewal applications . Elsewhere in the city , Fellig watches a criminal kill a youth for his sneakers . When he approaches to take photos of the dying young man , the murderer returns and repeatedly stabs Fellig , but he pulls the knife out of his back and walks away . Scully and Ritter learn of the crime and of the fact that Fellig 's prints are on the knife . Ritter demands to know how Fellig always seems to be around when people die , but Scully realizes that the man is in pain and asks whether he was wounded in the attack which Fellig says he merely observed . When she sees the wounds on his back she sends him to the hospital , much to Ritter 's chagrin . Ritter reminds Scully that they are trying to charge Fellig with murder , not let him go . 
 Ritter leaves Scully staking out Fellig 's apartment , but Scully is unnerved when she sees Fellig shooting photos of her out his window and bangs on his door , demanding to know how he took photos at a crime scene before the police even knew the crime had been committed . He invites her to take a ride with him so he can show her . After driving , he sees a prostitute who appears to be gray to him . Fellig tells Scully that the woman will be dead very soon . A pimp approaches the woman and begins to harass her . Scully leaps out of the car with her gun , announcing that she is an FBI agent and handcuffing the pimp , but when the prostitute tries to flee , she is hit by a truck and killed . 
 Scully goes to warn Fellig that he is about to be charged for murder , and accuses him of profiting from people 's deaths . In his darkroom , Fellig shows Scully a photo of a dead woman with an odd fuzzy shape around her head , which the photographer claims is Death . When asked why he bothers to try to photograph Death , Fellig says that it is so he can look Death in the face and finally die . He claims to be 149 years old , and says he cannot kill himself . Scully points out that most people would like to live forever , but Fellig says that he has experienced everything , and that even love does not last forever . Suddenly , he notices that Scully is gray , and says , " Count your blessings . " When she asks about the science of his immortality , he says he was meant to die of yellow fever , but he refused to look Death in the face , so instead Death took the kind nurse who had taken care of him . Fellig takes a photo just as Ritter enters and shoots . The bullet passes right through the camera and through Fellig into Scully , who collapses . While Ritter rushes to call an ambulance , Fellig asks Scully whether she saw Death and begs her to close her eyes . He covers her hand with his own . The color returns to Scully 's hand as Fellig 's turns gray . Looking up , he dies . 
 At the hospital , Mulder watches through a window as Ritter apologizes to Scully , then tells Ritter that he 's a lucky man ( because Scully survived ) . Going inside the room , Mulder reports to Scully that Fellig died of a single gunshot wound , while the doctors are amazed at her own rapid recovery . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 " Tithonus " was written by Vince Gilligan , who based aspects of it on three real aspects of history . The name Alfred Fellig is a reference to famous photographer Arthur Fellig , better known as Weegee . The title of the episode is a reference to the Greek myth of Tithonus . Tithonus was the son the king of Troy and a favorite of the Titan goddess Eos . She later kidnapped him to be her lover and asked Zeus to make Tithonus immortal . Eos , however , forgot to ask for eternal youth and Tithonus indeed lived forever but prayed every sunrise for death . The final aspect of history used by Gilligan was the yellow fever epidemic in the 19th century . 
 A story about explicit immortality had been discussed for several years . However , the writers found it hard to make immortality seem scary . Frank Spotnitz , the show 's executive producer , noted that after making the immortal character a photographer who was trying to catch Death so that he could die , the problem was solved . The episode was not the first to make a reference to immortality , however . The season three episode " Clyde Bruckman 's Final Repose " featured Scully being told by the titular character that she would not die . This episode was the inception of a lesser @-@ known story arc that was originally supposed to reveal that Scully was immortal . The sub @-@ plot , popular with fans on the internet , was verified by Spotnitz . However , Spotnitz later admitted that this sub @-@ plot was bookended by " Tithonus " , a solution that Spotnitz later called " very satisfying " . 
 = = = Filming and effects = = = 
 The first five seasons of the series were mainly filmed in Vancouver , British Columbia ; production of the show 's sixth season , however , was based in Los Angeles , California . Several of the scenes were filmed on the sets from NYPD Blue , whose sets were located just across from The X @-@ Files studios . All of Fellig 's cameras were borrowed from the University of California 's Museum of Photography . Many of the photographs were used courtesy of Corbis . The production staff of The X @-@ Files were tasked with not only creating the photographs that Fellig was supposed to have taken , but also with crafting each so that they would appear as if they had been taken from different times . Tom Day , the episodes property master , had to research popular government typefaces and printing technologies to make the pictures appear as historically accurate as possible . Geoffrey Lewis , who portrayed Fellig , was photographed several times and each photo was edited to give the photographs the appearance of coming from different eras . 
 The episode featured several special effects . The stab wounds that were on Fellig 's back were constructed in " precisely graduated sizes " to show Fellig 's healing powers . The faux @-@ wounds were then applied to Lewis ' back by make @-@ up department head Cheri Montesanto @-@ <unk> . The hardest digital effect to create was the transformation of select figures from color into black @-@ and @-@ white . Visual effects producer Bill Millar noted that the process , was " very similar to the one used to wreck all those old movies by colorizing them . In fact , it 's basically the same , only in reverse " . The " painstaking " process involved outlining the portion of the frame to be de @-@ colorized . A computer program was then used to complete the job . Millar , who had previously used the technique on the NBC series Nightmare Cafe in 1992 , had used it in the 1998 movie Pleasantville . 
 = = Themes = = 
 Besides a direct reference to the titular mythological character , Matthew VanWinkle , in the chapter " Tennyson 's ' Tithonus ' and the Exhaustion of Survival in The X @-@ Files " , of the book The X @-@ Files and Literature : Unweaving the Story , Unraveling the Lie to Find the Truth , argues that the episode bears a striking resemblance to Alfred , Lord Tennyson 's dramatic monologue " Tithonus " . In the poem , one line reads " Alas ! For this gray shadow , once a man . " VanWinkle argues that in The X @-@ Files episode , this line is paralleled by Alfred Fellig 's tendency to see those about to die in a monochromatic vision . Furthermore , both the poem and the episode stress that death is not appealing because it is simply " a means to an end " . Rather , it is to be sought because it " is the event that most fully unites us with other humans . " 
 VanWinkle compared and contrasted Fellig with Eugene Victor Tooms , from the first season episodes " Squeeze " and " Tooms " , and John Barnett , from the first season entry " Young at Heart " . While all three are similar in that they have obtained , to a varying degree , elements of immortality , Tooms is different from Fellig because he is a " monstrous predator " , and Barnett is unlike Fellig because he is a mere sociopath . Fellig , however , is the only character , out of the three , to possess true immortality . Furthermore , he is separated from Tooms and Barnett due to his distinct hatred for his ability ; he did not want to be immortal ; rather , it was forced upon him . VanWinkle also notes that Fellig is , furthermore , different from Tennyson 's Tithonus because the latter actively sought immortality , due to the flaw of hubris or extreme pride , in order to become more like a god . 
 In the episode , VanWinkle draws parallels between Scully and Tithonus ' lover Aurora . In the end , both will " continue [ their ] ending and invariable office " — in the former 's case , investigating crimes , and in the latter 's case , raising the dawn . The themes of immortality and escaping death were later revisited in the eight season episode " The Gift " . In the episode , Agent John Doggett , played by Robert Patrick , is looking for clues following Mulder 's abduction . Without Scully , he travels to Pennsylvania and seeks out a soul eater : a being that can consume another person 's injuries . In the end , Doggett is fatally shot , and the soul eater , wishing to die , consumes Doggett 's death . VanWinkle argues that this episode serves as a direct parallel to " Tithonus " , although it switches the perspective significantly . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 " Tithonus " first aired in the United States on January 24 , 1999 . This episode earned a Nielsen rating of 9 @.@ 2 , with a 13 share , meaning that roughly 9 @.@ 2 percent of all television @-@ equipped households , and 13 percent of households watching television , were tuned in to the episode . It was viewed by 15 @.@ 90 million viewers . The episode aired in the United Kingdom and Ireland on Sky1 on May 9 , 1999 and received 0 @.@ 79 million viewers , making it the third most watched episode that week . Fox promoted the episode with the tagline " When death looks you in the face ... you 're dead . Tonight , Scully gets a good hard look . " 
 The episode was met with largely positive reviews . Zack Handlen of The A.V. Club wrote positively of the episode and awarded it an " A " grade . He noted the entries ' similarities with " Clyde Bruckman 's Final Repose " , noting that both deal with men " who [ know ] too much about death for [ their ] own good " . He also praised the characterization of Scully and Fellig ; he noted that the former is " no @-@ nonsense " and optimistic , whereas the latter is a " creepy man " who is jealous of those who are capable of dying . Handlen concluded that the episode " doesn ’ t play out like a classic monster episode , it feels like one " . Tom Kessenich , in his book Examination : An Unauthorized Look at Seasons 6 – 9 of the X @-@ Files wrote positively of the episode , comparing it favorably to " Clyde Bruckman 's Final Repose " . He wrote , " If imitation is the highest form of flattery , what is a fascinating offshoot of a previous incarnation ? I 'd say it looks a lot like the latest entry into Season 6 of The X @-@ Files . The engaging ' Tithonus ' . " 
 Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson , in their book Wanting to Believe : A Critical Guide to The X @-@ Files , Millennium & The Lone Gunmen , rated the episode five stars out of five , drawing comparisons to " Clyde Bruckman 's Final Repose " , but noting that the former has " a flavour all of its own " . Shearman and Pearson praised Geoffrey Lewis ' portrayal of Fellig , and described " Tithonus " as " bizarre , chilling , and yet strangely life @-@ affirming " . Paula Vitaris from Cinefantastique gave the episode a mixed @-@ to @-@ positive review and awarded it two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half stars out of four . Vitaris wrote that the episode had a " terrific ' feel ' " . In addition , Vitaris , despite slightly criticizing Gillian Anderson 's " tired " performance through most of the episode , called Anderson 's acting in the scene wherein Scully is shot " excellent " , citing her " amazement and near @-@ paralysis " as reasons why the scene was a success . The character of Alfred Fellig has also attracted positive critical acclaim . UGO Networks listed him amongst the greatest monster @-@ of @-@ the @-@ week characters in The X @-@ Files . 
 = JALways = 
 JALways Co . , Ltd . ( JAZ ) ( <unk> , Kabushiki @-@ gaisha <unk> ) , formerly Japan Air Charter Co . , Ltd . ( <unk> , Japan Ea <unk> Kabushiki @-@ gaisha ) , was an international airline registered in Shinagawa , Tokyo , Japan , with its headquarters and its main hub at Narita International Airport . The airline had a secondary hub at Osaka 's Kansai International Airport . Its operations included scheduled and non @-@ scheduled international passenger services to 15 high @-@ density low yield tourist destinations in nine countries using a fleet of Boeing only aircraft wet @-@ leased from Japan Airlines . 
 JALways was founded as Japan Air Charter on October 5 , 1990 and began charter operations with a McDonnell Douglas DC @-@ 10 on February 22 , 1991 . The airline obtained a license to operate scheduled services on July 30 , 1999 and operated its first scheduled passenger service on October 1 . On the same day , the airline changed its name to JALways . In the fiscal year ended March 31 , 1999 , JALways , together with its sister airlines within the JAL Group , carried over 32 million passengers and over 1 @.@ 1 million tons of cargo and mail . 
 JALways was once a wholly owned subsidiary of Japan 's flag carrier , Japan Airlines , but on December 1 , 2010 its operations were merged into those of its parent company . 
 = = History = = 
 The airline was established on October 5 , 1990 , as Japan Air Charter Co . , Ltd . ( JAZ ) , an 80 percent @-@ owned low @-@ cost charter subsidiary of Japan Airlines ( JAL ) , to operate leisure flights to Asia @-@ Pacific resort destinations from regional airports in Japan ; in response to a Ministry of Transport policy . JAZ obtained its aircraft from JAL ; its cockpit crews were American contract pilots based in Hawaii and its cabin crews were hired and based in Bangkok , where it operates a cabin crew training centre . JAZ obtained license to operate non @-@ scheduled services on February 22 , 1991 and operated its first charter flight from Fukuoka to Honolulu with a McDonnell Douglas DC @-@ 10 on July 1 . The airline celebrated its 100,000th passenger on July 9 , 1993 , in a ceremony held in Sendai . 
 During the 1990s , JAL was hit by the effects of Japan 's recession , increased foreign competition and the strengthening of the Japanese Yen , JAZ was given a new role to help reduce costs . The airline obtained the license to operate scheduled services on July 30 , 1999 and would operate as a scheduled carrier on a wet @-@ lease basis for JAL . It would operate on high @-@ density low yield tourist routes in the Asia @-@ Pacific region , particularly the Japan – Hawaii services ; with a fleet of four McDonnell Douglas DC @-@ 10s and five Boeing 747s . On October 1 , the airline changed its name to JALways Co . , Ltd. and operated its first scheduled passenger service from Tokyo to Kona and Honolulu . 
 JALways became a wholly owned subsidiary of Japan Airlines on March 9 , 2001 through an exchange of shares . The change in ownership enabled JAL to consolidate and improve management and operational efficiency in the JAL Group 's international passenger operations , part of the JAL Medium Term Corporate Plan 2000 @-@ 2002 . The airline introduced new uniforms for its cabin crew on April 1 , 2005 , and retired its last McDonnell Douglas DC @-@ 10 on October 31 . JALways became an affiliate member of Oneworld on April 1 , 2007 , together with four of its sister airlines , in the alliance 's biggest expansion in its young history . 
 As part of the JAL Medium Term Corporate Plan for 2005 – 2007 , announced on March 10 , 2005 , the JAL Group accelerated the retirement of older Boeing 747 aircraft . The airline operated its last Boeing 747 @-@ 300 Classic Jumbo Jet as JALways Flight 73 from Honolulu to Tokyo on July 30 , 2009 ; after 26 years of service to the airline group . The aircraft was draped in a giant Hawaiian lei before departure at Honolulu International Airport ; and the day was declared as " Japan Airlines Classic Jumbo Jet Day " by the State of Hawaii Governor Linda Lingle and Lt. Governor Duke Aiona The aircraft was met on arrival in Tokyo by the " Father of the 747 " , Mr Joseph F. " Joe " Sutter . A sell @-@ out commemorative flight flew fans of the Boeing 747 @-@ 300 Classic Jumbo Jet from Tokyo ( Haneda ) to <unk> on a round @-@ trip day tour on July 5 , 2009 . 
 In May 2009 , it was reported that the airline terminated the assignments of 130 American contract Hawaii @-@ based Boeing 747 pilots and closed its Oahu office . Japan @-@ based JAL cockpit crew now operates the five daily flights previously operated by the JALways crew . 
 = = Corporate affairs = = 
 Prior to closing , its headquarters were on the third floor of the Japan Airlines Narita Operation Center ( <unk> , Nihon Kōkū Narita <unk> <unk> ) at Narita International Airport in Narita , Chiba Prefecture and its main hub at Narita International Airport . 
 Previously its headquarters were on the 23rd floor of the <unk> <unk> ( <unk> <unk> Tennōzu ) in Higashi @-@ Shinagawa , Shinagawa , Tokyo . 
 = = Destinations = = 
 Until November 30 , 2010 , JALways operated scheduled services to 12 international and 3 domestic destinations in 9 different countries and 3 different continents . 
 = = Fleet = = 
 JALways operates a fleet of Boeing 747 @-@ 400 , Boeing 767 and Boeing 777 @-@ 200 aircraft , wet @-@ leased from its parent , Japan Airlines . 
 = = = Fleet history = = = 
 Aircraft that have been in service with JALways are ( in alphabetical order ) : 
 Boeing 747 @-@ 200 
 Boeing 747 @-@ 300 
 McDonnell Douglas DC @-@ 10 
 = = JAL Mileage Bank = = 
 JAL Mileage Bank ( JMB ) is the travel rewards program of JAL Group , including Japan Airlines , JALways , JAL Express , Japan Transocean Air , Japan Air Commuter , Hokkaido Air System and Ryukyu Air Commuter . 
 = = Incidents and accidents = = 
 On August 12 , 2005 , JALways Flight 58 operated by a McDonnell Douglas DC @-@ 10 from Fukuoka to Honolulu experienced left @-@ wing engine trouble shortly after takeoff . The aircraft immediately returned to Fukuoka Airport . Some engine parts fell on the Sharyo district of Fukuoka and several people were slightly injured and parked car windscreens damaged . 
 = The Phone Message = 
 " The Phone Message " is the ninth episode of the NBC sitcom Seinfeld , and the fourth of the show 's second season . The episode concerns protagonist Jerry Seinfeld ( Jerry Seinfeld ) dating a woman who likes a commercial for cotton Dockers he dislikes . Meanwhile , his friend George Costanza ( Jason Alexander ) leaves an obnoxious message on the answering machine of his girlfriend , and goes to great lengths to prevent her from hearing it . 
 Written by series co @-@ creators Seinfeld and Larry David and directed by Tom Cherones , the episode was produced to replace a script by staff writer Larry Charles . Charles had written an episode called " The Bet " , revolving around Elaine Benes ( Julia Louis @-@ Dreyfus ) buying a handgun . The script 's gun content was deemed too provocative and , in little time , Seinfeld and David wrote " The Phone Message " to fill the production void . Though the episode met with positive critical responses , its initial broadcast on February 13 , 1991 , was watched by an underwhelming audience of 13 million viewers , causing NBC to put the show on a two @-@ month hiatus . 
 = = Plot = = 
 George is excited when he finds that he and Jerry are having dates on the same night . Both of their dates go well up to the point that they have to say goodnight . George 's date Carol ( Tory Polone ) asks George to come up to her place for some coffee , but George tells her that he can 't drink coffee at night because it " keeps [ him ] up " . Once she leaves his car he realizes he made a mistake , as " coffee " is a euphemism for sex . Jerry 's date Donna ( Gretchen German ) remarks that she likes a cotton Dockers commercial that Jerry absolutely hates , and with that ends his interest in her . 
 George decides to call Carol , but gets her answering machine . He leaves her an extremely long , obnoxious message , and is concerned that she will think he is an idiot . Jerry 's friend Elaine Benes ( Julia Louis @-@ Dreyfus ) tells George how something similar happened to her brother @-@ in @-@ law , who took care of the problem by secretly switching the tape . Jerry advises George to wait a few days for Carol to call back ; George agrees , but continues to leave increasingly angry — and eventually almost hostile — messages on her machine . When he discovers she was out of town , he decides to go through with the plan of changing the tape . Frustrated by his inability to use an answering machine , George convinces Jerry to go with him . They decide to wait for Carol outside her apartment , and George will distract her while Jerry changes the tape . They succeed , but , just as they are about to leave Carol 's apartment , she tells George that she had already heard the messages and found them funny , adding that she " loves jokes like that . " 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = " The Bet " = = = 
 Staff writer Larry Charles had written a script for an episode entitled " The Bet " . In the episode , which was also known as " The Gun " , Elaine would bet against Jerry on the ease of buying a handgun to protect herself . The episode 's subplot revolved around Jerry 's neighbour Kramer returning from a vacation in Puerto Rico , claiming he had sex with a stewardess on his flight home . George and Jerry would remain skeptical , and make a bet with him ; eventually , George , Jerry and Elaine would go to the airport to check if Kramer was telling the truth . In writing " The Bet " , Charles had attempted to make a " funny , dark @-@ themed " episode . Sets for the episode were built . Bobbi Jo Lathan was cast as flight attendant Lucy Merrit and Ernie Sabella was cast as gun salesman Mo Korn , who was described in the script as " overweight , greasy , slow and low @-@ key " . 
 However , during the read @-@ through of the episode , it was negatively received by cast and crew members ; both Alexander and director Tom Cherones felt the episode 's gun content was too provocative . When she read a scene that referenced the assassinations of John F. Kennedy and William McKinley , Louis @-@ Dreyfus turned to Alexander and stated , " I 'm not gonna do this . " Though they did not want to , the cast started rehearsing . After twenty minutes they convinced Cherones to talk to Charles . On his way to Charles ' office , Cherones bumped into NBC executive Glenn Padnick , with whom he talked to Charles , eventually agreeing not to film the episode . Commenting on the episode , Charles stated " You know , it would have been an interesting show , but [ ... ] we couldn 't solve the funny problem of it . It never seemed to quite be as funny as it should be and , because of that , the balance was off and the darkness kind of enveloped it , and it could never really emerge from that darkness and become what it should have been . So , it was disappointing but also understandable . " Both Lathan and Sabella were given roles in later episodes ; Lathan appeared as Patti in the season three episode " The Stranded " , while Sabella was cast as the " greasy naked guy " in " The Subway " , also for the show 's third season . 
 = = = " The Phone Message " = = = 
 Series co @-@ creator Larry David co @-@ wrote the episode with Seinfeld in two days , as , with the cancellation of " The Bet " , they had little time to write the script . George 's storyline was largely based on David 's personal experiences of leaving phone messages to women that would mean the end of a relationship . David had previously written a sketch for Saturday Night Live regarding a man who went into his girlfriend 's house to erase her answering machine . The sketch was never produced , allowing David to use its storyline for the Seinfeld episode . Jerry 's storyline was based on Seinfeld 's own predicaments , as he extremely disliked the cotton Dockers commercial discussed in the episode . 
 A few changes were made to the first few drafts of the script . Additional dialogue between George and Jerry regarding dates during the 1850s was removed for timing purposes . During his date with Donna , Jerry would mention his remark about ponies in the earlier episode " The Pony Remark " , but this was later changed to remark about leaving a note when committing suicide . Initially , Kramer 's first name was revealed in the episode ; though the information was removed from the eventual script , the idea of revealing Kramer 's first name would be further exploited in the season six episode " The Switch " . 
 Gretchen German was cast as Donna , Jerry 's date . Gina Hecht , who would go on to portray George 's psychiatrist Dana Foley during the show 's fourth season , also auditioned for the part . Tory Polone , who portrayed George 's date Carol , had previously appeared in the 1989 television films When We Were Young and Sparks . The episode was first read by the cast on Friday , December 14 , 1990 . Table reads usually took place on Wednesdays , but the read @-@ through of " The Bet " had been held on December 12 . Directed by Cherones , as were all other episodes of the second season , " The Phone Message " was filmed in front of a live audience on December 19 , 1990 . Jerry 's stand @-@ up routine had been filmed one day earlier . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The episode was first broadcast in the United States on February 13 , 1991 , on NBC . " The Phone Message " received a Nielsen rating of 9 @.@ 7 and an audience share of 15 , indicating that 16 @.@ 1 % of American households watched the episode , and that 26 % of all televisions in use at the time were tuned into it . Nielsen Media Research also estimated that approximately 13 million American viewers watched the episode , making it the 59th most @-@ watched show of the week it was broadcast in . Disappointed with the ratings , as earlier episodes had averaged between 19 and 22 million viewers each , the network put the show on a two @-@ month hiatus . When the series returned in its original timeslot behind Cheers , its high ratings and increasing popularity led NBC to order the full season . 
 " The Phone Message " gained positive responses from critics . Jerry 's dumping Donna because she likes the commercial has been frequently cited as an example of how the show 's central characters would often break up with people for " fantastically insignificant reasons " . In a 1998 article , the staff of South Carolina newspaper The State cited " The Phone Message " as " [ ... ] the first episode that made an impression on [ them ] " , referring to Seinfeld as " the comedic version of Hill Street Blues . " Entertainment Weekly critics Mike Flaherty and Mary Kaye Schilling graded the episode with a B + , calling it " the first of two consecutive and classic George angst @-@ fests , as Jason Alexander — master of frantic venom — begins to make the character his own . " 
 = William Walton = 
 Sir William Turner Walton OM ( 29 March 1902 – 8 March 1983 ) was an English composer . During a sixty @-@ year career , he wrote music in several classical genres and styles , from film scores to opera . His best @-@ known works include Façade , the cantata Belshazzar 's Feast , the Viola Concerto and the First Symphony . 
 Born in Oldham , Lancashire , the son of a musician , Walton was a chorister and then an undergraduate at Christ Church , Oxford . On leaving the university , he was taken up by the literary Sitwell siblings , who provided him with a home and a cultural education . His earliest work of note was a collaboration with Edith Sitwell , Façade , which at first brought him notoriety as a modernist , but later became a popular ballet score . 
 In middle age , Walton left Britain and set up home with his young wife Susana on the Italian island of Ischia . By this time , he had ceased to be regarded as a modernist , and some of his compositions of the 1950s were criticised as old @-@ fashioned . His only full @-@ length opera , Troilus and Cressida , was among the works to be so labelled and has made little impact in opera houses . In his last years , his works came back into critical fashion ; his later compositions , dismissed by critics at the time of their premieres , were revalued and regarded alongside his earlier works . 
 Walton was a slow worker , painstakingly perfectionist , and his complete body of work across his long career is not large . His most popular compositions continue to be frequently performed in the twenty @-@ first century , and by 2010 almost all his works had been released on CD . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early years = = = 
 Walton was born into a musical family in Oldham , Lancashire , the second son in a family of three boys and a girl . His father , Charles Alexander Walton , was a musician who had trained at the Royal Manchester College of Music under Charles Hallé , and made a living as a singing teacher and church organist . Charles 's wife , Louisa Maria ( née Turner ) , had been a singer before their marriage . William Walton 's musical talents were spotted when he was still a young boy , and he took piano and violin lessons , though he never mastered either instrument . He was more successful as a singer : he and his elder brother sang in their father 's choir , taking part in performances of large @-@ scale works by Handel , Haydn , Mendelssohn and others . Walton was sent to a local school , but in 1912 his father saw a newspaper advertisement for probationer choristers at Christ Church Cathedral School in Oxford and applied for William to be admitted . The boy and his mother missed their intended train from Manchester to Oxford because Walton 's father had spent the money for the fare in a local public house . Louisa Walton had to borrow the fares from a greengrocer . Although they arrived in Oxford after the entrance trials were over , Mrs Walton successfully pleaded for her son to be heard , and he was accepted . He remained at the choir school for the next six years . The Dean of Christ Church , Dr Thomas Strong , noted the young Walton 's musical potential and was encouraged in this view by Sir Hubert Parry , who saw the manuscripts of some of Walton 's early compositions and said to Strong , " There 's a lot in this chap ; you must keep your eye on him . " 
 At the age of sixteen Walton became an undergraduate of Christ Church . It is sometimes said that he was Oxford 's youngest undergraduate since Henry VIII , and though this is probably not correct , he was nonetheless among the youngest . He came under the influence of Hugh Allen , the dominant figure in Oxford 's musical life . Allen introduced Walton to modern music , including Stravinsky 's Petrushka , and enthused him with " the mysteries of the orchestra " . Walton spent much time in the university library , studying scores by Stravinsky , Debussy , Sibelius , Roussel and others . He neglected his non @-@ musical studies , and though he passed the musical examinations with ease , he failed the Greek and algebra examinations required for graduation . Little survives from Walton 's juvenilia , but the choral anthem A Litany , written when he was fifteen , anticipates his mature style . 
 At Oxford Walton befriended several poets including Roy Campbell , Siegfried Sassoon and , most importantly for his future , Sacheverell Sitwell . Walton was sent down from Oxford in 1920 without a degree or any firm plans . Sitwell invited him to lodge in London with him and his literary brother and sister , Osbert and Edith . Walton took up residence in the attic of their house in Chelsea , later recalling , " I went for a few weeks and stayed about fifteen years " . 
 = = = First successes = = = 
 The Sitwells looked after their protégé both materially and culturally , giving him not only a home but a stimulating cultural education . He took music lessons with Ernest Ansermet , Ferruccio Busoni and Edward J. Dent . He attended the Russian ballet , met Stravinsky and Gershwin , heard the Savoy Orpheans at the Savoy Hotel and wrote an experimental string quartet heavily influenced by the Second Viennese School that was performed at a festival of new music at Salzburg in 1923 . Alban Berg heard the performance and was impressed enough to take Walton to meet Arnold Schoenberg , Berg 's teacher and the founder of the Second Viennese School . 
 In 1923 , in collaboration with Edith Sitwell , Walton had his first great success , though at first it was a <unk> de <unk> . Façade was first performed in public at the Aeolian Hall , London , on 12 June . The work consisted of Edith 's verses , which she recited through a megaphone from behind a screen , while Walton conducted an ensemble of six players in his accompanying music . The press was generally condemnatory . Walton 's biographer Michael Kennedy cites as typical a contemporary headline : " <unk> That They Paid to Hear " . The Daily Express loathed the work , but admitted that it was naggingly memorable . The Manchester Guardian wrote of " relentless cacophony " . The Observer condemned the verses and dismissed Walton 's music as " harmless " . In The Illustrated London News , Dent was much more appreciative : " The audience was at first inclined to treat the whole thing as an absurd joke , but there is always a surprisingly serious element in Miss Sitwell 's poetry and Mr Walton 's music … which soon induced the audience to listen with breathless attention . " In The Sunday Times , Ernest Newman said of Walton , " as a musical joker he is a jewel of the first water " . Among the audience were Evelyn Waugh , Virginia Woolf and Noël Coward . The last was so outraged by the avant @-@ garde nature of Sitwell 's verses and the staging , that he marched out ostentatiously during the performance . The players did not like the music : the clarinettist , Charles Draper asked the composer , " Mr Walton , has a clarinet player ever done you an injury ? " Nevertheless , the work soon became accepted , and within a decade Walton 's music was used for the popular Façade ballet , choreographed by Frederick Ashton . 
 Walton 's works of the 1920s , while he was living in the Sitwells ' attic , include the overture Portsmouth Point , dedicated to Sassoon and inspired by the well @-@ known painting of the same name by Thomas Rowlandson . It was first heard as an entr 'acte at a performance in Diaghilev 's 1926 ballet season , where The Times complained , " It is a little difficult to make much of new music when it is heard through the hum of conversation . " Sir Henry Wood programmed the work at the Proms the following year , where it made more of an impression . The composer conducted this performance ; he did not enjoy conducting , but he had firm views on how his works should be interpreted , and orchestral players appreciated his " easy nonchalance " and " complete absence of fuss . " Walton 's other works of the 1920s included a short orchestral piece , Siesta ( 1926 ) and a Sinfonia Concertante for piano and orchestra ( 1928 ) , which was well received at its premiere at a Royal Philharmonic Society concert , but has not entered the regular repertory . 
 The Viola Concerto ( 1929 ) brought Walton to the forefront of British classical music . It was written at the suggestion of Sir Thomas Beecham for the viola virtuoso Lionel Tertis . When Tertis received the manuscript , he rejected it immediately . The composer and violist Paul Hindemith stepped into the breach and gave the first performance . The work was greeted with enthusiasm . In The Manchester Guardian , Eric Blom wrote , " This young composer is a born genius " and said that it was tempting to call the concerto the best thing in recent music of any nationality . Tertis soon changed his mind and took the work up . A performance by him at a Three Choirs Festival concert in Worcester in 1932 was the only occasion on which Walton met Elgar , whom he greatly admired . Elgar did not share the general enthusiasm for Walton 's concerto . 
 Walton 's next major composition was the massive choral cantata Belshazzar 's Feast ( 1931 ) . It began as a work on a modest scale ; the BBC commissioned a piece for small chorus , orchestra of no more than fifteen players , and soloist . Osbert Sitwell constructed a text , selecting verses from several books of the Old Testament and the Book of Revelation . As Walton worked on it , he found that his music required far larger forces than the BBC proposed to allow , and Beecham rescued him by programming the work for the 1931 Leeds Festival , to be conducted by Malcolm Sargent . Walton later recalled Beecham as saying , " As you 'll never hear the work again , my boy , why not throw in a couple of brass bands ? " During early rehearsals , the Leeds chorus members found Walton 's music difficult to master , and it was falsely rumoured in London musical circles that Beecham had been obliged to send Sargent to Leeds to quell a revolt . The first performance was a triumph for the composer , conductor and performers . A contemporary critic wrote , " Those who experienced the tremendous impact of its first performance had full justification for feeling that a great composer had arisen in our land , a composer to whose potentialities it was impossible to set any limits . " The work has remained a staple of the choral repertoire . 
 = = = 1930s = = = 
 In the 1930s , Walton 's relationship with the Sitwells became less close . He had love affairs and new friendships that drew him out of their orbit . His first long affair was with Imma von <unk> , the young widow of a German baron . She and Walton met in the late 1920s and they were together until 1934 , when she left him . His later affair with Alice , Viscountess Wimborne ( born 1880 ) , which lasted from 1934 until her death in April 1948 , caused a wider breach between Walton and the Sitwells , as she disliked them as much as they disliked her . By the 1930s , Walton was earning enough from composing to allow him financial independence for the first time . A legacy from a musical benefactress in 1931 further enhanced his finances , and in 1934 he left the Sitwells ' house and bought a house in Belgravia . 
 Walton 's first major composition after Belshazzar 's Feast was his First Symphony . It was not written to a commission , and Walton worked slowly on the score from late 1931 until he completed it in 1935 . He had composed the first three of the four movements by the end of 1933 and promised the premiere to the conductor Hamilton Harty . Walton then found himself unable to complete the work . The end of his affair with Imma von <unk> coincided with , and may have contributed to , a sudden and persistent writer 's block . Harty persuaded Walton to let him perform the three existing movements , which he premiered in December 1934 with the London Symphony Orchestra . During 1934 Walton interrupted work on the symphony to compose his first film music , for Paul Czinner 's Escape Me Never ( 1934 ) , for which he was paid £ 300 . After a break of eight months , Walton resumed work on the symphony and completed it in 1935 . Harty and the BBC Symphony Orchestra gave the premiere of the completed piece in November of that year . The symphony aroused international interest . The leading continental conductors Wilhelm Furtwängler and Willem Mengelberg sent for copies of the score , the Chicago Symphony Orchestra premiered the work in the US under Harty , Eugene Ormandy and the Philadelphia Orchestra gave the New York premiere , and the young George Szell conducted the symphony in Australia . 
 Elgar having died in 1934 , the authorities turned to Walton to compose a march in the Elgarian tradition for the coronation of George VI in 1937 . His Crown Imperial was an immediate success with the public , but disappointed those of Walton 's admirers who thought of him as an avant garde composer . Among Walton 's other works from this decade are more film scores , including the first of his incidental music for Shakespeare adaptations , As You Like It ( 1936 ) ; a short ballet for a West End revue ( 1936 ) ; and a choral piece , In Honour of the City of London ( 1937 ) . His most important work of the 1930s , alongside the symphony , was the Violin Concerto ( 1939 ) , commissioned by Jascha Heifetz . The concerto , Walton later revealed , expressed his love for Alice Wimborne . Its strong romantic style caused some critics to label it retrogressive , and Walton said in a newspaper interview , " Today 's white hope is tomorrow 's black sheep . These days it is very sad for a composer to grow old ... I seriously advise all sensitive composers to die at the age of 37 . I know : I 've gone through the first halcyon period and am just about ripe for my critical damnation . " 
 In the late 1930s Walton became aware of a younger English composer whose fame was shortly to overtake his , Benjamin Britten . After their first meeting , Britten wrote in his diary , " [ ... ] to lunch with William Walton at Sloane Square . He is charming , but I feel always the school relationship with him – he is so obviously the head prefect of English music , whereas I 'm the promising new boy . " They remained on friendly terms for the rest of Britten 's life ; Walton admired many of Britten 's works , and considered him a genius ; Britten did not admire all of Walton 's works but was grateful for his support at difficult times in his life . 
 = = = Second World War = = = 
 During the Second World War Walton was exempted from military service on the understanding that he would compose music for wartime propaganda films . In addition to driving ambulances ( extremely badly , he said ) , he was attached to the Army Film Unit as music adviser . He wrote scores for six films during the war – some that he thought " rather boring " and some that have become classics such as The First of the Few ( 1942 ) and Laurence Olivier 's adaptation of Shakespeare 's Henry V ( 1944 ) . Walton was at first dismissive of his film scores , regarding them as professional but of no intrinsic worth ; he resisted attempts to arrange them into concert suites , saying , " Film music is not good film music if it can be used for any other purpose . " He later relented to the extent of allowing concert suites to be arranged from The First of the Few and the Olivier Shakespeare films . For the BBC , Walton composed the music for a large @-@ scale radio drama about Christopher Columbus , written by Louis MacNeice and starring Olivier . As with his film music , the composer was inclined to dismiss the musical importance of his work on the programme . Apart from these commissions , Walton 's wartime works of any magnitude comprised incidental music for John Gielgud 's 1942 production of Macbeth ; two scores for the Sadler 's Wells Ballet , The Wise Virgins , based on the music of J. S. Bach transcribed by Walton , and The Quest , with a plot loosely based on Spenser 's The Faerie Queene ; and , for the concert hall , a suite of orchestral miniatures , Music for Children , and a comedy overture , <unk> , composed for the fiftieth anniversary of the Chicago Symphony Orchestra . 
 Walton 's house in London was destroyed by German bombing in May 1941 , after which he spent much of his time at Alice Wimborne 's family house at Ashby St Ledgers in the countryside of Northamptonshire in the middle of England . While there , Walton worked on projects that had been in his mind for some time . In 1939 he had been planning a substantial chamber work , a string quartet , but he set it aside while composing his wartime film scores . In early 1945 he turned again to the quartet . Walton was conscious that Britten , with Les Illuminations ( 1940 ) , the Sinfonia da Requiem ( 1942 ) , and Peter Grimes in 1945 , had produced a series of substantial works , while Walton had produced no major composition since the Violin Concerto in 1939 . Among English critics and audiences , the Violin Concerto was not at first rated one of Walton 's finest works . Because Heifetz had bought the exclusive rights to play the concerto for two years , it was not heard in Britain until 1941 . The London premiere , with a less famous soloist , and in the unflattering acoustics of the Royal Albert Hall , did not immediately reveal the work as a masterpiece . The String Quartet in A minor , premiered in May 1947 , was Walton 's most substantial work of the 1940s . His biographer , Michael Kennedy , calls it one of his finest achievements and " a sure sign that he had thrown off the <unk> of his cinema style and rediscovered his true voice . " 
 = = = Post @-@ war = = = 
 In 1947 , Walton was presented with the Royal Philharmonic Society 's Gold Medal . In the same year he accepted an invitation from the BBC to compose his first opera . He decided to base it on Chaucer 's Troilus and Criseyde , but his preliminary work came to a halt in April 1948 when Alice Wimborne died . To take Walton 's mind off his grief , the music publisher Leslie Boosey persuaded him to be a British delegate to a conference on copyright in Buenos Aires later that year . While there , Walton met Susana Gil Passo ( 1926 – 2010 ) , daughter of an Argentine lawyer . At 22 she was 24 years younger than Walton ( Alice Wimborne had been 22 years his senior ) , and at first she ridiculed his romantic interest in her . He persisted , and she eventually accepted his proposal of marriage . The wedding was held in Buenos Aires in December 1948 . From the start of their marriage , the couple spent half the year on the Italian island of Ischia , and by the mid @-@ 1950s they lived there permanently . 
 Walton 's last work of the 1940s was his music for Olivier 's film of Hamlet ( 1948 ) . After that , he focused his attentions on his opera Troilus and Cressida . On the advice of the BBC , he invited Christopher Hassall to write the libretto . This did not help Walton 's relations with the Sitwells , each of whom thought he or she should have been asked to be his librettist . Work continued slowly over the next few years , with many breaks while Walton turned to other things . In 1950 he and Heifetz recorded the Violin Concerto for EMI . In 1951 Walton was knighted . In the same year , he prepared an authorised version of Façade , which had undergone many revisions since its premiere . In 1953 , following the accession of Elizabeth II he was again called on to write a coronation march , Orb and Sceptre ; he was also commissioned to write a choral setting of the Te Deum for the occasion . 
 Troilus and Cressida was presented at Covent Garden on 3 December 1954 . Its preparation was dogged by misfortunes . Olivier , originally scheduled to direct it , backed out , as did Henry Moore who had agreed to design the production ; Elisabeth Schwarzkopf , for whom the role of Cressida had been written , refused to perform it ; her replacement , Magda László , had difficulty mastering the English words ; and Sargent , the conductor , " did not seem well acquainted with the score " . The premiere had a friendly reception , but there was a general feeling that Hassall and Walton had written an old @-@ fashioned opera in an outmoded tradition . The piece was subsequently staged in San Francisco , New York and Milan during the next year , but failed to make a positive impression , and did not enter the regular operatic repertory . 
 In 1956 Walton sold his London house and took up full @-@ time residence on Ischia . He built a hilltop house at <unk> and called it La Mortella . Susana Walton created a magnificent garden there . Walton 's other works of the 1950s include the music for a fourth Shakespeare film , Olivier 's Richard III , and the Cello Concerto ( 1956 ) , written for Gregor Piatigorsky , who gave the premiere in January 1957 with the Boston Symphony Orchestra and the conductor Charles Munch . Some critics felt that the concerto was old @-@ fashioned ; Peter Heyworth wrote that there was little in the work that would have startled an audience in the year the Titanic met its iceberg ( 1912 ) . It has nevertheless entered the regular repertoire , performed by Paul Tortelier , Yo @-@ Yo Ma , Lynn Harrell and Pierre Fournier among others . 
 In 1966 Walton successfully underwent surgery for lung cancer . Until then he had been an inveterate pipe @-@ smoker , but after the operation he never smoked again . While he was convalescing , he worked on a one @-@ act comic opera , The Bear , which was premiered at Britten 's Aldeburgh Festival , in June 1966 , and enthusiastically received . Walton had become so used to being written off by music critics that he felt " there must be something wrong when the worms turned on some praise . " Walton received the Order of Merit in 1967 , the fourth composer to be so honoured , after Elgar , Vaughan Williams and Britten . 
 Walton 's orchestral works of the 1960s include his Second Symphony ( 1960 ) , Variations on a Theme by Hindemith ( 1963 ) , Capriccio <unk> ( 1968 ) , and Improvisations on an Impromptu of Benjamin Britten ( 1969 ) . His song cycles from this period were composed for Peter Pears ( Anon. in Love , 1960 ) and Schwarzkopf ( A Song for the Lord Mayor 's Table , 1962 ) . He was commissioned to compose a score for the 1969 film Battle of Britain , but the film company rejected most of his score , replacing it with music by Ron Goodwin . A concert suite of Walton 's score was published and recorded after Walton 's death . After his experience over Battle of Britain , Walton declared that he would write no more film music , but he was persuaded by Olivier to compose the score for a film of Chekhov 's Three Sisters in 1969 . 
