 Apart from the lion , the cheetah is the only cat that is gregarious ; however , female cheetahs tend to remain solitary . Tim Caro , of the University of California , Davis , identified the various social classes and their longevity . Pregnant and nursing females , a few adolescents , and males who have not joined any groups are typically solitary . Non @-@ lactating females , their cubs , adolescent siblings , and several males will form their own groups . A loose association between individuals of the opposite sex can be observed during the breeding season . These social groups typically keep away from one another . 
 Adult males are typically gregarious despite their territoriality , and may group together for life and form " coalitions " . These groups collectively defend their territories . In most cases , a coalition will comprise brothers born in the same litter who stayed together after weaning . However , if a cub is the only male in the litter , then two or three lone males may form a small group , or a lone male may join an existing group . Males in coalitions establish territories that ensure maximum access to females . Solitary males may or may not be territorial . Some males alternate between solitude and coalitions , whichever ensures encounters with a greater number of females . Although a coalition , due to its larger membership , demands a greater amount of resources than do the solitary males or their groups , the coalition has a greater chance of encountering and acquiring females for mating . 
 Females are not territorial , and live alone or with their offspring . Juveniles form mixed @-@ sex groups after weaning , but most of the young females stay back with their mother , with whom they do not show any significant interaction . Males eventually mature and try to acquire territories . 
 = = = Home ranges and territories = = = 
 Males in coalitions establish territories in locations that ensure maximum access to females . Males exhibit marking behaviour – territories , termite mounds , trees , common tracks and junctions , and trees are marked by urine , faeces , and claw scratches . The sizes can be location specific . For example , territories range from 33 to 42 km2 ( 13 to 16 sq mi ) in the Serengeti , while in the <unk> Private Game Reserve , the size can be 57 to 161 km2 ( 22 to 62 sq mi ) . Territorial solitary males establish considerably larger territories , as large as 777 km2 ( 300 sq mi ) in the Serengeti or 1 @,@ 390 km2 ( 540 sq mi ) in central Namibia . A 1987 study of the social organisation in males showed that territoriality depends on the size and age of the males and the membership of the coalition . It concluded that solitary as well as grouped males have a nearly equal chance of coming across females , but the males in coalitions are notably healthier and have better chances of survival than their solitary counterparts . In the Serengeti , only 4 % of the solitary males hold territories , while those who joined coalitions were far more successful . The average period for which territories are held is four months for <unk> , seven @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half months for pairs , and 22 months for trios . 
 Males exhibit pronounced marking behaviour – territories , termite mounds , trees , common tracks , and junctions are marked by urine , faeces , and claw scratches . Males marking their territory by urination stand less than a metre away from a tree or rock surface with the tail raised , pointing the penis either horizontally backward or 60 ° upward . Territorial clashes can take place between two coalitions , or coalitions and solitary males ; fights , however , are rarely gruesome . Another major reason for fights is to acquire dominance in the breeding season . These can even involve cannibalism . 
 Unlike male and other felines , female cheetahs do not establish territories . Instead , they live in unguarded areas , known as " home ranges " . Though home ranges often overlap , there is hardly any interaction between the females . Females are regular visitors to male territories . The size of a home range depends mainly on the availability of prey . The greater the density of prey animals in an area , the smaller the home range of a female cheetah there . In areas with nomadic prey animals ( such as the Thomson 's gazelle in the Serengeti and the springbok the in Kalahari Desert ) , the home ranges cover hundreds of square kilometres . In contrast , home ranges are merely 100 – 200 square kilometres ( 39 – 77 sq mi ) large where sedentary prey , such as the impala in the Kruger National Park , is available . 
 = = = Communication = = = 
 = = = = Vocalisations = = = = 
 The cheetah is a prominently vocal felid . They cannot roar but instead purr . A wide variety of cheetah vocalisations have been identified by several terms , but most of these lack a detailed acoustic description , which makes it difficult to assess reliably which term denotes which sound . In 2010 Robert Eklund ( of the University of Göteborg , Sweden ) and colleagues published a detailed report on the purring of the cheetah and compared it with that observed in other felids . The cheetah purrs when content , or to greet known individuals . A characteristic of purring is that it is realised on both <unk> and <unk> airstreams . Other vocalisations Eklund identified include : 
 Growling : Often accompanied by hissing and spitting , the cheetah growls to show its annoyance , or when faced with danger . A study showed that growls consist of numerous short pulses with a combined duration of up to five seconds . 
 Moaning or yowling : This is an escalated version of growling and is often combined with it . It is typically displayed when the danger increases . A study found that <unk> could last as long as two seconds . 
 Agonistic vocalisations : Eklund used this term as a reference to a combination of growls , moans , and hisses that is followed by spitting , a feature more conspicuous in cheetah than in other cats . In addition to spitting , the cheetah will hit the ground with its front paws . 
 In a 1991 book , biologist R. D. Estes had enlisted , in addition to the aforementioned vocalisations , some other sounds made by the cheetah : 
 <unk> : Similar to the meow of the domestic cat , the cheetah can bleat , and sometimes moan , when a larger predator deprives it of its prey . 
 Chirping or stutter @-@ barking : A cheetah chirps when excited ( for instance , when gathered around a kill ) . This vocalisation can also be used at social meetings , during courtship , or in attempting to find another ; the chirp of a mother searching for her cubs , which sounds more like the yelp of a dog than the chirp of a bird , can be heard up to 2 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 2 mi ) away . A study estimated the chirp 's total duration as 0 @.@ 09 to 0 @.@ 5 seconds . 
 <unk> : The purpose of this sound is similar to that of the chirp . It may resemble a growl . Zoologist Jonathan Kingdon considered the chirp of the cheetah as similar to the soft roar of the lion , and its churr as the latter 's loud roar . The churr , is staccato and has a shorter range than the chirp . A study showed that churrs comprise 3 to 15 separate pulses and last 0 @.@ 1 to 1 @.@ 3 seconds . 
 Mother @-@ cub vocalisations : Apart from chirping , mothers use some other sounds to interact with their cubs . A repeated ihn ihn is used to gather the cubs , while a <unk> <unk> is used to guide them on a journey . A low @-@ pitched alarm call is used to warn the cubs to stand still in the presence of danger . 
 <unk> : This sound is produced by cubs bickering over a kill ; the pitch rises with the intensity of the quarrel , and ends on a harsh note . 
 = = = = Other methods = = = = 
 Scent plays a significant role in olfactory communication . Cheetahs often investigate urine @-@ marked places ( territories or common landmarks ) for a long time by crouching on their forelegs and carefully smelling the place . Then the male will itself urinate there and sniff at its own scent before leaving . Other observing individuals will repeat the ritual . Females may also show marking behaviour but less prominently than the males . Females in oestrus will show maximum urine @-@ marking , and her excrement can attract males from far off . 
 Social meetings are marked by mutual sniffing in oral and genital areas , grooming one another , rubbing the cheeks , and face @-@ licking . Further physical contact has not been observed . 
 The tear streaks are a means of visual communication . The tear streaks combined with the black lips and the contrasting white fur give the face a striking appearance and form clear expressions when viewed from a close range . The ears and the face are obscure from a distance , and so are the expressions . On the other hand , the tail is quite conspicuous and is probably used by mothers to direct juveniles to follow them . 
 = = = = Display behaviour = = = = 
 Cheetahs engage in several displays during fights , hunting , or self @-@ defence . Prior to a sprint , the cheetah will hold its head down , with aggression on its face , and approach the target in a stiff gait . The aggressive expression is maintained during the run . To defend itself or its prey , a cheetah will hold its body low to the ground , and produce a snarl with its mouth wide open , the eyes staring threateningly ahead and the ears folded backward . This may be accompanied by moans , hisses , and growls . In more severe cases , the ground is hit with the paws . Fights are characterised by biting , tearing out the fur and attempts at strangling on both sides . 
 = = = Hunting and competitors = = = 
 The cheetah is a carnivore that prefers medium @-@ sized prey with a body mass ranging from 23 to 56 kg ( 51 to 123 lb ) . <unk> , duiker , Grant 's gazelle , impala , reedbuck , springbok , and Thomson 's gazelle are some of the common targets of the cheetah . Other prey animals include the bat @-@ eared fox , bushbuck , kudu , hartebeest , nyala , oribi , roan antelope , steenbok , sable antelope , and waterbuck ; they prey less frequently on African buffalo , gemsbok , giraffe , ostrich , warthog , wildebeest , and zebra . A study showed that a major proportion of the diet of Asiatic cheetahs consists of livestock ; local species such as chinkara , desert hare , <unk> gazelle , ibex , rodents , and wild sheep are also hunted . Generally , only groups of cheetahs will attempt to kill large animals such as hartebeest , although mothers with young cubs will attempt to secure a large prey all by themselves . There are no records of cheetah killing human beings . The diet of a cheetah depends on the area in which it lives . For example , on the East African plains , its preferred prey is the Thomson 's gazelle , somewhat smaller than the cheetah . In contrast , in Kwa @-@ Zulu Natal the preferred prey is the significantly larger nyala , males of which can weigh up to 130 kg ( 290 lb ) . They do , however , opt for young and adolescent targets , which make up about 50 % of the cheetah diet despite constituting only a small portion of the prey population . 
 Cheetahs hunt primarily throughout the day , but geographical variations exist . For instance , cheetahs in the Sahara and the Masai Mara hunt after sunset to escape the high temperatures of the day . In the Serengeti they hunt when the lions and hyenas are inactive . A study in Nairobi National Park ( Kenya ) showed that the success of the hunt depends on the species , age , sex , and habitat of the prey , and the size of the hunting herd or the efficiency of the hunting individual . Cheetahs hunt by vision rather than by scent . Prey is located from observation points or while roaming . Animals toward the edges of the herd are preferred . The cheetah will stalk their prey to within 100 – 300 m ( 330 – 980 ft ) ; it will try to approach it as closely as possible while concealing itself in cover , sometimes even up to 60 m ( 200 ft ) of the prey . The cheetah will crouch and move slowly while stalking , occasionally becoming motionless . The chase usually lasts less than a minute ; if the cheetah fails to make a kill quickly , it will give up . Cheetahs have an average hunting success rate of 40 to 50 % . 
 Cheetahs kill their prey by tripping it during the chase ; the cheetah can use its strong dewclaw to knock the prey off its balance . To kill medium- to large @-@ sized prey , the cheetah bites the prey 's throat to suffocate it to death . A bite on the back of the neck or the snout is enough to kill smaller prey . The prey is then taken to a shaded place ; the cheetah , highly exhausted after the chase , rests beside the kill and pants heavily for nearly five to 55 minutes . Groups of cheetah devour the kill peacefully , though minor growling may be observed . Cheetahs not involved in hunting will immediately start eating . Cheetah can consume large quantities of food . In a study at the Etosha National Park ( Namibia ) , the cheetah consumed as much as 10 kilograms ( 22 lb ) within two hours and stayed close to the remains for 11 hours . Cheetah move their head from side to side so that the sharp carnassial teeth effectively tear the flesh , which can then be swallowed without chewing . They typically begin with the hindquarters , and then progress toward the abdomen and the spine . Rib bones are chewed on at the ends , and the limbs are not generally torn apart while eating . 
 The cheetah , especially mothers with young cubs , are highly vigilant ; they need to remain on a lookout for large carnivores who might steal the prey or harm the cubs , and for any potential prey . The cheetah will surrender its kill to sturdier carnivores such as lions , leopards , spotted hyena , brown hyena , and wild dogs . Cheetahs lose around 10 to 15 % of their kills to other predators ; the percentage was found to be as high as 50 % in a 1986 study . Cheetahs have rarely been observed to feed on the kills of other carnivores ; this may be due to vultures and spotted hyena adroitly capturing and consuming heavy carcasses within a short time . 
 = = = Speed and acceleration = = = 
 = = = = Adaptations = = = = 
 The cheetah 's body is specialised for speed , and it is the fastest land animal . Estes describes the cheetah as the " felid version of the greyhound " , as both have similar morphology and the ability to reach tremendous speeds in a shorter time than other mammals . The thin and light body of the cheetah makes it well @-@ suited to short , explosive bursts of speed , rapid acceleration , and an ability to execute extreme changes in direction while moving at speed . These adaptations account for much of the cheetah 's ability to catch fast @-@ moving prey . 
 The large nasal passages ensure fast flow of sufficient air , and the enlarged heart and lungs allow the enrichment of blood with oxygen in a short time . This allows cheetahs to rapidly regain their stamina after a chase . During a typical chase , their respiratory rate increases from 60 to 150 breaths per minute . While running , in addition to having good traction due to their semi @-@ retractable claws , cheetahs use their tail as a rudder @-@ like means of steering that enables them to make sharp turns , necessary to outflank antelopes that often change direction to escape during a chase . The protracted claws increase grip over the ground , while foot pads make the sprint more convenient over tough ground . The tight binding of the tibia and the fibula restrict rotation about the lower leg , thus stabilising the animal throughout the sprint ; the downside , however , is that this reduces climbing efficiency . The pendulum @-@ like motion of the scapula increases the stride length and assists in shock absorption . The extension of the vertebral column can add as much as 76 centimetres ( 30 in ) to the length of a stride . During more than half of the time of the sprint , the animal has all four limbs in the air ; this also contributes to the stride length . 
 In the course of a sprint , the heat production in cheetah exceeds more than 50 % of the normal . The cheetah retains as much as 90 % of the heat generated in its body during the chase , which is considerably larger than the 20 % in the case of the domestic dog . The cheetah does not indulge in long distance chases , lest it develop dangerous temperatures , nearly 40 to 41 ° C ( 104 to 106 ° F ) . The cheetah will run no more than 500 m ( 1 @,@ 640 ft ) at the tremendous speeds of 80 to 112 km / h ( 50 to 70 mph ) ; very rarely do they run at these speeds as most chases are within 100 metres ( 330 ft ) . 
 = = = = Recorded values = = = = 
 In general , the speed of a hunting cheetah averages 64 km / h ( 40 mph ) during a chase , interspersed with a few short bursts when the speed may vary between 104 and 120 km / h ( 65 and 75 mph ) ; the most reliable measurement of the typical speed during a short chase is 112 km / h ( 70 mph ) . As this is an averaged value , a cheetah 's maximum speed may be still higher ; the value of the maximum speed is , however , disputed . The speeds attained by the cheetah are only slightly greater than those achieved by the pronghorn 88 @.@ 5 km / h ( 55 @.@ 0 mph ) and the springbok 88 km / h ( 55 mph ) . Yet the cheetah has a greater probability of succeeding in the chase due to its exceptional acceleration – it can attain a speed of 75 km / h ( 47 mph ) in just two seconds . One stride or jump of a galloping cheetah averages 7 metres ( 23 ft ) . Similarly , the ability to rapidly change direction is pivotal in ensuring hunting success . Cheetahs typically walk at 3 – 4 kilometres per hour ( 1 @.@ 9 – 2 @.@ 5 mph ) . 
 Speed and acceleration values for the hunting cheetah may be different from those for the non @-@ hunting because , while engaged in the chase , the cheetah is more likely to be twisting and turning and may be running through vegetation . In 2012 an 11 @-@ year @-@ old cheetah from the Cincinnati Zoo named Sarah made a world record by running 100 m ( 330 ft ) in 5 @.@ 95 seconds over a set run , during which she ran a recorded maximum speed of 98 kilometres per hour ( 61 mph ) . A study of five wild cheetahs ( three females , two males ) during hunting reported a maximum speed of 93 km / h ( 58 mph ) , with an average of 48 to 56 km / h ( 30 to 35 mph ) . Speed can be increased by almost 10 km / h ( 6 mph ) in a single stride . The average chase is 173 m ( 568 ft ) and the maximum ranges from 407 to 559 m ( 1 @,@ 335 to 1 @,@ 834 ft ) . 
 = = = Reproduction = = = 
 Cheetahs breed throughout the year ; they are induced ovulators . Females become sexually mature at 21 to 22 months of age . Females are <unk> – they have an oestrus ( " heat " ) cycle every 12 days ( this can vary from 10 to 20 days ) , each oestrus lasting one to three days . A female can give birth again after 17 to 20 months ; however , on the loss of a whole litter mothers can mate again . Urine @-@ marking in males becomes more pronounced when a female in their vicinity comes into oestrus . Males fight among one another to secure access to the female ; even males in a coalition may show some aggression toward one another on approaching a female . One male eventually wins dominance over the others . Mating , observed mainly at night , begins with the male approaching the female , who lies down on the ground . No courtship behaviour is observed ; the male immediately secures hold of the female 's nape and copulation takes place . The pair then ignore each other and part ways . However , they meet and copulate a few more times within the next few days . <unk> , females can mate with several males . The mean number of motile sperm in a single ejaculation is nearly 25 @.@ 3 million . 
 Gestation is nearly three months long . The number of cubs born can vary from one to eight , though the common number is three to five . Birth takes place in a sheltered place such as thick vegetation . Each cub weighs nearly 150 – 400 g ( 5 @.@ 3 – 14 @.@ 1 oz ) at birth ; the eyes , shut at birth , open in 4 to 11 days . Newborn cubs can crawl and spit ; they can start walking by two weeks . Their nape , shoulders and back are thickly covered with long bluish grey hair . This downy underlying fur , called a " mantle " , gives them a Mohawk @-@ type appearance ; this fur is shed as the cheetah grows older . A study noted that this mane gives a cheetah cub the appearance of the honey badger ; this could act as a camouflage in both animals . Cheetah cubs are highly vulnerable during the first few weeks of their life ; mothers keep their cubs hidden in dense vegetation for the first month . 
 Cubs start following their mothers at six weeks . The mother frequently shifts the cubs to new locations . A study of play behaviour of cheetah cubs showed that cubs tend to play after nursing or while they are on the move with their mothers . Play involves plenty of agility ; attacks are seldom lethal . Playing cubs stay near their mothers . The study further revealed that while the cubs showed improvement in catching each other as they grew up , the ability to crouch and hide did not develop remarkably . Thus , it was suggested that play helps develop only certain aspects of predator defence . Weaning occurs at three to six months of age . The mother brings kills to her cubs ; the cubs might purr as the mother licks them clean after the meal . Cubs as young as six months try to capture small prey like hares and juvenile gazelles . However , they may have to wait until as long as 15 months of age to make a successful kill on their own . 
 The offspring may stay with the mother for 13 to 20 months , associating with one another and feeding on kills together . After weaning , juveniles may form mixed @-@ sex herds ; young females may stay back with their mother , but there is hardly any interaction between the mother and daughters . The females in the mixed @-@ sex herd gradually move out as they near sexual maturity . In the Serengeti , average age of independence of 70 observed litters was 17 @.@ 1 months . Young females had their first litters at the age of about 2 @.@ 4 years and subsequent litters about 20 months later . The lifespan of wild cheetahs is 14 to 15 years for females ; their reproductive cycle typically ends by 12 years of age . Males generally live as long as 10 years . 
 = = = Mortality = = = 
 High mortality rates have been recorded in the Serengeti . In a 1994 study , nearly 77 % of litters died before eight weeks of birth , and nearly 83 % of those alive could not make it to adolescence ( 14 weeks ) . Lions emerged as the major predator of juveniles , accounting for nearly 78 % of the deaths . The study concluded that the survival rate of cubs till weaning was a mere 4 @.@ 8 % . This was attributed to the open terrain of the region , which does not allow cheetahs to conceal themselves . Cheetah cubs face higher mortality than most other large mammals . 
 It has been suggested that the significant lack of genetic diversity in cheetahs is a cause of poor quality and production of sperm , and birth defects such as cramped teeth , kinked tails , and bent limbs . Cheetahs do have low fertility rates , but they appear to have flourished for thousands of years with these low levels of genetic variance . Cheetah expert Laurie Marker points out that the high level of genetic uniformity would mean that if an infectious disease surfaced in a population , all of them have ( or lack ) the same level of immunity . In 1982 , 60 % of the cheetah population in the Wildlife Safari ( Oregon , United States ) died due to a peritonitis epidemic . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The cheetah inhabits a variety of habitats ; in Africa it has been observed in dry forests , scrub forests , and savannahs . However , the distribution of prey may influence habitat preferences ; in a study in the Kruger National Park , female cheetahs were found to spend a significant amount of time in woodlands , where impala occurred . It was suggested that though the forested area was unsuitable for hunting , the females preferred woodlands to encounter more impala . Male coalitions , on the other hand , shunned dense habitats and spent most of the time in open savannahs . An explanation given for this was that the coalitions prefer larger prey than impala . Though they do not prefer montane regions , cheetahs can occur at elevations as high as 4 @,@ 000 m ( 13 @,@ 000 ft ) . An open area with some cover , such as diffused bushes , is probably ideal for the cheetah because it needs to stalk and pursue its prey over a distance , exploiting its speed . This also minimises the risk of encountering larger carnivores . Complete lack of cover , however , can be a cause of prey loss and mortality . 
 In prehistoric times , the cheetah was distributed throughout Asia , Africa , Europe , and North America . Gradually , it vanished from Europe and North America . Nearly 500 years ago , the cheetah was still common throughout Africa , though it avoided deserts and tropical forests . Afghanistan , Iran , Iraq , Palestine , Syria , and the Ganga and Indus river valleys sheltered large numbers of cheetahs . However , today the cheetah has been exterminated from the majority of its earlier range . The IUCN estimates that the total expanse of the range of the cheetah in earlier times was approximately 25 @,@ 344 @,@ 648 km2 ( 9 @,@ 785 @,@ 623 sq mi ) ; the range ( as of 2015 ) has since then reduced to 2 @,@ 709 @,@ 054 km2 ( 1 @,@ 045 @,@ 972 sq mi ) , a substantial decline of 89 % . 
 In Africa , the cheetah occurs mainly in eastern and southern Africa ; the range across the continent has declined to a mere 10 % of the historic expanse . The range in eastern Africa has reduced to 6 % of its original range , so that presently it is distributed in an area of 310 @,@ 586 km2 ( 119 @,@ 918 sq mi ) . In the Horn of Africa , the cheetah occurs in Ethiopia , Kenya , South Sudan , Tanzania , and Uganda . The range has not reduced as much in the southern part of the continent , where it occurs in an area of 1 @,@ 223 @,@ 388 km2 ( 472 @,@ 353 sq mi ) , 22 % of its original range . Though cheetahs no longer occur in Malawi , significant populations thrive in south @-@ western Angola , Botswana , south @-@ western Mozambique , Namibia , northern South Africa , southern Zambia , and Zimbabwe . Very few isolated populations occur in the Sahara ; the population density in this region is as low as two to three individuals per 10 @,@ 000 km2 ( 3 @,@ 900 sq mi ) . They occur in very low numbers in northern and western Africa . In the past , the cheetah ranged across vast stretches of Asia : from the Mediterranean and the Arabian Peninsula in the west to the Indian subcontinent in the east , and as far north as the Caspian and Aral Seas . However , the cheetah has disappeared from the majority of its historic range , save for Iran and possibly a few areas in Afghanistan , the Indian subcontinent , and Turkmenistan . 
 = = Status and threats = = 
 The cheetah has been classified as Vulnerable by the IUCN ; it is listed under Appendix I of the Convention on the Conservation of Migratory Species of Wild Animals ( CMS ) and Appendix I of CITES ( Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species ) . In 2014 the CITES Standing Committee recognised the cheetah as a " species of priority " in their strategies in northeastern Africa to counter wildlife trafficking . As of 2015 , the IUCN gives the total number of surviving individuals as nearly 6 @,@ 700 . Regional estimates have been given as : 1 @,@ 960 in eastern Africa ( as of 2007 ) ; 4 @,@ 190 in southern Africa ( as of 2007 ) ; and 440 in western , central , and northern Africa ( as of 2012 ) . The southern half of the continent , therefore , is home to the largest number of cheetah . 29 sub @-@ populations have been identified , of which most consist of no more than 500 individuals . A small population of 60 to 100 individuals was reported from Iran in 2007 . Populations are feared to be declining , especially those of adults . 
 The cheetah is threatened by habitat loss through agricultural and industrial expansion ; moreover , the animal apparently requires a large area to live in as indicated by its low population densities . The cheetah appears to be less capable than the leopard of coexisting with humans . As such , human interference can disturb the activities , such as hunting and feeding , of cheetah . With 76 % of their range consisting of unprotected land , the cheetah are often targeted by farmers and pastoralists who attempt to protect their livestock . However , cheetahs typically do not prefer livestock for prey . Game hunters may also try to harm cheetah as these carnivores can deprive them of valuable game . Roadkill can be another threat , especially in areas where roads have been constructed near the natural habitat or protected areas . Cases of roadkill involving cheetahs have been reported from <unk> , <unk> , and Bafq . The threat is posed by infectious diseases is minor , given the low population densities and hence the minimal chance of infection . 
 = = Conservation measures = = 
 The IUCN has recommended co @-@ operation between countries across the cheetah 's range to minimise the conflict between cheetahs and human beings . A 2016 study showed that ecotourism can have a significantly positive impact on the conservation of the cheetah . Although the requirement of space for the habitat would have to be compromised in most cases , establishment of private reserves for cheetahs and ensuring the absence of predators and poachers could be a successful conservation measure . Additionally , the financial benefits accrued and the awareness generated can further aid the cause of the cheetah . At the same time , the animals should not be unnecessarily handled or disturbed , as cheetahs are particularly sensitive to human interference . 
 = = = In Africa = = = 
 The Range Wide Conservation Program for Cheetah and African Wild Dogs ( <unk> ) , the brainchild of Sarah Durant and Rosie Woodroffe ( of the Zoological Society of London ) , was started in 2007 with the primary aim of ensuring better conservation measures for the cheetah and the wild dog – two species with very low population densities . A joint initiative by the ZSL , the Wildlife Conservation Society , and the IUCN Cat Specialist Group , the program has among its major goals a review of the conservation policies adopted by the South African countries , and study and action on illegal hunting and trade of the cheetah . In a 2007 publication , Durant emphasised the role of land management and improvement in connectivity across the range in cheetah conservation , in the lack of which the populations might face severe fragmentation . 
 Benin ( 2014 ) , Botswana ( 2007 ) , Chad ( 2015 ) , Ethiopia ( 2010 ) , Kenya ( 2007 ) , Mozambique ( 2010 ) , Namibia ( 2013 ) , Niger ( 2012 ) , South Africa ( 2009 ) , South Sudan ( 2009 ) , Tanzania ( 2013 ) , Zambia ( 2009 ) , and Zimbabwe ( 2009 ) have formulated action plans for the conservation of the cheetah ( the years in which the workshops were held are given in brackets ) . 
 = = = In Asia = = = 
 In the 20th century , the populations of cheetah in India saw a drastic fall . The last physical evidence of the cheetah in India was three individuals , all shot by the Maharajah of <unk> in 1947 in eastern Madhya Pradesh , a man also noted for holding a record for shooting 1 @,@ 360 tigers . During the early 2000s , scientists from the Centre for Cellular and Molecular Biology ( CCMB ) , Hyderabad , proposed a plan to clone Asiatic cheetahs obtained from Iran . India asked Iran to transport one live pair to India , or , if that was not possible , allow them to collect sperm and of the cheetah pair in Iran itself . However , Iran rejected both proposals . 
 In September 2009 , the then Minister of Environment and Forests , Jairam Ramesh , assigned the Wildlife Trust of India and the Wildlife Institute of India with the task of examining the potential of cheetah reintroduction in the nation . The report , submitted in 2010 , showed that the Kuno Wildlife Sanctuary and <unk> Wildlife Sanctuary in Madhya Pradesh , and <unk> Landscape and Desert National Park in Rajasthan have a high potential to support reintroduced cheetah populations . These areas were found to be spacious ; of these four areas , the Kuno Wildlife Sanctuary had the largest available area , 6 @,@ 800 square kilometres ( 2 @,@ 600 sq mi ) . Moreover , these were rich in prey availability . The Sanjay National Park , though comprising an area of 12 @.@ 500 square kilometres ( 4 @.@ 826 sq mi ) and having supported cheetah populations before the independence of India in 1947 , is no longer suitable for the cheetah due to low prey density and risks of poaching . 
 In 2001 the Iranian government collaborated with the Cheetah Conservation Fund , the IUCN , Panthera , United Nations Development Programme ( UNDP ) , and the Wildlife Conservation Society on the Conservation of Asiatic Cheetah Project ( <unk> ) to protect the natural habitat of the Asiatic cheetah and its prey , to ensure that development projects do not hamper its survival , and to highlight the plight of the Asiatic cheetah . Iran declared 31 August as National Cheetah Day in 2006 . 
 = = Interaction with human beings = = 
 = = = Taming = = = 
 The cheetah in general shows no hostility toward human beings , probably due to its sociable nature . This might be a reason why the cheetah can be easily tamed , as it has been since antiquity . Reliefs in the Deir el @-@ Bahari temple complex tell of an expedition by Egyptians to the Land of Punt during the reign of the pharaoh Hatshepsut ( 1507 – 1458 BC ) that fetched , among other things , animals called " panthers " for Egypt . Two types of " panthers " were depicted in these sculptures : leashed cheetahs , referred to as " panthers of the north " , and sturdy leopards , referred to as " panthers of the south " . During the New Kingdom ( 16th to 11th centuries BC ) , cheetahs were common pet animals for the royalty , who decorated the animals with beautiful collars and leashes . The Egyptians would use their dogs to bring the concealed prey out in the open , after which a cheetah would be set upon it to kill it . A Sumerian seal dating back to nearly 3000 BC , featuring a leashed animal resembling a cheetah , has fuelled speculation that the cheetah might have been first domesticated and used for hunting in Sumer ( Mesopotamia ) . However , Thomas T. <unk> ( of The College of New Jersey ) argues that the depicted animal might not be a cheetah given its largely dog @-@ like features ; moreover , the background gives an impression of a montane area , which the cheetah does not typically inhabit . 
 Mainly two kinds of theories have been put forth to explain the subsequent expansion of the cheetah into Asia , Europe , and the rest of Africa . Historians who accept the Sumerian origin of the domesticated cheetah – such as Heinz F. <unk> and Burchard <unk> – hold that the animal gradually spread out to central and northern Africa , from where it reached India . On the other hand , historians such as Frederick E. <unk> accept the Egyptian origin and state that the cheetah gradually spread into central Asia , Iran , and India . In the third century AD , Roman author Claudius Aelianus wrote of tame panthers in India and " smaller lions " that would be used for tracking and hunting ; the account cannot be very reliable as Roman , as well as Greek , literature is not generally clear in its references to different types of cats . 
 Hunting with cheetahs became more prevalent toward the seventh century AD . In the Middle East , the cheetah would accompany the nobility to hunts in special seats behind saddles . Cheetahs continued to be associated with royalty and elegance in western Asia till as late as the 19th century . The first phase of taming would take several weeks , in which the cheetah would be kept tethered and made to get accustomed to human beings . Next , the cheetah would be tempted with food and trained to mount horses . Finally , its hunting instincts would be aroused by slaughtering animals before it . The whole process could take as long as a year to complete . In eastern Asia , the records are confusing as regional names for the leopard and the cheetah may be used interchangeably . The earliest depiction of cheetahs from eastern Asia dates back to the Tang dynasty ( 7th to 10th centuries AD ) ; paintings depict tethered cheetahs as well as cheetahs mounted on horses . Chinese emperors would use cheetahs , as well as caracals , as gifts . In the 13th and the 14th centuries , the Yuan rulers bought numerous caracals , cheetahs , and tigers from the western parts of the empire and Muslim merchants in return for gold , silver , cash , and silk . According to the Ming <unk> , the subsequent Ming dynasty ( 14th to 17th centuries ) continued this practice . The cheetah gradually entered Eurasia toward the 14th century , though they never became as popular as they had in the Middle East . The Mughal ruler Akbar the Great ( 1556 – 1605 ) is said to have kept as many as 1000 cheetahs . However , his son Jahangir wrote in his memoirs , <unk> @-@ e @-@ <unk> , that only one of them gave birth to cubs . Mughal rulers trained cheetahs as well as caracals in a similar way as the West Asians , and used them to hunt game – especially blackbuck . The rampant hunting severely affected the populations of wild animals . 
 = = = In captivity = = = 
 Mortality under captivity is generally high ; reasons include stillbirths , birth defects , cannibalism , hypothermia , neglect of cubs by mothers , and infectious diseases . A study comparing the health of captive and wild cheetahs noted that despite having similar genetic make @-@ up , wild cheetahs are far healthier than their captive counterparts . The study identified possible stress factors such as restricted habitat and interaction with human beings and other carnivores , and recommended private and spacious areas for captive cheetahs . A study of diseases suffered by captive cheetahs in the period 1989 – 92 in several North American zoos showed that hepatic <unk> @-@ occlusive disease , a disease of the liver , had affected 82 % of the deceased cheetahs , caused nine deaths , and occurred in 51 % of living females . Chronic gastritis was detected in 91 % of the population . <unk> , a disease of the kidneys , emerged as another significant disease , affecting 84 % of the cheetahs ; another renal disease , <unk> , affected 39 % of the cheetahs . Feline infectious peritonitis caused two deaths . Pneumonia was a major cause for juvenile deaths . Another study concluded that excess of vitamin A in their diets could result in <unk> @-@ occlusive disease in their livers . 
 Moreover , cheetahs are poor breeders in captivity , while wild individuals are far more successful . In a 1992 study , females in Serengeti were found to have 95 % success rate in breeding . In contrast , only 20 % of the North American captive cheetahs bred successfully in 1991 . Studies have shown that in @-@ vitro fertilisation in cheetah poses more difficulties than are faced in the case of other cats . 
 = = = In popular culture = = = 
 The cheetah has been widely portrayed in a variety of artistic works . In Bacchus and Ariadne , an oil painting by the 16th @-@ century Italian painter Titian , the chariot of the Greek god Dionysus ( Bacchus ) is depicted as being drawn by two cheetahs . The cheetahs in the painting were previously considered to be leopards . In 1764 English painter George Stubbs commemorated the gifting of a cheetah to George III by the English Governor of Madras , Sir George Pigot in his painting Cheetah with Two Indian Attendants and a Stag . The painting depicts a cheetah , hooded and collared by two Indian servants , along with a stag it was supposed to prey upon . The 1896 painting The Caress , by the 19th @-@ century Belgian symbolist painter Fernand <unk> , is a representation of the myth of Oedipus and the Sphinx . It portrays a creature with a woman 's head and a cheetah 's body ( often misidentified as a leopard 's ) . 
 A variety of literature mentions the cheetah . In 1969 author Joy Adamson , of Born Free fame , wrote The Spotted Sphinx , a biography of her pet cheetah Pippa . Hussein , An Entertainment , a novel by Patrick O 'Brian set in the British Raj period in India , illustrates the practice of royalty keeping and training cheetahs to hunt antelopes . The book How It Was with <unk> tells the true story of a family raising an orphaned cheetah cub named <unk> in Kenya . The 2005 film Duma was loosely based on this book . 
 The cheetah has often been featured in marketing and animation . In 1986 Frito @-@ Lay introduced the Chester Cheetah , an anthropomorphic cheetah , as the mascot for their Cheetos . The first release of Apple Inc . ' s Mac OS X , the Mac OS X 10 @.@ 0 , was code @-@ named " Cheetah " ; the subsequent releases have been named after big cats . The animated series <unk> had a character named " <unk> " , an anthropomorphic cheetah , voiced by Lynne Lipton . Comic book superheroine Wonder Woman 's chief adversary is Dr. Barbara Ann Minerva , alias The Cheetah . 
 = New York State Route 48 = 
 New York State Route 48 ( NY 48 ) is a 28 @.@ 20 @-@ mile ( 45 @.@ 38 km ) north – south state highway in Central New York in the United States . The southern terminus of the route is located at Interstate 690 ( I @-@ 690 ) exit 3 near the interchange between I @-@ 690 and the New York State Thruway ( I @-@ 90 ) in Van Buren , northwest of Syracuse . The northern terminus is located at an intersection with NY 104 in Oswego . In between , NY 48 passes through the riverside communities of Baldwinsville and Fulton and runs alongside both the Seneca River and Oswego River . For most of its route , NY 48 serves as an alternate route of NY 481 . The routes share similar alignments along the Oswego River from the Syracuse area to Oswego , with NY 481 following the eastern riverbank between the two locations . 
 When the route was originally assigned as part of the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York , it extended southward into downtown Syracuse . NY 48 was truncated to Van Buren after I @-@ 690 was built over portions of the road in the late 1950s and early 1960s . The portion of former NY 48 that was not supplanted by I @-@ 690 was turned over to Onondaga County ; however , the state reacquired the segment adjacent to the New York State Fairgrounds in 1980 . Around 1931 , a suffixed spur of NY 48 , New York State Route 48A was designated as an alternate from Oswego to the town of Minetto . The route was deleted from the state highway system around 1940 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 NY 48 begins at I @-@ 690 exit 3 just west of the Geddes town line in Van Buren , Onondaga County . Known as State Fair Boulevard , it proceeds west @-@ northwest , paralleling both NY 690 ( the northward continuation of I @-@ 690 ) and the Seneca River as it passes south of the Seneca Golf Club and Community Park . Shortly after passing the park , NY 48 enters the village of Baldwinsville on Syracuse Street and intersects Downer Street , the former routing of NY 31 west of the village . Originally , NY 31 overlapped NY 48 across the Seneca River ( here part of the Erie Canal ) to Genesee Street ; now , however , NY 48 continues alone to Genesee , where it intersects the modern routing of NY 31 ( concurrent with NY 370 ) through Baldwinsville . North of NY 31 and NY 370 , NY 48 becomes Oswego Street and turns northwest before traveling south of Lysander Park as it exits the village and becomes Oswego Road . 
 In the town of Lysander , NY 48 overlaps NY 631 for a short distance westward to an intersection with the northern end of NY 690 . Here , NY 48 turns north , and begins to run as an alternate to NY 481 . Both routes run from the Syracuse area to downtown Oswego . NY 48 runs right along the western side of the Oswego River , while NY 481 runs along the eastern side of the river . Both routes run through downtown Fulton and Oswego which are the two cities along the Oswego River . At several points , all that separates the two routes is the river itself . 
 Further north in Lysander , NY 48 crosses the CSX Transportation @-@ owned Baldwinsville Subdivision before turning to the northeast as it passes through the hamlet of Wrights Corners and entering Oswego County . Just past the county line in Granby , the route turns northwest , following the western bank the Oswego River ( and paralleling County Route 57 or CR 57 on the opposite side ) as it intersects CR 46 near the hamlet of <unk> . NY 48 continues along the riverbank to the city of Fulton , where it gains the name West First Street south of an intersection with NY 176 . Like NY 31 in Baldwinsville , NY 48 originally overlapped NY 176 north to NY 3 ( Broadway ) , where NY 176 continued east . Now , however , NY 176 ends here and NY 48 continues solo to NY 3 . Past Broadway , NY 48 proceeds north through the remainder of Fulton , now paralleling NY 481 extremely close with just Oswego River separating the two . 
 Midway between Fulton and the Minetto hamlet of the same name , NY 48 serves Battle Island State Park , named for a small island in the Oswego River a short distance to the north . NY 48 presses onward along the edge of the Oswego to the hamlet of Minetto , where it intersects CR 24 , formerly NY 48A . North of the hamlet , NY 48 passes by the Oswego Country Club as it enters the Oswego city limits . Once in the City of Oswego , NY 48 becomes West First Street . At Utica Street , NY 48 briefly turns west before turning back north at West Fifth Street and terminating at NY 104 ( Bridge Street ) . West First Street continues north for an additional six blocks to the Lake Ontario shoreline . NY 48 is city @-@ maintained within the cities of Fulton and Oswego ; the rest of the highway is maintained by the New York State Department of Transportation ( NYSDOT ) . 
 = = History = = 
 In the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York , NY 48 was assigned to a previously unnumbered roadway between downtown Syracuse and Oswego . From Van Buren north to Oswego , NY 48 roughly followed its modern alignment ; south of Van Buren , NY 48 was routed on State Fair Boulevard and Geddes Street to terminate at NY 5 , then routed on Erie Boulevard . The route was realigned slightly within Syracuse between 1938 and 1940 to use portions of Hiawatha Boulevard and West Genesee Street ( as well as a new portion of State Fair Boulevard ) to meet NY 5 at the modern intersection of Erie Boulevard and Genesee Street . 
 The portion of the New York State Thruway from Rochester east to the Westmoreland hamlet of Lowell opened on June 24 , 1954 . At the time , exit 39 connected directly to NY 48 . As early as 1954 , plans were drawn up to construct a freeway along the NY 48 corridor between the Thruway and NY 48 at the New York State Fairgrounds just northwest of the Syracuse city limits . Construction on the highway , situated between NY 48 and Onondaga Lake , began in the mid @-@ 1950s and was completed by 1961 . Other areas of State Fair Boulevard ( NY 48 ) were upgraded into limited @-@ access highways , including at Thruway exit 39 and in downtown Syracuse . As a result , NY 48 was truncated to its present southern terminus at the freeway , designated as I @-@ 690 , in Van Buren . 
 Following the removal of NY 48 south of the Thruway , the portion of State Fair Boulevard from the Syracuse city line north to I @-@ 690 exit 5 in Geddes became CR 80 . On April 1 , 1980 , ownership and maintenance of CR 80 between I @-@ 690 exits 6 ( NY 695 ) and 7 ( NY 297 ) was transferred to the state of New York as part of a highway maintenance swap between the state and Onondaga County . This segment , 0 @.@ 90 miles ( 1 @.@ 45 km ) in length , is now designated as NY <unk> , an unsigned reference route . The remainder of State Fair Boulevard within Geddes is still designated as CR 80 even though the designation now exists in two parts . 
 = = NY 48A = = 
 NY 48A was a designation assigned to an alternate route of NY 48 between the city of Oswego and the Minetto hamlet of the same name . It was assigned c . 1931 and began at the modern junction of NY 48 and CR 24 in Minetto . From there , it proceed west on what is now CR 24 and north on West Fifth Street ( partly CR 25 ) to Oswego , where NY 48A reconnected to its parent by way of Niagara Street . The designation was removed c . 1940 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = Cobra Triangle = 
 Cobra Triangle is a 1989 racing , vehicular combat video game developed by Rare and released by Nintendo for the Nintendo Entertainment System . The player controls a weapon @-@ equipped speedboat through 25 levels . Objectives include winning races , saving swimmers , and defusing bombs . The game also includes power @-@ ups and is displayed from a 3D isometric perspective with automatic scrolling that follows the player 's movement . The Stamper brothers designed the game and David Wise wrote its soundtrack . Computer and Video Games highly recommended the game and praised its graphics and gameplay . Later reviewers lauded its level diversity and noted its graphical similarities to previous Rare game R.C. Pro @-@ Am . IGN and GamesRadar ranked Cobra Triangle among their top NES games . The latter considered Cobra Triangle emblematic of the NES era 's aesthetic . It was also included in Rare 's 2015 Xbox One retrospective compilation , Rare Replay . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Cobra Triangle is a racing , vehicular combat video game . The player races a cannon @-@ equipped speedboat against other watercraft . The 25 stages of graduated difficulty vary in objectives : winning races , saving swimmers , and defusing bombs . Some levels end in boss fights . In races , the speedboat must avoid the riverbank and mid @-@ river obstacles while outpacing a timer . The boat can attack other competitors , fly airborne via ramps , and pick up power @-@ ups that upgrade its weapons and speed . In upstream races , the player navigates the speedboat to avoid logs and whirlpools . In bomb defusing activities , the player moves four protected bombs to a detonation site . In another mode , the player must destroy rogue boats before they drag swimmers to the edge of the lake . Any swimmers dragged halfway must be manually returned to the lake 's center . The player loses a life if unsuccessful . Cobra Triangle is displayed from a 3D isometric perspective and its screen automatically scrolls as the speedboat moves . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 Cobra Triangle was developed by Rare . Mark Betteridge and Tim and Chris Stamper designed the game and David Wise wrote its soundtrack . Nintendo released Cobra Triangle in July 1989 . It was later included in the August 2015 Xbox One compilation of 30 Rare titles , Rare Replay . 
 In contemporaneous reviews , Jaz Rignall ( Computer and Video Games ) wrote in high praise of the " convincing " graphics , smooth gameplay , and " addictive " replay value . The magazine selected the game as a recommendation . Mark Caswell ( The Games Machine ) was most frustrated by the waterfall jumping sequences . In a retrospective review , Skyler Miller ( AllGame ) appreciated the diversity of levels . Reviewers noted its graphical similarity to R.C. Pro @-@ Am , particularly in its camera angle and gameplay . Brett Alan Weiss ( AllGame ) put Cobra Triangle in the lineage of the 1982 River Raid for the Atari 2600 . In comparison , both games have vehicular boat combat while avoiding land . Cobra Triangle 's camera view is isometric rather than overhead , and its gameplay is more focused on racing than combat . IGN and GamesRadar named Cobra Triangle among the top NES games . The latter had " the most admiration " for Cobra Triangle out of all of Rare 's catalog . They thought the game aged well and typified NES @-@ era beauty in its isometric combat , upgrades , and game type variety . 
 = Lemon of Troy = 
 " Lemon of Troy " is the 24th episode of The Simpsons ' sixth season . It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on May 14 , 1995 . In the episode , the children of Springfield wage war on Shelbyville after their beloved lemon tree is stolen from them by Shelbyville children . The parents of the Springfield children take Ned 's recreational vehicle ( RV ) to search for their boys , and when they find them , the children convince them to help recover the stolen tree from an impound lot . 
 It was written by Brent Forrester and directed by Jim Reardon . For the episode , the animators designed a non @-@ polluted version of Springfield . It features cultural references to the 1984 song " When Doves Cry " , the 1981 film Mad Max 2 and the 1968 song " What a Wonderful World " , and the title of the episode is a play on the name Helen of Troy from Greek mythology . The episode acquired a Nielsen rating of 8 @.@ 1 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Marge lectures Bart on the importance of town pride , who realizes how wonderful it is living in Springfield . However , Bart also becomes upset with anti @-@ Springfield sentiments coming from the neighboring town of Shelbyville . Grampa explains that this rivalry can be traced back to the establishment of the two towns . This occurred when the founders Jebediah Springfield and Shelbyville Manhattan discovered they had irreconcilable differences regarding their visions for a perfect town , Springfield favoring promotion of chastity and Shelbyville advocating incestuous marriages between cousins . 
 The next day , Springfield 's lemon tree is stolen by a gang of boys from Shelbyville . Taking his town pride to heart and swearing to keep it , Bart leads Milhouse , Nelson , Martin , Todd , and Database into Shelbyville to search for the tree and bring it back to Springfield . The group splits up . Bart goes undercover and infiltrates the children of Shelbyville that stole the tree by disguising himself . However , he is unable to obtain any information . Eventually , the Springfield children track down the tree to an impound lot where the leader of the boys that stole the tree lives . 
 Back in Springfield , Homer , using Ned Flanders ' RV , leads the men to find the boys . When the two groups meet , the boys tell their fathers of the tree being stolen . At the impound lot , the men demand the return of the tree , while the owner of the impound lot refuses and taunts them . Using a plan similar to the Trojan Horse , Bart steers the RV to the outside of the hospital . The RV is taken to the impound lot after it is found parked outside the hospital . When night falls , the Springfield boys and their fathers get out of the RV and tie the tree to the top . They are caught in the middle of this act by the owner but manage to escape . The tree , though considerably damaged during the escape , is returned to Springfield . The children of Springfield celebrate with lemonade , while those in Shelbyville drink turnip juice , much to their disgust , having made up a story about the tree being haunted to cover the embarrassment of losing to their Springfield rivals . 
 = = Production = = 
 Brent Forrester wrote " Lemon of Troy " , his second episode of The Simpsons . Jim Reardon directed it . Early on in the production stage , the writers decided that the leader of the Shelbyville children , Shelby , and his father should be modeled after Bart and Homer . Shelby 's voice was provided by Tress MacNeille , and Shelby 's father was voiced by Hank Azaria , who based his performance on Walter Matthau . Dan Castellaneta originally based his performance of Homer on Matthau . 
 The writers wanted to have the Springfield children find an area of Springfield that was not decimated , and the animators designed a version of Springfield that was very idyllic . They drew several scenes of the children running through non @-@ polluted streams and woodlands . The animators gave Shelbyville 's nature a more dark feeling in comparison to Springfield . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 In the episode , Milhouse recites a slightly paraphrased line from Prince 's 1984 song " When Doves Cry " . Bart identifies the number seven in Roman numerals by referring to a nonexistent sequel of the Rocky series , Rocky VII : Adrian 's Revenge . The scene with Bart and his team sitting on a hill above the enemy camp and looking down at the captured tree being circled by children on bicycles bears a resemblance to an early scene in Mad Max 2 . The part in which Bart tries to fly by holding aerosol spray cans is a reference to My Secret Identity TV show . 
 The overall plot structure of Springfield residents attacking their neighboring rivals after they steal their prize possession is a reference to the legend of the Trojan War , in which the incentive for the Greeks declaring war on their Trojan neighbors is the abduction of their most famous and beautiful female citizen , Helen . The title of the episode is a play on her name . The method of recovery of the tree is an echo of the Trojan Horse ( a fact lost on Homer , who gleefully exclaims that " no one in history has ever done anything this clever " ) . 
 While Shelby 's father is towing Ned Flanders ' RV , he can be heard singing " What a Wonderful World " by Louis Armstrong . The inclusion of the RV itself references the 1981 film Stripes in which Bill Murray leads a group of U.S soldiers in a state of the art RV in an attempt to rescue a part of his unit that inadvertently cross into Czechoslovakia . 
 Shelbyville , can be seen as a cartoon <unk> of Merrymount , the neighboring town to the original colony of Plymouth . The scene of children dancing around the lemon tree , as well as the immoral practices of the original founder of Shelbyville hearken back to Thomas Morton . Morton , like Shelbyville Manhattan , founded a town based on libertine practices , such as incest as well as public drunkenness . A maypole was set up at the center of Merrymount , similar to the lemon tree , which the children danced around . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original American broadcast , " Lemon of Troy " finished 55th in the ratings for the week of May 11 to May 17 , 1995 , with a Nielsen rating of 8 @.@ 1 . The episode was the sixth highest rated show on the Fox network that week . Since airing , it has received many positive reviews from fans and television critics . Matt Groening , creator of The Simpsons , called the episode a " classic " and said it is one of his favorites from the show . Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood , the authors of the book I Can 't Believe It 's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide , said there was " some nice ideas in this episode — Bart and his chums all have near @-@ doubles in Shelbyville — but this is a strangely pedestrian outing , and seems hidden away — wisely — at this point in the season . " In a DVD review of the sixth season , DVD Verdict 's Ryan Keefer said the episode " easily [ is ] one of the best of the season " and that it has " gotten more enjoyable since it first aired " . He added that the episode is " full of everything that makes the show successful " and gave it an A. 
 = Little Tich = 
 Harry Relph ( 21 July 1867 – 10 February 1928 ) , professionally known as Little Tich , was a 4 foot 6 inch ( 137 cm ) tall English music hall comedian and dancer during the late 19th and early 20th centuries . He was best known for his acrobatic and comedic Big @-@ Boot Dance , which he performed in Europe and for which he wore boots with soles 28 inches ( 71 cm ) long . Aside from his music hall appearances , he was also a popular performer in Christmas pantomimes and appeared in them annually at theatres throughout the English provinces . He repeated this success in London , where he appeared in three pantomimes at the Theatre Royal , Drury Lane between 1891 and 1893 alongside Dan Leno and Marie Lloyd . 
 Born in Cudham , Kent , Little Tich began performing aged ten when he developed a dance and tin @-@ whistle act which he showcased at public houses in Sevenoaks . In the early 1880s he formed a blackface act and gained popularity with performances at the nearby <unk> Pleasure Gardens and Barnard 's Music Hall in Chatham . He travelled to London and appeared at the Forester 's Music Hall in 1884 . Later that year , he adopted the stage name " Little Tich " , which he based on his childhood nickname of " Tichborne " , acquired through his portly stature and physical likeness to the suspected Tichborne Claimant Arthur Orton . The term " <unk> " was later derived from " Little Tich " , and is used to describe things that are small . 
 Little Tich 's act matured during a tour of the United States between 1887 and 1889 where he established the Big @-@ Boot Dance and impressed audiences with his ability to stand on the tips of the shoes and to lean at extraordinary angles . In the 1890s he developed the Serpentine Dance and had a major success with the Christmas pantomime Babes in the Wood in Manchester during the 1889 – 90 season . In 1891 , he was recruited by the impresario Augustus Harris to appear in that years spectacular Theatre Royal , Drury Lane Christmas pantomime Humpty Dumpty . He starred in a further two productions at the theatre including Little Bo Peep ( 1892 ) and Robinson Crusoe ( 1893 ) . 
 Between 1896 and 1902 Little Tich performed in his own musical theatre company , and spent much of his time in Paris , where he became a popular variety artist . For his music hall acts , he created characters based on everyday observations . The characterisations used were " The Gas Inspector " , " The Spanish Señora " and " The Waiter " ; all three were later recorded onto shellac discs , of which he made twenty in total . He was married three times and fathered two children . In 1927 he suffered a stroke , which was partly triggered by a blow to the head which he had accidentally received during an evening performance at the Alhambra Theatre . He never recovered fully from the injury , and died the following year at his house in Hendon , aged 60 . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Family background and early life = = = 
 Little Tich was born Harry Relph in Cudham , Kent ( now in the London Borough of Bromley ) . He was the last of eight children born to Richard Relph ( 1790 – 1881 ) , a farmer and publican , and his wife Mary , née Moorefield ( 1835 – 1893 ) . The Relph family were close and lived in relative affluence . Richard Relph was a committed family man and was known in the village for his sharp business acumen . His early wealth , which was attributed to a series of successful horse @-@ trading deals , enabled him to purchase his first public house , the Rising Sun in Fawkham . In 1818 he married Sarah Ashenden and they had eight children ; she died in 1845 . In 1851 he moved to Cudham , bought the Blacksmith 's Arms and an adjoining farm , and started a new family with the 32 @-@ year @-@ old Mary Moorefield , a nurse @-@ maid governess from Dublin . 
 Little Tich was born with an extra digit on each hand , webbed from the little finger to the centre joint . He also experienced stunted growth . He reached 4 feet 6 inches ( 137 cm ) in height by the age of ten , but grew no taller . His physical differences from other children caused him to become socially withdrawn and lonely . Nevertheless , his disabilities earned him fame and were an asset to his parents ' business . Patrons would travel from neighbouring counties to witness his peculiarities , and the youngster revelled in the attention , dancing comically on his father 's saloon bar to curious guests . 
 Little Tich was educated at Knockholt , a three @-@ mile walk from Cudham . From an early age , he displayed considerable academic ability and also excelled in art ; by the time he was five , his drawings were being sold to patrons of the Blacksmith 's Arms by his father . Little Tich became interested in the travelling performers whom his father often employed to entertain guests at the inn . He would mimic the dancers , singers and <unk> , causing much amusement to both his family and patrons . So good were his impersonations that his siblings frequently took him to neighbouring public houses where they would get him to perform in exchange for money . These experiences prepared Little Tich for his future career . As a result of what he saw , he , like his father , became a strict teetotaller in later years , and showed a deep loathing for boisterous and intoxicated people . Little Tich revelled in his local celebrity status ; however , the older he got the more self @-@ conscious he became and wrongly interpreted the audience 's laughter as being aimed more at his disabilities rather than his comical performances . 
 = = = Move to Gravesend and early performances = = = 
 Richard Relph sold the Blacksmith 's Arms and the adjoining farm in 1875 and moved his family to Gravesend . The socially withdrawn Little Tich was forced to adapt to much busier surroundings ; day @-@ trippers , holidaymakers and fishermen often frequented the streets and occupied the plethora of public houses which adorned the port and neighbouring roads . He resumed his education , this time at Christ Church School , where he spent the next three years . In 1878 the headmaster deemed him too educationally advanced for the school , and Richard Relph was advised to secure for his young son a watchmaking apprenticeship instead ; Relph ignored the advice . 
 By 1878 Little Tich 's parents were unable to financially provide for him further and he sought full @-@ time employment as a <unk> boy in a barber 's shop in Gravesend . One evening , together with a friend whose brother was appearing in a talent contest , he visited a music hall for the first time and quickly became " hooked " on the idea of being able to perform . Thanks largely to his local celebrity status of being a " freak " , he was welcomed into the many public houses which catered for soldiers , sailors , merchant seamen and day @-@ trippers from London . 
 By 1878 , Little Tich had saved enough money to buy himself a tin whistle which he used to " amuse [ him ] self by playing all the jolly and sentimental pantomime songs of the day . " To earn money , he began busking to local theatre goers who were waiting in the outside queues . On the way home from his busking performances , he devised eccentric dances , much to the amusement of his onlooking neighbours . Little Tich made his stage debut as Harry Relph at the age of 12 in 1879 . The venue — although unidentified — was described by his daughter Mary as being a " back @-@ street , free @-@ and @-@ easy " where the acts were predominantly made up of amateurs and beginners . The audiences were often harsh and they would display their displeasure by throwing objects onto the stage . 
 One evening , having exhausted the list of amateur talent , the compere called on Little Tich and his tin @-@ whistle to take up the next turn . The performance was a success and Little Tich returned every night , often accompanying his tin @-@ whistle piece with impromptu dance routines . News of his performances spread , and he was soon signed up by the proprietor of the neighbouring Royal Exchange music hall , who bought his new signing a pair of clogs . Little Tich became a popular draw at the hall and often sang thirty songs a night . It was here that he discovered the art of blackface , a popular type of entertainment widely performed around the British Isles at that time . 
 = = = 1880s = = = 
 = = = = Early London engagements = = = = 
 At the start of the 1880s , Little Tich assumed the stage name " The Infant <unk> " and graduated to the world of open @-@ air theatre . The following year , he joined a blackface troupe who performed regularly at the <unk> Pleasure Gardens ; the local historian <unk> Clifford described them as " a band of minstrel <unk> of a superior type " . Little Tich 's transition from amateur to professional performer came when he appeared in a weekly spot at Barnard 's Music Hall in Chatham . Lew Barnard , the hall 's proprietor , offered him 35 shillings a week . Thrilled at the prospect of appearing in a proper music hall , Little Tich changed his name from The Infant <unk> to Young Tichborne , a nickname he had gained while living in Cudham years earlier . He enjoyed initial success at Barnard 's , but audience numbers soon diminished and his pay was reduced to 15 shillings a week as a result . To supplement his income , he resumed his position in the barber 's shop and took on a string of menial jobs that lasted six months . 
 In 1881 Little Tich left home with his sister Agnes , who chaperoned her young brother around the music halls and variety clubs throughout England . By now , he had swapped the tin @-@ whistle for a <unk> pipe which he used to accompany his clog dancing routine . He despised his early experiences of provincial touring as he was often forced to sleep in <unk> with very little money or food . To survive , he would often return to busking outside music halls to the waiting audiences . In the early months of 1884 , he secured an engagement at a rundown public house called The Dolphin in Kidderminster , where he was paid £ 2 a week . He also hired his first agent who , unbeknown to Little Tich , had advertised him as a " freak " and a " six @-@ fingered novelty " . The comedian was furious with the description and quickly dispensed with the agent 's services . By the summer months , his engagements had become infrequent so he used the long periods of unemployment constructively . He learned how to read and write music and taught himself to play various musical instruments including the piano , fiddle and cello . He also mastered dancing in big boots . 
 In November 1884 he changed his stage name for the third time to Little Tich , which derived from Tichborne , and " Tich " or " Tichy " became a common term meaning small . His reasoning for the name change was to capitalise on the release of the Tichborne claimant fraudster Arthur Orton who was then touring the British Isles in the hope of reopening the case . The change of name also coincided with the signing of a new agent who was known in London for being " one of the brightest and youngest in [ show ] business " . The agent , Edward Colley ( 1859 – 1889 ) , was equally thrilled with the acquisition of a new star and secured him a double engagement at the Marylebone Music Hall where he appeared as " Little Titch , The Most Curious Comique in Creation " and immediately after at the Forester 's Music Hall , where he was billed as " Little Titch , the Funny Little Nigger " . A reporter for The Era predicted , " We shall probably hear a great deal more about Little Titch , [ sic ] as he seems to be one of the few that can invest the business of the Negro comedian with any humour . " 
 By Christmas 1884 , Little Tich was a resident performer in four London music halls : the Middlesex Music Hall where he had an 8pm billing , the Marylebone ( at 9pm ) , the Star Palace of Varieties in Bermondsey ( at 10pm ) , and <unk> Music Hall in Mile End ( at 11pm ) . Out of the four halls , he had the most success at the Marylebone and fulfilled a ten @-@ week run . A critic for The Era who witnessed him perform at the Marylebone thought that he was " a curious comic " and that " his antics , his sayings and his business generally [ were ] very amusing , and he will doubtless improve in his singing , which is weak at present , even for a Negro delineator . " The commentator further noted that " he appear [ ed ] to be quite a young man at present ; but his dancing is peculiarly funny , though his dress in one of his characters is vulgar and suggestive ; this should be altered . " 
 Having been a success in London for nearly a year , Little Tich travelled to Scotland to appear in pantomime for the first time during the 1885 – 86 Christmas season . Robinson Crusoe opened at the Royal Princess Theatre in Glasgow and he appeared in the small role of <unk> , a black @-@ faced attendant for one of the main characters King Tum @-@ tum . The following Christmas , Little Tich starred for a second time in pantomime , this time at the Whitechapel Pavilion in a production of Cinderella in which he played " King Mischief " . 
 = = = = American success = = = = 
 The American impresario Tony Pastor came to England in 1886 and signed Little Tich for a tour of the United States . Pastor had seen the comedian perform at a small music hall called Gatti 's @-@ in @-@ the @-@ Road near to Westminster Bridge and was recruiting for his Gaiety Theatre Company . Little Tich left for America in the early months of 1887 and assumed his first role for Pastor in a burlesque version of The Hunchback of Notre @-@ Dame , playing the lead character for a fee of £ 10 a week . Later , during a successful run in a parody of Louis Bertin 's opera La Esmeralda , he impressed audiences with his " Big @-@ Boot Dance " , and Pastor engaged his new star for a further two seasons in the mock @-@ opera which had a total run of nine months . To show his appreciation for the record profits and huge audience attendances , Pastor presented Little Tich with a gold medal and a rare white Bohemian Shepherd dog which the comedian called Cheri . 
 Little Tich 's success under Pastor brought him to the attention of the Chicago State Opera Company , who secured him on a two @-@ year contract for a fee of $ 150 a week . Before the contract commenced , he was allowed to travel back to England where he honoured a pantomime commitment by appearing in Dick Whittington at the Theatre Royal in Brighton . In the piece he took the billing of " Tiny Titch " and played the Emperor Muley . In June 1888 , at the Chicago Opera House , Little Tich starred in The Crystal Slipper , a burlesque loosely based on Cinderella ; the production was a hit for the comedian and completed a run of over ten months . The Era described him as " the quaint little Negro comedian " and called his American engagement " brilliantly successful " . During The Crystal Slipper , Little Tich met the English dancer Laurie Brooks , whom he married in Cook County , Illinois on 20 January 1889 . That year marked the end of Little Tich 's " blacking up " routine , which he had performed in between his commitments for the Chicago State Opera Company . He was told by a producer that the American audiences would find the black face and English accent too much of a contrast and opined " a deaf mute with one eye could see you <unk> a coon . " Little Tich initially became worried at the prospect of appearing on stage without make @-@ up , but found that the audience approved of the change . 
 As the months progressed , the tour matured and news of his performances travelled across America . To compensate for the loss of his blackface act , Little Tich perfected his Big @-@ Boot Dance instead and swapped from 10 to 28 inch ( 71 cm ) boots which he found more suitable for his size . He had also mastered a quick change into the novelty footwear which he could perform in minutes . One stage director became concerned that the pause was too long for the audience to wait , and he threw the boots onto the stage causing the star to run back out in front of the waiting audience to put the boots on in front of them . While he did this , the orchestra provided an accompaniment of " till ready " music . For the audience , this provided much hilarity and they assumed it was part of the act . The unintentional sketch was " an instant hit " and the comedian incorporated this into his future Big @-@ Boot Dance routine . 
 In April 1889 Little Tich briefly returned to London to star at the Empire Theatre in Leicester Square where he was poorly received by audiences . As a result , the manager of the theatre reduced the comedian 's wages to £ 6 a week . The experience left him bitter towards the English entertainment industry and he returned to America to appear in a new production for the Chicago State Opera . The production , Bluebeard Junior , was not as successful as its predecessor , but toured for seven months . Despite his bad reviews back in England , Little Tich began to feel homesick and he was allowed to return home a few months short of his contract expiration . Once back , he and his wife set up home at 182 Kennington Road , Lambeth ; Laurie later gave birth to the couple 's son Paul on 7 November 1889 . 
 = = = 1890s = = = 
 = = = = Return to London and West End debut = = = = 
 In the later months of 1889 Little Tich secured an engagement at the London Pavilion in Piccadilly Circus . This time , he found his English critics to be complimentary about his talent , but as their praise was largely about his success in America , he considered them hypocritical . News of his much @-@ improved performances travelled throughout the country and he was visited by Thomas W. Charles , manager of Manchester 's Prince 's Theatre . Charles offered Little Tich a leading role in his forthcoming pantomime Babes in the Wood . The 1889 – 90 production was a huge success for the comedian and his performance reportedly earned him " the <unk> applause of the evening " . 
 By the early months of 1890 , Augustus Harris , the influential manager of the Theatre Royal , Drury Lane , had travelled to Manchester to look for new talent for his theatre 's forthcoming 1890 – 91 pantomime . Impressed with what he saw , he offered the comedian a theatrical residency at Drury Lane but he was forced to withdraw it as Little Tich was contracted to Charles for a further year ; Harris instead signed Little Tich for a two @-@ year contract starting the following season . The deal required Little Tich to star in two pantomimes for a wage of £ 36 a week . Following on from his success in Babes in the Wood which culminated in April 1890 , the theatre manager Rollo Balmain cast him as Quasimodo in a production of The Hunchback of Notre @-@ Dame at the Theatre Royal , Plymouth . The show featured a burlesque centrepiece which required Little Tich to dress as a ballerina and gave him the opportunity to perform two of his earliest songs , " Smiles " and " I Could Do , Could Do , Could Do with a Bit " , both written for him by Walter Tilbury . 
 In 1890 Little Tich continued to impress his London music hall audiences and appeared on the front covers of both the Entr 'acte and the Music Hall magazine , with the latter being widely available in the majority of London music hall auditoriums . Towards the end of the year , Little Tich appeared at the opening of the Tivoli Music Hall , before returning to Manchester at Christmas to fulfil the second of his two pantomime engagements for Thomas Charles in Little Bo @-@ peep , in which he played <unk> . The following year he reprised his role of Quasimodo and toured the provinces in The Hunchback of Notre @-@ Dame with Balmain 's company . 
 = = = = Life at Drury Lane = = = = 
 The year 1891 signalled a new era in the career of Little Tich . The Drury Lane pantomimes were known for their extravagance and splendour and featured lavish sets and big budgets . The first of the Drury Lane pantomimes in which Little Tich appeared was Humpty Dumpty in 1891 which also starred Drury Lane regulars Marie Lloyd , Dan Leno and Herbert Campbell . As well as the title role , Little Tich also played the minor part of the Yellow Dwarf in the harlequinade . It was during the latter characterisation that he revived his Big @-@ Boot Dance , which was a hit with audiences . The following Christmas , he equalled this success with his second pantomime Little Bo @-@ Peep in which he played the part of " Hop of my Thumb " . As well as Leno , Lloyd and Campbell , Harris recruited the singers Ada Blanche and Cecilia Loftus as principal boy and girl respectively . Harris was thrilled with Little Tich and signed him for the 1893 – 94 pantomime Robinson Crusoe in which he played Man Friday . The Derby Daily Telegraph called the comedian " one of the most amusing pantomime dames of all time " . Despite a budget of £ 30 @,@ 000 , Robinson Crusoe failed to equal the success of the previous two shows , which caused Harris to rethink his cast . Unaware of Harris 's plans , Little Tich approached him with a view of a pay rise ; the proposition angered the manager and not only was his request refused , but he was also ruled out of any future production . 
 = = = = New theatrical ventures and international engagements = = = = 
 In the early months of 1891 , Little Tich completed a successful tour of Germany . Two years later he developed the character Miss Turpentine for his self @-@ choreographed sketch The Serpentine Dance , which he performed over the next three years in Hamburg , Geneva , Rotterdam , Brussels , Nice , Monte Carlo , Barcelona and Budapest ; the tour also enabled him to become fluent in French , German , Italian and Spanish . He portrayed Miss Turpentine as an eccentric ballerina who wore an ill @-@ fitting tutu . The dance was a comic variation of the well @-@ known skirt dance belonging to Loie Fuller , which had been popular in France years earlier . Another successful characterisation was that of an eccentric Spanish dancer , which Little Tich devised while touring Europe , and like The Serpentine Dance , relied heavily on acrobatic choreography and comic miming rather than eccentric singing and joke reciting . 
 In 1894 , free from his contractual obligations at Drury Lane , he took a three @-@ year break from the English music hall scene and travelled to France to fulfil a number of engagements ; over the next ten years , he divided his time between there and England . In the early months of 1895 , he moved from music hall to variety theatre , a transition which many of his contemporaries had already successfully achieved . Lord Tom Noddy was showcased in September 1896 and ran at the Garrick Theatre , London for two months . The production had minimal success in the capital but was received well in the provinces . The show provided Little Tich with the chance to promote himself as a serious actor and to separate himself from the reputation of simply being the " deformed dwarf from the music hall . " The audience were described as being " very large " whose " bursts of laughter w [ ere ] frequent and loud " . A reporter for the Edinburgh Evening News thought that Little Tich was " the life and soul of the sketch " whose singing was " fairly good while [ his ] dancing was smart " , while the critic William Archer dismissed Little Tich as being the " Quasimodo of the music halls , whose talent lies in a grotesque combination of agility with deformity . " 
 He formed his own theatre company in mid @-@ 1895 , and produced his first show called Lord Tom Noddy , in which he also starred . He commissioned the dramatist George Dance to write the piece and made him a partner in the company . On 11 December 1896 , Little Tich was invited to appear at the Folies Bergère in France , where he starred in a short piece as Miss Turpentine and performed the Big @-@ Boot Dance . One journalist for the Sunday Referee claimed that " no artist since Loie Fuller , four years earlier , had scored such a success " , and as a result , he signed a two @-@ year contract at the Folies . Little Tich returned to England in the later months of 1897 , where he self @-@ produced the second of his company 's two shows , a musical comedy called Billy . Despite the show enjoying a healthy provincial tour after opening in Newcastle , one reporter thought that " it ha [ d ] not very much to recommend it " , but thought that Little Tich gave " some excellent fooling " and that it " [ was ] impossible not to laugh at some of the eccentricities " . However , the farce failed to make it to the West End of London . Little Tich saw this as a snub and he refused to perform in the capital again . Instead , he travelled to South Shields , where he appeared briefly in a successful short play called Giddy Ostend before retreating to France . 
 In 1898 he broke the Folies contract shortly before its expiry after being scouted by Joseph <unk> , who hired him to perform at the Olympia Music Hall in Paris . Following the breach of contract , the Folies manager Édouard Marchand initiated legal action against the comedian , who settled out of court for an undisclosed sum . The theatrical manager C.B. Cochran who had seen the comedian perform during this period , described him as " a reincarnation of the dwarf court @-@ jesters of the Middle Ages — the little English Don Antonio of Velasquez " . By now , Little Tich had become frustrated with his English audiences . With Billy failing to reach London and the unequal level of success in the English capital compared to France made him shun the English variety theatre scene altogether in the final years of the century . He returned to the less @-@ popular music halls as a result , where he remained for the rest of his career . 
 = = = 1900s = = = 
 = = = = Marriage troubles = = = = 
 In September 1894 , Little Tich and Laurie established the family home in the rue Lafayette , Paris . During 1897 , while Little Tich was away on a tour of England , Germany and Austria , Laurie eloped to Berlin with the French actor François Marty , leaving her husband responsible for their young son Paul . Unable to care for Paul , Little Tich sent him to England to live with relatives . That year , Little Tich met the dancer Julia <unk> during an engagement at the Olympia Music Hall in Paris and the two began a relationship . They moved to a flat in the boulevard Poissonnière , Paris , where they lived together , though keeping this a secret until after Laurie Relph 's death in 1901 . In 1900 Little Tich appeared in the French capital 's Phono @-@ Cinéma @-@ Théâtre where he performed the Big @-@ Boot Dance , which was recorded on film by the French director Clément @-@ Maurice . Years later , the film @-@ maker Jacques Tati called the piece " a foundation for everything that has been realised in comedy on the screen " . 
 In 1902 Little Tich starred in a special , one @-@ off revue with Marie Lloyd at the Tivoli theatre called The Revue , which was staged to celebrate the coronation of Edward VII . The following year , Little Tich 's performance at the Oxford Music Hall was described as being " ... a very droll turn " by a reporter for The Cornishman newspaper , who also called his Big @-@ Boot Dance " wonderful " . Little Tich rented another London property at 1 Teignmouth Road in Kilburn , to escape his life with Julia , which he was finding increasingly mundane . Despite their troubles , he married Julia in a discreet London ceremony on 31 March 1904 at St Giles Register Office and rented a further address at 44 Bedford Court Mansions in Bloomsbury . Although initially happy , the marriage quickly deteriorated as a result of differing opinions over social activities and money ; Julia was a sociable and extravagant person , whilst Little Tich preferred a quieter and <unk> lifestyle . 
 By 1906 Little Tich and Julia had become so estranged that she moved to a neighbouring flat , rented for her by her husband . The couple never publicly announced their separation , and he continued to provide financial support for his wife and fund her extravagant lifestyle for the next twenty years . Years later , Paul Relph admitted " Father and Julia never loved one another . Poor , poor father . His life was one long misery through her . " Over the next four years , Little Tich continued to perform in both England and France and earned £ 10 @,@ 000 a year . In 1905 he appeared in the second of a further three films for the French film industry called Le Raid Paris – Monte @-@ Carlo en Deux Heures , directed by Georges Méliès . This was followed by Little Tich in 1907 , and Little Tich , the Tec two years later . In 1907 Little Tich travelled to South Africa , where he appeared in a successful , nine @-@ week engagement for a fee of £ 500 a week . Soon after , he returned to England to take part in the Music Hall War , which saw The Variety Artistes ' Federation fight for more freedom and better working conditions on behalf of music hall performers . In 1909 he received a serious leg injury while on stage at the Belfast Hippodrome during a performance of the Serpentine Dance . A doctor in the audience diagnosed a dislocated knee , which forced the comedian to take seven weeks recuperation . Little Tich 's performance was described by a reporter for the Evening Telegraph and Post as being " up to date " and declared the Serpentine Dance was " next to the Big @-@ Boot Dance in popularity . " 
 = = = = Recording career and new family = = = = 
 In 1910 Little Tich became the adoptive father of Rodolphe Knoepper , an orphan born in 1899 to the brother of the Russian acrobat Harry Alaska . Alaska had previously worked for Little Tich as his dresser and after his death , Knoepper moved into the Relph residence in France and started his education there . After a few months of living with Little Tich , he was moved to London to stay with Julia . In later years Little Tich 's daughter Mary admitted that her father treated Knoepper as more of a son than Paul , who became estranged from the family by the 1920s . While in Paris in 1910 , Little Tich was made an officer of the Ordre des Palmes <unk> by the French Ministry of Public Instruction for his services to the stage . 
 Towards the end of 1910 , he travelled to Scotland to complete a short engagement at the King 's Theatre in Dundee . His performance was described by a theatre reviewer for the Evening Telegraph as being " downright genuine fun " and " very entertaining " . The following year Little Tich recorded the first of a selection of his music hall songs on one @-@ sided shellac discs used in the early acoustic recording process . Songs included " The Gas Inspector " , " King Ki @-@ Ki " , " The Toreador " and " The Zoo Keeper " and were followed two years later by " The Waiter " , " The Weather " , " The Don of the Don <unk> " and " A Risky Thing to Do " . 
 In 1915 Little Tich cut short his engagement at the Golders Green Hippodrome to take up a better offer in Paris . As a result , the proprietors of the Hippodrome sued for breach of contract and he had to pay them £ 103 in compensation . That year he recorded " The <unk> " , " The Gamekeeper " , " The Skylark " and " The Pirate " onto disc before heading to the northern English provinces to prepare for that year 's Christmas pantomime at the Royal Court Theatre in Liverpool . It was there that he met Winifred Latimer ( 1892 – 1973 ) , a singer and actress who had had some success on the London stage under Seymour Hicks a few years previously . Tich and Winifred were both starring in the Christmas pantomime Sinbad the Sailor , in which Little Tich played the title role and Winifred supported him as the principal boy . The two grew close and against her parents wishes , they began a relationship , shortly before the pantomime closed in the early months of 1916 . Sinbad the Sailor was a big success and Winifred was widely praised for her performance , which she attributed to the guidance she received from Little Tich . 
 In 1916 Winifred moved into a rented flat in Camden , chosen by Little Tich for its close proximity to his house in Bedford Square ; this enabled him to visit her with less chance of being recognised . In 1917 he recorded " Tally @-@ Ho ! " and " The Best Man " , the final two songs from his repertoire , onto shellac discs . That year Winifred became pregnant , which ended her career on the stage , a situation which pleased Little Tich immeasurably . However , Winifred was ostracised by her family and had to contend with life as an unmarried mother with no career and no chances of ever realising her remaining theatrical ambitions . On 23 February 1918 , while Little Tich was performing in Brighton , she gave birth to a daughter whom she named Mary . She and Mary then moved to 64 Gloucester Place in Marylebone . 
 = = = = Last years and death = = = = 
 By 1920 , relations between Little Tich and Winifred 's parents had improved and they welcomed him into the family . Despite renting a new , six @-@ room flat in Marylebone for his daughter and mistress , the comedian was now finding it increasingly difficult to support Winifred , Mary and Julia on his earnings as the years of generosity had drastically depleted his savings . His annual income in 1921 and 1922 had topped £ 9 @,@ 750 but had dropped to £ 3 @,@ 743 by 1923 . In 1925 he earned £ 6 @,@ 300 but this fell the following year to just £ 2 @,@ 100 . Worried by the drastic reduction in pay , he reduced Julia 's payments , which angered her family . Another money @-@ saving plan was to stop renting properties in London and secure a mortgage on a small house instead . To avoid speculation about his affair with Winifred , he decided to remain at Bedford Court Mansions , and bought a newly built house in Shirehall Park , Hendon , North @-@ West London in September 1925 for Winifred and Mary to move into . Soon after , he embarked on a successful tour of Europe which culminated at Christmas the same year . He returned to London and took part in a Christmas benefit at the London Coliseum , where he performed the Big @-@ Boot Dance . The performance was by now proving too strenuous for the 58 @-@ year @-@ old comedian , and he decided to retire it that year . 
 On the morning of 7 January 1926 , Julia Relph died of a cerebral haemorrhage in the flat which Little Tich had rented for her . Despite their estrangement , the comedian was distraught at her death and spent two nights at the apartment with her corpse . A few days later , he moved in with Winifred where he arranged his wife 's funeral , staying in the spare bedroom as a " house guest " . He made frequent visits back to Bedford Court Mansions to organise Julia 's paperwork and discovered that his wife had been having an affair with his friend Emile <unk> and that she was ten years older than she had led her husband to believe . Little Tich also found that she had used his money to buy a house in Golders Green as a future investment for Paul 's daughter Constance , and that his wife had participated in a secret scam to blackmail the comedian out of large quantities of cash . Despite the revelations , Little Tich mourned deeply for his wife and spoke fondly of her for the rest of his life . 
 On 10 April 1926 , Little Tich married Winifred at Caxton Hall , Westminster , with little publicity . Later that evening , he appeared at the Camberwell Palace in a short but popular engagement , while his new wife returned home to Hendon . For the honeymoon , the family travelled to Bristol , where Little Tich appeared on stage with the French actress Mistinguett , who presented him with a tributary gold statue of him wearing big boots . At the end of that year , the family paid a working visit to Australia , where he toured the Sydney theatres for a fee of £ 300 a week ; he received a lukewarm reception from audiences . 
 The following March , Little Tich and his family returned to England . He made only one appearance on stage that year , in November , when he introduced a new song called " The <unk> at the House of Commons " . For the character 's appearance he wore a ripped and dirty frock , a <unk> wig and carried an old mop and bucket which he borrowed from home . The act required him to flip the mop up into the air and grabbing the handle before carrying on singing . During one evening 's performance at the Alhambra Theatre , the trick went wrong and he received a blow to his head from the mop . Despite the pain , he continued with the piece and refused to seek medical treatment for the resulting bump and intense headache which followed . 
 One December morning in 1927 , whilst getting ready for a family day out , Little Tich was conversing with his wife who was in a separate room , upstairs at Shirehall Park . When he stopped responding , she became concerned , went to the room where her husband was , and found him slumped and insensible in a chair . He was taken to hospital where doctors diagnosed a stroke . He became mute and lost all feeling on the right side of his body , but was discharged from hospital and returned home to Hendon . He was frequently visited by the surgeon Sir Alfred Fripp , who made a secondary diagnosis of pernicious anaemia which he cited as having played an instrumental part in the comedian 's seizure . 
 On the morning of 10 February 1928 , Little Tich died at his home in Shirehall Park , Hendon , aged 60 and he was later buried at East Finchley Cemetery . His death and funeral were national news . The author and theatre critic Walter MacQueen @-@ Pope predicted that Little Tich would be remembered for his " physical peculiarity and the expression ' <unk> ' , meaning small " . A reporter for The Daily News called him " [ the ] comedian whose popularity had never waned and whose name was as famous in 1928 as it was when music @-@ halls flourished 30 years ago . " Writing in 1974 , the author Naomi Jacob thought that Little Tich would be remembered for many years to come stating " there is no reason why such names as Little Tich and Marie Lloyd should be forgotten any more than such names as Salvini , Bernhardt and Henry Irving . " 
 = Emu = 
 The emu ( Dromaius novaehollandiae ) is the second @-@ largest living bird by height , after its ratite relative , the ostrich . It is endemic to Australia where it is the largest native bird and the only extant member of the genus Dromaius . The emu 's range covers most of mainland Australia , but the Tasmanian emu and King Island emu subspecies became extinct after the European settlement of Australia in 1788 . The bird is sufficiently common for it to be rated as a least @-@ concern species by the International Union for Conservation of Nature . 
 Emus are soft @-@ feathered , brown , flightless birds with long necks and legs , and can reach up to 1 @.@ 9 metres ( 6 @.@ 2 ft ) in height . Emus can travel great distances , and when necessary can sprint at 50 km / h ( 31 mph ) ; they forage for a variety of plants and insects , but have been known to go for weeks without eating . They drink infrequently , but take in copious amounts of water when the opportunity arises . 
 Breeding takes place in May and June , and fighting among females for a mate is common . Females can mate several times and lay several clutches of eggs in one season . The male does the incubation ; during this process he hardly eats or drinks and loses a significant amount of weight . The eggs hatch after around eight weeks , and the young are nurtured by their fathers . They reach full size after around six months , but can remain as a family unit until the next breeding season . The emu is an important cultural icon of Australia , appearing on the coat of arms and various coins . The bird features prominently in Indigenous Australian mythology . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 = = = History = = = 
 Emus were first reported as having been seen by Europeans when explorers visited the western coast of Australia in 1696 ; this was an expedition led by Dutch captain Willem de <unk> who was searching for survivors of a ship that had gone missing two years earlier . The birds were known on the eastern coast before 1788 , when the first Europeans settled there . The birds were first mentioned under the name of the " New Holland cassowary " in Arthur Phillip 's Voyage to Botany Bay , published in 1789 with the following description : 
 This is a species differing in many particulars from that generally known , and is a much larger bird , standing higher on its legs and having the neck longer than in the common one . Total length seven feet two inches . The bill is not greatly different from that of the common Cassowary ; but the horny appendage , or helmet on top of the head , in this species is totally wanting : the whole of the head and neck is also covered with feathers , except the throat and fore part of the neck about half way , which are not so well feathered as the rest ; whereas in the common Cassowary the head and neck are bare and <unk> as in the turkey . 
 The plumage in general consists of a mixture of brown and grey , and the feathers are somewhat curled or bent at the ends in the natural state : the wings are so very short as to be totally useless for flight , and indeed , are scarcely to be distinguished from the rest of the plumage , were it not for their standing out a little . The long spines which are seen in the wings of the common sort , are in this not observable , — nor is there any appearance of a tail . The legs are stout , formed much as in the <unk> Cassowary , with the addition of their being jagged or sawed the whole of their length at the back part . 
 The species was named by ornithologist John Latham in 1790 based on a specimen from the Sydney area of Australia , a country which was known as New Holland at the time . He collaborated on Phillip 's book and provided the first descriptions of , and names for , many Australian bird species ; Dromaius comes from a Greek word meaning " racer " and novaehollandiae is the Latin term for New Holland , so the name can be rendered as " fast @-@ footed New Hollander " . In his original 1816 description of the emu , the French ornithologist Louis Jean Pierre Vieillot used two generic names , first <unk> and later Dromaius . It has been a point of contention ever since as to which name should be used ; the latter is more correctly formed , but the convention in taxonomy is that the first name given to an organism stands , unless it is clearly a typographical error . Most modern publications , including those of the Australian government , use Dromaius , with <unk> mentioned as an alternative spelling . 
 The etymology of the common name " emu " is uncertain , but is thought to have come from an Arabic word for large bird that was later used by Portuguese explorers to describe the related cassowary in Australia and New Guinea . Another theory is that it comes from the word " <unk> " , which is used in Portuguese to denote a large bird akin to an ostrich or crane . In Victoria , some terms for the emu were <unk> in the Dja Dja <unk> language , <unk> in Gunai , and <unk> in Jardwadjali . The birds were known as <unk> or <unk> to the local Eora and Darug inhabitants of the Sydney basin . 
 = = = Systematics = = = 
 The emu was long classified , with its closest relatives the cassowaries , in the family Casuariidae , part of the ratite order <unk> . However , an alternate classification was proposed in 2014 by Mitchell et al . , based on analysis of mitochondrial DNA . This splits off the Casuariidae into their own order , the <unk> , and includes only the cassowaries in the family Casuariidae , placing the emus in their own family , <unk> . The cladogram shown below is from their study . 
 Two different Dromaius species were present in Australia at the time of European settlement , and one additional species is known from fossil remains . The insular dwarf emus , D. baudinianus and D. n. minor , originally present on Kangaroo Island and King Island respectively , both became extinct shortly after the arrival of Europeans . D. n. diemenensis , a subspecies known as the Tasmanian emu , became extinct around 1865 . However , the mainland sub @-@ species , D. n. novaehollandiae , remains common . The population of these birds varies from decade to decade , largely being dependent on rainfall ; in 2009 , it was estimated that there were between 630 @,@ 000 and 725 @,@ 000 birds . Emus were introduced to Maria Island off Tasmania , and Kangaroo Island off the coast of South Australia , during the 20th century . While the Maria Island population died out in the mid @-@ 1990s , more birds have since been introduced , and attempts are being made to breed a form similar to the Tasmanian emu . The Kangaroo Island birds have successfully established a breeding population . 
 In 1912 , the Australian ornithologist Gregory M. Mathews recognised three living subspecies of emu , D. n. novaehollandiae ( Latham , 1790 ) , D. n. woodwardi Mathews , 1912 and D. n. rothschildi Mathews , 1912 . However , the Handbook of the Birds of the World argues that the last two of these subspecies are invalid ; natural variations in plumage colour and the nomadic nature of the species make it likely that there is a single race in mainland Australia . Examination of the DNA of the King Island emu shows this bird to be closely related to the mainland emu and hence best treated as a subspecies . 
 = = Description = = 
 The emu is the second largest bird in the world , only being exceeded in size by the ostrich ; the largest individuals can reach up to 150 to 190 cm ( 59 to 75 in ) in height . Measured from the bill to the tail , emus range in length from 139 to 164 cm ( 55 to 65 in ) , with males averaging 148 @.@ 5 cm ( 58 @.@ 5 in ) and females averaging 156 @.@ 8 cm ( 61 @.@ 7 in ) . Emus weigh between 18 and 60 kg ( 40 and 132 lb ) , with an average of 31 @.@ 5 and 37 kg ( 69 and 82 lb ) in males and females , respectively . Females are usually slightly larger than males and are substantially wider across the rump . 
 Although flightless , emus have vestigial wings , the wing chord measuring around 20 cm ( 8 in ) , and each wing having a small claw at the tip . Emus flap their wings when running , perhaps as a means of stabilising themselves when moving fast . They have long necks and legs , and can run at speeds of 48 km / h ( 30 mph ) due to their highly specialised pelvic limb musculature . Their feet have only three toes and a similarly reduced number of bones and associated foot muscles ; emus are the only birds with <unk> muscles in the back of the lower legs . The pelvic limb muscles of emus contribute a similar proportion of the total body mass as do the flight muscles of flying birds . When walking , the emu takes strides of about 100 cm ( 3 @.@ 3 ft ) , but at full gallop , a stride can be as long as 275 cm ( 9 ft ) . Its legs are devoid of feathers and underneath its feet are thick , cushioned pads . Like the cassowary , the emu has sharp claws on its toes which are its major defensive attribute , and are used in combat to inflict wounds on opponents by kicking . The toe and claw total 15 cm ( 6 in ) in length . The bill is quite small , measuring 5 @.@ 6 to 6 @.@ 7 cm ( 2 @.@ 2 to 2 @.@ 6 in ) , and is soft , being adapted for grazing . Emus have good eyesight and hearing , which allows them to detect threats at some distance . 
 The neck of the emu is pale blue and shows through its sparse feathers . They have grey @-@ brown plumage of shaggy appearance ; the shafts and the tips of the feathers are black . Solar radiation is absorbed by the tips , and the inner plumage insulates the skin . This prevents the birds from overheating , allowing them to be active during the heat of the day . A unique feature of the emu feather is the double rachis emerging from a single shaft . Both of the rachis have the same length , and the texture is variable ; the area near the skin is rather furry , but the more distant ends resemble grass . The sexes are similar in appearance , although the male 's penis can become visible when he urinates and defecates . The plumage varies in colour due to environmental factors , giving the bird a natural camouflage . Feathers of emus in more arid areas with red soils have a rufous tint while birds residing in damp conditions are generally darker in hue . The juvenile plumage develops at about three months and is blackish finely barred with brown , with the head and neck being especially dark . The facial feathers gradually thin to expose the bluish skin . The adult plumage has developed by about fifteen months . 
 The eyes of an emu are protected by nictitating membranes . These are translucent , secondary eyelids that move horizontally from the inside edge of the eye to the outside edge . They function as visors to protect the eyes from the dust that is prevalent in windy arid regions . Emus have a tracheal pouch , which becomes more prominent during the mating season . At more than 30 cm ( 12 in ) in length , it is quite spacious ; it has a thin wall , and an opening just 8 centimetres ( 3 in ) long . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 Once common on the east coast of Australia , emus are now uncommon there ; by contrast , the development of agriculture and the provision of water for stock in the interior of the continent have increased the range of the emu in arid regions . Emus live in various habitats across Australia both inland and near the coast . They are most common in areas of sclerophyll forest and savannah woodland , and least common in heavily populated districts and arid areas with annual precipitation of less than 600 millimetres ( 24 in ) . Emus predominately travel in pairs , and while they can form large flocks , this is an atypical social behaviour that arises from the common need to move towards a new food source . Emus have been shown to travel long distances to reach abundant feeding areas . In Western Australia , emu movements follow a distinct seasonal pattern – north in summer and south in winter . On the east coast their wanderings seem to be more random and do not appear to follow a set pattern . 
 = = Behaviour and ecology = = 
 Emus are diurnal birds and spend their day foraging , preening their plumage with their beak , dust bathing and resting . They are generally gregarious birds apart from the breeding season , and while some forage , others remain vigilant to their mutual benefit . They are able to swim when necessary , although they rarely do so unless the area is flooded or they need to cross a river . 
 Emus begin to settle down at sunset and sleep during the night . They do not sleep continuously but rouse themselves several times during the night . When falling asleep , emus first squat on their tarsi and enter a drowsy state during which they are alert enough to react to stimuli and quickly return to a fully awakened state if disturbed . As they fall into deeper sleep , their neck droops closer to the body and the eyelids begin to close . If there are no disturbances , they fall into a deeper sleep after about twenty minutes . During this phase , the body is gradually lowered until it is touching the ground with the legs folded underneath . The beak is turned down so that the whole neck becomes S @-@ shaped and folded onto itself . The feathers direct any rain downwards onto the ground . It has been suggested that the sleeping position is a type of camouflage , mimicking a small mound . Emus typically awake from deep sleep once every ninety minutes or so and stand upright to feed briefly or defecate . This period of wakefulness lasts for ten to twenty minutes , after which they return to slumber . Overall , an emu sleeps for around seven hours in each twenty @-@ four @-@ hour period . Young emus usually sleep with their neck flat and stretched forward along the ground surface . 
 The vocalisations of emus mostly consist of various booming and grunting sounds . The booming is created by the inflatable throat pouch ; the pitch can be regulated by the bird and depends on the size of the aperture . Most of the booming is done by females ; it is part of the courtship ritual , is used to announce the holding of territory and is issued as a threat to rivals . A high @-@ intensity boom is audible 2 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 2 mi ) away , while a low , more resonant call , produced during the breeding season , may at first attract mates and peaks while the male is incubating the eggs . Most of the grunting is done by males . It is used principally during the breeding season in territorial defence , as a threat to other males , during courtship and while the female is laying . Both sexes sometimes boom or grunt during threat displays or on encountering strange objects . 
 On very hot days , emus pant to maintain their body temperature , their lungs work as evaporative coolers and , unlike some other species , the resulting low levels of carbon dioxide in the blood do not appear to cause alkalosis . For normal breathing in cooler weather , they have large , <unk> nasal passages . Cool air warms as it passes through into the lungs , extracting heat from the nasal region . On exhalation , the emu 's cold nasal turbinates condense moisture back out of the air and absorb it for reuse . As with other ratites , the emu has great homeothermic ability , and can maintain this status from − 5 to 45 ° C ( 23 to 113 ° F ) . The thermoneutral zone of emus lies between 10 and 30 ° C ( 50 and 86 ° F ) . 
 As with other ratites , emus have a relatively low basal metabolic rate compared to other types of birds . At − 5 ° C ( 23 ° F ) , the metabolic rate of an emu sitting down is about 60 % of that when standing , partly because the lack of feathers under the stomach leads to a higher rate of heat loss when standing from the exposed underbelly . 
 = = = Diet = = = 
 Emus forage in a diurnal pattern and eat a variety of native and introduced plant species . The diet depends on seasonal availability with such plants as Acacia , Casuarina and grasses being favoured . They also eat insects and other arthropods , including grasshoppers and crickets , beetles , cockroaches , ladybirds , Bogong and cotton @-@ <unk> moth larvae , ants , spiders and millipedes . This provides a large part of their protein requirements . In Western Australia , food preferences have been observed in travelling emus ; they eat seeds from Acacia aneura until the rains arrive , after which they move on to fresh grass shoots and caterpillars ; in winter they feed on the leaves and pods of Cassia and in spring , they consume grasshoppers and the fruit of <unk> <unk> , a sort of <unk> . They are also known to feed on wheat , and any fruit or other crops that they can access , easily climbing over high fences if necessary . Emus serve as an important agent for the dispersal of large viable seeds , which contributes to floral biodiversity . One undesirable effect of this occurred in Queensland in the early twentieth century when emus fed on the fruit of prickly pears in the outback . They defecated the seeds in various places as they moved around , and this led to a series of campaigns to hunt emus and prevent the seeds of the invasive cactus being spread . The cacti were eventually controlled by an introduced moth ( <unk> <unk> ) whose larvae fed on the plant , one of the earliest examples of biological control . 
 Small stones are swallowed to assist in the grinding up and digestion of the plant material . Individual stones may weigh 45 g ( 1 @.@ 6 oz ) and the birds may have as much as 745 g ( 1 @.@ 642 lb ) in their gizzards at one time . They also eat charcoal , although the reason for this is unclear . Captive emus have been known to eat shards of glass , marbles , car keys , jewellery , and nuts and bolts . 
 Emus drink infrequently , but ingest large amounts when the opportunity arises . They typically drink once a day , first inspecting the water body and surrounding area in groups before kneeling down at the edge to drink . They prefer being on firm ground while drinking , rather than on rocks or mud , but if they sense danger , they often stand rather than kneel . If not disturbed , they may drink continuously for ten minutes . Due to the scarcity of water sources , emus are sometimes forced to go without water for several days . In the wild , they often share water holes with kangaroos , other birds and animals ; they are wary and tend to wait for the other animals to leave before they quench their thirst . 
 = = = Breeding = = = 
 Emus form breeding pairs during the summer months of December and January , and may remain together for about five months . During this time , they stay in an area a few kilometres in diameter and it is believed they find and defend territory within this area . Both males and females put on weight during the breeding season , with the female becoming slightly heavier at between 45 and 58 kg ( 99 and 128 lb ) . Mating usually takes place between April and June ; the exact timing is determined by the climate as the birds nest during the coolest part of the year . During the breeding season , males experience hormonal changes , including an increase in luteinizing hormone and testosterone levels , and their testicles double in size . 
 Males construct a rough nest in a semi @-@ sheltered hollow on the ground , using bark , grass , sticks and leaves to line it . The nest is almost always a flat surface rather than a segment of a sphere , although in cold conditions the nest is taller , up to 7 cm ( 2 @.@ 8 in ) tall , and more spherical to provide some extra heat retention . When other material is lacking , the bird sometimes uses a spinifex tussock a metre or so across , despite the prickly nature of the foliage . The nest can be placed on open ground or near a shrub or rock . The nest is usually placed in an area where the emu has a clear view of its surroundings and can detect approaching predators . 
 Female emus court the males ; the female 's plumage darkens slightly and the small patches of bare , featherless skin just below the eyes and near the beak turn turquoise @-@ blue . The colour of the male 's plumage remains unchanged , although the bare patches of skin also turn light blue . When courting , females stride around , pulling their neck back while puffing out their feathers and emitting low , monosyllabic calls that have been compared to drum beats . This calling can occur when males are out of sight or more than 50 metres ( 160 ft ) away . Once the male 's attention has been gained , the female circles her prospective mate at a distance of 10 to 40 metres ( 30 to 130 ft ) . As she does this , she looks at him by turning her neck , while at the same time keeping her rump facing towards him . If the male shows interest in the parading female , he will move closer ; the female continues the courtship by shuffling further away but continuing to circle him . 
 If a male is interested , he will stretch his neck and erect his feathers , then bend over and peck at the ground . He will circle around and <unk> up to the female , swaying his body and neck from side to side , and rubbing his breast against his partner 's rump . Often the female will reject his advances with aggression , but if amenable , she signals acceptance by squatting down and raising her rump . 
 Females are more aggressive than males during the courtship period , often fighting for access to mates , with fights among females accounting for more than half the aggressive interactions during this period . If females court a male that already has a partner , the incumbent female will try to repel the competitor , usually by chasing and kicking . These interactions can be prolonged , lasting up to five hours , especially when the male being fought over is single and neither female has the advantage of incumbency . In these cases , the females typically intensify their calls and displays . 
 The sperm from a mating is stored by the female and can suffice to fertilise about six eggs . The pair mate every day or two , and every second or third day the female lays one of a clutch of five to fifteen very large , thick @-@ shelled , green eggs . The shell is around 1 mm ( 0 @.@ 04 in ) thick , but rather thinner in northern regions according to indigenous Australians . The eggs are on average 13 cm × 9 cm ( 5 @.@ 1 in × 3 @.@ 5 in ) and weigh between 450 and 650 g ( 1 @.@ 0 and 1 @.@ 4 lb ) . The maternal investment in the egg is considerable , and the proportion of yolk to albumen , at about 50 % , is greater than would be predicted for a precocial egg of this size . This probably relates to the long incubation period which means the developing chick must consume greater resources before hatching . The first verified occurrence of genetically identical avian twins was demonstrated in the emu . The egg surface is granulated and pale green . During the incubation period , the egg turns dark green , although if the egg never hatches , it will turn white from the bleaching effect of the sun . 
 The male becomes broody after his mate starts laying , and may begin to incubate the eggs before the clutch is complete . From this time on , he does not eat , drink , or defecate , and stands only to turn the eggs , which he does about ten times a day . He develops a brood patch , a bare area of wrinkled skin which is in intimate contact with the eggs . Over the course of the eight @-@ week incubation period , he will lose a third of his weight and will survive on stored body fat and on any morning dew that he can reach from the nest . As with many other Australian birds , such as the superb fairywren , infidelity is the norm for emus , despite the initial pair bond : once the male starts brooding , the female usually wanders off , and may mate with other males and lay in multiple nests ; thus , as many as half the chicks in a brood may not be fathered by the incubating male , or even by either parent , as emus also exhibit brood parasitism . 
 Some females stay and defend the nest until the chicks start hatching , but most leave the nesting area completely to nest again ; in a good season , a female emu may nest three times . If the parents stay together during the incubation period , they will take turns standing guard over the eggs while the other drinks and feeds within earshot . If it perceives a threat during this period , it will lie down on top of the nest and try to blend in with the similar @-@ looking surrounds , and suddenly stand up to confront and scare the other party if it comes close . 
 Incubation takes 56 days , and the male stops incubating the eggs shortly before they hatch . The temperature of the nest rises slightly during the eight @-@ week period . Although the eggs are laid sequentially , they tend to hatch within two days of one another , as the eggs that were laid later experienced higher temperatures and developed more rapidly . During the process , the precocial emu chicks need to develop a capacity for thermoregulation . During incubation , the embryos are kept at a constant temperature but the chicks will need to be able to cope with varying external temperatures by the time they hatch . 
 Newly hatched chicks are active and can leave the nest within a few days of hatching . They stand about 12 cm ( 5 in ) tall at first , weigh 0 @.@ 5 kg ( 17 @.@ 6 oz ) , and have distinctive brown and cream stripes for camouflage , which fade after three months or so . The male guards the growing chicks for up to seven months , teaching them how to find food . Chicks grow very quickly and are fully grown in five to six months ; they may remain with their family group for another six months or so before they split up to breed in their second season . During their early life , the young emus are defended by their father , who adopts a belligerent stance towards other emus , including the mother . He does this by ruffling his feathers , emitting sharp grunts , and kicking his legs to drive off other animals . He can also bend his knees to crouch over smaller chicks to protect them . At night , he envelops his young with his feathers . As the young emus cannot travel far , the parents must choose an area with plentiful food in which to breed . In captivity , emus can live for upwards of ten years . 
 = = = Predation = = = 
 There are few native natural predators of emus still alive . Early in its species history it may have faced numerous terrestrial predators now extinct , including the giant lizard <unk> , the thylacine , and possibly other carnivorous marsupials , which may explain their seemingly well @-@ developed ability to defend themselves from terrestrial predators . The main predator of emus today is the dingo , which was originally introduced by Aboriginals thousands of years ago from a stock of semi @-@ domesticated wolves . Dingoes try to kill the emu by attacking the head . The emu typically tries to repel the dingo by jumping into the air and kicking or stamping the dingo on its way down . The emu jumps as the dingo barely has the capacity to jump high enough to threaten its neck , so a correctly timed leap to coincide with the dingo 's lunge can keep its head and neck out of danger . 
 Despite the potential prey @-@ predator relationship , the presence of <unk> dingoes does not appear to heavily influence emu numbers , with other natural conditions just as likely to cause mortality . Wedge @-@ tailed eagles are the only avian predator capable of attacking fully @-@ grown emus , though are perhaps most likely to take small or young specimens . The eagles attack emus by swooping downwards rapidly and at high speed and aiming for the head and neck . In this case , the emu 's jumping technique as employed against the dingo is not useful . The birds try to target the emu in open ground so that it cannot hide behind obstacles . Under such circumstances , the emu can only run in a chaotic manner and change directions frequently to try and evade its attacker . Other raptors , monitor lizards , introduced red foxes , feral and domestic dogs , and feral pigs occasionally feed on emu eggs or kill small chicks . 
 = = = Parasites = = = 
 Emus can suffer from both external and internal parasites , but under farmed conditions are more parasite @-@ free than ostriches or rheas . External parasites include the louse <unk> <unk> and various other lice , ticks , mites and flies . Chicks sometimes suffer from intestinal tract infections caused by coccidian protozoa , and the nematode Trichostrongylus tenuis infects the emu as well as a wide range of other birds , causing haemorrhagic diarrhoea . Other nematodes are found in the trachea and bronchi ; Syngamus trachea causing haemorrhagic tracheitis and <unk> variegatum causing serious respiratory problems in juveniles . 
 = = Relationship with humans = = 
 Emus were used as a source of food by indigenous Australians and early European settlers . Emus are inquisitive birds and have been known to approach humans if they see unexpected movement of a limb or piece of clothing . In the wild , they may follow and observe people . Aboriginal Australians used a variety of techniques to catch the birds , including spearing them while they drank at waterholes , catching them in nets , and attracting them by imitating their calls or by arousing their curiosity with a ball of feathers and rags dangled from a tree . The <unk> <unk> ( <unk> <unk> ) , or some similar poisonous plant , could be used to contaminate a waterhole , after which the disoriented emus were easy to catch . Another stratagem was for the hunter to use a skin as a disguise , and the birds could be lured into a camouflaged pit trap using rags or imitation calls . Aboriginal Australians only killed emus out of necessity , and frowned on anyone who hunted them for any other reason . Every part of the carcass had some use ; the fat was harvested for its valuable , multiple @-@ use oil , the bones were shaped into knives and tools , the feathers were used for body adornment and the tendons substituted for string . 
 The early European settlers killed emus to provide food and used their fat for fuelling lamps . They also tried to prevent them from interfering with farming or invading settlements in search of water during drought . An extreme example of this was the Emu War in Western Australia in 1932 . Emus flocked to the Chandler and <unk> area during a dry spell , damaging rabbit fencing and devastating crops . An attempt to drive them off was mounted , with the army called in to dispatch them with machine guns ; the emus largely avoided the hunters and won the battle . Emus are large , powerful birds , and their legs are among the strongest of any animal and powerful enough to tear down metal fencing . The birds are very defensive of their young , and there have been two documented cases of humans being attacked by emus . 
 = = = Economic value = = = 
 In the areas in which it was endemic , the emu was an important source of meat to Aboriginal Australians . They used the fat as bush medicine and rubbed it into their skin . It served as a valuable lubricant , was used to oil wooden tools and utensils such as the coolamon , and was mixed with ochre to make the traditional paint for ceremonial body adornment . 
 An example of how the emu was cooked comes from the Arrernte of Central Australia who called it <unk> <unk> : 
 " Emus are around all the time , in green times and dry times . You pluck the feathers out first , then pull out the crop from the stomach , and put in the feathers you 've pulled out , and then singe it on the fire . You wrap the milk guts that you 've pulled out into something [ such as ] gum leaves and cook them . When you 've got the fat off , you cut the meat up and cook it on fire made from river red gum wood . " 
 The birds were a food and fuel source for early European settlers , and are now farmed , in Australia and elsewhere , for their meat , oil and leather . Commercial emu farming started in Western Australia around 1970 . The commercial industry in the country is based on stock bred in captivity , and all states except Tasmania have licensing requirements to protect wild emus . Outside Australia , emus are farmed on a large scale in North America , with about 1 million birds in the US , Peru , and China , and to a lesser extent in some other countries . Emus breed well in captivity , and are kept in large open pens to avoid the leg and digestive problems that arise from inactivity . They are typically fed on grain supplemented by grazing , and are slaughtered at 15 to 18 months . 
 The Salem district administration in India advised farmers in 2012 not to invest in the emu business which was being heavily promoted at the time ; further investigation was needed to assess the profitability of farming the birds in India . In the United States , it was reported in 2013 that many ranchers had left the emu business ; it was estimated that the number of growers had dropped from over five thousand in 1998 to one or two thousand in 2013 . The remaining growers increasingly rely on sales of oil for their profit , although , leather , eggs , and meat are also sold . 
 Emus are farmed primarily for their meat , leather , feathers and oil , and 95 % of the carcass can be used . Emu meat is a low @-@ fat product ( less than 1 @.@ 5 % fat ) , and is comparable to other lean meats . Most of the usable portions ( the best cuts come from the thigh and the larger muscles of the drum or lower leg ) are , like other poultry , dark meat ; emu meat is considered for cooking purposes by the US Food and Drug Administration to be a red meat because its red colour and pH value approximate that of beef , but for inspection purposes it is considered to be poultry . Emu fat is rendered to produce oil for cosmetics , dietary supplements , and therapeutic products . The oil is obtained from the subcutaneous and <unk> fat ; the <unk> adipose tissue is heated and the liquefied fat is filtered to get a clear oil . This consists mainly of fatty acids of which oleic acid ( 42 % ) , linoleic and palmitic acids ( 21 % each ) are the most prominent components . It also contains various anti @-@ oxidants , notably carotenoids and flavones . 
 There is some evidence that the oil has anti @-@ inflammatory properties ; however , there have not yet been extensive tests , and the USDA regards pure emu oil as an unapproved drug and highlighted it in a 2009 article entitled " How to Spot Health Fraud " . Nevertheless , the oil has been linked to the easing of gastrointestinal inflammation , and tests on rats have shown that it has a significant effect in treating arthritis and joint pain , more so than olive or fish oils . It has been scientifically shown to improve the rate of wound healing , but the mechanism responsible for this effect is not understood . A 2008 study has claimed that emu oil has a better anti @-@ oxidative and anti @-@ inflammatory potential than ostrich oil , and linked this to emu oil 's higher proportion of unsaturated to saturated fatty acids . While there are no scientific studies showing that emu oil is effective in humans , it is marketed and promoted as a dietary supplement with a wide variety of claimed health benefits . Commercially marketed emu oil supplements are poorly standardised . 
 Emu leather has a distinctive patterned surface , due to a raised area around the feather follicles in the skin ; the leather is used in such items as wallets , handbags , shoes and clothes , often in combination with other leathers . The feathers and eggs are used in decorative arts and crafts . In particular , emptied emu eggs have been engraved with portraits , similar to cameos , and scenes of Australian native animals . 
 = = = Cultural references = = = 
 The emu has a prominent place in Australian Aboriginal mythology , including a creation myth of the <unk> and other groups in New South Wales who say that the sun was made by throwing an emu 's egg into the sky ; the bird features in numerous <unk> stories told across a number of Aboriginal groups . One story from Western Australia holds that a man once annoyed a small bird , who responded by throwing a boomerang , severing the arms of the man and transforming him into a flightless emu . The <unk> man of Central Australia is said to wear sandals made of emu feathers to mask his footprints . Many Aboriginal language groups throughout Australia have a tradition that the dark dust lanes in the Milky Way represent a giant emu in the sky . Several of the Sydney rock engravings depict emus , and the birds are mimicked in indigenous dances . 
 The emu is popularly but unofficially considered as a faunal emblem – the national bird of Australia . It appears as a shield bearer on the Coat of arms of Australia with the red kangaroo , and as a part of the Arms also appears on the Australian 50 cent coin . It has featured on numerous Australian postage stamps , including a pre @-@ federation New South Wales 100th Anniversary issue from 1888 , which featured a 2 pence blue emu stamp , a 36 cent stamp released in 1986 , and a $ 1 @.@ 35 stamp released in 1994 . The hats of the Australian Light Horse are decorated with emu feather plumes . 
 There are around six hundred gazetted places in Australia with " emu " in their title , including mountains , lakes , hills , plains , creeks and waterholes . During the 19th and 20th centuries , many Australian companies and household products were named after the bird . In Western Australia , Emu beer has been produced since the early 20th century and the Swan Brewery continues to produce a range of beers branded as " Emu " . The quarterly peer @-@ reviewed journal of the Royal Australasian Ornithologists Union , also known as Birds Australia , is entitled Emu : Austral Ornithology . 
 The comedian Rod Hull featured a wayward emu puppet in his act for many years and the bird returned to the small screen in the hands of his son after the puppeteer 's untimely death . 
 = = Status and conservation = = 
 In John Gould 's Handbook to the Birds of Australia , first published in 1865 , he lamented the loss of the emu from Tasmania , where it had become rare and has since become extinct ; he noted that emus were no longer common in the vicinity of Sydney and proposed that the species be given protected status . In the 1930s , emu killings in Western Australia peaked at 57 @,@ 000 , and culls were also mounted in Queensland during this period due to rampant crop damage . In the 1960s , bounties were still being paid in Western Australia for killing emus , but since then , wild emus have been granted formal protection under the Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999 . Their occurrence range is between 4 @,@ 240 @,@ 000 and 6 @,@ 730 @,@ 000 km2 ( 1 @,@ 640 @,@ 000 – 2 @,@ 600 @,@ 000 sq mi ) , and a 1992 census suggested that their total population was between 630 @,@ 000 and 725 @,@ 000 . As of 2012 , the International Union for Conservation of Nature considers their population trend to be stable and assesses their conservation status as being of least concern . The isolated emu population of the New South Wales North Coast <unk> and Port Stephens is listed as endangered by the New South Wales Government . 
 Although the population of emus on mainland Australia is thought to be higher now than it was before European settlement , some local populations are at risk of extinction . The threats faced by emus include the clearance and fragmentation of areas of suitable habitat , deliberate slaughter , collisions with vehicles and predation of the eggs and young . 
 = Sandgrouse = 
 Sandgrouse is the common name for Pteroclididae , a family of sixteen species of bird , members of the order <unk> . They are traditionally placed in two genera . The two central Asian species are classified as Syrrhaptes and the other fourteen species , from Africa and Asia , are placed in the genus Pterocles . They are ground dwelling birds restricted to treeless , open country , such as plains , savannahs and semi @-@ deserts . They are distributed across northern , southern and eastern Africa , Madagascar , the Middle East and India through to central Asia . The ranges of the black @-@ bellied sandgrouse and the pin @-@ tailed sandgrouse extend into the Iberian Peninsula and France , and Pallas 's sandgrouse occasionally breaks out in large numbers from its normal range in Asia . 
 = = Description = = 
 Sandgrouse have small , pigeon @-@ like heads and necks and sturdy compact bodies . They range in size from 24 to 40 centimetres ( 9 @.@ 4 to 15 @.@ 7 in ) in length and from 150 to 500 grams ( 5 @.@ 3 to 17 @.@ 6 oz ) in weight . The adults are sexually dimorphic with the males being slightly larger and more brightly colored than the females . They have eleven strong primary feathers and long pointed wings giving them a fast direct flight . The muscles of the wings are powerful and the birds are capable of rapid take off and sustained flight . In some species , the central feathers in the tail are extended into long points . The legs are short and members of the genus Syrrhaptes have feathers growing on both the legs and toes and no hind toes , while members of the genus Pterocles have legs feathered just at the front , no feathers on the toes and rudimentary hind toes raised off the ground . The plumage is cryptic , generally being in shades of sandy brown , grey and buff , variously mottled and barred , enabling the birds to merge into the dusty landscape . There is a dense layer of under down which helps insulate the bird from extremes of heat and cold . The feathers of the belly are specially adapted for absorbing water and retaining it , allowing adults , particularly males , to carry water to chicks that may be many miles away from watering holes . The amount of water that can be carried in this way is 15 to 20 millilitres ( 0 @.@ 5 to 0 @.@ 7 fluid ounce ) . 
 = = Distribution = = 
 Members of the genus Syrrhaptes are found in the steppes of central Asia . Their range extends from the Caspian Sea through southern Siberia , Tibet and Mongolia to northern and central China . They are normally resident , but Pallas 's sandgrouse can be locally migratory and very occasionally is irruptive , appearing in areas well outside its normal range . This happened in 1863 and 1888 , and a major irruption took place in 1908 when many birds were seen as far afield as Ireland and the United Kingdom where they bred in Yorkshire and Moray . 
 Members of the genus Pterocles are mainly found in the drier parts of northern , eastern and southern Africa though the range of some species extends into the Middle East and western Asia . The Madagascar sandgrouse is restricted to Madagascar . The black @-@ bellied sandgrouse and the pin @-@ tailed sandgrouse also occur in Spain , Portugal and southern France . Most species are sedentary though some make local migrations , typically to lower altitudes in winter . 
 = = Behaviour and ecology = = 
 = = = Diet and feeding = = = 
 Sandgrouse are principally seed eaters . Other food items eaten include green shoots and leaves , bulbs and berries . Insect food such as ants and termites may be eaten especially during the breeding season . The diet of many sandgrouse is highly specialised , with the seeds of a small number of plant species being dominant . This may depend on local availability but in other cases it reflects actual selection of favoured seeds over others by the sandgrouse . Seeds of leguminous plants are usually an important part of the diet . In agricultural areas oats and other grain are readily taken . Seeds are either collected from the ground or directly from the plants . Foraging techniques vary between species that coexist which reduces competition ; in Namibia , double @-@ banded sandgrouse feed slowly and methodically whilst Namaqua sandgrouse feed rapidly , exploring loose soil with their beaks and flicking it away sideways . Grit is also swallowed to help grind up food in the gizzard . 
 Sandgrouse are gregarious , feeding in flocks of up to 100 birds . As a consequence of their dry diet , they need to visit water sources regularly . Drinking times vary among the species . Ten species drink at dawn , four at dusk and two at indeterminate times . When drinking , water is sucked into the beak which is then raised to let the water flow down into the crop . By repeating this procedure rapidly , enough water to last twenty four hours can be swallowed in a few seconds . As they travel to water holes , they call to members of their own species and many hundreds or thousands synchronise their arrival at the drinking site despite converging from many different locations scattered over hundreds of square miles ( kilometres ) of territory . 
 They are vulnerable to attack while watering but with a large number of birds milling about , predators find it difficult to select a target bird and are likely to have been spotted before they can get close to the flock . The choice of a watering site is influenced by the topography of the nearby ground . The sandgrouse tend to avoid sites with cover for mammalian predators and their greatest risk is usually from predatory birds . Sandgrouse travel tens of miles to their traditional water holes and tend to disregard temporary water sources which may appear periodically . This probably has a survival value because a dried up water source in an arid region could result in dehydration and death . The Burchell 's sandgrouse in the Kalahari Desert sometimes travels over 100 miles ( 160 km ) daily to reach a water source . Not all species need to drink every day , and the Tibetan sandgrouse does not need to travel to drink because of the abundance of water from melting snowfields in its habitat . 
 = = = Breeding = = = 
 Sandgrouse are monogamous . The breeding season usually coincides with a crop of seeds after the local rainy season and at this time , the feeding flocks tend to break up into pairs . The nesting site is a slight depression in the ground , sometimes lined with a few pieces of dry foliage . Most typically , three cryptic eggs are laid , though occasionally there may be two or four . Incubation duties are shared and in most species , the males incubate at night while the females sit on the eggs during the day . The eggs usually hatch after 20 – 25 days . The precocial chicks are covered with down and leave the nest as soon as the last hatchling has dried out . The parents do not provide them with food and they learn , with parental guidance , what is edible and what is not . The chicks obtain their water from the soaked downy feathers on the adults breasts . At first the chicks are too small and young to thermoregulate , and are provided with shade during the hottest part of the day and brooded at night . They remain with their parents , as a family group , for several months . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The Pteroclididae was formerly included in the Galliformes due to the similarities the family shares with the true grouse . However , it was later discovered that these similarities are superficial and a result of convergent evolution . Sandgrouse were later placed near the Columbiformes largely due to their reported ability to drink by the " sucking " or " pumping " action of peristalsis of the esophagus , an unusual characteristic . More recently , it has been reported that they cannot suck up water in this way , and they are now treated separately in the order <unk> . They have been considered near passerine birds and are considered by some to be closer to the shorebirds . 
 In the DNA @-@ study by Fain and Houde ( 2004 ) they were included in the <unk> , together with the Columbiformes . In the larger study by Hackett et al . ( 2008 ) they were once again positioned close to the Columbiformes , in <unk> , but also with the <unk> . The intricately patterned , precocial downy young and egg colouration ( though not shape ) closely resemble those of many Charadriiformes . Eggs are near elliptical . 
 = = = Species = = = 
 = = Relations with humans = = 
 Sandgrouse have little interaction with people , primarily because most species live in arid unpopulated areas and at low densities . They are not generally sought after as game birds as they are not especially palatable , although they have on occasion been taken in great numbers at water holes . An attempt to introduce them into Nevada failed but they have been introduced to Hawaii . No species is considered to be threatened although there have been some localised range contractions , particularly in Europe . A subspecies of the chestnut @-@ bellied sandgrouse , P. e. <unk> , was last seen in the Nile Valley of Egypt in 1979 . It is thought to be extinct , but the reasons for this are unknown . 
 = Marvel vs. Capcom 2 : New Age of Heroes = 
 Marvel vs. Capcom 2 : New Age of Heroes ( Japanese : マーヴル VS . カプコン 2 <unk> <unk> オブ <unk> , Hepburn : Māvuru bāsasu Kapukon <unk> : Nyū Eiji obu Hīrōzu ) is a crossover fighting game developed and published by Capcom . It is the fourth installment in the Marvel vs. Capcom series , which features characters from both Capcom 's video game franchises and comic book series published by Marvel Comics . Originally released in Japanese arcades in 2000 , the game received ports to the Dreamcast , PlayStation 2 , PlayStation 3 , Xbox , Xbox 360 , and iOS devices over the span of twelve years . 
 In Marvel vs. Capcom 2 , players select a team of characters from the Marvel and Capcom universes to engage in combat and attempt to knock out their opponents . While the game uses similar tag team @-@ based game mechanics to the series ' previous iteration , Marvel vs. Capcom : Clash of Super Heroes , it features several significant changes , such as three @-@ on @-@ three gameplay , a new character assist system , and a more simplified control scheme . The character artwork uses traditional 2D @-@ animated sprites , while the backgrounds and visual effects are rendered in 3D . This makes Marvel vs. Capcom 2 the first game in the franchise to feature 2.5D graphics . 
 The game received positive reviews from critics , who praised its gameplay , visuals , and character roster , while criticizing its soundtrack and initial lack of online multiplayer support outside Japan . Following its release , Capcom lost the use of the Marvel Comics license , putting the series on a decade @-@ long hiatus . In April 2010 , Capcom announced the development of a sequel , Marvel vs. Capcom 3 : Fate of Two Worlds , which was later released in February 2011 . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Marvel vs. Capcom 2 : New Age of Heroes is the fourth installment in the Marvel vs. Capcom series of tag team @-@ based fighting games . Players select a team of three characters to compete in a one @-@ on @-@ one battle , as opposed to teams of two characters in the series ' previous entry , Marvel vs. Capcom : Clash of Super Heroes . The game introduces a more refined version of the " Variable System " used in past Marvel vs. Capcom games , which allows players to tag in other team members at any point during the match . Unlike Clash of Super Heroes , which features unplayable partner characters that the player can summon at will , Marvel vs. Capcom 2 re @-@ implements the " Variable Assist " gameplay mechanic introduced in Marvel Super Heroes vs. Street Fighter , allowing players to call upon one of their off @-@ screen team members to perform a single special move to aid them . Each playable character possesses three different types of assists , denoted by the Greek letters α , β , and γ , which can range from projectile attacks to healing moves . Assist characters receive extra damage if struck by the opponent . As characters fight , the team members not in play will also slowly regenerate their life gauges . A match lasts until one team completely runs out of vitality for all three fighters ; if the match timer reaches zero before either team is knocked out , the player with the most remaining health is declared the winner . 
 Similar to prior installments , as characters deal and receive damage , a colored meter at the bottom of the screen known as the " Hyper Combo Gauge " will gradually fill . When the meter is full , the player can use it to perform several special techniques , such as " hyper combos " , powerful attacks that deal heavy damage ; " delayed hyper combos " , which allow the player to execute multiple hyper combos consecutively ; and " variable combinations " , which summon the player 's entire team to use their hyper combos simultaneously . The game also introduces a new gameplay mechanic called the " snapback " , which forces the opponent to switch characters . Marvel vs. Capcom 2 features a modified version of the six @-@ button control scheme from Clash of Super Heroes . Instead of six attack buttons separated as three pairs of low , medium , and high @-@ strength punches and kicks , the game utilizes a setup of four attack buttons and two assist buttons . 
 = = = Modes = = = 
 Marvel vs. Capcom 2 : New Age of Heroes features both single @-@ player and multiplayer game modes . The game has an Arcade Mode , where the player must defeat seven AI @-@ controlled teams to reach the final boss character , Abyss , who sports three different forms . Unlike previous games in the series , Marvel vs. Capcom 2 does not have character @-@ specific endings , as the player will earn the same ending regardless of the characters they used to complete Arcade Mode . Versus Mode allows two players to compete against one another . Players can practice moves and combos in Training Mode , where they can also adjust certain settings , such as the number of bars available in the Hyper Combo Gauge . Score Attack , similar to Arcade Mode , pits the player against waves of AI @-@ controlled characters ; however , the main objective is to accumulate the highest score possible without the use of continues . 
 The arcade version of Marvel vs. Capcom 2 includes an experience system which unlocks hidden characters after a certain number of experience points are earned . This system was removed in the console versions in favor of the " Secret Factor " menu , where the player can buy hidden characters , stage backgrounds , and color schemes using points earned through normal play . The Xbox 360 and PlayStation 3 versions both feature online multiplayer , which includes player matches , ranked matches , and lobbies . The Japanese release of Marvel vs. Capcom 2 for the Dreamcast also featured online play through Capcom 's " Match Service " network ; however , it was limited to between two different Dreamcast systems . 
 = = = Playable characters = = = 
 Marvel vs. Capcom 2 : New Age of Heroes contains a roster of 56 playable characters . The roster features characters from various Marvel Comics properties , such as The Avengers and X @-@ Men , and Capcom video game franchises , including Street Fighter , Darkstalkers , and Mega Man . The game also introduces three original characters : <unk> , a cactus @-@ like creature ; Ruby Heart , a French air pirate ; and <unk> , a bō @-@ wielding monkey girl and granddaughter of the protagonist from the 1984 Capcom arcade game <unk> . In most versions of Marvel vs. Capcom 2 , 24 characters are available from the start , while the remaining 32 characters must be unlocked using experience points ; however , in the Xbox 360 and PlayStation 3 ports , all fighters are initially unlocked . 
 = = Development = = 
 On December 1 , 1999 , Capcom announced that a sequel to Marvel vs. Capcom : Clash of Super Heroes , titled Marvel vs. Capcom 2 : New Age of Heroes , was in development . It was developed for the Sega NAOMI arcade board and the Dreamcast , Capcom 's first attempt at a fighting game outside of the CP System II and III hardware systems . The game was the first in the Marvel vs. Capcom series to combine hand @-@ drawn two @-@ dimensional sprites upon three @-@ dimensional backgrounds . The Japanese home and arcade versions of the game were revealed to be compatible with the Dreamcast VMU . Players would be able to connect their VMU to the arcade version to exchange data , earning them experience points which could be used to unlock new characters , stages , and costume colors in the home version . The experience system included three types of points : " N @-@ Points " , earned by playing through the arcade version ; " D @-@ Points " , gained by playing through the Dreamcast version ; and " V @-@ Points " , obtained by playing online multiplayer . The game featured online play between two Dreamcast consoles through a specialized network known as " Match Service " . The service , developed by Capcom and <unk> Corp , used <unk> @-@ developed technology called " Data on Demand " as a foundation , which offered transfer rates below 70 milliseconds . These features were removed in all future domestic and international ports of Marvel vs. Capcom 2 . 
 During a press conference prior to the Electronic Entertainment Expo 2002 , Capcom unveiled its plans to bring Marvel vs. Capcom 2 over to the PlayStation 2 and Xbox consoles . While the PlayStation 2 version would allow players to compete against one another via USB modem connections , the Xbox version would not feature Xbox Live support . Once again , online multiplayer was not available outside Japan . Online service was discontinued when Capcom began to dissolve its dial @-@ up support in 2004 . 
 Following the commercial and critical success of Super Street Fighter II Turbo HD Remix in 2008 , Capcom stated its intentions to continue making high @-@ definition remakes of its past games . When asked specifically about Marvel vs. Capcom 2 , Capcom 's vice president of business development and strategic planning , Christian Svensson , indicated that the game was their most requested title by fans . On April 27 , 2009 , Marvel and Capcom jointly announced that Marvel vs. Capcom 2 would be coming to the Xbox 360 through the Xbox Live Arcade and PlayStation 3 through the PlayStation Store . A demo was released on April 30 exclusively for the PlayStation Network . When questioned about the lack of a Nintendo Wii port , Svensson stated that Capcom was unable to release the game on the console due to licensing restrictions and WiiWare 's file size limit . 
 The PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 ports were developed by Backbone Entertainment , who previously worked with Capcom on Super Street Fighter II Turbo HD Remix . The game was built using the original Dreamcast version 's code base . The online functionality in Marvel vs. Capcom 2 utilized the same net code from Super Street Fighter II Turbo HD Remix . Additional changes for the PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 versions included various filtering options for character sprites , labeled " Smooth " , " Crisp " , and " Classic " . Widescreen support was implemented ; since Marvel vs. Capcom 2 was originally designed with a 4 : 3 aspect ratio , the developers were able to widen the camera field of view . The ports also added independent music volume controls and support of custom soundtracks . Capcom offered a free downloadable hip hop mixtape as an alternative soundtrack for the game . 
 On April 20 , 2012 , Capcom announced the release of Marvel vs. Capcom 2 for iOS devices . Capcom created two control configurations for iPhone and iPad touch screens . Players have a choice between the standard six @-@ button layout , or a compact four @-@ button control scheme with " flick controls " . While the game does not support online play , a Versus Mode option is available over Bluetooth . 
 = = Release = = 
 Marvel vs. Capcom 2 : New Age of Heroes debuted in Japanese arcades on the Sega NAOMI arcade platform in early 2000 . The game was soon released on the Dreamcast in Japan on March 30 , 2000 , and North America on June 29 ; the European version , which was released on July 16 , 2000 , was published by Virgin Interactive . Marvel vs. Capcom 2 was ported to the PlayStation 2 on September 19 , 2002 in Japan , November 19 in North America , and November 29 in Europe . The Xbox version launched alongside its PlayStation 2 counterpart in Japan on September 19 , 2002 , which later received a North American release on March 30 , 2003 . It was then released internationally through the Xbox Live Arcade on July 29 , 2009 , and the PlayStation Network on August 13 . Lastly , the game became available for iOS devices on April 25 , 2012 . 
 On December 15 , 2013 , Capcom announced that Marvel vs. Capcom 2 would be removed from the Xbox Live Arcade and PlayStation Network stores towards the end of the month , following the apparent expiration of Capcom 's licensing contracts with Marvel Comics . The game was pulled from the PlayStation Network on December 17 and 19 in North America and Europe , respectively , and from the Xbox Live Arcade globally on December 26 . Eventually , the iOS version was also delisted from the Apple App Store . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Upon release , Marvel vs. Capcom 2 : New Age of Heroes received positive reviews for its frantic gameplay style , detailed backdrops and visuals , and enormous cast of playable characters . Anoop Gantayat of IGN praised the game for its refined battle system , despite its sheer level of insanity , labeling it as " one of the best fighting games out there " . Game Revolution lauded the game for its character roster and crazy action , claiming that Capcom crafted an excellent sequel by combining " timeless gameplay , an ensemble cast , and hyper energy " . The site also praised the graphics for creating a " 2.5D graphical wonder that is candy for the eyes " . Jeff Gerstmann of GameSpot praised the new control scheme and the addition of three @-@ on @-@ three combat ; he concluded that fans of the previous games would be pleased with the changes made in Marvel vs. Capcom 2 . 
 The early Dreamcast , PlayStation 2 , and Xbox versions of Marvel vs. Capcom 2 were criticized for their lack of online support outside Japan . Gerstmann commented that online multiplayer would have added a lot to the game 's appeal . In his Xbox review , Aaron Boulding of IGN was particularly critical over its exclusion , citing Capcom 's failure to deliver on its promise for Xbox Live support as the reason for his low score . However , following the release of the PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 ports , critics praised the game for providing a smooth online multiplayer experience . Topher <unk> of Destructoid praised the network performance , calling it " outstanding " and " flawless " . Wesley Yin @-@ Poole of VideoGamer.com stated that the addition of online play made the game " an essential purchase " . 
 Across all platforms , many reviewers cited the jazz @-@ inspired soundtrack as the game 's biggest flaw . Jeremy Dunham of IGN described the music as " plain god @-@ awful " , stating that the " jazzy lounge lizard music and snappy beats " did not fit the action in the slightest . Martin Taylor of Eurogamer expressed his disappointment that the game 's visual flair was backed by " a horrific , lift music @-@ oriented soundtrack and low quality sound effects " . Game Revolution shared the sentiment , declaring it as " some of the lamest music that you 've ever heard " . 
 Over the years since its release , Marvel vs. Capcom 2 has repeatedly been included by various critics into their lists of the best fighting games ever , including ScrewAttack at GameTrailers in 2007 , where it placed second , and Virgin Media in 2009 , where it placed third . It was declared the best 2D fighting game by Complex in 2011 and 2013 . In 2013 , the game was also named as the most iconic Marvel video game by Nerdist . In 2010 , GamePro also chose it as the 33rd best PS2 game of all time . The PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 versions of the game have sold 1 @.@ 4 million units . 
 = = Sequel = = 
 Following the release of Marvel vs. Capcom 2 : New Age of Heroes , Capcom was unable to retain the Marvel Comics license due to legal issues over copyright , placing the series on indefinite hiatus . However , on April 20 , 2010 , ten years after the game 's original debut , Capcom announced the development of a sequel : Marvel vs. Capcom 3 : Fate of Two Worlds . Production of Marvel vs. Capcom 3 was headed by Ryota Niitsuma , who had previously worked with Capcom on Tatsunoko vs. Capcom : Ultimate All @-@ Stars . While it utilizes largely similar game mechanics to Marvel vs. Capcom 2 , the sequel features new methods of play designed for newcomers to the fighting game genre , such as the addition of a simplified three @-@ button control scheme . Marvel vs. Capcom 3 was released in February 2011 for the PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 . 
 = Allahabad = 
 Allahabad ( / <unk> / ) , also known as Prayag प ् <unk> ( / <unk> / ) and <unk> , is a city in the Indian state of Uttar Pradesh and the administrative headquarters of Allahabad District , the most populous district in the state . As of 2011 , Allahabad is the seventh most populous city in the state , fifteenth in the Northern India and thirty @-@ sixth in India , with an estimated population of 1 @.@ 11 million in the city and 1 @.@ 21 million in its metropolitan region . In 2011 it was ranked the world 's 130th fastest @-@ growing city . Allahabad , in 2013 , was ranked the third most liveable city in the state ( after Noida and Lucknow ) and twenty @-@ ninth in the country . 
 The city 's original name – <unk> प ् <unk> , or " place of offerings " – comes from its position at the Sangam ( confluence ) of the Ganga , Yamuna and mythical Sarasvati rivers . It is the second @-@ oldest city in India , and plays a central role in Hindu scriptures . Allahabad was originally called Kaushambi ( now a separate district ) by the Kuru rulers of Hastinapur , who developed it as their capital . Since then , Allahabad has been a political , cultural and administrative centre of the Doab region . Mughal emperor Akbar renamed it <unk> , which the British changed to Allahabad . In 1833 it became the seat of the Ceded and Conquered Provinces region before its capital was moved to Agra in 1835 . Allahabad became the capital of the North @-@ Western Provinces in 1858 , and was the capital of India for a day . The city was the capital of the United Provinces from 1902 to 1920 and remained at the forefront of national importance during the struggle for Indian independence . 
 Located in southern Uttar Pradesh , the city 's metropolitan area covers 70 @.@ 5 km2 ( 27 @.@ 22 sq miles ) . Although the city and its surrounding area are governed by several municipalities , a large portion of Allahabad District is governed by the Allahabad City Council . The city is home to colleges , research institutions and central and state government offices . Allahabad has hosted cultural and sporting events , including Kumbh Mela and the Indira Marathon . Although the city 's economy was built on tourism , most of its income now derives from real estate and financial services . 
 = = History = = 
 The city was earlier known as <unk> , a name still commonly used . <unk> existed during the Vedic period , and is mentioned in the Veda as the location where Brahma ( the Hindu creator of the universe ) attended a ritual sacrifice . Excavations have revealed Northern Black Polished Ware dating to 600 – 700 BCE . The Puranas record that Yayati left Prayag and conquered the region of Saptha Sindhu . His five sons ( <unk> , <unk> , Puru , Anu and <unk> ) founded the main tribes of the Rigveda . Lord Rama , the protagonist of the Ramayana , spent time at the Ashram of Sage Bharadwaj before travelling to nearby Chitrakoot . 
 When the Aryans first settled in what they called the <unk> ( or <unk> ) , Prayag ( then Kaushambi ) was an important part of their territory . The Kurus , rulers of Hastinapur ( near present @-@ day Delhi ) , established the town of Kaushambi near Prayag . They shifted their capital to Kaushambi when Hastinapur was destroyed by floods . 
 The Doab region , which includes Allahabad , was controlled by a succession of empires and dynasties . The area became part of the Mauryan and Gupta Empires from the east and the Kushan Empire from the west before being governed by Kannauj during the 15th century . The city was the site of Maratha incursions before India was colonised . In 1765 , the British established a garrison at Allahabad Fort . Prayag became a part of the Delhi Sultanate when it was annexed by Mohammad Ghori in 1193 . Later , the Mughals took over from the slave rulers of Delhi and under them Prayag rose to prominence . Allahabad was a provincial capital in the Moghul Empire under the reign of Jahangir . Akbar built a fort on the banks of the sangam and renamed the settlement <unk> ( Persian for " place of a god " ) in 1575 . A unique artefact associated with Jahangir 's reign found in Allahabad is a large jade terrapin , now in the British Museum 's collection . 
 In 1765 , forces of Mir Qasim , the Nawab of Bengal , Shuja @-@ ud @-@ Daula , the Nawab of Awadh and the Mughal emperor Shah Alam II lost the Battle of Buxar to the British ; this was followed by the Treaty of Allahabad . Although the British did not yet establish direct rule , they saw Allahabad 's strategic position and established a garrison in Akbar 's fort . In 1801 , the Nawab of Awadh ceded the city to the British East India Company . Gradually , the rest of the Doab and its adjoining western region in its west ( including Delhi and Ajmer @-@ <unk> ) came under British rule . The northwestern area became a new presidency , the North Western Provinces of Agra , with its capital at Agra . Allahabad was an important part of the state . In 1834 , the city became the governmental seat of Agra Province and a High Court was established ; a year later , both were moved to Agra . Allahabad was a participant in the 1857 Indian Mutiny , when Maulvi Liaquat Ali unfurled the banner of revolt . During the rebellion Allahabad , with a number of European troops , was the scene of a massacre . 
 After the mutiny the British established a high court , a police headquarters and a public @-@ service commission in Allahabad , making the city an administrative centre . They truncated the Delhi region of the state , merging it with the Punjab and moving the capital of the North @-@ Western Provinces to Allahabad ( where it remained for 20 years ) . In January 1858 , Earl Canning departed Calcutta for Allahabad . That year he read Queen Victoria 's proclamation , transferring control of India from the East India Company to the British Crown ( beginning the British Raj ) , in Minto Park . In 1877 the provinces of Agra and Awadh were merged to form the United Provinces , with Allahabad its capital until 1920 . 
 The 1888 session of the Indian National Congress was held in the city , and by the turn of the 20th century Allahabad was a revolutionary centre . Nityanand Chatterji became a household name when he hurled a bomb at a European club . In Alfred Park in 1931 , Chandrashekhar Azad died when surrounded by British police . The Nehru family homes , Anand Bhavan and Swaraj Bhavan , were centres of Indian National Congress activity . During the years before independence Allahabad was home to thousands of satyagrahis led by Purushottam Das Tandon , <unk> Nath Pande , Narayan Dutt Tiwari and others . The first seeds of the Pakistani nation were sown in Allahabad . On 29 December 1930 , Allama Muhammad Iqbal 's presidential address to the All @-@ India Muslim League proposed a separate Muslim state for the Muslim @-@ majority regions of India . 
 Allahabad is known as the " city of prime ministers " because seven out of 15 prime ministers of India since independence have connections to Allahabad ( Jawaharlal Nehru , Lal Bahadur Shastri , Indira Gandhi , Rajiv Gandhi , <unk> Nanda , Vishwanath Pratap Singh and Chandra Shekhar ) . All seven leaders were either born there , were alumni of Allahabad University or were elected from an Allahabad constituency . 
 = = Geography = = 
 = = = Cityscape = = = 
 The old part of the city , at the south of Allahabad Junction Railway Station , consists of neighbourhoods like Chowk , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> and many more . In the north of the Railway Station , the new city consists of neighbourhoods like <unk> , Civil Lines , Georgetown , <unk> , Ashok Nagar , <unk> , Bharadwaj Puram and others which are relatively new and were built during the British rule . Civil Lines is the central business district of the city and is famous for its urban setting , gridiron plan roads and high rise buildings . Built in 1857 , it was the largest town @-@ planning project carried out in India before the establishment of New Delhi . Allahabad has many buildings featuring Indo @-@ Islamic and Indo @-@ Saracenic architecture . Although several buildings from the colonial period have been declared " heritage structures " , others are deteriorating . Famous landmarks of the city are Allahabad Museum , New Yamuna Bridge , Allahabad University , Triveni Sangam , All Saints Cathedral , Anand Bhavan , Alfred Park etc . 
 = = = Topography = = = 
 Allahabad is in south @-@ eastern part of Uttar Pradesh , at the confluence of the Ganga and Yamuna . The region was known in antiquity first as the Kuru , then as the Vats country . To the southwest is Bundelkhand , to the east and southeast is <unk> , to the north and northeast is Awadh and to the west is the lower doab ( of which Allahabad is part ) . The city is divided by a railway line running east @-@ west . South of the railway is the Old Chowk area , and the British @-@ built Civil Lines is north of it . Allahabad is geographically and culturally strategically located . Geographically part of the Ganga @-@ Yamuna Doab ( at the mouth of the Yamuna ) , culturally it is the terminus of the Indian west . The Indian Standard Time longitude ( 25 @.@ 15 ° N 82 @.@ 58 ° E ) is near the city . According to a United Nations Development Programme report , Allahabad is in a " low damage risk " wind and cyclone zone . In common with the rest of the doab , its soil and water are primarily alluvial . Pratapgarh is north of the city , <unk> is east , Rewa is south and Kaushambi is west . 
 = = = Climate = = = 
 Allahabad has a humid subtropical climate common to cities in the plains of North India , designated Cwa in the Köppen climate classification . The annual mean temperature is 26 @.@ 1 ° C ( 79 @.@ 0 ° F ) ; monthly mean temperatures are 18 – 29 ° C ( 64 – 84 ° F ) . Allahabad has three seasons : a hot , dry summer , a cool , dry winter and a hot , humid monsoon . Summer lasts from March to September with daily highs reaching up to 48 ° C in the dry summer ( from March to May ) and up to 40 ° C in the hot and extremely humid monsoon season ( from June to September ) . The monsoon begins in June , and lasts till August ; high humidity levels prevail well into September . Winter runs from December to February , with temperatures rarely dropping to the freezing point . The daily average maximum temperature is about 22 ° C ( 72 ° F ) and the minimum about 9 ° C ( 48 ° F ) . Allahabad never receives snow , but experiences dense winter fog due to numerous wood fires , coal fires , and open burning of rubbish — resulting in substantial traffic and travel delays , but the city does not receive snow . Its highest recorded temperature is 48 ° C ( 118 @.@ 4 ° F ) , and its lowest is − 2 ° C ( 28 ° F ) . 
 Rain from the Bay of Bengal or the Arabian Sea branches of the southwest monsoon falls on Allahabad from June to September , supplying the city with most of its annual rainfall of 1 @,@ 027 mm ( 40 in ) . The highest monthly rainfall total , 333 mm ( 13 in ) , occurs in August . The city receives 2 @,@ 961 hours of sunshine per year , with maximum sunlight in May . 
 = = = Biodiversity = = = 
 The Ganga @-@ Jamuna Doab , of which Allahabad is a part , is on the western Indus @-@ Gangetic Plain region . The doab ( including the Terai ) is responsible for the city 's unique flora and fauna . Since the arrival of humans , nearly half of city 's vertebrates have become extinct . Others are endangered or have had their range severely reduced . Associated changes in habitat and the introduction of reptiles , snakes and other mammals led to the extinction of bird species , including large birds such as eagles . The Allahabad Museum , one of four national museums in India , is documenting the flora and fauna of the Ganga and the Yamuna . 
 The most common birds found in the city are doves , peacocks , junglefowl , black partridge , house sparrows , songbirds , blue jays , parakeets , quails , bulbuls , and comb ducks . Large numbers of Deer are found in Trans Yamuna area of Allahabad . Other animals in the state include reptiles such as lizards , cobras , kraits , and gharials . During winter , large numbers of Siberian birds are reported in the sangam and nearby wetlands . 
 = = Demographics = = 
 The 2011 census reported a population of 1 @,@ 117 @,@ 094 in Allahabad . Provisional data suggest a density of 1 @,@ 086 people per km2 in 2011 , compared to 901 in 2001 . Natives of Uttar Pradesh form the majority of Allahabad 's population . The sex ratio of Allahabad is 858 per 1000 males and child sex ratio of girls is 876 per 1000 boys . 
 Allahabad 's literacy rate of 86 @.@ 50 percent is close to the all @-@ India average of 74 percent and the highest in the region . Male literacy is 90 @.@ 21 percent and female literacy 82 @.@ 17 percent . Among 35 major Indian cities , Allahabad reported the greatest number of violations of special and local laws to the National Crime Records Bureau . 
 Hindi , the official state language , is the predominant language in Allahabad . English is also used , particularly by white @-@ collar workers . Urdu is spoken by a sizeable minority . The Hindi dialect spoken in Allahabad is Awadhi , although <unk> is also common in the city . Bengali and Punjabi are also spoken . 
 = = Civic administration = = 
 Allahabad is known as the " Prime Minister Capital of India " , since seven of fifteen Prime Ministers of India are from the city . The city is administered by several government agencies . The Allahabad Nagar Nigam ( ANN ) , also called Allahabad Municipal Corporation ( AMC ) , oversees the city 's civic infrastructure under the Allahabad Metropolitan Region . The corporation originated in 1864 , when the Lucknow Municipal Act was passed by the Government of India . Allahabad is divided into 80 wards , with one member ( or corporator ) elected from each ward to form the Municipal Committee . The corporators elect the city 's mayor . Allahabad 's chief executive is its Commissioner , who is appointed by the state government . The city 's rapid , unplanned growth has created traffic congestion and stress on infrastructure which has challenged the ANN . Traffic gridlock has been addressed by a flyover system and one @-@ way streets . Land is expensive in Allahabad , especially in Civil Lines ( where skyscrapers exceeding 10 – 15 floors are being built ) . 
 As of 2012 , the Bahujan Samaj Party ( BSP ) controls the AMC . The city has a non @-@ political titular head , who presides over municipal functions and conferences . As the seat of the Government of Uttar Pradesh , Allahabad is home to local governing agencies and the Uttar Pradesh Legislative Assembly ( located in the Allahabad High Court building ) . The Allahabad police , headed by a commissioner , is overseen by the Uttar Pradesh Ministry of Home Affairs . The Allahabad district elects two representatives to India 's lower house , the Lok Sabha , and 12 representatives to the state legislative assembly . 
 = = Economy = = 
 Overall Allahabad has a very stable and diverse economy comprising various sectors such as State and Central government offices , education and research institutions , real estate , retail , banking , tourism and hospitality , agriculture based industries , railways , transport and logistics , miscellaneous service sectors , and manufacturing . Average Household Income of the city is US $ 2 @,@ 299 . 
 The construction sector is a major part of Allahabad 's economy . Secondary manufacturers and services may be registered or unregistered ; according to the third All India Census for Small Scale Industries , there are more than 10 @,@ 000 unregistered small @-@ scale industries in the city . An integrated industrial township has been proposed for 1 @,@ 200 acres ( 490 ha ) in Allahabad by the Dedicated Freight Corridor Corporation of India . 
 The city is also home to glass and wire @-@ based industry . The main industrial areas of Allahabad are Naini and <unk> , where several public and private sector companies have offices and factories . Bharat Petroleum Corporation Limited , India 's largest oil company ( which is state @-@ owned ) , is constructing a seven @-@ million @-@ tonnes @-@ per @-@ annum ( <unk> ) capacity refinery in <unk> with an investment estimated at ₹ 62 billion . Allahabad Bank , which began operations in 1865 , Bharat Pumps & <unk> and A. H. Wheeler and Company have their headquarters in the city . Major companies in the city are Reliance Industries , Alstom , ITI Limited , Areva , <unk> , Dey 's Medical , Food Corporation of India , Raymond Synthetics , Triveni Sheet Glass , Schneider Electric India Ltd , Triveni <unk> , EMC Power Ltd , Steel Authority of India , HCL Technologies , Indian Farmers Fertiliser Cooperative ( <unk> ) , <unk> Laboratories , <unk> Industries , Hindustan Cable , Indian Oil Corporation Ltd , <unk> <unk> and Hindustan Laboratories . The city is also headquarters of Central Organisation for Railway Electrification . 
 The primary economic sectors of the district are tourism , fishing and agriculture , and the city is a hub for India 's agricultural industry . In case of Agriculture crops Paddy has the largest share followed by <unk> , <unk> , Urd & <unk> in declining order during the <unk> season . In Rabi , Wheat is pre dominant followed by pulses and oilseed . Among oilseed crops , Mustard has very less area under pure farming and is grown mainly as a mixed crop . Linseed dominates the oilseed scenario of the district and is mainly grown in <unk> area . In case of pulses gram has largest area followed by pea and lentil ( <unk> ) . There is fairly good acreage under barley . 
 = = Culture and tourism = = 
 Allahabad has a literary and artistic heritage ; the former capital of the United Provinces , it was known as Prayag in the Vedas , the Ramayana and the Mahabharata . Allahabad has been called the " literary capital of Uttar Pradesh " , attracting visitors from East Asia ; the Chinese travellers <unk> Tsang and Fa Hien found a flourishing city in the fifth and seventh centuries , respectively . The number of foreign tourists , which mostly consisted of Asians , visiting the city was 98 @,@ 167 in 2010 which subsequently increased to 1 @,@ 07 @,@ 141 in 2014 . The city has a tradition of political graffiti which includes limericks and caricatures . In 1900 , Saraswati first Hindi monthly magazine of India , was started by Chintamani Ghosh . Mahavir Prasad Dwivedi , the doyen of modern Hindi literature , remained its editors from 1903 to 1920 . The Anand Bhavan , built during the 1930s as a new home for the Nehru family when the Swaraj Bhavan became the local Indian National Congress headquarters , has memorabilia from the Gandhi @-@ Nehru family . 
 During the 19th and 20th centuries , Hindi literature was modernised by authors such as Mahadevi Varma , <unk> Pant , Suryakant Tripathi ' Nirala ' and Harivansh Rai Bachchan . A noted poet was <unk> Sahay , better known as <unk> <unk> . <unk> and Varma have received Jnanpith Awards . Allahabad is a publication centre for Hindi literature , including the Lok Bharti , <unk> and <unk> . Persian and Urdu literature are also studied in the city . Akbar Allahabadi is a noted modern Urdu poet , and <unk> <unk> , Tegh Allahabadi , Shabnam <unk> and Rashid Allahabadi hail from Allahabad . English author and 1907 Nobel laureate Rudyard Kipling was an assistant editor and overseas correspondent for The Pioneer . 
 Although Hindu women have traditionally worn saris , the shalwar kameez and Western attire is gaining acceptance among younger women . Western dress is worn more by men , although the dhoti and kurta are seen during festivals . The formal male <unk> is often worn with <unk> on festive occasions . Diwali ( celebrated as a festival of light between mid @-@ October and mid @-@ December ) and Rama Navami ( when decorations light the banks of the Ganga and the Yamuna ) are the two most popular festivals in Allahabad . 
 Allahabad is noted for historic , cultural and religious tourism . Historic sites include Alfred Park , the Victoria and Thornhill Mayne Memorials , Minto Park , Allahabad Fort , the Ashoka Pillar and <unk> Bagh . Religious attractions include the Kumbh Mela , the Triveni Sangam ( sacred in Shaktism ) and All Saints Cathedral . The city hosts the Maha Kumbh Mela , the largest religious gathering in the world , every twelve years and the <unk> ( half ) Kumbh Mela every six years . Cultural attractions include the Allahabad Museum , the Jawahar Planetarium and the University of Allahabad . North Central Zone Culture Center , under Ministry of Culture ( India ) and Prayag Sangeet Samiti are nationally renowned centres of Arts , Dance , Music , local Folk Dance and Music , Plays / Theatre etc. and nurture upcoming artists . The city has also hosted International Film Festival of Prayag . 
 = = Infrastructure = = 
 = = = Transportation = = = 
 Allahabad is served by Allahabad Airport ( IATA : IXD , ICAO : <unk> ) , which began operations in February 1966 . The airport is 12 kilometres ( 7 @.@ 5 mi ) from the city centre and lies in <unk> , Allahabad . Air India and Spice Jet connect Allahabad to Delhi and Mumbai . Other nearby airports are in Varanasi , Lucknow and Kanpur . Ventura <unk> is operating direct fights to Lucknow & Varanasi from Allahabad Airport . Allahabad Junction is one of the main railway junctions in northern India and headquarters of the North Central Railway Zone . The four major railway stations in Allahabad are Prayag Station , City Station at <unk> , <unk> Station and Allahabad Junction . The city is connected to most other Uttar Pradesh cities and major Indian cities such as Agra , Aligarh , Bareilly , Jhansi , Kolkata , New Delhi , Patna , Mumbai , Visakhapatnam , Chennai , Bangalore , Guwahati , Thiruvananthapuram , Hyderabad , Pune , Bhopal , Kanpur , Lucknow and Jaipur . Auto <unk> have been a popular mode of transportation . Since 2014 , E @-@ rickshaws have also been introduced and quickly spread over the city . Renowned taxi firms like Ola Cabs , <unk> etc. are also operating in the city , making transportation in the city more hassle @-@ free & convenient . Cycle rickshaws are the most economical means of transportation in Allahabad along with e @-@ rickshaws . 
 Buses operated by Uttar Pradesh State Road Transport Corporation ( <unk> ) are an important means of public transport in the metro . National Highway 2 runs through the city centre . India 's longest cable @-@ stayed bridge , the New Yamuna Bridge ( built 2001 – 04 ) , is located in Allahabad and connects the city to the suburb of Naini across the Yamuna . The Old Naini Bridge now accommodates railway and auto traffic . A road bridge across the Ganga also connects Allahabad and <unk> . National Waterway 1 , the longest Waterway in India , connects Allahabad and Haldia . Allahabad Metrorail Project covering the entire metropolitan region is also underway . After the decision to develop Allahabad as a Smart City , more stress is being laid on transportation facilities in the city . 
 = = = Utilities = = = 
 The city generates 5 @,@ 34 @,@ 760 kg of domestic solid wastes everyday , while per capita generation of waste is 0 @.@ 40 kg per day . The sewer service areas are divided into nine zones in the city . Allahabad Municipal Corporation oversees the solid waste management project . Allahabad was the first city to get pre @-@ paid meters for electricity bill in Uttar Pradesh . The city is equipped with over 40 CCTVs at major crossings and markets . 
 = = Education = = 
 The Allahabad educational system is distinct from Uttar Pradesh 's other cities , with an emphasis on broad education . Board of High School and Intermediate Education Uttar Pradesh , the world 's biggest examining body , is headquartered in the city . Although English is the language of instruction in most private schools , government schools and colleges offer Hindi and English @-@ medium education . Schools in Allahabad follow the 10 + 2 + 3 plan . After completing their secondary education , students typically enroll in higher secondary schools affiliated with the Uttar Pradesh Board of High School and Intermediate Education , the ICSE or the <unk> and focus on liberal arts , business or science . Vocational programs are also available . 
 Allahabad attracts students from throughout India . As of 2010 , the city had one central university , three deemed universities and an open university . Allahabad University , founded in 1876 , is the oldest university in the state . Motilal Nehru National Institute of Technology Allahabad is a noted technical institution . Sam <unk> Institute of Agriculture , Technology and Sciences is an ' A @-@ grade ' , deemed university with global standards . Other notable schools in Allahabad include the Indian Institute of Information Technology - Allahabad ; Motilal Nehru Medical College ; Ewing Christian College ; Harish @-@ Chandra Research Institute ; Govind Ballabh Pant Social Science Institute and Institute of Engineering and Rural Technology . 
 Academics and artists who were born , worked or studied in Allahabad include mathematician <unk> Agrawal , electrical engineer <unk> K. <unk> , poet Subhadra Kumari Chauhan , novelist Julia Strachey , philanthropist <unk> Raja Chauhan , actor Amitabh Bachchan , Nobel laureate Rudyard Kipling , Lieutenant General Syed Ata <unk> and musicians Shubha Mudgal and Hariprasad Chaurasia . 
 = = Sports = = 
 Cricket and field hockey are the most popular sports in Allahabad , with kabaddi , kho @-@ kho , gilli danda and <unk> are played in rural areas near the city . Gully cricket , also known as street cricket , is popular among city youth . Several sports complexes are used by amateur and professional athletes ; these include the Madan Mohan Malviya Stadium , the Amitabh Bachchan Sports Complex and the Boys ' High School and College Gymnasium . There is an international @-@ level swimming complex in Georgetown . The National Sports Academy in <unk> trains gymnasts for the Commonwealth Games . The Indira Marathon honours the late prime minister Indira Gandhi . 
 = = Media = = 
 Allahabad 's Hindi @-@ language newspapers include Dainik Jagran , Amar Ujala , Dainik Bhaskar , Nai Dunia , Hindustan Dainik , Daily News Activist and Aaj . The Leader , Northern India Patrika ( <unk> ) and The Pioneer are English @-@ language newspapers published in the city ; others include The Times of India , the Hindustan Times , The Hindu , The Indian Express , and The Asian Age . Newspapers in Urdu , Gujarati and Punjabi are also available . 
 All India Radio , the national , state @-@ owned radio broadcaster , has AM radio stations in the city . Allahabad has five FM stations , including two AIR stations : BIG FM 92 @.@ 7 , Red FM 93 @.@ 5 , Gyan Vani , <unk> Bharti and <unk> . There is a Doordarshan Kendra in the city . Regional TV channels are accessible via cable subscription , direct @-@ broadcast satellite service or Internet @-@ based television . 
 = Princeton University Chapel = 
 The Princeton University Chapel is located on that university 's main campus in Princeton , New Jersey , United States . It replaces an older chapel that burned down in 1920 . Designed in 1921 by Ralph Adams Cram in his signature Collegiate Gothic style , it was built by the university between 1924 and 1928 at a cost of $ 2 @.@ 3 million . Martin Luther King , Jr . , delivered a sermon there in 1960 . The chapel was rededicated in an interfaith ceremony in 2002 following a major two @-@ year restoration . 
 Its size and design evoke a small cathedral of the English Middle Ages . The only university chapel of its size at the time it was built was King 's College Chapel at the University of Cambridge . The foundation is poured concrete , and the superstructure is sandstone and limestone . The main sanctuary consists of a narthex , a gallery , a nave , two transepts joined by a crossing , and an elevated choir . The chapel 's extensive iconography consists of stained glass , stonemasonry , and wood carvings . Among the stained glass are four " great windows " , one facing each cardinal direction , and four " Christian epic " windows in the walls of the choir . The iconography was planned by Albert M. Friend , a faculty member in Princeton 's Department of Art and Archaeology , with the goal of portraying , in one scholar 's words , a " synthesis between Christian faith and modern thought . " 
 The chapel seats almost 2 @,@ 000 people . A nondenominational chapel , it hosts weekly ecumenical Christian services and daily Catholic Masses . It also hosts several annual special events , such as baccalaureate services and <unk> . 
 = = History = = 
 Princeton University built the chapel to replace the Marquand Chapel , which stood between where the present chapel and McCosh Hall stand until it burned to the ground in 1920 . The location for the new chapel was chosen for two reasons : symbolically , the new chapel would rise from the ashes of the old one , and practically , it would locate the new chapel centrally as the campus expanded eastward . 
 Ralph Adams Cram , the university 's supervising architect , designed and oversaw construction of the new chapel . Cram sought to build a crown jewel for the Collegiate Gothic motif he had championed on the Princeton campus . The university 's president , John Grier Hibben , also had a stake in the project : student hostility toward Princeton 's brand of mainline Presbyterianism was on the rise . An ordained minister , Hibben hoped the new chapel 's majesty would inspire students to attend services of their own volition . Cram , a convert to High Church Episcopalianism from Unitarianism , also lent support to this aim . 
 Cram designed the chapel with the assistance of Alexander Hoyle , a member of his firm . Albert M. Friend , a faculty member in Princeton 's Department of Art and Archaeology , played a central role in planning the iconography . It was built by Matthews Construction Company , which worked on several projects on Princeton 's campus . Among those who contributed to the design of stained glass windows were Charles Connick , Henry Lee Willet ( of the studio that would become Willet Hauser ) , and Philadelphia @-@ based stained glass artist Nicola d 'Ascenzo . 
 The plans for the new chapel were made public in 1921 . Hibben called replacing the Marquand Chapel " an immediate necessity " ; nonetheless , the project encountered financial problems early on . The insurance money from the Marquand Chapel was insufficient , and fundraising for the chapel competed with an ongoing general capital campaign for the university . Ground was ultimately broken during Princeton 's commencement ceremonies in June 1924 , and in the following year Cram and Hibben laid the cornerstone . The construction received considerable media attention , as it promised to be the largest university chapel in the United States and the second largest in the world after King 's College Chapel , Cambridge . The construction cost about $ 2 @.@ 3 million and was completed in 1928 . Hibben led the dedication ceremony on May 31 of that year , in an elaborate ceremony covered by TIME . 
 On March 13 , 1960 , less than six weeks after the first of the Greensboro sit @-@ ins , Martin Luther King , Jr . , delivered a sermon at the chapel . In the sermon he called for universal brotherhood and a life of spiritual richness . A plaque on the interior south wall of the chapel 's nave commemorates the occasion . 
 The chapel underwent a two @-@ year , $ 10 million restoration between 2000 and 2002 . Despite the complexity of the work , the chapel remained open throughout the restoration . The project earned a New Jersey Historic Preservation Award in 2002 , and the stone work won the 2004 Tucker Award for Renovation and Restoration from Stone World magazine . At the time , two experts working on the stained glass restoration called it the largest such project that had ever been undertaken in the United States ; too large for a single studio , it was divided among studios in Massachusetts , Pennsylvania , and New York . 
 Following the restoration , the chapel was rededicated in an interfaith ceremony in which people belonging to Buddhism , Christianity , Islam , and Judaism gave prayers . Leading the ceremony , then @-@ Dean of Religious Life Thomas <unk> said , " This edifice is unmistakably Christian , [ but ] this chapel is meant to belong to all of us . " 
 = = Description = = 
 The chapel 's Collegiate Gothic design evokes an English church of the Middle Ages , although several aspects of it , including the vault and its supports , recall French churches . The chapel is cruciform and is built on the scale of a large parish church or a small cathedral . The only precedent for a university chapel of this size was King 's College Chapel , and only a small part of that chapel was used regularly . Stillwell cites Exeter Cathedral and the Octagon tower of Ely Cathedral as precedents for the architectural detail , but notes that the Princeton chapel 's detail nonetheless differs significantly from these . 
 The foundation is made of poured concrete . When the chapel was built , the rest of the structure above the grade level was masonry , and the only metal reinforcement was some structural steel in the framing of the roof . During the 2000 @-@ 02 restoration , some pinnacles were reset with stainless steel anchors . The arches of the crossing were designed to support the addition of a central tower , but this option has not been exercised : in Bush and Kemeny 's words , " Cram felt that Princeton already had enough towers . " 
 = = = Exterior = = = 
 The chapel is approximately the size of a small medieval English cathedral . Measured on the exterior , it is 277 feet ( 84 m ) long , 76 feet ( 23 m ) wide at its transepts , and 121 feet ( 37 m ) high . The exterior is constructed largely from Pennsylvania sandstone , with Indiana limestone used for the trim . 
 On the western end of the chapel is the narthex , which has entrances on the north , west , and south walls . An additional door on the chapel 's north side opens onto the Hibben Garden , named in recognition of John Grier Hibben 's role in the chapel 's construction and dedication . The garden of <unk> was designed by H. Russell Butler , Jr . On the chapel 's south side are an additional door at ground level to the east and an exterior pulpit , designed after one at Magdalen College , Oxford , and named Bright Pulpit , in honor of John Bright . The chapel is connected on its eastern side to Dickinson Hall by the Rothschild arch , symbolizing a connection between religion and scholarship . Cram resigned as Princeton 's supervising architect over the inclusion of the arch , which he disliked ; nonetheless , he participated in the chapel 's 1928 dedication ceremony . Nearby is the Mather Sundial , a replica of the Turnbull Sundial in the courtyard of Corpus Christi College , Oxford . A statue of a pelican , a religious symbol associated with Corpus Christi , sits atop the sundial , which was presented to Princeton in 1907 by William Mather , then the governor of Victoria University of Manchester . 
 Each of the three narthex entrances sits below a tympanum . These 3 tympana were designed and sculpted by John Angel . The tympanum above the main , west entrance depicts Jesus as described in the Book of Revelation , together with the four beasts and other relevant iconography . It resembles the tympanum of the Royal Portal of Chartres Cathedral . Beneath the figure of Christ is Princeton University 's shield , illustrating the university 's motto , Dei sub <unk> <unk> ( " Under the power of God she flourishes " ) . The tympana above the north and south entrances depict the Annunciation and the Baptism of Christ , respectively . 
 The exterior iconography includes two notable whimsical elements . A <unk> on the east wall features a relief of a bulldog head ; a decades @-@ old myth relates that Cram placed it there to recognize Yale University , whose mascot is the bulldog . ( Cram was not a Yale alumnus and in fact did not attend college , so it is unclear what interest he might have had promoting Yale . ) A sculptor who worked on the chapel during its construction placed small carvings of his face and Cram 's at the bottoms of crockets flanking the main entrance ; Cram is identifiable by his glasses . 
 = = = Interior = = = 
 Measured in the interior , the chapel is 249 feet ( 76 m ) long , 93 @.@ 5 feet ( 28 m ) wide at its transepts , and 78 @.@ 5 feet ( 24 m ) high at the crossing . Most of the interior is limestone , but the aisles and the central area of the choir are <unk> Creek sandstone . Sound @-@ absorbing tile is mounted on parts of the wall and vault . Running west to east , the main sanctuary consists of a narthex , a gallery , a nave , two transepts joined by a crossing , and an elevated choir ; it seats almost 2 @,@ 000 . The building 's southeast corner houses a vestry . 
 Inscribed on the narthex wall facing the nave is " A Prayer for Princeton " , which as of 2008 was still used in services at the chapel . Another inscription , from Psalm 100 , refers to Westminster Choir College , which holds its commencement ceremonies in the chapel . Two staircases on the east and west of the narthex lead to an upper gallery , which looks out upon the nave . 
 Three doorways lead from the narthex into the nave , which is 74 feet ( 23 m ) high and named for Hibben . It is divided into three vertical levels : an arcade at ground level , a triforium beneath the roofs of the aisles , and a clerestory . The configuration and its proportions are typical of English churches , but the nave 's vaulted ceiling and the colonnettes supporting it recall French churches . The gallery above the narthex is at the level of the triforium . The aisles are narrower than in medieval churches and are used for passage rather than seating . The south aisle features five window bays , while the north has four ; where the easternmost bay would be is the entrance to a side chapel called the Blessed Sacrament Chapel . The pews in the nave are constructed from wood originally intended for Civil War gun carriages ; over 100 carvers spent more than a year producing the intricate carvings . 
 The northern transept is named for Henry Gurdon Marquand , the benefactor of the Marquand Chapel , which burned to the ground in 1920 and which the present chapel was built to replace . An American flag flown by the USS Princeton hangs from the transept 's north wall . The southern transept is named for Chester Alwyn Braman , the first donor to the University Chapel Fund . A staircase leads from the Braman Transept to the Bright Pulpit . 
 The choir , named Milbank Choir for Elizabeth Milbank Anderson is elevated by several steps . An altar stands at the far east end . The altar and the choir stalls were built and carved by Irving and Casson , A. H. Davenport Company , in Sherwood Forest oak ; Cram speculated that the wood may have dated from the time of Robin Hood . According to Stillwell , the woodwork " represents an outstanding example of American craftsmanship . " 
 An oak made pulpit stands in front of the choir facing the nave . It originated in the north of France , probably in the mid @-@ 1500s . Its French Renaissance style suggests that it was made during the reign of Henry II . The lectern is also oak and dates from the 1600s . It had been used in a church near Avranches , France , for 200 years . A private individual purchased it shortly before the confiscation of church property during the French Revolution . It changed hands several times before Hibben obtained it for the chapel . 
 The chapel 's organ has 7 @,@ 897 pipes in 135 ranks and 109 stops . It was designed by Ernest M. Skinner and installed in 1928 . Skinner invented the contra <unk> stop for the Princeton chapel organ in response to a request by Princeton 's director of music . In 1990 the organ was dismantled and shipped to England for a major restoration by Mander Organs . Thomas Trotter gave the re @-@ opening recital on the restored organ in 1992 . 
 = = = Iconography = = = 
 The chapel 's iconography consists of over 10 @,@ 000 square feet ( 930 m2 ) of stained glass as well as stonework and wood carvings . Albert M. Friend , a faculty member in Princeton 's Department of Art and Archaeology and an expert on medieval art , was the primary planner of the iconography , with the support and assistance of Hibben , Cram , and others . A devout Christian , Friend shared Hibben 's goal of persuading Princeton students to choose lives of Christian observance and sought with the chapel 's iconography , in Milliner 's words , " to carefully dismantle materialist objections to Christian faith and to articulate Princeton 's synthesis between Christian faith and modern thought . " Kessler calls the stained glass " a summa of the heritage of Christianity up to the early twentieth century . " 
 The stained glass windows of the nave 's north and south aisles represent one aspect of this synthesis . The north windows depict Biblical figures and scenes , while the south windows contain images associated with human knowledge . The lower of these , at the triforium level , depict the teachings of Christ , while the six upper windows at the clerestory level depict influential figures in Philosophy , Theology , Chivalry , Poetry , Law , and Science , as read from east to west . The Science window faces a window due to Willet on the north wall with scenes from Genesis , symbolizing harmony between the Christian story of the Creation and the modern means of understanding it . 
 Four large stained glass windows are found in the main sanctuary . 
 The Great East Window , " The Love of Christ " : Milbank Choir . Due to Charles Connick , it is richly decorated with scenes from the life of Christ , culminating with an image of the Crucifixion of Jesus in the great rose . The process of selecting the scenes for this window was contentious , pitting the preferences of the conservative Presbyterian Hibben and his colleagues against those of the Milbank family , the window 's donors and liberal Episcopalians . The final compromise paired the Works of Mercy with Gospel scenes complementing each of them . 
 The Great West Window , " The Second Coming of Christ " : the gallery . Due to Nicola d 'Ascenzo of Philadelphia , this window epitomizes Friend 's iconographical argument . To students who would complain of the burdens of religion in daily life , the window answers with John 10 : 10 : " I am come that they might have life and that they might have it more abundantly . " 
 The Great North Window , " Christ the Martyr " : Marquand Transept . A verse from Mark 13 : 13 , " He who shall endure to the end shall be saved " , is carved below the window , declaring the theme . The lower part of the window shows historical Christians noted for their perseverance . 
 The Great South Window , " Christ the Teacher " : Braman Transept . Here again the theme is declared by a Gospel verse , this time John 8 : 32 , " And ye shall know the truth and the truth shall make you free . " Noted Christian writers and teachers are depicted at the bottom with the seven liberal arts . 
 The doorway to the Blessed Sacrament Chapel on the north wall of the nave is topped by carvings of shields representing three Christian religious centers , Jerusalem , Rome , and Canterbury , and flanked by carvings representing the seven virtues and corresponding seven vices . The other door leaving the Blessed Sacrament Chapel is topped by carvings of shields representing three medieval universities , Oxford , Paris , and Salamanca , and flanked by carvings representing the seven liberal arts ( the Trivium and the <unk> ) and the seven gifts of the Holy Spirit . 
 Large stained glass windows due to Connick in the walls of the choir retell four " Christian epics " : the Divine Comedy and Le Morte d 'Arthur on the north wall and Paradise Lost and Pilgrim 's Progress on the south wall . Milliner notes that images of historical and legendary people carved into the choir 's woodwork " reflect the intended seating during a Chapel ceremony " . Images of figures connected to music are carved into the front ( west ) , where the choir would sit , and images of scholars are carved into the back ( east ) , where faculty would sit . Behind the altar are carved images of eight religious figures : four Catholic saints to the north , and four leaders of Protestantism to the south . The epic windows reinforce the idea of a " Catholic north " and a " Protestant south " : Catholics wrote the north epics and Protestants the south epics . In an ecumenical touch , the north and south are symbolically united by " The Love of Christ " in the Great East Window . 
 Stained glass windows telling the story of the Book of Job are set into the walls of the staircases between the narthex and the gallery . Friend was known for delivering popular lectures on Job , and Milliner speculates that Friend had these windows included to address the problem of evil . Connick designed the windows in consultation with Friend , but they were made by others after the former 's death . 
 The chapel 's iconography pays tribute in places to the other Abrahamic religions . Abraham himself is depicted in a stained glass window on the north side of the nave , together with a Star of David , a Christian cross , and a star and crescent . Other windows show Baruch Spinoza and Muhammad ibn Zakariya al @-@ Razi ; both images were planned before the chapel was built . 
 In several places the chapel 's iconography includes images of figures associated with Princeton University : 
 Jonathan Edwards , Princeton 's third president : in the Theology window in the nave 's south wall and again among the Protestant leaders carved into the woodwork in the choir behind the altar . 
 Joseph Henry , a professor and Trustee of Princeton : in the Science window in the nave 's south wall . 
 James Madison , a 1771 graduate of Princeton and its first graduate student : in the Law window in the nave 's south wall . 
 Adlai Stevenson II , a 1922 graduate of Princeton : in a dedicated stained glass window near the vestry . 
 John Witherspoon , Princeton 's sixth president : in the Great South Window , among the Christian teachers . 
 = = Current use = = 
 The chapel operates within university 's Office of Religious Life . It is overseen by the Dean of the Chapel . The current Dean of the Chapel is Alison Boden , who is also Dean of Religious Life at Princeton . 
 The Office of Religious Life calls the chapel " the home of regular religious services for many of the university 's faith groups , including the 264 @-@ year @-@ old ecumenical Christian worshiping community [ ... ] that founded Princeton in 1746 . " Though the university was once closely associated with the Presbyterian Church , it has never been affiliated with any religious denomination . In keeping with this tradition , the chapel hosts ecumenical Christian services each Sunday . Catholic Mass is celebrated daily , Reconciliation is offered several days a week , and there is Eucharistic Adoration twice weekly . 
 The chapel also hosts several annual special events . 
 Opening Exercises : The ceremony marking the beginning of the university 's academic year has been held in the chapel since 1929 . 
 Service of Remembrance : On Alumni Day , the chapel hosts a service remembering members of the Princeton University community who died during the preceding calendar year . 
 Westminster Choir College : The nearby conservatory holds many major performances and ceremonies each year in the chapel . These events include the annual Evening of Readings and Carols in December and the Westminster commencement ceremonies in May . 
 Baccalaureate : Princeton University 's graduating senior class attends an interfaith baccalaureate service in the chapel on the Sunday prior to Commencement . 
 The Princeton University Chapel Choir rehearses , provides music for the weekly service , and performs occasional concerts in the chapel . 
 = = Relative size = = 
 The Office of Religious Life calls the chapel the third @-@ largest university chapel in the world . According to Milliner , Princeton 's is the second @-@ tallest by height of the nave at the crossing ; the tallest is King 's College Chapel at the University of Cambridge . The belltower of the Basilica of the Sacred Heart at the University of Notre Dame , the tower of the Duke University Chapel , the tower of the University of Chicago 's Rockefeller Chapel , and the campanile of Valparaiso University 's Chapel of the Resurrection are all taller than Princeton 's chapel , which does not have a tower or other appendages . 
 = Charlie Buckton = 
 Charlotte " Charlie " Buckton is a fictional character from the Australian Channel Seven soap opera Home and Away , played by Esther Anderson . Anderson was added to the cast in a bid to add more " sex appeal " to the show . She said it was her dream job and relocated to Sydney immediately to accommodate filming . The character made her on @-@ screen debut during the episode airing on 6 June 2008 . Charlie was billed as having a " warm heart " and being " family oriented " ; however , her actions are often misunderstood and her persona has been perceived as " brash " . She is described as being " passionate about her work " and often neglects her daughter , Ruby 's ( Rebecca Breeds ) needs . 
 Charlie 's first notable storyline was a lesbian relationship with Joey Collins ( Kate Bell ) . The storyline was implemented by producers to boost ratings and Anderson said it helped portray Charlie 's vulnerable side . The storyline angered Christian and conservative oriented family groups . They complained that Home and Away had featured sexualised plotlines unsuitable for children , and Channel Seven was inundated with parental complaints stating that children should not be exposed to same @-@ sex relationships in a family show . Viewership declined after transmission of the storyline and producers cut scenes to <unk> to viewers ' wishes , which outraged the LGBT community . The storyline came to a natural end and Anderson and executive producer Cameron Welsh praised the plot because it portrayed a real @-@ life situation and denounced the conservative views as outdated . Anderson stated that the storyline was a great one to portray in terms of acting . 
 Charlie 's sexuality was sidelined and she began a relationship with Angelo Rosetta ( Luke Jacobz ) . Throughout their romance Charlie played out various family oriented plots and was described as having strong feelings for him . Their romance was portrayed to be wayward and unstable . In 2011 , their relationship ended after producers felt there were no more storylines to give to the pair . Charlie later develops feelings for Darryl Braxton ( Steve Peacocke ) . Another notable storyline for Charlie saw her reveal that her supposed sister , Ruby , was in fact her daughter . Anderson said the filming process was challenging as they felt the need to get the story right . Viewers sympathised with Charlie and saw a " beautiful element " in the portrayal . The revelation ruined the on @-@ screen relationship between Charlie and Ruby , and was never repaired . 
 Charlie has received critical analysis through her storylines and persona and opinion has been mixed . Ruth Deller of Lowculture said Charlie had endured " scandalous @-@ headline @-@ grabbing @-@ faux @-@ <unk> " , whilst Holy Soap stated that she has a " questionable taste in men . " Charlie has been ill received by Jaci Stephen of the Daily Mail because of her on @-@ off relationship with Angelo and Stephen regularly expresses her general dislike of the character in her column . In contrast , the Daily Star liked Charlie 's image , which they branded " sexy " , and the Daily Record praised her for the drama she creates . Anderson 's portrayal of Charlie has seen her earn various award nominations , including the " Most Popular Personality on Australian Television " and " Most Popular Actress " Logie Awards . Charlie departed on 24 January 2012 , following Anderson 's decision to quit Home and Away . However , in November 2012 , it was announced that Anderson had reprised her role and Charlie returned on 17 June 2013 . 
 = = Casting = = 
 In May 2008 , former model Anderson was recruited by Home and Away in a bid to add " sex appeal " to the show . Anderson was a long @-@ time fan of Home and Away and she said she was " thrilled " when she won the role of Charlie after an audition . Four days after hearing that she had landed the part , Anderson had to move to Sydney from Melbourne for filming . Anderson has said that her job as a model should not reflect on her acting ability . She added " For me , modelling was just an avenue that got me into acting , I have always wanted to act " . She also stated that the role is her dream job . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Characterisation = = = 
 When Charlie first arrived in the Bay , Channel Seven described her as having a " bone to pick and the prowess to do it " in reference to her father , Ross ' ( David Downer ) relationship with Morag Bellingham ( Cornelia Frances ) , which Charlie disapproved of because her mother had only recently died . They also described her as having a " warm heart " and being " family oriented " . Charlie can be " misunderstood " at times , which makes her appear brash . On her character , Anderson said , " Charlie is strong @-@ willed with lots of guts and she is never afraid to show who she is , which makes her genuine and likeable " . Whilst interviewed by the Llanelli Star , Anderson described Charlie 's responsibilities stating : " Charlie is very passionate about her work . She cares about Ruby more than life itself and is responsible for her , so these are priorities over a finding a man . I don 't think it 's a matter of need for her but she definitely would like someone to share her life with and that romantic element is a good balance in Charlie 's somewhat serious life . " 
 = = = Relationship with Roman Harris = = = 
 Charlie 's first relationship is with Roman Harris ( Conrad Coleby ) , which was confirmed by Coleby via an interview in TV Week . Roman initially rejects Charlie 's advances ; until she goes on a date with Angelo Rosetta ( Luke Jacobz ) . Anderson told The Sun that Angelo " surprises " Charlie by organising a <unk> picnic for her . When Roman finds out he " confesses that he adores her and they share a passionate kiss " . Coleby told TV Week that Charlie and Roman 's first kiss is a " strange moment " . The pair get off to a bad start because of a misunderstanding . Coleby said that Charlie is " feisty " and Roman finds that attractive . He added that Roman was not on the rebound after splitting up with Martha MacKenzie ( Jodi Gordon ) because Roman ended it . Coleby said that his daughter , Nicole Franklin ( Tessa James ) creates problems with Charlie because Roman " has his hands full " with her . Charlie 's has headstrong expectations of herself and also expects the same from those around her . This trait often causes problems for her romance with Roman . 
 Roman soon tires of Charlie 's outlook on life and decides to end their relationship . Coleby told TV Week that " whenever things go wrong in life , Charlie sees them as black and white , whereas Roman can see that there are two sides to a story . " Coleby opined that Roman has " residual feelings " for Martha that he is not aware <unk> Franklin ( Adrienne Pickering ) also makes Roman realise that Charlie is " kind of irritating " . Natalie 's actions make Roman realise that " they 're just not suited to each other " . However , Coleby said that he hoped there was a future for the characters , but felt it was better that they " move apart for a while " . 
 After their break up Charlie gets drunk and goes into work as normal the next day . While on duty Annie Campbell ( Charlotte Best ) becomes stuck down a storm drain . Charlie attempts to save her but a storm forces the water levels to rise . As Charlie is hungover , Anderson told Inside Soap that " Charlie 's a bit dazed and confused when all this happens " . However , she is a " professional and goes straight into work mode " . When Charlie frees Annie , a wave of water floods the drain and Charlie is swept away . Roman then arrives on the scene and fights to save Charlie . Anderson explained that it is up to Roman to save Charlie 's life and said " of all people it has to be the guy who 's just broken her heart " . Off @-@ screen the scenes in the storm drain posed a series of logistical challenges for the production team . The series had a specially built set for the scenes and they placed jets under the water to create rough waves . Anderson said that she could swim and was not afraid to film in the water . The only problem was the temperature of the water . Anderson said " It was absolutely freezing . Filming was tough work , but I think the finished result is worth it . " 
 = = = Relationship with Joey Collins = = = 
 In 2009 , Home and Away producers introduced a storyline that saw Charlie begin a relationship with another woman . Producers hoped the plot would boost the shows ratings . Over five weeks , the storyline would see Charlie realise that her friendship with Joey Collins ( played by Kate Bell ) is beginning to develop into something else . As they fall for each other , Charlie and Joey share intimate kissing and dance scenes . Anderson explained that the producers came to her about the storyline and asked if she was okay with it , as it was to be emotional and it required commitment . Anderson told them that she was okay with it and she said she was pleased to be given the storyline as it showed more of Charlie 's vulnerable side . This was Anderson 's first big storyline in the show and she was required to work more hours . Anderson explained that she and Bell formed a trust early on , which helped them to portray the story in the right light . Anderson spoke with gay friends , so she could form an accurate portrayal of her character 's feelings . The storyline " throws [ Charlie 's ] world upside down " and changes her whole identity ; it surprises her . 
 Upon the announcement of the storyline , church and conservative family groups attacked the plot . Pro @-@ Family Perspectives director Angela Conway said " They ( Home and Away ) continue to market to kids and they continue to develop quite sexualised plot lines " . Two weeks after the storyline began airing , viewing figures for the show fell by over 100 @,@ 000 and Channel Seven was inundated with complaints from parents asking for their children not to be exposed to same @-@ sex relationships in a family show . Following pressure from the conservative groups , it was announced that Channel Seven had decided to censor a kissing scene between Charlie and Joey . Producers were to cut " intimate images " from a scene in which the characters share a passionate kiss . 
 Gay and lesbian groups staged protests against the show , despite an announcement from Channel Seven saying that the episode would be shown in its entirety . The broadcaster said the kiss would air as planned , but they had decided against showing a " more lusty follow up " scene . Seven 's head of creative drama and development , Bevan Lee , said Home and Away bosses cut the " more lusty follow up because it fitted better with the storyline " . Lee added that he was " saddened " that the storyline had been reduced to a " facile argument about six missing seconds of screen time and that the bulk of commentators , both conservative and liberal , are making pronouncements on story material they know nothing of " . British broadcaster , Five , said that they would show the kiss during their airing of the episode . The channel said " Five , the UK broadcaster for Home and Away , will screen a lesbian kiss in a forthcoming episode . It forms part of a six @-@ week @-@ long story , about the attraction between two female characters , Joey and Charlie . There will be several episodes where the characters kiss " . They added that the producers at Channel Seven " edit all episodes for artistic and editorial reasons only " and the storyline would remain uncompromised in its Australian airing . 
 A Channel Seven spokeswoman revealed that the network received fewer than 30 telephone calls nationally after screening the " lesbian kiss " episode of the show . The calls were evenly split between those supporting the broadcast of the kiss , and those raising concerns . The show 's series producer Cameron Welsh and Anderson both spoke out in defence of the storyline . Welsh said , " The idea of this show has always been that we hold a mirror to society – and when society changes , we change with it . What 's ahead in Home and Away is right not only for the series , but also for the times we are living in " . Anderson said that she felt it was the right time to tell this story and added , " It 's really important for us to reflect society , and this storyline is what is going on for many people in real life " . She also said that she did not think the plot would be so shocking , but was glad the show was exploring a gay relationship . 
 The end of the storyline was criticised by gay advocates after Charlie was seen having sex with Hugo Austin ( Bernard Curry ) and Joey left Summer Bay alone . Anderson also suggested that Hugo may have been enough to " sway " Charlie towards men . Some sceptics had suggested that Home and Away would not allow Charlie and Joey to remain in a same @-@ sex relationship . Anderson later acknowledged she had feared that the story would see her typecast as " the lesbian cop . " Anderson reflected on the storyline during an interview with The Daily Telegraph , saying " The Charlie / Joey ( lesbian ) storyline was the first time you got to see Charlie 's vulnerable side . ( The controversy ) blew my mind – I wasn 't expecting it at all . I think it was a fantastic storyline because for the first time I got to show the producers and audience what I could do . " 
 = = = Relationship with Angelo Rosetta = = = 
 Charlie 's relationship with Angelo has been a focal point in her storylines . They originally date , but break up after Angelo kills Jack Holden ( Paul O 'Brien ) . Charlie becomes jealous when Angelo begins dating May Stone ( Alin Sumarwata ) and Anderson told Inside Soap that " Charlie 's feelings for Angelo are complex . " Charlie cannot fight her attraction to <unk> and the actress claimed that the couple would not have broken up if it had not been for Jack 's death . Anderson also stated that the storyline sees a new side to Charlie , jealousy . She decides to get in the way of his new relationship . Anderson went on to explain : " She admits part of her wanted to cause trouble , but Angelo is still attracted to Charlie and they sleep together . " The actress also defends Charlie 's actions claiming she did not intentionally set out to hurt May . Charlie and <unk> 's relationship dynamic becomes strained after Charlie refuses to give Angelo an " easy life . " Although they have a " great connection between them " , Anderson felt Angelo would not put up with Charlie for long because she can be " quite bossy . " She also said " Charlie 's got the good end of the stick and poor Angelo is in for a pretty rough ride ! " 
 Anderson later revealed that Charlie and Angelo would face tough times in 2011 , stating : " They 've had their fair share of hurdles – and there are more to come . " Charlie and Angelo split up and Anderson admitted she was happy that there is always drama in Charlie 's love life and she added " I think it 's going to be full @-@ on for Ms Buckton this year . But , you know , romances in Summer Bay never last . " Of breaking Charlie and Angelo up , Welsh said , " The thinking behind that was to challenge the characters and do something a bit different . " He went on to explain that with characters who have been together a long time , there is a temptation to repeat storylines and the team wanted to change the dynamic between Charlie and Angelo . 
 = = = Illegitimate daughter = = = 
 Another story arc saw Charlie reveal that her sister Ruby Buckton ( Rebecca Breeds ) is in fact her daughter . Charlie gave birth to Ruby after she was raped by Grant <unk> ( Clayton Watson ) , when she was younger . Both Anderson and Breeds found the storyline challenging and felt they had to get it right . Breeds said it made her nervous but was pleased with the end result . She said she had to let it affect her own emotions to effect the viewing public . " The revelation ruins their relationship , and Anderson said that Charlie was " trying desperately to bridge this gap " . Breeds added " Ruby just wants to get some security back , everything she thought her life was is totally up in the air " . Ruby becomes confused and starts to ask herself questions such as " Where do I stand now ? " and " How do I reconcile this ? " Breeds said it was a " big exploration " and a journey for Ruby , with Anderson agreeing . Anderson felt there was a beautiful element to the storyline and opined : " Although it is tragic , you feel sorry for Charlie and you can sort of understand where it has all come from . " She added that everyone feels sorry for Ruby , meaning neither are wrong . Furthermore , she said , " You are just rooting for them , you just want them to get back to how they were and it is a bit of a journey . " Comparing the storyline to the lesbian plot she said , " Perhaps this storyline was a little bit harder , you 've seen the start of this storyline and there is a lot more to come and it wasn 't easy . " 
 Charlie later struggles to deal with Ruby 's relationship with Casey Braxton ( Lincoln Younes ) . Discussing Charlie 's motives , Anderson stated : " Ruby 's at that age where she is quite impressionable , and Charlie doesn 't want to see her getting hurt . She 's only very recently been in a relationship with Romeo Smith ( Luke Mitchell ) , and Charlie is concerned about her moving from one guy to the next too quickly . " Anderson opined it is Darryl Braxton ( Steve Peacocke ) who gives Charlie her first piece of good parenting advice . She concluded that Charlie 's approach only causes conflict with Ruby because she is so strong @-@ willed . 
 = = = Darryl Braxton = = = 
 In February 2011 , Darryl Braxton was introduced to the show and The Daily Telegraph reported that he was set to get to know Charlie in a future storyline . Charlie meets Darryl after she comes to ask him to keep his surf gang under control . During an interview with Digital Spy , Peacocke was asked if Darryl likes Charlie romantically and he said , " For a bloke like Brax , Charlie is pretty ideal – she 's smart , sexy and is strong enough to take him on . He 's all about testing himself and he knows he 'll be running a gauntlet if he pursues her . She 's got that X @-@ factor he can 't ignore . " When a fight breaks out at the Surf Club , Charlie arrives to investigate and she asks Darryl to step outside , so they can talk . Darryl misinterprets the situation and believes Charlie just wants to be alone with him , he then kisses her . Charlie is " horrified " and she arrests Darryl for assaulting a police officer . Peacocke revealed that after the arrest , " things will develop dangerously " between Charlie and Darryl and that it will be " tense to watch ! " Charlie is put under pressure from the community to find a more serious crime with which to charge Darryl and his gang . She believes that he is selling stolen alcohol to Angelo , but everything checks out and Darryl come to the belief that the kiss has " sparked something in Charlie . " 
 Darryl is initially unsuccessful in his attempts to win Charlie over , but Anderson hinted that her character would fall for him . She said , " I think the way Steve [ Peacocke ] has played Brax , there is definitely enough there for Charlie to see that he has a heart and to see the good side in him as well . " Discussing the plot in which Charlie tried to keep Ruby away from Casey , Anderson said , " I think she 's also telling herself to stay away from Brax , but Charlie can 't get him out of her head . " Colin Vickery of The Daily Telegraph said Darryl had turned Charlie 's " safe police world " upside down , and Anderson told him , " What is wonderful about this relationship is that it is forbidden love . There is this element of danger that brings excitement along with it . " She described the relationship as " fun and flirty " and said it shows another layer to Charlie , as it has brought out her fun side . The arrival of Darryl 's ex @-@ girlfriend Tegan Callahan ( Saskia Burmeister ) causes Charlie and Darryl to split . However , Vickery said it was obvious that Charlie cannot stay away from Darryl for long . 
 = = = Departure = = = 
 In November 2011 , Jonathon Moran and Elle Halliwell of The Daily Telegraph announced Anderson had quit Home and Away to further her acting career in Hollywood . The following month , Inside Soap writer Sarah Ellis reported Anderson had confirmed her departure from the show . Moran and Halliwell said it was unknown whether Charlie would be killed off or move to The City . On 22 January 2012 , The Daily Telegraph 's Debbie Schipp reported Anderson had filmed her final scenes with the show in August and they would air later that week . Anderson said she was happy with her decision to leave Home and Away and " throw my life in the air and see what happens . " On screen , Charlie decided to move to the city with Brax , Ruby and Casey . However , at the end of the show 's 23rd season , Charlie was shot twice by Jake <unk> ( Fletcher Humphrys ) , in revenge for her shooting dead his brother . Charlie was critically injured and rushed to the hospital , where she underwent surgery . Sid Walker ( Robert Mammone ) later told Ruby that Charlie was being kept alive by a ventilator and that she would not breathe on her own again . Ruby was then left with the decision as to whether she should turn Charlie 's life support off or not . 
 Both Ruby and Brax decide Charlie 's ventilator should be turned off as there is nothing more the doctors can do for her and Charlie dies . Speaking about her character 's exit storyline , Anderson said " When I read the final script for Charlie 's exit , I made sure I was in the privacy of my own home . It was written really well – it was a tragic love story and I hope the fans like it . " The actress explained that the storyline was great and the writers had done a brilliant job with Charlie and Brax . She also said some fans would be disappointed that the couple did not end up together . Anderson revealed that the series producer had told her that after investing so much in getting Charlie together with Brax , she would not have left the Bay for another reason and killing her off was the best way . Of her reaction to the storyline , Anderson said " I started sobbing ! But that was the initial shock . You play this character for three and a half years and you really empathise with them . You have to love a part of them – it 's a little extension of you . So it 's just so final , the death . But once I had time to let it sink in , now I 'm really , really happy with the ending . It 's very dramatic and it 's definitely going out with a bang , so to speak ! " Anderson departed on screen on 24 January 2012 . 
 = = = Return = = = 
 On 25 November 2012 , Debbie Schipp from the Herald Sun reported that Anderson would return to Home and Away in December to shoot " a handful of episodes " to be broadcast during the following year . Schipp revealed that there was " intense speculation " about how the writers would get around the fact that Charlie died on @-@ screen in January . Of her return , Anderson explained " I told my mum and dad that I was coming back , and they almost fell off their chairs . They said : ' Hang on , didn 't Charlie die ? ' It 's hilarious , because this time twelve months ago I was keeping it the biggest secret from everyone as to whether Charlie would live or die , and now I 'm in the same boat again as far as not giving anything away . " The actress added that the return storyline was outlined a couple of months ago and she just knew that she wanted to do it . Charlie returned on 17 June 2013 . 
 = = Storylines = = 
 Charlie arrives in Summer Bay to tell Morag Bellingham to leave her father , Ross , alone . However , Ross tells her that he loves Morag . Charlie is partnered with Jack Holden when she starts her job as a Senior Constable at the <unk> Creek Police Station and her sister , Ruby , arrives in the Bay . Charlie begins a relationship with Roman Harris and she eventually accepts Ross and Morag being together . Ross and Morag marry , but after they come back from their honeymoon , Charlie realises something is wrong with her father . Ross is diagnosed with Alzheimer 's , devastating Charlie . He later moves into a home . Roman breaks up with Charlie and she begins drinking and refusing help . She rescues Annie Campbell from a storm drain and nearly dies . She is rescued by Roman , which makes her bitter . Charlie gets a promotion at work and she goes on a date with Angelo Rosetta . Charlie becomes a respected member of the community and she builds up strong friendships with Leah Patterson @-@ Baker ( Ada Nicodemou ) and Miles Copeland ( Josh Quong Tart ) . 
 Charlie gets involved in Joey Collins ' rape investigation . When Joey 's brother , Brett ( Toby <unk> ) , kicks her out of their home , Charlie invites her to stay at Leah 's . Charlie and Joey grow closer and after Charlie saves Joey from drowning , they kiss . Charlie rejects Joey , but she eventually admits that she likes her and they begin a relationship . One night , Charlie gets drunk and sleeps with Hugo Austin . Joey finds out and leaves town . Charlie admits to Angelo that she has feelings for him and they begin dating . Charlie is deliberately run over by Brett during a date with Angelo . She is taken to the hospital and a doctor notices a <unk> scar . Morag confronts Charlie and she claims that she had a baby boy who died . Charlie later tells Angelo and Ruby that she was raped by her boyfriend , Grant , when she was fourteen and that Ruby is actually her daughter . Ruby runs away , but she returns and moves in with Irene Roberts ( Lynne McGranger ) . Grant arrives in the Bay , horrifying Charlie . She angrily confronts Grant and later kidnaps him and tries to force him into confessing that he raped her . Grant later dies and Charlie becomes the prime suspect . She is arrested , but Ross later confesses to killing Grant . 
 Angelo is promoted to Sergeant and Charlie is promoted to Leading Senior Constable , becoming his second @-@ in @-@ command , which causes tension between the pair ; not only does Charlie have to take orders from an officer who was until recently her subordinate , but also has to get used to sharing what had once been her own office . Angelo is forced to leave the police force and Charlie feels guilty when she is made Sergeant . She encourages Angelo when he decides to set up a restaurant . They later decide to end their relationship and agree to remain friends . Ross dies and Charlie and Ruby attend his funeral . The River Boys , a surf gang from Mangrove River , arrive in town and Darryl " Brax " Braxton begins flirting with Charlie . He later kisses her and Charlie arrests him for assault . Charlie becomes concerned when Ruby tells her that she had sex with Romeo Smith and later suffers a hypoglycemic attack . Charlie discovers Ruby with Casey Braxton and she tells Brax to keep Casey away from Ruby . Charlie is called out to a party at a mansion and arrests Casey . She realises that Ruby was also involved and threatens to stop her from seeing Casey . Brax visits Charlie and they argue . Brax kisses her again and they have sex . Charlie tells him it was a mistake , but she kisses him again and asks him to keep their relationship quiet . 
 Angelo tells Charlie about a marijuana plantation . When Charlie and the other officers get to it , they find and arrest Heath Braxton ( Daniel Ewing ) . Angelo goes missing and Charlie worries that Brax is involved . Angelo is eventually found , but he tells Charlie that he does not remember what happened . Morag and Angelo discover Charlie 's relationship with Brax and she decides to end it . The couple eventually get back together . Brax 's ex @-@ girlfriend , Tegan , arrives in the Bay and works out Charlie is seeing Brax . Charlie arrests Heath and Jake <unk> following a drugs raid and Ruby learns of Charlie and Brax 's relationship . Brax and Charlie split up again . Charlie is devastated when she learns Brax had sex with Tegan . Charlie arrests Heath again and he is sent to jail . Brax is stabbed and Charlie finds him and gets him to the hospital . She realises she loves him , but Tegan arrives and announces Brax is the father of her daughter . Charlie later learns Tegan was lying . 
 Heath gets out of jail and walks in on Charlie and Brax together . Charlie tells the Inspector about her relationship with Brax , but he allows her stay with the case . During The Great Storm , Tegan is in a car accident and Charlie attends to her , they talk about loving Brax . Tegan dies and Charlie learns Jake 's brother , Hammer ( Benedict Samuel ) , has threatened her life . While she is out jogging , Charlie is shot at . Brax pushes her out of the way , but she sustains an injury to her arm . Hammer kidnaps Charlie and holds her and Brax hostage . When Hammer goes to kill Brax , Charlie shoots him dead . She is briefly suspended from her job . Charlie begins investigating an arson attack at Jake 's place and she arrests Casey . During his hearing , Casey 's lawyer , Hayley O 'Connor ( Alyssa McClelland ) , exposes Charlie and Brax 's relationship and the Coastal News publishes a front page article about it . Charlie tells Brax they should be together , but she changes her mind when she learns Brax had sex with Hayley . 
 Charlie investigates a robbery at a petrol station and she goes on a date with Simon Peet ( Rory Williamson ) . Forensics link Brax to the robbery and he tells Charlie he is being set up . Charlie is later removed from the case and she gives Brax an opportunity to steal evidence . Charlie goes to a cabin in the countryside with Bianca Scott ( Lisa Gormley ) and Brax and Heath show up . Brax and Charlie talk and they get back together . On their way home , Charlie and Brax crash into Liam Murphy ( Axle Whitehead ) . Bianca and Heath cover for them and Charlie 's friendship with Bianca breaks down . Charlie decides to quit her job and she asks Brax to leave the River Boys , which he does . Charlie and Brax then make plans to move to the city with Casey and Ruby . On her last day in uniform , Charlie is shot by Jake . She is found by Casey , Ruby and Brax and taken to the hospital , when she undergoes surgery . Charlie is placed on life support and Ruby is told she will not breathe on her own again . Ruby and Brax decide Charlie 's ventilator should be turned off and Charlie dies . 
 In June 2013 , when Brax is shot by Adam Sharpe ( Martin Lynes ) , he falls unconscious and Charlie appears to him on a clifftop . She warns Brax that he is in danger and that night he is poisoned by Adam in the hospital , causing him to go into a coma . Charlie appears to Brax again and he explains that he is tired of fighting . He wishes to remain with her , saying that his brothers no longer need him . Charlie tries to encourage Brax to go back and asks him about Ricky Sharpe ( Bonnie <unk> ) . She realises that Brax loves Ricky and tells him to let go , so he can return to her . 
 = = Reception = = 
 For her portrayal of Charlie , Anderson has garnered various award nominations . At the 2008 Inside Soap Awards , Anderson received a nomination for " Sexiest Female " . In 2010 , she was nominated for " Best Daytime Star " . That same year saw Anderson earn nominations for the " Most Popular Personality on Australian Television " and " Most Popular Actress " Logie Awards . 2011 saw Anderson nominated once again for " Best Daytime Star " at the Inside Soap Awards . Anderson received nominations for Most Popular TV personality and Most Popular Actress at the 2012 Logie Awards . The episode featuring Charlie 's death was nominated for an Australian Writers ' Guild award . 
 Holy Soap described the character 's most memorable moment as " Locking lips with gal pal Joey " . In her book Free to a Good Home , author Catherine Deveny criticised the reaction to Charlie and Joey 's same sex relationship . She called the first kiss between the couple the " TV disappointment of the year " and she nicknamed the soap Homo Go Away because the scene in which the kiss featured were diluted to suit certain viewers . Of the decline in ratings during the storyline , Deveny said " Since the lesbian plotline began two weeks ago , 100 @,@ 000 people have turned off . Wow ! Turned off . That must be the first time the words ' lesbian ' and ' turn off ' have occurred in the same sentence . And all we 'd seen until Tuesday was lingering touches and intense stares . " Deveny then explained that she would rather let her children watch lesbians on television than Christians . She highlighted that only mothers complained to the network about their children being exposed to a same @-@ sex relationship during a family show , not fathers . 
 In September 2010 , the Holy Soap website ran a poll to find viewers ' favourite Home and Away couple , which Charlie and Angelo won with 45 % of the vote . The website branded them as the " The Bay 's criminally hot couple " and said they had been keeping viewers glued to their screens with their on / off @-@ relationship . They later said Charlie had a " questionable taste in men " . Peter Dyke , writing for British tabloid the Daily Star , branded Charlie as " Sexy " and states : " Most fellas would not mind feeling the strong arm of the law if this beauty was their local police officer . " The Daily Record opined that Charlie 's determination to prove Grant as a rapist was " dangerously close to an obsession . " They also said that ever since Charlie and her family arrived in Summer Bay they have " created drama . " 
 The character was negatively received by Ruth Deller of television website Lowculture and Jaci Stephen of the Daily Mail . In May 2009 , Deller placed Charlie at number five on her list of worst soap opera characters segment . Deller said , " The Summer Bay cop may have lots of storylines , but the LC community don 't really approve – mainly due to Esther Anderson 's apparent lack of acting chops . It 's like our hatred for Michelle Connor ( Coronation Street ) all over again , only this time with added scandalous @-@ headline @-@ grabbing @-@ faux @-@ <unk> ! " In July 2009 , Deller said , " It would be easy to spend every month slagging off Charlie , because there 's so much to dislike " . Deller also added that Charlie 's daughter is " everything Charlie isn 't " . Stephen wondered if Charlie is going through an early menopause as she always appears " to be in a sweat onscreen . " During a storyline , which saw Charlie decide she needs a counsellor to find her self @-@ identity , Stephen complained that it was all she seemed to mention since her " foray into lesbianism . " Stephen did , however , agree that Charlie needed a counsellor . She also stated she could help by telling her ; " Charlie : you 're a mess . " Stephen was critical of Charlie 's relationship with Angelo , which she described as a " rocky road " . She wanted to know how much the show could " wring out of their on / off romance " and asked if somebody could send them out to sea in a sinking boat . Following Charlie and Angelo 's 2011 break up , Stephen stated that the show needs to " change the record ! " 
 Upon seeing the beginning of Charlie 's storyline with Darryl Braxton , Stephen said , " Oh , please not another Angelo – I can 't go through all that again . " When Charlie arrests Darryl for kissing her , Stephen quipped : " That woman will do anything to get a guy in handcuffs . " All About Soap said Charlie and Darryl 's chemistry was " clear for everyone to see " and wondered when she would stop hiding behind her " law @-@ abiding facade " . When Charlie and Darryl share their " steamy moment " , Erin Miller of TV Week said " It was the moment we 've all been waiting for . " In 2012 , Stephen questioned whether there was another police officer who has had " such a difficult life as Charlie " . She said she transformed from " lesbian to gangster 's moll " and opined that her life continued to " spiral out of control " . 
 Kerry Barrett and Carena Crawford of All About Soap said Charlie was both a " sexy sergeant " and the soap opera 's " cutest crime fighter " . They opined that getting involved with Brax was never going to end well for Charlie but did not suspect she would die . The pair concluded that while it was sad for them , they were unsure how the residents of Summer Bay would manage without Charlie . 
 = Ryan Garko = 
 Ryan Francis Garko ( born January 2 , 1981 ) is a former professional baseball outfielder , first baseman , and designated hitter . In college , he was a catcher . He has played for the Cleveland Indians , the San Francisco Giants , and the Texas Rangers in Major League Baseball as well as the Samsung Lions in the Korea Baseball Organization . Garko is seen by former ESPN reporter John Sickels as a good hitter who hits to all parts of the field , but with poor defensive instincts . Through 2010 , he has a .275 career average , 427 hits , 55 home runs , and 250 RBI in 463 games . 
 When he attended Stanford University , Garko won the Johnny Bench Award and was named the Pac @-@ 10 Co @-@ Player of the Year his senior year . He was also voted onto the College World Series Legends Team , featuring 28 of the best College World Series players as voted upon by fans , writers , and head coaches . During his time in the Cleveland Indians ' organization , Garko was converted into a first baseman . In 2006 , Baseball America ranked him as the fifth best prospect in the Indians organization , including being the best at hitting for average . 
 Garko debuted in 2006 for the Indians , eventually taking over their first base position . In 2007 , he hit a career @-@ high 21 home runs in the regular season and batted over .300 for the Indians in the playoffs . Questions about Garko 's ability to hit caused him to lose some playing time in 2008 , although he managed to have 90 RBI . In 2009 , Garko was traded to the San Francisco Giants to become their first baseman , but he slumped and ended the season as a backup . He signed with the Seattle Mariners in 2010 but was claimed off waivers at the end of spring training by the Texas Rangers . After just 15 games , he was sent to the minors , where he spent the rest of the year . He played for the Samsung Lions of the Korea Baseball Organization in 2011 and played in the minor leagues in the United States in 2012 . He has not played in 2013 , although he attended spring training with the Colorado Rockies . 
 He was hired as an assistant coach at Stanford prior to the 2014 college baseball season . 
 = = Amateur career = = 
 = = = Early life and high school = = = 
 Garko was born in Pittsburgh , Pennsylvania . At the age of three , his family moved to southern California . He attended Saint Angela <unk> School in Brea , California , where his mother was a teacher , and attended high school at Servite High School . He graduated from Servite in 1999 alongside future major league players Ben Francisco and Brian Wolfe . Also in 1999 , Garko played for the USA Baseball Junior National Team . He holds numerous records at Servite High School , including the single @-@ season records in , triples ( 6 ) , home runs ( 8 ) , RBIs ( 52 ) , and the career records in , games played ( 101 ) , at @-@ bats ( 314 ) , hits ( 149 ) , triples ( 19 ) , home runs ( 24 ) , RBIs ( 121 ) , and walks ( 80 ) . He was also the starting quarterback on the football team for two years . In the classroom , Garko had a 4 @.@ 2 GPA . 
 = = = College = = = 
 Garko attended Stanford University on a scholarship . He led the Stanford Cardinal baseball team in batting average in his sophomore season ( 2001 ) with a .398 clip , and was named their Most Improved Player . He helped Stanford reach the College World Series and hit <unk> in the CWS . That summer , he played with the Hyannis Mets in the Cape Cod League , an amateur summer league , and batted .233 with 14 runs , 28 hits , 3 home runs , and 19 RBIs . Next season , in his junior year , Garko was named a Johnny Bench Award semifinalist . During his senior year , he won the award and was named a First Team All @-@ American . He also shared the Pac @-@ 10 Conference Baseball of the Year Award with Dustin Pedroia , and was named the NCAA Regional Most Outstanding Player and Stanford 's Most Valuable Player . In his time at Stanford , Garko batted .350 with 60 doubles , 39 home runs , 191 RBIs in 218 games played . He is as of 2013 fifth all @-@ time in doubles at Stanford , seventh in RBIs , and ninth in batting average and home runs . His only problem at Stanford was that he had trouble with controlling his weight . On May 6 , 2010 , Garko was voted on to a 28 @-@ member College World Series Legends Team as a part of a commemoration of the final College World Series in Johnny Rosenblatt Stadium . The team was voted upon by college baseball fans , college baseball writers , and Division I head coaches . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 = = = Cleveland Indians = = = 
 = = = = 2003 – 2004 seasons = = = = 
 Garko was selected as a catcher by the Cleveland Indians in the third round ( 78th overall ) of the 2003 Major League Baseball draft . On July 8 , 2003 , he signed a contract with the Indians and was assigned to the Mahoning Valley Scrappers of the New York – Penn League . In his first professional season , Garko batted .273 with four home runs and 16 RBIs in 45 games . The next season , 2004 , he split time between the Class @-@ A Advanced Kinston Indians , the Double @-@ A Akron Aeros , and the Triple @-@ A Buffalo Bisons . During April , he was named the " Player of the Month " in the Carolina League . He was also named the 13th best prospect in the Carolina League by Baseball America . He batted a combined .330 with 33 doubles , 22 home runs , and 99 RBIs in 113 games with all three leagues . Garko was third in the Carolina League in batting average with a .328 clip , and sixth in home runs with 16 . At the end of the season , he was named the Cleveland Indians ' minor league player of the year by USA Today . Garko participated in the Arizona Fall League ( AFL ) at the end of the 2004 season . With the Peoria Javelinas in the AFL , he batted .348 with 40 hits , 5 home runs , and 30 RBIs in 30 games . He was named to the AFL Raising Stars team , an all @-@ star team voted upon by managers and coaches . 
 = = = = 2005 season = = = = 
 In 2005 , Garko spent spring training with the Indians , but he was returned to the minor leagues before the regular season . He spent most of the season with the Triple @-@ A Buffalo Bisons . He hit .303 with 19 home runs , and 77 RBIs in 127 games . Halfway through the 2005 season , Garko was selected to the International League all @-@ star team . He was also selected to the All @-@ Star Futures Game in Detroit . On September 18 , 2005 , Garko made his major league debut against the Kansas City Royals , pinch @-@ hitting for Travis Hafner in the eighth inning and striking out against Chris <unk> . That was his only major league appearance of the year . For the second straight season , Garko played in the Arizona Fall League at the end of the season , this time with the Mesa Solar Sox . He batted .314 with 27 hits , 5 home runs , and 27 RBIs in 23 games . 
 = = = = 2006 season = = = = 
 Entering the 2006 season , Baseball America ranked Garko as the fifth best prospect in the Indians ' organization and the best at hitting for average . Garko attended spring training with the Indians in 2006 . He was sent to Triple @-@ A before the start of the season and began his season with the Buffalo Bisons . He injured his left wrist on April 21 , but was not placed on the disabled list after x @-@ rays turned up negative . Garko hit .247 with 15 home runs , and 59 RBIs in 127 games at the Triple @-@ A level . Garko was tied for second in bases on balls ( 45 ) , and was tied for third in home runs and RBIs on the Bisons ' roster at the end of the season . He was called up by the Indians on June 30 , after Cleveland traded first baseman Eduardo Pérez to the Seattle Mariners . His first major league hit , a double , came on July 1 , against the Cincinnati Reds . He hit his first home run a little over a month later , on August 10 , against the Los Angeles Angels of Anaheim . Although Garko favored his traditional position of catcher , the Indians moved him to first base so he would have a better chance of competing for a major league roster spot . By September , he was the starting everyday first baseman for the Indians after Ben Broussard was traded to Seattle . Garko finished the season with a .292 batting average , 12 doubles , seven home runs , and 45 RBIs in 50 games at the major league level . 
 = = = = 2007 season = = = = 
 Going into 2007 , Anthony <unk> of MLB.com reported that Garko would have to improve on the defensive end to make the 25 @-@ man roster because the Indians already had a first baseman in Casey Blake . Towards the end of spring training , Indians ' manager Eric Wedge noted that Garko had made improvements on defense . He made the 2007 roster out of spring training for the first time in his career . On April 22 , Garko hit a game @-@ winning three @-@ run home run in the top of the ninth inning against the Tampa Bay Rays . He became the everyday starting first baseman early in the season after Casey Blake moved to third base because of an injury to Andy Marte . He began to dislike interleague play because during it , designated hitter Travis Hafner was moved to first base , which forced Garko to the bench . On July 18 , Garko hit a two @-@ run home run in the ninth inning against Chicago White Sox ' pitcher Bobby Jenks to tie the score at five @-@ to @-@ five , and then drove in an RBI run for the win in the eleventh inning . During the regular season , Garko batted .289 with 29 doubles , one triple , 21 home runs and 61 RBIs in 138 games . He was third in the league with 20 hit by pitches ( an Indians single @-@ season record ) . In the postseason , he hit .314 with two doubles , one home run , and five RBIs in nine games . The Indians defeated the New York Yankees in four games in the American League Division Series before losing the American League Championship Series in seven games to the Boston Red Sox . 
 = = = = 2008 season = = = = 
 Going into the 2008 season , there were questions surrounding Garko 's ability to improve as a hitter . During the early part of the season , Michael Aubrey was playing more than Garko because Garko was having trouble hitting right @-@ handed pitching . Garko was moved down the batting order because of his struggles . In August , Garko stated that he was watching videotape in an attempt to pick up his hitting . On August 6 , he was benched for three games by manager Eric Wedge for failing to run on a ground ball he hit . On September 27 , Garko hit two home runs , including a grand slam against the Chicago White Sox . At the end of the season , Garko hit .273 with 21 doubles , one triple , 14 home runs and 90 RBIs in 141 games . His 90 RBI tied Grady Sizemore for the team lead . 
 = = = = 2009 season = = = = 
 Before spring training in 2009 , there was speculation that if Garko did not perform well , he might lose his starting first base job . Garko began practicing the outfield position for the upcoming season . Eric Wedge stated that Garko would in fact be playing the outfield in spring training . On June 21 , Garko was held out of the game because of a sprained left wrist . 
 = = = San Francisco Giants = = = 
 On July 27 , 2009 , Garko was traded to the San Francisco Giants for left @-@ handed pitcher Scott Barnes . He hit a game @-@ winning double on August 18 , against the Cincinnati Reds in the top of the tenth inning . He was acquired to be a full @-@ time first baseman ; however , during his tenure in San Francisco , he was third on the depth chart ( behind Pablo Sandoval and Travis Ishikawa ) after he got off to a sluggish start . With the Giants , Garko batted .235 with 3 doubles , 1 triple , 2 home runs and 12 RBIs and 9 walks in 40 games . Combined with his time in the Indians and Giants organization , Garko batted .268 with 13 doubles , 13 home runs and 51 RBIs in 118 games . On December 12 , 2009 , Garko was non @-@ tendered by the Giants , making him a free agent . 
 = = = Seattle Mariners = = = 
 Garko signed a one @-@ year $ 550 @,@ 000 contract with the Seattle Mariners on February 1 , 2010 . Garko said that the reason he was signed by Seattle was because he has success against left @-@ handed pitching . He added about signing with the Mariners : 
 However , in the spring , Garko batted only .220 with one home run and four RBIs . On March 30 , he was placed on waivers by the Mariners to make room for Mike Sweeney of the 25 @-@ man roster . Geoff Baker , reporter for The Seattle Times , stated that the reason for Garko being placed on waivers was because of Sweeney 's clubhouse presence and the fact that the Mariners had stated that , due to his defensive abilities , Casey Kotchman , whom Garko was expected to split playing time with , was going to play the majority of the games at first base leaving the back @-@ up designated hitter spot for Garko . The final decision , Baker stated , was that the Mariners had their organization full with back @-@ up first basemen and designated hitters like Sweeney and Tommy <unk> . 
 = = = Texas Rangers = = = 
 On April 1 , Garko was claimed by the Texas Rangers . As a result of his signing , the Rangers optioned Max Ramírez to the Triple @-@ A Oklahoma City RedHawks to make room for Garko on the 25 @-@ man roster . The Rangers had shown interest in Garko at the trade deadline in 2009 , however , no transaction ever formed and he was sent to the San Francisco Giants . On May 13 , The Dallas Morning News reporter Evan Grant reported that the Rangers intended to option Garko to the minor leagues and later place him on outright waivers when outfielder Nelson Cruz was activated from the disabled list , although no transaction was official at the time of the report . Later that day , the Rangers officially optioned Garko to Triple @-@ A Oklahoma City and placed him on waivers after Cruz was activated from the disabled list . On May 13 , he cleared waivers and was outrighted to Triple @-@ A Oklahoma City , which removed him from the Rangers ' 40 @-@ man roster . Garko hit his first home run of the season , a grand slam , with the RedHawks against the Triple @-@ A Portland Beavers on May 21 . However , with Oklahoma City in 2010 , Garko batted only .235 with only ninety hits and twelve home runs . He became a free agent at the end of the season . 
 = = = KBO and minor leagues = = = 
 On December 10 , Garko signed a one @-@ year deal with the Samsung Lions of the Korea Baseball Organization . Due to injury , he was released on July 12 . 
 Garko signed with the Long Island Ducks of the independent Atlantic League of Professional Baseball in March 2012 . He started well , leading the league in OPS and placing among the league leaders in batting average before getting signed to a minor league contract by the Tampa Bay Rays on May 14 . Garko spent the rest of the season playing for the Double @-@ A Montgomery Biscuits of the Southern League , batting .297 with 68 hits , eight home runs , and 40 RBI in 61 games . On November 3 , he became a free agent . 
 On January 30 , 2013 , Garko signed a minor league contract with the Colorado Rockies . He was released before the season on March 23 . 
 = = = Coaching = = = 
 After his playing career ended , he joined the coaching staff at Stanford University , a position he held through the 2014 season . 
 Garko was named as the manager of the Double @-@ A Tulsa Drillers of the Texas League , a Los Angeles Dodgers affiliate for the 2016 season . 
 = = Personal = = 
 Garko resides in Scottsdale , Arizona , with his spouse Christie , whom he met in 2004 . They were on their honeymoon when Garko found out that the Giants had made him a free agent after the 2009 season . He is a fan of the Los Angeles Lakers and the Notre Dame Fighting Irish . 
 = Bat Out of Hell III : The Monster Is Loose = 
 Bat Out of Hell III : The Monster is Loose is the tenth studio album by Meat Loaf and the third and final one in the Bat Out of Hell trilogy . It was released in October 2006 , 29 years after Bat Out of Hell ( 1977 ) , and 13 years after Bat Out of Hell II : Back into Hell ( 1993 ) . 
 Produced by Desmond Child , it is the only Bat album not involving Jim Steinman in its production . The album was subject to a legal dispute between Meat Loaf and Steinman , who had registered the phrase " Bat Out of Hell " as a trademark and attempted to prevent the album using the phrase . In the end , seven songs that Steinman wrote for various other projects were included . 
 As with its predecessors , the album received mixed reviews . A tour , named " The Seize the Night Tour " , followed the release , concentrating upon songs from the Bat albums . 
 = = History = = 
 According to a Reuters report , Meat Loaf and Steinman started working on an album in 2001 . During the concerts in his Hair of the Dog tour , Meat Loaf made a point to mention that he and Steinman were putting out a new album . 
 The composer suffered some health setbacks around 2004 . Meat Loaf says that " lawyers worked for over a year putting together a contract for Steinman to do Bat Out of Hell III . It was one of the best producer 's contracts in the history of the record business . " Ultimately , according to the singer , Steinman was not well enough to work on such an intense project and made what he calls the " selfish " decision to go ahead without him . In promotional interviews he said that he did not want to wait a year and a half just to find out that Steinman was still unfit . Describing himself as a " really loyal person , " Meat Loaf says that " the decision not to use Steinman has taken its toll on me . " 
 However , in 2006 , David Sonenberg , Steinman 's manager , said : 
 Jim 's health is excellent . That 's not the reason he didn 't participate in ( Bat III ) . He had some meaningful health problems about four years ago , but he 's been totally healthy the last couple of years . His health in no way impacted on his involvement in the Bat Out of Hell project . 
 The development problems and confusion over Steinman 's involvement is a result of a dispute of the trademark " Bat Out of Hell " , which Steinman registered in 1995 . Meat Loaf sued Steinman and his manager , in a complaint filed May 28 , 2006 in federal District Court in Los Angeles , California , for $ 50 million and to prevent further use by the writer / producer . 
 Meat Loaf has stated that he contributed lyrics to " Bat Out of Hell " . He had used the phrase extensively for tours , to which Steinman had never objected " until a recent falling out . " Steinman and his representatives approached Meat Loaf 's labels , Universal and Virgin , asserting trademark ownership and threatening litigation to prevent the album 's release . An agreement was reached in Summer 2006 . According to Virgin , " the two came to an amicable agreement that ensured that Jim Steinman 's music would be a continuing part of the ' Bat Out of Hell ' legacy . " In promotional interviews , Meat Loaf has played down the dispute with Steinman , pointing out that it was over in three weeks and was purely for the sake of business . 
 I consider him to be one of my best friends but the real thing is about managers : I think Steinman 's manager is the devil and Steinman feels the same way about my manager . So , we had to communicate through managers and he refused to sign some papers that would have allowed for the recording of Bat Out of Hell III without a hitch . So , really , I didn 't sue Jim Steinman . I sued his manager . 
 Despite the fact that Steinman was not involved in the recording or production , the album does include seven of his songs , five of which are covers of previously released songs . The other two were covers of Steinman 's demos intended for musical theater projects , at the time unreleased . The agreement enabled Steinman to work on a musical theatre project based on all of the songs from Bat Out of Hell . Describing the project as " Cirque du Soleil on acid " , in September 2007 , he expected it to open in London in 2010 . 
 = = Production = = 
 Meat Loaf had announced that Michael Beinhorn was producing the record , but Desmond Child took the helm . The singer reports that Child would say things that made him think he was sitting next to Steinman . Child began recording sessions by playing Slipknot CDs to get the assembled musicians in the mood . In addition to musicians from his touring band , the Neverland Express , several guest players contributed to the album . Meat Loaf says , " I didn 't just want to bring in rock players — I wanted to go to extreme rock people " resulting in an album that " has all the touches of the other two Bats , but it 's much more of a rock album . " Child says , that one of the most memorable experiences working on the album was working with Brian May , who played on " Bad for Good " . The album also featured guest performances by John 5 , Steve Vai and John Shanks . 
 Meat Loaf says that he does not enjoy recording in studios . He compares the process to " going to the dentist and having root canal everyday " . Whereas you really have to be flat for people to notice it in a live show , in a studio , every " nuance is under a microscope ... and I 'm a perfectionist who knows that there 's no such thing as perfection but I try to get as close as I can . " 
 Todd Rundgren , who produced the first album and arranged all of the background vocals for Bat II , arranged the background vocals for three tracks . In a promotional interview for the album Rundgren has said " continuity is an important thing . " However , in another interview he said that his contribution was considerably less than on some earlier Meat Loaf albums . 
 And by the time they got it all organized and figured out , there were really only a couple of songs left for me to do anything on . So I came into L.A. for a couple of days and Kasim ... came in , as was the routine , and we did maybe three songs ... just so that I ’ d have a few fingerprints on the record . I think someone , maybe Meat Loaf , said that to keep everything covered , I had to be in there somewhere ... but not necessarily running the whole thing . So my involvement was pretty much peripheral . 
 The album features three duets . Norwegian vocalist Marion Raven duets on " It 's All Coming Back to Me Now " . " What About Love ? " features Patti Russo , who has toured with Meat Loaf for over thirteen years . Finally , Jennifer Hudson performs on " The Future Ain 't What It Used to Be " . 
 = = Compositions = = 
 The album opens with the title track . " The Monster Is Loose " is highly influenced by the Gothic style of John 5 , who plays the main guitar parts . The song is very heavy and continues Meat Loaf 's association with Major League Baseball established with Phil Rizzuto 's commentary on " Paradise by the Dashboard Light . " " Blind as a Bat " , written by Desmond Child , tells about how one is thankful for the love another has given him , even after he has done deeds to suggest that he does not deserve such love . 
 According to Steinman , " It 's All Coming Back to Me Now " was inspired by Wuthering Heights , and was an attempt to write " the most passionate , romantic song " he could ever create . In interviews , Meat Loaf has said that , in his mind , the song was always meant to be a duet . Norwegian artist Marion Raven , who had been working on her solo album with Child , was chosen because the timbre of her voice starkly contrasts to Meat Loaf 's . 
 " Bad for Good " was one of the many songs written by Steinman under the inspiration of Peter Pan and lost boys who never grow up . This is reflected in lyrics such as " You know I 'm gonna be like this forever / I 'm never gonna be what I should . " The song was written to appear on the follow @-@ up to Bat Out of Hell , but which Steinman recorded himself . Because of this , Meat Loaf was aware that there is a " core of fans that know that song , " so he " had that under the microscope more than any other on the album . " 
 " Cry Over Me " is , according to Meat Loaf , a timeless song dealing with relationships of all kinds . In a 2007 interview , he says that it can be about your first or last loves , or dealing with your boss at work . Partially quoting the lyrics , the singer posits that there are times when " you want him to feel exactly like I felt when he said that to me . " 
 The Guardian says " In the Land of the Pig ( The Butcher Is King ) " is " five Olympian minutes crying out for a full production at Glyndebourne . " Guitarist Steve Vai describes it as " very Gothic ; almost terrifying . " It is about the intense power over subordinates : 
 Can 't you hear the choir now ? 
 Listen to the animals sing . 
 Can 't you hear the slaughterhouse bells ? 
 In the land of the pigs the butcher is king . 
 " Monstro " is a bombastic orchestral piece layered with chorals that lead into the piano introduction to " Alive . " Meat Loaf decided to hire Desmond Child when he revealed that he had written " Alive " especially for the album . The song refers to how the singer has overcome difficult periods in his life . 
 " What About Love " , a piano @-@ based duet with Patti Russo , is a sexually charged song that echoes " Paradise by the Dashboard Light " from the 1977 album . Here , though , the singers are singing about love throughout , not bitterness . The final verse contains the most explicit lyrics about their first sexual encounter . 
 [ Boy : ] 
 I can 't forget the feeling of your sweat upon my skin . 
 And the tremble of your body on the day you let me in ... 
 [ Girl : ] 
 On a <unk> 's surrender with nothing to lose . 
 You were scared and so was I when I gave myself to you ... 
 " Seize the Night " has a strong orchestral foundation underneath the lead vocals and a choir . A duet with Jennifer Hudson , " The Future Ain 't What It Used to Be " is a pessimistic song based upon the myth that Pandora closed her jar before allowing " hope " to escape ( the song first appeared on the only album performed by female group Pandora 's Box ) . The lyrics reveal the hopelessness of the past ( Were there ever any stars in the sky ? ) and the future ( There 's nothing so sad as a tomorrow gone bad ) . 
 The final song of the Bat trilogy is a short one written by Steinman . A few lyrics of Cry to Heaven begin rather sweet , but turning rather bitter : ( Cry baby cry / Cry , cry to heaven / If that doesn 't do it for you / Go ahead and cry like hell . ) The two parts are bridged by an instrumental dominated by an Irish flute . 
 = = Cover and booklet = = 
 The cover follows the style of the previous two albums called Bat Out of Hell . Julie Bell designed the cover and the artwork that appears alongside the lyrics in the booklet . She also supplied the art for the " It 's All Coming Back to Me Now " single . The cover features the biker from the first two covers about to slay the giant bat from the second cover . Like the first two Bat albums , Steinman 's songwriting is credited on the cover , this time shared with Desmond Child . 
 The booklet contains all of the lyrics to the songs , each page featuring a small illustration . The CD liner contains a dedication " For thirty years of friendship and inspiration , Bat Out of Hell III is dedicated to Jim Steinman . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 The album debuted at # 8 on the Billboard 200 and sold about 81 @,@ 000 copies in its opening week , his best since Bat Out of Hell II : Back Into Hell . However , it slipped to # 60 after three weeks . The album also reached # 3 in the UK charts , but quickly fell off . 
 Q gave the album a positive review , calling it " the second @-@ best album to bear the ' Bat ' name " , and saying that Child did an ' impressive recreation of Steinman 's Andrew Lloyd Webber @-@ on @-@ steroids approach ' , while the album was " overblown , frequently ridiculous and largely devoid of irony . " They were unimpressed with the title track , suggesting that ' whoever decided it would be a good idea for Meat Loaf to tackle nu metal ... should be tarred and feathered . " Q did , however , praise the " operatic " vocals and May 's " fabulously hysterical guitar " on the track " Bad for Good " . The Village Voice named it as ' Album of the Year This Week ' , calling it " absurdist , righteous majesty " . 
 Some reviews lamented Steinman 's absence . According to Allmusic , " this Bat is quite obviously a patchwork , pieced together from things borrowed and recreated , never quite gelling the way either of the previous Bats did . " They criticized " The Monster is Loose " as a " disarming , a grindingly metallic riff @-@ rocker that sits very uncomfortably next to Steinman 's " It 's All Coming Back to Me Now " , and Child as " a professional who is playing a game without bothering to learn the rules . " On the other hand , the review commended Meat Loaf 's voice : he sings " his heart out as he valiantly tries to make this Bat a worthy successor to the originals . " 
 = = Singles and music videos = = 
 " It 's All Coming Back to Me Now " was the first song released as a single . It reached number one in Raven 's native Norway , and the top ten in both the United Kingdom and Germany . " Blind As a Bat " was scheduled to be released in the UK on December 18 , but was then put back to February 26 , as two CDs . In turn , this single was pulled at the last minute , in favor of " Cry Over Me " , which was released on May 7 , 2007 . 
 P. R. Brown directed the videos for " It 's All Coming Back to Me Now " and " Cry over Me . " " It 's All Coming Back to Me Now " is an elaborate production , in which Meat Loaf is being haunted by the memory of his dead lover . Told in flashback , Raven 's character crashes her car to avoid a man standing in the road . She sings as an unseen spirit following Meat Loaf . It echoes Steinman 's comments that the song is about the " dark side of love " and the " ability to be resurrected by it . " 
 The video for " Cry over Me " had the lowest budget since those for the original album . A simple video , Meat Loaf has said that it only took four hours to film . The music video for " The Monster Is Loose " consists of animation . Its storyline is about a biker who rescues a girl from an enormous bat @-@ like creature . 
 The videos for " It 's All Coming Back to Me Now " , " Cry over Me " and " The Monster Is Loose " are included as bonus features on the 3 Bats Live DVD , released in October 2007 . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All of the Jim Steinman songs were written for other projects . Like Bat II , the album contains two songs ( " It 's All Coming Back ... " and " The Future Ain 't What It Used to Be " ) that originally appeared on Original Sin , Steinman 's 1989 concept album with Pandora 's Box . Steinman 's demo of " In the Land of the Pig , the Butcher Is King " was part of the preparations for the unrealized Batman : The Musical project . Steinman 's " Cry to Heaven " demo was intended for the possibility that Steinman would provide songs for a musical based on the film Cry @-@ Baby . Cry @-@ Baby has since been staged , but without any work from Jim Steinman . " Bad for Good " was featured as the title track on Steinman 's 1981 album . Some of the songs on the Bad for Good album were once intended to be a Meat Loaf solo album . " Seize the Night " first appeared as " Carpe <unk> " in the German language musical Tanz der Vampire . It was also performed in English in the 2002 Broadway show called Dance of the Vampires , and demos of the song in English became widely available around that time . " If It Ain 't Broke , Break It " first appeared in the MTV film Wuthering Heights , and a recording of the song was released on the soundtrack CD for the film . 
 = = Alternative releases = = 
 A limited edition was released with an accompanying DVD , containing a short " making of " featurette , the animated trailer , and " The Monster is Loose " career montage video . The US version also includes a photo gallery and the " It 's All Coming Back to Me Now " video . 
 Best Buy 's version of the album came with an exclusive bonus track : a live version of " Testify " ( from Couldn 't Have Said It Better ) . This track was originally announced to be on the CD itself , but Best Buy opted to include an insert in the packaging giving customers a code to download the song . Circuit City 's version came with an exclusive downloadable track : a live version of " Life Is a Lemon and I Want My Money Back " . Target released a " Limited Tour Edition " with a concert ticket pre @-@ sale offer . Wal Mart released the album as part of an exclusive 2 @-@ pack with the Meat Loaf Bat Out of Hell Classic Albums DVD . 
 The version of the album available from Apple 's iTunes Store includes two bonus tracks , a live version of " I 'd Do Anything for Love " , recorded at a concert in Australia , and " Heads Will Roll " , sung by Marion Raven from her EP of the same name . 
 = = Tour = = 
 Meat Loaf embarked on a 112 date world tour to promote the album . He performed a concert performing some songs from all three Bat Out of Hell albums on October 16 at London 's Royal Albert Hall , and performed many of those songs on the rest of his tour as well . He also performed a " Bat on Broadway " performance on November 2 , 2006 at New York 's Palace Theater , as well as shows in Toronto , Atlantic City , Uncasville , and Mexico City . 
 Marion Raven joined Meat Loaf for the first leg of his 2007 tour , Seize the Night tour . She was the supporting act , promoting her Set Me Free album . Meat Loaf introduced her on stage at the latter stages of the concerts to duet on " It 's All Coming Back to Me Now " . 
 A DVD of the tour was released in October 2007 , entitled 3 Bats Live . It also contains a bonus disc featuring the promotional videos and animations from Bat III . 
 Portions of the tour were captured on film in the Theatrical Documentary Meat Loaf : In Search of Paradise , directed by Bruce David Klein , which was released in 2008 . 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Lead vocals – Meat Loaf 
 Session Musicians 
 backing vocals – Becky <unk> ( track 11 ) , Andreas Carlsson ( track 8 ) , Desmond Child , Marti Frederiksen ( track 11 ) , Diana <unk> ( tracks 2 , 7 , 13 , 14 ) , John Gregory ( tracks 3 , 11 ) , Storm Lee , Richard <unk> , Jeanette Olsson , Jason Paige , Keely Pressly ( track 3 ) , <unk> Saviola ( track 10 ) , Maria Vidal ( track 13 ) 
 programming – Randy Canto ( track 10 ) , Doug Emery ( track 14 ) , Harry Sommerdahl ( tracks 2 , 7 , 9 , 10 ) , Chris Vrenna ( track 6 ) 
 gospel choir ( tracks 8 , 13 ) – Barbara Allen , Vernon Allen , Esther Austin , Bonita Brisco , Cheryl Brown , Sonya <unk> , Jessica Jones , Joseph Powell , Sandra Stokes , <unk> Stovall 
 trumpet ( track 10 ) – Gary Grant , Steve Madaio 
 Orchestra 
 David Campbell – Conductor and arranger 
 = Virgin Islands at the 2008 Summer Olympics = 
 The United States Virgin Islands competed in the 2008 Summer Olympics , which were held in Beijing , the People 's Republic of China from August 8 to August 24 , 2008 . The appearance of its 23 @-@ person delegation marked its fifteenth appearance at the Olympic games , and its tenth appearance at the Summer Olympic games . In total , seven athletes participated on behalf of the Virgin Islands ( Tabarie Henry and LaVerne Jones @-@ Ferrette in track and field , John and Julius Jackson in boxing , Thomas Barrows III in sailing , Ned Gerard in shooting , and Josh Laban in swimming ) in Beijing . Of those , John Jackson and Tabarie Henry progressed to a post @-@ preliminary event , and Henry reached semifinals in his own . There were no Virgin Islander medalists at the Beijing Olympics . 
 = = Background = = 
 Between its beginning and the Beijing Olympics , the United States Virgin Islands have participated in fifteen Olympics games , including five Winter Olympics . Of the ten Summer Olympic games , the Virgin Islands have sent a delegation for every game since the 1968 Summer Olympics in Mexico City excluding the 1980 Summer Olympics in Moscow . The first women in the team participated at the 1976 Summer Olympics in Montréal , and the delegation has included women ever since , peaking at the 1996 Summer Olympics in Atlanta . The size of its summer Olympic team was largest between 1972 ( 16 athletes ) and 1992 ( 25 athletes ) , and was at its all @-@ time largest in the 1984 Summer Olympics in Los Angeles when 29 athletes competed for the country . After 1996 , the team carried 15 athletes or less . 
 In its entire history up to Beijing , there has been one medalist : Peter Holmberg , who medaled silver in the 1988 Summer Olympics in Seoul . Seven Virgin Islanders participated in the Beijing games , including five men and one woman in five distinct sports . There were no medalists , although boxer John Jackson and runner Tabarie Henry progressed to post @-@ preliminary rounds . Josh Laban was the nation 's flag bearer during ceremonies . 
 The Virgin Islands ' delegation to Beijing included five executives ( among them , Virgin Islands Olympic Committee President Hans <unk> ) ; the seven Olympians , along with nine assisting staff ( coaches , etc . ) ; and two youth camp athletes . Overall , 23 people composed the team . 
 = = Athletics = = 
 = = = Men 's competition = = = 
 Then @-@ attendee of the Kansan Barton County Community College Tabarie Henry qualified for the Beijing Olympics when he ran the 400 meter dash in 45 @.@ 42 seconds at the John McDonnell Invitational in Fayetteville , Arkansas in April . His qualifying time passed the Olympic A standard and marked the 15th fastest time in the event 's history and the 10th fastest time set that year in all the world . Henry 's participation in Beijing marked his Olympic debut . At the Olympics , Tabarie Henry participated in round one of his event in August 17 . He was placed in Heat 7 against eventual silver medalist Jeremy Wariner of the United States and Belgian runner Cedric van <unk> . With a time of 45 @.@ 36 seconds , Henry ranked second of eight in his heat , behind Wariner by 0 @.@ 13 seconds and ahead of van <unk> by 0 @.@ 18 seconds . Overall , Henry tied Nery Brenes of Costa Rica for 18th place out of 56 athletes . He progressed to semifinals . 
 At the August 19th semifinal rounds , Henry was placed in Heat 1 , again against Wariner and also versus Brenes and Christopher Brown of the Bahamas , among others . Tabarie Henry ran the event in 45 @.@ 19 seconds , ending seventh out of eight athletes in the heat , at 0 @.@ 13 seconds behind Cuba 's Williams Collazo ( 6th place ) and 0 @.@ 45 seconds ahead of Italy 's Claudio Licciardello ( 8th place ) . Overall , Henry ranked 17th out of 24 athletes , and did not progress to finals on August 21 . 
 = = = Women 's competition = = = 
 LaVerne Jones @-@ Ferrette , the only female athlete to participate in the Beijing Olympics on behalf of the United States Virgin Islands , participated in the 100 meters and 200 meters dashes . Her participation in Beijing marked her second Olympic games , as she also participated in the 100 m and 200 m in the Athenian 2004 Summer Olympics . 
 Jones @-@ Ferrette 's participation in the 100 m dash began with the August 15 first round . Jones @-@ Ferrette was placed in Heat 1 . She placed third behind Jamaica 's Kerron Stewart ( 1st place ) and Norway 's Ezinne Okparaebo ( 2nd place ) with a time of 11 @.@ 41 seconds . Okparaebo was 0 @.@ 09 seconds faster than Jones @-@ Ferrette ; Haiti 's Barbara Pierre was 0 @.@ 09 seconds slower . Jones @-@ Ferrette ranked 20th out of 85 athletes in the first round , and progressed to round two . Jones was placed in Heat 1 during the second round , completing the event in 11 @.@ 55 seconds and ranking fifth of eight athletes . Jones @-@ Ferrette was 0 @.@ 1 seconds slower than Kittitian runner Virgil Hodge and 0 @.@ 1 seconds faster than Cameroon 's Myriam Leonie Mani . Overall , Jones @-@ Ferrette tied Ukrainian Natalia <unk> for 29th place out of 40 athletes . She did not progress further . 
 LaVerne Jones @-@ Ferrette also participated in the 200 m dash . On August 18 , she was placed in Heat 6 of the first round , completing the event in 23 @.@ 12 seconds and ranking fourth place out of eight athletes . Jones @-@ Ferrette was 0 @.@ 04 seconds behind Cuba 's Roxana Diaz , and was 0 @.@ 29 seconds ahead of Brazil 's Evelyn Santos . Jones @-@ Ferrette ranked 16th overall out of 48 athletes . Jones progressed to the August 19 second round , and was placed in Heat 1 against athletes that included Jamaica 's Veronica Campbell and the Cayman Islands ' Cydonie Mothersill . Jones @-@ Ferrette placed seventh out of eight with a time of 23 @.@ 37 seconds . Overall , LaVerne Jones @-@ Ferrette placed 24th out of 32 athletes . She did not advance to semifinals . 
 = = = Summary = = = 
 Key 
 Note – Ranks given for track events are within the athlete 's heat only 
 Q 
 = Qualified for the next round 
 q = 
 Qualified for the next round as a fastest loser or , in field events , by position without achieving the qualifying target 
 NR 
 = National record 
 N / A = 
 Round not applicable for the event 
 Bye = Athlete not required to compete in round 
 Men 
 Women 
 = = Boxing = = 
 The Virgin Islands qualified two boxers for the Olympic boxing tournament . John Jackson qualified at the first American qualifying tournament . His brother Julius Jackson earned his spot at the second qualifier . The Beijing Olympics marked the first time that either of the Jackson brothers had participated in the Olympic games . Although neither medaled , John Jackson progressed to the Round of 16 , which followed the preliminary round . 
 = = Sailing = = 
 Then @-@ student of Yale University Thomas Barrows III was the only sailor to participate on behalf of the Virgin Islands during the 2008 Beijing Olympics . His appearance in Beijing marked his first time at any Olympic games . He qualified for the Men 's Laser class , which consists of ten races , and involved 43 athletes . In the first race , Barrows ranked 20th ; in the second , 28th ; in the third , 20th , in the fourth , 24th ; in the fifth , 26th ; in the sixth , 31st ; in the seventh , 15th ; in the eighth , 10th ( his highest ) ; and in the ninth , 21st . Barrows did not complete the tenth race . Overall , Barrows earned 195 points in total , but ended with 164 net points and ranked 21st in the event . He did not medal . 
 Men 
 M 
 = Medal race ; EL = 
 Eliminated – did not advance into the medal race ; CAN = Race cancelled 
 = = Shooting = = 
 Ned Gerard was the only shooter representing the Virgin Islands at the Beijing Olympics . He qualified for the shooting event men 's 50 m small @-@ bore rifle , prone . His participation in Beijing marked his Olympic debut . The shooting event took place on August 14 . In the first round , Gerard scored 96 points ; the second round , 96 points again ; the third round , 95 ; the fourth round , 98 ; the fifth round , 97 ; and the last round , 98 . Ned Gerard scored 580 @.@ 0 points , ranking 53rd out of 56 athletes , and thus did not medal . He fell two points behind Cuba 's <unk> Perez and two points ahead of Kyrgyzstan 's Ruslan Ismailov . Gerard was 122 @.@ 7 points behind event leader Artur <unk> of the Ukraine . 
 Men 
 = = Swimming = = 
 Former University of Georgia student Josh Laban was the only swimmer to participate on behalf of the Virgin Islands at the 2008 Beijing Olympics . He has known U.S. Virgin Islander swimmers Kieran Locke and Kevin Hensley since childhood , and competed alongside them during qualifying competitions . His participation marked his second appearance at the Olympics , with his first being at the 2004 Summer Olympics in Athens . In Beijing , Laban was placed in the seventh heat of the August 14 preliminaries round against swimmers that included Chile 's Oliver Elliot and Romania 's Norbert <unk> . With a time of 23 @.@ 28 seconds , Laban ranked seventh in the heat of eight athletes , defeating Kyrgyzstan 's Vitaly <unk> by 0 @.@ 74 seconds and falling behind sixth @-@ place swimmer Martyn Forde of Barbados by 0 @.@ 20 seconds . Laban was 0 @.@ 53 seconds slower than Elliot , who led the heat . Overall , Laban ranked 53rd out of 97 athletes competing in the event . He did not progress to the semifinal rounds held later that day . 
 Men 
 = Parthenon Frieze = 
 The Parthenon frieze is the high @-@ relief <unk> marble sculpture created to adorn the upper part of the Parthenon ’ s naos . It was sculpted between c . 443 and 438 BC , most likely under the direction of <unk> . Of the 524 feet ( 160 m ) of the original frieze , 420 feet ( 130 m ) survives — some 80 percent . The rest is known only from the drawings attributed to French artist Jacques Carrey in 1674 , thirteen years before the Venetian bombardment that ruined the temple . 
 At present , the majority of the frieze is at the British Museum in London ( forming the major part of the Elgin Marbles ) ; the largest proportion of the rest is in Athens , and the remainder of fragments shared between six other institutions . Casts of the frieze may be found in the Beazley archive at the Ashmolean Museum at Oxford , at the Spurlock Museum in Urbana , in the <unk> at Basel and elsewhere . 
 = = Construction = = 
 Plutarch ’ s Life of Pericles , 13 @.@ 4 – 9 , informs us “ the man who directed all the projects and was overseer [ <unk> ] for him [ Pericles ] was Phidias ... Almost everything was under his supervision , and , as we have said , he was in charge , owing to his friendship with Perikles , of all the other artists ” . The description was not <unk> , the term usually given to the creative influence behind a building project , rather <unk> . But it is from this claim , the circumstantial evidence of Phidias ’ s known work on the Athena <unk> and his central role in the Periclean building programme that he is attributed authorship of the frieze . The frieze consists of 378 figures and 245 animals . It was 160 meters in length ( 524 ft ) when complete , as well as 1 meter in height , and it projects 5 @.@ 6 cm forward at its maximum depth . It is composed of 114 blocks of an average 1 @.@ 22 meters in length , depicting two parallel files in procession . It was a particular novelty of the Parthenon that the cella carries an Ionic frieze over the <unk> pronaos rather than Doric metopes as would have been expected of a Doric temple . Judging by the existence of <unk> and <unk> below the frieze on the east wall this was an innovation introduced late in the building process and replaced the ten metopes and triglyphs that might otherwise have been placed there . 
 The marble was quarried from Mt . <unk> and transported 19 km to the acropolis of Athens . A persistent question has been whether it was carved in situ . Just below the moulding and above the <unk> there is a channel 17 mm high that would have served to give access to the sculptor 's chisel when finishing the heads or feet on the relief ; this <unk> or guide strip is the best evidence there is that the blocks were carved on the wall . Additionally , on practical grounds it is easier to move a sculptor than a sculpture , and to crowbar them into place could have potentially chipped the edges . No information is recoverable on the workshop , but estimates range from three to 80 sculptors on the basis of style , however Jenifer <unk> suggests nine on the grounds that this would be the least number necessary to produce the work in the time given . It was finished with metal detailing and painted . No colour , however , survives , but the background was perhaps blue judging by comparison with grave stelae and the paint remnants on the frieze of the <unk> . Possibly figures held objects that were also rendered in paint such as Poseidon ’ s trident and the laurel in Apollo ’ s hand . The many drill holes found in Apollo ’ s and Hera ’ s heads indicate that a gilded bronze wreath would probably have crowned the gods . 
 The system of numbering the frieze blocks dates back to Adolf Michaelis 's 1871 work Der Parthenon , and since then Ian Jenkins has revised this scheme in the light of recent discoveries . The convention , here preserved , is that blocks are numbered in Roman and figures in Arabic numerals , the figures are numbered left to right against the direction of the procession on the north and west and with it on the south . 
 = = Description = = 
 The narrative of the frieze begins at the southwest corner where the procession appears to divide into two separate files . The first third of the west frieze is not part of the procession but instead seems to be the preparatory stages for the participants . The first figure here is a marshal dressing , <unk> , followed by several men preparing the horses <unk> – 23 until figure <unk> who , it has been suggested , may be engaged in the <unk> , the tryout or enrollment of the knights . <unk> is an ambiguous figure who might be either the protesting owner of a rejected horse or a <unk> ( herald ) whose hand held part of an otherwise lost <unk> ( trumpet ) , but either way this point marks the beginning of the procession proper . 
 The following ranks <unk> – 1 along with <unk> – 136 and S1 – 61 are all of horsemen and constitute 46 % of the whole frieze . They are divided into two lines of ten ranks – the same number of the Attic tribes . All are beardless youths with the exception of two , W8 and <unk> , who along with S2 – 7 wear Thracian dress of fur cap , a patterned cloak and high boots ; these have been identified by Martin Robertson as <unk> . Next are the four @-@ horse chariots , each with charioteer and armed passenger , there are ten on the south frieze and eleven on the north . Since these passengers are sometimes depicted as dismounting they may be taken to represent the apobatai , participants in the ceremonial race found in Attica and Boeotia . 
 By <unk> and <unk> the equestrian parade is at an end , and the following 16 figures on the north and 18 on the south are taken to be the elders of Athens judging by their braided hair , an attribute of distinguished age in Classical art . Four of these figures raise their right hand in a clenched fist gesture suggestive of a pose associated with the <unk> ( olive branch bearers ) who were older men chosen for their good looks in competition . No drill holes , however , exist for any branch to be inserted in their hands . Next in line ( <unk> – 114 , N20 – 28 ) are the musicians : four <unk> ( a variant of the lyre ) and four aulos ( flute ) players . N16 – 19 and S115 – 118 ( conjectured ) are the <unk> , the water @-@ vessel carriers , here men rather than metic girls mentioned in the literature on the <unk> . N13 – 15 , S119 – 121 are the <unk> , the tray bearers of the honeycombs and cakes used to entice the sacrificial animals to the altar . N1 – 12 , <unk> – 149 are the ten cows on the north and four cows and four sheep on the south meant for sacrifice on the acropolis , presumably an abbreviated form of the <unk> usually offered on this occasion – there is an a @-@ b @-@ a rhythm of placid and restive cows . 
 As the files converge on the east frieze we encounter the first women celebrants E2 – 27 , <unk> – 51 , <unk> – 63 . They carry the sacrificial instruments and paraphernalia including the <unk> ( phial or jug ) , <unk> ( wine jars ) , <unk> ( incense burner ) , and in the case of <unk> – 51 they have evidently just handed the marshal <unk> a <unk> , making the girl the kanephoros . The next groups E18 – 23 , <unk> – 46 , are problematic . Six on the left and four on the right , if one does not count two other figures who may or may not be marshals , then this group might be taken to be the ten eponymous heroes who gave their names to the ten tribes . Their proximity to the gods indicates their importance , but selecting differently then nine of them may be the archons of the polis or <unk> officials who managed the procession ; there is insufficient iconographic evidence to determine which interpretation is correct . The twelve seated gods are taken to be the Olympians , they are one third taller than any other figure on the frieze and are arranged in two groups of six on <unk> ( backless ) stools , common forms of ancient furniture , with the exception of Zeus who is enthroned . Their backs are turned to what must be the culminating event of the procession <unk> – 35 ; five figures ( three children and two adults , and though badly corroded the two children on the left are probably girls ) the girls bear objects on their heads , while a third , probably a boy , assists an adult who may be the archon basileus , in folding a piece of cloth . This is usually understood to be the presentation of Athena ’ s peplos , perhaps by the <unk> . 
 = = Style = = 
 The Parthenon frieze is the defining monument of the High Classical style of Attic sculpture . It stands between the gradual eclipse of the Severe style as witnessed on the Parthenon metopes and the evolution of the Late Classical Rich style exemplified by the Nike balustrade . What sources the designer of the frieze drew upon is hard to gauge , certainly large scale narrative art was familiar to 5th @-@ century Athenians as in the Stoa <unk> painting by <unk> of Thasos . While there is an overall coherence to the work there are design differences on opposing sides of the frieze which has suggested to some scholars the possibility of more than one designer and a pattern of influence amongst them . There is greater nudity and frontally on the north than the south , the massing and distribution of figures is greatly different on the east than the more widely spaced west , and the east and north generally exhibit greater innovation . This evidence , along with the frequency with Greek artists were seen to collaborate , has led Jenifer <unk> to hypothesize the existence of two designers working on the sculpture . This would admit the possibility of a later designer comparing and competing with the earlier and so explain the observable changes in composition . 
 This period is one of discovery of the expressive possibilities of the human body ; there is a greater freedom in the poses and gestures , and an increased attention to anatomical verisimilitude as may be observed in the <unk> stances of the figures <unk> and W4 who partially anticipate the <unk> of Polykleitos . There is a noticeable ease to the physiques of the frieze compared with the stiffness of the metopes along with an eye for such subtleties as knuckle joints , veins and the careful articulation of musculature . One important innovation of the style is the use of drapery as an expression of motion or to suggest the body beneath ; in archaic and early classical sculpture clothing fell over the body as if it were a curtain obscuring the form below , now there is the billowing <unk> of the horsemen or the multi @-@ pleated <unk> of the women which lends a surface movement and tension to their otherwise static poses . The variation in the manes of the horses has been of particular interest to scholars attempting to discern the artistic personalities of the sculptors who laboured on the frieze , so far this <unk> analysis has been without conclusion . 
 = = Interpretation = = 
 As no description of the frieze survives from antiquity , the question of the meaning of the sculpture has been a persistent and unresolved one . The first published attempt at interpretation belongs to <unk> of Ancona in the 15th century AD who referred to it as the “ victories of Athens in the time of Pericles ” . What is now the orthodox view of the piece , however , namely that it depicts the Greater Panathenaic procession from the <unk> by the <unk> gate to the Acropolis , was mooted by Stuart and Revett in the second volume of their Antiquities of Athens , 1787 . Subsequent interpretations have largely built on this theory even if they disallow that a temple sculpture could represent a contemporary event rather than a mythological or historical one . It has only been in recent years that an alternative thesis in which the frieze depicts the founding myth of the city of Athens instead of the festival <unk> has emerged . 
 The contention that the scene is a document of Athena ’ s festival is fraught with problems . Later sources indicate that a number of classes of individual who performed a role in the procession are not present in the frieze , these include : the hoplites , the allies in the Delian league , the <unk> or umbrella bearers , the female <unk> ( only male <unk> bearers are portrayed ) thetes , slaves , metics , the <unk> ship and some would suggest the kanephoros , though there is evidence that she is accounted for . That what we now see was meant to be a generic image of the religious festival is problematic since no other temple sculpture depicts a contemporary event involving mortals . Locating the scene in mythical or historical time has been the principal difficulty of the line of inquiry . John Boardman has suggested that the cavalry portray the <unk> of the <unk> , the hoplites who fell at Marathon in 490 , and that therefore these riders were the Athenians who took part in the last pre @-@ war Greater <unk> . In support , he points out , the number of horsemen , chariot passengers ( but not charioteers ) , grooms and marshals comes to the same as the number <unk> gives for the Athenian dead : 192 . Equally suggestive of a reference to the Persian War is the similarity several scholars have noted of the frieze to the Apadana sculpture in Persepolis . This has variously been posited to be democratic Athens counter posing itself to oriental tyranny or aristocratic Athens emulating the Imperial East . Further to this zeitgeist argument there is J.J. <unk> ’ s contention that the frieze embodies a Periclean manifesto , which favours the cultural institutions of <unk> ( or contests , as witnessed by the apobatai ) , sacrifices and military training as well as a number of other democratic virtues . More recent scholarship pursuing this vein has made the frieze a site of ideological tension between the elite and the demos with perhaps only the aristocracy present and merely veiled reference to the ten tribes . 
 The pediments , metopes and shield of the <unk> all illustrate the mythological past and as the gods are observing on the east frieze it is natural to reach for a mythological explanation . <unk> <unk> , has ventured that the relief shows us the first Panathenaic procession instituted under the mythical King <unk> . This explanation would account for the absence of the allies and the ship as these post @-@ date the original practice of the sacrificial rite . In evidence she offers <unk> as the future King <unk> presenting the first peplos to his predecessor <unk> , iconographically similar to the boy ’ s depiction on a fragmentary <unk> of the 450s . A recent interpretation by Joan Breton Connelly identifies the central scene on the east frieze ( hence above the door to the cella and focal point of the procession ) not as the handing over of Athena ’ s peplos by the <unk> but the donning of sacrificial garb by the daughter of King Erechtheus in preparation for the sacrifice of her life . An interpretation suggested by the text of the fragmentary papyrus remains of Euripides ’ s <unk> wherein her life is demanded in order to save the city from <unk> and the <unk> . Thus , the gods turn their backs to her to prevent the pollution from the sight of her death . A contentious subject in the field , Connelly 's solution to the problem of meaning poses as many problems as it answers . 
 = = Influence = = 
 The earliest surviving works of art that exhibit traces of the influence of the Parthenon frieze belong to the media of vase painting and grave stelae where we can find some echo not just of motifs , themes , poses but tenor , as well . Direct imitation , and indeed quotation , of the frieze begins to be pronounced around 430 BC . One example , an explicit copy , is a <unk> attributed to the Wedding Painter of a youth “ parking up ” a horse exactly in the manner of the figure W25 on the frieze . While those vase paintings that resemble the frieze cluster around 430 , the vases that quote the pediments are datable nearer to the end of the century , giving further evidence of the priority of the sculptural program . More accomplished painters also found inspiration in the sculpture , namely <unk> I and his group , especially the Peleus Painter , the <unk> Painter and the late work of the Achilles Painter . Later painters of talent also managed to capture the mood of <unk> or thoughtful piety of the procession as , for example , on the volute krater of the <unk> Painter of a sacrifice to Apollo , which shares the quiet dignity of the best of High Classical sculpture . 
 The impact of the frieze can be sought in the Attic relief sculpture of the late 5th century ; this resonance may be discovered to some degree in the public works of the <unk> frieze and the Nike Athena balustrade , where the imagery of the seated gods and the sandal @-@ binder respectively likely owes a debt to the Parthenon . There are also traces found on the private commissions of grave stelae from the period , for example the “ cat stele ” from Aegina bears a distinct similarity to the figures <unk> – 6 . As does the Hermes of the four @-@ figure relief known from a Roman copy . Later classicizing art of the Hellenistic and Roman eras also looked to the frieze for inspiration as attested by the Lycian Sarcophagus of Sidon , Phoenicia , the Ara Pacis Augustae , the Gemma <unk> , and many pieces of the Hadrianic generation . 
 = The Rural Juror = 
 " The Rural Juror " is the tenth episode of the first season of 30 Rock . It was written by Matt Hubbard and was directed by Beth McCarthy . The episode first aired on January 11 , 2007 , on the NBC network in the United States and December 13 , 2007 , on Five in the United Kingdom . Guest stars in the episode include Lonny Ross , Keith Powell , Maulik Pancholy , Kevin Brown , Grizz Chapman , Chris Parnell , Rachel Dratch , Whoopi Goldberg , Charlie Grandy , Bob <unk> , Matt Oberg , Vickie Schmitt and Eric <unk> . 
 The episode focuses on the release of Jenna Maroney 's ( Jane Krakowski ) long @-@ anticipated indie film , The Rural Juror , the tongue @-@ twisting title of which Liz Lemon ( Tina Fey ) and the writers of TGS with Tracy Jordan cannot understand . Meanwhile , Tracy Jordan ( Tracy Morgan ) , desperate for some financial help , heeds Jack Donaghy 's ( Alec Baldwin ) advice and creates his own celebrity product to endorse . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Jenna anticipates the opening of her new film , The Rural Juror . The film , based on a " Kevin Grisham novel " ( John Grisham 's brother ) , revolves around a Southern – born lawyer named Constance Justice . Jenna wants Liz to give her an honest opinion of the film , as she is nervous about how it will be received by the public . Liz sees the film in private , and her reaction is very negative , but she hesitates to tell Jenna the truth . When Jenna finds out that Liz hated the film , the two start fighting and accusing each other of not being truthful . Meanwhile , ignoring Liz 's warnings , Josh Girard ( Lonny Ross ) manages to break into Liz 's office to steal the film , which he watches with the rest of the TGS with Tracy Jordan writing staff . Much to Liz 's shock , the staff say they liked the film . As the argument between Liz and Jenna escalates , Jack intervenes and persuades them to work things out . Liz admits that she was jealous of Jenna 's success , and they forgive one another . 
 Jack is on the phone with Maureen Dowd when Tracy shows up to ask him for $ 100 @,@ 000 . Jack tells him that this is impossible but says that he has a better idea : use his celebrity image to endorse a product . After Tracy agrees , he comes up with " The Tracy Jordan Meat Machine " . Armed with an " endorsement " from Dr. Spaceman ( Chris Parnell ) and hook @-@ ups from Jack , the product is finally ready for sale . Soon after , a series of product defects prompts Tracy to tell Jack that he no longer wishes to endorse the product . Jack finds a way to make it work : by rebranding it as a Whoopi Goldberg @-@ endorsed product targeted for the Ukraine . 
 = = Production = = 
 " The Rural Juror " was filmed in early November 2006 . Regarding the episode 's title , Tina Fey explained that " it came out of a discussion in the writers ' room " when she asked , " you know what two words I cannot pronounce properly ? " After a few abortive efforts by Fey 's co @-@ writers , who also made " rural juror " sound akin to " <unk> @-@ <unk> , " everyone was so pleased that " [ they ] wanted to hurry up and get it on the air before someone else did . " Jenna 's film , The Rural Juror , was first mentioned three episodes earlier , in " Tracy Does Conan " , and referenced several times later . A running joke throughout the series was the difficulty in pronouncing the film 's title , so that everyone thought it was called something different . Throughout the episode , the film was called " Roar Her , Gem Her " by Liz ; and also " Oral Germ Whore " and " Roaring Junior " by Pete . This episode also features the first mention of Mitch Lemon ( Andy Richter ) , Liz 's brother . Mitch has a form of amnesia , named Trauma Induced <unk> , due to a skiing accident in December 1985 . 
 = = Character development = = 
 Several critics praised this episode for its character development , something that they said was missing in the previous episodes . Robert Canning of IGN said that although there was still plenty of room for growth , the episode gave a better understanding of Liz and Jenna 's friendship . He felt that prior to the episode , nothing was known about Liz and Jenna 's longtime friendship , and that there was no depth to it . Canning said that Liz 's admission of being somewhat jealous of Jenna 's success was a much needed storyline for the show , and one that gave the audience something deeper to latch onto . However , Canning pointed out that small hints of what their friendship was like in the past were played for laughs as opposed to establishing any sort of history . Canning found that their verbal sparring really " solidified their bond " , and that by the end of the episode the audience had seen their " human side " and the " characters had become people " . 
 Matt Webb Mitovich of TV Guide said that he was finally starting to understand Jenna , and how she fits into the show . He said that even though she was supposed to come off as flighty and disillusioned at times , he realized that in reality she was not completely flighty and disillusioned . He also noted the development in Liz and Jenna 's friendship , learning that they go " way back " as friends and as a comedy team . Julia Ward of AOL 's TV Squad disagreed , however . She felt that the show had too many storylines and that this episode made it seem as if the show was about the relationship between Liz and Jenna , rather than the storylines introduced in the pilot . She said that having several ongoing storylines is possible , but the show needs some kind of center . 
 = = Reception = = 
 According to the Nielsen ratings system , " The Rural Juror " was viewed by an average of 6 @.@ 10 million American viewers . The episode achieved a rating of 2 @.@ 9 in the key adults 18 – 49 demographic , which refers to 2 @.@ 9 % of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds in the U.S. The episode was ranked sixty @-@ third in Nielsen 's prime @-@ time television rankings for the week . Upon its original broadcast in the United Kingdom , this episode was viewed by 200 @,@ 000 viewers , which was 2 % of the viewing audience at the time of the broadcast . 
 Robert Canning of IGN said the episode " was a well @-@ crafted half @-@ hour with a solid main storyline " . He said that the episode took 30 Rock in the " right direction " with a good story structure and a " successful effort at developing its characters " . Canning rated the episode 8 out of 10 . Julia Ward of AOL 's TV Squad started her review by saying if Alec Baldwin did not win the Golden Globe for his performance , she would have no choice but to resign from her post at the Hollywood Foreign Press Association , which he did at the 64th Golden Globe Awards for Best Performance by an Actor in a Television Series - Comedy or Musical . She enjoyed Tina Fey 's performance and liked Tracy 's meat machine endorsement , Liz 's " singles yoga " and " scalp pain " Google searches and Dr. Leo Spaceman 's " reds , yellows , purples " . She criticized several guest appearances , saying Goldberg 's guest appearance was " underwhelming , " and felt that Jane Krakowski was still " an odd fit for the show " . Matt Webb Mitovich of TV Guide also gave a positive review , saying the episode " moved so dang fast and was so crackling " that it was very entertaining . 
 = HMS Monmouth ( 1901 ) = 
 HMS Monmouth was the lead ship of her class of 10 armoured cruisers built for the Royal Navy in the first decade of the 20th century . She was assigned to the 1st Cruiser Squadron of the Channel Fleet upon completion in 1903 . She was transferred to the China Station in 1906 , and remained there until she returned home in 1913 and was assigned to the reserve Third Fleet . When World War I began in August 1914 , the ship was recommissioned and assigned to the 5th Cruiser Squadron in the Central Atlantic to search for German commerce raiders and protect Allied shipping . She was detached upon arrival to patrol the Brazilian coast for German ships , and was later ordered to the South Atlantic to join Rear Admiral Christopher Cradock 's squadron in their search for the German East Asia Squadron . He found the German squadron on 1 November off the coast of Chile . The German squadron outnumbered Cradock 's force and were individually more powerful ; they sank Cradock 's two armoured cruisers in the Battle of Coronel . Monmouth was lost with all hands . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 Monmouth was designed to displace 9 @,@ 800 long tons ( 10 @,@ 000 t ) . The ship had an overall length of 463 feet 6 inches ( 141 @.@ 3 m ) , a beam of 66 feet ( 20 @.@ 1 m ) and a deep draught of 25 feet ( 7 @.@ 6 m ) . She was powered by two 4 @-@ cylinder triple @-@ expansion steam engines , each driving one shaft , which produced a total of 22 @,@ 000 indicated horsepower ( 16 @,@ 000 kW ) designed to give a maximum speed of 23 knots ( 43 km / h ; 26 mph ) . Monmouth , however , was one of three of the Monmouths that failed to meet her designed speed . The engines were powered by 31 Belleville boilers . She carried a maximum of 1 @,@ 600 long tons ( 1 @,@ 600 t ) of coal and her complement consisted of 678 officers and enlisted men . 
 Her main armament consisted of fourteen breech @-@ loading ( BL ) 6 @-@ inch Mk VII guns . Four of these guns were mounted in two twin @-@ gun turrets , one each fore and aft of the superstructure and the others positioned in casemates amidships . Six of these were mounted on the main deck and were only usable in calm weather . They had a maximum range of approximately 12 @,@ 200 yards ( 11 @,@ 200 m ) with their 100 @-@ pound ( 45 kg ) shells . Ten quick @-@ firing ( QF ) 12 @-@ pounder 12 cwt guns were fitted for defence against torpedo boats . Monmouth also carried three 3 @-@ pounder Hotchkiss guns and two submerged 18 @-@ inch torpedo tubes . 
