 The ship 's waterline armour belt had a maximum thickness of four inches ( 102 mm ) and was closed off by five @-@ inch ( 127 mm ) transverse bulkheads . The armour of the gun turrets and their barbettes was four inches thick while the casemate armour was five inches thick . The protective deck armour ranged in thickness from .75 – 2 inches ( 19 – 51 mm ) and the conning tower was protected by ten inches ( 254 mm ) of armour . 
 = = Construction and service = = 
 Monmouth , named for the Welsh county , was laid down by London and Glasgow Shipbuilding at their shipyard in Govan on 29 August 1899 , and launched on 13 November 1901 . Her completion was delayed due to a collision with the liner Assyria in Glasgow harbour in late March 1902 , and she was finally completed on 2 December 1903 , when she was initially assigned to the 1st Cruiser Squadron of the Channel Fleet . She was briefly placed in reserve in Devonport at the end of January 1906 , before being recommissioned in April for service on the China Station . Monmouth remained there until 1913 , when she returned home and was assigned to the reserve Third Fleet . 
 She was mobilised on 4 August with a crew that mostly consisted of reservists , and sent to the 5th Cruiser Squadron of Rear Admiral Archibald Stoddart on the Cape Verde – Canary Islands station . Upon her arrival on 13 August , Stoddart detached her to the Brazilian coast to search for the German light cruisers known to be in the area . She came under Cradock 's command in mid @-@ September . At the end of September , Cradock made his first fruitless search of the Tierra del Fuego area and later detached Monmouth and two other ships to search up the Chilean coast , reaching Valparaiso on 15 October , while his flagship , Good Hope returned to Port Stanley , in the Falkland Islands , to recoal and to reestablish communications with the Admiralty . He received word on 7 October that German Vice Admiral Spee 's ships were definitely bound for the Cape Horn region and waited for the elderly predreadnought battleship Canopus to reinforce his squadron . She was in poor mechanical condition when she arrived at Port Stanley and required time to make repairs . Good Hope sailed on 22 October without her , going around Cape Horn , while Canopus and three colliers departed the following day , taking the shorter route through the Strait of Magellan . 
 = = = Battle of Coronel = = = 
 Good Hope rendezvoused with the rest of the squadron at Vallenar Roads , in the remote <unk> Archipelago of Chile on 27 October to recoal . They departed two days later , just as Canopus arrived , Cradock ordering the battleship to follow as soon as possible . He sent the light cruiser Glasgow to scout ahead and to enter Coronel , Chile to pick up any messages from the Admiralty and acquire intelligence regarding German activities . The cruiser began to pick up German radio signals from the light cruiser SMS Leipzig on the afternoon of 29 October , and delayed entering Coronel for two days with Cradock 's permission to avoid being trapped by the fast German ships . A German supply ship was already there and radioed Spee that Glasgow had entered the harbour around twilight . The cruiser departed on the morning of 1 November , but Spee had already made plans to catch her when informed of her presence the previous evening . 
 Glasgow departed Coronel at 09 : 15 after having picked up the squadron 's mail , and rendezvoused with the rest of the squadron four hours later . Cradock ordered his ships to form line abreast with a distance of 15 nautical miles ( 28 km ; 17 mi ) between ships to maximise visibility at 13 : 50 and steered north at a speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . At 16 : 17 Leipzig spotted Glasgow , the easternmost British ship , to its west and she spotted Leipzig 's funnel smoke three minutes later . At 17 : 10 Cradock ordered his ships to head for <unk> , the closest ship to the Germans . Once gathered together , he formed them into line astern , with Good Hope in the lead , steering southeasterly at 16 knots ( 30 km / h ; 18 mph ) at 18 : 18 . As the sixteen 21 @-@ centimetre ( 8 @.@ 3 in ) guns aboard the armoured cruisers Scharnhorst and Gneisenau were only matched by the two 9 @.@ 2 @-@ inch guns on his flagship , he needed to close the range to bring his more numerous 6 @-@ inch guns to bear . The Force 7 winds and high seas , however , prevented the use of half of those guns as they were too close to the water . He also wanted to use the setting sun to his advantage so that its light would blind the German gunner . Spee was well aware of the British advantages and refused to allow Cradock to close the range . His ships were faster than the British , slowed by the 16 @-@ knot maximum speed of the armed merchant cruiser Otranto , and he opened up the range to 18 @,@ 000 yards ( 16 @,@ 000 m ) until conditions changed to suit him . The sun set at 18 : 50 , which silhouetted the British ships against the light sky while the German ships became indistinguishable from the shoreline behind them . 
 Spee immediately turned to close and signalled his ships to open fire at 19 : 04 , when the range closed to 12 @,@ 300 yards ( 11 @,@ 200 m ) . Spee 's flagship , Scharnhorst , engaged Good Hope while Gneisenau fired at Monmouth . The German shooting was very accurate , with both armoured cruisers quickly scoring hits on their British counterparts while still outside six @-@ inch gun range , starting fires on both ships . Cradock , knowing his only chance was to close the range , continued to do so despite the battering that Spee 's ships inflicted . By 19 : 23 the range was almost half of that when the battle began and the British ships bore onwards . One shell from Gneisenau blew the roof off Monmouth 's forward turret and started a fire , causing an ammunition explosion that completely blew the turret off the ship . Spee tried to open the range , fearing a torpedo attack , but the British were only 5 @,@ 500 yards ( 5 @,@ 000 m ) away at 19 : 35 . Severely damaged , Monmouth began to slow and veered out of line . 
 Glasgow fought almost an entirely separate battle as the German armoured cruisers ignored her almost completely and she inconclusively dueled the light cruisers Leipzig and Dresden . Glasgow broke contact with the German squadron at 20 : 05 and discovered Monmouth , listing and down by the bow , having extinguished her fires , 10 minutes later . She was trying to turn north to put her stern to the heavy northerly swell and was taking water at the bow . There was little that Glasgow could do to assist the larger ship as the moonlight illuminated both ships and the Germans were searching for them . 
 The light cruiser Nürnberg had been trailing the German squadron and spotted the plume of smoke from Glasgow at 20 : 35 , and then saw Monmouth with a 10 @-@ degree list to port shortly afterwards . As Nürnberg closed the range , Monmouth 's list increased so that none of the guns on her port side could be used . The German cruiser closed to within 600 yards ( 550 m ) and illuminated her flag with its spotlight in the hopes that she would strike her colours and surrender . There was no response from the British ship and Nürnberg opened fire at 21 : 20 , aiming high , but there was still no response . The German ship then fired a torpedo which missed and turned off its searchlight . Monmouth then increased speed and turned towards Nürnberg , which caused her to open fire again . Monmouth capsized at 21 : 58 , taking her entire crew of 735 men with her as the seas were too rough to attempt any rescue effort . 
 = George Grossmith = 
 George Grossmith ( 9 December 1847 – 1 March 1912 ) was an English comedian , writer , composer , actor , and singer . His performing career spanned more than four decades . As a writer and composer , he created 18 comic operas , nearly 100 musical sketches , some 600 songs and piano pieces , three books and both serious and comic pieces for newspapers and magazines . 
 Grossmith is best remembered for two aspects of his career . First , he created a series of nine memorable characters in the comic operas of Gilbert and Sullivan from 1877 to 1889 , including Sir Joseph Porter , in H.M.S. Pinafore ( 1878 ) , the Major @-@ General in The Pirates of Penzance ( 1880 ) and Ko @-@ Ko in The Mikado ( 1885 – 87 ) . Second , he wrote , in collaboration with his brother Weedon , the 1892 comic novel The Diary of a Nobody . 
 Grossmith was also famous in his day for performing his own comic piano sketches and songs , both before and after his Gilbert and Sullivan days , becoming the most popular British solo performer of the 1890s . Some of his comic songs endure today , including " See Me Dance the Polka " . He continued to perform into the first decade of the 20th century . His son , George Grossmith , Jr . , became a famous actor , playwright and producer of Edwardian musical comedies . 
 = = Life and career = = 
 George Grossmith was born in Islington , London and grew up in St. Pancras and Hampstead , London . His father , also named George ( 1820 – 1880 ) , was the chief reporter for The Times and other newspapers at the Bow Street Magistrates ' Court and was also a lecturer and entertainer . His mother was Louisa Emmeline Grossmith née Weedon ( d . 1882 ) . Over the years , Grossmith 's father spent less of his time at Bow Street and more of it touring as a performer . As a young man , Grossmith was usually credited as " Jnr " to distinguish him from his father , especially when they performed together , but for most of his career , he was credited simply as " George Grossmith " . Later , his actor @-@ playwright @-@ theatre manager son was credited as George Grossmith " Jr " rather than " III " ; some sources confuse the two men . His other son , Lawrence Grossmith , was also a successful actor , primarily in America . 
 Grossmith had a younger sister , Emily , and younger brother , Weedon . In 1855 , he went to boarding school at Massingham House on Haverstock Hill in the district of Hampstead . There he studied the piano and began to amuse his friends and teachers with shadow pantomimes , and later by playing the piano by ear . His family moved to Haverstock Hill when young Grossmith was 10 , and he became a day student . At the age of 12 , he transferred to the North London Collegiate School in Camden Town . He was back in St. Pancras by age 13 . He was an avid amateur photographer and painter as a teenager , but it was his brother Weedon who went to art school . The Grossmith family had many friends engaged in the arts , including J. L. Toole , Ellen Terry , Henry Irving , H. J. Byron , Tom Hood , T. W. Robertson , and John Hollingshead ( later , the manager of the Gaiety Theatre , London ) . 
 Grossmith had hoped to become a barrister . Instead , he worked for many years , beginning in the 1860s , training and then substituting for his father as the Bow Street reporter for The Times , among other publications , when his father was on his lecture tours . Among the cases on which he reported was the Clerkenwell bombing by the Fenians in 1867 . At the same time as he began reporting , he began to write humorous articles for periodicals and to participate in amateur theatrical performances . He also joined his father in his entertainments , lectures , and imitations , and began to add music to the entertainments , which his father had not done . In 1873 , Grossmith married Emmeline Rosa Noyce ( 1849 – 1905 ) , the daughter of a neighbourhood physician , whom he had met years earlier at a children 's party . The couple had four children : George , Sylvia ( 1875 – 1932 ; married Stuart James Bevan in 1900 ) , Lawrence and Cordelia Rosa ( 1879 – 1943 ) . The family lived initially in Marylebone before moving , about 1885 , to Dorset Square nearby . 
 = = = Early performing career = = = 
 Young Grossmith received some recognition for amateur songs and sketches at private parties and , beginning in 1864 , at penny readings . He also participated in a small number of theatricals as an amateur , including playing John <unk> , Jr. in Robertson 's play , Society , at the Gallery of Illustration , in 1868 . The after @-@ piece was a burlesque , written by Grossmith 's father , on the Dickens play No Thoroughfare . He then played the title role in Paul Pry , a comedy by Poole , also at the Gallery of Illustration , in 1870 . But he and his father felt that his talents lay in " sketch " comedy rather than theatre . The younger Grossmith admired the comic pianist and entertainer John Orlando Parry , who created and performed in many of the German Reed Entertainments , and he tried to emulate Parry in developing his own sketches , consisting of humorous anecdotes , mildly satirical comment , ad lib chat , and comic songs centred on the piano . 
 Grossmith took to the professional stage in 1870 with a sketch called Human Oddities , written by his father , and a song called " The Gay Photographer " ( that is , the " carefree " photographer ) . The song , with words by Grossmith 's father and music by young Grossmith , concerns a photographer who broke the heart of a young lady named Miss Jenkins ; so she drank his chemicals and died . In late 1870 , the younger Grossmith appeared on his own with a nightly spot at the " old Polytechnic " in Regent Street , where comic sketches alternated with scientific and serious lectures for the entertainment of the public . Human Oddities and another sketch , The Yellow Dwarf , were successful for Grossmith , and he took the former work on tour for six months . An 1871 Grossmith sketch was called He was a Careful Man . Biographer Tony Joseph notes that , except for a few early pieces , nearly all of Grossmith 's material was written and composed by Grossmith himself . Joseph describes the sketches as " a light @-@ hearted sending up of various aspects of contemporary life and manners . ... he was the complete performer ... as a pianist ( he performed for the most part sitting at a piano ) ... as a raconteur ... as a mimic , facial expression , timing — he had it all . A short , dapper figure , he turned his lack of inches to positive advantage , and audiences took to him everywhere . " 
 Grossmith toured in the summer of 1871 with Mr and Mrs Howard Paul and occasionally afterwards . He and Mrs Paul would also appear together in The Sorcerer in 1877 . Also in 1871 , at the Polytechnic , he performed three more sketches , The <unk> Penny Readings , Theatricals at Thespis Lodge and The Silver Wedding ( including what would be one of his most popular songs , " I am so Volatile " , with words by his father ) . On 14 February 1872 , Grossmith gave a sketch parody of a penny reading at the Gaiety Theatre , London , since on Ash Wednesday , theatres refrained from presenting costumed performances out of respect for the holiday . At the time , coincidentally , the Gaiety was presenting Thespis , Gilbert and Sullivan 's first collaboration . Throughout these years , Grossmith continued working at Bow Street during the day . 
 In 1873 , Grossmith and his father began joint tours of humorous recitations and comic sketches at literary institutes and public halls , to church groups and to branches of the YMCA all over England and even in Scotland and Wales . Young Grossmith 's sketches at this time included The <unk> Penny Readings , Our Choral Society and In the Stalls . They toured almost constantly for the following three years , but they returned to see their families in London on weekends . Around this time , he met and became firm friends with Fred Sullivan , and afterwards , he met Sullivan 's brother Arthur . Through Arthur Cecil , Sullivan , and some of their friends , Grossmith began to be invited to entertain at private " society " parties , which he continued to do throughout his career . Later , these parties would often occur late in the evening after Grossmith performed at the Savoy Theatre . In 1876 , he collaborated with Florence Marryat , the author and reciter , on Entre Nous . This piece consisted of a series of piano sketches , alternating with scenes and costumed recitations , including a two @-@ person " satirical musical sketch " , really a short comic opera , called Cups and Saucers , which they then toured . Grossmith also took a number of engagements , including recitals at private homes . In 1877 , Lionel Brough introduced another popular Grossmith song , " The Muddle Puddle Junction Porter " . By then , Grossmith had become friendly with many in the music and theatre establishments , including Arthur Sullivan and impresario Richard D 'Oyly Carte ; and Grossmith had the opportunity to perform in Gilbert and Sullivan 's Trial by Jury and other Sullivan works at charity benefits . 
 After entertaining professionally in sketch comedy for seven years , however , Grossmith discovered that his income decreased each year as his family and household expenses increased . He also disliked travelling . Accordingly , he was pleased when , despite his relative inexperience in legitimate theatre , he received a letter from Arthur Sullivan in November 1877 inviting him to take a part in his new piece with W. S. Gilbert : The Sorcerer . 
 = = = D 'Oyly Carte years = = = 
 Grossmith had appeared in charity performances of Trial by Jury , where both Sullivan and Gilbert had seen him ( indeed , Gilbert had directed one such performance , in which Grossmith played the judge ) , and Gilbert had earlier commented favourably on his performance in Tom Robertson 's Society at the Gallery of Illustration . Sullivan mentioned to Arthur Cecil , the leading tenor from the Gallery of Illustration , that he was looking for someone to play the comic title role in his new comic opera , The Sorcerer . Cecil reminded Sullivan about Grossmith , and Sullivan seized on the idea . After singing for Sullivan , upon meeting Gilbert , Grossmith wondered aloud if the role shouldn 't be played by " a fine man with a fine voice " . Gilbert replied , " That is exactly what we don 't want . " Although Grossmith had reservations about cancelling his touring engagements and going into the " wicked " professional theatre ( a move that might lose him church and other engagements in the future ) , and Richard D 'Oyly Carte 's backers objected to casting a sketch comedian in the central role of a comic opera , Grossmith was hired . 
 Grossmith was a hit as the tradesmanlike John Wellington Wells , the title role in The Sorcerer , and became a regular member of Richard D 'Oyly Carte 's company . He created all nine of the lead comic baritone roles in Gilbert and Sullivan 's famous Savoy Operas in London from 1877 to 1889 , including the pompous First Lord of the Admiralty , Sir Joseph Porter , in H.M.S. Pinafore ( 1878 ) ; Major @-@ General Stanley in The Pirates of Penzance , who is an expert at everything except " military knowledge " ( 1880 ) ; the aesthetic poet , Reginald Bunthorne in Patience ( 1881 ) ; the love @-@ lonely Lord Chancellor in Iolanthe ( 1882 ) ; the sarcastic cripple , King Gama , in Princess Ida ( 1884 ) ; Ko @-@ Ko the cheap tailor , elevated to the post of Lord High Executioner , in The Mikado ( 1885 ) ; the accursed Robin <unk> in Ruddigore ( 1887 ) ; and the pathetic jester , Jack Point , in The Yeomen of the Guard ( 1888 ) . On 29 January 1887 , one week after the opening night of Ruddigore , Grossmith fell dangerously ill . However , by 13 February , his physicians pronounced him convalescent , and he resumed the role of Robin by 18 February . During Grossmith 's absence , his understudy Henry Lytton , who would later become the principal comedian of the company , had the opportunity to perform the role in Grossmith 's place . 
 Years later , Grossmith 's obituary in The Times noted the comedian 's " nimbleness , his diverting tricks , his still more diverting dignity — the dignity of a man of few inches high or round — and his incomparable power of rapid speech and singing . " The Daily Telegraph wrote of his Jack Point : " Whether giving expression to poor Jack ’ s professional wit , or hiding a sorry heart behind light words ... Mr Grossmith was master of the part he assumed . " In 1883 , The Times , reviewing a matinee performance of Iolanthe , wrote : " Mr. Grossmith 's impersonation of the Lord Chancellor has ... become an exquisitely refined satire . " On the other hand , his sketch comedy background had trained Grossmith to improvise comic business . Gilbert and the actor had a famous exchange during rehearsals for The Mikado about an improvised bit of " business " in which Jessie Bond pushed Grossmith , as they kneeled before the Mikado , and he rolled completely over . Gilbert requested that they cut out the gag , and Grossmith replied : " but I get an enormous laugh by it " . <unk> Gilbert : " So you would if you sat on a pork @-@ pie . " 
 The actor , famously jittery on opening nights , is depicted both on and off stage in the biographical film , Topsy Turvy . Hesketh Pearson wrote in 1935 that Grossmith injected himself with drugs ( presumably morphine ) to calm his <unk> and in the film he is shown injecting himself on the opening night of The Mikado . In his diary , Arthur Sullivan wrote afterwards , " All went very well except Grossmith , whose nervousness nearly upset the piece " . Grossmith spoke self @-@ deprecatingly about his own vocal prowess ( Sullivan and others disagreed ) : 
 Of course , I haven 't any voice to speak of , but I have a great register , and Sullivan used to amuse himself by making me sing bass in one number of an opera and tenor in another . In ' Ruddygore ' , Sir Arthur had engaged a man to play the servant , my menial , so to speak , who had an enormous bass voice , and who had to go down to the lower E flat . <unk> enough , he could go down to G , and then he dropped out entirely , and I did the [ low E @-@ flat ] below . Generally the audience roared with laughter , and it absolutely brought down the house . 
 During his time with the D 'Oyly Carte Opera Company , Grossmith 's father and mother died ( in 1880 and 1882 , respectively ) . Throughout this period , Grossmith continued to perform his sketches , often late at night after performing at the Savoy , and continued to write new sketches , such as Amateur Theatricals ( 1878 ) , A Juvenile Party ( 1879 ) , A Musical Nightmare ( 1880 ) , and A Little Yachting ( 1886 ) . He also wrote the music for Arthur Law 's short comic opera , Uncle Samuel ( 1881 ) , the one @-@ act curtain raiser that preceded Patience on the Opera Comique programme . His Cups and Saucers was revived and played with Pinafore and also played by the company on tour . Other comic operas by Grossmith during these years included Mr <unk> 's Elopement ( 1882 ) and A Peculiar Case ( 1884 , both with libretti by Arthur Law ) and The Real Case of Hide and <unk> ( 1886 ) . Grossmith also continued to give his " society " and other entertainments , often late at night after his performance at the Savoy . He also composed the music for another comic opera , The Great Tay @-@ Kin and another piece , both with libretti by Arthur Law , which were performed at Toole 's Theatre in 1885 . 
 Grossmith also wrote , composed , and performed in several one @-@ man drawing room sketches , short comic operas or monologues that were given at the Opera Comique or the Savoy Theatre in place of the companion pieces when shorter matinee programmes were playing . These works included Beauties on the Beach ( 1878 ) , Five Hamlets ( 1878 ) , a revival of his A Silver Wedding ( 1879 ) , The Drama on <unk> ( 1883 ) , Homburg , or Haunted by The Mikado ( 1887 – 88 ) , and Holiday Hall ( 1888 ) . In reviewing a matinee performance of The Drama on <unk> , The Times commented , " he not only satirizes the present tendency of fashionable amateurs to join the stage , but also parodies ... the manner of Mr. Irving and other actors of the present day , including himself . The sketch created great amusement , though of course , it depends entirely for its success upon the actor 's powers of mimicry . " Grossmith also performed in charity events , including as Bouncer in Cox and Box in 1879 at the Opera Comique . 
 In addition , Grossmith 's comic song written in 1886 , " See me dance the polka " , was extremely popular . It has been used in a number of films and has been quoted or referred to in literature and music , including in the poem / song " Polka " from Façade by Edith Sitwell and William Walton . Other songs he wrote during this period include " An Awful Little Scrub " ( 1880 ) , " The Speaker 's Eye " ( 1882 ) , " The ' Bus Conductor 's Song " ( 1883 ) , " How I Became an Actor " ( 1883 ) , " See Me Reverse " ( 1884 ) , " The Lost Key " ( 1885 ) , and " The Happy Fatherland " ( 1887 ) . 
 = = = Later years = = = 
 Grossmith left the D 'Oyly Carte company near the end of the original run of The Yeomen of the Guard on 17 August 1889 and resumed his career entertaining at the piano , which he continued to do for more than 15 years afterwards . Despite his dislike of travelling , he toured in Britain , Ireland , and , on five occasions , North America . His drawing @-@ room sketches included his own popular songs , such as " See me Dance the Polka " , " The Happy Fatherland " , " The Polka and the Choir @-@ boy " , " Thou of My Thou " , " The French Verbs " , " Go on Talking – Don 't Mind Me " , " I Don 't Mind Flies " . His new sketches during this period included Modern Music and Morals ( 1889 ) , On Tour ; or , Piano and I ( 1891 ) , A Seaside Holiday ( 1892 ) , Fashionable Music ( 1892 ) and Is Music a Failure ? ( 1892 ) . According to The Times , " His genial satire was enjoyed even by those at whom its shafts were aimed . " When he toured Scotland in the autumn of 1890 , Grossmith gave a command performance for Queen Victoria at Balmoral Castle . He also composed the music for a three @-@ act comic opera with a libretto by Gilbert , Haste to the Wedding ( 1892 ) . In this piece , his son George Grossmith , Jr. made his stage debut . Musically more challenging than any composition he had attempted before , this work was unsuccessful . Later , however , Grossmith said that the experience of writing with Gilbert was one of the happiest of his life . In 1892 – 93 he toured North America ( his second tour there ) , writing successful new sketches , " How I Discovered America " and " Baby on the Shore " ( 1893 ) . 
 In 1892 , Grossmith collaborated with his brother Weedon Grossmith to expand a series of amusing columns they had written in 1888 – 89 for Punch . The Diary of a Nobody was published as a novel and has never been out of print since . The book is a sharp analysis of social insecurity , and Charles Pooter of The Laurels , <unk> Terrace , Holloway , was immediately recognised as one of the great comic characters of English literature . The work has itself been the object of dramatisation and adaptation , including three times for television : 1964 , 1979 and 2007 . 
 Grossmith had become the most popular solo entertainer of his day , and his tours earned him far more than he had earned while performing with the D 'Oyly Carte Opera Company . He also continued to compose music , including the comic opera Castle Bang ( 1894 ) and the sketches The <unk> Drama ( 1895 ) and Do We Enjoy Our Holidays ? ( 1897 ) and songs like " The Baby on the Shore " ( 1893 ) , " Johnnie at the Gaiety " ( 1895 ) , " Tommy 's First Love " ( 1897 ) , and " The Happy Old Days at Peckham " ( 1903 ) . In 1894 – 95 , however , Gilbert enticed Grossmith to take the role of George <unk> in His Excellency , with music by Frank Osmond Carr . Also in 1897 , he played briefly as King Ferdinand V of <unk> in F. C. Burnand 's His Majesty at the Savoy Theatre and made two more short London stage appearances thereafter , as Scoones in Young Mr Yarde ( 1898 ) and Lambert Simnel in The Gay Pretenders ( 1900 ) . An 1896 interview of Grossmith reveals him feeling his age and considering the end of his touring career , while enjoying time spent at home with his family , dogs and antique piano collection . Grossmith suffered from depression after the death of his wife of cancer in 1905 , and his health began to fail , so that he increasingly missed engagements . He was nevertheless persuaded to continue giving his entertainments , which he did on a less frequent basis , until November 1908 . The following year , Grossmith retired to Folkestone , Kent , a town that he had visited for many years , where he wrote his second volume of reminiscences , Piano and I ( 1910 ) . 
 Grossmith died at his home in <unk> at the age of 64 . He is buried in Kensal Green Cemetery , in the London Borough of Brent . In his will , dated 26 October 1908 , Grossmith left small bequests to a variety of charities and persons ; 2 @,@ 000 pounds , artworks and heirlooms to each of his children ( except that Lawrence did not receive a cash bequest ) , his son George receiving also " two silver bowls presented to him by [ Gilbert , Sullivan and ] Carte [ and ] the ivory baton with which he conducted the orchestra on the occasion of his said son 's first appearance on the stage " in Haste to the Wedding ; and smaller bequests to his children 's spouses and his nieces , nephews , grandchildren and some cousins , with the residuary estate shared equally by his children ( although the residuary estate was not large ) . 
 = = Writings and compositions ; legacy ; recordings = = 
 Grossmith wrote numerous comic pieces for the magazine Punch , including a series of ten skits in 1884 inspired by his Bow Street experiences , which he called " Very Trying " . He also wrote two memoirs , A Society Clown : Reminiscences ( 1888 ) and Piano and I : Further Reminiscences ( 1910 ) . In his career , Grossmith wrote 18 comic operas , nearly 100 musical sketches , some 600 songs and piano pieces , and three books . He also wrote both serious and comic pieces for newspapers and magazines throughout his career , displaying a wide range of styles . 
 Grossmith was followed , in the Gilbert and Sullivan comic roles , by a number of other popular performers , including Henry Lytton , Martyn Green , Peter Pratt , John Reed , and many others , who each owed a debt to Grossmith as the creator of the roles . Many actors have portrayed Grossmith in biographical films , revues and sketches . In Britain , among others , Martyn Green , John Reed ( in A Song to Sing , O at the Savoy Theatre in 1981 ) , Simon Butteriss and Leon Berger have done so . Australian Anthony <unk> played Grossmith in A Song to Sing , O in 1987 . 
 Over forty of the songs that Grossmith wrote or performed in his one @-@ man shows have been recorded by baritone Leon Berger ( a British Gilbert & Sullivan singer and Grossmith scholar ) , accompanied by Selwyn Tillett ( G & S scholar ) on two CDs : A Society Clown : The Songs of George Grossmith and The Grossmith Legacy . The latter also contains the recorded voice of Grossmith 's son , George Grossmith Jr . Both are on the Divine Art Label . No recordings of Grossmith 's voice are known to exist , although wax cylinder recording technology was available during his lifetime . 
 = = = Writings = = = 
 Grossmith , George ( 1888 ) . A Society Clown : Reminiscences . Bristol / London : Arrowsmith . Accessed 9 March 2008 
 Grossmith , George and Weedon Grossmith ( 1892 ) . The Diary of a Nobody . Bristol : Arrowsmith . 
 Grossmith , George ( 1910 ) . Piano and I : Further Reminiscences . Bristol : Arrowsmith . 
 Grossmith , George ( 2009 ) [ 1904 ] . Sylvia Grossmith Bevan and Cordelia Grossmith , ed . The George Grossmith Birthday Book . Los Angeles : David Trutt . 
 Grossmith , George , ed . David Trutt ( 2009 ) . George Grossmith Songs and Sketches ( PDF ) . Los Angeles : David Trutt ( <unk> @ <unk> ) . 
 = = = Portrayals = = = 
 Grossmith was portrayed by Martyn Green in the 1953 film The Story of Gilbert and Sullivan and by Martin Savage in the 1999 film Topsy @-@ Turvy . Simon Butteriss portrayed Grossmith in the 2006 television documentary A Salaried Wit : Grossmith , Gilbert and Sullivan and in the five @-@ part 2015 15 Minute Drama " I Am the Very Model of a Modern Major @-@ General " on BBC Radio 4 . 
 = Nasr ibn Sayyar = 
 <unk> ibn <unk> al @-@ <unk> al @-@ <unk> ( Arabic : <unk> بن <unk> <unk> <unk> ) ( 663 – 748 ) was an Arab general and the last Umayyad governor of Khurasan in 738 – 748 . Nasr played a distinguished role in the wars against the Turgesh , although he failed to decisively confront the rebellion of al @-@ Harith ibn Surayj in its early stages . Although respected as a soldier and a statesman , he owed his appointment as governor more to his obscure tribal background , which rendered him dependent on the Caliph . His tenure was nevertheless successful , as Nasr introduced long @-@ overdue tax reforms that alleviated social tension and largely restored stabilized Umayyad control in Transoxiana , which had been greatly reduced under the Turgesh onslaught . His last years were occupied by intertribal rivalries and uprisings , however , as the Caliphate itself descended into a period of civil war . In 746 Nasr was driven from his capital by Ibn Surayj and Juday ' al @-@ Kirmani , but returned after the latter fell out among themselves , resulting in Ibn Surayj 's death . Preoccupied with this conflict , Nasr was unable to stop the outbreak and spread of the Abbasid Revolution , whose leader , Abu Muslim , exploited the situation to his advantage . Evicted from his province in early 748 , he fled to Iran pursued by the Abbasid forces , where he died in December 748 . 
 = = Early life and career = = 
 Nasr was a military leader with long service and experience in Khurasan . As early as 705 he participated in a campaign along the upper Oxus River , led by Salih , the brother of Qutayba ibn Muslim , the general who had been tasked with subduing Transoxiana . For his service during this campaign , Nasr was awarded an entire village in this region . Despite the successes of Qutayba , much of Central Asia east of the Oxus remained outside effective Arab control ; while garrisons had been established in places like Samarkand , Balkh , or Bukhara , the Caliphate largely relied on <unk> relationships with the multitude of local rulers , who became tributary to the Umayyads . In addition , clashes with the Chinese @-@ backed Turgesh , the ambiguous policy followed regarding conversion of the native population ( mass conversions would lessen the taxable population and hence the amount of tribute received ) and increasing inter @-@ Arab tribal factionalism weakened Umayyad control over the region and necessitated increased military activity . 
 In 724 , Nasr is recorded as heading a Mudari army sent against Balkh , where restive Yemenite troops refused to participate in the expedition against Ferghana that resulted in the disastrous " Day of Thirst " . His troops , reinforced by men from the subject Hephthalite principality of <unk> , clashed with the Yemenis at <unk> and prevailed over them . This led to resentment towards his person among the Yemenis , especially from those around Balkh ; and during the governorship of the Yemeni Asad ibn Abdallah al @-@ Qasri , along with other Mudari leaders , Nasr fell into disfavour and was mistreated . 
 Nasr was one of the few Muslim leaders to distinguish himself in the disastrous Battle of the Defile in July 731 . In 734 he was appointed as governor of Balkh , after arresting the previous governor . There he faced the rebellion of the local Khurasani troops under al @-@ Harith ibn Surayj , who called for reforms in taxation and the ending of discrimination towards the native converts ( mawali ) . Ibn Surayj marched on Balkh and took the city with only 4 @,@ 000 followers , even though Nasr commanded 10 @,@ 000 men . It is unclear from the sources whether the town was seized from Nasr , or whether it was captured in his absence and then successfully held against him . In any case , Nasr and his army remained passive for the remainder of the revolt ; they did not aid the provincial capital , Merv , when the rebels attacked it , and this stance encouraged several local tribes to join the uprising . Eventually however the rebels were defeated by Juday ' al @-@ Kirmani , with Ibn Surayj fleeing across the Oxus to the Turgesh . 
 = = Appointment as governor of Khurasan = = 
 In July 738 , at the age of 74 , Nasr was appointed as governor of Khurasan . Despite his age , he was widely respected both for his military record , his knowledge of the affairs of Khurasan and his abilities as a statesman . Julius Wellhausen wrote of him that " His age did not affect the freshness of his mind , as is testified not only by his deeds , but also by the verses in which he gave expression to his feelings till the very end of his life " . However , in the climate of the times , his nomination owed more to his appropriate tribal affiliation than his personal qualities . 
 From the early days of the Muslim conquests , Arab armies were divided into regiments drawn from individual tribes or tribal confederations ( <unk> or ‘ asha ‘ ir ) . Despite the fact that many of these groupings were recent creations , created for reasons of military efficiency rather than any common ancestry , they soon developed a strong and distinct identity . Eventually , and certainly by the beginning of the Umayyad period , this system progressed to the formation of ever @-@ larger super @-@ groupings , culminating in the two super @-@ groups : the northern Arab Mudaris or Qaysis , and the south Arabs or " Yemenis " ( Yaman ) , dominated by the Azd and Rabi 'ah tribes . By the 8th century , this division had become firmly established across the Caliphate and was a source of constant internal instability , as the two groups formed in essence two rival political parties , jockeying for power and separated by a fierce hatred for each other . During Hisham ibn Abd al @-@ Malik 's reign , the Umayyad government appointed Mudaris as governors in Khurasan , except for Asad ibn Abdallah al @-@ Qasri 's tenure in 735 – 738 . Nasr 's appointment came four months after Asad 's death . In the interim , the sources report variously that the province was run either by the Syrian general Ja 'far ibn <unk> al @-@ Bahrani or by Asad 's lieutenant Juday ' al @-@ Kirmani . At any rate , the sources agree that al @-@ Kirmani stood at the time as the most prominent man in Khurasan and should have been the clear choice for governor . His Yemeni roots ( he was the leader of the Azd in Khurasan ) , however , made him unpalatable to the Caliph . 
 Nasr on the other hand , in addition to his other qualities , was a Mudari and married to a Tamimi wife . He would therefore be acceptable to the numerous Mudari element of the Khurasani army , which outnumbered the Yemenis , but could also , as a local , help to reduce the Khurasani Arabs ' discontent towards the Syria @-@ centric Umayyad government . Nasr 's own relatively obscure tribal background — from a non @-@ noble family of the Layth tribe from <unk> — also suited the Caliph 's purposes , as it meant that he lacked any local power base of his own . Indeed , Nasr 's rule throughout his tenure was not fully accepted by many Arab tribesmen : aside from the Yemenis , who favoured their " own " candidate al @-@ Kirmani and resented the shift in power back towards the Mudaris , the Qays around Nishapur refused to support him , and even the Syrian contingent sided with his opponents . Nasr was hence mostly reliant on the support of his wife 's powerful Tamim tribe living around Marv . As long as he was supported by a strong central government in Damascus , Nasr was able to keep his internal enemies in check , but in the troubles that followed Hisham 's death in 743 , that support vanished . In the event , Nasr would succeed in retaining his office for a decade , despite the turmoil that swept the Caliphate after 743 . When Yazid III came to power in early 744 , he initially ordered Nasr replaced . Nasr refused to accept this , and held on to the post , being eventually confirmed to it a few months later . After Marwan II 's rise to power in December 744 , he likewise affirmed Nasr 's position . 
 = = Reforms and campaigns = = 
 Nasr gave his province an unprecedented period of good government , stability and prosperity , so that , in the words of the 9th @-@ century historian al @-@ Mada <unk> , " Khurasan was built up as it had never been before " . His major achievements during his tenure were the reform of the tax system and the restoration of Umayyad control over Transoxiana . 
 The Khurasani tax system had been established at the time of the Muslim conquest and remained unchanged since . It relied on the collection of a fixed tribute by the local non @-@ Muslim ( mostly Zoroastrian ) gentry , the dihqans , who often discriminated against the Muslim settlers and the native converts . This contributed to the latter 's increasing resentment of Umayyad rule , and the demand for a tax reform had fuelled past revolts like that of Ibn Surayj . Consequently , Nasr streamlined the tax system in 739 , implementing a blanket imposition ( the kharaj ) on all owners of agricultural land and forcing the non @-@ Muslims to pay an additional poll tax ( the <unk> ) . In this way , the chroniclers report , 30 @,@ 000 Muslims were absolved of the <unk> , and 80 @,@ 000 non @-@ Muslims were forced to pay it instead . Attention was also paid to the accurate collection of the kharaj in accordance with treaties with the local rulers , as a result of which the tax burden was generally eased . This reform is traditionally held to have assisted in regaining the loyalty of the local populations and their princes , who returned quickly to the Arab fold ; other modern scholars however consider the effect of this belated reform on the prevailing anti @-@ Umayyad climate as minimal . Upon his appointment , Nasr also moved the provincial capital back to Merv from Balkh , where Asad had established it . Additionally , for the first time in the province 's history he appointed sub @-@ governors . They were drawn from among his allies and supporters in order to reward them and to improve his own control of the province . 
 Taking advantage of the disintegration of the Turgesh khaganate after the murder of the khagan Suluk , Nasr moved aggressively across the Oxus . His first campaign , immediately after his appointment , was in the area of <unk> ; his second campaign , in 740 , recovered much territory in Sogdia , including Samarkand , with little apparent resistance . Aiming to recover all the lands previously conquered under Qutayba ibn Muslim and to curtail the activities of the renegade Ibn Surayj , who was based there , Nasr then launched an expedition targeting al @-@ Shash ( Tashkent ) . The principality of Usrushana submitted peacefully , but when the Muslim army reached the Jaxartes , it was confronted by a 15 @,@ 000 @-@ strong force from Shash along with Ibn Surayj 's men and some Turgesh ; according to Muslim tradition , the latter were led by Suluk 's murderer and successor , Kursul . According to Arab tradition , Nasr was able to drive off the Turgesh and scored a victory against one of their detachments , killing its chief , but apparently failed to subdue al @-@ Shash , for he was forced to content himself with an agreement with the ruler of Shash , whereby Ibn Surayj was evicted to <unk> , where the latter was left unmolested to continue his opposition to the Umayyads . Nasr also launched two expeditions against Ferghana , which plundered and ravaged the countryside and took many captives . It seems , however , that the Muslim reconquest at this time did not extend much further than Samarkand , with occasional tribute being possibly levied from the remoter principalities . 
 Outwardly at least , by 743 the Umayyad position in Khurasan appeared stronger than ever . The reality beneath the splendid façade however was different . Tension and mutual mistrust existed between the Khurasani Arab levies ( muqatila ) and the 20 @,@ 000 Syrian troops introduced into the province as a security measure after the disastrous Battle of the Defile in 731 , while tribal antagonism continued to create trouble : apart from continued Yemeni resentment at Nasr , there was strong dislike of the Umayyads ' Syrian regime , fanned by their unjust tax policies . Although Nasr tried to remedy the situation , it was too late . 
 In addition , Khurasan was a major center of early <unk> , and specifically of the <unk> sect of the Hashimiyya , which had gained wide acceptance in the province , especially among the mawali . In 742 – 743 , Nasr confronted and defeated a revolt led by Yahya , son of Zayd ibn Ali and the leader of the Hashimiyya in Khurasan . Yahya was captured and executed , and the resulting vacuum in Hashimi leadership opened the path for the Khurasani branch of the movement to come under the control of the Abbasid family . It is however , a testament to the " respect and even affection " ( Gibb ) with which Nasr was regarded by the native population in Transoxiana , that in contrast to Khurasan no native city there welcomed the Hashimi missionaries , and that they remained loyal to him even during the later Abbasid Revolution . 
 = = Civil wars and the Abbasid Revolution = = 
 In 743 , after the death of Caliph Hisham , Walid II reconfirmed Nasr in his post , but the influential governor of Iraq , Yusuf ibn Umar , an opponent of Nasr , tried to lure him away from his province by calling him to Iraq . Nasr delayed his departure , stalling for time , and was saved by the murder of Walid in April 744 . However , Walid 's successor , Yazid III , moved to install a regime dominated by the Yemeni Kalbi tribe . Nasr 's position was severely undermined , and the Yemeni faction now hoped to see their leader Juday ' al @-@ Kirmani appointed governor in his stead . Indeed , Yazid appointed his favourite , the Kalbi Mansur ibn <unk> , as governor of Iraq , and he in turn nominated his own brother as Nasr 's replacement . Nasr refused to accept this , and was again fortunate in his persistence , for Mansur fell out of favour and was dismissed after only two months . Agitation among the Yemeni faction persisted , amidst rumours that Nasr had intercepted letters appointing al @-@ Kirmani as governor , and a dispute on the payment of stipends to the muqatila . Nasr tried to secure his own position by deposing al @-@ Kirmani from his leadership of the Azd , as well as by trying to win over Azd and Rabi 'ah leaders . This led to a general uprising by the Azd and Rabi 'ah under al @-@ Kirmani . It is indicative of the lingering intertribal antagonism of the late Umayyad world that the rebellion was launched in the name of revenge for the <unk> , an Azd family that had been purged after rebelling in 720 , an act which had since become a symbol of Yemeni resentment of the Umayyads and their northern Arab @-@ dominated regime . 
 On 13 July 744 , Nasr captured and imprisoned al @-@ Kirmani . After barely a month , the latter escaped , and his rebellion was joined not only by Azd soldiers , but also by many of the Arab settlers around Marv . A tentative truce was initially agreed upon , during which fruitless negotiations were conducted , but after Yazid reconfirmed Nasr in his post , al @-@ Kirmani and the Yemenis — in reality , al @-@ Kirmani 's followers included other tribes as well , including most of the Syrians and even some Mudaris , but they were collectively called <unk> in the sources — resumed their revolt . Nasr in turn tried to strengthen his own position by enlisting the services of al @-@ Harith ibn Surayj , al @-@ Kirmani 's one @-@ time adversary , who enjoyed considerable support among some Arab tribes and especially his native <unk> . When Ibn Surayj arrived at Merv in July 745 he was enthusiastically received by the town 's inhabitants . <unk> Nasr 's proposals for cooperation , Ibn Surayj soon withdrew to the countryside and rose in rebellion as well . Ibn Surayj was also able to exploit the unpopularity of Marwan II among the Mudaris and Nasr 's followers , even though Nasr recognized him as the legitimate Caliph in exchange for his own confirmation to his post . Exploiting this resentment , Ibn Surayj soon gathered around him an army of over 3 @,@ 000 men . 
 In March 746 Ibn Surayj 's army attacked Marv , but was repulsed with many casualties , and he then made common cause with al @-@ Kirmani — of whose activities between his escape in 744 and this point nothing is known . With Marwan II still trying to consolidate his own position in Syria and Mesopotamia , Nasr was bereft of any hopes of reinforcement , and the allied armies of Ibn Surayj and al @-@ Kirmani drove him out of Merv towards the end of 746 . Nasr retreated to Nishapur , but within days al @-@ Kirmani and Ibn Surayj fell out among themselves and clashed , resulting in the death of Ibn Surayj . Al @-@ Kirmani then destroyed the Tamimi quarters in the city , a shocking act , as dwellings were traditionally considered exempt from warfare in Arab culture . As a result , the Mudari tribes , hitherto reserved towards Nasr , now came over to him . Backed by them , especially the Qaysis settled around Nishapur , Nasr now resolved to take back the capital . During summer 747 , Nasr 's and al @-@ Kirmani 's armies confronted each other before the walls of Marv , occupying two fortified camps and skirmishing with each other for several months . The fighting stopped only when news came of the start of the Hashimi uprising under Abu Muslim . 
 Negotiations commenced , but were almost broken off when a member of Nasr 's entourage , an embittered son of Ibn Surayj , attacked and killed al @-@ Kirmani . Calmer heads prevailed for the moment , the two sides were able to tentatively settle their differences , and Nasr re @-@ occupied his seat in Marv . Tensions however remained and Abu Muslim soon managed to persuade al @-@ Kirmani 's son and successor Ali that Nasr had been involved in his father 's murder . As a result , both Ali al @-@ Kirmani and Nasr separately appealed for aid against each other to Abu Muslim , who now held the balance of power . The latter eventually chose to support al @-@ Kirmani . On 14 February 748 , the Hashimi army occupied Marv , and Nasr again had to flee the city . Pursued by the Hashimi forces under Qahtaba ibn Shabib al @-@ Ta 'i , Nasr was forced to abandon Nishapur too after his son Tamim was defeated at Tus , and retreat to the region of <unk> , on the western borderlands of Khurasan . At this point , the long @-@ awaited reinforcements from the Caliph arrived , but their general and Nasr failed to coordinate their movements , and Qahtaba was able to defeat the Caliph 's army at Rey and kill its commander . Nasr was now forced to abandon <unk> and flee towards Hamadan . On the way , in the town of Sawa , he fell ill and died on 9 December , at the age of 85 . 
 His grandson , Rafi ibn al @-@ Layth , led a large @-@ scale rebellion against the misgovernment of the Abbasid governor Ali ibn Isa ibn Mahan in 807 – 810 , which spread across Khurasan and Transoxiana . 
 = Dream of the Rarebit Fiend = 
 Dream of the Rarebit Fiend is a newspaper comic strip by American cartoonist Winsor McCay , begun September 10 , 1904 . It was McCay 's second successful strip , after Little Sammy Sneeze secured him a position on the cartoon staff of the New York Herald . Rarebit Fiend appeared in the Evening Telegram , a newspaper published by the Herald . For contractual reasons , McCay signed the strip with the pen name " Silas " . 
 The strip had no continuity or recurring characters , but a recurring theme : a character has a nightmare or other bizarre dream , usually after eating a Welsh rarebit — a cheese @-@ on @-@ toast dish . The character awakens in the closing panel and regrets having eaten the rarebit . The dreams often reveal unflattering sides of the dreamers ' psyches — their phobias , hypocrisies , discomforts , and dark fantasies . This was in great contrast to the colorful fantasy dreams in McCay 's signature strip Little Nemo , which he began in 1905 . Whereas children were Nemo 's target audience , McCay aimed Rarebit Fiend at adults . 
 The popularity of Rarebit Fiend and Nemo led to McCay gaining a contract in 1911 with William Randolph Hearst 's chain of newspapers with a star 's salary . His editor there thought McCay 's highly skilled cartooning " serious , not funny " , and had McCay give up comic strips in favor of editorial cartooning . McCay revived the strip in 1923 – 1925 as Rarebit Reveries , of which few examples have survived . 
 A number of film adaptations of Rarebit Fiend have appeared , including Edwin S. Porter 's live @-@ action Dream of a Rarebit Fiend in 1906 , and four pioneering animated films by McCay himself : How a Mosquito Operates in 1912 , and 1921 's Bug Vaudeville , The Pet , and The Flying House . The strip is said to have anticipated a number of recurring ideas in popular culture , such as marauding giant beasts damaging cities — as later popularized by King Kong and Godzilla . 
 = = Overview = = 
 Winsor McCay first produced Dream of the Rarebit Fiend in 1904 , a year before the dream romps of his Little Nemo and a full generation before the artists of the Surrealist movement unleashed the subconscious on the public . The strip had no recurring characters , but followed a theme : after eating a Welsh rarebit , the day 's protagonist would be subject to the darker side of his or her psyche . Typically , the strip would begin with an absurd situation which became more and more absurd until the Fiend — the dreamer — awakened in the final panel . Some situations were merely silly : elephants falling from the ceiling , or two women 's mink coats having a fight . Other times , they could be more disturbing : characters finding themselves dismembered , buried alive from a first @-@ person perspective or a child 's mother being planted and becoming a tree . In some strips the Fiend was a spectator watching fantastic or horrible things happen to someone close to themself . The protagonists are typically urban bourgeoisie whom McCay subjects to fears of public humiliation or loss of social esteem or respectability . 
 Rarebit Fiend was the only one of McCay 's strips in which he approached social or political topics , or dealt with contemporary life . He addressed religious leaders , alcoholism , homelessness , political speeches , suicide , fashion , and other topics , whereas his other strips were fantasy or had seemingly vague , timeless backgrounds . The strip referenced contemporary events such as the 1904 election of Theodore Roosevelt ; the recently built Flatiron Building ( 1902 ) and St. Regis Hotel ( 1904 ) in New York City ; and the Russo @-@ Japanese War of 1904 – 05 . 
 The rarebit is a dish typically made with rich cheese thinned with ale and served melted on toast with cayenne and mustard mixed in . McCay used it despite its innocuousness — cultural theorist Scott <unk> states rarebit was not the sort of dish a person would associate with having nightmares . 
 McCay 's most famous character , Little Nemo , first appeared in the first year of Dream of the Rarebit Fiend , on December 10 , 1904 . In 1905 , McCay had Nemo appear in his own strip in the New York Herald . In comparison to Little Nemo , the artwork of the Rarebit Fiend strips had minimal backgrounds , and were usually done from a static perspective with the main characters often in a fixed position . The content of Rarebit Fiend played a much bigger role than it did in Little Nemo , whose focus was on beautiful visuals . The stories were self @-@ contained , whereas the Nemo story continued from week to week . The dreams in Nemo were aimed at children , but Rarebit Fiend had adult @-@ oriented subjects — social embarrassment , fear of dying or going insane , and so on . Some of the dreams in both strips were wish @-@ fulfillment fantasies . 
 Unlike most comic strips from the time , Rarebit Fiend is not humorous or escapist . The strips highlight readers ' darker selves — hypocrisies , deceitfulness , phobias , and discomfort . They offer often biting social commentary and show marital , money , and religious matters in a negative light . McCay had an interest in pushing formal boundaries , and playful self @-@ referentiality plays a role in many of the strips ; characters sometimes refer to McCay 's alter @-@ ego " Silas " or to the reader . Though frequent in Rarebit Fiend , this self @-@ referentiality does not appear in McCay 's other strips . 
 In contrast to the skilled artwork , the lettering in the dialogue balloons , as in McCay 's other work , was awkward and could approach illegibility , especially in reproductions , where the artwork has normally been greatly reduced in size . McCay seemed to show little regard for the dialogue balloons , their content , and their placement in the composition . They tend to contain repetitive monologues expressing the increasing distress of the speakers , and show that McCay 's gift was in the visual and not the verbal . 
 = = Background = = 
 McCay began cartooning in the 1890s and had a prolific output published in magazines and newspapers . He became known for his ability to draw quickly , a talent he often employed during chalk talks on the vaudeville stage ( alongside the likes of Harry Houdini and W. C. Fields ) . Before Dream of the Rarebit Fiend and Little Nemo , McCay had shown an interest the topic of dreams . Some of his earlier work , numbering at least 10 regular comic strips , had titles such as Daydreams and It Was Only a Dream . McCay 's were not the first dream @-@ themed comic strips to be published : McCay 's employer , the New York Herald , had printed at least three such strips , beginning with Charles Reese 's Drowsy Dick in 1902 . Psychoanalysis and dream interpretation had begun to enter the public consciousness with the 1900 publication of Freud 's Interpretation of Dreams . 
 McCay first proposed a strip in which a tobacco fiend finds himself at the North Pole , unable to secure a cigarette and a light . In the last panel he awakens to find it a dream . The Herald asked McCay to make a series of the strip , but with a Welsh rarebit theme instead of tobacco , and McCay complied . The strip appeared in a Herald subsidiary , the Evening Telegram , and the Herald 's editor required McCay to use a pseudonym for the strip work to keep it separate from his other work . McCay signed Rarebit Fiend strips as " Silas " , a name he borrowing from a neighborhood garbage cart driver . After switching to William Randolph Hearst 's New York American newspaper in 1911 , McCay dropped the " Silas " pseudonym and signed his work with his own name . 
 McCay married in 1891 , and the marriage was not a happy one . According to McCay biographer John Canemaker , McCay depicts marriage in Rarebit Fiend as " a minefield of hypocrisy , jealousy , and misunderstanding " . McCay was a short man , barely five feet ( 150 cm ) tall . He was dominated by his wife , who stood as tall as he was . Images of small , shy men dominated by their taller or fatter wives appear frequently in Rarebit Fiend . Gigantism , with characters overwhelmed by rapidly growing elements , was another recurring motif , perhaps as compensation on McCay 's part for a sense of smallness . McCay 's brother Arthur had been put in a mental asylum , which may have inspired the themes of insanity that are common in the strip . 
 Despite the strip 's bleak view , McCay 's work was so popular that William Randolph Hearst hired him in 1911 with a star 's salary . Hearst editor Arthur Brisbane deemed McCay 's work " serious , not funny " , and had the cartoonist give up his comic strips ( including Rarebit Fiend and Nemo ) to work full @-@ time illustrating editorials . 
 = = = Influences = = = 
 Scholars such as Claude <unk> , Ulrich Merkl , Alfredo Castelli , and others have hunted down what they believe to have influenced McCay 's work on Dream of the Rarebit Fiend . Among the possible influences are Edward Lear 's popular The Book of Nonsense ( 1870 ) , Gelett Burgess ' The Burgess Nonsense Book ( 1901 ) , Lewis Carroll 's Alice 's Adventures in Wonderland ( 1865 ) ( particularly the pool of tears scene , which seems related to the flood of sweat in one early Rarebit Fiend strip ) , and a variety of dream cartoons and illustrations that appeared in various periodicals McCay was likely familiar with . 
 The most probable immediate influence on the strip was Welsh Rarebit Tales ( 1902 ) by Harle Oren Cummins . Cummins stated he drew inspiration for this collection of 15 science fiction stories from nightmares brought on by eating Welsh rarebit and lobster — making further likely the influence , as several post @-@ Herald strips from 1911 and 1912 were titled Dream of a Lobster Fiend . 
 Other influences that have been established include H. G. Wells , L. Frank Baum 's The Wonderful Wizard of Oz ( 1900 ) , J. M. Barrie 's Peter Pan ( 1904 ) , Carlo Collodi 's Pinocchio ( 1883 ) , Arthur Conan Doyle 's Sherlock Holmes and the Engineer 's Thumb ( 1889 ) , Henryk Sienkiewicz 's Quo Vadis ( 1896 ) , Robert Louis Stevenson 's Dr Jekyll and Mr Hyde ( 1886 ) , and Mark Twain 's The 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 Pound Bank @-@ Note ( 1893 ) . 
 McCay never acknowledged the influence of Sigmund Freud , whose The Interpretation of Dreams had been published in 1900 . According to McCay scholar Ulrich Merkl , it is likely McCay was aware of the Viennese doctor 's theories , as they had been widely reported and talked about in the New York newspaper world McCay was a part of . 
 = = Publishing history = = 
 Dream of the Rarebit Fiend was McCay 's longest running comic strip . He made over 300 more Rarebit Fiend episodes than he made of the more famous Little Nemo . The first strip appeared on September 10 , 1904 , in the New York Herald , a few months after the first appearance of McCay 's Little Sammy Sneeze . It was McCay 's second successful newspaper strip , after Sammy Sneeze landed him a position on the cartooning staff of the Herald . Dream of the Rarebit Fiend ran in the Evening Telegram , which was published by the Herald at the time . 
 The strip appeared two to three times a week . It typically filled a quarter of a newspaper page on weekdays , and half a page on Saturdays . The strip normally appeared in black @-@ and @-@ white , but 29 of the strips appeared in color throughout 1913 , run weekly in the Herald . These were strips drawn between 1908 and 1911 which the Evening Telegram had neglected to print . McCay sometimes encouraged readers to submit dream ideas , to be sent care of the Herald to " Silas the Dreamer " . McCay acknowledged the submissions he accepted with a " thanks to ... " on the strip beside his own signature . Among those credited were science fiction pioneer Hugo Gernsback . 
 Dream of the Rarebit Fiend initial run continued until 1911 . It appeared again in various papers between 1911 and 1913 under other titles , such as Midsummer Day Dreams and It Was Only a Dream . From 1923 to 1925 McCay revived the strip under the title Rarebit Reveries . Though signed " Robert Winsor McCay Jr . " ( McCay 's son ) , the strips appear to be in McCay 's own hand , with the possible exception of the lettering . McCay had also signed some of his animation and editorial cartoons with his son 's name . As of 2007 only seven examples of Rarebit Reveries were known , though it is nearly certain others were printed . 
 = = = Collections = = = 
 The earliest collection , titled Dreams of the Rarebit Fiend , appeared in 1905 from Frederick A. Stokes and reprinted 61 of the strips . Dover Publications reprinted this collection in 1973 in a 10 % enlarged edition with new introductory material . The Dover edition dropped the final strip from the original collection as it contained ethnic humor that the publisher believed would not be to the taste of a 1970s audience . 
 Rarebit Fiend examples appear in Daydreams and Nightmares ( Fantagraphics , 1988 / 2006 ; editor Richard Marschall ) , a collection of miscellaneous work by McCay . Checker Books reprinted many of the Rarebit Fiend strips over eight volumes of the series Winsor McCay : Early Works and in 2006 reprinted 183 of the color Saturday strips in Dream of the Rarebit Fiend : The Saturdays . The Checker books reprinted all but about 300 of the known Rarebit Fiend strips . 
 In July 2007 , German art historian Ulrich Merkl self @-@ published a 17 in × 12 in ( 43 @.@ 5 cm × 31 cm ) , 464 @-@ page volume called Dream of the Rarebit Fiend , reproducing 369 of the strips in full size . Previous reprintings of the strip reduced the strips to about a third of their originally published size , resulting in loss of detail and making the lettering hard to read . The size of the book made automatic binding impossible , so it had to be bound by hand . The book was limited to 1000 copies , and a DVD was included with scans of the 821 known installments of the strip , the complete text of the book , a catalogue raisonné of the strips , and a video of an example of McCay 's animation . The sources of the strips were from Merkl 's personal collection , the Cartoon Research Library of the Ohio State University , and microfilms purchased from the New York Public Library containing the complete New York Evening Journal run of the strip . Merkl has said that , on average , six hours were required per strip for scanning and restoration . The book also featured two essays by Italian comics editor Alfredo Castelli and one by <unk> Taylor , former president of the International Association for the Study of Dreams . 
 = = Other media = = 
 McCay 's work was very popular . It was adapted to film by McCay and others , and was optioned for Broadway . A " comic opera or musical <unk> " called Dream of the Welsh Rarebit Fiend went unproduced , though McCay signed a contract to collaborate on it with music by Max Hirschfeld and lyrics by George Henry Payne and Robert Gilbert Welch . 
 = = = Film = = = 
 = = = = Dream of a Rarebit Fiend ( 1906 ) = = = = 
 Film pioneer Edwin S. Porter produced a seven @-@ minute live @-@ action film adaptation called The Dream of a Rarebit Fiend in 1906 for the Edison Company . The Fiend was played by John P. Brawn , who is tormented by imps in his bed , which flies through the air and leaves him hanging from a steeple — a scene similar to that of an early strips that ran on January 28 , 1905 . 
 = = = = Animation by McCay = = = = 
 McCay produced four hand @-@ drawn animated films based upon his Rarebit Fiend series : 
 = = = = = How a Mosquito Operates ( 1912 ) = = = = = 
 Put together in December 1911 , and released in 1912 , McCay 's second film ( also known as The Story of a Mosquito ) is one of the earliest examples of line @-@ drawn animation . A giant top @-@ hatted mosquito flies in through a window to feed on a man in bed , who tries in vain to defend himself . The mosquito drinks itself so full that it explodes . Rather than expanding like a balloon , the mosquito fills up in a naturalistic fashion according to its body structure . The idea for the film came from a Rarebit Fiend strip published on June 5 , 1909 . McCay biographer John Canemaker commends McCay for his ability to imbue the mosquito with character and a personality . 
 = = = = = Bug Vaudeville ( 1921 ) = = = = = 
 In the fantasy Bug Vaudeville , a tramp comes out from a group of meticulously drawn trees and falls asleep , muttering that cheese cakes give him strange dreams . A series of bugs put on performance after performance against highly detailed and realistic backgrounds . The performance ends with a spider who grabs a silhouetted member of the audience and eats him whole . 
 The film was released in 1921 , and draws from McCay 's experiences in the worlds of the circus and vaudeville . The film is presented as a vaudeville show , though without the stage interaction McCay used in Gertie the Dinosaur . Film critic Andrew Sarris praised Bug Vaudeville as his favorite of McCay 's films for " the linear expressiveness of the drawings and the intuitive rhythm of the acts " . Sarris wrote that a director like Federico Fellini " would be honored by such insight into the ritual of performance " . 
 = = = = = The Pet ( 1921 ) = = = = = 
 The Pet depicts a couple who adopt a mysterious animal with an insatiable appetite . It consumes its milk , the house cat , the house 's furnishings , rat poison , and passing vehicles , including airplanes and a blimp , while growing larger and larger . As it wanders among the skyscrapers of the city a swarm of airplanes and zeppelins gather to bomb the beast . 
 A Rarebit Fiend strip from March 8 , 1905 , inspired The Pet , which was released in 1921 . The dark film was the last over which McCay had " total creative control " , according to McCay biographer John Canemaker . Cartoonist Stephen R. Bissette called it " the first @-@ ever ' giant monster attacking a city ' motion picture ever made " . 
 = = = = = The Flying House ( 1921 ) = = = = = 
 Against the backdrop of the rapidly <unk> United States of the 1910s and 1920s , one house from the artificial grid of modern , planned America takes flight in the dream of a woman who has feasted on Welsh rarebit . The Flying House is rendered in meticulous realistic detail . The house is conventional in every respect — until the viewer reaches the attic , where the woman 's husband is seen tending an enormous engine . He attaches a propeller to a shaft out front of the house , and tells his wife that his actions are in reaction to their landlord 's intention to evict them over nonpayment . He says he plans to " steal the house " , and the couple fly away to find a place where their landlord will never find them — a swamp , the ocean , even the moon , where they are chased off by the Man in the Moon with a <unk> . The film self @-@ consciously directs the viewers to notice the quality and accuracy of the animation when the house takes off into space , calling attention to the " remarkable piece of animation which follows " , accurately showing the revolutions of the Earth and Moon and the " beautiful constellation of Orion " . The woman becomes anxious that they will become " lost in the sky " . In the end , the house is struck by a military rocket , bringing the nightmare to an end as the woman awakens in her bed . 
 The film was released in 1921 , and was credited to McCay 's son Robert , though Canemaker states it is unlikely the elder McCay was not involved . A 1921 New York Times review found the film " interesting because of its excellent workmanship and fantastic character " though it was " not as brightly humorous " as it could be . Film critic Richard Eder contrasted the film 's realistic <unk> with the more innocent qualities that came to be associated with American cartoons . In 2011 , animator Bill Plympton restored the film , using Kickstarter to fund the project . He had the film colorized , and actors Matthew Modine and Patricia Clarkson provided voices . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The Edison Military Band performed a piece called " Dream of the Rarebit Fiend " on an Edison cylinder ( Edison <unk> ) in 1907 , written by Thomas W. <unk> . The music was likely inspired by Porter 's 1906 film , and may have been intended to accompany it . The piece was written for an 18 – 20 @-@ piece band , and has been recorded numerous times . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Rarebit Fiend set up a formula which McCay was to use in the better @-@ known Little Nemo . A large number of the Nemo strips used ideas recycled from Rarebit Fiend , such as the October 31 , 1907 , " walking bed " episode , which was used in the July 26 , 1908 , episode of Little Nemo . 
 Comics scholar Jeet Heer called Rarebit Fiend " perhaps the most bizarre newspaper feature in American history " . Merkl notes examples of the strip presaging ideas and scenes in later media : the strip includes scenes in which a man kicks a dog , slaps a woman , beats a blind man , and throws another woman out a window , as in Luis Buñuel 's film L 'Age d 'Or ( 1930 ) ; and giant characters let loose in the big city , climbing and damaging buildings and subway trains , as in King Kong ( 1933 ) . Merkl compares the strip for March 9 , 1907 , in which a child 's bedroom becomes a lion @-@ infested jungle , to the 1950 Ray Bradbury story " The Veldt " , and the strip from September 26 , 1908 , depicting a stretchable face , to Salvador Dalí 's surrealist painting Soft self @-@ portrait with fried bacon ( 1941 ) and the cosmetic surgeries in Terry Gilliam 's Brazil . Stephen R. Bissette compares a strip featuring elevators flying from buildings and other scenes to the 2005 Tim Burton take on Charlie and the Chocolate Factory . 
 The strip was most likely an influence on episodes of Frank King 's early comic strip Bobby Make @-@ Believe . Many scholars believe that Carl Barks , a professed fan of Little Nemo , was likely exposed to Rarebit Fiend , which appeared in The San Francisco Examiner , which Barks read growing up . Several episodes of Barks 's Donald Duck strips appear to have taken their subjects from Rarebit Fiend . Many scenes from animated films by Tex Avery from between 1943 and 1954 are said to show clearly a Rarebit Fiend influence . Science fiction illustrator Frank R. Paul painted a number of pulp magazine covers influenced by Rarebit Fiend . 
 Art Spiegelman paid parodic homage to Rarebit Fiend in his 1974 strip " Real Dream " . In 1991 , Rick Veitch began producing short comics based on his dreams . Beginning in 1994 , he put out twenty @-@ one issues of <unk> ' Rick 's Rare Bit Fiends from his own King Hell Press . 
 = = = = Books = = = = 
 = = = = Newspapers = = = = 
 = = = = Web = = = = 
 = = = Strips = = = 
 Complete scans from the Ulrich Merkl DVD at The Internet Archive 
 Archives of Dream of the Rarebit Fiend at Comic Strip Library 
 = = = Other = = = 
 The Burgess Nonsense Book ( 1901 ) by Gelett Burgess at the Internet Archive 
 Welsh Rarebit Tales ( 1902 ) by Harle Oren Cummins at the Internet Archive 
 = Twyfelfontein = 
 Twyfelfontein ( Afrikaans : uncertain spring ) , officially known as <unk> @-@ <unk> ( Damara / Nama : jumping waterhole ) , is a site of ancient rock engravings in the Kunene Region of north @-@ western Namibia . It consists of a spring in a valley flanked by the slopes of a sandstone table mountain that receives very little rainfall and has a wide range of diurnal temperatures . 
 The site has been inhabited for 6 @,@ 000 years , first by hunter @-@ gatherers and later by Khoikhoi herders . Both ethnic groups used it as a place of worship and a site to conduct shamanist rituals . In the process of these rituals at least 2 @,@ 500 items of rock carvings have been created , as well as a few rock paintings . Displaying one of the largest concentrations of rock petroglyphs in Africa , UNESCO approved Twyfelfontein as Namibia 's first World Heritage Site in 2007 . 
 = = History = = 
 Twyfelfontein valley has been inhabited by Stone @-@ age hunter @-@ gatherers of the Wilton stone age culture group since approximately 6 @,@ 000 years ago . They made most of the engravings and probably all the paintings . 2 @,@ 000 to 2 @,@ 500 years ago the Khoikhoi , an ethnic group related to the San ( Bushmen ) , occupied the valley , then known under its Damara / Nama name <unk> @-@ <unk> ( jumping waterhole ) . The Khoikhoi also produced rock art which can clearly be distinguished from the older engravings . 
 The area was uninhabited by Europeans until after World War II , when a severe drought caused white Afrikaans speaking farmers ( Boers ) to move in . The farm was later procured by the apartheid government as part of the <unk> Plan and became part of the Damaraland <unk> . The white settlers left in 1965 . 
 <unk> Reinhard <unk> , who also discovered the White Lady rock painting at <unk> , reported the presence of rock engravings in the area in 1921 . A more thorough investigation was only conducted after David Levin studied the feasibility of farming in 1947 . He rediscovered the spring but struggled to extract enough water to sustain his family and his herd . Slowly becoming obsessed with doubts about the capacity of the spring an Afrikaans @-@ speaking friend began calling him David Twyfelfontein ( David Doubts @-@ the @-@ spring ) in jest . When Levin bought the land and registered his farm in 1948 he gave it the name Twyfelfontein . While commonly being translated as doubtful spring , a more accurate translation for the word <unk> is therefore " questionable " or " uncertain " . 
 In 1950 scientific investigation of the rock art started with an investigation by Ernst Rudolph Scherz who described over 2500 rock engravings on 212 sandstone slabs . Today it is estimated that the site contains more than 5000 individual depictions . 
 = = Location and description = = 
 Twyfelfontein is situated in the <unk> valley of the Mount Etjo formation in southern Kunene Region of Namibia , an area formerly known as Damaraland . The rocks containing the art work are situated in a valley flanked by the slopes of a sandstone table mountain . An underground aquifer on an impermeable layer of shale sustains a spring in this otherwise very dry area . The name Twyfelfontein refers to the spring itself , to the valley containing the spring , and in the context of traveling and tourism also to a greater area containing nearby tourist attractions : the rock engravings , the Organ Pipes ( Namibia ) , Burnt Mountain , <unk> crater , and the Petrified Forest . The World Heritage Site covers the area of rock engravings . 
 The area is a transitional zone between semi desert , savanna , and shrubland and receives less than 150 mm ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) annual rainfall . Diurnal temperatures vary from 10 to 28 ° C ( 50 to 82 ° F ) in the winter month of July and 21 to 35 ° C ( 70 to 95 ° F ) in the summer month of November . 
 Twyfelfontein lies 20 km ( 12 mi ) south of the <unk> major road from <unk> to <unk> . From there it is connected by the district road <unk> . The Twyfelfontein Country Lodge features a gravel airstrip . The lodge , camp site , visitor 's centre and most of the other tourist facilities are managed as a joint venture between the lodge owners and the Twyfelfontein @-@ <unk> Conservancy . 
 The rock art area consists of fourteen smaller sites that have been introduced by Scherz in his initial site survey . They are still used to describe the location of artworks in Twyfelfontein : 
 = = Artworks = = 
 Sandstone rocks at Twyfelfontein are covered by the so @-@ called desert varnish , a hard patina that appears brown or dark grey . Engravings were effected by chiseling through this patina , exposing the lighter rock underneath . The indentations were created over the course of thousands of years . The oldest engravings might be as old as 10 @,@ 000 years , and the creation of new works probably ended by the arrival of pastoral tribes around 1000 AD . Three different types of engravings can be distinguished at Twyfelfontein : 
 iconic imagery ( images of animals , humans , and fantasy creatures ) 
 pictograms ( geometric rock art like pecked circles , rows of dots ) 
 indentations for or from everyday use ( grinding hollows , board games , gong stones ) 
 Additionally , the site contains rock paintings at 13 different locations , with depictions of humans painted in red ochre in six rock shelters . The similar occurrence of rock paintings and rock engravings is very rare . 
 The hunter @-@ gatherers made most of the iconic engravings and probably all the paintings . The carvings represent animals such as rhinoceroses , elephants , ostriches and giraffes as well as depictions of human and animal footprints . Some of the figures , most prominently the " Lion Man " — a lion with an extremely long rectangular kinked tail ending in a six @-@ toed <unk> — depict the transformation of humans into animals . This transformation and the depiction of animals together with their tracks make it likely that they were created as part of shamanist rituals . The more simplistic perception that they only show hunter @-@ gatherers ' attempts to acquire food is now thought to be naïve . 
 Engravings of animals that certainly never occurred in this area , like a sea lion , penguins , and possibly flamingos indicate that the hunter @-@ gatherers might have had contact with the coast more than 100 km ( 62 mi ) away . A modern archaeological survey led by Sven <unk> questions these descriptions of Scherz ' initial investigation and describes the not easily recognisable fauna as " strange animals " — rough work of animals , possibly giraffe , that did occur at Twyfelfontein . 
 The Khoikhoi herders produced the geometric imagery , probably depicting herder groups . They are also the creators of the more worldly indentations in that area that served as grinding hollows and game boards . Some of the stones bear marks from use as gong stones ; they make unusual sounds when hit . 
 = = Archaeology = = 
 The archaeological name of the site is Twyfelfontein 534 . It is subdivided into 15 smaller sites as described by Scherz in 1975 . Objects from the site include a variety of stone tools made mostly from quartzite . Type and shape of these tools indicate not only the use on rock but also the prevalence of wood and leather working . Artwork such as pendants and beads from ostrich eggshell fragments have been found at several places . Of the items of daily use charcoal and bone fragments have been excavated as well as undecorated pottery fragments , although the pottery might have originated from early farmers rather than the Stone Age culture that produced the rock art . 
 The archaeological value of the site does not compare with its importance as rock art collection . The findings do , however , support the shamanist origin of the engravings because food remains from the site proved to be bones of small antelope , rock <unk> and even lizards rather than the large species depicted . 
 = = Site protection and recognition = = 
 On 15 Aug 1952 the area was declared a National Monument by the South @-@ West African administration . Despite its early recognition , the site was left unguarded until 1986 when the entire area was declared a nature reserve . As a result , many of the petroglyphs were damaged or removed . Additionally , visitors have left their own graffiti on the sandstone slabs . 
 Under Namibian legislation , the site is protected under Section 54 of the National Heritage Act . In 2007 , UNESCO approved Twyfelfontein as Namibia 's first World Heritage Site as one of the largest concentrations of rock petroglyphs in Africa . The organisation recognised " a coherent , extensive and high quality record of ritual practices relating to hunter @-@ gather communities [ ... ] over at least two millennia " ( criterion iii ) , and " links between ritual and economic practices in the apparent sacred association of the land adjacent to an aquifer " according to criterion V of the cultural selection criteria . Twyfelfontein was Namibia 's only World Heritage Site until 2013 when the Namib Sand Sea was listed . 
 To achieve having the site listed by UNESCO , the government of Namibia defined a buffer zone of 91 @.@ 9 km2 ( 35 @.@ 5 sq mi ) to protect the visual setting . In the 0 @.@ 6 km2 ( 0 @.@ 2 sq mi ) core site , grazing is restricted and the establishment of tourism facilities is prohibited . Although Twyfelfontein is regarded as " generally intact " , the Twyfelfontein Country Lodge within the " <unk> " ( Place of Ceremonies ) rock engraving site in the buffer zone is of concern to UNESCO , who stated " This has severely compromised the integrity of the rock engravings in this area . " The hiking trail allowed visitors unsupervised access and is seen as running too close to many of the rock @-@ art sites . Site management has , however , improved since applying for World Heritage status , particularly with regards to visitor management ; unsupervised hiking is no longer allowed . 
 = = = Literature = = = 
 <unk> , Sven . " Rock Art of Twyfelfontein , Namibia , Africa . Twyfelfontein Site Report " . Bradshaw Foundation . Retrieved 4 Aug 2010 . 
 Scherz , Ernst @-@ Rudolf ( 1975 ) . <unk> in Südwest @-@ Afrika . Teil II : Die <unk> im <unk> Südwest @-@ <unk> [ Rock Art in South @-@ West Africa . Volume II : The engravings in north @-@ western South @-@ West Africa ] ( in German ) . Cologne : <unk> Verlag . ISBN 978 @-@ 3 @-@ 412 @-@ <unk> @-@ 3 . 
 <unk> , Peter ( 2014 ) . <unk> <unk> Namibia ( in German ) . Frankfurt a . M. : Africa Magna Verlag . ISBN 978 @-@ 3 @-@ <unk> @-@ 39 @-@ 4 . 
 = Evermore ( band ) = 
 Evermore are a band originally from Feilding , New Zealand , now based in Melbourne , Australia . The band consists of Jon ( guitar , vocals , album production ) , and Peter ( keyboards , bass , vocals ) and Dann Hume ( drums , guitar , vocals ) . The band have released three platinum @-@ selling albums , Dreams ( 2004 ) , Real Life ( 2006 ) and Truth of the World : Welcome to the Show ( 2009 ) and a self @-@ titled greatest hits album including three new songs . They have been nominated for seven ARIA Awards , and have won two Vodafone New Zealand Music Awards . They have won the APRA Silver Scroll songwriting award , and the Channel V Oz Artist of the Year Award . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Evermore started in 1999 consisting of brothers Jon , Peter , and Dann . Jon was born in Australia , while Peter and Dann were born in New Zealand . The three were raised and home @-@ schooled in Feilding , Manawatu . The brothers were introduced to music at a young age by their parents , and frequently listened to their record collection . The name " Evermore " was taken from the Led Zeppelin song " The Battle of Evermore " in 1999 . Jon says the trio 's parents were highly supportive of them taking up music , stating " they always wanted us to do something creative ... Nothing was too risky . " In 2012 , youngest brother Dann took a break from playing drums with Evermore to pursue his own singing and production career . He supported the Lisa Mitchell tour in 2012 as <unk> . 
 = = = Rise to fame ( 2000 – 2002 ) = = = 
 In 2000 , Evermore entered <unk> with Richard Higham , who played bass guitar in the band at the time . The band won the competition , and used the prize money to help fund their studio , Red Sky Studio . 
 Evermore 's first EP , Slipping Away , was released on 1 December 2002 , with only 300 copies pressed . However , the EP received regular airplay on Triple J , and was thus able to garner the band some attention . Their next EP , the Oil & Water EP , released 13 January 2003 resulted in the band 's first concert tour , again supported by Triple J. My Own Way EP , the band 's third EP , was released on 15 September 2003 , after which the band toured with American band Brad . 
 In August 2003 , Evermore appeared on the cover of New Zealand Musician in New Zealand , following success in " Project <unk> " – a promotion by radio station <unk> to gain awareness for up @-@ and @-@ coming bands . 
 = = = Dreams ( 2003 – 2006 ) = = = 
 Dreams , Evermore 's debut studio album , was released on 27 September 2004 in Australia . It peaked at number fifteen on the ARIA albums chart , and number thirty on the RIANZ albums chart . Three singles were released from the album ; " It 's Too Late " , " For One Day " , and " Come to Nothing " ; which charted moderately . The three singles were featured on the New Zealand and Australian promos of The O.C. , with " It 's Too Late " ultimately appearing on the show . A remixed version of " It 's Too Late " with Dirty South , titled " It 's Too Late ( Ride on ) " , was also released , and appeared on numerous compilation albums . 
 On Dreams , Evermore worked with producer Barrett Jones ( Nirvana , Foo Fighters , Whiskeytown ) , who was introduced to the band by Brad on their past tour . The band 's Red Sky Studio in Feilding was flooded in February 2004 , so the band relocated to Seattle for recording . 
 Dreams differed to Evermore 's earlier " retro @-@ sounding , riff @-@ based pop @-@ rock " works , and instead contained a more " spacious " sound according to Jon . He said he drew inspiration and was influenced by Silverchair and Muse , as well as Pink Floyd . Jon also noted that the band initially wanted to create a concept album , but stated that " we sort of had to tone it back a bit , because we wanted to make a double album " . <unk> reviewer Eleanor Goodman described Dreams as " clear rather than grungy , soulful rather than angsty " . 
 The band released The Lakeside Sessions Vol . 1 , an iTunes @-@ exclusive live acoustic EP on 20 December 2005 . 
 = = = Real Life ( 2006 – 2008 ) = = = 
 Evermore 's second album , Real Life , was released on 8 July 2006 by Warner . The album peaked at number five on the ARIA albums chart and number two on the RIANZ albums chart , spending over half a year in both . It was also certified platinum in Australia . Four singles were released from the album ; " Running " , " Light Surrounding You " , " Unbreakable " , and " Never Let You Go " . Of these , " Light Surrounding You " charted best , and became Evermore 's first number one single . 
 Real Life was initially recorded on the Central Coast of New South Wales , where the band spent three months . Production moved to Easton , Maryland for an additional three months , and continued recording with producer John Alagía . Following recording and production , the album was mixed by Tom Lord @-@ Alge ( blink @-@ 182 ) . 
 The album 's release was followed by a tour of New Zealand and Australia that began in September and October with support acts Bob Evans , The Vagrant City Scandal . In June 2006 , Evermore opened for another band who trace their own start a decade ago , also coming from New Zealand to gain world fame in Melbourne . Thus , they found themselves as the opening act for Split Enz at the Rod Laver Arena in Melbourne . On 17 November 2006 , Evermore performed at a charity concert : the Make Poverty History Concert in Melbourne , playing " Stand by Me " . Early in 2007 , the band played at the Big Day Out , as well as at the 21st Australian Scout Jamboree and on 29 April they appeared at the 2007 MTV Australia Video Music Awards to perform " Light Surrounding You " . 
 = = = Truth of the World : Welcome to the Show ( 2008 – 2009 ) = = = 
 The band 's third album Truth of the World : Welcome to the Show was released on 20 March 2009 and debuted at number 14 on the ARIA albums chart . The album was preceded by two singles ; the first , " Between The Lines " , was released as a free download from the band 's website on 10 November 2008 . The second single , " Hey Boys and Girls ( Truth of the World <unk> ) " , was released on 3 February 2009 . It peaked at number 5 on the New Zealand charts and number 4 on the Australian charts . Their single " Can You Hear Me ? " was released to radio on 11 May , but did not chart . 
 Truth of the World is a concept album about trash media , political propaganda , advertising and infotainment . It was recorded at the band 's own studio in Melbourne over a period of 18 months . 
 In July and August 2009 , Evermore supported Pink during the Funhouse Tour in Ireland and on the second half of the Australian leg of the tour . After the successful Australian tours in support of Truth of the World : Welcome to the Show and support of the pop artist Pink on her Funhouse Tour , the singer was impressed enough to invite the band to perform as main support act for her upcoming European tour . The band released a self @-@ titled greatest hits album on 12 March in Australia and New Zealand , which included the single " Underground " , which did not chart . 
 = = = Follow the Sun ( 2010 – present ) = = = 
 After completing a major tour of Australia and Europe as opening act for superstar Pink early 2010 , the band took some time out of the spot light , stating on their official website and blog that they were currently writing and recording their next studio album . The band took 2011 as an opportunity to build a new recording studio , now named , The Stables Recording Studio , in regional Victoria , using it to record new material . In early 2011 the band took a portable recording studio on an elaborate round world writing trip . 
 The result of this was on the 12 October 2012 when they released their fourth studio album Follow the Sun . The first single , the title track ' Follow the Sun ' , was used by HBO America in a major end of year promotion for the station and also featured in the worldwide trailer for DreamWorks Animation 's The <unk> . Two Australia headline tours were to follow in 2012 and 2013 as well as support for Maroon 5 's Australian leg of their worldwide Overexposed Tour and Matchbox Twenty Australian North Tour with INXS . 
 = = Members = = 
 Jon Hume - vocals , guitars , percussion , production , ( 1999 – present ) piano , ukulele , drums ( 2012 – present ) 
 Peter Hume - bass guitar , keyboards , piano , vocals , ( 1999 – present ) mandolin , ukulele , guitar ( 2012 – present ) 
 Dann Hume - drums , percussion , vocals , ( 1999 @-@ 2012 ) guitars , piano ( 2006 @-@ 2012 ) 
 = = Discography = = 
 = = Awards and nominations = = 
 = = = ARIA Awards = = = 
 = = = Vodafone New Zealand Music Awards = = = 
 = = = Other awards = = = 
 = = = = Won = = = = 
 2005 MTV Australia Awards , Supernova Breakthrough Act for Dreams 
 2005 APRA Silver Scroll Award for " It 's Too Late " . 
 2007 Channel V Oz Artist of the Year . 
 = = = = Nominated = = = = 
 2005 Jack Awards , Best Live Newcomer . 
 2006 APRA Silver Scroll Award for " Running " . 
 2009 The New Zealand sweets as Choice awards 
 2010 APRA Awards , Most Played Australian Work and Rock Work of the Year for " Hey Boys and Girls ( Truth of the World <unk> ) " . 
 2013 APRA Rock Work of the Year 
 = Antonio Luna = 
 Antonio Luna de San Pedro y <unk> San Ignacio ( 29 October 1866 – 5 June 1899 ) , an Ilocano born in Manila , was a Filipino general who fought in the Philippine – American War . 
 Regarded as one of the fiercest generals of his time , he succeeded Artemio <unk> as Chief of Staff of the Armed Forces of the Philippines . He sought to apply his background in military science to the fledgling army . A sharpshooter himself , he organized professional guerrilla soldiers later to be known as the " Luna Sharpshooters " and the " Black Guard " . His three @-@ tier defense , now known as the Luna Defense Line , gave the American troops a hard campaign in the provinces north of Manila . This defense line culminated in the creation of a military base in the Cordillera . 
 Despite his commitment to discipline the army and serve the Republic which attracted the admiration of people , his temper caused some to abhor him . His efforts were not without recognition during his time , for he was awarded the Philippine Republic Medal in 1899 . He was also a member of the Malolos Congress . Besides his military studies , Luna also studied pharmacy , literature and chemistry . 
 = = Family background = = 
 Antonio Luna was born on 29 October 1866 in Calle <unk> ( <unk> Street ) , Binondo ( now part of San Nicolas ) , Manila . He was the youngest of seven children of Joaquín Luna de San Pedro y Posadas ( 1829 – 1891 ) , from <unk> , Ilocos Norte , and Spanish <unk> <unk> <unk> San Ignacio y <unk> ( 1836 – 1906 , from Luna , La Union ( formerly <unk> ) . His father was a traveling salesman of the government tobacco monopoly . The tobacco monopoly was formally established in 1782 . After their family moved to Manila in 1861 , his father became a merchant in Binondo . 
 = = = Siblings = = = 
 His older brother , Juan , was an accomplished painter who studied in the Madrid Escuela de Bellas Artes de San Fernando . His <unk> garnered one of the three gold medals awarded in the Madrid <unk> Nacional de Bellas Artes in 1884 . Another brother , José , became a doctor . Yet another brother , Joaquín , fought with Antonio in the Philippine @-@ American War , and later served as governor of La Union from 1904 to 1907 . Joaquín would also serve as senator from 1916 to 1919 . His three other siblings were <unk> , Manuel , and Remedios . 
 = = Education = = 
 At the age of six , Luna initially learned reading , writing , and arithmetic from a teacher known as Maestro <unk> . He also memorized the Doctrina Christiana , believed to be the first book printed in the Philippines . The title of the work literally means " Christian Doctrine " , and thus the primary goal of the book was to propagate Christian teaching across the Philippine archipelago . The book consists of 38 leaves and 74 pages of text in Spanish , Tagalog transliterated into roman letters , and Tagalog in its original <unk> script , under a woodcut of Saint Dominic , with the verso originally blank , although in contemporary versions bears the manuscript inscription , " <unk> en dos reales " , signed by Juan de Cuellar . After a syllabary comes the basic prayers : the Lord 's Prayer , Hail Mary , Credo , and the Salve Regina . Following these are Articles of Faith , the Ten Commandments , Commandments of the Holy Church , Sacraments of the Holy Church , Seven Mortal Sins , Fourteen Works of Charity , and points on Confession and Catechism . 
 After his education under Maestro <unk> , he studied at the Ateneo Municipal de Manila , where he received a Bachelor of Arts degree in 1885 . He went on to study literature and chemistry at the University of Santo Tomas , where he won first prize for a paper in chemistry titled Two Fundamental Bodies of Chemistry ( Dos <unk> <unk> de la <unk> ) . He also studied pharmacy . Meanwhile , his background on swordsmanship , fencing , and military tactics came from his studies under Don Martin Cartagena , a major in the Spanish Army . In addition , he acquired skill to become a sharpshooter . Upon the invitation of his elder brother Juan in 1890 , Antonio was sent by his parents to Spain . There he acquired a licentiate ( at Universidad de Barcelona ) and doctorate ( at Universidad Central de Madrid ) . 
 = = = Scientific achievements = = = 
 Luna was active as a researcher in the scientific community . After receiving his doctorate in 1893 , he published a scientific treatise on malaria entitled On <unk> Pathology ( El <unk> del <unk> ) , which was favorably received in the scientific community . He then went to Belgium and France , and worked as assistant to Dr. <unk> at the Pasteur Institute and to Dr. <unk> . In recognition of his ability , he was commissioned by the Spanish government to study tropical and communicable diseases . In 1894 , he returned to the Philippines where he took part in an examination to determine who would become the chief chemist of the Municipal Laboratory of Manila . Luna came in first and won the position . 
 = = Propaganda Movement = = 
 In Spain , he became one of the Filipino expatriates who mounted the Propaganda Movement and wrote for La Solidaridad , headed by <unk> <unk> . He wrote a piece titled Impressions which dealt with Spanish customs and idiosyncrasies under the pen @-@ name " Taga @-@ <unk> " . Also , like many of the Filipino liberals in Spain , Luna joined the Masonry where he rose to being Master Mason . 
 He and his brother Juan also opened the Sala de Armas , a fencing club , in Manila . When he learned of the underground societies that were planning a revolution and was asked to join , he scoffed at the idea and turned down the offer . Like other Filipino émigrés involved in the Reform Movement , he was in favor of reform rather than revolution as the way towards independence . Besides affecting their property , the proponents of the Reform Movement saw that no revolution would succeed without the necessary preparations . Nevertheless , after the existence of the Katipunan was leaked in August 1896 , the Luna brothers were arrested and jailed in Fort Santiago for " participating " in the revolution . His statement concerning the revolution was one of the many statements used to abet the laying down of death sentence for José Rizal . Months later , José and Juan were freed but Antonio was exiled to Spain in 1897 , where he was imprisoned at the <unk> Modelo de Madrid . 
 His more famous and yet controversial brother , Juan , who had been pardoned by the Spanish Queen Regent Maria Christina of Austria herself , left for Spain to use his influence to intercede for Antonio in August 1897 . Soon enough , Antonio 's case was dismissed by the Military Supreme Court and he was released . 
 Luna , repenting for his blunder during the end of the first phase during Philippine Revolution , which ended at the Pact of Biak @-@ na @-@ Bato , then prepared himself for the second phase . Upon his release in December 1897 , Luna studied field fortifications , guerrilla warfare , organization , and other aspects of military science under Gerard Leman , who would later be the commanding general of the fortress at Liège . He also read extensively about the discipline when he was at the Ateneo de Madrid . The second phase of the revolution began with the return of Emilio Aguinaldo to Cavite in 1898 . Upon arriving in Hong Kong , he was given a letter of recommendation to Aguinaldo and a revolver by Felipe Agoncillo . He returned to the Philippines in July 1898 . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Luna courted Nellie Boustead , a woman who was also courted by José Rizal , in the period between 1889 – 1891 . Boustead was reportedly infatuated with Rizal . In a party held by Filipinos , a drunk Antonio Luna made unsavory remarks against Nellie Boustead . This prompted Rizal to challenge Luna into a duel . However , Luna apologized to Rizal , thus averting a duel between the compatriots . 
 There are urban legends that persist to the present concerning Luna diverting millions of pesos from the Republic 's treasury , particularly from Ilocos and Pampanga , to the hometown of his alleged sweetheart , Ysidra Cojuangco . Ysidra was the aunt of Jose Cojuangco , father of Corazon Aquino . Luna 's wealth was rumored to have been entrusted to Ysidra , resulting in the latter becoming one of the richest women in the Philippines by 1900 . However , there were no recorded comments or printed insinuations of Luna 's financial impropriety from anti @-@ Luna figures of the Aguinaldo government during and immediately after the Philippine – American War . 
 = = Philippine – American War = = 
 = = = Prior to the war = = = 
 Luna was one of the first to see action in Manila on 13 August 1898 , when the Americans landed troops in Intramuros . Since June 1898 , Manila had been completely surrounded by the revolutionary troops . Colonel Luciano San Miguel occupied Mandaluyong ; General Pío del Pilar , Makati ; General Mariano <unk> , <unk> ; Colonel Enrique Pacheco , <unk> , <unk> , and Caloocan . General Gregorio del Pilar marched through <unk> , taking Tondo , <unk> , and <unk> ; <unk> cleared <unk> and Paco , and held Ermita and Malate . Luna thought the Filipinos should enter Intramuros to have joint occupation of the walled city . But Aguinaldo , heeding the advice of General Wesley Merritt and Commodore ( later Admiral ) George Dewey , whose fleet had moored in Manila Bay , sent Luna to the trenches where he ordered his troops to fire on the Americans . After the chaos following the American occupation , at a meeting in Ermita , Luna tried to complain to American officers about the disorderly conduct of their soldiers . 
 To silence Luna , Aguinaldo appointed him as Chief of War Operations on 26 September 1898 , and assigned the rank of brigadier general . In quick succession , he was made the Director or Assistant Secretary of War and Supreme Chief of the Republican Army on 28 September , arousing the envy of the other generals who were fighting since the first phase of the Revolution . Meanwhile , Luna felt that bureaucratic placebos were being thrown his way , when all he wanted was to organize and discipline the enthusiastic but ill @-@ fed and ill @-@ trained troops into a real army . 
 On 15 September 1898 , the Malolos Congress , the constituent assembly of the First Philippine Republic , was convened in <unk> Church . Luna would be one of the elected representatives , and was narrowly defeated by Pedro Paterno as President of the Congress with a vote of 24 – 23 . 
 Seeing the need for a military school , in October 1898 , Luna established a military academy at Malolos , known as the Academia Militar , which was the precursor of the present Philippine Military Academy . He appointed Colonel Manuel Bernal <unk> , a mestizo who was formerly lieutenant serving the Civil Guard , as superintendent . He recruited other mestizos and Spaniards who had fought in the Spanish army during the 1896 Revolution for training . However , the academy had to be suspended indefinitely by March 1899 due to the outbreak of the Philippine – American War . 
 A score of veteran officers became teachers at his military school . Luna devised two courses of instruction , planned the reorganization , with a battalion of <unk> and a cavalry squadron , set up an inventory of guns and ammunition , arsenals , using convents and town halls , quartermasters , lookouts and communication systems . He built trenches with the help of his chief engineer , General Jose Alejandrino , and had his brother Juan design the school 's uniforms ( the Filipino <unk> ) . He also insisted on strict discipline over and above clan armies and regional loyalties , which prevented coordination between various military units . Envisioning one united army for the Republic , clan armies and regional loyalties presented a lack of national consciousness . It was also a condition that the Spanish utilized to keep the native contingent of their armed forces within check . Soldiers of one region were used to fight revolts in other regions . 
 Convinced that the fate of the infant Republic should be a contest for the minds of Filipinos , Luna turned to journalism to strengthen Filipino minds with the ideas of nationhood and the need to fight the Americans . He decided to publish a newspaper , " La Independencia . " This four @-@ page daily was filled with articles , short stories , patriotic songs and poems . The staff was installed in one of the coaches of the train that ran from Manila to Pangasinan . The paper came out in September 1898 , and was an instant success . A movable feast of information , humor , and good writing , 4 @,@ 000 copies were printed , which was more than all the other newspapers in circulation put together . 
 When the Treaty of Paris , under which Spain was to cede the Philippines to the United States , was made public in December 1898 , Luna quickly decided to take military action . He proposed a strategy that was designed to trap the Americans in Manila before more of their troops could land by executing surprise attacks ( guerrilla warfare ) while building up strength in the north . If the American forces penetrated his lines , Luna determined that he would wage a series of delaying battles and prepare a fortress in northern Luzon , particularly the Cordillera . This , however , was turned down by the High Command , who still believed that the Americans would grant full independence . 
 = = = Outbreak of the war = = = 
 The Americans gained the time and the opportunity to start hostilities with the Filipinos at the place and time of their choice . On the night of 4 February 1899 , when most of the Filipino generals were at a ball in Malolos to celebrate the success of the American anti @-@ imperialists delaying the ratification of the Treaty of Paris , the Americans staged an incident along the concrete blockhouses in Santa Mesa near the <unk> Bridge . An American patrol fired on Filipino troops , claiming afterwards that the Filipinos had started shooting first . The whole Filipino line from Pasay to Caloocan returned fire and the first battle of the Filipino @-@ American War ensued . Two days later , in response to the incident , the US Senate voted for annexation . In doing so , the conflict became the war of conquest , occupation and annexation that Luna , Mabini , and others had predicted and about which they had warned Aguinaldo and his generals previously . 
 Luna , after receiving orders from Aguinaldo , rushed to the front lines from his headquarters at Polo ( present @-@ day Valenzuela City ) and led three companies to La Loma to engage General Arthur MacArthur 's forces . Fighting took place at Marikina , Caloocan , Santa Ana , and Paco . The Filipinos were subjected to a carefully planned attack with naval artillery , with Dewey 's US fleet firing from the Manila Bay . Filipino casualties were high , amounting to around 2 @,@ 000 killed and wounded . Luna personally had to carry wounded officers and men to safety ; of these rescues , the most dramatic was that of Commander José Torres Bugallón . After being hit by an American bullet , Bugallón had managed to advance another fifty meters before he was seen by Luna to collapse by the side of the road . As the Americans kept up their fire on the road , Luna had to gather an escort of around 25 men to save Bugallón , who Luna declared was equivalent to 500 men . Surviving the encounter , Luna tried to encourage Bugallón to live and gave the latter an instant promotion to lieutenant colonel . However , Bugallón died thereafter . 
 On 7 February , Luna issued a detailed order to the field officers of the territorial militia . Containing five specific objects , it began " by virtue of the barbarous attack upon our army on February 4 , " and ended with " war without quarter to false Americans who wish to enslave us . Independence or death ! " The order labeled the US forces " an army of drunkards and thieves " in response to the continued bombardment of the towns around Manila , the burning and looting of whole districts , and the raping of Filipino women by US troops . 
 When Luna saw that the American advance had halted , mainly to stabilize their lines , he again mobilized his troops to attack La Loma on February 10 . Fierce fighting ensued but the Filipinos were forced to withdraw thereafter . Caloocan was left with American forces in control of the southern terminus of the Manila to Dagupan railway , along with five engines , fifty passenger coaches , and a hundred freight cars . After consolidating control of Caloocan , the obvious next objective for American forces would be the Republic capital at Malolos . However , General Otis delayed for almost a month in hopes that Filipino forces would be deployed in its defense . 
 Nevertheless , with their superior firepower and newly arrived reinforcements , the Americans had not expected such resistance . They were so surprised that an urgent cable was sent to General Lawton who was in Colombo , Ceylon ( now Sri Lanka ) , with his troops . Illustrating the concern that the Americans had , the telegram stated , " Situation critical in Manila . Your early arrival great importance . " 
 = = = Luna Sharpshooters and the Black Guard = = = 
 The Luna Sharpshooters was a short @-@ lived unit formed by Luna to serve under the Philippine Revolutionary Army . On 11 February , eight infantrymen , formerly under Captains Márquez and Jaro , were sent by then Secretary of War Baldomero Aguinaldo to Luna , then Assistant Secretary of War . The infantrymen were disarmed by the Americans . So , they journeyed to be commissioned in the regular Filipino army . Seeing their desire to serve in the army , Luna took them in and from their group grew and emerged as the Luna Sharpshooters . The sharpshooters became famous for their fierce fighting and proved their worth by being the usual spearheading unit in every major battle in the Philippine @-@ American War . After the Battle of <unk> on 25 – 27 April 1899 , only seven or eight of them remained in the regular Filipino army . In the Battle of <unk> on 18 December 1899 , an unknown Filipino sharpshooter under the command of General <unk> Gerónimo killed General Henry Ware Lawton , making the latter the highest ranking casualty during the course of the war . 
 Luna also formed other units similar to the sharpshooters . One would be the unit , which would later be named after Bugallón , commanded by Rosendo Simón de <unk> . The unit emerged from a group of ten men wanting to volunteer in the regular Filipino army . Luna , still thinking of the defeat at the Battle of Caloocan , sent the men away at first . However , he soon changed his mind and decided to give the men an initiation . After taking breakfast , he ordered a subordinate , Colonel <unk> , to prepare arms and ammunition for the ten men . Then , the men boarded a train destined towards <unk> , which was American @-@ held territory . After giving orders to the men , he let them go and watched them with his telescope . The men , succeeding their mission , eventually returned unharmed . Admiring their bravery , he organized them into a guerrilla unit of around 50 members . This unit would see action in the Second Battle of Caloocan . 
 Another unit would be the Black Guard , a 25 @-@ man guerrilla unit under a certain Lieutenant García . García , one of Luna 's favorites , was a modest but brave soldier . His unit was tasked to approach the enemy by surprise and quickly return to camp . Luna had admired García 's unit very much that he wanted to increase their size . However , García declined the offer . He believed that a larger force might undermine the efficiency of their work . Jose Alejandrino , the chief army engineer and one of Luna 's aides , stated that he never heard of García and his unit again after Luna 's resignation on February 28 . 
 = = = Further operations during the war = = = 
 A Filipino counterattack began at dawn on 23 February . The plan was to employ a pincer movement , using the battalions from the North and South , with the sharpshooters ( the only professionally trained troops ) at crucial points . The <unk> or <unk> inside Manila would start a great fire to signal the start of the assault . Troops directly under Luna 's command were divided into three : the West Brigade under General Pantaleon García , the Center Brigade under General Mariano <unk> , and the East Brigade under General <unk> Gerónimo . Luna even requested the battle @-@ hardened Tinio Brigade from Northern Luzon , under the command of General Manuel Tinio . It had more than 1 @,@ 900 soldiers . However , Aguinaldo gave only ambiguous answers and the Tinio Brigade was unable to participate in the battle . It was only partly successful because of two main reasons . Firstly , some of the successful Filipino sectors ran low on ammunition and food , and were thus forced to withdraw to Polo . Secondly , Luna failed to relieve the Kapampangan militia , already past their prime , when the battalion from Kawit , Cavite , refused to replace the former , saying that they had orders to obey only instructions directly from Aguinaldo . Such insubordination had become quite common among the Filipino forces at that time as most of the troops owed their loyalty to the officers from their provinces , towns or districts and not to the central command . As a result , the counterattack soon collapsed , and Luna placated himself by disarming the Kawit Battalion . 
 Luna , however , proved to be a strict disciplinarian and his temper alienated many in the ranks of the common soldiers . An example of this occurred during the Battle of <unk> , wherein Luna ordered General Tomás Mascardo to send troops from Guagua to strengthen the former 's defenses . However , Mascardo ignored orders by Luna insisting that he was going to <unk> to undertake an " inspection of troops " . Another version of Mascardo 's reasoning emerged and it was probably that which reached Luna . This version was that Mascardo had left to visit his girlfriend . Luna , infuriated by Mascardo 's actions , had decided to detain him . However , Major Hernando , one of Luna 's aides , tried to placate the general 's anger by convincing Luna to push the case to President Aguinaldo . Aguinaldo complied to detain Mascardo for twenty @-@ four hours . Upon returning to the field , however , the Americans had broken through his defenses at the <unk> River , forcing Luna to withdraw despite his heroic action to defend the remaining sectors . 
 Luna resigned on 1 March , mainly in resentment for the rearmament of the Kawit Battalion as the Presidential Guard . Aguinaldo hesitantly accepted the resignation . As a result , Luna was absent from the field for three weeks , during which the Filipino forces suffered several defeats and setbacks . One such defeat would be at the Battle of <unk> River on 27 March . Receiving the depressing reports from the field through his La Independencia correspondents , Luna went to Aguinaldo and asked to be reinstated with more powers over all the military heads , and Aguinaldo promoted him to Lieutenant General and agreed making him Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief of all the Filipino forces in Central Luzon ( Bulacan , Tarlac , Pampanga , Nueva Ecija , Bataan , Zambales ) . 
 The Luna Defense Line was planned to create a series of delaying battles from Caloocan to Angeles , Pampanga , as the Republic was constructing a guerrilla base in the Mountain Province . The base was planned to be the last stand headquarters of the Republic in the case the Americans broke through the Defense Line . American military observers were astonished by the Defense Line , which they described as consisting of numerous bamboo trenches stretching from town to town . The series of trenches allowed the Filipinos to withdraw gradually , firing from cover at the advancing Americans . As the American troops occupied each new position , they were subjected to a series of traps that had been set in the trenches , which included bamboo spikes and poisonous reptiles . 
 Earlier in the month of May 1899 , Luna almost fell in the field at the Battle of Santo Tomas . Mounted on his horse , Luna then charged into the battlefield leading his main force in a counterattack . As they advanced , the American forces began firing upon them . Luna 's horse was hit and he fell to the ground . As he recovered , Luna realized that he had been shot in the stomach , and he attempted to kill himself with his revolver to avoid capture . He was saved , though , by the actions of a Filipino colonel named Alejandro <unk> who , having seen Luna fall , rode towards the general to save him . Despite being heavily wounded in one of his legs and an arm , with his remaining strength <unk> carried Luna away from battle to the Filipino rear . Upon reaching safety , Luna realized that his wound was not very deep as most of the impact of the bullet had been taken by a silk belt full of gold coins that his parents had given him , which he had been wearing . As he left the field to have his wounds tended , Luna turned over the command to General <unk> Concepción , the Filipino commander of the nearby town of Angeles . Meanwhile , in recognition of his work , Luna was awarded with the Philippine Republic Medal . By the end of May 1899 , Colonel Joaquín Luna , one of Antonio 's brothers , warned him that a plot had been concocted by " old elements " or the autonomists of the Republic ( who were bent on accepting American sovereignty over the country ) and a clique of army officers whom Luna had disarmed , arrested , and / or insulted . Luna shrugged off all these threats , reiterating his trust for Aguinaldo , and continued building defenses at Pangasinan where the Americans were planning a landing . 
 = = Assassination and the aftermath = = 
 On 2 June 1899 , Luna received two telegrams – one asked for help in launching a counterattack in San Fernando , Pampanga ; and the other said to be signed by Aguinaldo himself , ordered him to go to the new capital at Cabanatuan , Nueva Ecija to form a new cabinet . In his jubilation , Luna wrote <unk> <unk> , military commander of Cebu , to stand firm in the war . Luna set off from <unk> , Pangasinan ; first by train , then on horseback , and eventually in three carriages to Nueva Ecija with 25 of his men . During the journey , two of the carriages broke down , so he proceeded with just one carriage with Colonel Francisco Román and Captain Eduardo Rusca , having earlier shed his cavalry escort . On 4 June , Luna sent a telegram to Aguinaldo confirming his arrival . Upon arriving at Cabanatuan on 5 June , Luna alone , proceeded to the headquarters to communicate with the President . As he went up the stairs , he ran into an officer whom he had previously disarmed for insubordination , and an old enemy whom he had once threatened with arrest for favoring American autonomy . The former was Captain Pedro Janolino , commander of the Kawit Battalion . The latter was Felipe <unk> , Minister of Foreign Affairs and a member of the Cabinet . He was told that Aguinaldo had left for San Isidro in Tarlac . Enraged , Luna asked why he had not been told the meeting was cancelled . 
 Both exchanged heated words as he was about to depart , a rifle shot in the plaza rang out . Still outraged and furious , Luna rushed down the stairs and met Janolino , accompanied by some elements of the Kawit Battalion . Janolino swung his bolo at Luna , wounding him in the head . Janolino 's men fired at Luna , while others started stabbing him , even as he tried to fire his revolver at one of his attackers . He staggered out into the plaza where Román and Rusca were rushing to his aid , but they too were set upon and shot , with Román being killed and Rusca severely wounded . As he lay dying , Luna uttered " Cowards ! Assassins ! " . Luna received more than 30 wounds . He was hurriedly buried in the churchyard , after which Aguinaldo relieved Luna 's officers and men from the field , including General <unk> Concepción , whose headquarters in Angeles , Pampanga Aguinaldo besieged the same day Luna was assassinated . 
 Immediately after Luna 's death , confusion reigned on both sides . The Americans even thought Luna had taken over to replace Aguinaldo . Luna 's death was publicly declared only by 8 June , and a circular providing details of the event released by 13 June . While investigations were supposedly made concerning Luna 's death , not one person was convicted . Later , General Pantaleon García said that it was he who was verbally ordered by Aguinaldo to conduct the assassination of Luna at Cabanatuan . His sickness at the time prevented his participation in the assassination . Aguinaldo would be firm in his stand that he had nothing to do with the assassination of Luna . 
 The death of Luna , the most brilliant and capable of the Filipino generals at the time , was a decisive factor in the fight against the American forces . Despite mixed reactions on both the Filipino and American sides on the death of Luna , there are people from both sides who nevertheless developed an admiration for him . General Frederick Funston , who received the credit of capturing Aguinaldo at Palanan , Isabela , stated that Luna was the " ablest and most aggressive leader of the Filipino Republic . " For General James Franklin Bell , Luna " was the only general the Filipino army had . " General Robert Hughes remarked that " with the death of General Luna , the Filipino army lost the only General it had . " Meanwhile , Apolinario Mabini , former Prime Minister and Secretary of Foreign Affairs , had this to say : " If he was sometimes hasty and even cruel in his resolution , it was because the army had been brought to a desperate situation by the demoralization of the soldiers and the lack of ammunitions : nothing but action of rash courage and extraordinary energy could hinder its dissolution . " Of the Filipino armed forces organized during Luna 's service in the army , Major General Henry Ware Lawton commented , " Filipinos are a very fine set of soldiers , far better than the Indians ... Inferior in every particular equipment and supplies , they are the bravest men I have ever seen ... I 'm very well impressed with the Filipinos ! " This statement Lawton later recanted . 
 Subsequently , Aguinaldo suffered successive , disastrous losses in the field , as he retreated northwards . On 13 November 1899 , Aguinaldo decided to disperse his army and begin conducting a guerrilla war . General José Alejandrino , one of Luna 's remaining aides , stated in his memoirs that if Luna had been able to finish the planned military camp in the Mountain Province and had shifted to guerrilla warfare earlier as Luna had suggested , Aguinaldo might have avoided having to run for his life in the Cordillera Mountains . For historian Teodoro Agoncillo , however , Luna 's death did not directly contribute to the resulting fall of the Republic . In his book , Malolos : The Crisis of the Republic , Agoncillo stated that the loss of Luna showed the existence of a lack of discipline among the regular Filipino soldiers and it was a major weakness that was never remedied during the course of the war . Also , soldiers connected with Luna were demoralized and as a result eventually surrendered to the Americans . On 23 March 1901 , Aguinaldo was captured in Palanan , Isabela , by American forces . He was later brought to Manila , and made to pledge allegiance to the United States on 1 April . 
 = = Commemoration = = 
 The famous University of the Philippines Diliman Sunken Garden was named as General Antonio Luna Parade Grounds . 
 The municipalities of General Luna , Quezon and General Luna , Surigao del Norte are named after Luna . 
 General Antonio Luna Avenue , a two @-@ lane national road in San Mateo , Rizal , was named after Luna . 
 General Luna Street , stretching from Intramuros to Paco in the Manila , was named after Luna . Formerly Calle Real del Palacio ( Intramuros ) and Calle <unk> ( Ermita @-@ Paco ) , the whole stretch was integrated into one and was renamed Calle Gen. Luna during the American period . 
 General Antonio Luna , a barrio in Mayorga , Leyte , is named after Luna . 
 In 1951 , the first postwar Philippine fifty peso bill featured a portrait of Luna until it was replaced in 1969 by a portrait of Sergio <unk> . 
 In 1958 , a stamp featuring Luna was released on his 92nd birth anniversary . 
 After the 102nd anniversary of Luna 's birth ( 1968 ) , former President Ferdinand Marcos delivered a speech about the general . He said that Luna 's guerrilla tactics preceded that of China 's Mao Zedong and Vietnam 's Vo Nguyen Giap and Ho Chi Minh . 
 In 1999 , the second and last of the General Emilio Aguinaldo @-@ class patrol vessels was commissioned by the Philippine Navy . It was named BRP Gen. Antonio Luna ( PG @-@ 141 ) , after the general of the same name . 
 A monument of Luna was erected at Plaza Lucero in Cabanatuan , Nueva Ecija . 
 Manila Mayor Alfredo Lim led a commemorative program on Luna 's 144th birth anniversary ( 2010 ) . 
 A Philippine military base , Camp Antonio Luna in <unk> , Bataan , was named after the general . It is currently the Office of the Director of the Government Arsenal . 
 General Luna is a Filipino rock band named after Luna . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 Portrayed by Christopher de Leon in the 2012 film , El Presidente . 
 Portrayed by JC <unk> in the 2014 TV series , Ilustrado . 
 Portrayed by Marc Abaya and John <unk> in the 2015 film , <unk> Luna ( Lead Role ) . 
 = = = Books = = = 
 Agoncillo , Teodoro . History of the Filipino People ( 8th ed . ) . Quezon City : C & E Publishing . 
 Agoncillo , Teodoro ( 1974 ) . Introduction to Filipino History . 
 Agoncillo , Teodoro ( 1960 ) . Malolos : The Crisis of the Republic . ISBN 978 @-@ 971 @-@ 542 @-@ 096 @-@ 9 . 
 Jimenez , Ruby Rosa A. ( 2015 ) . <unk> Luna : The History behind the Movie . Mandaluyong City : Anvil Publishing , Inc . 
 Jose , <unk> R. ( 1972 ) . The Rise and Fall of Antonio Luna . Solar Pub . Corporation . ISBN 978 @-@ 971 @-@ 17 @-@ 0700 @-@ 2 . 
 Kalaw , Maximo M. ( 1927 ) . " The development of Philippine politics " . Oriental commercial . Retrieved 2008 @-@ 03 @-@ 22 . 
 Linn , Brian McAllister ( <unk> ) . The Philippine War , 1899 – 1902 . University Press of Kansas . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 7006 @-@ 1225 @-@ 3 . 
 Linn , Brian McAllister ( <unk> ) . The U.S. Army and Counterinsurgency in the Philippine War , 1899 – 1902 . UNC Press Books . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 8078 @-@ <unk> @-@ 4 . 
 Ocampo , Ambeth ( 2010 ) . Looking Back . Anvil Publishing , Inc . ISBN 978 @-@ 971 @-@ 27 @-@ 2336 @-@ 0 . 
 = Mycena overholtsii = 
 Mycena overholtsii , commonly known as the snowbank fairy helmet or fuzzy foot , is a species of fungus in the family Mycenaceae . The mushrooms produced by the fungus are relatively large for the genus Mycena , with convex grayish caps up to 5 cm ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) in diameter and stems up to 15 cm ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) long . The gills on the underside of the cap are whitish to pale gray , and initially closely spaced before becoming well @-@ spaced at maturity after the cap enlarges . The mushrooms are characterized by the dense covering of white " hairs " on the base of the stem . M. overholtsii is an example of a snowbank fungus , growing on well @-@ decayed conifer logs near snowbanks , during or just after snowmelt . Formerly known only from high @-@ elevation areas of western North America , particularly the Rocky Mountain and Cascade regions , it was reported for the first time in Japan in 2010 . The edibility of the mushroom is unknown . M. overholtsii can be distinguished from other comparable species by differences in location , or spore size . 
 = = History and naming = = 
 The species was first described by mycologists Alexander H. Smith and Wilhelm Solheim in 1953 , on the basis of specimens collected in the Medicine Bow Mountains of Albany County , Wyoming . The specific epithet honors the early 20th @-@ century American mycologist Lee Oras Overholts . It is commonly known as the " snowbank fairy helmet " , or " fuzzy foot " , although it shares the latter name with <unk> <unk> and Xeromphalina <unk> . M. overholtsii has been given the Japanese name <unk> . 
 = = Description = = 
 Mycena overholtsii produces some of the largest mushrooms of the genus Mycena . They have caps that are 1 @.@ 5 to 5 cm ( 0 @.@ 6 to 2 @.@ 0 in ) in diameter , and convex in shape , developing an umbo ( a central protrusion resembling a nipple ) in maturity . The cap surface is smooth , moist , and marked with radial striations . The caps are somewhat hygrophanous , and depending on age and state of hydration , range in color from brown or grayish @-@ brown , to dark or bluish @-@ gray . The mushroom flesh is thin and watery , with a light gray color . 
 The gills have an adnate , adnexed , or shallowly decurrent attachment to the stem , and are initially closely spaced before becoming well @-@ spaced at maturity . They have a whitish to pale gray color , and will stain gray when they are bruised . There are three or four tiers of lamellulae ( short gills that do not extend fully from the cap margin to the stem ) interspersed between the gills . The stem is 4 to 15 cm ( 1 @.@ 6 to 5 @.@ 9 in ) long by 0 @.@ 3 to 1 cm ( 0 @.@ 1 to 0 @.@ 4 in ) thick , and tapers upward so that the stem apex is slightly thinner than the base . It can be straight or curved , has cartilage @-@ like flesh , and is hollow in maturity . When growing on soft , well @-@ decayed wood , the stem often penetrates deeply into the substrate . The stem is pinkish @-@ brown in color , and the lower half is tomentose – densely covered with white , woolly hairs . The mushroom has a yeast @-@ like odor and a mild taste ; its edibility is unknown , but it is not considered poisonous . 
 = = = Microscopic characteristics = = = 
 Viewed in deposit , as with a spore print , the spores appear white . Microscopically , the spores are roughly elliptical , sometimes appearing bean @-@ shaped , with dimensions of 5 @.@ 5 – 7 @.@ 0 by 3 @.@ 0 – 3 @.@ 5 µm . They are thin @-@ walled and smooth , and bear an indistinct hilar appendage . The spores are amyloid , meaning they will absorb iodine and turn black to blue @-@ black when stained with Melzer 's reagent . The basidia ( spore @-@ bearing cells ) are four @-@ spored . The cheilocystidia ( cystidia on the gill edge ) , which are scattered and interspersed with basidia , are roughly cylindric to fusoid ( spindle @-@ shaped ) , smooth , hyaline ( translucent ) , and measure 45 – 65 by 2 – 5 @.@ 5 µm . Pleurocystidia ( cystidia on the gill face ) are uncommon , and similar in appearance to the cheilocystidia . The cap cuticle is an ixocutis ( a fungal tissue type in which the hyphae are gelatinous and lie flat ) with mostly smooth hyphae that are 1 @.@ 5 – 3 @.@ 5 µm in diameter . The cap flesh is dextrinoid , meaning it will turn reddish @-@ brown in Melzer 's reagent . Clamp connections are present in the hyphae of M. overholtsii . 
 = = = Similar species = = = 
 Other similar mycenas that grow in clusters on wood include M. maculata and M. galericulata . The fruit bodies of M. maculata often develop red stains as they mature , but this characteristic is inconsistent and cannot be reliably used for identification . Its spores are larger than that of M. overholtsii , measuring 7 – 10 by 4 – 6 µm . M. galericulata is very similar in appearance to M. maculata , but does not undergo reddish staining ; its spores are 8 – 12 by 5 @.@ 5 – 9 µm . Another similar species is M. <unk> , which can be distinguished by its bleach @-@ like odor , an eastern North American distribution , fruiting season during summer and autumn , and small spores measuring 4 – 5 by 2 @.@ 5 – 3 µm . 
 = = Habitat and distribution = = 
 This species is sometimes found singly , but more often in clusters on well @-@ rotted conifer logs and stumps ( often Douglas @-@ fir ) near melting snowbanks , or sometimes in moist snow chambers formed by receding snow . Cool nighttime temperatures reduce the snowmelt rate , and help ensure that spores released by the mushroom will be dispersed into the soil . The mushroom is common in western North America , particularly the Pacific Northwest , the Rocky Mountains and the Cascade mountains . It has been reported in four US states : South Dakota , California , Washington and Wyoming , but is not known in Oregon . It is also found in western Canada . The mushroom is restricted to areas with minimum elevations of 1 @,@ 000 m ( 3 @,@ 300 ft ) . In 2010 , it was reported growing in the boreal coniferous forests of Hokkaido , Japan , in plantations of Sakhalin fir ( Abies <unk> ) , as well as in natural forests dominated by both Sakhalin fir and <unk> spruce ( Picea <unk> ) . In North America , the mushroom usually appears between March and July ; Japanese collections were made in May . The fruiting period can be prolonged , especially in areas with heavy snowfall , or at high elevations where the snowmelt is delayed . 
 = Voalavo = 
 Voalavo is a genus of rodent in the subfamily Nesomyinae , found only in Madagascar . Two species are known , both of which occur in mountain forest above 1250 m ( 4100 ft ) altitude ; Voalavo gymnocaudus lives in northern Madagascar and Voalavo antsahabensis is restricted to a small area in the central part of the island . The genus was discovered in 1994 and formally described in 1998 . Within Nesomyinae , it is most closely related to the genus Eliurus , and DNA sequence data suggest that the current definitions of these two genera need to be changed . 
 Species of Voalavo are small , gray , mouse @-@ like rodents , among the smallest nesomyines . They lack the distinctive tuft of long hairs on the tail that is characteristic of Eliurus . The tail is long and females have six mammae . In Voalavo , there are two glands on the chest ( absent in Eliurus ) that produce a sweet @-@ smelling musk in breeding males . In the skull , the facial skeleton is long and the braincase is smooth . The incisive foramina ( openings in the front part of the palate ) are long and the bony palate itself is smooth . The molars are somewhat hypsodont ( high @-@ crowned ) , though less so than in Eliurus , and the third molars are reduced in size and complexity . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 A specimen of the genus was first collected in 1994 in Anjanaharibe @-@ Sud , northern Madagascar . The genus was named Voalavo in 1998 by Michael Carleton and Steven Goodman , with a single species , the type Voalavo gymnocaudus , restricted to the Northern Highlands of Madagascar . The generic name Voalavo is a Malagasy word for " rodent " . A second species , Voalavo antsahabensis , was named by Goodman and colleagues in 2005 from the region of Anjozorobe in the Central Highlands . The two Voalavo species are closely related and quite similar , but differ in various subtle morphological characters ( mainly measurements ) and by 10 % in the sequence of the mitochondrial gene cytochrome b . 
 Voalavo is part of the subfamily Nesomyinae , which includes nine genera that are all restricted to Madagascar . Before the discoveries of Monticolomys ( published in 1996 ) and Voalavo ( 1998 ) , all of the known genera within Nesomyinae were quite distinct from each other , so much so that phylogenetic relationships among them long remained obscure . Like Monticolomys ( closely related to Macrotarsomys ) , however , Voalavo shows clear similarities to another nesomyine genus , Eliurus . In their description of Voalavo , Carleton and Goodman argued that , although closely related , Eliurus and Voalavo form separate monophyletic groups ; but a 1999 molecular phylogenetic study by Sharon Jansa and colleagues , who compared cytochrome b sequences among nesomyines and other rodents , found that Voalavo gymnocaudus was more closely related to Eliurus grandidieri than to other species of Eliurus . This finding called into question the separate generic status of Voalavo . However , tissue samples of Eliurus petteri , a species that is thought to be closely related to E. grandidieri , were not available , so this species could not be included in the study . Data from nuclear genes also supports the relationship between V. gymnocaudus and E. grandidieri , but E. petteri remains genetically unstudied and the taxonomic issue has not been resolved . 
 Molecular phylogenetic analysis of nuclear DNA supports a close relationship between Eliurus , Voalavo , and two other nesomyine genera , Gymnuromys and Brachytarsomys . These genera are more distantly related to the other nesomyine genera and even more distantly to the other subfamilies of the family Nesomyidae , which occur in mainland Africa . 
 = = Description = = 
 Voalavo is a small rodent resembling a mouse with gray fur . Species of the genus are among the smallest known nesomyines , close in size only to Monticolomys koopmani . In terms of external morphology , Voalavo is barely different from Eliurus ; fur coloration patterns , general morphology of the feet , and number of mammae ( six ) are all the same in both genera . However , all species of Eliurus have a pronounced tuft of elongated hairs at the tip of the tail , a feature that is absent in Voalavo , although the latter does have slightly longer hairs near the tip . The tail is longer than the head and body . Relative tail length in V. gymnocaudus ( 136 % of head and body length ) is comparable to that of the longest @-@ tailed species of Eliurus , E. grandidieri and E. petteri , but V. antsahabensis has a somewhat shorter tail . Furthermore , the pads of the feet are larger in Eliurus , and specifically , the <unk> pad ( located at the middle of the tarsus ) is circular and fairly small in Voalavo , but longer and larger in Eliurus . On the chest , Voalavo species have a gland that produces a sweet @-@ swelling musk in breeding males ; this gland is absent in Eliurus . Unlike all other nesomyines but Brachyuromys , Voalavo lacks an entepicondylar foramen , an opening on the humerus ( upper arm bone ) . 
 The skull of Voalavo also resembles that of Eliurus , with a long facial skeleton , an hourglass @-@ shaped interorbital region ( between the eyes ) , and a smooth interorbital region and braincase , without ridges or shelves . Other shared characteristics include an essentially featureless bony palate , without many pits and ridges , and a broad mesopterygoid fossa ( the opening behind the palate ) . In other characteristics , Voalavo resembles some but not all species of Eliurus . For example , the length of the incisive foramina matches the maximum seen in Eliurus species ( in this case , in Eliurus majori and Eliurus penicillatus ) . The back margin of the incisive foramen is rounded in V. antsahabensis , but angular in V. gymnocaudus . The two species also differ in the shape of the suture ( dividing line ) between the maxillary and palatine bones , which is straight in V. antsahabensis , but more curved in V. gymnocaudus . The capsular process , a projection at the back of the mandible ( lower jaw ) that houses the root of the lower incisor , is indistinct in Voalavo , a feature it shares with E. grandidieri , E. majori , and E. petteri , but not the other species of Eliurus . 
 Other features of the skull distinguish the two genera . The tegmen tympani , the roof of the tympanic cavity , is much reduced in Voalavo relative to Eliurus . The subsquamosal fenestrae , openings in the squamosal bone at the back of the skull , are larger in Voalavo than in Eliurus . The zygomatic plate , a plate at the sides of the skull that roots the front part of the zygomatic arches ( cheekbones ) , is narrower in Voalavo , and lacks a clear zygomatic notch ( a notch formed by a projection at the front of the zygomatic plate ) , which is present in Eliurus . Among nesomyines , only Brachytarsomys has a more reduced zygomatic notch . 
 Like Eliurus , Voalavo has moderately high @-@ crowned ( hypsodont ) molars with crowns that consist not of discrete cusps , but of transverse laminae ( plates ) that generally lack longitudinal connections . However , Eliurus molars are slightly more hypsodont than those of Voalavo . The third upper and lower molars are smaller relative to the second molars in Voalavo than in Eliurus . Perhaps as a consequence , the upper third molar lacks discrete laminae in Voalavo , and the lower third molar has only two laminae ( three in Eliurus ) . There are three roots under each upper molar and two under each lower . 
 = = Distribution and ecology = = 
 Both species of Voalavo occur in montane forest . V. gymnocaudus is restricted to the Northern Highlands , where it is found at 1 @,@ 250 – 1 @,@ 950 m ( 4 @,@ 100 – 6 @,@ 400 ft ) altitude in Marojejy and Anjanaharibe @-@ Sud . The known range of V. antsahabensis is restricted to the vicinity of Anjozorobe at 1 @,@ 250 – 1 @,@ 425 m ( 4 @,@ 101 – 4 @,@ 675 ft ) altitude . Although most of the 450 km ( 280 mi ) between the ranges of the two species consists of montane forest — suitable habitat for Voalavo — the area is bisected by the low @-@ lying <unk> Window , which may serve as a barrier between the two species . Subfossil remains of Voalavo have been found in the former Mahajanga Province ( northwestern Madagascar ) . 
 Very little is known of the ecology of Voalavo antsahabensis , but V. gymnocaudus is thought to be largely terrestrial with some scansorial ( tree @-@ climbing ) abilities . It is active during the night , bears up to three young per litter , and probably eats fruits and seeds . Various parasites have been recorded on V. gymnocaudus , including mites and Eimeria . 
 = = Conservation status = = 
 Because Voalavo antsahabensis has a small range that is threatened by the practice of slash @-@ and @-@ burn agriculture ( known in Madagascar as tavy ) , it is listed on the IUCN Red List as " Endangered " . Although V. gymnocaudus also has a small range , it is mostly within protected areas , and this species is therefore listed as " Least Concern " . 
 = Oregon Public Library = 
 The Oregon Public Library is located in Oregon , Illinois , United States , the county seat of Ogle County . The building is a public library that was constructed in 1909 . Prior to 1909 , Oregon 's library was housed in different buildings , none of which were designed to house a library . The library was built using a grant from wealthy philanthropist Andrew Carnegie . The grant was obtained after Oregon 's citizens voted to change Oregon 's library from a city library to a township library . The building was completed by 1908 but the library did not begin operation until 1909 . 
 The Oregon Library was designed by Chicago architects Pond and Pond . The Ponds were members of the Eagle 's Nest Art Colony , founded by Lorado Taft , and their association with Taft and the colony led them to design the library . Their design was influenced by the colony , and a combination of two architectural styles , Classical Revival and the Arts and Crafts movement . The completed library included a second floor art gallery to which members of Eagle 's Nest donated works for a permanent collection . The gallery 's collection includes 64 paintings and sculptures as well as a Currier and Ives lithograph collection appraised at US $ 700 @,@ 000 . The Oregon Public Library was listed on the U.S. National Register of Historic Places in 2003 , three years later it was included as a contributing property in a historic district that received the National Register designation . 
 = = History = = 
 While the library building dates to the early 20th century the move toward intellectual outreach in Oregon started years before . The first Oregon library was organized in 1872 , though it had no building of its own . Before the library had its own building , library books were stored in a drug store and then in the County Treasurer 's office . Eventually the Oregon Library occupied rented office space in the First National Bank building . This situation persisted until 1905 when Oregon voters voiced their collective opinion on the library 's future . 
 The citizens of Oregon were faced with a dilemma in 1905 : either allow Oregon 's library to remain , truly , Oregon 's city library , or , by referendum , allow Oregon 's library to make the shift into a township library . This change would allow the library one distinct advantage ; it would qualify the library for a grant from Andrew Carnegie for the construction of a new building . Initially , Carnegie promised US $ 7 @,@ 000 for the new library but once voters approved the change the grant amount was increased to $ 10 @,@ 000 . The grant , aside from requiring the library to hold " township library " status , required a site to be selected prior to the grant application process ; a site , at the corner of Oregon 's Jefferson and Third Streets , was selected . 
 = = Art gallery = = 
 = = = Eagle 's Nest influence = = = 
 Even before the library was built , members of the Eagle 's Nest Art Colony were pushing for the new building to include a second @-@ story art gallery . The colony , founded in 1898 by sculptor Lorado Taft , was based on the bluffs flanking the east bank of the Rock River , overlooking Oregon . Later in Carnegie 's philanthropy his secretary James Bertram laid out strict requirements , including requirements which discouraged multiple uses for Carnegie libraries . Another requirement stipulated that Bertram approve library plans prior to grant approval or construction . The Oregon library , however , was constructed before Bertram 's requirements were published and includes the gallery . 
 The art colony at Eagle 's Nest was populated by Chicago artists , all members of the Chicago Art Institute or the University of Chicago art department , who gathered in Ogle County to escape the summer heat of Chicago . Two of the charter members of the art colony were the Chicago architects , Allen and Irving Kane Pond , who designed the Oregon Public Library building . It was the Ponds ' association with the Eagle 's Nest Art Colony that led them to design the library . 
 The building was constructed after the Carnegie grant approval , and its first use came in October 1908 by Leon A. <unk> , a colony member , for an exhibition of 100 paintings . The library proper did not begin providing its services until 1909 . The colony tried to contribute to area culture by requiring its members to hold art shows , lectures , and other exhibitions throughout the early 20th century . With the library complete it began to play a role in those exhibitions . Hamlin Garland , a 1921 Pulitzer Prize recipient for literature , spoke at the Oregon library while he was a member of the Eagle 's Nest Colony . 
 = = = Collections = = = 
 The gallery on the second floor of the library building was not formally dedicated until July 4 , 1918 . That date marked the beginning of the library 's permanent collection , which started with additions from members of the Eagle 's Nest Colony . Members donated twelve statues , twenty oil paintings , and four portraits to the permanent collection of the art gallery . One of the statues in the collection is a 4 @-@ foot ( 1 @.@ 2 @-@ m ) plaster study of The Eternal Indian by Lorado Taft . It was completed in 1908 as he prepared to create the Black Hawk Statue at the original site of the Eagle 's Nest Colony . The entire permanent collection consists of 32 paintings and 32 sculptures from Eagle 's Nest artists . A citizen left the library a Currier and Ives lithograph collection which contains 46 Currier and Ives lithographs and 14 lithographs by Nathaniel Currier . The two collections have been appraised at over $ 700 @,@ 000 . 
 In addition to the substantial historical art collection held by the library gallery the collection consists of works by local artists . One Oregon resident has donated artwork from the annual Grand Detour Art Show regularly . Other area residents have donated pieces as well . In all , the library holds about 30 contemporary works by local artists . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 The library is designed with an eye toward late 19th century and early 20th century movements in architecture . While it contains many elements common to Classical Revival architecture the building 's asymmetry and playfully creative style are distinctly characteristic of the Arts and Crafts Movement . The building was designed by the Chicago architectural firm of Pond and Pond and is constructed of buff colored brick . Red brick belt coursing and accents contrast the buff colored brick on the majority of the facade . The two @-@ story Oregon Public Library has a full brick basement and approximately 5 @,@ 500 foot ² ( 511 m ² ) of floor space . 
 The building , though based on Classical architecture is not entirely a Classical building . Its rooflines , main entrance , and the placement and style of the windows are all asymmetrical in nature , a hallmark of the Arts and Crafts style . Its simple massing and noticeable lack of ornamentation throughout the structure connects the building closely to the Arts and Crafts movement . This influence is seen most prominently on the building 's interior . 
 Though Arts and Crafts is specifically regarded as a movement within architecture , as opposed to a full @-@ blown style , there are elements that are considered typical to buildings designed in the style . Examples include , dark , heavy woodwork and very simple ornamentation . The Oregon Public Library contains functional elements associated with that movement . Dark woodwork is found throughout the building , first in the stairwell to the gallery and its balusters and newel posts and then in the four @-@ panel wooden interior door . The ceilings are coffered and have exposed wooden beams . Also located in the interior is a large 1909 wooden floor clock , a built @-@ in storage cabinet , and two wooden fuse boxes that all evoke the Arts and Crafts movement . 
 The building does demonstrate elements of Classical Revival architecture but they are minimal and concentrated around the front entrance . Below the front entrance hood there are two stone pilasters and a stone lintel , as well as relief work adorning the pediment ; leading to the front entrance are seven concrete stairs . The entire entry facade is a gable @-@ front , temple style design and on the library 's east wing there are stone @-@ capped modified buttresses . Each of these elements demonstrates the Classical Revival style . 
 = = Significance = = 
 The Oregon Public Library was added to the U.S. National Register of Historic Places on May 9 , 2003 for its architectural and educational significance . The building represents a good example of the Arts and Crafts movement in architecture . As a Carnegie library , the Oregon Public Library satisfied the requirements laid out for listing on the National Register in the Illinois Carnegie Libraries Multiple Property Submission . When the Oregon Commercial Historic District was listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 2006 the Oregon Library was included as a contributing property . The library building is considered the most " outstanding " of the Craftsman or Arts and Crafts buildings within the historic district boundaries . 
 = Food in England = 
 Food in England is a 1954 book by the social historian Dorothy Hartley . It is both a cookery book and a history of English cuisine . It was acclaimed on publication ; the contemporary critic Harold Nicolson described the book as a classic . It has remained in print ever since . 
 The book provides what has been called an idiosyncratic and a combative take on the history of English cooking . The book is unusual as a history in not citing its sources , serving more as an oral social history from Hartley 's own experiences as she travelled England as a journalist for the Daily Sketch , interviewing " the last generation to have had countryside lives sharing something in common with the Tudors . " The book strikes some readers as principally a history , but it consists mainly of recipes . Some of these such as <unk> pie are old @-@ fashioned , but all are practical recipes that can be cooked . 
 = = Context = = 
 Dorothy Hartley 's mother was from <unk> , near Llangollen in North Wales , where the family owned quarries and property . In 1933 Hartley moved to a house in <unk> , where she lived for the rest of her life . It was there that she began work on the book for which she is best known , Food in England , leading to its publication in 1954 . 
 = = Book = = 
 = = = Approach = = = 
 Most of the chapters address aspects of English food , whether types of food such as meat , eggs , fungi , and bread , or ways of dealing with food such as salting , drying and preserving . Some chapters such as ' Elizabethan households ' are explicitly historical . Every chapter , however , is also a history . For example chapter V , Meat , discusses " a rather interesting mediaeval miracle " and illustrates a traditional " Colonial Travelling Meat Safe of Mosquito Net " . The text switches repeatedly from instructions ( " To prepare mutton fat for a mutton <unk> , melt it over a bowl of hot water " ) to historical asides ( " Mutton fat was used in the mountain @-@ sheep districts for the same purposes as suet or goose @-@ grease in the valleys " ) . Many of the processes are distinctly old @-@ fashioned ; thus , Hartley describes <unk> , dredging , and frothing , switching between the past and present tenses : " Dredging . This was done between <unk> . Thus you dredge with powders or spices to give flavour , or with acid juices , or chopped herbs , which the pouring fat washes down into the crevices of the roasting meat . " 
 A substantial part of the text consists of recipes . In the Meat chapter , these begin with recipes for beef , including " Baron of Beef " , " Sirloin ( Norman @-@ French , sur loin ) " , " Rib of Beef " , " Boiled Beef with Carrots " , and " Oat Pudding , for Boiled Beef " . Each recipe has a heading in italics ; some have an illustration , drawn by Hartley , or else a quotation or proverb . There is no list of ingredients . The first paragraph often describes the dish or its ingredients . Thus for sirloin , she advises " This is the best beef joint and should be roasted . Never have the undercut taken out ... " . The instructions are given in a few paragraphs : " Let the sirloin be well hung ; dust it lightly with dry mustard , pepper and brown flour to give a crisp crust ; bed the fat end well under the lean undercut , and secure in place with string or carefully placed skewer . Roast carefully , <unk> frequently . " 
 Where quantities or cooking temperatures have to be specified , these are included in the instructions ; otherwise , matters are left to the cook 's discretion . Thus in " Spice Sauce ( sauce for fish or flesh ) " , Hartley directs " Take a quart of sharp cider , .... some mace , a few cloves , some lemon peel , horse @-@ radish root sliced , some sweet herbs , 6 <unk> [ shallots ] , 8 anchovies , 3 <unk> of shred red peppers ... " 
 For baking , where exact instructions are needed , these are given in Imperial units , but the oven temperature and timing are again left mainly to the cook 's experience . Thus for " Bath Buns " , she instructs : " Make a light dough with 1 / 2 lb. of flour , 1 / 4 lb. of butter or lard , 1 oz. of castor sugar , 2 eggs , 1 / 2 pint of lukewarm milk , and about 1 @.@ 2 oz. of yeast . Rub butter into flour ; blend ... Set it to rise in a warm place , ... bake lightly and thoroughly till golden brown . " 
 = = = Contents = = = 
 Food in England has 27 chapters : 
 There is a bibliography and an index . 
 = = = Editions = = = 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Contemporary = = = 
 On its publication in 1954 , the book was received with immediate acclaim , and has remained in print ever since . The Manchester Guardian called it " fascinating … unusually readable " ; Harold Nicolson in The Observer said , " it will become a classic " , though he made gentle fun of the combative Englishness of Hartley 's culinary pronouncements . 
 = = = Modern = = = 
 The Sunday Times , reviewing the seventh edition of the book , wrote " For food scholarship at its best see Dorothy Hartley 's robust , idiosyncratic , irresistible Food in England ... As packed with diverse and fascinating information as a Scotch bun with fruit , this untidy bundle of erudition is held together by the writer 's huge enjoyment of her subject , her immense curiosity about everything to do with the growth , preparation , preservation and eating of food in this country since the Middle Ages . " 
 The cultural historian Panikos Panayi describes the book as a tour de force , seminal , and richly illustrated ; and he notes that Food in England is partly a recipe book , partly a history . He contrasts it favourably with Philip Harben 's Traditional Dishes of Britain , published a year earlier , which he criticises as accepting the " stereotypical stalwarts of British food " , whereas Hartley rightly accepts ( Panayi quotes ) that " foreign dishes ... like the foreigners , become ' naturalised English ' " . 
 The historian of food Bee Wilson , rereading " this endearing work " 58 years on for The Guardian , wrote that she had remembered it as a history book and an epic account of English cooking , " interspersed with recipes . " She was therefore " startled " to find that almost the whole of the text is " taken up with practical recipes and techniques , with very little historical narrative . " Wilson finds the book as Hartley explicitly intended , an untidy kitchen , " a warm friendly place " . For Hartley , writes Wilson , " the past is not a foreign country " , but ever @-@ present . She notes that Hartley " announces dogmatically " that English cooking is old @-@ fashioned " because we like it that way . " Wilson finds " Hartley 's devotion to archaic recipes such as <unk> pie and <unk> ... mildly crazed . " But whether mad or not , Hartley " approaches the cuisine of the past with the humour and sharpness of a journalist . " 
 The Historic Royal Palaces curator Lucy Worsley presented a BBC film , ' Food in England ' , The Lost World of Dorothy Hartley , on 6 November 2015 . Worsley , writing in The Telegraph , calls Food in England " the definitive history of the way the English eat . " She describes the book as " laden with odd facts and folklore ... a curious mixture of cookery , history , anthropology and even magic , ... with her own strong and lively illustrations . " She admits it is not a conventional history , since Hartley breaks " the first rule of the historian : to cite her evidence . She wasn 't fond of footnotes . " In a year of filming Hartley 's places and people she knew , Worsley discovered that " my frustration with her technique as historian was misplaced . " Hartley had travelled continually to gather materials for her weekly Daily Sketch column , sometimes sleeping rough " in a hedge . " The work is thus effectively , Worsley argues , an oral history , as Hartley interviewed " the last generation to have had countryside lives sharing something in common with the Tudors . " The emphasis on local , seasonal food chimes well , Worsley suggests , with the modern trend for just those things . 
 The Museum of English Rural Life at the University of Reading curates the Dorothy Hartley collection . It cites the Oxford Dictionary of National Biography 's entry on Hartley , calling Food in England " Arguably her best work , and the one for which she will be remembered " . It calls the book " as full of magic and potions as any medieval herbal . " 
 = Halo.Bungie.Org = 
 Halo.Bungie.Org , often referred to as HBO , is a fansite created in 1999 by Claude Errera ( known online by the pseudonym " Louis Wu " ) and two associates as a news site for the Bungie video game Halo : Combat Evolved . The site was started in 1999 as <unk> based on the project 's development name before it was called Halo . The site now covers all Halo properties ( including those associated with 343 Industries ) and posts game news , rumors , and fan art and videos . 
 Halo.Bungie.Org grew to become the most widely read Halo fansite , receiving about 600 @,@ 000 page views a day in 2007 . While his cofounders have ceased involvement in the site , Errera continues to update all sections of the site with the occasional assistance of others . Aside from contests , Halo.Bungie.Org also coordinates charitable endeavors and fundraisers . 
 = = History = = 
 Claude Errera and several friends first created <unk> for developer Bungie 's other video games , namely Marathon , in 1998 . Before <unk> , Errera had been involved in other Bungie @-@ related sites . Halo.bungie.org began as " <unk> " on May 22 , 1999 , after information about what was to become Halo was leaked soon after the Electronic Entertainment Expo in 1999 . 
 While Errera had used his real name for previous Bungie sites , his cofounder wanted to remain anonymous . At the time , little was known about the new project other than that it was set on a ringworld — a massive ring @-@ shaped habitat . As such , the site founders took aliases from Larry Niven 's novel Ringworld ; Errera assumed the name " Louis Wu " , after the novel 's protagonist . Though the universe 's Halo megastructures turned out to have more in common with Iain Banks ' Orbitals , the aliases stuck and it was too late to change them . The first Halo trailer was unveiled in July 1999 , and the site was renamed . Errera and the other founders searched the web for information and provided a place on Halo.bungie.org for fans to discuss and contribute . 
 Over time one member of staff dropped out followed by another shortly after Bungie 's acquisition by Microsoft , leaving Errera the sole webmaster and the main force on the site . Errera says that the only reason he has become known as the " Godfather " of Halo is due his long @-@ term presence in the community . Halo.Bungie.Org is unusual among large non @-@ commercial sites in having no paid advertisements of any kind on any portion of the pages . 
 = = Overview = = 
 Halo.Bungie.Org is the most widely read Halo fansite . In 2007 , it received about 600 @,@ 000 page views a day . The site covers game news and rumors , strategy , fan @-@ made machinima , stories and art , contests and forums . In the site 's early years , it received only a small amount of fan @-@ submitted material , which has ballooned since and made constant site maintenance a challenge . Errera attributes the site 's longevity to the fact that it provided fans with not just Halo news but a place to share their love of the franchise . At a time when there was no easy video sharing via YouTube , Halo.bungie.org posted and categorized Halo films that fans submitted . 
 Each day , Errera reads through the Halo.Bungie.Org forums , looking for interesting items to put on the news page and monitoring comments . He then checks other Halo and gaming @-@ related sites for more news . He also approves fan movies or artwork and updates batches of new submitted content . Errera credits the site 's success to its longevity ; " When you ’ re there from the beginning , and you add new content every day , folks tend to come back , " he said . 
 = = Recognition and charity = = 
 Bungie has a strong relationship with Halo.bungie.org and has called the page the ultimate Halo fansite . Halo.bungie.org is listed as a source on Bungie 's project pages ; Bungie employees frequent the Halo.bungie.org forums , often to point out a new Bungie.net update or answer questions from fans . Halo.bungie.org often receives promotional items from Bungie to give away in various contests . Its administrators and members have been repeatedly quoted in mainstream publications . 
 Errera has been interviewed numerous times by gaming sites such as Microsoft 's Xbox.com and mainstream media organizations such as CBS and the BBC . The site was nominated for IGN 's " best fansite " award in 2005 . 
 Halo.bungie.org has used its notability to conduct several fundraisers for various causes , including raising money for Hurricane Katrina disaster relief . The site 's members took part in a massive effort by the Halo community to raise money , primarily through selling collectible items through eBay auctions . These auctions raised just under $ 11 @,@ 000 for the relief effort . Members of the community also chipped in through personal means ; one member held a charity Xbox live night and raised $ 139 . In 2003 , following news that community member Brian Morden 's cancer had returned , the community decided to set up a donation fund to support him . Although Brian died later that year , the fund became the Brian Morden Memorial Fund . 
 = Final Fantasy Dimensions = 
 Final Fantasy Dimensions , known in Japan as Final Fantasy Legends : Hikari to Yami no Senshi ( ファイナルファンタジー レジェンズ <unk> , Fainaru Fantajī <unk> : Hikari to Yami no Senshi , lit . " Final Fantasy Legends : Warriors of Light and Darkness " ) is a role @-@ playing video game developed by Matrix Software and published by Square Enix for mobile devices . 
 Similar to Final Fantasy IV : The After Years , it was initially released as an episodic game , with the first two installments released on September 9 , 2010 on the Japanese i @-@ mode distribution service , and December 9 , 2010 for the EZweb distribution service . The game was remade for the iOS and Android platforms and released internationally in August 2012 . 
 Final Fantasy Dimensions features 2D graphics and a Job Change System similar to that of Final Fantasy V. Its battle system is a variation of the Final Fantasy series 's Active Time Battle system . The game follows two parties , the Warriors of Light and the Warriors of Darkness , with players controlling up to five party members at a time in battle , on their quest to reform their shattered world and foil the dark plans of the Avalon Empire . 
 In 2014 , a second game in the Final Fantasy Legends series was announced for smartphones , titled Final Fantasy Legends : Toki no <unk> ( ファイナルファンタジー レジェンズ <unk> , lit . " Final Fantasy Legends : Crystal of Time and Space " ) . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Final Fantasy Dimensions is a role @-@ playing video game , developed in the style of previous 16 @-@ bit Final Fantasy games . The game uses the Active Time Battle system in which a character 's turn are determined by a gauge that fills over time during battle . Once the gauge fills completely from one character , players can choose a command from that specific character . After choosing a command , the gauge fills over again to execute the command . Once the gauge fills again and the command is executed , the gauge empties and repeats the cycle . Similar to Final Fantasy IV : The After Years , the game was released in an episodic format , but players must play through each episode in sequence . Players command a party of five with the party members changing in each episode . 
 The game uses a Job System similar to Final Fantasy V as a base of its battles . The game allows players to change job while still retaining skills that have already been acquired . Job @-@ specific abilities can be learned after crossing a certain amount of AP for the current job given . That learned ability can be set even if the player changes to a different job . Players are limited in how many abilities they can set at a given time . This limit rises as the job 's level rises . The game also has " Fusion Abilities " which players can form by setting combinations of certain abilities . 
 The Jobs available from the beginning for all the eight main characters are Freelancer , Warrior , Monk , Thief , Red Mage , White Mage , Black Mage , and Summoner . Each episode introduces a new Job , which is unlocked after completing the episode . The unlockable jobs for the Warriors of Light are Dragoon , Bard , <unk> , Paladin , and Seer , while the jobs unlocked for the Warriors of Darkness are Ranger , Dark Knight , Dancer , Ninja , and Magus . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Long ago , there was a great world war ended by the efforts of the Avalon Empire , which became the dominant power in the land . The story begins with Sol , Diana , Glaive and Aigis being sent by the King of Lux to investigate a powerful crystal linked to the balance of the world . Simultaneously , Nacht , Alba , Dusk and Sarah are sent by the Avalon Empire to break their treaty with Lux by stealing the same crystal . On the way to the crystal 's shrine , Sol 's party aids a mysterious man called Elgo , who agrees to accompany them to the temple . When the two groups meet within the crystal shrine , the crystal 's guardian spirit attacks them . Upon its guardian 's defeat , the crystal shatters and splits the world into two halves : the " World of Light " , ever in daylight , and the " World of Darkness " in which day never rises . Sol , Aigis , Dusk , and Sarah remain in the first half of the world and become the " Warriors of Light " , with Elgo accompanying them . Nacht , Alba , Diana and Glaive find themselves in the other half and become the " Warriors of Darkness " . Both groups of Warriors travel the split world in search of each other . As they travel , they retrieve the fragments of the crystal , which grant them new abilities and gradually cause the world to reform . They also encounter the Avalon Empire and their four Generals : Vata , <unk> , <unk> , and Styx . All four generals are defeated except for Vata , who decides to aid the Warriors for reasons unknown . In the battle between the Warriors of Light and <unk> aboard an Avalon ship , Elgo seemingly sacrifices himself to save the Warriors of Light . 
 As the two worlds begin to merge , Dusk and Alba reveal their plans to go to the ancient floating city known as Mysidia . Once the Warriors of Light arrive and meet the Elder of Mysidia , Sophia , the Avalon Empire attempt to strike Mysidia with their airship superweapon Heliogabalus . The warriors destroy the ship with the aid of Dr. <unk> , the living doll <unk> , and Barbara and her dragons . Sophia then helps the warriors gain the last remaining crystal in the World of Light within the caves of Mysidia . After gaining the crystal 's ability , Mysidia falls to the ground while simultaneously the Warriors of Darkness are aided by a mysterious man known as The Mask in gaining the last crystal fragment remaining in the World of Darkness . They succeed in gaining the fragment , however The Mask dies . Before his death , he reveals himself to be Elgo 's other half that formed when the world split in two and asks the Warriors of Darkness to take care of his other Half as he dies . After both parties gain the fragments , the split world merges and both parties are reunited , however most of the people in the world have disappeared . Attempting to make a frontal attack to the Avalon Empire , the warriors discover a barrier protecting Avalon and eight gates across the world , linking to a realm called the Rift . Upon entering one of the gates , the warriors encounter a dark sphere in which Sophia explains it is a substance found only in the Rift known as Dark Matter , and that Avalon 's goal is to harvest it for their evil purposes . Vata explains the Avalon Empire is guarding the dark matter across the world with their generals , who have been revived in undead forms . After collecting all eight pieces of the dark matter and defeating the undead generals , the dark matter fuses together , creating a new crystal and revealing that the crystal split the world to protect itself from the Empire 's plans . The crystal then breaks the barrier that was protecting Avalon , allowing the warriors to enter . 
 Upon entering Avalon , they defeat all of the Divine Generals . Once the Warriors attack the Emperor , it is revealed that they were battling with his armor , and that he was never there . After this revelation , a new gate to the Rift opens within Avalon . When the warriors enter the Rift , they encounter Vata , who explains that they are in the void and warns them that , in order for them to proceed , someone must make a sacrifice . As they traverse the void , they encounter the armies of Nil , having to fight the four magical blades of Nil . After defeating the four blades , another gate appears in the Void . Dr. <unk> reports to the warriors that the gates are what is known as " Dark Flow " , and that it is draining the life of the world into Nil , a dark dimension of shadows . Vata attempts to aid the warriors in destroying the Dark Flow by being engulfed by it and attempting to control it . As he is being engulfed by Dark Flow , he reveals he originally was part of a village that Avalon destroyed . He trained to be in the ranks of the generals of Avalon , but when he discovered he could never be a match for them , he gave up on his plans until he discovered the Warriors . Vata fails at the cost of his life , and the Dark Flow remains . The Warriors then enter Dark Flow , leading them to the World of Nil . 
 Coming to the palace at the center of Nil , they encounter the Emperor himself , who is revealed to be Elgo . Elgo explains to the party that he wished to use the crystals to achieve immortality , and predicted that the crystals , sensing his purpose , would split the world hoping to halt his plans . Elgo then utilized the power of Nil to move between the worlds and ensured that the Warriors collect the crystals in effort to restore the world so that he could achieve his goals . The Warriors and Elgo battle , with Elgo using the power of Nil against them . When he is defeated , Elgo loses control of Nil and it mutates him into a dark monster . The Warriors , seeing that Nil will ravage their world unchecked , fight the transformed Elgo and win . As Nil reverses its flow and life is returned to the world , all the Warriors flee , apart from Dusk and Alba , who are presumed dead . Soon however , they are revealed to be alive , saved by the spirits of Vata and the Mask . The game ends with the Warriors reunited , and the world and its crystal restored . 
 = = Development = = 
 The game was developed by the same internal Square Enix team that made Final Fantasy IV : The After Years , which was also initially a game for Japanese cell phones . The game was directed by Toshio Akiyama and produced by Takashi Tokita . Character designs were provided by Akira <unk> while the in @-@ game 2D dot versions were created by Kazuko Shibuya . Takashi Tokita explained the game was meant to transcend the expectations of RPGs in cellphones . The team set the theme of a scenario of creating another game for the SNES . The team also added several references to previous games such as Sarah and Matoya being references to the original Final Fantasy game and Dusk and Alba being reminiscent of Palom and Porom from Final Fantasy IV . When asked about the high pricing for the game , the team explained their reasons stating , " This title offers about 50 hours of gameplay , and we feel that our community can enjoy the contents of this game as much as they would a console title . Also , we have set the price where it is because this title was developed specifically for the mobile platform , as opposed to just being a port of an older console or handheld game . " When developing the smartphone version , Takashi Tokita changed the structure of selling a group of episodes rather than individually . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 Naoshi Mizuta composed the music of Final Fantasy Dimensions with the exception of a number of songs previously composed by Nobuo Uematsu . Naoshi intended to compose the music closer to previous Final Fantasy games such as a solid melody that can be hummed or whistled . Naoshi also made it so that the Light chapters would have different music from the Dark chapters in order to have variation of music between them . A soundtrack for the game titled Final Fantasy Legends : Hikari to Yami no Senshi Original Soundtrack ( ファイナルファンタジー レジェンズ <unk> オリジナル ・ サウンドトラック ) was released digitally in Japan on August 8 , 2011 to celebrate the completion of the game . An EP soundtrack titled Sekai no <unk> from Final Fantasy Legends ( <unk> from FINAL FANTASY <unk> , lit . " The World 's Future from Final Fantasy Legends " ) was also released digitally in Japan on iTunes and mora music store on August 31 , 2012 . The EP contains the arranged ending song with added lyrics featured in the iOS / Android version and being renamed using Katakana . The song was arranged by Hajime Kikuchi with added lyrics performed by Riya of Eufonius . 
 = = = Release history = = = 
 The game was initially hinted when Square Enix trademarked Hikari to Yami no Senshi which was initially believed to be related to Tactics Ogre : Let Us Cling Together . It was announced in Japan as Final Fantasy Legends : Hikari to Yami no Senshi on July 21 , 2010 . The first chapters of the game were first released for iMode phones on September 6 , 2010 , and for EZweb phones on December 9 , 2010 . The rest of the chapters were released approximately once a month since then till August 8 , 2011 for iMode and November 10 , 2011 for EZweb . On Tokyo Game Show of 2011 , the game was announced to be released on iOS and Android with improved graphics and sound , and support for slide @-@ pad controls over the feature phone version . On E3 2012 , the iOS / Android version was announced internationally as Final Fantasy Dimensions also to be released on August 31 , 2012 . Due to technical difficulties , only " Prologue " was released first for the iOS version . All other chapters were purchasable at the in @-@ app shop after upgrading from 1 @.@ 0 @.@ 0 to 1 @.@ 0 @.@ 1 which was available later in the same day . The Android version was released on December 21 , 2012 in its complete form . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The game had received mainly positive reviews . Final Fantasy Dimensions received an aggregated score of 78 on Metacritic based on 10 reviews and 74 @.@ 43 % on GameRankings based on seven reviews . Slide to Play gave it a perfect score of 4 out of 4 stating , " Square Enix has made a truly masterful game here . The story is huge , the characters enjoyable and fun to play , and other than the iffy controls , the game works fantastically well on the touchscreen . The menus in particular are elegantly designed . The music and graphics are even great in creating a world that reminds us that the old and new can coexist , and do so with aplomb " . Justin Davis of IGN criticized the episodic structure of the game however " Players can 't fully explore the game world until they 're almost at the end – over 30 hours in ! " , however also praises the gameplay stating , " What Dimensions lacks in scenario & story flexibility it makes up for with sheer depth and flexibility in its job system . Players can assign any party member to any available job on @-@ the @-@ fly , with more opening up as the story progresses . " Joe Juba of Game Informer praised the gameplay but criticized the lack of fanfare stating , " Despite the fun job system and classic vibe to the combat , Dimensions seems like it was set up to fail . It released to little fanfare at a prohibitive price point for mobile games . " <unk> Eklund of TouchArcade praised the games features stating , " There 's an epic , high fantasy plot with lots of twists , a large cast of characters whose appearance and abilities vary wildly , tons of random combat , lots of leveling @-@ up and abilities to unlock , a gradual opening up of the world , secret items , bonus dungeons , and a lot of looking inside pots and barrels in order to pilfer the worldly goods of the townspeople you run across . " GamesTM praised the game for resembling previous Final Fantasy games . 
 Derek Heemsbergen of RPGFan gave it a mixed review stating , " I 'm grateful that the game was released in English , and while it isn 't everything I hoped it would be , Final Fantasy : Dimensions does enough right to be worth playing . " Nathan Mustafa of <unk> however , criticized the dialogue structure , the lack of animation , and sound of the game stating , " In the end , I cannot reconcile these cheapened portions of the game . I understand it is a port of a ' mobile ' game from Japan , but the quality of the port could have been much better . Had my three key issues with how the game presents itself not been present , I would probably have walked away feeling quite positive about Final Fantasy Dimensions . In its current form , though , I can only give it a middling score . " 
 = Neon = 
 Neon is a chemical element with symbol Ne and atomic number 10 . It is in group 18 ( noble gases ) of the periodic table . Neon is a colorless , odorless , inert monatomic gas under standard conditions , with about two @-@ thirds the density of air . It was discovered ( along with krypton and xenon ) in 1898 as one of the three residual rare inert elements remaining in dry air , after nitrogen , oxygen , argon and carbon dioxide were removed . Neon was the second of these three rare gases to be discovered , and was immediately recognized as a new element from its bright red emission spectrum . The name neon is derived from the Greek word , <unk> , neuter singular form of νέος ( <unk> ) , meaning new . Neon is chemically inert and forms no uncharged chemical compounds . The compounds of neon include ionic molecules , molecules held together by van der Waals forces and clathrates . 
 During cosmic <unk> of the elements , large amounts of neon are built up from the alpha @-@ capture fusion process in stars . Although neon is a very common element in the universe and solar system ( it is fifth in cosmic abundance after hydrogen , helium , oxygen and carbon ) , it is very rare on Earth . It composes about 18 @.@ 2 ppm of air by volume ( this is about the same as the molecular or mole fraction ) , and a smaller fraction in Earth 's crust . The reason for neon 's relative scarcity on Earth and the inner ( terrestrial ) planets is that neon is highly volatile and forms no compounds to fix it to solids . As a result , it escaped from the planetesimals under the warmth of the newly ignited Sun in the early Solar System . Even the atmosphere of Jupiter is somewhat depleted of neon , presumably for this reason . It is also lighter than air , causing it to escape even from Earth 's atmosphere . 
 Neon gives a distinct reddish @-@ orange glow low @-@ voltage neon glow lamps and in high @-@ voltage discharge tubes and neon advertising signs . The red emission line from neon also causes the well known red light of helium – neon lasers . Neon is used in some plasma tube and refrigerant applications but has few other commercial uses . It is commercially extracted by the fractional distillation of liquid air . Since air is the only source , it is considerably more expensive than helium . 
 = = History = = 
 Neon ( Greek <unk> ( <unk> ) , neuter singular form of νέος meaning " new " ) , was discovered in 1898 by the British chemists Sir William Ramsay ( 1852 – 1916 ) and Morris W. Travers ( 1872 – 1961 ) in London , England . Neon was discovered when Ramsay chilled a sample of air until it became a liquid , then warmed the liquid and captured the gases as they boiled off . The gases nitrogen , oxygen , and argon had been identified , but the remaining gases were isolated in roughly their order of abundance , in a six @-@ week period beginning at the end of May 1898 . First to be identified was krypton . The next , after krypton had been removed , was a gas which gave a brilliant red light under spectroscopic discharge . This gas , identified in June , was named neon , the Greek analogue of " novum " , ( new ) , suggested by Ramsay 's son . The characteristic brilliant red @-@ orange color emitted by gaseous neon when excited electrically was noted immediately ; Travers later wrote , " the blaze of crimson light from the tube told its own story and was a sight to dwell upon and never forget . " A second gas was also reported along with neon , having approximately the same density as argon but with a different spectrum – Ramsay and Travers named it <unk> . " 
 However , subsequent spectroscopic analysis revealed it to be argon contaminated with carbon monoxide . Finally , the same team discovered xenon by the same process , in September 1898 . 
 Neon 's scarcity precluded its prompt application for lighting along the lines of Moore tubes , which used nitrogen and which were commercialized in the early 1900s . After 1902 , Georges Claude 's company , Air Liquide , produced industrial quantities of neon as a byproduct of his air liquefaction business . In December 1910 Claude demonstrated modern neon lighting based on a sealed tube of neon . Claude tried briefly to sell neon tubes for indoor domestic lighting , due to their intensity , but the market failed because homeowners objected to the color . In 1912 , Claude 's associate began selling neon discharge tubes as eye @-@ catching advertising signs and was instantly more successful . Neon tubes were introduced to the U.S. in 1923 with two large neon signs bought by a Los Angeles Packard car dealership . The glow and arresting red color made neon advertising completely different from the competition . 
 Neon played a role in the basic understanding of the nature of atoms in 1913 , when J. J. Thomson , as part of his exploration into the composition of canal rays , channeled streams of neon ions through a magnetic and an electric field and measured the deflection of the streams with a photographic plate . Thomson observed two separate patches of light on the photographic plate ( see image ) , which suggested two different parabolas of deflection . Thomson eventually concluded that some of the atoms in the neon gas were of higher mass than the rest . Though not understood at the time by Thomson , this was the first discovery of isotopes of stable atoms . Thomson 's device was a crude version of the instrument we now term a mass spectrometer . 
 = = Isotopes = = 
 Neon is the second lightest inert gas . Neon has three stable isotopes : 20Ne ( 90 @.@ 48 % ) , 21Ne ( 0 @.@ 27 % ) and 22Ne ( 9 @.@ 25 % ) . 21Ne and 22Ne are partly primordial and partly nucleogenic ( i.e. made by nuclear reactions of other nuclides with neutrons or other particles in the environment ) and their variations in natural abundance are well understood . In contrast , 20Ne ( the chief primordial isotope made in stellar nucleosynthesis ) is not known to be nucleogenic or radiogenic ( save for cluster decay production , which is thought to produce only a small amount ) . The causes of the variation of 20Ne in the Earth have thus been hotly debated . 
 The principal nuclear reactions which generate nucleogenic neon isotopes start from <unk> and <unk> , which produce 21Ne and 22Ne , respectively , after neutron capture and immediate emission of an alpha particle . The neutrons that produce the reactions are mostly produced by secondary spallation reactions from alpha particles , in turn derived from uranium @-@ series decay chains . The net result yields a trend towards lower 20Ne / 22Ne and higher 21Ne / 22Ne ratios observed in uranium @-@ rich rocks such as granites . Neon @-@ 21 may also be produced in a nucleogenic reaction , when 20Ne absorbs a neutron from various natural terrestrial neutron sources . 
 In addition , isotopic analysis of exposed terrestrial rocks has demonstrated the cosmogenic ( cosmic ray ) production of 21Ne . This isotope is generated by spallation reactions on magnesium , sodium , silicon , and aluminium . By analyzing all three isotopes , the cosmogenic component can be resolved from magmatic neon and nucleogenic neon . This suggests that neon will be a useful tool in determining cosmic exposure ages of surface rocks and meteorites . 
 Similar to xenon , neon content observed in samples of volcanic gases is enriched in 20Ne , as well as nucleogenic 21Ne , relative to 22Ne content . The neon isotopic content of these mantle @-@ derived samples represents a non @-@ atmospheric source of neon . The 20Ne @-@ enriched components are attributed to exotic primordial rare gas components in the Earth , possibly representing solar neon . Elevated 20Ne abundances are found in diamonds , further suggesting a solar neon reservoir in the Earth . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 Neon is the second @-@ lightest noble gas , after helium . It glows reddish @-@ orange in a vacuum discharge tube . Also , neon has the narrowest liquid range of any element : from 24 @.@ 55 K to 27 @.@ 05 K ( − 248 @.@ 45 ° C to − 245 @.@ 95 ° C , or − 415 @.@ 21 ° F to − 410 @.@ 71 ° F ) . It has over 40 times the refrigerating capacity of liquid helium and three times that of liquid hydrogen ( on a per unit volume basis ) . In most applications it is a less expensive refrigerant than helium . 
 Neon plasma has the most intense light discharge at normal voltages and currents of all the noble gases . The average color of this light to the human eye is red @-@ orange due to many lines in this range ; it also contains a strong green line which is hidden , unless the visual components are dispersed by a spectroscope . 
 Two quite different kinds of neon lighting are in common use . Neon glow lamps are generally tiny , with most operating between 100 and 250 volts . They have been widely used as power @-@ on indicators and in circuit @-@ testing equipment , but light @-@ emitting diodes ( LEDs ) now dominate in those applications . These simple neon devices were the forerunners of plasma displays and plasma television screens . Neon signs typically operate at much higher voltages ( 2 – 15 kilovolts ) , and the luminous tubes are commonly meters long . The glass tubing is often formed into shapes and letters for signage as well as architectural and artistic applications . 
 = = Occurrence = = 
 Stable isotopes of neon are produced in stars . 20Ne is created in fusing helium and oxygen in the alpha process , which requires temperatures above 100 <unk> and masses greater than 3 solar masses . 
 Neon is abundant on a universal scale ; it is the fifth most abundant chemical element in the universe by mass , after hydrogen , helium , oxygen , and carbon ( see chemical element ) . Its relative rarity on Earth , like that of helium , is due to its relative lightness , high vapor pressure at very low temperatures , and chemical inertness , all properties which tend to keep it from being trapped in the condensing gas and dust clouds that formed the smaller and warmer solid planets like Earth . 
 Neon is monatomic , making it lighter than the molecules of diatomic nitrogen and oxygen which form the bulk of Earth 's atmosphere ; a balloon filled with neon will rise in air , albeit more slowly than a helium balloon . 
 Neon 's abundance in the universe is about 1 part in 750 ; in the Sun and presumably in the proto @-@ solar system nebula , about 1 part in 600 . The Galileo spacecraft atmospheric entry probe found that even in the upper atmosphere of Jupiter , the abundance of neon is reduced ( depleted ) by about a factor of 10 , to a level of 1 part in 6 @,@ 000 by mass . This may indicate that even the ice @-@ planetesimals which brought neon into Jupiter from the outer solar system , formed in a region which was too warm to retain the neon atmospheric component ( abundances of heavier inert gases on Jupiter are several times that found in the Sun ) . 
 Neon comprises 1 part in 55 @,@ 000 in the Earth 's atmosphere , or 18 @.@ 2 ppm by volume ( this is about the same as the molecule or mole fraction ) , or 1 part in 79 @,@ 000 of air by mass . It comprises a smaller fraction in the crust . It is industrially produced by cryogenic fractional distillation of liquefied air . 
 On 17 August 2015 , based on studies with the Lunar Atmosphere and Dust Environment Explorer ( LADEE ) spacecraft , NASA scientists reported the detection of neon in the exosphere of the moon . 
 = = Chemistry = = 
 Neon is the first p @-@ block noble gas , and the first element with a true octet of electrons . 
 It is inert : as is the case with its lighter analogue , helium , no strongly bound neutral molecules containing neon have been identified . The ions [ <unk> ] + , [ <unk> ] + , and [ <unk> ] + have been observed from optical and mass <unk> studies . Solid neon clathrate hydrate was produced from water ice and neon gas at pressures 0 @.@ 35 – 0 @.@ 48 GPa and temperatures ca . – 30 ° C. Ne atoms are not bonded to water and can freely move through this material . They can be extracted by placing the clathrate into a vacuum chamber for several days , yielding ice XVI , the least dense crystalline form of water . 
 The familiar Pauling electronegativity scale relies upon chemical bond energies , but such values have obviously not been measured for inert helium and neon . The Allen electronegativity scale , which relies only upon ( measurable ) atomic energies , identifies neon as the most electronegative element , closely followed by fluorine and helium . 
 = = Applications = = 
 Neon is often used in signs and produces an unmistakable bright reddish @-@ orange light . Although tube lights with other colors are often called " neon " , they use different noble gases or varied colors of fluorescent lighting . 
 Neon is used in vacuum tubes , high @-@ voltage indicators , lightning arresters , wave meter tubes , television tubes , and helium – neon lasers . Liquefied neon is commercially used as a cryogenic refrigerant in applications not requiring the lower temperature range attainable with more extreme liquid helium refrigeration . 
 Neon , as liquid or gas , is relatively expensive – for small quantities , the price of liquid neon can be more than 55 times that of liquid helium . Driving neon 's expense is the rarity of neon , which unlike helium , can only be obtained from air . 
 The triple point temperature of neon ( 24 @.@ <unk> K ) is a defining fixed point in the International Temperature Scale of 1990 . 
 = Boys Don 't Cry ( film ) = 
 Boys Don 't Cry is a 1999 American romantic drama film directed by Kimberly Peirce and co @-@ written by Peirce and Andy Bienen . The film is a dramatization of the real @-@ life story of Brandon Teena , an American trans man played in the film by Hilary Swank , who adopts a male identity and attempts to find himself and love in Nebraska but falls victim to a brutal hate crime perpetrated by two male acquaintances . The film also stars Chloë Sevigny , Peter Sarsgaard , Brendan Sexton III , and Alicia Goranson . After reading about the murders while in college , Peirce researched the case and worked on the screenplay for almost five years . Peirce was inspired by All She Wanted , a 1996 book about the killing written by Aphrodite Jones ; however , she chose to focus the story of the film on the relationship between Brandon and his girlfriend Lana Tisdel . Many actors sought the lead role during a three @-@ year casting process before Swank was cast . Swank was chosen because her personality seemed similar to Teena 's . Sevigny initially auditioned for the role of Brandon , but Peirce could not picture her playing a man , so she was ultimately cast as Teena 's girlfriend Lana . Most of the film 's characters were based on real @-@ life people ; others were composites . 
 Filming occurred during October and November 1998 in the Dallas , Texas area . The producers initially wanted to film in Falls City , Nebraska , where the real @-@ life events had taken place ; however , budget constraints meant that principal photography had to occur in Texas . The film 's cinematography uses dim and artificial lighting throughout and was influenced by a variety of styles , including neorealism and the films of Martin Scorsese , while the soundtrack consisted primarily of country , blues , and rock music from the film . The film 's themes , which have been explored by many scholars , include the nature of romantic and platonic relationships , the causes of violence against LGBT people , transgender people and the gender binary , and the relationship among social class , race , and gender . 
 The film premiered at the New York Film Festival on October 8 , 1999 , before appearing at various other film festivals . Distributed by Fox Searchlight Pictures , the film received a limited release in the United States on October 22 , 1999 , and it performed well at the North American box office , gaining three times its production budget by May 2000 . The film received overwhelming acclaim from critics . It was widely lauded as one of the best films of the year ; praise focused on the lead performances by Swank and Sevigny as well as the film 's depiction of its subject matter . However , some people who had been involved with Brandon in real life criticized the film for not portraying the events accurately . Boys Don 't Cry was nominated for multiple awards ; at the 72nd Academy Awards in 2000 , Swank was awarded the Academy Award for Best Actress and Sevigny was nominated for Best Supporting Actress . The pair were also nominated at the 57th Golden Globe Awards , with Swank winning the Best Actress – Drama award . Boys Don 't Cry , which dealt with controversial issues , was initially assigned an NC @-@ 17 rating but was later reclassified to an R rating . It was released on home video in September 2000 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Brandon Teena ( Hilary Swank ) is a young trans man whose birth name was Teena Renae Brandon . When Brandon is discovered to be transgender by a former girlfriend 's brother , he receives physical threats . Soon after , he is involved in a bar fight and is evicted from his cousin 's trailer . Brandon moves to Falls City , Nebraska , where he befriends ex @-@ convicts John Lotter ( Peter Sarsgaard ) and Tom Nissen ( Brendan Sexton III ) , and their friends Candace ( Alicia Goranson ) and Lana Tisdel ( Chloë Sevigny ) . Brandon becomes romantically involved with Lana , who is unaware of his biological sex and troubled past . The two make plans to move to Memphis , where Brandon will manage Lana 's karaoke singing career . 
 The police detain Brandon on charges that arose prior to his relocation ; they place him in the women 's section of the Falls City prison . Lana bails Brandon out and asks why he was placed in a women 's prison . Brandon lies to her , saying he was born a hermaphrodite and will soon receive a sex change . Lana declares her love for Brandon , regardless of his sex or gender . Tom and John become suspicious after reading a newspaper article about Brandon that refers to him by his birth name , Teena Brandon . They force Brandon to remove his pants and reveal his genitals . They try to make Lana look , but she shields her eyes and turns away . After this confrontation , Tom and John drag Brandon into John 's car and drive to an isolated location , where they beat and rape him . Afterwards , they take Brandon to Tom 's house . Though injured , Brandon escapes through a bathroom window . Although his assailants threaten Brandon and warn him not to report the attack to the police , Lana persuades him to do so . 
 Later , John and Tom get drunk and decide to kill Brandon . Lana attempts to stop them , but the pair drive to Candace 's remote house where they find Brandon , who has been hiding in a nearby shed . John shoots Brandon under the chin . Tom shoots Candace in the head as Lana fights with them , begging them to stop . Tom stabs Brandon 's lifeless body and tries to shoot Lana but John stops him . John and Tom flee the scene while Lana lies with Brandon 's body . The next morning , Lana awakens next to Brandon 's corpse . Her mother arrives and takes her away from the scene . As Lana leaves Falls City , a letter Brandon wrote to her is heard in a voiceover . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Hilary Swank as Brandon Teena 
 Chloë Sevigny as Lana Tisdel 
 Peter Sarsgaard as John Lotter 
 Brendan Sexton III as Marvin ' Tom ' Nissen 
 Alicia Goranson as Candace 
 <unk> <unk> as Linda Tisdel , Lana 's mother 
 Matt McGrath as Lonny , Brandon 's cousin 
 Alison Folland as Kate Lotter , John 's sister and Lana 's best friend 
 Lou Perryman as Sheriff Charles B. <unk> 
 Cheyenne Rushing as Nicole , Brandon 's fictional first girlfriend in Lincoln 
 Libby Villari as the Nurse 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Brandon Teena was a trans man who was raped and murdered by two male acquaintances in December 1993 , when he was 21 . Kimberly Peirce , at the time a Columbia University film student , became interested in the case after reading a 1994 Village Voice article by Donna <unk> . Peirce became engrossed in Brandon 's life and death ; she said , " the minute I read about Brandon , I fell in love . With the intensity of his desire to turn himself into a boy , the fact that he did it with no role models . The leap of imagination that this person took was completely overwhelming to me . " The sensationalist news coverage of the case prolonged her interest . Peirce said she looked beyond the brutality of the case and instead viewed the positive aspects of Brandon 's life as part of what eventually causes his death . She admired Brandon 's audacity , ability to solve complicated problems , and what she perceived as the sense of fantasy invoked by his personality . 
 Peirce wanted to tell the story from Brandon 's perspective . She was familiar with Brandon 's desire to wear men 's clothing : " I started looking at all the other coverage and a great deal of it was sensational . People were focusing on the spectacle of a girl who had passed as a boy because that is so unfamiliar to so many people . Where to me , I knew girls who had passed as boys , so Brandon was not some weird person to me . Brandon was a very familiar person . " Peirce was influenced by the public perception of the case , believing the American public were generally misinformed : she said , " People were also focusing on the crime without giving it much emotional understanding and I think that 's really dangerous , especially with this culture of violence that we live in " . Peirce began working on a concept for the film and gave it the working title Take It Like a Man . 
 The project drew interest from various production companies . Diane Keaton 's production company , Blue Relief , showed interest in the screenplay in the mid @-@ 1990s . Initially , the film was to be largely based on Aphrodite Jones ' 1996 true crime book All She Wanted , which told the story of Brandon 's final few weeks . Earlier drafts of the script incorporated scenes featuring Brandon 's family background , including his sister Tammy and mother Joann , as well as some of Teena 's ex @-@ girlfriends . However , Peirce modified the script to fit her vision to focus on the relationship between Brandon and his 19 @-@ year @-@ old girlfriend Lana Tisdel , which Peirce termed a " great love story " , in contrast to All She Wanted , which did not place an emphasis on the relationship . To fund the writing and development of the project , Peirce worked as a paralegal on a midnight shift and as a 35mm film projectionist ; she also received a grant from New York Foundation for the Arts . The project attracted the attention of producer Christine Vachon , who had seen a short film Peirce had made for her thesis in 1995 . IFC Films , Hart Sharp Entertainment , and Killer Films , Vachon and Eva Kolodner 's production company , provided financing for the project . IFC contributed roughly $ 1 million , but the film 's eventual budget remained under $ 2 million . Peirce co @-@ wrote the screenplay with Andy Bienen . They worked together for 18 months on the final drafts and were careful not to " mythologize " Brandon ; the aim was to keep him as human as possible . In the editing stage of the script , Peirce sent the draft to Fox Searchlight Pictures , which agreed to produce and distribute the film while giving Peirce artistic license . 
 Prior to filming , Peirce researched the facts by interviewing the people surrounding the case . She immersed herself in the information available about the murder , including trial transcripts . She met Lana Tisdel at a convenience store and interviewed her at Tisdel 's home . Tisdel , who began dating Brandon just two weeks before he was murdered , was 19 @-@ years @-@ old at the time of the murders and lived in Falls City with her mother . Peirce also interviewed Tisdel 's mother and Brandon 's friends . However , she was unable to interview Brandon 's mother or any of his biological family . Much factual information , including Nissen being a convicted arsonist , was incorporated into Boys Don 't Cry . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 The filmmakers retained the names of most of the case 's real @-@ life protagonists , but the names of several supporting characters were altered . For example , the character of Candace was named Lisa Lambert in real life . The casting process for Boys Don 't Cry lasted almost four years . Drew Barrymore was an early candidate to star in the film . Peirce scouted the LGBT community , looking mainly for masculine , lesbian women for the role of Brandon Teena . Peirce said the LGBT community was very interested in the project because of the publicity surrounding the murder . High @-@ profile actors avoided Peirce 's auditions at the request of their agents because of the stigma associated with the role . At one point , the project was nearly abandoned because Peirce was not satisfied with most of the people who auditioned . In 1996 , after a hundred female actors had been considered and rejected , the relatively unknown actor Hilary Swank sent a videotape to Peirce and was signed on to the project . Swank successfully passed as a boy to the doorman at her audition . During her audition , Swank , who was 22 , lied to Peirce about her age . Swank said that like Brandon she was 21 years of age . When Peirce later confronted her about her lie , Swank responded , " But that 's what Brandon would do " . Swank 's anonymity as an actor persuaded Peirce to cast her ; Peirce said she did not want a " known actor " to portray Teena . In addition , Peirce felt that Swank 's audition was " the first time I saw someone who not only blurred the gender lines , but who was this beautiful , androgynous person with this cowboy hat and a sock in her pants , who smiled and loved being Brandon . " 
 Peirce required that Swank " make a full transformation " into a male . Immediately after being cast , Peirce took Swank to a hairdresser , where her lower @-@ back length hair was cut and dyed chestnut brown . When she saw her then @-@ husband , Chad Lowe , again , he barely recognized her . Swank prepared for the role by dressing and living as a man for at least a month , including wrapping her chest in tension bandages and putting socks down the front of her trousers as Brandon Teena had done . Her masquerade was convincing ; Swank 's neighbors believed the " young man " coming and going from her home was Swank 's visiting brother . She reduced her body fat to seven percent to accentuate her facial structure and refused to let the cast and crew see her out of costume . Swank earned $ 75 per day for her work on Boys Don 't Cry , totaling $ 3 @,@ 000 . Her earnings were so low that she did not qualify for health insurance . 
 For the role of Brandon 's girlfriend , Lana Tisdel , Peirce had envisioned a young Jodie Foster . The role was also offered to Reese Witherspoon and Sarah Polley . Peirce ultimately decided to cast Chloë Sevigny based on her performance in The Last Days of Disco ( 1998 ) . Sevigny had auditioned for the role of Brandon , but Peirce decided Sevigny would be more suited to playing Lana because she could not picture Sevigny as a man . 
 " There 's a moment in The Last Days of Disco when Chloë does this little dance move and flirts with the camera , " she says . " She has this mix of attractiveness , flirtation and sophistication that she gives you , but then takes away very quickly so that you want more : you want to reach into the screen and grab her . When I saw that , and her confidence and wit , I thought : if she could flirt with Brandon and the audience in that way , that 's exactly what we need for Lana . I said to her , ' Will you please audition to play Lana ? ' She said , ' No . ' And I said , ' OK , you can have the role . ' " 
 Sevigny dyed her hair red for the role to match Lana 's strawberry blonde hair . Peirce later said , " Chloë just surrendered to the part . She watched videos of Lana . She just became her very naturally . " 
 Peter Sarsgaard played John Lotter , Lana 's former boyfriend , who raped and murdered Teena . Sarsgaard was one of the first choices for the role . He later said he wanted his character to be " likable , sympathetic even " , because he wanted the audience " to understand why they would hang out with me . If my character wasn 't necessarily likable , I wanted him to be charismatic enough that you weren 't going to have a dull time if you were with him . " In another interview , Sarsgaard said he felt " empowered " by playing Lotter . In an interview with The Independent , Sarsgaard said , " I felt very sexy , weirdly , playing John Lotter . I felt like I was just like the sheriff , y 'know , and that everyone loved me . " Sarsgaard recalled watching footage of and reading about Lotter to prepare for the role . Peirce cast Alicia Goranson , known for playing Becky on the sitcom Roseanne , as Candace because of her likeness to Lisa Lambert . Like Sevigny , Goranson had initially auditioned for the lead role . 
 = = = Principal photography = = = 
 Initially , Boys Don 't Cry was scheduled to film for thirty days . However , principal photography for the film lasted from October 19 to November 24 , 1998 . The small budget dictated some of the filming decisions , including the omission of some incidents to speed up the overall pacing . Timing constraints and Peirce 's visions relating to the plot limited what could be achieved with the narrative . For example , the film portrays a double murder when in actuality a third person , Phillip DeVine — a black disabled man — was also killed at the scene . At the time , he had been dating Lana Tisdel 's sister , Leslie , who was omitted from the story . Boys Don 't Cry was primarily filmed in Greenville , Texas , a small town about 45 mi ( 72 km ) northeast of Dallas . Most of the incidents in the case took place in Falls City , Nebraska , but budget constraints led the filmmakers to choose locations in Texas . Peirce initially wanted to shoot in Falls City , but Vachon told her that filming there would not be possible . Afterwards , the film was going to be shot in Omaha , Nebraska , but Peirce felt that " none of [ the places ] looked right . " In addition , Peirce also scouted filming locations in Kansas and Florida before deciding on Texas . One of Peirce 's main goals was for the audience to sympathize with Brandon . On the film 's DVD commentary track , Peirce said , " The work was informing me about how I wanted to represent it . I wanted the audience to enter deeply into this place , this character , so they could entertain these contradictions in Brandon 's own mind and would not think he was crazy , would not think he was lying , but would see him as more deeply human " . 
 Some scenes in Boys Don 't Cry required emotional and physical intensity ; these were allocated extended periods of filming . The scene in which Brandon , at the wishes of his friends , bumper @-@ skis on the back of a pickup truck , was delayed when a police officer , just arriving at a shift change , required a large lighting crane to be moved from one side of the road to the other . The scenes took six hours to shoot and were filmed at sunrise , resulting in a blue sky being seen in the background . There were some technical complications : some of the filming equipment got stuck in mud , and radio wires in some of the scenes conflicted with the sound production . Swank required a stunt double for a scene in which she falls off the back of a truck . Teena 's rape scene was given an extended filming time ; Sexton , who portrayed one of the attackers , walked away in tears afterward . Swank found portraying her character daunting and felt the need to " keep a distance " from the reality of the actual event . When scenes became difficult , Swank requested the company of her husband on set . At times , Peirce worked for seventeen hours a day in order to complete more work , but the other crew members told her that this was taking up potential nighttime filming hours . 
 = = = Cinematography = = = 
 Peirce , who had originally sought a career in photography before moving into filmmaking , applied techniques she had learned into the film . She described the film 's mood as " artificial night " . Director of Photography Jim Denault showed her the work of photographer Jan Staller , whose long @-@ exposure night photography under artificial lighting inspired Denault to avoid using " moonlight " effects for most of the film . As a way to further incorporate the sense of artificial night , John Pirozzi , who had been experimenting with time @-@ lapse photography using a non @-@ motion @-@ controlled moving camera , was invited to create the transition shots seen throughout the film . 
 The film 's visual style depicts the Midwestern United States in a " withdrawn " , dark and understated light to give a " surreal " effect . Denault shot Boys Don 't Cry in flat , spherical format on 35 mm film using Kodak Vision film stock . The film was shot with a Moviecam Compact camera fitted with Carl Zeiss super speed lenses . For the scene in which Brandon is stripped , a hand @-@ held camera was used to give a sense of subjectivity and intimacy . 
 The use of low natural light and heavy artificial light is illustrated early in the film in the opening roller rink scene in which Brandon pursues his first relationship with a young woman . For this scene , Peirce used a three @-@ shot method similar to that used in a scene in The Wizard of Oz ( 1939 ) in which Dorothy leaves her house and enters Oz . The scene consists of a three @-@ shot sequence meant to symbolize Brandon 's metaphorical " entrance to manhood " , or Brandon 's social transition from a woman to a man . Some scenes were given a prolonged shooting sequence to induce a feeling of hallucination . An example is the sequence in which Brandon and Lana first have sex , followed by a shot of her , Brandon , Candace , and Kate driving in a car against a city skyline backdrop . The scene in which John and Tom strip Brandon was filmed with three cameras due to time constraints , even though Peirce wanted six cameras to film it . The scene took an hour and a half to film in total . 
 Peirce drew inspiration from the filming style of John Cassavetes and the early work of Martin Scorsese , and she incorporated neo @-@ realist techniques into the film . She was also influenced by a second style of work — the " magical " films of Michael Powell and Kenji Mizoguchi . The former style is used when Brandon joins the social circle of John , Tom , Lana and her mother , while the latter is used when Brandon and Lana begin to depart from that life . The film was also influenced by Bonnie and Clyde ( 1967 ) . Peirce incorporated influences from Raging Bull ( 1980 ) by opening the film with a shot of Brandon traveling along a highway , as seen from the character 's imaginative or dream perspective , similar to the beginning of Raging Bull . When a character expresses a dream or hopeful assertion , Peirce cuts to an " eerily lit " dream landscape . The Pawnbroker ( 1964 ) inspired the cinematography and editing of Brandon 's rape scene , particularly in its use of fast cutting . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 Because the film is set in the rural Midwestern United States , the Boys Don 't Cry soundtrack album features a compilation of country , blues and rock music . Nathan Larson and Nina Persson of The Cardigans composed an instrumental version of Restless Heart 's 1988 country @-@ pop song " The Bluest Eyes in Texas " , a variation of which was used as the film 's love theme and score . The song itself is heard during a karaoke scene , sung by Sevigny 's character , and at the end of the film . The title of the film is taken from the song of the same name by British rock band The Cure . An American cover of the song , sung by Nathan Larson , plays in the background in the scene in which Lana bails Brandon out of jail and during one of their sex scenes . However , the song is not included on the released soundtrack . Songs by Lynyrd Skynyrd ( " Tuesday 's Gone " ) , Paisley Underground band Opal ( " She 's a Diamond " ) and The Charlatans ( " <unk> Blues " ) also appear in the film , as do cover versions of other songs . The soundtrack was released on November 23 , 1999 , by Koch Records . " The Bluest Eyes in Texas " was played when Hilary Swank went onstage to receive her Academy Award for Best Actress in 2000 . The song also plays over the film 's end credits . 
 = = Themes and analysis = = 
 Boys Don 't Cry has been widely discussed and analyzed by scholars and others . Roger Ebert described the film as a " romantic tragedy " embedded in a working class American setting , calling it " Romeo and Juliet set in a Nebraska trailer park " . Philosopher Rebecca Hanrahan argued that the question of identity — particularly Brandon 's — is alluded to frequently in Boys Don 't Cry and that Peirce poses the nature of identification and self as the film 's main question . Journalist Janet Maslin said the film is about accepting identity , which in turn means accepting the fate predisposed for that identity . Paula <unk> called the film a " bold cautionary tale " ; she regarded the film as a negative , dismal depiction of Midwestern America , writing that " [ Peirce 's film has ] captured the mystique and eerie loneliness " and " isolation of the Midwest , with its dusty desolation and nowhere @-@ to @-@ go frustration that propels people to violence and despair " . 
 Christine Vachon , the film 's executive producer , said , " It 's not just about two stupid thugs who killed somebody . It 's about these guys whose world is so tenuous and so fragile that they can 't stand to have any of their beliefs shattered " , referring to John and Tom 's views of their lives , Brandon 's aspirations and his biological sex . Along with other turn @-@ of @-@ the @-@ millennium films such as In the Company of Men ( 1997 ) , American Beauty ( 1999 ) , Fight Club ( 1999 ) , and American Psycho ( 2000 ) , Vincent Hausmann said Boys Don 't Cry " raises the broader , widely explored issue of masculinity in crisis " . Jason Wood said the film , together with Patty Jenkins 's Monster ( 2003 ) , is an exploration of " social problems " . 
 = = = Romantic and platonic relationships = = = 
 Several scholars commented on the relationship between Brandon and Lana as well as Brandon 's relationship to John and Tom . Carol Siegel regarded the film as a thematically rich love story between two ill @-@ fated lovers , similarly to Romeo and Juliet . Judith Halberstam ( or Jack Halberstam ) attributed Boys Don 't Cry 's success to its ostensible argument for tolerance of sexual diversity by depicting a relationship between two unlikely people . This tragic aspect of the love story led Halberstam to compare Brandon and Lana 's relationship and subsequent drama to classic and modern romances including Romeo and Juliet , often using the term star @-@ crossed lovers . In the Journal for Creativity in Mental Health , <unk> Veronique Aguilar discussed Brandon 's ability to create interpersonal relationships in the film . She opined that Brandon wanted to create close relationships , but he could not due to his transgender status until he became close with Lana . " Although Brandon is able to make a brief but authentic connection with Lana , he continues to experience a sense of aloneness in the world . He consistently faces a sense of fear related to the power @-@ over dynamics that he and others who are transsexual face … Brandon experiences the central relational paradox , in which he yearns for connection ; however , due to the real threat he faces , he is unable to make that connection . " 
 Myra Hird , in the International Feminist Journal of Politics , argued that John and Brandon exemplify two different and contrasting types of masculinity , and that Brandon 's version is preferred by the film 's female characters , comparing them to Arnold Schwarzenegger and Jimmy Stewart , respectively . " Throughout the film , John offers the viewer a typified narrative of heteronormative masculinity . [ … ] Against this hegemonic masculinity , Brandon offers a masculinity reminiscent of a by @-@ gone era of chivalry . " Furthermore , she contended that John was threatened by Brandon 's version of masculinity . " Gender boundaries are taken extremely seriously in Western society , and Boys Don 't Cry depicts how intensely threatened John and Tom are by Brandon 's superior portrayal of a masculinity ' schedule ' . John cannot abide Brandon 's desire , and clear ability , to access male privilege , and his reaction is to force Brandon to be female through the act of rape . " 
 = = = Causes of violence against LGBT people = = = 
 Other commentators discussed the more complex psychological causes of Brandon 's murder . Halberstam commented on the complicated causes of the murder , and whether it was due to transphobia or homophobia : " Ultimately in Boys [ Don 't Cry ] , the double vision of the transgender subject gives way to the universal vision of humanism , the transgender man and his lover become lesbians and the murder seems instead to be the outcome of vicious homophobic rage . " Ebert called the film a " sad song about a free spirit who tried to fly a little too close to the flame " . In the same journal , Julianne Pidduck commented on the film 's rape and murder scenes , " Effectively , the viewer is asked to experience the rape from the victim 's point of view . The film invites political , emotional and corporeal allegiances linked to known and imagined risk , especially for female and / or queer viewers . An allegiance with Brandon 's outsider status aligns the viewer with Brandon 's initial exhilaration at his transgressive success as a boy , drawing us through to the film 's disturbing finale . " 
 = = = Self @-@ identity , transgender identity and the gender binary = = = 
 Many scholars addressed the various performances of gender by the characters in the film ; Moss and Lynne <unk> offered a psychoanalytic analysis , calling the film a " case report " that " presents [ Brandon 's ] transsexual inclinations as a series of euphoric conquests " and " focuses on a range of anxious reactions to her [ sic ] transsexuality . [ … ] or a case not for what they might reveal about female hysteria , but for what they might reveal about misogyny " . Elaborating on the themes of the film , they wrote : 
 In her film , Pierce [ sic ] inserts the unconventional problems of transsexuality into a conventional narrative structure . Throughout the film Brandon is presented as a doomed , though beguiling and beautiful rascal , recognizably located in the lineage of well @-@ known cinematic bad @-@ boys like James Dean , Steve McQueen , and Paul Newman . Like these predecessors , Brandon 's heroic stature derives from her [ sic ] unwillingness to compromise her [ sic ] identity … Pierce [ sic ] presents Brandon 's struggles against biological determinism as the struggles of a dignified renegade . 
 Brenda Cooper , in Critical Studies in Media Communication , argued that the film " can be read as a liberatory narrative that queers the centers of heteronormativity and hegemonic masculinity by privileging female masculinity and celebrating its differences from heterosexual norms . " She argued that the film challenged heteronormativity by criticizing the concept of the American Heartland , by presenting problems with heterosexual masculinity and its internalised aggression , by " centering female masculinity " , and blurring gender boundaries . Later on in the same essay , she commented that Brandon both embodied and rejected traditional masculinity , providing a new outlook on what it means to be a man which excited and thrilled the women in the film : " Brandon ’ s performance of masculinity , however , can be interpreted as operating on two levels in the narratives : When Brandon tries to establish his male identity with his new buddies , he imitates the kind of overly aggressive macho machismo that John and Tom represent . But Lana falls for Brandon because of his version of masculinity , which contradicts and challenges traditional assumptions about what it takes to be a man and to please a woman . Brandon ’ s articulation of manhood effectively mocks sexist masculine ideals and appropriates the codes of normative masculinity . " Michele Aaron , in Screen , claimed that the film was primarily centered on " the spectacle of transvestism " and that the film as a whole was " a tale of passing " . 
 Jennifer Esposito wrote that " We watch onscreen as Brandon binds his breasts , packs a dildo , fixes his hair in a mirror . His masculinity is carefully scripted . John and Tom … are never shown preparing for masculinity . They are already masculine . " Melissa Rigney argued that the film defied traditional portrayals of transgender characters by not confining Brandon to certain stereotypes . " On the surface , Boys Don 't Cry appears to hold the potential of rendering gender in excess : the figure of Brandon Teena can be read variously as butch , male , lesbian , transgender , transsexual , and heterosexual . [ … ] Although female masculinity comes to the forefront in this film , I argue that the film attempts to subsume the transgressive potential of the gender outlaw within a lesbian framework and narrative , one that reduces and , ultimately , nullifies Brandon 's gender and sexual excess . " In contrast , Annabelle Wilcox opined that the film primarily reinforced the gender binary by showing that " Brandon 's body is branded by such rhetoric and representation , and is assumed to be a site of ' truth ' that closes the question that being transgender poses for subjectivity , gender , and sexuality . " She also went on to note that many film critics either disregarded Brandon 's male identity or used female pronouns when referring to him . Rachel Swan , writing for Film Quarterly , wrote that Brandon 's masculinity was often contrasted with Lana 's femininity as a means of illustrating the two sides of the gender binary . In addition , she regarded John and Tom 's rape of Brandon as an attempt to psychologically castrate him . 
 In another piece , Halberstam compared the media portrayal of Brandon to that of Billy Tipton , a jazz musician who no one knew was transgender until the post @-@ mortem discovery that he was assigned female at birth . She wrote , " On some level Brandon 's story , while cleaving to its own specificity , needs to remain an open narrative — not a stable narrative of FTM transsexual identity nor a singular tale of queer bashing , not a cautionary fable about the violence of rural America nor an advertisement for urban organizations of queer community ; like the narrative of Billy Tipton , Brandon 's story permits a dream of transformation . " Christine Dando argued that " masculinity is associated with outside and femininity with interior spaces . " 
 = = = Social class and race = = = 
 Lisa Henderson commented on the intersection between social class and gender in the film , particularly Brandon 's working @-@ class status : " My reading of Boys [ Don 't Cry ] through the lens of class representation is not born of a univocal search for so @-@ called positive images , but I do recoil at what appears to me to be a new instalment in a long history of popular images of working @-@ class pathology . [ … ] But that is not the whole story . Within this universe of feeling and reaction structured by lack and tinted blue by country lyrics and a protective and threatening night @-@ time light , characters imbricate gender and class through their longings for love , acceptance and a better life . " Jennifer Devere Brody commented on the film 's exclusion of Philip DeVine , a disabled African @-@ American man who was another victim of the shooting . " Perhaps one can only speculate about the motivations behind this decision . But the effects are familiar ones in the history of racist representations . The erasure of DeVine from the narrative places the white female bodies as the only true victims of crime ; and the film 's inability to show DeVine as violated rather than violator perpetuates the myth of the black man as always already a perpetrator of crime . " Regarding Devine , Halberstam wrote , " Peirce perhaps thought that her film , already running close to two hours , could not handle another subplot , but the story of Philip DeVine is important and it is a crucial part of the drama of gender , race , sexuality , and class that was enacted in the heartland . Race is not incidental to this narrative of mostly white , Midwestern small towns and by omitting DeVine 's story from Boys Don 't Cry , Peirce contributes to the detachment of transgender narratives from narratives about race , consigning the memory of DeVine to oblivion . " 
 = = = Culture of the Midwestern United States = = = 
 Several authors commented on the possible impact that the film 's setting of Falls City , Nebraska , located in the Midwestern United States , could have had on the film 's plot . Maslin called Boys Don 't Cry a tale of a trapped , small town character 's search for life beyond the rural existence and the high price he pays for his view of the " American dream " . Regarding the film 's portrayal of Nebraska , Halberstam wrote , " The landscape of Nebraska then serves as a contested site upon which multiple narratives unfold , narratives indeed which refuse to collapse into simply one story . Some of these narratives are narratives of hate , some of desire ; others tell of ignorance and brutality ; still others of isolation and fear ; some allow violence and ignorant prejudices to become the essence of white poor rural identity ; still others provoke questions about the deployment of whiteness and the regulation of violence . " 
 Christina Dando wrote that the typical portrayal of the Midwest as a " frontier " area did not come through in the film until the setting switched from Lincoln to Falls City : " The flat landscape , the spacious sky , the home , evoke two different Plains time periods familiar to many Americans through historic photographs : the early settlement process … and 1930s Farm Security Administration photographs . It is virtually timeless . There is also a sense of both place and <unk> . While the landscape is distinctively Plains , it could be described as nowhere . " She went on to argue that the setting is not only conveyed visually , but also through the characters ' homes . " While there is no trailer park in Falls City , Brandon 's community there occupies the margin : Candace and Lana 's homes appear to be on the outskirts of town , or even outside of town . There are no complete families , only the family that that has been created . The men appear to have no homes , relationally or physically : none are shown to have family . Speaking about the film 's cinematography and the relation to its themes : 
 The Plains frontier landscape as it is constructed in Boys Don 't Cry is dark , literally and figuratively . Most of the scenes are set at night , utilizing night Plains skies with time @-@ lapse clouds , heightening the isolation . Film frames of placeless and timeless . The community also is dark . It is marginal , just managing to get along , and in the end deadly . While the classic Western dichotomy of men associated with exteriors and women with interiors is apparent , so too is Brandon 's border @-@ crossing . He appears to be able to easily handle both landscapes , yet belong to neither . 
 Dando compared the film to other tragic books and films that have been set on the Great Plains , including My Ántonia , Giants in the Earth , The Grapes of Wrath , In Cold Blood , and Badlands , writing that unlike the other works , " Brandon is [ a ] character who truly crosses frontiers . " 
 = = Release = = 
 = = = Premiere and commercial performance = = = 
 Boys Don 't Cry aired in Canada at the Toronto International Film Festival ( TIFF ) in September 1999 . It premiered in the U.S. at the New York Film Festival on October 8 , 1999 , to critical acclaim . It was shown at the Reel Affirmations International Gay and Lesbian Film Festival in early October , where it won further praise and appeared at the Venice International Film Festival . Boys Don 't Cry was given a special screening in snippets at the Sundance Film Festival . At that time , the film was still called Take It Like a Man . The film received a limited release theatrically on October 22 , 1999 , in the U.S. , where it was distributed by Fox Searchlight Pictures , a subsidiary of Twentieth Century Fox that specializes in independent films . Initially , many viewers complained via email to Peirce that the film was not being shown near them , as the film was only being shown on 25 screens across the country . However , this number increased to nearly 200 by March 2000 . The film grossed $ 73 @,@ 720 in its opening week . By December 5 , the film had grossed in excess of $ 2 million . By May 2000 , it had a U.S. total gross of $ 11 @,@ 540 @,@ 607 — more than three times its production budget . Internationally , the film was released on March 2 , 2000 in Australia and on April 9 , 2000 , in the United Kingdom . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Critics lauded Boys Don 't Cry in 1999 , with many calling it one of the best films of the year . Review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes reports 88 % of 75 professional critics gave the film a positive review ; the site consensus is that " Hilary Swank 's acclaimed performance pays fitting tribute to the tragic life of Brandon Teena " . Another review aggregator , Metacritic , gave the film an 86 of 100 , indicating " universal acclaim " . One reviewer said the film was a " critical knockout " . 
 Critics often praised the performances by Swank and Sevigny ; Peter Travers said the pair " give performances that burn in the memory " , and The Film Stage termed Swank 's performance " one of the greatest " Best Actress Oscar @-@ winning performances . Peter Stack of the San Francisco Chronicle lauded the lead acting performances of Swank , Sevigny , <unk> , and Sexton III , writing , " It may be the best @-@ acted film of the year " . Online film reviewer James Berardinelli gave the film three and a half stars out of four ; he highlighted the performances of Swank and Sevigny as the film 's greatest success and likened the film 's intensity to that of a train wreck . Berardinelli wrote that Swank " gives the performance of her career " and that " Sevigny 's performance is more conventional than Swank 's , but no less effective . She provides the counterbalance to the tide of hatred that drowns the last act of the film . " Emanuel Levy of Variety Magazine called the acting " flawless " and concluded that the " stunningly accomplished " and " candid " film could be " seen as a Rebel Without a Cause for these culturally diverse and complex times , with the two misfits enacting a version of the James Dean — Natalie Wood romance with utmost conviction , searching , like their ' 50s counterparts , for love , self @-@ worth and a place to call home " . Stephen Hunter of The Washington Post said the performances are of such " luminous humanity that they break your heart " . Premiere listed Swank 's performance as one of the " 100 Greatest Performances of All Time " . Owen Gleiberman of Entertainment Weekly called Swank a " revelation " and wrote , " by the end , her Brandon / Teena is beyond male or female . It 's as if we were simply glimpsing the character 's soul , in all its yearning and conflicted beauty . " 
 Other reviewers were positive towards the way Boys Don 't Cry portrayed its subject <unk> and Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun @-@ Times listed Boys Don 't Cry as one of the five best films of 1999 , saying , " this could have been a clinical movie of the week , but instead it 's a sad song about a free spirit who tried to fly a little too close to the flame " . Janet Maslin of The New York Times said the film was " stunning " and gave it four stars out of four stars . Maslin said , " unlike most films about mind @-@ numbing tragedy , this one manages to be full of hope " . Kenneth Turan of The Los Angeles Times praised the lack of romanticization and dramatization of the characters , and wrote , " Peirce and Bienen and the expert cast engage us in the actuality of these rootless , hopeless , stoned @-@ out lives without sentimentalizing or romanticizing them " and that " Boys Don 't Cry is an exceptional — and exceptionally disturbing film " . Mike Clarke of USA Today commended Peirce 's depth of knowledge of the case and the subject matter , writing , " Peirce seems to have researched her subject with grad @-@ school @-@ thesis intensity " . 
 Jay Carr of The Boston Globe wrote , " Boys Don 't Cry not only revisits the crime , but convinces us we 're being taken inside it " . Stephanie Zacharek of Salon gave a positive review , singling out the directing and acting . She wrote , " Peirce ... covers an extraordinary amount of territory , not just in terms of dealing with Brandon ’ s sexual @-@ identity and self @-@ fulfillment issues , but also in trying to understand the lives of those around him " . Zacharek described Swank 's performance as " a continual revelation " and Sevigny 's performance as " transformative " . She said , " When Brandon dies , " Boys Don ’ t Cry " reaches an emotional intensity that ’ s almost operatic . The saddest thing , though , is seeing Sevigny ’ s Lana crumpled over his corpse — the way she plays it , you know that when Brandon went , he took a part of her with him , too " . David Edelstein of Slate was also very positive towards the film , calling it " a meditation on the irrelevance of gender . " He went on to praise Swank , Sevigny , and Sarsgaard in their roles , especially Sevigny , writing that she " keeps the movie tantalizing " . 
 The film was not without detractors , who focused on the film 's portrayal of Brandon and his actions . Richard Corliss of Time magazine was one of the film 's negative reviewers ; he wrote , " the film lets down the material . It 's too cool : all attitude , no sizzle " . Peter Rainer of New York Magazine compared the film unfavorably with Rebel Without a Cause ( 1954 ) , calling it a " transgendered " version , elaborating that the film " could have used a tougher and more exploratory spirit ; for Peirce , there was no cruelty , no derangement in Brandon 's impostures toward the unsuspecting . " In 2007 , Premiere ranked the film on its list of the " The 25 Most Dangerous Movies " . 
 The film was generally well @-@ received by the LGBT community . Boys Don 't Cry 's release came a year after the murder of a homosexual teenager , Matthew Shepard , which occurred October 12 , 1998 . The murder sparked additional public interest in hate crime legislation in America and in Brandon Teena , and increased public interest in Boys Don 't Cry . Cooper wrote that Boys Don 't Cry " is perhaps the only film addressing the issue of female masculinity by a self @-@ described queer filmmaker to reach mainstream audiences and to receive critical acclaim and prestigious awards . " However , Noelle Howey , writing for Mother Jones , wrote that despite the critical acclaim , relatively few critics understood what she perceived as the main point of the film — Brandon being a victim of trans bashing . Howey said , " Even a cursory glance at reviews of " Boys Don 't Cry " reveals that while most critics admired the film , few absorbed its main point : that Brandon Teena was a biological girl who felt innately that she was a man . Most of the media instead cast Teena as a Yentl for the new millennium , rather than a victim of anti @-@ transgender bigotry . " 
 = = = = Factual accuracy = = = = 
 The accuracy of Boys Don 't Cry was disputed by real @-@ life people involved in the murder . The real Lana Tisdel declared her dislike for the film ; she said Brandon never proposed to her and that when she discovered the truth about Brandon 's sex , she ended the relationship and left him . Tisdel disliked the way she was portrayed in the film , and called the film the " second murder of Brandon Teena " . Before the film 's theatrical release , Lana Tisdel sued the film 's producers , claiming that the film depicted her as " lazy , white trash and a skanky snake " and that her family and friends had come to see her as " a lesbian who did nothing to stop a murder " . Tisdel said the film falsely portrayed her continuing her relationship with Teena after she discovered he was transgender . Tisdel settled her lawsuit against Fox Searchlight for an undisclosed sum . Sarah Nissen , cousin of perpetrator Marvin Nissen , was also critical of the film , saying , " There 's none of it that 's right . It was just weird . " Leslie Tisdel , Lana 's sister , called the film " a lie of a movie " . Leslie was not included in the film , and her ties with the third victim , Phillip DeVine , were omitted due to storyline constraints . 
 Lana Tisdel 's potential involvement in the rape and murder of Brandon Teena was also highlighted . Various people involved in the case , particularly Brandon 's family , have alleged that Tisdel was somehow involved with the murders , or had at least set them up in an act of vengeance . Perhaps the most notable admission about Tisdel 's motives came from Tom Nissen , who infamously confessed that Tisdel was present at the time of the murders in the car and had even tried knocking on the door of the farmhouse where Brandon , Lambert and DeVine were staying . When nobody answered the door , Nissen alleges that Lotter broke in while Tisdel waited in the vehicle while the murders were carried out . Tisdel denied this and a lack of evidence meant that it could not be vigorously pursued in the proceeding court case — the residing judge considered most of Nissen 's claims as nothing more than hearsay . Not only did Tisdel vehemently deny any involvement in Brandon 's murder , she denied ever being present at Lisa Lambert 's farmhouse on the night Brandon was murdered . Unlike Tisdel 's own evidence and the admissions presented in court , Boys Don 't Cry took the liberty of placing Tisdel at the crime scene , albeit without any intention of setting Brandon up . 
 = = = Awards and nominations = = = 
 The film won a variety of awards , most of which went to Swank for her performance . Swank won a Best Actress Oscar while Sevigny received a nomination in the category of Best Supporting Actress . From the Hollywood Foreign Press , the film received two Golden Globe nominations in the same two categories ( Best Actress , Best Supporting Actress ) for Swank and Sevigny , winning Best Actress . Swank and Sevigny both received Best Actress Awards from the New York Film Critics Circle , the Chicago Film Critics Association Awards and an Independent Spirit Award . The film won three awards at the Boston Society of Film Critics Awards ; Best Actress ( Swank ) , Best Supporting Actress ( Sevigny ) and Best Director ( Peirce ) . Swank and Sevigny won Satellite Awards for their performances , and the film was nominated in two categories ; Best Picture ( Drama ) and Best Director . It was named one of the best films of the year by the National Board of Review of Motion Pictures . 
 The family of Brandon Teena criticized Swank for her repeated use of the male gender pronoun " he " in her Oscar acceptance speech . Teena 's mother JoAnn Brandon said her child 's transgenderism was a defense mechanism that was developed in response to childhood sexual abuse , rather than being an expression of Teena 's gendered sense of self . She said , " She pretended she was a man so no other man could touch her " . Despite the criticism , Kevin <unk> , writing for Out , defended Swank 's acceptance speech ; he said , " Swank deserves a place in the great acceptance speech canon for being bold , not only as an actress , but as an award winner " . 
 = = = Rating and home media = = = 
 Boys Don 't Cry garnered significant attention for its graphic rape scene . The film was initially assigned an NC @-@ 17 rating from the MPAA ; the content was toned down for the U.S. release , where it was rated R. Peirce was interviewed for a 2005 documentary titled This Film Is Not Yet Rated , which discussed the film 's problems with the MPAA , particularly the censoring of the sex scenes . The portrayal of a double rape caused significant problems with the MPAA and had to be trimmed to avoid the NC @-@ 17 rating . Both the Australian and European version are more explicit , particularly the first rape . Peirce was angry because the MPAA wanted the sex scene between Brandon and Lana removed but was satisfied with the level of brutality in the murder scene . 
 Boys Don 't Cry was first released on home video by Fox Searchlight Pictures in September 2000 apart of a " Premiere Series " , preceded by a DVD release in April 2000 in the United States and Canada . The DVD 's special features included a commentary by Kimberly Peirce and a behind @-@ the @-@ scenes featurette containing interviews with Peirce , Swank and Sevigny ; there was also a theatrical trailer and three television trailers . This same edition was re @-@ released in 2009 with different cover art . The film was released on Blu @-@ ray on February 16 , 2011 , by 20th Century Fox Entertainment in conjunction with Fox Pathé Europa . 
 = Titan ( supercomputer ) = 
 Titan is a supercomputer built by Cray at Oak Ridge National Laboratory for use in a variety of science projects . Titan is an upgrade of Jaguar , a previous supercomputer at Oak Ridge , that uses graphics processing units ( GPUs ) in addition to conventional central processing units ( CPUs ) . Titan is the first such hybrid to perform over 10 petaFLOPS . The upgrade began in October 2011 , commenced stability testing in October 2012 and it became available to researchers in early 2013 . The initial cost of the upgrade was US $ 60 million , funded primarily by the United States Department of Energy . 
 Titan is due to be eclipsed at Oak Ridge by Summit in 2018 , which is being built by IBM and features fewer nodes with much greater GPU capability per node as well as local per @-@ node non @-@ volatile caching of file data from the system 's parallel file system . 
 Titan employs AMD Opteron CPUs in conjunction with Nvidia Tesla GPUs to improve energy efficiency while providing an order of magnitude increase in computational power over Jaguar . It uses 18 @,@ 688 CPUs paired with an equal number of GPUs to perform at a theoretical peak of 27 petaFLOPS ; in the <unk> benchmark used to rank supercomputers ' speed , it performed at 17 @.@ 59 petaFLOPS . This was enough to take first place in the November 2012 list by the TOP500 organization , but <unk> @-@ 2 overtook it on the June 2013 list . 
 Titan is available for any scientific purpose ; access depends on the importance of the project and its potential to exploit the hybrid architecture . Any selected code must also be executable on other supercomputers to avoid sole dependence on Titan . Six vanguard codes were the first selected . They dealt mostly with molecular scale physics or climate models , while 25 others queued behind them . The inclusion of GPUs compelled authors to alter their codes . The modifications typically increased the degree of parallelism , given that GPUs offer many more simultaneous threads than CPUs . The changes often yield greater performance even on CPU @-@ only machines . 
 = = History = = 
 Plans to create a supercomputer capable of 20 petaFLOPS at the Oak Ridge Leadership Computing Facility ( <unk> ) at Oak Ridge National Laboratory ( ORNL ) originated as far back as 2005 , when Jaguar was built . Titan will itself be replaced by an approximately 200 petaFLOPS system in 2016 as part of ORNL 's plan to operate an <unk> ( 1000 petaFLOPS to 1 <unk> ) machine by 2020 . The initial plan to build a new 15 @,@ 000 square meter ( 160 @,@ 000 ft2 ) building for Titan , was discarded in favor of using Jaguar 's existing infrastructure . The precise system architecture was not finalized until 2010 , although a deal with Nvidia to supply the GPUs was signed in 2009 . Titan was first announced at the private ACM / IEEE Supercomputing Conference ( SC10 ) on November 16 , 2010 , and was publicly announced on October 11 , 2011 , as the first phase of the Titan upgrade began . 
 Jaguar had received various upgrades since its creation . It began with the Cray <unk> platform that yielded 25 teraFLOPS . By 2008 , Jaguar had been expanded with more cabinets and upgraded to the <unk> platform , reaching 263 teraFLOPS . In 2009 , it was upgraded to the XT5 platform , hitting 1 @.@ 4 petaFLOPS . Its final upgrades brought Jaguar to 1 @.@ 76 petaFLOPS . 
 Titan was funded primarily by the US Department of Energy through ORNL . Funding was sufficient to purchase the CPUs but not all of the GPUs so the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration agreed to fund the remaining nodes in return for computing time . ORNL scientific computing chief Jeff Nichols noted that Titan cost approximately $ 60 million upfront , of which the NOAA contribution was less than $ 10 million , but precise figures were covered by non @-@ disclosure agreements . The full term of the contract with Cray included $ 97 million , excluding potential upgrades . 
 The yearlong conversion began October 9 , 2011 . Between October and December , 96 of Jaguar 's 200 cabinets , each containing 24 XT5 blades ( two 6 @-@ core CPUs per node , four nodes per blade ) , were upgraded to XK7 blades ( one 16 @-@ core CPU per node , four nodes per blade ) while the remainder of the machine remained in use . In December , computation was moved to the 96 XK7 cabinets while the remaining 104 cabinets were upgraded to XK7 blades . ORNL 's external <unk> connection was upgraded from 10 Gbit / s to 100 Gbit / s and the system interconnect ( the network over which CPUs communicate with each other ) was updated . The <unk> design used in Jaguar was upgraded to the Gemini interconnect used in Titan which connects the nodes into a direct 3D torus interconnect network . Gemini uses wormhole flow control internally . The system memory was doubled to 584 <unk> . 960 of the XK7 nodes ( 10 cabinets ) were fitted with a Fermi based GPU as Kepler GPUs were not then available ; these 960 nodes were referred to as TitanDev and used to test code . This first phase of the upgrade increased the peak performance of Jaguar to 3 @.@ 3 petaFLOPS . Beginning on September 13 , 2012 , Nvidia K20X GPUs were fitted to all of Jaguar 's XK7 compute blades , including the 960 TitanDev nodes . In October , the task was completed and the computer was finally christened Titan . 
 In March 2013 , Nvidia launched the GTX Titan , a consumer graphics card that uses the same GPU die as the K20X GPUs in Titan . Titan underwent acceptance testing in early 2013 but only completed 92 % of the tests , short of the required 95 % . The problem was discovered to be excess gold in the female edge connectors of the motherboards ' PCIe slots causing cracks in the motherboards ' solder . The cost of repair was borne by Cray and between 12 and 16 cabinets were repaired each week . Throughout the repairs users were given access to the available CPUs . On March 11 , they gained access to 8 @,@ 972 GPUs . ORNL announced on April 8 that the repairs were complete and acceptance test completion was announced on June 11 , 2013 . 
 Titan 's hardware has a theoretical peak performance of 27 petaFLOPS with " perfect " software . On November 12 , 2012 , the TOP500 organization that ranks the worlds ' supercomputers by <unk> performance , ranked Titan first at 17 @.@ 59 petaFLOPS , displacing IBM Sequoia . Titan also ranked third on the <unk> , the same 500 supercomputers ranked in terms of energy efficiency . In the June 2013 TOP500 ranking , Titan fell to second place behind <unk> @-@ 2 and to twenty @-@ ninth on the <unk> list . Titan did not re @-@ test for the June 2013 ranking , because it would still have ranked second , at 27 petaFLOPS . 
 = = Hardware = = 
 Titan uses Jaguar 's 200 cabinets , covering 404 square meters ( 4 @,@ 352 ft2 ) , with replaced internals and upgraded networking . Reusing Jaguar 's power and cooling systems saved approximately $ 20 million . Power is provided to each cabinet at three @-@ phase 480 V. This requires thinner cables than the US standard 208 V , saving $ 1 million in copper . At its peak , Titan draws 8 @.@ 2 MW , 1 @.@ 2 MW more than Jaguar , but runs almost ten times as fast in terms of floating point calculations . In the event of a power failure , carbon fiber flywheel power storage can keep the networking and storage infrastructure running for up to 16 seconds . After 2 seconds without power , diesel generators fire up , taking approximately 7 seconds to reach full power . They can provide power indefinitely . The generators are designed only to keep the networking and storage components powered so that a reboot is much quicker ; the generators are not capable of powering the processing infrastructure . 
 Titan has 18 @,@ 688 nodes ( 4 nodes per blade , 24 blades per cabinet ) , each containing a 16 @-@ core AMD Opteron <unk> CPU with 32 GB of DDR3 ECC memory and an Nvidia Tesla K20X GPU with 6 GB GDDR5 ECC memory . There are a total of 299 @,@ 008 processor cores , and a total of 693 @.@ 6 <unk> of CPU and GPU RAM . 
 Initially , Titan used Jaguar 's 10 PB of Lustre storage with a transfer speed of 240 GB / s , but in April 2013 , the storage was upgraded to 40 PB with a transfer rate of 1 @.@ 4 TB / s . GPUs were selected for their vastly higher parallel processing efficiency over CPUs . Although the GPUs have a slower clock speed than the CPUs , each GPU contains 2 @,@ 688 CUDA cores at 732 MHz , resulting in a faster overall system . Consequently , the CPUs ' cores are used to allocate tasks to the GPUs rather than directly processing the data as in conventional supercomputers . 
 Titan runs the Cray Linux Environment , a full version of Linux on the login nodes that users directly access , but a smaller , more efficient version on the compute nodes . 
 Titan 's components are air @-@ cooled by heat sinks , but the air is chilled before being pumped through the cabinets . Fan noise is so loud that hearing protection is required for people spending more than 15 minutes in the machine room . The system has a cooling capacity of 23 @.@ 2 MW ( 6600 tons ) and works by chilling water to 5 @.@ 5 ° C ( 42 ° F ) , which in turn cools recirculated air . 
 Researchers also have access to <unk> ( Exploratory Visualization Environment for Research and Technology ) to better understand the data that Titan outputs . <unk> is a visualization room with a 10 by 3 meter ( 33 by 10 ft ) screen and a smaller , secondary screen . The screens are 37 and 33 megapixels respectively with stereoscopic 3D capability . 
 = = Projects = = 
 In 2009 , the Oak Ridge Leadership Computing Facility that manages Titan narrowed the fifty applications for first use of the supercomputer down to six " vanguard " codes chosen for the importance of the research and for their ability to fully utilize the system . The six vanguard projects to use Titan were : 
 <unk> , a project that models the molecular physics of combustion , aims to improve the efficiency of diesel and biofuel engines . In 2009 , using Jaguar , it produced the first fully resolved simulation of <unk> hydrocarbon flames relevant to the efficiency of direct injection diesel engines . 
 WL @-@ <unk> simulates the interactions between electrons and atoms in magnetic materials at temperatures other than absolute zero . An earlier version of the code was the first to perform at greater than one petaFLOPS on Jaguar . 
 Denovo simulates nuclear reactions with the aim of improving the efficiency and reducing the waste of nuclear reactors . The performance of Denovo on conventional CPU @-@ based machines doubled after the tweaks for Titan and it performs 3 @.@ 5 times faster on Titan than it did on Jaguar . 
 Large @-@ scale Atomic / Molecular Massively Parallel Simulator ( <unk> ) is a molecular dynamics code that simulates particles across a range of scales , from quantum to relativistic , to improve materials science with potential applications in semi @-@ conductor , biomolecule and polymer development . 
 CAM @-@ SE is a combination of two codes : Community Atmosphere Model , a global atmosphere model , and High Order Method Modeling Environment , a code that solves fluid and thermodynamic equations . CAM @-@ SE will allow greater accuracy in climate simulations . 
 Non @-@ Equilibrium Radiation Diffusion ( NRDF ) plots non @-@ charged particles through supernovae with potential applications in laser fusion , fluid dynamics , medical imaging , nuclear reactors , energy storage and combustion . Its Chimera code uses hundreds of partial differential equations to track the energy , angle , angle of scatter and type of each neutrino modeled in a star going supernova , resulting in millions of individual equations . The code was named Chimera after the mythological creature because it has three " heads " : the first simulates the hydrodynamics of stellar material , the second simulates radiation transport and the third simulates nuclear burning . 
 Bonsai is a gravitational tree code for simulation galaxies . It has been used for the 2014 Gordon Bell prize nomination for simulating the Milky Way Galaxy on a star by star basis , with 200 billion stars . In this application the computer reached a sustained speed of 24 @.@ 773 <unk> . 
 VERA is a light water reactor simulation written at the Consortium for Advanced Simulation of Light Water Reactors ( <unk> ) on Jaguar . VERA allows engineers to monitor the performance and status of any part of a reactor core throughout the lifetime of the reactor to identify points of interest . Although not one of the first six projects , VERA was planned to run on Titan after optimization with assistance from CAAR and testing on TitanDev . Computer scientist Tom Evans found that the adaption to Titan 's hybrid architecture was more difficult than to previous CPU @-@ based supercomputers . He aimed to simulate an entire reactor fuel cycle , an eighteen to thirty @-@ six month @-@ long process , in one week on Titan . 
 In 2013 thirty @-@ one codes were planned to run on Titan , typically four or five at any one time . 
 = = Code modifications = = 
 The code of many projects has to be modified to suit the GPU processing of Titan , but each code is required to be executable on CPU @-@ based systems so that projects do not become solely dependent on Titan . <unk> formed the Center for Accelerated Application Readiness ( CAAR ) to aid with the adaptation process . It holds developer workshops at Nvidia headquarters to educate users about the architecture , compilers and applications on Titan . CAAR has been working on compilers with Nvidia and code vendors to integrate directives for GPUs into their programming languages . Researchers can thus express parallelism in their code with their existing programming language , typically Fortran , C or C + + , and the compiler can express it to the GPUs . Dr. Bronson Messer , a computational astrophysicist , said of the task : " ... an application using Titan to the utmost must also find a way to keep the GPU busy , remembering all the while that the GPU is fast , but less flexible than the CPU . " Moab Cluster Suite is used to prioritize jobs to nodes to keep utilization high ; it improved efficiency from 70 % to approximately 95 % in the tested software . Some projects found that the changes increased efficiency of their code on non @-@ GPU machines ; the performance of Denovo doubled on CPU @-@ based machines . 
 The amount of code alteration required to run on the GPUs varies by project . According to Dr. Messer of NRDF , only a small percentage of his code runs on GPUs because the calculations are relatively simple but processed repeatedly and in parallel . NRDF is written in CUDA Fortran , a version of Fortran with CUDA extensions for the GPUs . Chimera 's third " head " was the first to run on the GPUs as the nuclear burning could most easily be simulated by GPU architecture . Other aspects of the code were planned to be modified in time . On Jaguar , the project modeled 14 or 15 nuclear species but Messer anticipated simulating up to 200 species , allowing far greater precision when comparing the simulation to empirical observation . 
 = Bricker Amendment = 
 The Bricker Amendment is the collective name of a number of proposed amendments to the United States Constitution considered by the United States Senate in the 1950s . Each of these amendments would have placed restrictions on the scope and ratification of treaties and executive agreements entered into by the United States and are named for their sponsor , Republican Senator John W. Bricker of Ohio . 
 Non @-@ interventionism , the view that the United States should not become embroiled in foreign conflicts and world politics , has always been an element in American politics but was especially strong in the years following World War I. American entry into World War II temporarily suppressed non @-@ interventionist sentiments , but they returned in the post @-@ war years in response to America 's new international role , particularly as a reaction to the new United Nations and its affiliated international organizations . Some feared the loss of American sovereignty to these transnational agencies , because of the Soviet Union 's role in the spread of international Communism and the Cold War . 
 Frank E. Holman , president of the American Bar Association ( ABA ) , called attention to state and Federal court decisions , notably Missouri v. Holland , which he claimed could give international treaties and agreements precedence over the United States Constitution and could be used by foreigners to threaten American liberties . Senator Bricker was influenced by the ABA 's work and first introduced a constitutional amendment in 1951 . With substantial popular support and the election of a Republican President and Congress in the elections of 1952 , Bricker 's plan seemed destined to be sent to the individual states for ratification . 
 The best @-@ known version of the Bricker Amendment , considered by the Senate in 1953 – 54 , declared that no treaty could be made by the United States that conflicted with the Constitution , was self @-@ executing without the passage of separate enabling legislation through Congress , or which granted Congress legislative powers beyond those specified in the Constitution . It also limited the president 's power to enter into executive agreements with foreign powers . 
 Bricker 's proposal attracted broad bipartisan support and was a focal point of intra @-@ party conflict between the administration of president Dwight D. Eisenhower and the Old Right faction of conservative Republican senators . Despite the initial support , the Bricker Amendment was blocked through the intervention of President Eisenhower with then @-@ Senate Minority Leader Lyndon Johnson and failed in the Senate by a single vote in 1954 . Three years later the Supreme Court of the United States explicitly ruled in Reid v. Covert that the Bill of Rights cannot be abrogated by agreements with foreign powers . Nevertheless , Senator Bricker 's ideas still have supporters , and new versions of his amendment have been reintroduced in Congress periodically . 
 = = Historical background = = 
 = = = American non @-@ interventionism = = = 
 The Bricker Amendment controversy grew from the strong vein of non @-@ interventionism , nationalism , and suspicion of foreign influences that has existed from the beginnings of the American republic . " Non @-@ interventionism was the considered response to foreign and domestic developments of a large , responsible , and respectable segment of the American people , " wrote one historian of the movement . The pre @-@ Revolutionary cry of " no taxation without representation ! " spoke to the inability of Americans to participate in how they would be governed , a state made clear when British authorities suppressed local government in colonies accustomed to home rule , e.g. Massachusetts . 
 The first President , George Washington , warned his countrymen to observe good faith and justice towards all nations , to cultivate peace and harmony with all , excluding both " inveterate antipathies against particular nations , and passionate attachments for others " , and " to steer clear of permanent alliances with any portion of the foreign world . " Under John Adams , his successor , the United States attempted to avoid the conflict between France and Britain , and passed the Alien and Sedition Acts of 1798 to control foreign citizens . 
 In his inaugural address , President Thomas Jefferson declared that one of " the essential principles of our Government " was " peace , commerce , and honest friendship with all nations , entangling alliances with none . " President James Monroe 's doctrine ( 1823 ) announced the primacy of American influence in the Western Hemisphere . 
 In the 20th century , America was initially neutral in World War I and avoided entering the conflict for three years . President Woodrow Wilson , a Democrat , won reelection in 1916 with the slogan " he kept us out of war , " although he subsequently led the U.S. into the conflict . Once hostilities were concluded , Republican Senators William Borah of Idaho and Henry Cabot Lodge of Massachusetts led like @-@ minded colleagues in the United States Senate to reject the Treaty of Versailles ( 1919 ) and to avoid joining both international agencies created by it , the League of Nations and the World Court , for fear of losing American sovereignty . 
 This fear of foreign control was long associated with anti @-@ Catholicism and attendant allegations of Catholic dual loyalty to their country and the Pope , stemming from America 's British Protestant roots . As late as the 1960 presidential election , in which President John F. Kennedy became America 's first Catholic chief executive , there were Americans who believed Catholics ' first loyalty would be to the Pope and not the United States . Previous concerns about " foreign influence " led to restrictive laws such as the Chinese Exclusion Act of 1882 , the Johnson @-@ Reed Act of 1924 , the Smith Act of 1940 , and numerous state laws restricting foreigners from engaging in business or owning land . Similarly , America long maintained a protectionist trade policy with high tariffs on foreign products , notably the Smoot – Hawley Tariff Act of 1930 . 
 In the 1930s , legislators of both parties opposed American involvement in the conflicts in Asia and Europe . Between 1934 and 1936 , Senator Gerald Nye held dramatic hearings attempting to show that America was forced into World War I by an alliance of arms merchants , bankers , and foreign influences . In response , Congress passed , and President Franklin D. Roosevelt signed , Senator Nye 's Neutrality Act of 1935 to preclude American involvement in another European war . 
 Several times after the conclusion of World War I , constitutional amendments were proposed in Congress to require a nationwide referendum on declaring war . When President Roosevelt in 1937 proposed a " quarantine " of <unk> nations such as Japan , he found little support , remarking " It 's a terrible thing to look over your shoulder when you are trying to lead — and find no one there . " The America First Committee , formed in 1940 to keep the United States out of World War II , included Americans across the political spectrum from socialist Norman Thomas , journalist John T. Flynn of The New Republic , and Senator Burton K. Wheeler of Montana on the left to Chicago Tribune publisher Colonel Robert R. McCormick , Sears , Roebuck chairman General Robert E. Wood , and Senator Nye on the right . 
 Prior to America 's entry into World War II , President Roosevelt proposed helping the United Kingdom against Nazi Germany ; in response , Senator Wheeler famously declared " the lend @-@ lease @-@ give program is the New Deal 's triple @-@ A foreign policy ; it will plow under every fourth American boy . " Senator Wheeler was even thought to have leaked the United States 's war plan Rainbow 5 ( which superseded Orange ) only days before the attack on Pearl Harbor on December 7 , 1941 . Typical of American sentiment was the title of an anti @-@ interventionist book , Why Meddle in Europe ? Even Bainbridge Colby , Secretary of State under Woodrow Wilson , testified to the Senate Foreign Relations Committee in 1939 that entering World War I had been a mistake and the United States would have been better off even if Germany had won that conflict . 
 = = = Fears return after World War II = = = 
 The attack on Pearl Harbor temporarily silenced American non @-@ interventionism ; the America First Committee disbanded within days . However , in the final days of World War II , non @-@ interventionism began its resurgence — non @-@ interventionists had spoken against ratification of the United Nations Charter but were unsuccessful in preventing the United States from becoming a founding member of the United Nations . Suspicions of the U.N. and its associated international organizations were fanned by conservatives , most notably by Frank E. Holman , an attorney from Seattle , Washington in what has been called a " crusade . " 
 Holman , a Utah native and Rhodes scholar , was elected president of the American Bar Association in 1947 and dedicated his term as president to warning Americans of the dangers of " treaty law . " While Article II of the United Nations Charter stated " Nothing contained in the present Charter shall authorize the United Nations to intervene in matters which are essentially within the domestic jurisdiction of any state , " an international analogue to the Tenth Amendment , Holman saw the work of the U.N. on the proposed Genocide Convention and Universal Declaration of Human Rights and numerous proposals of the International Labor Organization , a body created under the League of Nations , as being far outside the UN 's powers and an invasion against American liberties . 
 Holman cautioned the Genocide Convention would subject Americans to the jurisdiction of foreign courts with unfamiliar procedures and without the protections afforded under the Bill of Rights . He said the Convention 's language was sweeping and vague and offered a scenario where a white motorist who struck and killed a black child could be extradited to The Hague on genocide charges . Holman 's critics claimed the language was no more sweeping or vague than the state and Federal statutes that American courts interpreted every day . Duane Tananbaum , the leading historian of the Bricker Amendment , wrote " most of ABA 's objections to the Genocide Convention had no basis whatsoever in reality " and his example of a car accident becoming an international incident was not possible . Eisenhower 's Attorney General Herbert Brownell called this scenario " outlandish " . 
 But Holman 's hypothetical especially alarmed Southern Democrats who had gone to great lengths to obstruct Federal action targeted at ending the Jim Crow system of racial segregation in the American South . They feared that , if ratified , the Genocide Convention could be used in conjunction with the Constitution 's Necessary and Proper Clause to pass a Federal civil rights law ( despite the conservative view that such a law would go beyond the enumerated powers of Article I , Section 8 ) . 
 President Eisenhower 's aide Arthur Larson said Holman 's warnings were part of " all kinds of preposterous and legally lunatic scares [ that ] were raised , " including " that the International Court would take over our tariff and immigration controls , and then our education , post offices , military and welfare activities . " In Holman 's own book advancing the Bricker Amendment he wrote the U.N. Charter meant the Federal government could : 
 control and regulate all education , including public and parochial schools , it could control and regulate all matters affecting civil rights , marriage , divorce , etc ; it could control all our sources of production of foods and the products of the farms and factories ; ... it could regiment labor and conditions of employment . 
 = = Legal background = = 
 The United States Constitution , effective in 1789 , gave the Federal government power over foreign affairs and restricted the individual States ' authority in this realm . Article I , section ten provides , " no State shall enter into any Treaty , Alliance , or Confederation " and that " no State shall , without the Consent of the Congress . . . enter into any Agreement or Compact with another State or with a foreign Power . " The Federal government 's primacy was made clear in the Supremacy Clause of Article VI , which declares , " This Constitution , and the laws of the United States which shall be made in <unk> thereof ; and all Treaties made , or which shall be made , under the authority of the United States , shall be the Supreme Law of the land ; and the Judges in every state shall be bound thereby , any Thing in the Constitution or Laws of any State to the Contrary notwithstanding . " While executive agreements were not mentioned in the Constitution , Congress authorized them for delivery of the mail as early as 1792 . 
 = = = Early precedents = = = 
 Constitutional scholars note that the supremacy clause was designed to protect the only significant treaty into which the infant United States had entered : the Treaty of Paris of 1783 , which ended the Revolutionary War and under which Great Britain recognized the thirteen former colonies as thirteen independent and fully sovereign states . Nonetheless , its wording ignited fear of the potential abuse of the treaty power from the beginning . For example , the North Carolina ratifying convention that approved the Constitution did so with a reservation asking for a constitutional amendment that 
 No treaties which shall be directly opposed to the existing laws of the United States in Congress assembled shall be valid until such laws shall be repealed , or made conformable to such treaty ; nor shall any treaty be valid which is contradictory to the Constitution of the United States . 
 Early legal precedents striking down State laws that conflicted with federally negotiated international treaties arose from the peace treaty with Britain , but subsequent treaties were found to trump city ordinances , state laws on escheat of land owned by foreigners and , in the 20th Century , state laws regarding tort claims . Subsequently , in a case involving a treaty concluded with the Cherokee Indians , the Supreme Court declared " It need hardly be said that a treaty cannot change the Constitution or be held valid if it be in violation of that instrument . This results from the nature and fundamental principles of our government . The effect of treaties and acts of Congress , when in conflict , is not settled by the Constitution . But the question is not involved in any doubt as to its proper solution . A treaty may supersede a prior act of Congress , and an act of Congress may supersede a prior treaty . " 
 Likewise , in a case regarding ownership of land by foreign nationals , the Court wrote , " The treaty power , as expressed in the constitution , is in terms unlimited , except by those restraints which are found in that instrument against the action of the government , or of its departments , and those arising from the nature of the government itself , and of that of the states . It would not be contended that it extends so far as to authorize what the constitution forbids , or a change in the character of the government , or in that of one of the states , or a cession of any portion of the territory of the latter , without its consent . But , with these exceptions , it is not perceived that there is any limit to the questions which can be adjusted touching any matter which is properly the subject of negotiation with a foreign country . " 
 Justice Horace Gray , in the Supreme Court 's opinion in the 1898 citizenship case United States v. Wong Kim Ark , wrote " that statutes enacted by Congress , as well as treaties made by the President and Senate , must yield to the paramount and supreme law of the Constitution . " 
 = = = Twentieth century rulings = = = 
 = = = = Missouri v. Holland = = = = 
 The precedent most often cited by critics of " treaty law " was Missouri v. Holland . Congress had attempted to protect migratory birds by statute , but federal and state courts declared the law unconstitutional . The United States subsequently negotiated and ratified a treaty with Canada to achieve the same purpose , Congress then passed the Migratory Bird Treaty Act of 1918 to enforce it . In Missouri v. Holland , the United States Supreme Court upheld the constitutionality of the new law . Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes , writing for the Court , declared : 
 Acts of Congress are the supreme law of the land only when made in pursuance of the Constitution , while treaties are declared to be so when made under the authority of the United States . It is open to question whether the authority of the United States means more than the formal acts prescribed to make the convention . We do not mean to imply that there are no qualifications to the treaty @-@ making power ; but they must be ascertained in a different way . It is obvious that there may be matters of the sharpest exigency for the national well being that an act of Congress could not deal with but that a treaty followed by such an act could , and it is not lightly to be assumed that , in matters requiring national action , ' a power which must belong to and somewhere reside in every civilized government ' is not to be found . 
 Proponents of the Bricker Amendment said this language made it essential to add to the Constitution explicit limitations on the treaty @-@ making power . Raymond Moley wrote in 1953 that Holland meant " the protection of an international duck takes precedence over the constitutional protections of American citizens " . In response , legal scholars such as Professor Edward Samuel Corwin of Princeton University said the language of the Constitution regarding treaties — " under the authority of the United States " — was misunderstood by Holmes , and was written to protect the 1783 peace treaty with Britain ; this became " in part the source of Senator Bricker 's agitation " . Professor Zechariah Chafee of Harvard Law School wrote , " the Framers never talked about having treaties on the same level as the Constitution . What they did want was to make sure a state could no longer flout any lawful action taken by the nation " . Chafee claimed that the word " Supreme " , as used in Article VI , simply meant " supreme over the states " . 
 = = = = Pink and Belmont = = = = 
 Two additional cases frequently cited by proponents of the Amendment were both related to the Roosevelt Administration 's recognition of the Soviet government in 1933 . In the course of recognizing the USSR , letters were exchanged with the Soviet Union 's foreign minister , Maxim Litvinov , to settle claims between the two countries , in an agreement neither sent to the Senate nor ratified by it . In Belmont v. United States the constitutionality of executive agreements was tested in the Supreme Court . Justice George Sutherland , writing for the majority , upheld the power of the president , finding : 
 That the negotiations , acceptance of the assignment and agreements and understandings in respect thereof were within the competence of the President may not be doubted . Governmental power over external affairs is not distributed , but is vested exclusively in the national government . And in respect of what was done here , the Executive had authority to speak as the sole organ of that government . The assignment and the agreements in connection therewith did not , as in the case of treaties , as that term is used in the treaty making clause of the Constitution ( article 2 , 2 ) , require the advice and consent of the Senate . 
 A second case from the Litvinov Agreement , United States v. Pink , also went to the Supreme Court . In Pink , the New York State superintendent of insurance was ordered to turn over assets belonging to a Russian insurance company pursuant to the Litvinov assignment . The United States sued New York to claim the money held by the Insurance Superintendent , and lost in lower courts . However , the Supreme Court held New York was interfering with the President 's exclusive power over foreign affairs , independent of any language in the Constitution , a doctrine it enunciated in United States v. Curtiss @-@ Wright Export Corp. and ordered New York to pay the money to the Federal Government . The Court declared that " the Fifth Amendment does not stand in the way of giving full force and effect to the Litvinov Assignment " and 
 The powers of the President in the conduct of foreign relations included the power , without consent of the Senate , to determine the public policy of the United States with respect to the Russian nationalization decrees . What government is to be regarded here as representative of a foreign sovereign state is a political rather than a judicial question , and is to be determined by the political department of the government . That authority is not limited to a determination of the government to be recognized . It includes the power to determine the policy which is to govern the question of recognition . Objections to the underlying policy as well as objections to recognition are to be addressed to the political department and not to the courts . 
 = = = = <unk> during Congressional debate = = = = 
 Unlike in Pink and Belmont , an executive agreement on potato imports from Canada , litigated in United States v. Guy W. Capps , Inc . , another oft cited case , the courts declared an agreement unenforceable . In Capps the courts found that the agreement , which directly contradicted a statute passed by Congress , could not be enforced . 
 But the dissent of Chief Justice Fred M. Vinson in Youngstown Sheet & Tube Co. v. Sawyer ( commonly referred to as the " steel seizure case " ) alarmed conservatives . President Harry S. Truman had nationalized the American steel industry to prevent a strike he claimed would interfere with the prosecution of the Korean War . Though the United States Supreme Court found this illegal , Vinson 's defense of this sweeping exercise of executive authority was used to justify the Bricker Amendment . Those warning of " treaty law " claimed that in the future , Americans could be endangered with the use of the executive powers Vinson supported . 
 = = = = State precedents = = = = 
 Some state courts issued rulings in the 1940s and 1950s that relied on the United Nations Charter , much to the alarm of Holman and others . In Fujii v. California , a California law restricting the ownership of land by aliens was ruled by a state appeals court to be a violation of the UN Charter . In Fujii , the Court declared " The Charter has become ' the supreme Law of the Land ... any Thing in the Constitution of Laws of any State to the Contrary notwithstanding . ' The position of this country in the family of nations forbids trafficking innocuous generalities but demands that every State in the Union accept and act upon the Charter according to its plain language and its unmistakable purpose and intent . " 
 However , the California Supreme Court overruled , declaring that while the Charter was " entitled to respectful consideration by the courts and Legislatures of every member nation , " it was " not intended to supersede existing domestic legislation . " Similarly , a New York trial court refused to consider the U.N. Charter in an effort to strike down racially restrictive covenants in housing , declaring " these treaties have nothing to do with domestic matters , " citing Article 2 , Section 7 of the Charter . 
 In another covenant case , the Michigan Supreme Court discounted efforts to use the Charter , saying " these pronouncements are merely indicative of a desirable social trend and an objective devoutly to be desired by all well @-@ thinking peoples . " These words were quoted with approval by the Iowa Supreme Court in overturning a lower court decision that relied on the Charter , noting the Charter 's principles " do not have the force or effect of superseding our laws . " 
 = = = Internationalization and the United Nations = = = 
 Following the Second World War , various treaties were proposed under the aegis of the United Nations , in the spirit of collective security and internationalism that followed the global conflict of the preceding years . In particular , the Genocide Convention , which made a crime of " causing serious mental harm " to " a national , ethnic , racial , or religious group " and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights , which contained sweeping language about health care , employment , vacations , and other subjects outside the traditional scope of treaties , were considered problematic by non @-@ interventionists and advocates of limited government . 
 Historian Stephen Ambrose described the suspicions of Americans : " Southern leaders feared that the U.N. commitment to human rights would imperil segregation ; the American Medical Association feared it would bring about socialized medicine . " It was , the American Bar Association declared , " one of the greatest constitutional crises the country has ever faced . " 
 Conservatives were worried that these treaties could be used to expand the power of the Federal government at the expense of the people and the states . In a speech to the American Bar Association 's regional meeting at Louisville , Kentucky on April 11 , 1952 , John Foster Dulles , an American delegate to the United Nations , said , " Treaties make international law and they also make domestic law . Under our Constitution , treaties become the Supreme Law of the Land . They are indeed more supreme than ordinary laws , for Congressional laws are invalid if they do not conform to the Constitution , whereas treaty laws can override the Constitution . " Dulles said the power to make treaties " is an extraordinary power liable to abuse . " 
 Senator Everett Dirksen , a Republican of Illinois , declared , " we are in a new era of international organizations . They are grinding out treaties like so many eager beavers which will have effects on the rights of American citizens . " Eisenhower 's Attorney General Herbert Brownell admitted executive agreements " had sometimes been abused in the past . " Frank E. Holman wrote Secretary of State George Marshall in November 1948 regarding the dangers of the Human Rights Declaration , receiving the dismissive reply that the agreement was " merely declaratory in character " and had no legal effect . The conservative ABA called for a Constitutional amendment to address what they perceived to be a potential abuse of executive power . Holman described the threat : 
 More or less coincident with the organization of the United Nations a new form of internationalism arose which undertook to enlarge the historical concept of international law and treaties to have them include and deal with the domestic affairs and internal laws of independent nations . 
 Senator Bricker thought the " one world " movement advocated by those such as Wendell Willkie , Roosevelt 's Republican challenger in the 1940 election , would attempt to use treaties to undermine American liberties . Conservatives cited as evidence the statement of John P. Humphrey , the first director of the United Nations Commission on Human Rights : 
 What the United Nations is trying to do is revolutionary in character . Human rights are largely a matter of [ the ] relationship between the State and individuals , and therefore a matter which has been traditionally regarded as being within the domestic jurisdiction of states . What is now being proposed is , in effect , the creation of some super national supervision of this relationship . 
 Frank E. Holman testified before the Senate Judiciary Committee that the Bricker Amendment was needed " to eliminate the risk that through ' treaty law ' our basic American rights may be bargained away in attempts to show our good <unk> and to indicate to the rest of the world our spirit of brotherhood . " W.L. McGrath , president of the Williamson Heater Company in Cincinnati , Ohio , told the Senate that the International Labor Organization , to which he had been an American delegate , was " seeking to set itself up as a sort of international legislature to formulate socialistic laws which it hopes , by the vehicle of treaty ratification , can essentially be imposed upon most of the countries of the world . " 
 = = Congress considers the proposal = = 
 Republican Senator John W. Bricker , an attorney , had served as governor of Ohio and was Thomas E. Dewey 's running mate in the 1944 campaign before winning a Senate seat in the 1946 Republican landslide . Author Robert Caro declared Senator Bricker to be " a fervent admirer " of Senators Robert A. Taft of Ohio , " whom he had three times backed for the presidential nomination , " and Joseph McCarthy of Wisconsin , " whom he would support to the last , " and stated that Bricker was " a fervent hater of foreign aid , the United Nations , and all those he lumped with Eleanor Roosevelt under the contemptuous designation of ' One <unk> ' . He was the embodiment of the GOP 's " Old Guard , " borne out by his voting record : Americans for Democratic Action gave him a " zero " rating in 1949 , However , Bricker was not a doctrinaire non @-@ interventionist ; he had voted in favor of the Marshall Plan and the North Atlantic Treaty . 
 President Eisenhower disagreed about the necessity of the Amendment , writing in his diary in April 1953 , " Senator Bricker wants to amend the Constitution . . . By and large the logic of the case is all against Senator Bricker , but he has gotten almost psychopathic on the subject , and a great many lawyers have taken his side of the case . This fact does not impress me very much . Lawyers have been trained to take either side of any case and make the most intelligent and impassioned defense of their adopted viewpoint . " 
 Historians describe the Bricker Amendment as " the high water mark of the non @-@ interventionist surge in the 1950s " and " the embodiment of the Old Guard 's rage at what it viewed as twenty years of presidential usurpation of Congress 's constitutional powers " which " grew out of sentiment both anti @-@ Democrat and anti @-@ presidential . " Bricker 's pressing the issue , wrote Time just before the climactic vote , was " a time @-@ bomb threat to both G.O.P. unity and White House @-@ Congressional accord . " Senator Bricker warned " the constitutional power of Congress to determine American foreign policy is at stake . " 
 = = = 82nd Congress = = = 
 In the 82nd Congress , Senator Bricker introduced the first version of his amendment , S.J. Res. 102 , drafted by Bricker and his staff . The American Bar Association was still studying the issue of how to prevent an abuse of " treaty law " when Bricker introduced his resolution on July 17 , 1951 , without the ABA 's involvement , but the Senator wanted to begin immediate debate on an issue he considered vital . Bricker was not trying to reverse the Yalta Agreement , in contrast to the goals of some of his conservative colleagues ; he was worried most about what might be done by the United Nations or under an executive agreement . A second proposal , S.J. Res 130 , was introduced by Bricker on February 7 , 1952 , with fifty @-@ eight co @-@ sponsors , including every Republican except Eugene Millikin of Colorado . 
 President Harry S. Truman was adamantly opposed to limitations on executive power and ordered every executive branch agency to report on how the Bricker Amendment would affect its work and to offer this information to the Judiciary Committee . Consequently , in its hearings , the Committee heard from representatives of the Departments of Agriculture , Commerce , Defense , Labor , and the Post Office , along with the Bureau of Internal Revenue , the Securities and Exchange Commission , and the Federal Bureau of Narcotics . Duane Tananbaum wrote the hearings " provided the amendment 's supporters with a wider forum for their argument that a constitutional amendment was needed " and gave opponents a chance to debate the issue . 
 Bricker 's amendment was raised as an issue in his 1952 re @-@ election campaign . Toledo mayor Michael <unk> railed that the amendment was " an unwarranted interference with the provisions of the Constitution , " but Bricker was easily elected to a second term . 
 = = = 83rd Congress : Consideration by the new Republican majority = = = 
 Bricker introduced his proposal , S.J. Res 1 , on the first day of the 83rd Congress and soon had sixty @-@ three co @-@ sponsors on a resolution much closer to the language of the amendment proposed by the American Bar Association . This time , every Republican senator , including Millikin , was a co @-@ sponsor , as were eighteen Democrats . Including Bricker , this totaled exactly the sixty @-@ four votes that comprised two @-@ thirds of the full Senate , the number necessary to approve a constitutional amendment . Companion measures were introduced in the United States House of Representatives , but no action was taken on them ; the focus was on the Senate . 
 The Eisenhower Administration was caught by surprise as Sherman Adams , Eisenhower 's Chief of Staff , thought an agreement had been reached with Bricker to delay introduction of his amendment until after the Administration had studied the issue . " Bricker hoped to force the new administration 's hand , " wrote Duane Tananbaum . George E. Reedy , aide to Senate minority leader Lyndon B. Johnson of Texas , said popular support for the measure made it " apparent from the start that it could not be defeated on a straight @-@ out vote . No one could vote against the Bricker Amendment with impunity and very few could vote against it and survive at all . . . There was no hope of stopping it through direct opposition . " Johnson told his aide Bobby Baker it was " the worst bill I can think of " and " it will be the bane of every president we elect . " 
 Eisenhower privately disparaged Bricker 's motives , suggesting Bricker 's push for the Amendment was driven by " his one hope of achieving at least a faint immortality in American history , " and considered the Amendment entirely unnecessary , telling Stephen Ambrose it was " an addition to the Constitution that said you could not violate the Constitution . " 
 = = = Eisenhower seeks delay = = = 
 Eisenhower publicly stated his opposition in his press conference of March 26 , 1953 : " The Bricker Amendment , as analyzed for me by the Secretary of State , would , as I understand it , in certain ways restrict the authority that the President must have , if he is to conduct the foreign affairs of this Nation effectively . . . . I do believe that there are certain features that would work to the disadvantage of our country , particularly in making it impossible for the President to work with the flexibility that he needs in this highly complicated and difficult situation . " Eisenhower 's phrasing , " as analyzed for me by the Secretary of State , " led Bricker and other conservatives to blame Dulles for misleading Eisenhower , and raised their suspicion that the Secretary of State was a tool of Eastern internationalist interests . 
 Eisenhower sent Attorney General Herbert Brownell to meet with Bricker to try to delay consideration of the resolution while the administration studied it ; Bricker refused , noting his original proposal was introduced over a year earlier in the previous session of Congress . Bricker was willing , however , to compromise on the language of an amendment , unlike Frank Holman , who was intent on a particular wording . However , the administration , particularly Dulles , irritated Bricker by refusing to offer an alternative to his resolution . Eisenhower privately continued to disparage the Amendment with strong language , calling it " a stupid blind violation of the Constitution by stupid , blind non @-@ interventionists " and stating " if it is true that when you die the name of the things that bothered you the most are engraved on your skull , I 'm sure I 'll have there the mud and dirt of France during the invasion and the name of Senator Bricker . " 
 = = = Republican infighting = = = 
 Sherman Adams wrote " Eisenhower thus found himself caught in a crossfire between the Republican conservatives and the State Department " and stated President Eisenhower thought the Bricker Amendment was a refusal of America " to accept the leadership of world democracy that had been thrust upon it . " In 1954 , Eisenhower wrote Senate majority leader William F. Knowland of California stating , " Adoption of the Bricker Amendment in its present form by the Senate would be notice to our friends as well as our enemies abroad that our country intends to withdraw from its leadership in world affairs . " 
 Despite the Amendment 's popularity and large number of sponsors , Majority Leader Taft stalled the bill itself in the Judiciary Committee at the behest of President Eisenhower . However , on June 10 , ill health led Taft to resign as Majority Leader , and five days later , the Judiciary Committee reported the measure to the full Senate . No action was taken before the session adjourned in August ; debate would begin in January 1954 . 
 The long delay allowed opposition to mobilize . Erwin Griswold , dean of the Harvard Law School , and Owen Roberts , retired Justice of the United States Supreme Court , organized the Committee for the Defense of the Constitution . They were joined by such prominent Americans as attorney John W. Davis , former Attorney General William D. Mitchell , former Secretary of War Kenneth C. Royall , former First Lady Eleanor Roosevelt , Governor Adlai Stevenson , former President Harry S. Truman , Judge John J. Parker , former Justice Felix Frankfurter , Denver Post publisher Palmer Hoyt , the Reverend Harry Emerson Fosdick , socialist Norman Thomas , and General Lucius D. Clay . The Committee claimed the Amendment would give Congress too much power and make America 's system to approve treaties " the most cumbersome in the world . " 
 Roberts dismissed the Amendment , declaring " we must decide whether we are to stand on the silly shibboleth of national security , " a statement supporters of the Amendment eagerly seized upon . The Committee was joined in opposing the Amendment by the League of Women Voters , the American Association for the United Nations , and the Association of the Bar of the City of New York , one of the few bar associations to oppose the Amendment . 
 Conservatives Clarence Manion , former dean of the University of Notre Dame Law School , and newspaper publisher Frank Gannett formed organizations to support the Amendment while a wide spectrum of groups entered the debate . Supporting the Bricker Amendment were the National Association of Attorneys General , the American Legion , the Veterans of Foreign Wars , the Marine Corps League , National <unk> , the Catholic War Veterans , the Kiwanis , the U.S. Chamber of Commerce , the National Grange , the American Farm Bureau Federation , the Daughters of the American Revolution , The Colonial Dames of America , the National Association of Evangelicals , the American Medical Association , the General Federation of Women 's Clubs , and the Association of American Physicians and Surgeons . In opposition were Americans for Democratic Action , the American Jewish Congress , the American Federation of Labor , B 'nai B 'rith , the United World Federalists , the American Civil Liberties Union , and the American Association of University Women : groups that Holman characterized as " eastern seaboard internationalists . " 
 = = = Eisenhower aided by Democrats = = = 
 Faced with essentially united opposition from his own Party 's Senate caucus , Eisenhower needed the help of Democrats to defeat the Amendment . Caro summarized the problem : " Defeating the amendment and thereby preserving the power of the presidency — his first objective — could not be accomplished even if he united his party 's liberal and moderate senators against it ; there simply were not enough of them . He would have to turn conservative Senators against it too , conservatives who were at the moment wholeheartedly for it — and not just Democratic conservatives but at least a few members of the Republican Old Guard . " President Eisenhower continued his opposition . In January , he claimed that the Bricker Amendment would fatally weaken the bargaining position of the United States because the states would be involved in foreign policy , recalling the divisions under the Articles of Confederation . 
 Before the Second Session of the 83rd Congress convened , the Amendment " went through a complex and incomprehensible series of changes as various Senators struggled to find a precise wording that would satisfy both the President and Bricker . " In fact , President Eisenhower himself in January 1954 said that nobody understood the Bricker Amendment , but his position " was clear ; he opposed any amendment that would reduce the President 's power to conduct foreign policy . " In his opposition to the Amendment , Eisenhower obtained the help of Senate Minority Leader Lyndon B. Johnson , who persuaded Senator Walter F. George of Georgia to sponsor his own proposal in order to sap support from Senator Bricker 's . The George Substitute introduced on January 27 , 1954 especially infuriated Bricker since George also wanted limits on treaties . 
 George warned in the Senate , " I do not want a president of the U.S. to conclude an executive agreement which will make it unlawful for me to kill a cat in the back alley of my lot at night and I do not want the President of the U.S. to make a treaty with India which would preclude me from butchering a cow in my own pasture . " Senator George was ideal as an opponent as he was a hero to conservatives of both parties for his opposition to the New Deal and his survival of President Franklin D. Roosevelt 's unsuccessful effort to purge him when he sought re @-@ election in 1938 . " Democrats and Republicans alike respected him and recognized his influence . " 
 Eisenhower worked to prevent a vote , telling Republican Senators that he agreed that President Roosevelt had done things he would not have done , but that the Amendment would not have prevented the Yalta Agreement . By the time the Senate finally voted on the Bricker Amendment on February 26 , thirteen of the nineteen Democrats who had co @-@ sponsored it had withdrawn their support , at the urging of Senators Johnson and George . The original version of S.J. Res. 1 failed 42 – 50 . By a 61 @-@ 30 vote , the Senate agreed to substitute George 's language for Bricker 's — if only ninety @-@ one senators voted , sixty @-@ one was the necessary two @-@ thirds vote for final approval . 
 Senator Herbert H. Lehman of New York said in the debate " what we are doing is one of the most dangerous and inexcusable things that any great legislative body can do . " However , Johnson had planned carefully and had several votes in reserve . When revised Amendments came to a vote , with Vice President Richard Nixon presiding over the Senate , Senator Harley M. Kilgore of West Virginia arrived to cast the deciding vote of " nay . " The measure was defeated 60 @-@ 31 . In the final count , thirty @-@ two Republicans voted for the revised Bricker Amendment and fourteen voted against . 
 Senator Bricker was embittered by the defeat . " By the mid @-@ 1950s , " wrote the Senator 's biographer , " Bricker had become alienated from the mainstream of his own party ... fulminating on the far right of the political spectrum . " Decades after his defeat he was still furious . " Ike did it ! " he said . " He killed my amendment . " 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Senator Bricker introduced another proposal later in the 83rd Congress and proposed similar constitutional amendments in the 84th and 85th Congresses . While hearings were held in the 84th and 85th Congresses , the full Senate took no action and the idea of amending the Constitution was never again seriously considered . In part , this was because the Supreme Court issued rulings that undercut arguments for it , notably in Reid v. Covert . 
 The Supreme Court in 1957 declared that the United States could not abrogate the rights guaranteed to citizens in the Bill of Rights through international agreements . Reid v. Covert and Kinsella v. Krueger concerned the prosecution of two servicemen 's wives who killed their husbands abroad and were , under the status of forces agreements in place , tried and convicted in American courts @-@ martial . The Court found the Congress had no constitutional authority to subject servicemen 's dependents to the Uniform Code of Military Justice and overturned the convictions . Justice Hugo Black 's opinion for the Court declared : 
 There is nothing in [ the Constitution ] which intimates that treaties and laws enacted pursuant to [ it ] do not have to comply with the provisions of the Constitution . Nor is there anything in the debates which accompanied the drafting and ratification of the Constitution which even suggests such a result . These debates as well as the history that surrounds the adoption of the treaty provision in Article VI make it clear that the reason treaties were not limited to those made in " pursuance " of the Constitution was so that agreements made by the United States under the Articles of Confederation , including the important peace treaties which concluded the Revolutionary War , would remain in effect . It would be manifestly contrary to the objectives of those who created the Constitution , as well as those who were responsible for the Bill of Rights — let alone alien to our entire constitutional history and tradition — to construe Article VI as permitting the United States to exercise power under an international agreement without observing constitutional prohibitions . In effect , such construction would permit amendment of that document in a manner not sanctioned by Article V. The prohibitions of the Constitution were designed to apply to all branches of the National Government and they cannot be nullified by the Executive or by the Executive and the Senate combined . 
 In Seery v. United States the government argued that an executive agreement allowed it to confiscate property in Austria owned by an American citizen without compensation . But this was rejected , the Court of Claims writing " there can be no doubt that an executive agreement , not being a transaction which is even mentioned in the Constitution , can impair constitutional rights . " 
 The United States ultimately ratified the U.N. ' s Genocide Convention in 1986 . The Convention was signed with reservations , which prevented the law being enacted if it contradicted the Constitution . Several states expressed concern that this would undermine the provisions of the convention . 
 The Bricker Amendment is occasionally revived in Congress . For example , in 1997 , Representative Helen Chenoweth ( R – Idaho ) offered her version of the Bricker Amendment in the 105th Congress . 
 = = Timeline = = 
 Timeline of dates important in consideration of the Amendment : 
 March 4 , 1789 . The United States Constitution comes into force . 
 October 24 , 1945 . The United Nations Charter comes into force . 
 1946 . United Nations Commission on Human Rights created . 
 February 25 , 1948 . The American Bar Association 's House of Delegates votes for its Committee on Peace and Law Through the United Nations to study the proposed U.N. conventions . 
 September 9 , 1948 . The ABA House of Delegates votes to oppose the Covenant on Human Rights . 
