 The rova 's earliest defining features had crystallised among the Merina as residences for local rulers at least 100 years before the emergence of the united Kingdom of Imerina under Andriamanelo . According to custom , a rova 's foundation was always elevated relative to the surrounding village . The compound also always featured a kianja ( central courtyard ) marked by a vatomasina ( tall sacred stone ) where the sovereign would stand to deliver kabary ( royal speeches or decrees ) . Contained within the rova was at least one lapa ( royal palace or residence ) as well as the <unk> ( tomb ) of one or more of the site 's founders . The sovereign 's lodgings typically stood in the northern part of the rova , while the spouse or spouses lived in the southern part . It was not until the dawn of the 19th century that a perimeter wall of sharpened wooden stakes would constitute another defining feature of rova construction . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = 1610 – 1792 = = = 
 The Rova of Antananarivo is located 1 @,@ 480 metres ( 4 @,@ 860 ft ) above sea level on Analamanga , originally the highest of the numerous hills in Antananarivo . Around 1610 or 1625 , Andrianjaka , King of Imerina and grandson of King Andriamanelo , ordered a garrison of 1 @,@ 000 soldiers to seize the strategic site from its original Vazimba inhabitants . He reportedly succeeded with minimal bloodshed . According to oral history , the mere encampment of his army at the foot of Analamanga was sufficient to secure the submission of the Vazimba . Andrianjaka 's army then cleared the forest covering the hill 's summit and built a traditional rova to serve as an initial garrison , including an unnamed simple wooden house within it as a palace for the king . Soon afterward Andrianjaka built two more houses , reportedly named Masoandrotsiroa ( " There Are Not Two Suns " , also called Masoandro ) and Besakana ( " Great Breadth " ) . According to another account , Besakana may have been the name of the very first of the three houses Andrianjaka built within the Rova . The king also designated the construction site and design for the royal tombs he named <unk> Masina Fitomiandalana ( " Seven Sacred Houses Arranged in Order " , also called Fitomiandalana ) , which were to be laid out in a line . Andrianjaka 's own tomb was the first of these to be built . 
 Generations of Andrianjaka 's successors through to his great @-@ grandson King Andriamasinavalona ( 1675 – 1710 ) ruled over the united central highland kingdom of Imerina from the Rova of Antananarivo . These monarchs occasionally altered the compound and its buildings to suit their purposes . In particular , Besakana served as a primary royal residence and was repeatedly rebuilt , most notably for Andriamasinavalona who , according to oral history , had famously sought and then spared a human sacrifice in preparation for the endeavour . At some point prior to 1800 , as the community of nobles inhabiting the Rova grew , the hilltop was lowered by 9 @.@ 1 metres ( 30 ft ) to expand the amount of level land available for construction . Consequently , among the hills of Antananarivo , the hilltop of Analamanga is now second in height to that of <unk> to the south . 
 The role of the Rova as a seat of power for the Kingdom of Imerina changed when Andriamasinavalona chose to divide the kingdom into four provinces ruled by his favourite sons . Antananarivo became the capital of the southern Imerina province with the Rova as its seat of government . The site retained this role until the late 18th century , when King Andrianampoinimerina ( 1787 – 1810 ) of Ambohimanga led a series of attacks beginning in 1792 that culminated in the capture of Antananarivo and its incorporation into the newly reunified Kingdom of Imerina . 
 = = = 1792 – 1810 = = = 
 After Andrianampoinimerina reunited the divided and warring Kingdom of Imerina , he successfully pursued an expansionist policy that saw his authority extended over a large portion of Madagascar by the time of his death in 1810 . Having captured Antananarivo by 1793 and transferred his capital from Ambohimanga to Antananarivo the following year , Andrianampoinimerina established new structures on the Rova grounds that would become imbued with the political and historic significance of his reign . In keeping with the tradition of Merina sovereigns before him , each building was assigned a name by which it could be distinguished . Several of the buildings were used interchangeably by the king as personal residences , including Manjakamiadana ( " Where It is Pleasant to Rule " ) , Besakana , <unk> ( " Vast Improvement " , also called Manatsara ) — which he alone was authorised to enter — and Marivolanitra ( " Beneath the Heavens " ) , a building reportedly designed with a staircase leading to a rooftop observation deck from which the king could observe the town and plains below . 
 A number of the Rova 's buildings possessed unique design features . The modest wood building then known as Manjakamiadana was also called <unk> ( " Silver Hands " ) for the hand @-@ shaped sculptures crafted from melted silver piastres and attached to each of the building 's four tandrotrano ( roof horns ) — an architectural design element formed from the crossed gable beams that extended past the roof line of all traditional aristocratic Merina houses . <unk> 's decorative silver hands were later affixed to the roof horns of Besakana . Another distinctive building from this period was called Bevato ( " Many Stones " ) because its foundation was atypically composed of stone blocks . Manatsara was said to be the most well constructed of the many houses because it was built using <unk> ( <unk> <unk> ) , an extremely durable and rot @-@ resistant indigenous hardwood , rather than a traditional wood called <unk> ( <unk> <unk> ) . According to oral history , Manatsara was treasured by Andrianampoinimerina and the house was quite old but still well preserved in the mid @-@ 19th century when Queen Ranavalona I decided to recover its interior walls with wood taken from Sihanaka country . 
 Andrianampoinimerina 's many wives and other family members occupied the majority of the buildings , most notably Mahitsielafanjaka ( " That Which is Upright Rules Long " , also called Mahitsy ) , the abode of wife <unk> , where the sampy ( royal idol ) called Manjakatsiroa was kept . Three other royal idols were kept on the Rova grounds , namely <unk> , <unk> and Rafantaka , each of which were housed in their own separate buildings . Nanjakana ( " Royal " ) was occupied by wives named <unk> and <unk> . <unk> ( " Good Eldest One " ) was the home of <unk> , while <unk> , Andrianampoinimerina 's principal wife , occupied Bado ( " Stupid " ) . <unk> ( " Armor of Sanctity " ) was inhabited by wives <unk> and <unk> ; Andrianampoinimerina 's son and heir , Radama I , would later offer this same house to Rasalimo , who eventually became one of Radama 's wives . Three notable houses were inhabited by other family members . Andrianampoinimerina gave Besakana to his adopted daughter Ramavo ( later to become Radama 's wife and eventually Queen Ranavalona I ) . Andrianampoinimerina 's sister , <unk> , originally shared Besakana with Ramavo until a daughter named <unk> vacated a house called Fohiloha ( " Short " ) , leaving <unk> to occupy it alone . Masoandrotsiroa served as the residence of Ramavo 's sister , Rangita , and an aunt named <unk> , a daughter of Andrianampoinimerina 's grandfather King Andriambelomasina , was given a house named <unk> ( " Fortified Ship " ) . 
 At least two buildings were transported in their entirety onto or away from the Rova compound during Andrianampoinimerina 's reign . <unk> ( " Guarding Money " ) was moved from <unk> to the Rova compound , where it was inhabited by one of the king 's wives , <unk> . The king also had Manatsara removed from Antananarivo to Ambohidrabiby . 
 = = = 1810 – 1896 = = = 
 Following unification of the greater part of the island under Merina rule in the 19th century , the palaces of the Rova served as the seat of power for successive sovereigns of the Kingdom of Madagascar , including King Radama I ( 1810 – 1828 ) , Queen Ranavalona I ( 1828 – 1861 ) , King Radama II ( 1861 – 1863 ) , Queen Rasoherina ( 1863 – 1868 ) , Queen Ranavalona II ( 1868 – 1883 ) and lastly Queen Ranavalona III ( 1883 – 1895 ) , who ruled from the Rova until Madagascar 's annexation by France . During his successful 1817 military campaign to pacify the east coast , Radama I — son and successor of Andrianampoinimerina — was favourably impressed by the houses he saw in Toamasina that had been built by newly arrived Creole merchants from Mauritius and Reunion . Radama invited one of them , a craftsman named Louis Gros , to return with him to Antananarivo to redesign Bevato as a home for his principal wife , Rasalimo . The new Bevato reportedly featured two stories , much like the houses Radama had seen in Toamasina . 
 Another wooden palace , Tranovola ( " Silver House " ) , was under construction at the same time as Bevato and is considered by historians to represent the first true hybrid of Creole and traditional Merina aristocratic architecture . Its innovations included a roof of wood shingles , a second storey , the addition of a veranda , glass windows , multiple interior rooms ( as opposed to a single open interior space ) and the use of curved shapes as design elements . Historic sources offer conflicting accounts of these two buildings . Some maintain that Bevato was relocated and remodelled to become Tranovola , while others maintain the buildings were separate but debate which of the two houses was the first two @-@ storey building in the Rova ( still other sources award this innovation to Marivolanitra ) . The design of Radama 's tomb likewise embodies the hybrid style that was to influence and inspire not only the majority of the buildings built at the Rova in the 19th century , but ultimately architecture throughout the entire highland region of Madagascar — particularly in its use of equidistant pillars supporting the overhanging roof to create a veranda . 
 Despite the stylistic innovations Radama adopted for the construction of several of the compound 's buildings , the Rova largely retained its traditional features during his reign . The basic layout of the compound remained largely unaltered from its original design with the sole exception of an expansion of the Rova along its north @-@ south axis . Stone walls topped with sharpened wooden stakes were built around the new perimeter during this period . Venerable buildings such as Besakana , Nanjakana , Mahitsy and Manjakamiadana were retained , as were the houses of several of Andrianampoinimerina 's wives , many of whom were still living at the time of Radama 's death in 1828 . During his reign , Radama undertook the restoration of Marivolanitra to serve chiefly as housing for visiting foreigners , and briefly inhabited it himself in addition to his main residence at Besakana . He also had a house called Kelisoa ( " Petite Beauty " ) built as a lodging for his concubines . 
 The Rova underwent several significant changes during the lengthy reign of Queen Ranavalona I. The largest of the buildings in the modern @-@ day compound , the wooden Manjakamiadana , was built between 1839 and 1840 . Ranavalona also made further modifications to Tranovola in 1845 , when it became the residence of her son Radama II . The boundaries of the compound were expanded to their largest and final extent , and numerous older buildings were removed from the Rova of Antananarivo to other towns in the highlands . Voahangy ( " Pearl " ) , the former home of Andrianampoinimerina 's wife <unk> , was moved to Alasora . The house known as <unk> ( " Forbidden to be Desired " ) , formerly inhabited by another of his wives , <unk> , was moved to the region of <unk> . Bado was moved to Ambohidrabiby . The queen also moved Fohiloha , Kelisoa , Manatsara and Masoandro to the royal village of Ambohimanga . 
 Later queens also left their mark on the Rova through major construction projects . Queen Rasoherina had Marivolanitra relocated to Mahazoarivo to make room for Manampisoa ( " Adding What is Pleasant " ) , built from 1865 to 1867 for use as her personal residence . A Protestant chapel ( Fiangonana ) was erected during the reign of Ranavalona II , who also ordered the exterior of the wooden Manjakamiadana to be encased in stone . Plans to build a private residence for Ranavalona III were abandoned in 1896 at the time of French colonisation of the island . According to one source , partial electrification of the Rova may have been successfully tested on Christmas Day 1892 . Following this experiment , Prime Minister Rainilaiarivony and Queen Ranavalona III began working with a contractor to purchase and install the necessary equipment to expand electrification throughout the Rova , but this initiative was also interrupted by the advent of French colonisation . 
 = = = 1896 – present = = = 
 The 1896 French colonisation of Madagascar brought an end to the rule of the Merina sovereigns . The Rova of Antananarivo was converted into a museum the following year , and the Fitomiandalana tombs were excavated and moved to a new location behind the tombs of Radama I and Rasoherina . The bodies of sovereigns previously interred in the royal tombs at Ambohimanga were exhumed and transferred to the tombs in the Rova grounds , a sacrilegious move that degraded the status of Ambohimanga as a site of sacred pilgrimage . According to <unk> ( 1999 ) , French colonial administrator General Joseph Gallieni undertook this <unk> of the Rova in an attempt to break popular belief in the power of the royal ancestors . By the same token , his actions relegated Malagasy sovereignty under the Merina rulers to a relic of an unenlightened past . The desecration of the two most sacred sites of Merina royalty represented a calculated political move intended to establish the political and cultural superiority of the colonial power . 
 Following independence the Rova compound remained largely closed to the public throughout the First ( 1960 – 1972 ) and Second ( 1975 – 1992 ) Republics except on special occasions . In 1995 , three years into the Third Republic ( 1992 – 2010 ) , the Rova compound was destroyed by fire . The tombs , chapel , exterior of <unk> and two traditional wooden houses ( Besakana and Mahitsy ) have since been restored with further restorations planned to continue until at least 2013 . 
 = = Buildings = = 
 The Rova compound extends to just less than one hectare ( approximately two acres ) , spanning 116 metres ( 381 ft ) north to south and over 61 metres ( 200 ft ) from east to west . A barricade of thick wooden posts with sharpened ends surrounded the compound until 1897 when it was replaced with a brick wall on the orders of General Gallieni . Entered via a stone stairway leading to a large north @-@ facing gate built by James Cameron in 1845 , this portal is topped by a bronze <unk> ( eagle ) imported from France by Jean Laborde in 1840 . Beyond the gate lies an open dirt courtyard approximately 37 metres ( 121 ft ) square , with the far end opposite the gate delimited by the northern face and entrance of Manjakamiadana . Over time , the Rova compound has contained several key buildings of political and historical significance , including five palaces , a chapel and nine tombs . 
 = = = Manjakamiadana = = = 
 Manjakamiadana was built in two stages . The original palace , built between 1839 and 1840 on the orders of Ranavalona I , was built entirely in wood by Jean Laborde . In 1867 , during the reign of Ranavalona II , a stone casing was erected around the original wooden structure . The 30 @-@ metre ( 98 ft ) long , 20 @-@ metre ( 66 ft ) wide original wooden structure was 37 metres ( 121 ft ) high , including the steeply pitched roof of wooden shingles , itself 15 metres ( 49 ft ) in height . These measurements exclude the two superimposed balconies that extended 4 @.@ 6 metres ( 15 ft ) from the exterior walls and encircled the entire building , supported by 0 @.@ 61 @-@ metre ( 2 @.@ 0 ft ) diameter wooden posts . The exterior of the entire building , including the roof , was painted white , with the exception of the balcony railings which were red . The exterior walls were composed of wooden planks tightly fitted together in a repeated chevron pattern reminiscent of traditional thatch walls , while the wood planks of the interior walls were hung vertically . The building could be entered by three doors : the main entrance in the northern wall , another in the southern wall and a third reserved for servants in the eastern wall . 
 An open and spacious ground floor respected the same traditional layout exemplified in Besakana and other Merina homes , including the presence of hearth stones in their customary corner . Following traditional construction practices , the roof three stories above was supported by an enormous andry ( central pillar ) that was given the name <unk> ( " Genuine Silver " ) . According to popular legend , this was made of a single rosewood tree trunk transported from the eastern rain forests . Recent archaeological excavations of the site during reconstruction have since disproved this account as the pillar was found to be a composite of fitted rosewood pieces rather than a single solid post . According to custom , the north @-@ eastern corner pillar was the first to be erected . Its length necessitated the use of a pulley designed by Jean Laborde , the principal architect , to haul the trunk into place . When an accident occurred during the operation , the queen designated a Malagasy carpenter to manufacture a crane to complete the task . Thousands of the queen 's subjects were forced to labour on the building 's construction in lieu of paying cash taxes pursuant to a tradition called fanampoana . One historic source claimed that 25 @,@ 000 subjects participated in the raising of the building 's corner posts alone . The harsh working conditions were said to have been the cause of many deaths , although precise figures are unknown . 
 Due to the deterioration of the wood of the exterior balconies over time , Queen Ranavalona II commissioned James Cameron to reinforce and encase the original structure in a stone shell in 1867 . Cameron 's exterior replaced the wooden balconies with stone walls three stories high . On each of the three floors , seven arched windows run the length of the two longer side walls while five windows illuminate the shorter front and back walls . A square tower stands at each of the four corners of the stone shell , extending above the level of the walls and forming their junction . A clock and bells were installed in the north @-@ eastern tower . 
 The ground floor of Manjakamiadana was divided into two vast rooms with furniture and decor that reflected European influence but with placement of objects respecting the norms of Malagasy cosmology . Following the reign of Radama II , the building was no longer inhabited but instead was reserved for state occasions . The northernmost of these two rooms was the site of the signing of important trade treaties with British and American dignitaries . It was also opened annually for the celebration of the Fandroana ( Royal Bath ) ceremony . Following the imposition of French colonial rule , Manjakamiadana was transformed in 1897 into L <unk> Le Myre de Vilers ( Le Myre de Vilers School ) , a training centre for Malagasy civil servants employed by the French colonial regime . When the purpose of the building changed , the elevation of the main hall 's floor was raised by building a platform on top of the original wooden floor . 
 = = = Tranovola = = = 
 Tranovola was first built in the Rova compound for Radama I in 1819 by Gros , then later reconstructed by Jean Laborde in 1845 on the orders of Queen Ranavalona I for her son Radama II . The origin of the name Tranovola , meaning " Silver House " , derives from the silver ornamentation used to decorate the exterior of the building . Sources have offered varying accounts of this silver decoration , including silver nails reportedly used to affix the roof , silver ornamentation on the window and door casings , tiny silver bells hung from the roof , and tiny mirrors embedded in the interior and exterior walls . Another account describes silver " fringes " on the west side of the building , and gable decorations consisting of silver " buttons " and decorative images made from pounded silver . After the supposed assassination of Radama II in 1863 , the palace was used by Prime Ministers Rainivoninahitriniony and Rainilaiarivony to receive ambassadors and conduct the diplomatic affairs of the Kingdom of Madagascar . 
 Built entirely of wood and surrounded by two stacked verandas around a central interior pillar supporting a steeply pitched roof , the exterior walls of Tranovola were painted red while the roof and railings of the verandas were painted white . Prior to its 1845 remodel , the original 6 @-@ metre ( 20 ft ) long and 7 @.@ 2 @-@ metre ( 24 ft ) wide Tranovola took shape in several stages over the course of Radama 's reign . The initial building was a two @-@ storey house that in other respects largely followed the traditional architectural norms of the noble class in the highlands . Some time later a balcony was added on the second floor . This was eventually replaced by wraparound verandas on both floors , from which the king would deliver his royal speeches to the crowd gathered below . 
 There were two key catalysts beyond Radama 's affinity for Creole architecture that inspired Gros to innovate so far beyond traditional construction norms : the recent construction of a two @-@ storey house with a balcony in the neighbourhood of Andohalo by a British missionary ( the first balcony in highland Madagascar ) , and the 1823 arrival of Princess Rasalimo to the Rova , necessitating the redesign of Bevato as her residence . Rasalimo , whose marriage to Radama secured the peace between the Merina Kingdom and that of her Sakalava people on the west coast , was made Radama 's principal wife and reportedly demanded an exceptional palace for her home . This request led Radama to employ a Creole architect named Jean Julien to design the unprecedented two @-@ storey house . Although historic sources are divided on whether Tranovola , Bevato or Marivolanitra was the first two @-@ storey house at the Rova , the innovations embodied in these buildings and particularly in Tranovola underscore the rising influence of foreign architectural norms in Imerina . Tranovola is widely represented by historians as the first true example of the hybridisation of Merina architectural norms and those of Europe , and its design served as a model for the larger Manjakamiadana palace some years later . The innovative features of this building and the Manjakamiadana it inspired — particularly the verandas supported by exterior columns — became the new norm in highlands architecture , especially upon the adoption of brick as the principal building material . 
 On each floor of the two @-@ storey building , the floor plan consisted of a large central room flanked on either side by two smaller rooms . Although the interior was laid out according to traditional cosmological norms with a north @-@ south orientation and central supporting pillar , the decor was entirely innovative . Tranovola was the first building in Imerina to feature glass windows . Its walls were inlaid with mirrors and painted with naive art frescoes of Merina sovereigns and royal army imagery in a style that has drawn comparisons with French 19th century <unk> prints . The building 's fine silk brocaded curtains , chandeliers , cabinets in ebony and gold , and sculptures in alabaster and bronze were remarked upon by a European visitor in 1823 , as were the colourful fabric wall coverings imported from England . During the reign of Ranavalona I , Crown Prince Rakoto ( later King Radama II ) occupied Tranovola as his personal residence . After the Queen 's death , Radama continued to occupy rooms on the second storey of the building , using the smaller rooms on the ground floor as storage space . A British visitor in 1873 reported that the wooden floors of Tranovola were highly polished , while the walls were hung with French wallpaper and decorated with imported mirrors and oil paintings including a portrait of Queen Victoria given as a gift to Radama II . Just inside the front door sat a seven @-@ pound Armstrong Gun in its carriage with numerous imported sofas , costly decorative objects and other items placed throughout the vast space . 
 Under Gallieni 's colonial administration , Tranovola was annexed to L <unk> le Myre de Vilers housed in the nearby Manjakamiadana . Later , in 1902 , Tranovola became the headquarters of the Académie Malgache ( Malagasy Academy ) before being transformed into a museum of palaeontology . 
 = = = Manampisoa = = = 
 Manampisoa , also called <unk> ( " Beautiful Palace " ) , was a small villa in the form of a cross designed by James Cameron for Queen Rasoherina . Construction was overseen by William Pool . After the first corner post of the building was raised on 25 April 1865 , work continued for two years before Manampisoa was complete . Measuring approximately 19 metres ( 62 ft ) long , 9 @.@ 1 metres ( 30 ft ) wide and 15 metres ( 49 ft ) high , the structure was built using traditional vertical wood wall boards topped by a wooden roof and featured sliding windows protected by heavy wooden shutters . It was built on a site formerly occupied by the wooden house called Marivolanitra , which was relocated to Mahazoarivo to make room for the new building . 
 Inside , the layout consisted of two floors with four rooms each , linked by a central staircase with a decorative wooden balustrade . Ebony and rosewood were used for the interior panelling , floors and ceilings while the floor of the central hall exhibited a diamond parquet design in oak and rosewood . An 1873 visitor described the floor as " highly polished ... all right enough for bare feet but rather slippery for boots " . Wallpaper adorned the walls of the central hall , which was approximately 15 metres ( 49 ft ) long , 6 @.@ 1 metres ( 20 ft ) wide and 3 @.@ 7 metres ( 12 ft ) high . The queen 's couch occupied the northeast corner of the room , a space reserved for the ancestors according to traditional Malagasy cosmology , where she would receive visitors in repose . A room formerly used as an office by Prime Minister Rainilaiarivony occupied the portion of the second floor facing the stairway . 
 Manampisoa was one of the residences of queens Rasoherina , Ranavalona II and Ranavalona III , the last three monarchs of the Kingdom of Madagascar . Once complete , Manampisoa was used by Rasoherina as her primary residence but the queen was only able to inhabit the house for approximately one year before dying in April 1868 . After Rasoherina 's death , her successor , Ranavalona II , used the building as a temporary worship space during work on the stone chapel . Upon the collapse of the monarchy following French colonisation , the colonial authority transformed Manampisoa into a museum of Malagasy culture . 
 = = = Besakana and other houses = = = 
 To the south of Manjakamiadana and Tranovola stood a number of smaller , older wooden houses , each between 15 metres ( 49 ft ) and 18 metres ( 59 ft ) high built in the traditional Merina architectural style reserved for the noble class . Three of these were of particular importance : Besakana , Mahitsy and Masoandro . 
 Besakana is believed to have been the first residence of a Merina sovereign on the Rova site . Historical accounts claim that the first sovereign of Antananarivo , Andrianjaka , built the original Besakana as his personal residence at his newly established capital in the mid @-@ 17th century . This original building was torn down and reconstructed in the same design by Andriamasinavalona around 1680 , and again by Andrianampoinimerina in 1800 , each of whom used the building as their personal residence . Radama I lived in Besakana for much of his time in the Rova compound . The first school in Imerina was established at Radama 's behest on 8 December 1820 by David Jones of the London Missionary Society to educate the children of the royal family . This school initially operated from Besakana for a short while until classes were transferred to the larger , recently remodelled Bevato nearby . Sovereigns were enthroned in Besakana and their mortal remains were displayed here before burial . A visitor writing in 1888 described this ancient building as " the official state room for civil affairs ... regarded as the throne of the kingdom . " 
 Mahitsielafanjaka ( Mahitsy ) became the residence of Andrianampoinimerina after he moved his capital from Ambohimanga to Antananarivo . Described in 1888 as the seat of ancestral spiritual authority at the Rova , the traditional sacrifice of a rooster during the ceremony of the Fandroana took place here , and ombiasy ( astrologers ) asked to perform sikidy ( divination ) for a sovereign would do so within this space . The building also formerly housed a major royal idol called Manjakatsiroa ( or the entire collection of royal idols , according to another account ) until the supposed public burning of all such relics by Queen Ranavalona II in 1869 following her conversion to Christianity . Built in 1796 , the traditional wooden Mahitsy follows traditional architectural norms : the roof is supported by the central pillar , and two superimposed beds — the highest for the king and the other for his wives — are located in the northeast corner , the portion of the home reserved for royalty and the ancestors . These beds are raised high off the ground to protect the sleepers from a nocturnal attack . Items formerly on display in this building after the end of the Merina monarchy in 1897 until the destruction of the original structure in the 1995 fire included Andrianampoinimerina 's <unk> ( palanquin ) , several wooden trunks and a pot of jaka ( zebu confit ) said to date from the king 's reign . 
 The name Masoandrotsiroa ( Masoandro ) was given to a series of buildings on the Rova grounds . The original Masoandro was one of the first three residences built by the Rova 's founder , Andrianjaka , in the early 17th century , and over time it became the house reserved for occupation by a new sovereign immediately following coronation . This same Masoandro or a restored version of it was still standing on the Rova grounds and occupied by one of Andrianampoinimerina 's wives two hundred years later . However , historic sources offer seemingly contradictory or incomplete accounts of the fate of this historic building . A Masoandro was said to have been relocated from the Rova to Ambohimanga by Ranavalona I. Another source states that Masoandro was demolished at the Rova by Ranavalona II and replaced by a house in brick , only to be demolished again by Ranavalona III . This last sovereign of Madagascar sought to build a new brick palace , also called Masoandro , with four square corner towers and a higher central tower modelled on the French Residence of Antananarivo . Work began in 1893 but was interrupted by war with France in 1895 . The brick foundations of this unfinished Masoandro are still visible today . Still another source states that Masoandro was one of three traditional wooden houses still standing at the Rova when Madagascar was colonised by the French , with the implication that the name was applied to distinct buildings at various times . 
 Near the foundations of the brick Masoandro formerly stood Kelisoa , a traditional wooden structure which housed sacred animals and concubines at different points during the reign of Radama I and was later used by Ranavalona III to hold receptions . Also formerly standing here was <unk> ( " Good Message " ) , a small palace built for Ranavalona I , rebuilt after 1862 , occupied as a primary residence by Ranavalona II and Ranavalona III , and ultimately destroyed by French artillery in September 1895 . 
 By the 1960s , Besakana , Mahitsy and one other wooden house ( presumably the last wooden Masoandro ) were the only remaining examples of an estimated twenty ancient aristocratic houses that had occupied the Rova site during the reign of Andrianampoinimerina . By 1975 , this unidentified third house — said to be the oldest original structure on the grounds — was no longer standing . 
 = = = Royal tombs = = = 
 Nine royal tombs were located in the north @-@ eastern quadrant of the Rova grounds . These included the two large tombs of King Radama I ( <unk> ) and Queen Rasoherina ( <unk> ) , as well as seven ancient wooden tombs known collectively as the Fitomiandalana . These older tombs , the first of which was built in 1630 for King Andrianjaka , were a series of seven tomb pits topped with individual wooden trano masina ( tomb houses ) built close together in a row with their gable peaks aligned , followed by one tomb pit without a tomb house . Tomb houses are particular to highland tombs and are intended to indicate the noble rank of the deceased and house his or her spirit after death . 
 Each tomb of the Fitomiandalana contained the bodies of early Kings of Imerina and their relatives , and was assigned a name after the principal occupant of the underlying grave . These were , in order : <unk> ( son of Andriamasinavalona and King of Antananarivo , five bodies ) , <unk> ( son of Andriamasinavalona and King of Antananarivo at the time of future king Andrianampoinimerina 's birth , three bodies ) , <unk> ( oldest son of Andriamasinavalona and King of Antananarivo , two bodies ) , Andriamasinavalona ( great @-@ grandson of Andrianjaka and King of Imerina , three bodies ) , <unk> ( grandson of Andrianjaka and King of Imerina , two bodies ) , Andrianjaka ( founder of Antananarivo and King of Imerina , 12 bodies ) and Andriantsitakatrandriana ( son of Andrianjaka and King of Imerina , two bodies ) . The final tomb without a tomb house was for Andriantomponimerina ( son of Andriamasinavalona and King of Antananarivo ) and housed eight bodies . 
 After the dissolution of the Kingdom of Madagascar , the French colonial authorities shifted the location of these tombs thereby disrupting the original cosmological symbolism of their arrangement . When the original tombs were excavated for relocation , the French found the mortal remains of the nobles within had each been wrapped in numerous traditional lambas ( woven silk cloths ) then set within wooden coffins packed with charcoal . Bodies buried at Ambohimanga were found to have been entombed in the same way . 
 Two more distinctive stone tombs were built beside the Fitomiandalana , to the north of Tranovola , the first of which was completed in 1828 by Louis Gros for Radama I. Further north , the second tomb was originally built for Queen Rasoherina by James Cameron in 1868 . Both of these stone tombs were topped with a tomb house . Radama 's tomb bears features popularised during the reign of his father , Andrianampoinimerina : three superimposed levels ( excluding the tomb house ) with upright sheets of stone at the base level , one of which could be removed to provide access to the subterranean chamber where the sovereign 's body was laid upon a massive stone slab . Radama 's tomb house broke with tradition by replacing the usual miniaturised version of the aristocratic wooden house ( typified by Besakana and other ancient houses in the Rova grounds ) with a house featuring a veranda , an architectural novelty introduced during his reign . The roof of this tomb house was originally thatch made from rushes but was replaced in the 1850s with wooden shingles , an innovation introduced from nearby Reunion Island or Mauritius . By contrast , the tomb of Rasoherina , erected forty years later , featured a two @-@ level base ( excluding the tomb house ) made of chiselled stone blocks held together with cement . 
 General Joseph Gallieni ordered the disinterment of the Merina sovereigns buried 21 kilometres ( 13 mi ) away at Ambohimanga and had them reburied at the Rova . The bodies of Radama II and Andrianampoinimerina were added to the tomb of Radama I , while those of Ranavalona I and Ranavalona II went into the tomb of Rasoherina . Several decades later in 1938 , the body of Ranavalona III , who died in 1917 at her place of exile in Algiers ( Algeria ) , was added to those of the other queens of Madagascar at the Rova . During the 1995 fire , heat from the burning wooden structures within the Rova compound caused the stone tombs to explode , leaving the mortal remains of generations of Merina sovereigns to be consumed by the flames . 
 = = = Fiangonana = = = 
 Built by William Pool for Ranavalona II , Fiangonana ( " Chapel " ) required eleven years to complete . The structure 's foundation stone was laid on 20 July 1869 , and its subsequent construction used over 35 @,@ 000 hand @-@ chiselled stones . Inaugurated on 8 April 1880 , the central worship space measured 12 @.@ 9 metres ( 42 ft ) wide and 18 @.@ 5 metres ( 61 ft ) in length with an estimated capacity of 450 persons . The building was designed with a private pew for the royal family , elevated on a platform approximately 0 @.@ 91 metres ( 3 @.@ 0 ft ) high and accessed by a short staircase . A private entrance available to the royal family was accessible by a decorative exterior bridge linking the chapel to the raised embankment upon which Manampisoa stood . 
 The chapel boasts a number of distinctive features . At the time of its completion , its 34 @-@ metre ( 112 ft ) tower was the only structure in Madagascar to be roofed in locally sourced slate . The windows were decorated with stained glass , and a pipe organ was installed to provide music at services . The organ and stained glass were imported from England , while the pews , altar panels and queen 's private pew were all ornately crafted from indigenous precious woods by local artisans . During the colonial period , the chapel was used briefly as an exhibition space for European paintings before being closed to the public . 
 = = Destruction = = 
 On the night of 6 November 1995 , a fire broke out in the Rova compound , destroying or severely damaging all of its buildings . Once the flames had been extinguished , all that remained of the original structures were the stone shells of the royal chapel and Manjakamiadana . Fire @-@ fighters arrived late at the scene . Their capacity to douse the fire was hampered by the discovery that their fire hoses did not properly fit onto the nearby hydrants . In addition , the water pressure at the hydrants was significantly reduced due to Analamanga hilltop 's high elevation . As the fire @-@ fighters battled the flames , numerous bystanders ran into Rova compound buildings to retrieve artefacts of historic and cultural significance . Approximately 1 @,@ 675 objects were saved out of an estimated total of 6 @,@ 700 . Some pillaging is believed to have occurred . On the night of the fire , the body of one of the queens was found in the public square in the centre of the city . A funeral vigil was held the following day for these royal remains . The remains were later identified as belonging to Ranavalona III , and have since been re @-@ interred in the royal tombs at Ambohimanga . 
 The destruction of the Rova of Antananarivo occurred at a time when the complex was in the final stages of the process to become classified as Madagascar 's first cultural UNESCO World Heritage Site . Six people were initially charged in connection with the Rova 's destruction in an Antananarivo court of law , but the official investigation concluded that the fire was an accident . Public accusations of a cover @-@ up placed the blame for the fire on government officials , various ethnic groups , foreign powers and other parties . Over fifteen years after the fire , the widespread belief persists within and outside Madagascar that a deliberate arson was the cause . Rumoured justifications for arson at the Rova were numerous and remain unproven . The revelation that important financial archives had been destroyed early on the morning of the fire sparked rumours that corrupt government officials had lit the blaze to create a public distraction from their illicit activities . Other explanations have included popular dissatisfaction with the election of divisive mayor Guy Willy <unk> or a flare @-@ up of long @-@ standing tensions among coastal peoples resentful of Merina socio @-@ political domination . Accusations were also made against both then @-@ president Albert Zafy and his predecessor , Didier Ratsiraka . The debate over why and how the Rova burned remains an unresolved and highly contentious subject almost two decades later . 
 = = Reconstruction = = 
 Shortly after the fire , the government of Madagascar established the Direction nationale des opérations Rova ( <unk> , or National Office of Rova Operations ) , a body directed by four national experts within Madagascar 's Ministry of Culture who were tasked with developing and overseeing plans for the reconstruction of the Rova . Two years after the fire , several key milestones in the process had been achieved , with objects recovered from the fire inventoried , site excavations completed , preliminary restoration plans for Manjakamiadana developed , and work on the royal chapel initiated . A ramp was also built to enable site access for the necessary heavy construction vehicles . Prior to work commencing , a traditional ceremony was performed to restore the sanctity of the site , which had served a dual role as both a physical tomb and spiritual link to venerated ancestors . 
 Estimated initial reconstruction costs were put at 20 million U.S. dollars by experts from UNESCO , which was the principal contributor of funds as well as expertise due to the Rova 's then status as a soon @-@ to @-@ be officially recognised World Heritage Site . The French Development Agency also pledged tens of thousands of dollars to the project while additional monies in the form of private donations from residents of Antananarivo helped to fund the reconstruction of the tombs on the complex . However , according to a UNESCO report released in June 2000 , the majority of funds raised by UNESCO between 1997 and 2000 for the Ratsiraka administration 's Rova reconstruction initiative — an estimated 700 billion Malagasy Francs — were allegedly embezzled by the <unk> Administrator , stalling reconstruction at the end of the planning stage . 
 Significant progress toward reconstruction was seen under the administration of President Marc Ravalomanana ( 2001 – 2009 ) who created the Comité national du patrimoine ( CMP , or National Heritage Committee ) responsible for overseeing the effort . The less time @-@ intensive restoration projects were the first to be undertaken and completed . Efforts to restore the chapel , the monument least affected by the fire due to its stone structure , focused particularly on restoring its roof , steeple and wooden pews along with altar panels that had burned in the fire . Work on the chapel was completed in 2003 . Reconstruction work on Mahitsy began in 2001 and was completed in January 2003 , while planning for the reconstruction of Besakana began in December 2003 but stalled in 2009 . The restoration of the nine royal tombs in the Rova complex was completed in October 2003 . In early January 2006 , Phase 1 of the Manjakamiadana reconstruction commenced . This phase was scheduled for completion in May 2008 . The reconstruction of the larger wooden palaces , such as Tranovola and Manampisoa , has not been planned . 
 The original exterior of Manjakamiadana comprised over 70 @,@ 000 granite stones , of which approximately 20 @,@ 000 had become cracked during the fire and needed replacement . The western wall of the palace partially collapsed in January 2004 and required complete rebuilding . Every stone was removed and numbered to facilitate the reinsertion of each one in its original place with two French stone @-@ masonry companies engaged to supervise the work . The foundation was modernised , first using laser technology to assess the topography of the site , then by driving 22 cement piles into the ground beneath the foundation base to a depth of 23 metres ( 75 ft ) . Phase 2 consisted of replacing each of the numbered exterior wall stones in its original place , bolstered where needed by new stones to replace those damaged in the fire . Although the palace interior was originally made of wood , the reconstructed building was designed using reinforced concrete interior supporting beams for the walls , ceiling and roof due to concerns over the availability and durability of hardwood . Finally , the roof was re @-@ tiled in blue @-@ gray slate imported from quarries near the French city of Angers . 
 Phases 1 and 2 of the reconstruction process were declared complete in December 2009 at a total cost of 6 @.@ 5 million euros . The work employed 230 people at three sites : a granite quarry on National Route 1 ( <unk> ) , a separate site where the stones were chiselled into shape , and the site of the Rova itself . Phase 3 will consist of the design and rebuilding of the interior of the palace , while Phase 4 will involve planning and subsequent development of the display and management of the museum collection to be housed on the ground floor . In late 2010 , work on these final two phases of reconstruction was scheduled to begin in 2011 with completion expected within 24 months at a cost of approximately 3 @,@ 765 @,@ 000 euros . Following the completion of the first two phases , the Minister of Culture and Heritage fast @-@ tracked the enclosure of windows and doors to protect the building 's interior and began establishing a new inventory of historic objects saved from the fire . These artefacts are currently housed in the Andafiavaratra Palace , former home of late 19th @-@ century Prime Minister Rainilaiarivony , and will be transferred to a museum within Manjakamiadana upon its completion . 
 In March 2009 the Ravalomanana administration was ousted following several months of opposition protests led by then @-@ mayor of Antananarivo , Andry Rajoelina . The transfer of power to Rajoelina , who adopted the title of President of the High Transitional Authority ( HAT ) , was widely viewed as a coup d 'état by members of the international community , leading many bilateral and intergovernmental donors to suspend non @-@ humanitarian support to the regime . The HAT declared its intention to continue the Manjakamiadana reconstruction project using a combination of state funds and donations from private Malagasy citizens . Six banking agencies in Madagascar were selected to serve as collection points for private donations . On 7 March 2011 the HAT relieved the original members of the National Heritage Committee of their posts and mandated the appointment of new members selected from among the regime 's ministerial staff . Despite the introduction of these diverse strategies , the HAT struggled to obtain adequate funds to continue the pace of Rova reconstruction seen in the latter half of the Ravalomanana presidency . Progress toward completion advanced sporadically at a gradual rate throughout the Rajoelina administration . Since assuming power in January 2014 , the Rajaonarimampianina administration has been engaged in discussions with the French Secretary of State for the Francophonie and International Development to agree upon French financial support to assist in completing the restoration work . In June 2014 , the administration declared that the cost of completing the final two phases had risen to 6 @-@ 7 million from the 3 @.@ 7 million originally estimated in 2010 . 
 = Siege of Port Royal ( 1710 ) = 
 The Siege of Port Royal ( 5 – 13 October 1710 ) , also known as the Conquest of Acadia , was conducted by British regular and provincial forces under the command of Francis Nicholson against a French Acadian garrison and the Wabanaki Confederacy under the command of Daniel d 'Auger de Subercase , at the Acadian capital , Port Royal . The successful British siege marked the beginning of permanent British control over the peninsular portion of Acadia , which they renamed Nova Scotia , and it was the first time the British took and held a French colonial possession . After the French surrender , the British occupied the fort in the capital with all the pomp and ceremony of having captured one of the great fortresses of Europe , and renamed it Annapolis Royal . 
 The siege was the third British attempt during Queen Anne 's War to capture the Acadian capital , and it had profound consequences over the next 50 years . The conquest was a key element in the framing of the North American issues in French @-@ British treaty negotiations of 1711 – 1713 . It resulted in the creation of a new colony — Nova Scotia — and introduced significant questions concerning the fate of both the Acadians and the Mi 'kmaq who continued to occupy Acadia . 
 The Conquest of Acadia was a foundational moment in the history of the Canadian state — it was a precursor to the British conquests of Louisbourg and Quebec , and it portended the end of French power in North America more generally . 
 = = Background = = 
 Port Royal was the capital of the French colony of Acadia almost since the French first began settling the area in 1604 . It consequently became a focal point for conflict between English and French colonists in the next century . It was destroyed in 1613 by English raiders led by Samuel Argall , but eventually rebuilt . In 1690 it was captured by forces from the Province of Massachusetts Bay , although it was restored to France by the Treaty of Ryswick . 
 = = = Early expeditions = = = 
 With the outbreak of the War of the Spanish Succession in 1702 , colonists on both sides again prepared for conflict . Acadia 's governor , Jacques @-@ François de Monbeton de Brouillan , had , in anticipation of war , already begun construction of a stone and earth fort in 1701 , which was largely completed by 1704 . Following a French raid on Deerfield on the Massachusetts frontier in February 1704 , the English in Boston organized a raid against Acadia the following May . Led by Benjamin Church , they raided Grand Pré and other Acadian communities . English and French accounts differ on whether Church 's expedition mounted an attack on Port Royal . Church 's account indicates that they anchored in the harbour and considered making an attack , but ultimately decided against the idea ; French accounts claim that a minor attack was made . 
 When Daniel d 'Auger de Subercase became governor of Acadia in 1706 , he went on the offensive , encouraging Indian raids against English targets in New England . He also encouraged privateering from Port Royal against English colonial shipping . The privateers were highly effective ; the English fishing fleet on the Grand Banks was reduced by 80 percent between 1702 and 1707 , and some English coastal communities were raided . 
 English merchants in Boston had long traded with Port Royal , and some of this activity had continued illegally after the war began . However , the business was being hurt by the war , and some merchants began making vocal calls for action , and public outrage rose over the failure of the Massachusetts defenses to stop the French and Indian raids . Massachusetts Bay Governor Joseph Dudley had made repeated requests to London for support without any success , and finally decided to act independently to fend off accusations of complicity in the illegal trade . In spring of 1707 , he authorized an expedition against Port Royal . This expedition made two separate attempts to take Port Royal ; for a variety of reasons , both attempts failed despite the expedition 's significant numerical superiority . 
 = = = British expedition organized = = = 
 In the following years , France failed to send any significant support , while the British mobilized larger and better @-@ organized forces for the conflict in North America . Samuel Vetch , a Scots businessman with colonial ties , went to London in 1708 and lobbied Queen Anne for military support to conquer all of New France . She authorized a " great enterprise " to conquer all of Acadia and Canada in 1709 that was aborted when the promised military support failed to materialize . Vetch and Francis Nicholson , an Englishman who had previously served as colonial governor of Maryland and Virginia , returned to England in its aftermath , and again appealed to the queen for support . They were accompanied by four Indian chiefs , who caused a sensation in London . Nicholson and Vetch successfully argued on behalf of colonial interests for British military support against Port Royal . 
 Nicholson arrived in Boston on 15 July 1710 , bearing a commission from the queen as " General and Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief of all and sundry the Forces , to be employed in the expedition design 'd for the reducing of Port Royal in Nova Scotia " . In addition to 400 marines brought over from England , four New England provinces raised militia regiments : Massachusetts Bay provided 900 , Rhode Island 180 , Connecticut 300 , and New Hampshire 100 . Some of the provincial troops were drilled in the arts of siege warfare by Paul Mascarene , a Huguenot officer in the British Army . A band of Iroquois was also recruited to serve as scouts on the expedition . When the fleet sailed on 29 September , it consisted of 36 transports , two bomb galleys , and five warships . Two ships , HMS Falmouth and HMS Dragon , were sent from England , while HMS Feversham and HMS Lowestoft were sent from New York to join with HMS Chester , which was already stationed at Boston . Nicholson sent HMS Chester ahead of the fleet to blockade the Digby Gut , which controlled naval access to Port Royal . 
 = = = Port Royal defences = = = 
 Port Royal was defended by about 300 troops , many of whom were poorly trained recruits from France . Subercase had taken steps to improve the local defences since the 1707 sieges , building a new bomb @-@ proof powder magazine and barracks in 1708 , and clearing woods from the river banks to deny attackers cover . He completed the construction of another vessel to assist in naval defence , and engaged privateers with great success against New England fishing and shipping . From prisoners taken by the privateers he learned that plans were continually being made in 1708 and 1709 for new attempts on Port Royal . 
 = = Siege = = 
 As the fleet sailed north , it was met by a dispatch vessel sent by Thomas Matthews , captain of the Chester . She carried deserters from the French garrison , who reported that morale was extremely low . Nicholson sent the ship ahead with one of the transports ; when they entered Digby Gut they received some fire from parties of Mi 'kmaq on the shore . The ships returned fire with their cannons , without either side taking casualties . On 5 October , the main British fleet arrived at Goat Island , about 10 kilometres ( 6 @.@ 2 mi ) below Port Royal . That afternoon , the transport Caesar ran aground while attempting to enter the Annapolis River , and was eventually swept onto the rocks . Its captain , some of its crew , and 23 soldiers died , while a company commander and some 25 others struggled ashore . 
 The following day , 6 October , British marines began landing both north and south of the fortress and the town . The northern force was joined by four New England regiments under Colonel Vetch , while Nicholson led the remaining New England troops as part of the southern force . The landings took place without incident , with fire from the fort answered by one of the fleet 's bomb ships at long range . Although later accounts of the siege claimed Vetch 's detachment was part of a strategic plan to surround the fort , contemporary accounts report that Vetch wanted to have a command that was somewhat independent of Nicholson . These same accounts claim Vetch never got to within range of the fort 's guns until after the siege ended ; his attempts to erect a battery of mortars in a muddy area across Allain 's Creek from the fort was repulsed by cannon fire . The southern force met with guerrilla @-@ style resistance outside the fort , with Acadian and Indian defenders firing small arms from houses and wooded areas , in addition to taking fire from the fort . This fire resulted in three British killed , but the defenders were unable to keep the British on the south side from establishing a camp about 400 yards ( 370 m ) from the fort . 
 Over the next four days the British landed their cannons and brought them up to the camp . Fire from the fort and supporters outside it persisted , and the British bomb ships wrought havoc within the fort with their fire each night . With the opening of new British batteries imminent , Subercase sent out an officer with a parley flag on 10 October . The negotiations got off to a bad start because the officer was not properly announced by a drummer , and deteriorated from there . Each side ended up holding an officer of the other , principally over matters of military etiquette , and the British continued their siege work . 
 By 12 October , the siege trenches had advanced , and cannons that were within 300 feet ( 91 m ) of the fort opened fire . Nicholson sent Subercase a demand that he surrender , and negotiations began once more . By the end of the day , the parties reached an agreement on the terms of surrender , which was formally signed the next day . The garrison was allowed to leave the fort with all the honours of war , " their Arms and Baggage , Drums beating , and Colours flying . " The British were to transport the garrison to France , and there were specific protections in the capitulation to protect the local residents . These terms called for the " Inhabitants within Cannon shot of the Fort " to be allowed to remain on their properties for up to two years if they so chose , provided they were willing to take an oath to the British Crown . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The British took formal possession of Port Royal following a ceremony on 16 October , in which they renamed the place Annapolis Royal in honour of their queen . Samuel Vetch was inaugurated as the new governor of Nova Scotia . Massachusetts and New Hampshire proclaimed a day of public thanksgiving . 
 The first attempt to retake Annapolis Royal happened the next year . After a skirmish in which a party of British soldiers was ambushed , Bernard @-@ Anselme d 'Abbadie de Saint @-@ Castin lead a force of 200 Acadians and native warriors in a siege of the fort , without success . 
 The capture of Port Royal marked the end of French rule in peninsular Acadia , and inaugurated a struggle for control of the territory that lasted until the British conquests of the Seven Years ' War . The status of Acadia was one of the more contentious issues in the negotiations leading to the 1713 Treaty of Utrecht , and very nearly led to renewed war . French negotiators were unable to recover Acadia , although they were able to retain Isle Saint @-@ Jean ( present @-@ day Prince Edward Island ) and Île Royale , ( present day Cape Breton Island ) , which provided access to the important Atlantic fisheries . 
 Acadia 's people were placed in a difficult position by the conquest . The British on numerous occasions demanded they take oaths to the British Crown , but many refused to take oaths requiring them to take arms against the French , preferring to proclaim their neutrality . For this and other reasons , hundreds of Acadians left peninsular Nova Scotia over the next decade . Most of them avoided the principal French colonial settlements and went to French @-@ occupied Isle Saint @-@ Jean . 
 Acadia 's border was not formally demarcated by the Treaty of Utrecht , which became a cause of ongoing friction between the British and French , especially on the Isthmus of Chignecto , which both sides eventually fortified . The French interpreted the phrase ancient boundaries to imply only the peninsula of present @-@ day Nova Scotia , thereby excluding the mainland between New England and the St. Lawrence , <unk> St. Jean , and Cape Breton . This helped the Amerindians of <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> to retain their sovereignty over their old hunting grounds . 
 In 1746 , the grand expedition was organized in France under the command of the Duc d <unk> . The expedition was composed of 20 warships , 21 frigates , and 32 transport ships , containing 800 cannons , 3 @,@ 000 soldiers , and 10 @,@ 000 marines . The expedition was to retake Louisbourg and then Annapolis Royal . However , after a three months crossing , and the dispersal of the fleet between Sable Island and the mainland , the expedition turned out to be a disaster for the French , and they would not try to recapture Port Royal again . 
 The territorial dispute would not be fully resolved until the British conquest of New France in 1760 , and the informal boundary between the British and French in the dispute ( the <unk> River ) now forms the border between the Canadian provinces of Nova Scotia and New Brunswick . 
 = = Historic fiction = = 
 Evelyn <unk> My Captain Waits . <unk> 
 = Delaware Route 273 = 
 Delaware Route 273 ( DE 273 ) is a state highway in New Castle County , Delaware . The route runs from Maryland Route 273 ( MD 273 ) at the Maryland border near Newark east to DE 9 and DE 141 in New Castle . The route runs through suburban areas between Newark and New Castle as a four @-@ lane divided highway , passing through Ogletown and Christiana . DE 273 intersects DE 896 in downtown Newark , DE 2 / DE 72 on the eastern edge of Newark , DE 4 in Ogletown , Interstate 95 ( I @-@ 95 ) , DE 7 , and DE 1 in Christiana , DE 37 in Pleasantville , and DE 58 and U.S. Route 13 ( US 13 ) / US 40 in Hares Corner . 
 What is now DE 273 was originally built as a state highway in the 1920s and 1930s , with the portion east of Hares Corner becoming a part of US 40 , which had crossed the Delaware River on a ferry between New Castle and Pennsville , New Jersey . DE 273 was designated by 1936 to connect the Maryland border near Newark to Hares Corner . In the 1950s , the route was extended to New Castle when US 40 was realigned to the Delaware Memorial Bridge . DE 273 was moved onto new alignments around Christiana in the 1980s and through Ogletown in the 1990s . 
 = = Route description = = 
 DE 273 begins at the Maryland border west of Newark , where it continues west into that state as MD 273 . From the state line , the route heads southeast on two @-@ lane undivided Nottingham Road , passing through wooded suburban neighborhoods as it enters Newark . DE 273 becomes West Main Street as it approaches the downtown area , intersecting the southbound direction of DE 896 , at which point DE 273 forms a concurrency with southbound DE 896 . The road crosses CSX 's Philadelphia Subdivision and comes to an intersection with New London Road , which runs northwest as northbound DE 896 , and South Main Street , which heads southwest as DE 896 . 
 At this point , DE 273 splits into the one @-@ way pair of West Delaware Avenue eastbound and West Main Street westbound , with eastbound DE 273 briefly following one @-@ way South Main Street southwest to get from West Main Street to West Delaware Avenue . The one @-@ way pair , which carries two lanes in each direction , becomes concurrent with DE 896 in both directions until the South College Avenue intersection . DE 273 runs through the University of Delaware campus and continues through the downtown as East Delaware Avenue eastbound and East Main Street westbound . Farther east , East Delaware Avenue shifts farther to the south of East Main Street , with the one @-@ way streets passing between a residential neighborhood and East Delaware Avenue passing to the north of Newark High School . Past here , the route comes to an intersection with DE 2 / DE 72 . At this point , eastbound DE 273 turns north to join DE 72 on four @-@ lane divided Library Avenue to rejoin westbound DE 273 . 
 Past DE 2 / DE 72 , DE 273 leaves Newark and heads east on Ogletown Road , a five @-@ lane road with a center left @-@ turn lane that passes through commercial areas , soon becoming a four @-@ lane divided highway . The road continues east and comes to a bridge over Amtrak 's Northeast Corridor . The route turns southeast and reaches an interchange with DE 4 in Ogletown . Past this interchange , DE 273 becomes Christiana Road and heads east through suburban residential neighborhoods with some businesses . The road bends southeast again as it comes to an interchange with I @-@ 95 ( Delaware Turnpike ) . Following this , the route heads into more commercial areas and becomes Christiana Road , bypassing the community of Christiana to the southwest . DE 273 runs south through wooded areas and crosses Old Baltimore Pike before curving east and coming to an intersection with DE 7 . A short distance later , the road reaches an interchange with the DE 1 freeway . 
 Following this interchange , DE 273 heads through woods before entering areas of suburban homes and businesses , coming to an intersection with the southern terminus of DE 37 in Pleasantville . The route continues east and intersects the eastern terminus of DE 58 near the Wilmington Airport . A short distance later , the road comes to an intersection with US 13 / US 40 in Hares Corner . 
 Past this intersection , DE 273 becomes concurrent with DE 9 Truck and turns into two @-@ lane undivided Frenchtown Road , heading east between business parks to the south and farm fields to the north . DE 273 comes to an intersection with DE 9 and DE 141 to the west of New Castle , where the route , along with DE 9 Truck , officially ends . Despite this , DE 273 signage continues east along DE 9 toward New Castle on Delaware Street . Along this stretch , the road crosses the New Castle Industrial Track Trail . Before reaching the New Castle Historic District after a crossing of Norfolk Southern 's New Castle Secondary , DE 9 / DE 273 makes a left turn onto Ferry Cut Off Street . DE 273 's signed eastern terminus is at Sixth Street near the Delaware River , where DE 9 turns northeast on Sixth Street to head toward Wilmington . 
 DE 273 has an annual average daily traffic count ranging from a high of 49 @,@ 566 vehicles at the I @-@ 95 interchange to a low of 8 @,@ 760 vehicles at the western edge of Newark . The portion of DE 273 east of DE 896 is part of the National Highway System . 
 = = History = = 
 What is now DE 273 originally existed as a county road by 1920 . Four years later , the portion of road through Newark was upgraded to a state highway while the road was paved between Hares Corner and New Castle . A year later , the section between Ogletown and Christiana was planned as a state highway while the section east of Basin Road was upgraded to a state highway . In 1930 , the road between the Maryland border and Newark was built as a state highway , providing a shorter route to the Conowingo Dam in Maryland . The following year , US 40 was designated to run on the portion of road between Hares Corner and New Castle , where it connected to a ferry across the Delaware River to Pennsville , New Jersey . Also by this time , all of present @-@ day DE 273 was upgraded to a state highway except the portion of US 40 between Hares Corner and Basin Road . In 1934 , recommendations were made to upgrade US 40 to a state highway between Hares Corner and New Castle . The portion of US 40 between Hares Corner and New Castle was taken over by the state on July 1 , 1935 . Construction on upgrading this section began in 1936 . This project was completed later that year . The same year , a bridge was constructed over a Pennsylvania Railroad line ( now the New Castle Industrial Track Trail ) in New Castle . 
 DE 273 was designated to run from the Maryland border west of Newark east to US 13 and US 40 in Hares Corner by 1936 , roughly following its current alignment . In Newark , the route ran concurrent with DE 2 . By 1952 , US 40 was realigned to use the Delaware Memorial Bridge to cross the Delaware River , and DE 273 was extended east along the former alignment of US 40 to end at present @-@ day DE 9 in New Castle . In 1956 , DE 2 and DE 273 were routed onto the one @-@ way pair of Delaware Avenue eastbound and Main Street westbound in downtown Newark following an eastward extension of Delaware Avenue to the intersection between DE 2 and DE 273 east of the city . 
 By 1984 , DE 9 was realigned to follow DE 273 east of the DE 141 intersection . DE 273 was realigned to bypass Christiana a year later . DE 2 was routed to bypass Newark and DE 2 Bus. became concurrent with DE 273 through Newark by 1990 . By 1997 , DE 273 was moved to its current alignment in the Ogletown area , eliminating a short concurrency with DE 4 and involving the construction of an interchange with that route . The concurrent DE 2 Bus. designation was eliminated in 2013 as part of simplifying the route numbers in Newark . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in New Castle County . 
 = Jimmy Chamberlin = 
 James Joseph " Jimmy " Chamberlin ( born June 10 , 1964 ) is an American drummer and record producer . He is best known as the drummer for the alternative rock band The Smashing Pumpkins . Following the 2000 breakup of the band , Chamberlin joined Pumpkins frontman Billy Corgan in the supergroup Zwan and also formed his own group , the Jimmy Chamberlin Complex . In 2005 , Chamberlin joined Corgan in reforming The Smashing Pumpkins ; he eventually left the group in March 2009 , though he would return again in 2015 for a summer tour . He performed in the group Skysaw until 2012 . He is currently active under the Jimmy Chamberlin Complex name . In addition to his current work as CEO , Chamberlin has joined Chicago jazz saxophonist Frank Catalano for a string of 2013 – 15 performances in the Chicago area . An EP by Catalano and Chamberlin Love Supreme Collective - EP was released on the 29th of July 2014 . 
 Chamberlin , who originally trained as a jazz drummer , cites jazz musicians Benny Goodman , Duke Ellington , Gene Krupa , and Buddy Rich , as well as rock drummers Keith Moon , Ian Paice , and John Bonham as major influences on his technique . While he is known as " one of the most powerful drummers in rock , " he primarily strives for emotionally communicative playing . In 2008 , Gigwise named Chamberlin the 5th best drummer of all time . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early life = = = 
 Chamberlin was born in Joliet , Illinois , one of six children . His father and his older brother Paul were both active in jazz bands , playing clarinet and drums respectively , and his brother Paul is still an active rock drummer , with a local cover band , Chasing Amy . 
 Chamberlin began drumming at age 9 . His early instruction included Latin , Brazilian , and big band techniques , but focused on jazz , under the tutelage of future Yanni drummer , Charlie Adams . 
 Chamberlin left home at age 15 and joined a series of local bands . Although his early music career proved profitable , Chamberlin 's father pressured him into going to college . In 1994 , Chamberlin revealed that he had been estranged from his father for seven years . After three years with the show band JP and the Cats , Chamberlin , wearied by the touring schedule , quit and got a job building custom homes with his brother @-@ in @-@ law . Before long , he joined the Smashing Pumpkins . 
 = = = The Smashing Pumpkins = = = 
 The Smashing Pumpkins were looking for a live drummer to open a show at the Metro , a Chicago club . Chamberlin and Billy Corgan met through a mutual friend , and Chamberlin expressed cautious interest , later recalling : 
 So I went out and saw the band – Billy , James , and D 'arcy – playing at Avalon with a drum machine . Man , did they sound horrible ! They were atrocious . But the thing I noticed was that not only were the song structures good , but Billy 's voice had a lot of drive to it , like he was dying to succeed . So I ended up driving from work every Wednesday to rehearse with them . 
 Corgan had his own concerns : 
 He was wearing a pink t @-@ shirt , stonewashed jeans , he had a mullet haircut , and he was driving a <unk> , and had yellow drums . We were sort of looking each other in the eye thinking , ' This ain 't gonna happen , this is not the guy . ' [ But ] he 'd learned all our songs , as only Jimmy can , off the top of his head , and , within one practice , we were ready to play . It was amazing . We just knew right away . He 's that good . 
 Chamberlin made " tons of cash " as a carpenter , before giving up the job to move to Chicago and devote himself to the band . Chamberlin 's entry quickly pushed the band toward a more powerful , intense sound . The first two Smashing Pumpkins albums , Gish and Siamese Dream , were performed almost entirely by Corgan and Chamberlin alone . 
 During this period Chamberlin struggled with substance abuse . During the recording of 1993 's Siamese Dream in Marietta , Georgia , Chamberlin often disappeared for days at a time into the drug underworld of Atlanta , while the rest of the band feared for his life . He later said of his drug addiction that " It 's pretty textbook [ ... ] Guy makes it in rock band , gets very full of himself , starts thinking he 's indestructible , and all of a sudden he destroys himself . " 
 In the midst of the lengthy world tour supporting 1995 's multi @-@ platinum Mellon Collie and the Infinite Sadness , Chamberlin 's father died , and his substance abuse hit a fever pitch . Of this period , Chamberlin later said , " I learned that escapism was better than emotion , and that 's where I hid ... It got to the point that I really didn 't care . Life was scary for me . " Prior to shows scheduled July ' 96 at Madison Square Garden in New York City , Chamberlin and touring keyboardist Jonathan Melvoin overdosed on heroin ; Melvoin subsequently died , and Chamberlin was kicked out of the band , ostensibly to protect his health . 
 In October 1998 , Corgan convened a band meeting in which Chamberlin was reinstated as the group 's drummer , and the band decided to break up after one more album and tour . The band yielded two albums in 2000 , Machina / The Machines of God and the freely distributed Machina II / The Friends & Enemies of Modern Music , before performing a farewell show in Chicago on December 2 , 2000 . 
 = = = Other projects , 2001 – 2016 = = = 
 Chamberlin went on to form Zwan in 2001 with Corgan . Although Chamberlin predicted that " the band 's going to be huge , " Zwan produced only one album , Mary Star of the Sea , before disbanding in 2003 . Chamberlin formed his next project , Jimmy Chamberlin Complex , in 2004 , and released its first studio album , Life Begins Again , in 2005 . Chamberlin stated that , with the Jimmy Chamberlin Complex , " I just wanted to make music and not really be constrained to making a Zwan or a Pumpkins record . " . On the 29th of April 2016 , the Jimmy Chamberlin Complex released a new song " Paranoid " via Jimmy Chamberlin 's Official Twitter account 
 = = = Skysaw = = = 
 While giving drum clinics in late 2009 , Chamberlin announced his next project , a band called This . Describing the music as ' progressive , symphonic pop ' he reported that the band , also including multi @-@ instrumentalists Mike Reina and guitarist Anthony <unk> , would record with Roy Thomas Baker in Washington , D.C. in early 2010 . 
 This released their first album , a six @-@ track release titled Great Civilizations , on November 1 , 2010 as a digital download only , on both Amazon and iTunes . No official release announcement was made even on the band 's official website . Downloads from iTunes and Amazon were removed after there was confusion over the band 's name . The new band name , Skysaw , was officially announced in December 2010 . 
 In March 2011 it was announced that the Skysaw full @-@ length LP would be released on Dangerbird Records . On June 21 , 2011 , the new , extended 10 song LP Great Civilizations was released . The band subsequently toured with label mates Minus The Bear , performed hometown shows at Chicago 's Metro and the Black Cat in Washington , DC , and performed on the <unk> Television Show in Chicago , IL . Touring members included Boris <unk> and Paul Wood of New York band Dead Heart Bloom . 
 On August 23 , 2012 Jimmy announced at a drum clinic that he had left Skysaw . 
 = = = Corporate ventures = = = 
 In 2011 , after introductions by then 1871 CEO Kevin <unk> , Chamberlin began working with the burgeoning Chicago tech scene as an investor and advisor . Chamberlin 's increased involvement with startups led him to an introduction to LiveOne Inc . – a leader in digital and streaming entertainment . Founders Tim and John <unk> ( of Chicago ) were presenting their new social platform , <unk> to an investment group that included Chamberlin . Chamberlin was impressed with the fledgling company and the <unk> technology and subsequently came on board to support the company both financially and as an advisor . In 2013 Chamberlin became Chief Executive Officer of LiveOne Inc . LiveOne Inc. has since partnered with Yahoo , YouTube , Live Nation , AEG , Vans , Phish , C3 , Budweiser 's Made In America Festival , Umphrey 's McGee , among others . 
 In November 2014 Chamberlin attended Web Summit , Ireland 's top tech conference . While there , he spoke of his time with the Smashing Pumpkins as well as on the future of Digital Music at the Web Summit Centre Stage with Adrian Grenier , Chris <unk> , and Brian Morrissey . He pointed to digital as the medium for artists to truly express themselves and create art that connects with their fans : " Artists are looking for a destination ... [ and ] digital gives them the opportunity to realize some of those destinations and package them in a way that allows them to be creative " . 
 While there , he also name checked U2 and said their recent iTunes @-@ wide album release " moved the ball forward for everybody . " 
 = = = Frank Catalano = = = 
 Chamberlin joined Chicago jazz saxophonist Frank Catalano in 2013 for a number of live performances in the Chicago area . Since then they have continued to play live shows and have released a series of albums together . On July 29 , 2014 , Love Supreme Collective - EP featuring Jimmy Chamberlin , Percy Jones , Chris Poland , and Adam Benjamin was released and quickly became the # 1 selling jazz album on iTunes USA . The follow up album , released April 07th , 2015 called " God 's Gonna Cut You Down " debuted at # 2 on the iTunes Jazz sales chart and was the # 1 charting Instrumental album upon its release in April 2015 . It reached number 4 on the Billboard Jazz charts . On the 27th of May 2016 , a 3rd collaboration between Catalano and Chamberlin was released called " Bye Bye Blackbird " . This record features David Sanborn . 
 = = = Revival of The Smashing Pumpkins = = = 
 Billy Corgan announced at an April 2004 solo performance that he and Chamberlin intended to work together again in the future . After appearing on Life Begins Again , Corgan announced plans to " renew and revive " the Pumpkins through a full @-@ page advertisement in his hometown 's newspaper , the Chicago Tribune , on June 21 , 2005 . Chamberlin contacted Corgan to accept , and on February 2 , 2006 , MTV.com reported that he and Corgan had signed a new management deal with the Front Line Management , with a spokesperson confirming they had signed under the name " Smashing Pumpkins " . 
 Chamberlin and Corgan , without the other original members , decided to record an album alone . They played their first show in Paris on May 22 , 2007 , with three new band members . On July 10 , the new album , Zeitgeist , was released . Over the next year and a half , the band released more recordings and toured extensively . 
 On March 20 , 2009 the Pumpkins ' website announced that Chamberlin was leaving the band . Chamberlin released a blog stating that he left as he felt that the band would not further his commitment to music . 
 Chamberlin again joined the band for the 2015 End Times Tour . 
 Chamberlin remained in the line @-@ up for the subsequent " In Plainsong " Tour in 2016 
 = = Musical style and influences = = 
 Chamberlin comes from a jazz background , and he notes jazz musicians Benny Goodman , Duke Ellington , Gene Krupa , and Buddy Rich as influences . He has also been compared to jazz drummer Dennis Chambers for his " quick hands , furious snare rolls , and crackling rimshots . " In general , he is one of the few hard rock drummers to combine a driving backbeat with jazz @-@ like flourishes . When asked about his influences in 2007 , he responded : 
 Aside from the obvious – Keith Moon , John Bonham , Ian Paice – I would have to say Tony Williams , Elvin Jones , any of the jazz greats – Gene Krupa , those people . I think , more and more , as I get older , I 've developed my own rock style and I tend to pull more stuff from Elvin Jones and Tony now that I can incorporate it into a rock arena and kind of modernize it . 
 Other drummers that influenced Chamberlin around the recording of Zeitgeist included Bobby Caldwell of Captain Beyond , Lalo Schifrin 's Dirty Harry soundtrack , Weather Report , and Return to Forever 's Lenny White . 
 Chamberlin prefers not to use Pro Tools or click tracks ; He uses the slide technique for double strokes on the bass drum . 
 Bandmate Billy Corgan has said of Chamberlin , " he 's up there with Bonham , you know , that level of drummer , who has been able to play a variety of music and have his style impact the way people play drums . That 's the hallmark of a great drummer . And , right now , I think , pound for pound , he 's the best drummer in the world . " 
 = = Equipment = = 
 On the Smashing Pumpkins album Zeitgeist and subsequent tour , Chamberlin used a Yamaha Maple Custom Absolute kit with 60 ( instead of standard 45 ) degree bearing edges . His kit consisted of two snares ( <unk> and the main snare , his <unk> " Signature " model – Yamaha SD @-@ <unk> ) , six toms ( <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , and an 8x8 above his floor toms which are 16x16 and <unk> ) , a 16x22 bass drum , four crash cymbals ( a 15 " thin and three Zildjian A customs – 15 " , 18 " , and 19 " ) , an 8 " splash cymbal , 15 " New Beat hi @-@ hats , a 20 " China High , a 22 " K Constantinople medium ride , and a 22 " riveted swish knocker . He occasionally used a triangle on his kit , mounted above the hi hats . Chamberlin 's drumheads are Remo coated Ambassador on snare @-@ side , clear Emperors on tom batters with clear Ambassadors underneath , with a <unk> 3 on the bass drum batter . He uses Zildjian cymbals and Vic Firth 5B sticks . His signature snare drum is popular with other drummers – Chad Smith has been known to use it as a second snare drum . 
 On the 6th of April , 2011 , Chamberlin announced that he had switched from long @-@ term drum manufacturer Yamaha to Drum Workshop . He has ordered a custom " prototype " Copper Lacquer Specialty with Chrome Hardware . The Shells are a ply combination of VLT Maple and Mahogany with no reinforcement hoops . The kick drum hoops are Solid Black Lacquer . The sizes are <unk> , 7x10 , <unk> , <unk> rack toms . <unk> , 16x16 floor toms . 16x22 kick and with a matching <unk> snare and a stainless steel <unk> snare . 
 As of 2015 , Chamberlin is endorsing Sakae drums . His current set up consists of a <unk> " bass drum , <unk> " rack tom , <unk> " rack tom , <unk> " rack tom , <unk> " floor tom and a 16x16 floor tom . His snare is a Sakae maple <unk> . 
 = = Discography = = 
 = Derivative = 
 The derivative of a function of a real variable measures the sensitivity to change of a quantity ( a function value or dependent variable ) which is determined by another quantity ( the independent variable ) . Derivatives are a fundamental tool of calculus . For example , the derivative of the position of a moving object with respect to time is the object 's velocity : this measures how quickly the position of the object changes when time is advanced . 
 The derivative of a function of a single variable at a chosen input value , when it exists , is the slope of the tangent line to the graph of the function at that point . The tangent line is the best linear approximation of the function near that input value . For this reason , the derivative is often described as the " instantaneous rate of change " , the ratio of the instantaneous change in the dependent variable to that of the independent variable . 
 Derivatives may be generalized to functions of several real variables . In this generalization , the derivative is reinterpreted as a linear transformation whose graph is ( after an appropriate translation ) the best linear approximation to the graph of the original function . The Jacobian matrix is the matrix that represents this linear transformation with respect to the basis given by the choice of independent and dependent variables . It can be calculated in terms of the partial derivatives with respect to the independent variables . For a real @-@ valued function of several variables , the Jacobian matrix reduces to the gradient vector . 
 The process of finding a derivative is called differentiation . The reverse process is called <unk> . The fundamental theorem of calculus states that <unk> is the same as integration . Differentiation and integration constitute the two fundamental operations in single @-@ variable calculus . 
 = = Differentiation and derivative = = 
 Differentiation is the action of computing a derivative . The derivative of a function y 
 = f ( x ) of a variable x is a measure of the rate at which the value y of the function changes with respect to the change of the variable x . It is called the derivative of f with respect to x . If x and y are real numbers , and if the graph of f is plotted against x , the derivative is the slope of this graph at each point . 
 The simplest case , apart from the trivial case of a constant function , is when y is a linear function of x , meaning that the graph of y divided by x is a line . In this case , y = 
 f ( x ) = m x + b , for real numbers m and b , and the slope m is given by 
 <formula> 
 where the symbol Δ ( Delta ) is an abbreviation for " change in . " This formula is true because 
 <formula> 
 Thus , since 
 <formula> 
 it follows that 
 <formula> 
 This gives an exact value for the slope of a line . If the function f is not linear ( i.e. its graph is not a straight line ) , however , then the change in y divided by the change in x varies : differentiation is a method to find an exact value for this rate of change at any given value of x . 
 The idea , illustrated by Figures 1 to 3 , is to compute the rate of change as the limit value of the ratio of the differences <unk> / Δx as Δx becomes infinitely small . 
 = = = Notation = = = 
 Two distinct notations are commonly used for the derivative , one deriving from Leibniz and the other from Joseph Louis Lagrange . 
 In Leibniz 's notation , an infinitesimal change in x is denoted by dx , and the derivative of y with respect to x is written 
 <formula> 
 suggesting the ratio of two infinitesimal quantities . ( The above expression is read as " the derivative of y with respect to x " , " d y by d x " , or " d y over d x " . The oral form " d y d x " is often used conversationally , although it may lead to confusion . ) 
 In Lagrange 's notation , the derivative with respect to x of a function f ( x ) is denoted f ' ( x ) ( read as " f prime of x " ) or fx ' ( x ) ( read as " f prime x of x " ) , in case of ambiguity of the variable implied by the derivation . Lagrange 's notation is sometimes incorrectly attributed to Newton . 
 = = = Rigorous definition = = = 
 The most common approach to turn this intuitive idea into a precise definition is to define the derivative as a limit of difference quotients of real numbers . This is the approach described below . 
 Let f be a real valued function defined in an open neighborhood of a real number a . In classical geometry , the tangent line to the graph of the function f at a was the unique line through the point ( a , f ( a ) ) that did not meet the graph of f transversally , meaning that the line did not pass straight through the graph . The derivative of y with respect to x at a is , geometrically , the slope of the tangent line to the graph of f at ( a , f ( a ) ) . The slope of the tangent line is very close to the slope of the line through ( a , f ( a ) ) and a nearby point on the graph , for example ( a + h , f ( a + h ) ) . These lines are called secant lines . A value of h close to zero gives a good approximation to the slope of the tangent line , and smaller values ( in absolute value ) of h will , in general , give better approximations . The slope m of the secant line is the difference between the y values of these points divided by the difference between the x values , that is , 
 <formula> 
 This expression is Newton 's difference quotient . Passing from an approximation to an exact answer is done using a limit . Geometrically , the limit of the secant lines is the tangent line . Therefore , the limit of the difference quotient as h approaches zero , if it exists , should represent the slope of the tangent line to ( a , f ( a ) ) . This limit is defined to be the derivative of the function f at a : 
 <formula> 
 When the limit exists , f is said to be differentiable at a . Here f ′ ( a ) is one of several common notations for the derivative ( see below ) . 
 Equivalently , the derivative satisfies the property that 
 <formula> 
 which has the intuitive interpretation ( see Figure 1 ) that the tangent line to f at a gives the best linear approximation 
 <formula> 
 to f near a ( i.e. , for small h ) . This interpretation is the easiest to generalize to other settings ( see below ) . 
 Substituting 0 for h in the difference quotient causes division by zero , so the slope of the tangent line cannot be found directly using this method . Instead , define Q ( h ) to be the difference quotient as a function of h : 
 <formula> 
 Q ( h ) is the slope of the secant line between ( a , f ( a ) ) and ( a + h , f ( a + h ) ) . If f is a continuous function , meaning that its graph is an unbroken curve with no gaps , then Q is a continuous function away from h 
 = 0 . If the limit <unk> → <unk> ( h ) exists , meaning that there is a way of choosing a value for Q ( 0 ) that makes Q a continuous function , then the function f is differentiable at a , and its derivative at a equals Q ( 0 ) . 
 In practice , the existence of a continuous extension of the difference quotient Q ( h ) to h = 
 0 is shown by modifying the numerator to cancel h in the denominator . Such manipulations can make the limit value of Q for small h clear even though Q is still not defined at h = 0 . This process can be long and tedious for complicated functions , and many shortcuts are commonly used to simplify the process . 
 = = = Definition over the hyperreals = = = 
 Relative to a hyperreal extension R ⊂ R * of the real numbers , the derivative of a real function y 
 = f ( x ) at a real point x can be defined as the shadow of the quotient ∆ y / ∆ x for infinitesimal ∆ x , where ∆ y = 
 f ( x + ∆ x ) - f ( x ) . Here the natural extension of f to the hyperreals is still denoted f . Here the derivative is said to exist if the shadow is independent of the infinitesimal chosen . 
 = = = Example = = = 
 The squaring function f ( x ) 
 = x2 is differentiable at x = 
 3 , and its derivative there is 6 . This result is established by calculating the limit as h approaches zero of the difference quotient of f ( 3 ) : 
 <formula> 
 The last expression shows that the difference quotient equals 6 + h when h ≠ 0 and is undefined when h 
 = 0 , because of the definition of the difference quotient . However , the definition of the limit says the difference quotient does not need to be defined when h = 
 0 . The limit is the result of letting h go to zero , meaning it is the value that 6 + h tends to as h becomes very small : 
 <formula> 
 Hence the slope of the graph of the squaring function at the point ( 3 , 9 ) is 6 , and so its derivative at x 
 = 3 is f ′ ( 3 ) = 
 6 . 
 More generally , a similar computation shows that the derivative of the squaring function at x 
 = a is f ′ ( a ) = 
 2a . 
 = = = Continuity and differentiability = = = 
 If y 
 = f ( x ) is differentiable at a , then f must also be continuous at a . As an example , choose a point a and let f be the step function that returns a value , say 1 , for all x less than a , and returns a different value , say 10 , for all x greater than or equal to a. f cannot have a derivative at a . If h is negative , then a + h is on the low part of the step , so the secant line from a to a + h is very steep , and as h tends to zero the slope tends to infinity . If h is positive , then a + h is on the high part of the step , so the secant line from a to a + h has slope zero . Consequently , the secant lines do not approach any single slope , so the limit of the difference quotient does not exist . 
 However , even if a function is continuous at a point , it may not be differentiable there . For example , the absolute value function y = 
 | x | is continuous at x 
 = 0 , but it is not differentiable there . If h is positive , then the slope of the secant line from 0 to h is one , whereas if h is negative , then the slope of the secant line from 0 to h is negative one . This can be seen graphically as a " kink " or a " cusp " in the graph at x = 
 0 . Even a function with a smooth graph is not differentiable at a point where its tangent is vertical : For instance , the function y 
 = x1 / 3 is not differentiable at x = 
 0 . 
 In summary : for a function f to have a derivative it is necessary for the function f to be continuous , but continuity alone is not sufficient . 
 Most functions that occur in practice have derivatives at all points or at almost every point . Early in the history of calculus , many mathematicians assumed that a continuous function was differentiable at most points . Under mild conditions , for example if the function is a monotone function or a Lipschitz function , this is true . However , in 1872 Weierstrass found the first example of a function that is continuous everywhere but differentiable nowhere . This example is now known as the Weierstrass function . In 1931 , Stefan Banach proved that the set of functions that have a derivative at some point is a meager set in the space of all continuous functions . Informally , this means that hardly any continuous functions have a derivative at even one point . 
 = = = The derivative as a function = = = 
 Let f be a function that has a derivative at every point a in the domain of f . Because every point a has a derivative , there is a function that sends the point a to the derivative of f at a . This function is written f ′ ( x ) and is called the derivative function or the derivative of f . The derivative of f collects all the derivatives of f at all the points in the domain of f . 
 Sometimes f has a derivative at most , but not all , points of its domain . The function whose value at a equals f ′ ( a ) whenever f ′ ( a ) is defined and elsewhere is undefined is also called the derivative of f . It is still a function , but its domain is strictly smaller than the domain of f . 
 Using this idea , differentiation becomes a function of functions : The derivative is an operator whose domain is the set of all functions that have derivatives at every point of their domain and whose range is a set of functions . If we denote this operator by D , then D ( f ) is the function f ′ ( x ) . Since D ( f ) is a function , it can be evaluated at a point a . By the definition of the derivative function , D ( f ) ( a ) 
 = f ′ ( a ) . 
 For comparison , consider the doubling function f ( x ) = 
 2x ; f is a real @-@ valued function of a real number , meaning that it takes numbers as inputs and has numbers as outputs : 
 <formula> 
 The operator D , however , is not defined on individual numbers . It is only defined on functions : 
 <formula> 
 Because the output of D is a function , the output of D can be evaluated at a point . For instance , when D is applied to the squaring function , x ↦ x2 , D outputs the doubling function x ↦ 2x , which we named f ( x ) . This output function can then be evaluated to get f ( 1 ) 
 = 2 , f ( 2 ) = 
 4 , and so on . 
 = = = Higher derivatives = = = 
 Let f be a differentiable function , and let f ′ ( x ) be its derivative . The derivative of f ′ ( x ) ( if it has one ) is written f ′ ′ ( x ) and is called the second derivative of f . Similarly , the derivative of a second derivative , if it exists , is written f ′ ′ ′ ( x ) and is called the third derivative of f . Continuing this process , one can define , if it exists , the nth derivative as the derivative of the ( n @-@ 1 ) th derivative . These repeated derivatives are called higher @-@ order derivatives . The nth derivative is also called the derivative of order n . 
 If x ( t ) represents the position of an object at time t , then the higher @-@ order derivatives of x have physical interpretations . The second derivative of x is the derivative of x ′ ( t ) , the velocity , and by definition this is the object 's acceleration . The third derivative of x is defined to be the jerk , and the fourth derivative is defined to be the <unk> . 
 A function f need not have a derivative , for example , if it is not continuous . Similarly , even if f does have a derivative , it may not have a second derivative . For example , let 
 <formula> 
 Calculation shows that f is a differentiable function whose derivative is 
 <formula> 
 f ′ ( x ) is twice the absolute value function , and it does not have a derivative at zero . Similar examples show that a function can have k derivatives for any non @-@ negative integer k but no ( k + 1 ) th @-@ order derivative . A function that has k successive derivatives is called k times differentiable . If in addition the kth derivative is continuous , then the function is said to be of differentiability class <unk> . ( This is a stronger condition than having k derivatives . For an example , see differentiability class . ) A function that has infinitely many derivatives is called infinitely differentiable or smooth . 
 On the real line , every polynomial function is infinitely differentiable . By standard differentiation rules , if a polynomial of degree n is differentiated n times , then it becomes a constant function . All of its subsequent derivatives are identically zero . In particular , they exist , so polynomials are smooth functions . 
 The derivatives of a function f at a point x provide polynomial approximations to that function near x . For example , if f is twice differentiable , then 
 <formula> 
 in the sense that 
 <formula> 
 If f is infinitely differentiable , then this is the beginning of the Taylor series for f evaluated at x + h around x . 
 = = = <unk> point = = = 
 A point where the second derivative of a function changes sign is called an inflection point . At an inflection point , the second derivative may be zero , as in the case of the inflection point x 
 = 0 of the function y = 
 x3 , or it may fail to exist , as in the case of the inflection point x 
 = 0 of the function y = 
 x1 / 3 . At an inflection point , a function switches from being a convex function to being a concave function or vice versa . 
 = = Notation ( details ) = = 
 = = = Leibniz 's notation = = = 
 The notation for derivatives introduced by Gottfried Leibniz is one of the earliest . It is still commonly used when the equation y 
 = f ( x ) is viewed as a functional relationship between dependent and independent variables . Then the first derivative is denoted by 
 <formula> 
 and was once thought of as an infinitesimal quotient . Higher derivatives are expressed using the notation 
 <formula> 
 for the nth derivative of y = 
 f ( x ) ( with respect to x ) . These are abbreviations for multiple applications of the derivative operator . For example , 
 <formula> 
 With Leibniz 's notation , we can write the derivative of y at the point x = a in two different ways : 
 <formula> 
 Leibniz 's notation allows one to specify the variable for differentiation ( in the denominator ) . This is especially relevant for partial differentiation . It also makes the chain rule easy to remember : 
 <formula> 
 = = = Lagrange 's notation = = = 
 Sometimes referred to as prime notation , one of the most common modern notation for differentiation is due to Joseph @-@ Louis Lagrange and uses the prime mark , so that the derivative of a function f ( x ) is denoted f ′ ( x ) or simply f ′ . Similarly , the second and third derivatives are denoted 
 <formula> and <formula> 
 To denote the number of derivatives beyond this point , some authors use Roman numerals in superscript , whereas others place the number in parentheses : 
 <formula> or <formula> 
 The latter notation generalizes to yield the notation f ( n ) for the nth derivative of f – this notation is most useful when we wish to talk about the derivative as being a function itself , as in this case the Leibniz notation can become cumbersome . 
 = = = Newton 's notation = = = 
 Newton 's notation for differentiation , also called the dot notation , places a dot over the function name to represent a time derivative . If y = f ( t ) , then 
 <formula> and <formula> 
 denote , respectively , the first and second derivatives of y with respect to t . This notation is used exclusively for derivatives with respect to time or arc length . It is very common in physics , differential equations , and differential geometry . While the notation becomes unmanageable for high @-@ order derivatives , in practice only few derivatives are needed . 
 = = = Euler 's notation = = = 
 Euler 's notation uses a differential operator D , which is applied to a function f to give the first derivative <unk> . The second derivative is denoted <unk> , and the nth derivative is denoted <unk> . 
 If y = f ( x ) is a dependent variable , then often the subscript x is attached to the D to clarify the independent variable x . Euler 's notation is then written 
 <formula> or <formula> , 
 although this subscript is often omitted when the variable x is understood , for instance when this is the only variable present in the expression . 
 Euler 's notation is useful for stating and solving linear differential equations . 
 = = Rules of computation = = 
 The derivative of a function can , in principle , be computed from the definition by considering the difference quotient , and computing its limit . In practice , once the derivatives of a few simple functions are known , the derivatives of other functions are more easily computed using rules for obtaining derivatives of more complicated functions from simpler ones . 
 = = = Rules for basic functions = = = 
 Most derivative computations eventually require taking the derivative of some common functions . The following incomplete list gives some of the most frequently used functions of a single real variable and their derivatives . 
 Derivatives of powers : if 
 <formula> 
 where r is any real number , then 
 <formula> 
 wherever this function is defined . For example , if <formula> , then 
 <formula> 
 and the derivative function is defined only for positive x , not for x 
 = 0 . When r = 
 0 , this rule implies that f ′ ( x ) is zero for x ≠ 0 , which is almost the constant rule ( stated below ) . 
 Exponential and logarithmic functions : 
 <formula> 
 <formula> 
 <formula> 
 <formula> 
 Trigonometric functions : 
 <formula> 
 <formula> 
 <formula> 
 Inverse trigonometric functions : 
 <formula> 
 <formula> 
 <formula> 
 = = = Rules for combined functions = = = 
 In many cases , complicated limit calculations by direct application of Newton 's difference quotient can be avoided using differentiation rules . Some of the most basic rules are the following . 
 Constant rule : if f ( x ) is constant , then 
 <formula> 
 Sum rule : 
 <formula> for all functions f and g and all real numbers <formula> and <formula> . 
 Product rule : 
 <formula> for all functions f and g . As a special case , this rule includes the fact <formula> whenever <formula> is a constant , because <formula> by the constant rule . 
 Quotient rule : 
 <formula> for all functions f and g at all inputs where g ≠ 0 . 
 Chain rule : If <formula> , then 
 <formula> 
 = = = Computation example = = = 
 The derivative of 
 <formula> 
 is 
 <formula> 
 Here the second term was computed using the chain rule and third using the product rule . The known derivatives of the elementary functions x2 , x4 , sin ( x ) , ln ( x ) and exp ( x ) = ex , as well as the constant 7 , were also used . 
 = = Derivatives in higher dimensions = = 
 = = = Derivatives of vector valued functions = = = 
 A vector @-@ valued function y ( t ) of a real variable sends real numbers to vectors in some vector space Rn . A vector @-@ valued function can be split up into its coordinate functions y1 ( t ) , y2 ( t ) , … , yn ( t ) , meaning that y ( t ) = ( y1 ( t ) , ... , yn ( t ) ) . This includes , for example , parametric curves in R2 or R3 . The coordinate functions are real valued functions , so the above definition of derivative applies to them . The derivative of y ( t ) is defined to be the vector , called the tangent vector , whose coordinates are the derivatives of the coordinate functions . That is , 
 <formula> 
 Equivalently , 
 <formula> 
 if the limit exists . The subtraction in the numerator is subtraction of vectors , not scalars . If the derivative of y exists for every value of t , then y ′ is another vector valued function . 
 If e1 , … , en is the standard basis for Rn , then y ( t ) can also be written as y1 ( t ) e1 + … + yn ( t ) en . If we assume that the derivative of a vector @-@ valued function retains the linearity property , then the derivative of y ( t ) must be 
 <formula> 
 because each of the basis vectors is a constant . 
 This generalization is useful , for example , if y ( t ) is the position vector of a particle at time t ; then the derivative y ′ ( t ) is the velocity vector of the particle at time t . 
 = = = Partial derivatives = = = 
 Suppose that f is a function that depends on more than one variable — for instance , 
 <formula> 
 f can be reinterpreted as a family of functions of one variable indexed by the other variables : 
 <formula> 
 In other words , every value of x chooses a function , denoted fx , which is a function of one real number . That is , 
 <formula> 
 <formula> 
 Once a value of x is chosen , say a , then f ( x , y ) determines a function fa that sends y to a2 + ay + y2 : 
 <formula> 
 In this expression , a is a constant , not a variable , so fa is a function of only one real variable . Consequently , the definition of the derivative for a function of one variable applies : 
 <formula> 
 The above procedure can be performed for any choice of a . Assembling the derivatives together into a function gives a function that describes the variation of f in the y direction : 
 <formula> 
 This is the partial derivative of f with respect to y . Here ∂ is a rounded d called the partial derivative symbol . To distinguish it from the letter d , ∂ is sometimes pronounced " der " , " del " , or " partial " instead of " dee " . 
 In general , the partial derivative of a function f ( x1 , … , xn ) in the direction xi at the point ( a1 … , an ) is defined to be : 
 <formula> 
 In the above difference quotient , all the variables except xi are held fixed . That choice of fixed values determines a function of one variable 
 <formula> 
 and , by definition , 
 <formula> 
 In other words , the different choices of a index a family of one @-@ variable functions just as in the example above . This expression also shows that the computation of partial derivatives reduces to the computation of one @-@ variable derivatives . 
 An important example of a function of several variables is the case of a scalar @-@ valued function f ( x1 , ... , xn ) on a domain in Euclidean space Rn ( e.g. , on R2 or R3 ) . In this case f has a partial derivative ∂ f / ∂ xj with respect to each variable xj . At the point a , these partial derivatives define the vector 
 <formula> 
 This vector is called the gradient of f at a . If f is differentiable at every point in some domain , then the gradient is a vector @-@ valued function <unk> f that takes the point a to the vector <unk> f ( a ) . Consequently , the gradient determines a vector field . 
 = = = Directional derivatives = = = 
 If f is a real @-@ valued function on Rn , then the partial derivatives of f measure its variation in the direction of the coordinate axes . For example , if f is a function of x and y , then its partial derivatives measure the variation in f in the x direction and the y direction . They do not , however , directly measure the variation of f in any other direction , such as along the diagonal line y 
 = x . These are measured using directional derivatives . Choose a vector 
 <formula> 
 The directional derivative of f in the direction of v at the point x is the limit 
 <formula> 
 In some cases it may be easier to compute or estimate the directional derivative after changing the length of the vector . Often this is done to turn the problem into the computation of a directional derivative in the direction of a unit vector . To see how this works , suppose that v = 
 <unk> . Substitute h 
 = k / λ into the difference quotient . The difference quotient becomes : 
 <formula> 
 This is λ times the difference quotient for the directional derivative of f with respect to u . Furthermore , taking the limit as h tends to zero is the same as taking the limit as k tends to zero because h and k are multiples of each other . Therefore , Dv ( f ) = 
 <unk> ( f ) . Because of this <unk> property , directional derivatives are frequently considered only for unit vectors . 
 If all the partial derivatives of f exist and are continuous at x , then they determine the directional derivative of f in the direction v by the formula : 
 <formula> 
 This is a consequence of the definition of the total derivative . It follows that the directional derivative is linear in v , meaning that Dv + w ( f ) = Dv ( f ) + <unk> ( f ) . 
 The same definition also works when f is a function with values in Rm . The above definition is applied to each component of the vectors . In this case , the directional derivative is a vector in Rm . 
 = = = Total derivative , total differential and Jacobian matrix = = = 
 When f is a function from an open subset of Rn to Rm , then the directional derivative of f in a chosen direction is the best linear approximation to f at that point and in that direction . But when n > 1 , no single directional derivative can give a complete picture of the behavior of f . The total derivative gives a complete picture by considering all directions at once . That is , for any vector v starting at a , the linear approximation formula holds : 
 <formula> 
 Just like the single @-@ variable derivative , f ′ ( a ) is chosen so that the error in this approximation is as small as possible . 
 If n and m are both one , then the derivative f ′ ( a ) is a number and the expression f ′ ( a ) v is the product of two numbers . But in higher dimensions , it is impossible for f ′ ( a ) to be a number . If it were a number , then f ′ ( a ) v would be a vector in Rn while the other terms would be vectors in Rm , and therefore the formula would not make sense . For the linear approximation formula to make sense , f ′ ( a ) must be a function that sends vectors in Rn to vectors in Rm , and f ′ ( a ) v must denote this function evaluated at v. 
 To determine what kind of function it is , notice that the linear approximation formula can be rewritten as 
 <formula> 
 Notice that if we choose another vector w , then this approximate equation determines another approximate equation by substituting w for v. It determines a third approximate equation by substituting both w for v and a + v for a . By subtracting these two new equations , we get 
 <formula> 
 If we assume that v is small and that the derivative varies continuously in a , then f ′ ( a + v ) is approximately equal to f ′ ( a ) , and therefore the right @-@ hand side is approximately zero . The left @-@ hand side can be rewritten in a different way using the linear approximation formula with v + w substituted for v. The linear approximation formula implies : 
 <formula> 
 This suggests that f ′ ( a ) is a linear transformation from the vector space Rn to the vector space Rm . In fact , it is possible to make this a precise derivation by measuring the error in the approximations . Assume that the error in these linear approximation formula is bounded by a constant times | | v | | , where the constant is independent of v but depends continuously on a . Then , after adding an appropriate error term , all of the above approximate equalities can be rephrased as inequalities . In particular , f ′ ( a ) is a linear transformation up to a small error term . In the limit as v and w tend to zero , it must therefore be a linear transformation . Since we define the total derivative by taking a limit as v goes to zero , f ′ ( a ) must be a linear transformation . 
 In one variable , the fact that the derivative is the best linear approximation is expressed by the fact that it is the limit of difference quotients . However , the usual difference quotient does not make sense in higher dimensions because it is not usually possible to divide vectors . In particular , the numerator and denominator of the difference quotient are not even in the same vector space : The numerator lies in the <unk> Rm while the denominator lies in the domain Rn . Furthermore , the derivative is a linear transformation , a different type of object from both the numerator and denominator . To make precise the idea that f ′ ( a ) is the best linear approximation , it is necessary to adapt a different formula for the one @-@ variable derivative in which these problems disappear . If f : R → R , then the usual definition of the derivative may be manipulated to show that the derivative of f at a is the unique number f ′ ( a ) such that 
 <formula> 
 This is equivalent to 
 <formula> 
 because the limit of a function tends to zero if and only if the limit of the absolute value of the function tends to zero . This last formula can be adapted to the many @-@ variable situation by replacing the absolute values with norms . 
 The definition of the total derivative of f at a , therefore , is that it is the unique linear transformation f ′ ( a ) : Rn → Rm such that 
 <formula> 
 Here h is a vector in Rn , so the norm in the denominator is the standard length on Rn . However , f ′ ( a ) h is a vector in Rm , and the norm in the numerator is the standard length on Rm . If v is a vector starting at a , then f ′ ( a ) v is called the pushforward of v by f and is sometimes written f ∗ v. 
 If the total derivative exists at a , then all the partial derivatives and directional derivatives of f exist at a , and for all v , f ′ ( a ) v is the directional derivative of f in the direction v. If we write f using coordinate functions , so that f = ( f1 , f2 , ... , fm ) , then the total derivative can be expressed using the partial derivatives as a matrix . This matrix is called the Jacobian matrix of f at a : 
 <formula> 
 The existence of the total derivative f ′ ( a ) is strictly stronger than the existence of all the partial derivatives , but if the partial derivatives exist and are continuous , then the total derivative exists , is given by the Jacobian , and depends continuously on a . 
 The definition of the total derivative subsumes the definition of the derivative in one variable . That is , if f is a real @-@ valued function of a real variable , then the total derivative exists if and only if the usual derivative exists . The Jacobian matrix reduces to a 1 × 1 matrix whose only entry is the derivative f ′ ( x ) . This 1 × 1 matrix satisfies the property that f ( a + h ) − f ( a ) − f ′ ( a ) h is approximately zero , in other words that 
 <formula> 
 Up to changing variables , this is the statement that the function <formula> is the best linear approximation to f at a . 
 The total derivative of a function does not give another function in the same way as the one @-@ variable case . This is because the total derivative of a <unk> function has to record much more information than the derivative of a single @-@ variable function . Instead , the total derivative gives a function from the tangent bundle of the source to the tangent bundle of the target . 
 The natural analog of second , third , and higher @-@ order total derivatives is not a linear transformation , is not a function on the tangent bundle , and is not built by repeatedly taking the total derivative . The analog of a higher @-@ order derivative , called a jet , cannot be a linear transformation because higher @-@ order derivatives reflect subtle geometric information , such as concavity , which cannot be described in terms of linear data such as vectors . It cannot be a function on the tangent bundle because the tangent bundle only has room for the base space and the directional derivatives . Because jets capture higher @-@ order information , they take as arguments additional coordinates representing higher @-@ order changes in direction . The space determined by these additional coordinates is called the jet bundle . The relation between the total derivative and the partial derivatives of a function is paralleled in the relation between the kth order jet of a function and its partial derivatives of order less than or equal to k . 
 By repeatedly taking the total derivative , one obtains higher versions of the Fréchet derivative , specialized to Rp . The kth order total derivative may be interpreted as a map 
 <formula> 
 which takes a point x in Rn and assigns to it an element of the space of k @-@ linear maps from Rn to Rm – the " best " ( in a certain precise sense ) k @-@ linear approximation to f at that point . By <unk> it with the diagonal map Δ , x → ( x , x ) , a generalized Taylor series may be begun as 
 <formula> 
 where f ( a ) is identified with a constant function , ( x − a ) i are the components of the vector x − a , and ( D f ) i and ( D2 f ) j k are the components of D f and D2 f as linear transformations . 
 = = Generalizations = = 
 The concept of a derivative can be extended to many other settings . The common thread is that the derivative of a function at a point serves as a linear approximation of the function at that point . 
 An important generalization of the derivative concerns complex functions of complex variables , such as functions from ( a domain in ) the complex numbers C to C. The notion of the derivative of such a function is obtained by replacing real variables with complex variables in the definition . If C is identified with R2 by writing a complex number z as x + i y , then a differentiable function from C to C is certainly differentiable as a function from R2 to R2 ( in the sense that its partial derivatives all exist ) , but the converse is not true in general : the complex derivative only exists if the real derivative is complex linear and this imposes relations between the partial derivatives called the Cauchy – Riemann equations – see holomorphic functions . 
 Another generalization concerns functions between differentiable or smooth manifolds . Intuitively speaking such a manifold M is a space that can be approximated near each point x by a vector space called its tangent space : the prototypical example is a smooth surface in R3 . The derivative ( or differential ) of a ( differentiable ) map f : M → N between manifolds , at a point x in M , is then a linear map from the tangent space of M at x to the tangent space of N at f ( x ) . The derivative function becomes a map between the tangent bundles of M and N. This definition is fundamental in differential geometry and has many uses – see pushforward ( differential ) and pullback ( differential geometry ) . 
 Differentiation can also be defined for maps between infinite dimensional vector spaces such as Banach spaces and Fréchet spaces . There is a generalization both of the directional derivative , called the <unk> derivative , and of the differential , called the Fréchet derivative . 
 One deficiency of the classical derivative is that not very many functions are differentiable . Nevertheless , there is a way of extending the notion of the derivative so that all continuous functions and many other functions can be differentiated using a concept known as the weak derivative . The idea is to embed the continuous functions in a larger space called the space of distributions and only require that a function is differentiable " on average " . 
 The properties of the derivative have inspired the introduction and study of many similar objects in algebra and topology — see , for example , differential algebra . 
 The discrete equivalent of differentiation is finite differences . The study of differential calculus is unified with the calculus of finite differences in time scale calculus . 
 Also see arithmetic derivative . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Print = = = 
 = = = Online books = = = 
 = Cheryl Tunt = 
 Cheryl Tunt is a fictional character from the animated television series Archer . Cheryl , a secretary for Malory Archer , collaborates with seven other field operatives of the International Secret Intelligence Service ( ISIS ) , an illegal intelligence agency headquartered in New York City . Judy Greer provides the speaking voice for the character , who first appeared in the series ' pilot episode " Mole Hunt " on January 17 , 2010 , and starting with season 5 , Jessy Lynn Martens provides the singing voice for the character when she turns into country star Cherlene . Conceived and devised by Archer creator Adam Reed , Cheryl was initially intended to serve only as a minor character for the series . 
 A descendant of the wealthy Tunt family , Cheryl is introduced as a clingy and emotionally fragile individual . Early on she is intermittently referred to as " Carol " by her coworkers ( a premise which becomes one of the shows ' longest running jokes ) as they are initially dismissive of her somewhat morbid behavior and neglectful of her presence . As the series progresses , the character abandons her lugubrious traits and embraces a more sadistic and maniacal personality . Cheryl is often sexually aroused from being choked and enjoys sniffing and drinking rubber cement . She possesses a ditzy demeanor , which often interferes with her work ethic . An array of descriptions have been established for the character by critics , mainly her " incompetent " and " insane " tendencies . Throughout the series ' run , the character has been applauded by television commentators , as has Greer 's voice work , which has resulted in the actress being nominated for an Annie Award in the category of Voice Acting in a Television Production . 
 = = Arc and personality = = 
 Cheryl Tunt is introduced in the Archer pilot episode , " Mole Hunt " , as the secretary for Malory Archer ( Jessica Walter ) . Following the abrupt ending of her relationship with Sterling Archer ( H. Jon Benjamin ) , Cheryl attempts to manipulate Cyril Figgis ( Chris Parnell ) into cheating on companion Lana Kane ( Aisha Tyler ) , for whom she has great disdain . Cyril , who inevitably sustains emotional distress from Lana 's dominant antics , succumbs to Cheryl 's sexual desires after becoming suspicious of his girlfriend 's interactions with Archer . Paranoid that Lana may find out about his affair , Cyril attempts to distance himself from Cheryl , much to her dismay . She threatens to notify Lana of their affair — after having sex with Cyril , Cheryl reveals to Pam Poovey ( Amber Nash ) that her actual intention was to acquire Archer 's attention , as she thought that having a connection with Cyril would spark feelings of jealousy . Though Lana catches Cyril cheating on her with <unk> , the former head of HR at the Organization of Democratic Intelligence Networks ( <unk> ) , Cheryl confesses of their affair to her , subsequently adding more tension to their rivalry . 
 As an heir to the wealth of the Tunt family — who were trailblazers in the railroad industry — Cheryl is often subjected to numerous threats and kidnappings . As a result of her parents ' death , she and her brother , Cecil Tunt , inherit an estimated US $ 1 billion in trust funds ; it is split evenly amongst each party , which culminated with Cheryl 's net worth increasing tenfold . This prompts a group of robbers to cultivate a plan to abduct her , which ultimately fails as they mistake Pam for her . In that same episode , it is also revealed that she owns an ocelot named <unk> , for which Archer develops a fondness ( this is a comedic reference to Salvador Dalí , who really did have a pet ocelot by that name with whom he frequently traveled . ) Cecil later tricks ISIS into a mission with the intent to videotape members talking of Cheryl 's insanity so he can get control of her half of the fortune . It turns out Cecil has spent all of his half of the fortune on various charities , including an undersea base whose insane leader used the funds to buy nerve gas missiles . 
 Cheryl is introduced as an emotionally fragile woman , who pines for the affection of Archer . As the series began to progress , the character abandons her depressive characteristics and adopts a more maniacal and unstable personality . " It was really fun to see her evolve , " Greer asserted , " and I think [ Archer creator Adam Reed ] and I always had fun recording together . I 'm so thankful that it got so crazy and turned so upside down , and how nuts this character is . It 's so fun . " Her instability has regularly resulted in Cheryl being sent into mental institutions . She is often sexually aroused from being choked . Commentators have described Cheryl as " incompetent " , " insane " , " glue @-@ chugging " , and " empty @-@ headed " . Throughout much of the first season , the character frequently developed aliases for herself to acquiesce to her coworkers ; these aliases include Cristal , an homage to the alcoholic beverage of the same name , and <unk> , which she professed " better captured [ her ] sensual womanhood " . 
 My interpretation is that she isn ’ t trying to keep the secret . That she doesn ’ t care . She changed her last name to avoid getting kidnapped , but really , if anyone figured it out and asked her , she ’ d just probably be like “ Yeah , shut up ! ” or whatever . I feel like everyone at ISIS is so self @-@ involved and so concerned with furthering their own agenda that it would never occur to them to think that anyone else has anything else going on . 
 After ISIS has gone bankrupt in the fifth season , Cheryl realizes her dream of becoming a country music superstar under the artist name " Cherlene " , after Dr. Krieger first cures her stage fright by injecting her with a microscopic mind control chip in the fourth episode ( " House Call " ) . Music performed by Cherlene in the show is sung by Jessy Lynn Martens and produced by among others <unk> Kinney of Drivin N Cryin . The network also released a 12 @-@ track album named " Cherlene " featuring country songs from the show , including a country cover of Kenny Loggins ' " Danger Zone " . 
 = = Development = = 
 Producers recruited actress Judy Greer to provide the role of Cheryl Tunt . Greer , despite auditioning for various advertisements , was unable to breakout as a prominent voice actress for animated television . While in Los Angeles , California , Greer met casting director Linda <unk> , who lent her roles in television shows such as Family Guy and Glenn Martin , DDS — the actress ascribes the interest from Archer producers to her work in the latter series . " She was kind of relentless with them , saying ' Use her , use her . ' I read for many different roles and then finally they cast me . " 
 Greer was notified of the position by her agent while shooting for a separate film . " I 'd been trying to get into voiceovers , " she explained , " so they called and said it was a pilot they were doing for FX , and I could record the part on my day off in 10 minutes . " The actress read the script and recorded her lines at a recording studio in Phoenix , Arizona ; upon first glance , Greer suggested that the raunchy and risque nature of the script would prevent any television stations from picking up the series . " So when I found out it was picked up , I was like , ' Oh ! Wait , I don 't know what you 're talking about . ' They said , ' Remember that thing ? ' And I went , ' Really ? ' So then I recorded a bunch of them , and the scripts were the funniest scripts that I 've ever read , and so crazy . " 
 Prior to Greer 's casting , Cheryl was initially intended to merely be a secondary character for Archer , and serve as a central figure in a proposed pregnancy angle . " It was going to be a running gag that Archer kept impregnating Malory ’ s secretaries , " remarked Reed , " Whenever it happened , they would gas them with sleeping gas and just leave them on the steps at Bellevue Hospital with no ID or memory of what just happened . But when Judy agreed to do the show , Cheryl became a much more important character . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 Television critics have commended the development of Cheryl , as well as Greer 's portrayal of the character . HitFix 's Alan Sepinwall declared that Cheryl was his favorite character on the show . In his review for " El <unk> " , Todd VanDerWerff of The A.V. Club felt that Greer 's vocals were the highlight of the episode , and affirmed that she effectively portrayed the unstable characteristics of Cheryl . " Greer is mostly just asked to say crazy things as Cheryl , and that ’ s fun , but she steps it up here , playing both Cheryl ’ s insanity and the part of her that ’ s a spoiled trust @-@ fund kid who ’ s found a day job and has to ride the subway with a dwarf that freaks her out . " Likewise , Ian MacDonald of TV Overmind proclaimed that the writers " found a great way to expand on ISIS ' most emotionally unstable employees " ; " Cheryl , whose crazy has been escalated to an almost extreme , " MacDonald stated , " seems almost justified in her maladjusted @-@ ness . She 's a billionaire heiress who owns an ocelot and drinks glue [ ... ] . Humor involving insane rich people just no [ t ] getting it is usually pretty funny , and if anyone can pull it off , it 's Adam Reed and [ Judy ] Greer . " Alongside fellow cast members Jessica Walter and H. Jon Benjamin , Greer was a candidate for an Annie Award in the category of Voice Acting in a Television Production — the award was given to Jeff Bennett for his work in the Nickelodeon television series The Penguins of Madagascar . 
 = Oil shale industry = 
 Oil shale industry is an industry of mining and processing of oil shale — a fine @-@ grained sedimentary rock , containing significant amounts of kerogen ( a solid mixture of organic chemical compounds ) , from which liquid hydrocarbons can be manufactured . The industry has developed in Brazil , China , Estonia and to some extent in Germany and Russia . Several other countries are currently conducting research on their oil shale reserves and production methods to improve efficiency and recovery . However , Australia has halted their pilot projects due to environmental concerns . Estonia accounted for about 70 % of the world 's oil shale production in a study published in 2005 . 
 Oil shale has been used for industrial purposes since the early 17th century , when it was mined for its minerals . Since the late 19th century , shale oil has also been used for its oil content and as a low grade fuel for power generation . However , barring countries having significant oil shale deposits , its use for power generation is not particularly widespread . Similarly , oil shale is a source for production of synthetic crude oil and it is seen as a solution towards increasing domestic production of oil in countries that are reliant on imports . 
 = = History = = 
 Oil shale has been used since ancient times . Modern industrial oil shale mining began in 1837 at the Autun mines in France , followed by Britain , Germany and several other countries . The oil shale industry started growing just before World War I because of the mass production of automobiles and trucks and the supposed shortage of gasoline for transportation needs . In 1924 , the Tallinn Power Plant was the first power plant in the world to switch to oil shale firing . 
 Following the end of World War II , the oil shale industry declined due to the discovery of large supplies of easily accessible and cheaper crude oil . Oil shale production however , continued to grow in Estonia , Russia and China . 
 Following the 1973 oil crisis , the oil shale industry was restarted in several countries , but in the 1980s , when oil prices fell , many industries faced closure . The global oil shale industry has grown again from the mid @-@ 1990s . In 2003 , the oil shale development program was initiated in the United States , and in 2005 , the commercial leasing program for oil shale and tar sands was introduced . 
 As of May 2007 , Estonia is actively engaged in exploitation of oil shale on a significant scale and accounts for 70 % of the world 's processed oil shale . Estonia is unique in that its oil shale deposit account for just 17 % of total deposits in European Union but it generates 90 % of its power from oil shale . Oil shale industry in Estonia employs 7 @,@ 500 people , which is about 1 % of national employment , accounting for 4 % of its gross domestic product . 
 = = Mining = = 
 Oil shale is mined either by traditional underground mining or surface mining techniques . There are several mining methods available , but the common aim of all these methods is to fragment the oil shale deposits in order to enable the transport of shale fragments to a power plant or retorting facility . The main methods of surface mining are open pit mining and strip mining . An important method of sub @-@ surface mining is the room @-@ and @-@ pillar method . In this method , the material is extracted across a horizontal plane while leaving " pillars " of untouched material to support the roof . These pillars reduce the likelihood of a collapse . Oil shale can also be obtained as a by @-@ product of coal mining . 
 The largest oil shale mine in the world is the Estonia Mine , operated by Eesti Energia Kaevandused . In 2005 , Estonia mined 14 @.@ 8 million tonnes of oil shale . During the same period , mining permits were issued for almost 24 million tonnes , with applications being received for mining an additional 26 million tonnes . In 2008 , the Estonian Parliament approved the " National Development Plan for the Use of Oil Shale 2008 @-@ 2015 " , which limits the annual extraction of oil shale to 20 million tonnes . 
 = = Power generation = = 
 Oil shale can be used as a fuel in thermal power plants , wherein oil shale is burnt like coal to drive the steam turbines . As of 2012 , there are oil shale @-@ fired power plants in Estonia with a generating capacity of 2 @,@ 967 megawatts ( MW ) , China , and Germany . Also Israel , Romania and Russia have run oil shale @-@ fired power plants , but have shut them down or switched to other fuels like natural gas . Jordan and Egypt have announced their plans to construct oil shale @-@ fired power plants , while Canada and Turkey plan to burn oil shale at the power plants along with coal . 
 Thermal power plants which use oil shale as a fuel mostly employ two types of combustion methods . The traditional method is Pulverized combustion ( PC ) which is used in the older units of oil shale @-@ fired power plants in Estonia , while the more advanced method is <unk> bed combustion ( FBC ) , which is used in the Holcim cement factory in <unk> , Germany , and was used in the <unk> Rotem power plant in Israel . The main FBC technologies are Bubbling fluidized bed combustion ( <unk> ) and Circulating fluidized bed combustion ( CFBC ) . 
 There are more than 60 power plants around the world , which are using CFBC technology for combustion of coal and lignite , but only two new units at Narva Power Plants in Estonia , and one at <unk> Power Plant in China use CFBC technology for combustion of oil shale . The most advanced and efficient oil shale combustion technology is Pressurized fluidized @-@ bed combustion ( <unk> ) . However , this technology is still premature and is in its nascent stage . 
 = = Oil extraction = = 
 As of 2008 , the major shale oil producers are Estonia , Brazil and China , while Australia , USA , Canada and Jordan have planned to set up or restart shale oil production . According to the World Energy Council , in 2008 the total production of shale oil from oil shale was 930 @,@ 000 tonnes , equal to 17 @,@ 700 barrels per day ( 2 @,@ 810 m3 / d ) , of which China produced 375 @,@ 000 tonnes , Estonia 355 @,@ 000 tonnes , and Brazil 200 tonnes . In comparison , production of the conventional oil and natural gas liquids in 2008 amounted 3 @.@ 95 billion tonnes or 82 @.@ 12 million barrels per day ( 13 @.@ 056 × 10 ^ 6 m3 / d ) . 
 Although there are several oil shale retorting technologies , only four technologies are currently in commercial use . These are Kiviter , Galoter , Fushun , and Petrosix . The two main methods of extracting oil from shale are ex @-@ situ and in @-@ situ . In ex @-@ situ method , the oil shale is mined and transported to the retort facility in order to extract the oil . The in @-@ situ method converts the kerogen while it is still in the form of an oil shale deposit , and then extracts it via a well , where it rises up as normal petroleum . 
 = = Other industrial uses = = 
 Oil shale is used for cement production by Kunda Nordic Cement in Estonia , by Holcim in Germany , and by Fushun cement factory in China . Oil shale can also be used for production of different chemical products , construction materials , and pharmaceutical products , e.g. ammonium <unk> . However , use of oil shale for production of these products is still very rare and in experimental stages only . 
 Some oil shales are suitable source for sulfur , ammonia , alumina , soda ash , and nahcolite which occur as shale oil extraction byproducts . Some oil shales can also be used for uranium and other rare chemical element production . During 1946 – 1952 , a marine variety of <unk> shale was used for uranium production in Sillamäe , Estonia , and during 1950 – 1989 alum shale was used in Sweden for the same purpose . Oil shale gas can also be used as a substitute for natural gas . After World War II , Estonian @-@ produced oil shale gas was used in Leningrad and the cities in North Estonia . However , at the current price level of natural gas , this is not economically feasible . 
 = = Economics = = 
 The amount of economically recoverable oil shale is unknown . The various attempts to develop oil shale deposits have succeeded only when the cost of shale @-@ oil production in a given region comes in below the price of crude oil or its other substitutes . According to a survey conducted by the RAND Corporation , the cost of producing a barrel of shale oil at a hypothetical surface retorting complex in the United States ( comprising a mine , retorting plant , upgrading plant , supporting utilities , and spent shale reclamation ) , would range between US $ 70 – 95 ( $ 440 – 600 / m3 ) , adjusted to 2005 values . Assuming a gradual increase in output after the start of commercial production , the analysis projects a gradual reduction in processing costs to $ 30 – 40 per barrel ( $ 190 – 250 / m3 ) after achieving the milestone of 1 billion barrels ( 160 × 10 ^ 6 m3 ) . Royal Dutch Shell has announced that its Shell ICP technology would realize a profit when crude oil prices are higher than $ 30 per barrel ( $ 190 / m3 ) , while some technologies at full @-@ scale production assert profitability at oil prices even lower than $ 20 per barrel ( $ 130 / m3 ) . 
 To increase the efficiency of oil shale retorting and by this the viability of the shale oil production , researchers have proposed and tested several co @-@ pyrolysis processes , in which other materials such as biomass , peat , waste bitumen , or rubber and plastic wastes are retorted along with the oil shale . Some modified technologies propose combining a fluidized bed retort with a circulated fluidized bed furnace for burning the by @-@ products of pyrolysis ( char and oil shale gas ) and thereby improving oil yield , increasing throughput , and decreasing retorting time . 
 In a 1972 publication by the journal <unk> Informations ( ISSN <unk> @-@ <unk> ) , shale oil production was unfavorably compared to the coal liquefaction . The article stated that coal liquefaction was less expensive , generated more oil , and created fewer environmental impacts than oil shale extraction . It cited a conversion ratio of 650 liters ( 170 U.S. gal ; 140 imp gal ) of oil per one tonne of coal , as against 150 liters ( 40 U.S. gal ; 33 imp gal ) of shale oil per one tonne of oil shale . 
 A critical measure of the viability of oil shale as an energy source lies in the ratio of the energy produced by the shale to the energy used in its mining and processing , a ratio known as " Energy Returned on Energy Invested " ( EROEI ) . A 1984 study estimated the EROEI of the various known oil @-@ shale deposits as varying between 0 @.@ 7 – 13 @.@ 3 although known oil @-@ shale extraction development projects assert an EROEI between 3 and 10 . According to the World Energy Outlook 2010 , the EROEI of ex @-@ situ processing is typically 4 to 5 while of in @-@ situ processing it may be even as low as 2 . However , according to the IEA most of used energy can be provided by burning the spent shale or oil @-@ shale gas . 
 The water needed in the oil shale retorting process offers an additional economic consideration : this may pose a problem in areas with water scarcity . 
 = = Environmental considerations = = 
 Oil shale mining involves a number of environmental impacts , more pronounced in surface mining than in underground mining . They include acid drainage induced by the sudden rapid exposure and subsequent oxidation of formerly buried materials , the introduction of metals into surface @-@ water and groundwater , increased erosion , sulfur @-@ gas emissions , and air pollution caused by the production of particulates during processing , transport , and support activities . In 2002 , about 97 % of air pollution , 86 % of total waste and 23 % of water pollution in Estonia came from the power industry , which uses oil shale as the main resource for its power production . 
 Oil shale extraction can damage the biological and recreational value of land and the ecosystem in the mining area . Combustion and thermal processing generate waste material . In addition , the atmospheric emissions from oil shale processing and combustion include carbon dioxide , a greenhouse gas . Environmentalists oppose production and usage of oil shale , as it creates even more greenhouse gases than conventional fossil fuels . Section 526 of the Energy Independence And Security Act prohibits United States government agencies from buying oil produced by processes that produce more greenhouse gas emissions than would traditional petroleum . Experimental in situ conversion processes and carbon capture and storage technologies may reduce some of these concerns in the future , but at the same time they may cause other problems , including groundwater pollution . 
 Concerns have been prominently raised over the oil shale industry 's use of water , particularly in arid regions where water consumption is a sensitive issue . In some cases , oil shale mining requires the lowering of groundwater levels below the level of the oil shale strata , which may affect the surrounding arable land and forest . Above @-@ ground retorting typically consumes between one and five barrels of water per barrel of produced shale oil , depending on technology . Water is usually used for spent shale cooling and oil shale ash disposal . In situ processing , according to one estimate , uses about one @-@ tenth as much water . 
 A 2008 programmatic environmental impact statement issued by the United States Bureau of Land Management stated that surface mining and retort operations produce 2 to 10 U.S. gallons ( 7 @.@ 6 to 37 @.@ 9 l ; 1 @.@ 7 to 8 @.@ 3 imp gal ) of waste water per 1 short ton ( 0 @.@ 91 t ) of processed oil shale . 
 Environmental activists , including members of Greenpeace , have organized strong protests against the oil shale industry . In one result , Queensland Energy Resources put the proposed Stuart Oil Shale Project in Australia on hold in 2004 . 
 = 1906 Florida Keys hurricane = 
 The 1906 Florida Keys hurricane was a powerful and deadly hurricane that caused major impacts in Cuba and southern Florida . The fifth hurricane and third major hurricane of the season , the storm formed from a system near Barbados on October 4 . By October 8 , it had intensified into a tropical storm , and made landfall as a hurricane in Central America . The hurricane traveled towards Cuba , making landfall and wreaking havoc on the island . The storm then made a third landfall in the Florida Keys during the evening of October 18 . At least 240 people were killed as a result of the hurricane , and damages totaled at least $ 4 @,@ 135 @,@ 000 . 
 Of the 240 people killed during the storm , 135 were workers on the Florida East Coast Railway . The hurricane eventually led to the end of pineapple production in the Florida Keys for commercial purposes in 1915 , although this was amplified by two further hurricanes in the following years . In 1947 , Project Cirrus , a collaboration of the United States Air Force , attempted to seed a hurricane ; however , the storm made a sudden re @-@ curvature and came ashore near Charleston , South Carolina . As a result , several lawsuits were filed , although they were denied after the path of this storm was revealed to have been similar to the 1947 hurricane . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 The hurricane originated from a " cyclonic perturbation " near Barbados on October 4 , as reported by local newspapers . On October 5 , no closed circulation was evident in the system . In Colón , Panama , a report was sent to the Weather Bureau , reporting sinking barometric pressures on October 6 . It was recognized as a tropical storm early on October 8 , with winds of 40 mph ( 65 km / h ) , while located in the southwestern Caribbean Sea . 
 As the system continued to move west on October 9 , it strengthened into a hurricane , and while it began to curve toward the west @-@ northwest , further strengthening occurred , as it intensified into a Category 2 hurricane . The hurricane made landfall in Nicaragua on October 10 as a Category 3 hurricane . The system quickly weakened to a tropical storm as it traveled west @-@ northwestward on October 11 , later passing over the Gulf of Honduras . It later struck Belize on October 13 as a strong Category 1 hurricane on October 13 , tracking north @-@ northwestward . 
 The system weakened into a tropical storm by October 14 but restrengthened into a Category 1 hurricane by October 16 . As the hurricane began to turn northeastward , it continued to intensify , attaining Category 3 status by October 17 . The hurricane continued to approach Havana during the day , and the hurricane 's center passed east of Havana during the evening . The following morning , the hurricane was located over southern Florida moving northeastward , and passed east of the coast of South Carolina . The hurricane began to weaken as it was forced to curve south @-@ southwestward , striking Florida again as the result of a high @-@ pressure area . The system eventually weakened to a tropical depression over Florida , and traced southwestward into the Gulf of Mexico . On October 23 , the remnants of the hurricane struck Central America and dissipated on October 23 . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 = = = Central America = = = 
 The town of Bluefields suffered moderate damage during the hurricane , including downed trees and damage to roofs . In western Nicaragua , widespread flooding damaged roads and disrupted the construction of a port in Corinto . In <unk> , many plantations were severely damaged , in addition to the destruction of bridges and roads in the city . Several landslides occurred , leading to the destruction of many hills . In addition , local crops suffered much damage , including much of the local banana and rubber crops . A large wave measuring 15 feet ( 4 @.@ 6 m ) caused by the storm was described off Nicaragua , and caused brief disappearances of the Seal Cays . Along the Mosquito Coast , the town of <unk> was nearly wiped out by the hurricane . Damage to fruit plantations in Costa Rica totaled $ 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 . 
 = = = Cuba = = = 
 Havana sustained major damage from the hurricane , with 50 houses destroyed , and cable operators in Miami , Santiago , and Jamaica were unable to reach telegraph services in the city . The wall of a legation of the United States was blown down . <unk> 's sea baths were severely damaged . Havana 's streetcar service was temporarily disrupted by the storm . Trees were blown down in the parks of Havana . Twenty people were killed in the city , while in <unk> , nine people were killed , with many others missing . In Matanzas , the location of the United States ' 28th Infantry , tents were destroyed and there was widespread damage . However , nobody was killed or injured in the city . In San Luis , tobacco crops were ruined , and 150 tobacco barns in the Alquízar municipality were destroyed . The sugar crop in Pinar del Río Province survived well during the hurricane . In the La <unk> section of Cuba , the banana crops were completely destroyed . Rivers topped their banks throughout the country . 
 = = = Florida = = = 
 In Miami , over 100 houses were destroyed , and the Episcopal and Methodist churches were completely destroyed . The jail in Miami was nearly completely dismantled , and the prisoners were evacuated . In Fort Pierce , the Peninsula and Occidental railcar sheds collapsed , with the roofs blown away . A two @-@ story brick saloon was destroyed during the hurricane . The Miami telegraph office reported street flooding in the city , and that the telegraph office was flooded . Damage in Miami amounted to $ 160 @,@ 000 . In Key West , houses and trees were knocked down . In St. Augustine , the tide was described as the " highest in ten years , " where streets were flooded throughout the city . At least 70 passengers on the steamers St. Lucia and Peerless drowned during the storm near Elliott Key . The steamers Campbell and the Sara were destroyed near the Isle of Pines , and the <unk> sank . Telegraph lines were also down south of Jupiter . 
 The effects of the hurricane were most severe on the Florida East Coast Railway , where at least 135 people died , 104 of them on Houseboat No. 4 , one of the railway 's boats . Many of the workers were swept to sea on barges and flatboats ; however , the steamer Jenny rescued 42 workers , who were dropped off at Key West , while another 24 were sent to Savannah , Georgia . The railway 's losses totaled about $ 200 @,@ 000 . Construction was disrupted for a whole year by the storm , as equipment was reassembled and repaired . Many farmers on the Florida Keys suffered large losses ; orange groves and fields of pineapples were devastated by the storm . Six lives were lost on plantations in the Keys . At the government wharf , the Fessenden was damaged during the hurricane . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Following the hurricane , all workers of the Florida East Coast Railway were provided with wooden barracks on land , and several additional safety measures were enforced . The hurricane eventually led to the end of the commercial production of pineapples in the Florida Keys . In 1947 , Project Cirrus attempted to use the method of cloud seeding in a hurricane . Approximately 180 pounds ( 82 kg ) of crushed dry ice were seeded into the 1947 hurricane . The system was successfully seeded ; however , soon after the seeding , the hurricane changed course and traced toward Charleston , South Carolina . Following the seeding , the project was cancelled and numerous lawsuits were filed as the result of the sudden change of the path in the storm . However , the similar path of this hurricane prevented the success of the lawsuits . 
 = Ellen van Dijk = 
 Eleonora Maria " Ellen " van Dijk ( Dutch pronunciation : [ <unk> <unk> <unk> vɑn <unk> ] ; born 11 February 1987 ) is a Dutch professional road racing cyclist riding for Boels Dolmans Cycling Team . Besides road cycling she was also a track cyclist until 2012 . Van Dijk is known as a time trial specialist and is four times world champion . She won her first world title on the track in the scratch race in 2008 . She became Road World Champion in 2012 and 2013 in the team time trial and in 2013 also in the individual time trial . In 2015 she won the time trial at the first European Games and the silver medal in the team time trial at the world championships . 
 Van Dijk started as a speed skater and as part of her skating training she undertook cycling as part of cross @-@ training in summer . She excelled at both , competing nationally at junior level . After becoming a national cycling champion for the fifth time in 2007 , she quit speed skating and became a full @-@ time cyclist . Along with her world title successes , Van Dijk has also twice been European track champion , twice European time trial champion and has won six World Cup races . In 2012 she competed in three disciplines at the 2012 Olympic Games in London , where she helped Marianne Vos win the gold medal in the road race , finished eighth in the time trial and sixth in the team pursuit . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Ellen van Dijk grew up in <unk> , Utrecht together with her two older brothers , her father Nico and her mother Anneke . Besides speed skating and cycling , she also played volleyball and performed gymnastics when she was a child . Van Dijk left <unk> for her study to Amsterdam in 2006 , where she still lives . During the first years in Amsterdam she shared her apartment with <unk> Kerste , her best friend and also a Dutch cyclist . Kerste moved out a few years later and Van Dijk has since shared an apartment with the Dutch cyclist Hannah Walter . In December 2014 Van Dijk moved to Woerden . 
 Van Dijk graduated from <unk> College , Woerden , in 2005 and earned a bachelor ’ s degree in Human Movement Sciences at the VU University in Amsterdam in 2011 . After the Olympics she started her master 's degree , but didn 't have time to complete it . 
 = = Sport career = = 
 = = = Speed skating = = = 
 Van Dijk started her career as a speed skater . As a very young child , she had performed in natural ice skating tours and , at the age of eight , she became a member of a local speed skating club . During the winter months , Van Dijk trained almost every day at the local speed skating rink in Utrecht . She did this from when she was aged twelve until she was twenty years old . Van Dijk competed five times in the junior Dutch Allround Championships ; she finished in tenth place on two occasions in the all @-@ around competition and in fourth place in the 3000m in 2005 . She also rode the track record at the 5000 metres . 
 = = = Early cycling years = = = 
 When she was ten years old , Van Dijk started , together with her two brothers and <unk> Kerste , cross @-@ training on a bike during the summer and she began competing in regional races . Because Van Dijk performed well , she started competing in national races at the age of 15 in 2002 . In the same year , in her first national championship , she finished in fourth place . The following year , she won the Dutch national road championship in the novice category . In 2004 , Van Dijk won two more national titles , this time as a junior , in the road race and in the road individual time trial . In the latter , she beat Marianne Vos , though Vos would avenge her defeat in Road World Championships in Verona , Italy . Vos won the junior road race world title , with Van Dijk finishing third . In 2005 , Van Dijk again won the Dutch national junior title in the individual time trial but finished second in the road race , again behind Vos . In 2007 , when Van Dijk was considered for selection in regional speed skating , she had to choose between speed skating and cycling – ultimately , she chose cycling . 
 = = = Professional career = = = 
 = = = = 2006 = = = = 
 Van Dijk achieved two stage victories in the Tour <unk> en Limousin and in the Giro della Toscana . In the middle of the season , Van Dijk suffered a clavicle fracture and as a result was hampered in the national championships . She finished 10th at the U @-@ 23 European Championships in Valkenburg and at the World University Cycling Championship , Van Dijk won the individual time trial and finished second in the road race . At the end of the season , Van Dijk was a reserve at the road world championships but she did not race . At the Dutch National Track Championships she won bronze in the individual pursuit . 
 = = = = 2007 = = = = 
 Van Dijk won the first stage in the Tour of Chongming Island and finished second in the general classification . At the national time trial championships she became for the first time Dutch champion in the elite category . In the time trial at the European Championships ( under @-@ 23 ) she finished fifth . Due to her good results in the time trials she was chosen to represent the Netherlands in the time trial at the Road World Championships in Stuttgart where she finished 17th . Due to her good results she became <unk> of the year of Woerden . Because Van Dijk had more spare time in the winter after quitting speed skating , she was invited to join the Dutch national track cycling team . At the national track championships she became Dutch champion in the individual pursuit , ahead of Marianne Vos and Kirsten Wild , and finished fourth in the scratch race and points race . 
 = = = = 2008 = = = = 
 Due to her good results at the national track cycling championships , Van Dijk was chosen to ride the individual pursuit in the remaining two ( out of four ) 2007 – 2008 track cycling World Cups , where she could , via the UCI World Ranking system , potentially earn qualification for the 2008 Olympic Games . She finished in Los Angeles and Copenhagen in fifth and fourth places respectively . After finishing fifth in the individual pursuit at the World Track Championships in Manchester , Van Dijk missed out on qualification for the Olympic games ; she finished 12th in the UCI World Rankings and only the first eleven riders qualified . The day after she took revenge by winning her first major senior title , the scratch race at the 2008 World Cycling Championships . With eight laps to go she attacked and rode solo to the finish line . Later that year , she also became European Track Championships in the scratch as well as in the points race . She rode to the silver medal in the omnium and the individual pursuit events . Despite not winning a medal at the Dutch time trial championships she won the time trial at the European Championships ( under @-@ 23 ) . She was not selected to ride the time trial at the Summer Olympics , because the course would be too heavy for her . 
 = = = = 2009 = = = = 
 On the track , Van Dijk followed other competitors by riding with a heavier gear . The change seemed to bear fruit when , in February at the Track Cycling World Cup in Copenhagen , she won her first two World Cup victories in the individual pursuit and points race and won a silver medal in the team pursuit . A month later at the Track Cycling World Championships in Pruszków , Poland , she failed to live up to her billing as world champion and her performances were not as good as those than in Copenhagen in February and in Manchester the year before . Indeed , Van Dijk did not reach the podium in any event . In spite of her disappointing performance in Pruszków , Van Dijk was approached by , and soon agreed to join , the professional road cycling team Team Columbia – High Road Women . Although the name of the team has changed on a number of occasions since , Van Dijk rode for this team until 2013 . The road season did not start well as Van Dijk suffered a concussion in a crash during the Ronde van Gelderland in April and she was unable to ride for nearly six weeks . Almost immediately after having recovered from her injury , she defended successfully her European time trial title at the European Road Championships in July . After riding the time trial at the Road World Championships , Van Dijk took some rest in preparation for the Track Cycling World Cups . She skipped the National track championships , which were held two weeks after the World Championships . 
 = = = = 2010 = = = = 
 Van Dijk did not reach the finals at the Track Cycling World Championships in Melbourne , finishing fifth in both the individual pursuit and the team pursuit events . She also participated in the points race as a late replacement and finished eighth . Van Dijk won the time trial on the road in the Holland Ladies Tour en route to finishing third in the final general classification standings . She won the Sparkassen Giro and finished second in the Open de Suède Vårgårda World Cup race in Sweden . At the Dutch Track Championships , Van Dijk won five medals including gold in the individual pursuit . 
 = = = = 2011 = = = = 
 Van Dijk cycled in the team pursuit to a national team time trial record at the Track Cycling World Cup in Manchester . A month later however she rode with the team three seconds slower at the Track Cycling World Championships and finished in 5th place ; the same position in which Van Dijk finished in the individual pursuit . 
 Van Dijk started the road cycling season by winning all three classifications ( yellow jersey , points and young rider ) in the Ladies Tour of Qatar , including winning the second stage . Van Dijk dedicated her stage and overall win to teammate Carla Swart , who died whilst training after being hit by a truck a few weeks earlier . The price money she earned in Qatar was sent to her family . After riding stage races in the Netherlands , China and Spain she finished second at the Dutch time trial championships in Veendam and qualified for the World Championships later the year . A month later , in Sweden , she rode two World Cup races , winning the Open de Suède Vårgårda TTT and finishing second in the Open de Suède Vårgårda . As preparation for the World Championships she won the time trial at the Holland Ladies Tour . At the World Championships in Copenhagen she finished 6th in the time trial and was the best Dutch rider . Returning to the track , Van Dijk won the Track Cycling World Cup in Astana in a new national record , which was her fourth World Cup victory . At the end of the year she successfully defended her Dutch individual pursuit title at the Dutch National Track Championships and also became national champion in the <unk> . 
 = = = = 2012 = = = = 
 After a knee injury due to an accident with a scooter and a few weeks of required rest and adjusted training , Van Dijk won a stage in the Energiewacht Tour ; because she did not earn enough bonus seconds during the tour she finished second in the general classification . Van Dijk also won the individual time trial and the road race in the Omloop van Borsele . A few days later she started in the Gracia @-@ Orlova , where she won the prologue and a stage and helped her team @-@ mate Evelyn Stevens to win the general classification . Back in the Netherlands , in Emmen , she became the Dutch time trial champion in the elite category for the second time in her career . 
 Van Dijk was selected to represent her country at the Olympic Games in London , and she competed in the road race and the individual time trial on the road and in the team pursuit on the track . In the road race , Van Dijk was a domestique for Marianne Vos , who won the gold medal . Van Dijk attacked five times but finished outside the time limit . Because the victory of Marianne Vos was seen as a team performance , Van Dijk , <unk> <unk> and Annemiek van Vleuten were all subsequently honoured in both the Holland Heineken House and the <unk> . In the time trial , Van Dijk finished eighth . She said afterwards that she was afraid to start too fast and subsequently lost a lot of time in the first part of the race . In the team pursuit , Van Dijk finished sixth together with Kirsten Wild , Amy Pieters and Vera <unk> . In the qualification heats , the team had held the Olympic record for a short period and they rode a new Dutch national record in round one . According to Van Dijk , sixth place was the highest attainable place the team could have hoped to achieve . 
 As preparation for the Road World Championships , Van Dijk and her Team Specialized – lululemon won the team time trials at the World Cup ( <unk> ) and in the Holland Ladies Tour . In between these victories , Van Dijk won the first and final stages of the Lotto @-@ Decca Tour and as a result also topped the general classification , finishing ahead of Kirsten Wild in second place . At the World Road Championships in Valkenburg Van Dijk became world champion in the team time trial with Team Specialized – lululemon . Three days later , Van Dijk finished fifth in the individual time trial on a hilly course that she afterwards described as being " not made for me " . During the road race , she was a casualty in a crash involving 50 riders and did not finish the race . During the winter period she chose not to ride on the track to keep her focus completely on the 2013 road cycling season . 
 = = = = 2013 = = = = 
 Van Dijk started the season with a third place in the general classification of the Ladies Tour of Qatar . During the season openers Van Dijk rode very well highlighted by her victory in the Le Samyn des Dames . In the first three UCI World Cup races Van Dijk finished two times second ( Ronde van Drenthe , Tour of Flanders ) and rode to a third place in the Trofeo Alfredo Binda in Italy . Her second stage race of the season , the Energiewacht Tour included the first individual time trial of the season which she won with a big difference . After also finishing two times second she won the general classification . About the time trial she said later that she had been tested on her time trial position during her stay in Italy . After a day of testing and adjusting the position of the <unk> and the steer she found a better position which she was able to maintain for almost half an hour . She also said that she rode at a higher power than in the time trials at the 2012 Summer Olympics and the 2012 World Championships . Van Dijk also improved riding uphill and finished <unk> in the fourth World Cup race , the hilly La Flèche Wallonne . Her time trial continued to go well and she won the time trials at the <unk> Omloop van Borsele and two time trial stages in the Gracia @-@ Orlová . She also won a mountain stage , the queen stage , in the Gracia @-@ Orlová and so the general classification . In June she successfully defended her National Time Trial title in <unk> . A few days later she rode in medal position during the National Road Race Championships but had to abandon the race due to a broken derailleur in the second last lap . At the Giro d 'Italia <unk> , the most prestigious stage race in women 's cycling , she won stage 8 , an individual time trial . With Specialized – lululemon she won World Cup team time trial at the Open de Suède Vårgårda TTT . After the last two World Cup races , the Open de Suède Vårgårda where she finished fourth and the GP de <unk> which she did not ride to prepare for the last stage races , she finished third in the overall World Cup standings . She rode strong during the stage races and won the general classification of the Lotto @-@ Belisol Belgium Tour as well as of the Holland Ladies Tour , including the team time trial stages . 
 As a preparation for the World Championships in Tuscany Van Dijk went during the season a few times to Italy to practise the time trial course . She trained at five in the morning to avoid traffic and made video recordings of the course to get to know the turns . In the week before the World Championships she won the French time trial Chrono Champenois – Trophée Européen . All the preparations paid off and the World Championships were very successful for Van Dijk . With her team she won for the second consecutive year the world title in the team time trial . Because Van Dijk had won almost all the time trials this year she was also the main favourite for the individual time trial . Despite the pressure she won the time trial with a convincing victory and became the second Dutch women to win this title . At the end of the championships , Van Dijk finished 16th on a non @-@ preferable hilly road race course . 
 Due to her successful season she ended third in the 2013 Women 's Road World Ranking . At the end of the year Van Dijk won the title Amsterdam Sportswoman of the year . She was nominated previous years but never won the title . She was also nominated to become Dutch cyclist of the year but lost from Marianne Vos . 
 = = = = 2014 = = = = 
 In October 2013 Van Dijk announced that she signed a three @-@ year contract with Boels Dolmans Cycling Team . She is a teammate of among others Lizzie Armitstead , Katarzyna <unk> and Christine <unk> . The time trial at the 2016 Summer Olympics will be her big goal . She will keep her focus on time trials , world cup races and flat short stage races . Due to her focus on road cycling , she will not compete on the track . Van Dijk was not able to start in the Ladies Tour of Qatar because she did not recover in time from an illness after riding <unk> Egmond @-@ pier @-@ Egmond . She got back her shape during the fist races and just missed the podium in the GP Le Samyn . At the first World Cup race of the season , the Ronde van Drenthe , Van Dijk helped team mate Lizzie Armitstead to victory by closing a massive gap in the final of the race . 
 Van Dijk won the Tour of Flanders after a solo of 25 kilometres in April . After her time trial victory at the World Championships in 2013 , it is her major victory of her career according to herself . At the end of April , Ellen van Dijk won for the third consecutive the time trial at the Omloop van Borsele . The day afterwards Van Dijk finished third in the road race which ended with a bunch sprint . As part of the same time trial competition , Van Dijk did not win the time trial at the GP <unk> a month later . She finished second behind former team mate Lisa Brennauer . Van Dijk responded that here average power during the time trial was not great but also not very bad and that Brennauer is a world class time trialist . Two days later she finished again second in the prologue of the <unk> Jacobs stage race , two seconds behind Marianne Vos . 
 At the Boels Rental Hills Classic Van Dijk was part of front group that consisted of six riders which fell apart into a group of three riders . With an uphill finish , Van Dijk lost the sprint from Johansson ( Orica @-@ AIS ) and finished second ahead of Amy Pieters ( Rabo Liv ) . Van Dijk won the mountain classification of the race . In June , Van Dijk started as the main favourite at the Dutch National Time Trial Championships , but did not win her fourth time trial title . She finished second , with a margin of only 0 @.@ 02 seconds , behind Annemiek van Vleuten ( Rabo Liv ) . Van Dijk was disappointed and responded that she was not that good as in 2013 without having a real explanation for it . 
 Van Dijk participated at La Course by Le Tour de France , the inaugural edition of a women 's race on the final day and on the same circuit of the Tour de France with worldwide broadcasting . Van Dijk attacked multiple times and was the only women who was able to get clear for a few laps with a maximal advantage of over half a minute . At the Open de Suède Vårgårda TTT , where she finished third with her team , she got some confidence back about her time trial performances . In begin September Van Dijk won the time trial of the Boels Rental Ladies Tour , with a 12 seconds gap over her main rival Lisa Brennauer . Her first international time trial victory of the season . With the other stages ending in a bunch sprint and sprinters winning the <unk> seconds , Van Dijk finished third in the general classification . A final test for het time trial capabilities before the World Championships was at the Chrono Champenois ITT . Halfway the 33 @.@ 40 kilometres ( 20 @.@ 8 miles ) time trial she had a 39 seconds advantage over Hanna <unk> , but she finished second 8 seconds behind her because she lost about a minute after riding the wrong direction . 
 = = = = 2015 = = = = 
 Van Dijk started the season as usual with the Ladies Tour of Qatar . She won the second stage and took the lead in the general classification . The day afterwards team mate Lizzie Armitstead took over the leading jersey . Van Dijk ended the tour in third place in the overall classification . During the first European race of the season , the Omloop het Nieuwsblad , van Dijk escaped from a front group of 15 riders on the Molenberg with 30 km to go . Anna van der Breggen was the only one who was able to follow her . The duo extended their advantage over the cobbled sections that followed , holding off the chase group to the line , where Van Dijk lost the two @-@ up sprint . A few days later Van Dijk rode again strong in the Le Samyn des Dames . In the final kilometers she closed a one @-@ minute gap with the front group . After closing the gap she was the leadout for Chantal <unk> who sprinted to victory . Due to a back injury , Van Dijk could not start in Omloop van het <unk> . In the first World Cup of the season , the Ronde van Drenthe , the team was eager to win . In the final Van Dijk was the lead @-@ out for Armitstead . However , Armitstead lost Van Dijk in the last kilometer . Van Dijk continued sprinting and rode to the third place . She was happy with her result , but found it a shame that the team did not win . During the second World Cup race , the Trofeo Alfredo Bina Van Dijk couldn 't ride uphill with the fastest riders and finished eighth , with team mate Armitstead taking the win . For the Tour of Flanders , Van Dijk heard a day before the race she was not as a leader of the team , although Van Dijk won this World Cup race previous year . Because Van Dijk prepared very well for this race she was disappointed , and didn 't ride a good race finishing 24th . Van Dijk rode several races in the Netherlands , Belgium and Spain in April , May and the begin of the June . The most notable results from these race being a second place in the team time trial in the Energiewacht Tour and a second place in <unk> @-@ Geraardsbergen @-@ <unk> , being outsprinted by Gracie Elvin . Van Dijk was selected to represent the Netherlands at the first 2015 European Games in the time trial and the road race in Baku , Azerbaijan in June . The time trial was her big goal and she was the favorite to win it . With a good race over the straight circuit she was 36 seconds faster than the Ukrainian Hanna <unk> and won the first gold medal for the Netherlands . In the road race she was part of front group of four riders , together with <unk> Anna van der Breggen . During the last lap it appeared that Van der Breggen rode for her Polish trade @-@ team mate Katarzyna <unk> and not for the Netherlands . Van Dijk was the brunt of these tactics and finished fourth . Four days later , back in the Netherlands , she was not able to win the national time trial championships , finishing almost half a minute behind Van der Breggen . 
 During the La Course by Le Tour de France the rain poured down and made the course and cobbles slippery . Van Dijk was involved by one of the many crashes . She broke het collarbone and had to abandon the race . At home she had installed a high @-@ <unk> tent , and with a speedy recovery she went with Iris <unk> to Switzerland to train at high altitude . Six weeks after her crash she could race again and started in the 2015 Boels Rental Ladies Tour on 1 September . She rode in the stage race stronger every day and finished second in the time trial , two seconds behind of Lisa Brennauer . She moved to the third place in the general classification and was able to keep this position . 
 At the 2015 UCI Road World Championships in Richmond , United States , she won the silver medal with her team in the team time trial . In the time trial she finished disappointingly seventh . A reason for her performance was that her rear <unk> was not well attached in the frame . Her wheel ran into the frame , damaging her tire and puncturing her inner tube . For the road race she rode for Anna van der Breggen who won the silver medal and finished in tenth place herself . 
 = = = = 2016 = = = = 
 Van Dijk started the road race season also this year with the Ladies Tour of Qatar . It was very windy and Van Dijk lost some time in the second stage because she rode in the second echelon . In the third stage she was part of the front group . In the last few kilometres she was able to ride away and won the stage , in the same city as she won the year before . She moved up to the third place in the general classification and maintained this position , with team mate Romy Kasper finishing in second place overall . At the Omloop het Nieuwsblad at the end of February , Van Dijk attacked at the last climb . She was caught and finished the race in arrears due to a bike change . Due to a crash during the race she went to the hospital afterwards and it appears she had one broken and some bruised ribs . 
 = = Achievements = = 
 = = = Results at championships and Games = = = 
 OTL 
 = over time limit , DNF = 
 did not finish , U23 = under 23 
 = = = Other major achievements = = = 
 = = Dutch national records , team pursuit = = 
 The women 's 3000 m team pursuit track cycling <unk> was introduced at the 2007 – 08 track cycling season . The Dutch team consisting of Ellen van Dijk , <unk> <unk> and Yvonne <unk> rode the team pursuit for the first time at Round 4 at the 2007 – 08 UCI Track Cycling World Cup in Copenhagen in a time of 3 : 36 @.@ 901 ( 49 @.@ 792 km / h ) . They broke the record later that day . After have ridden the team pursuit for the first time , the record has been broken nine times . Van Dijk is the only woman who always has been part of the squad when a record was broken . The current record was settled during the 2012 Summer Olympics by Van Dijk , Kirsten Wild and Vera <unk> in a time of 3 : 20 @.@ 013 ( 53 @.@ 996 km / h ) on 4 August 2012 . After the 2011 – 12 track cycling season the UCI changed the discipline into a 4000 m team pursuit with 4 riders . 
 = = Personal records = = 
 = Hugo Award = 
 The Hugo Awards are a set of awards given annually for the best science fiction or fantasy works and achievements of the previous year . The awards are named after Hugo Gernsback , the founder of the pioneering science fiction magazine Amazing Stories , and were officially named the Science Fiction Achievement Awards until 1992 . Organized and overseen by the World Science Fiction Society , the awards are given each year at the annual World Science Fiction Convention as the central focus of the event . They were first given in 1953 , at the 11th World Science Fiction Convention , and have been awarded every year since 1955 . Over the years that the award has been given , the categories presented have changed ; currently Hugo Awards are given in more than a dozen categories , and include both written and dramatic works of various types . 
 One of the most prestigious science fiction awards , the Hugo Awards have been termed as " among the highest honors bestowed in science fiction and fantasy writing " . Works that have won have been published in special collections , and the official logo of the Hugo Awards is often placed on the winning books ' cover as a promotional tool . The 2015 awards were presented at the 73rd Worldcon , <unk> , in Spokane , United States , on August 22 , 2015 . The 2016 Hugos will be presented at the 74th Worldcon , <unk> II , in Kansas City , United States , on August 21 , 2016 . 
 For lists of winners and nominees for each category , see the list of award categories below . 
 = = Award = = 
 The World Science Fiction Society ( WSFS ) gives out the Hugo Awards each year for the best science fiction or fantasy works and achievements of the previous year . The award is named after Hugo Gernsback , who founded the pioneering science fiction magazine Amazing Stories and who is considered one of the " fathers " of the science fiction genre . Works are eligible for an award if they were published in English in the prior calendar year . There are no written rules as to which works qualify as science fiction or fantasy , and the decision of eligibility in that regard is left up to the voters , rather than to the organizing committee . Hugo Award nominees and winners are chosen by supporting or attending members of the annual World Science Fiction Convention , or Worldcon , and the presentation evening constitutes its central event . The selection process is defined in the WSFS constitution as instant @-@ runoff voting with five nominees per category , except in the case of a tie . The awards are split over more than a dozen categories , and include both written and dramatic works . 
 For each category of Hugo , the voter may rank " No Award " as one of their choices . Voters are instructed that they should do so if they feel that none of the nominees are worthy of the award , or if they feel the category should be abolished entirely . A vote for " No Award " other than as one 's first choice signifies that the voter believes the nominee ( s ) ranked higher than " No Award " are worthy of a Hugo in that category , while those ranked lower are not . 
 The five works on the ballot for each category are the most @-@ nominated by members that year , with no limit on the number of stories that can be nominated . From 1953 to 1958 the awards did not include any recognition of runner @-@ up novels , but since 1959 all of the candidates have been recorded . Initial nominations are made by members in January through March , while voting on the ballot of five nominations is performed roughly in April through July , subject to change depending on when that year 's Worldcon is held . Worldcons are generally held near the start of September , and take place in a different city around the world each year . 
 The idea of giving out awards at Worldcons was proposed by Harold Lynch for the 1953 convention . The idea was based on the Academy Awards , with the name " Hugo " being given by Robert A. <unk> . The award itself was created by Jack McKnight and Ben Jason in 1953 , based on the design of hood ornaments of 1950s cars . It consisted of a finned rocket ship on a wooden base . Each subsequent award , with the exception of the 1958 award , has been similar to the original design . The rocket trophy was formally redesigned in 1984 , and since then only the base of the trophy has changed each year . There is no monetary or other remuneration associated with the Hugo , other than the trophy . 
 = = = Retro Hugos = = = 
 Retrospective Hugo Awards , or Retro Hugos , were added in the mid @-@ 1990s . These awards are given by Worldcons held 50 , 75 , or 100 years after a Worldcon where no Hugos had been awarded , which were the conventions in 1939 – 41 , 1946 – 52 , and 1954 , and are given for works that would have been eligible in that year , by the same process as the regular Hugos . Retro Hugos have only been given five times : in 1996 , 2001 , and 2004 for 50 years prior , and 2014 and 2016 for 75 years prior . The six Worldcons eligible in 1997 – 2000 , 2002 , and 2015 chose not to award them . The next opportunity will be in 2022 for 1947 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = 1950s = = = 
 The first Hugo Awards were presented at the 11th Worldcon in Philadelphia in 1953 , which awarded Hugos in seven categories . The awards presented that year were initially conceived as a one @-@ off event , though the organizers hoped that subsequent conventions would also present them . At the time , Worldcons were completely run by their respective committees as independent events and had no oversight between years . Thus there was no mandate for any future conventions to repeat the awards , and no set rules for how to do so . 
 The 1954 Worldcon chose not to , but the awards were reinstated at the 1955 Worldcon , and thereafter became traditional . The award was called the Annual Science Fiction Achievement Award , with " Hugo Award " being an unofficial , but better known name . The nickname was accepted as an official alternative name in 1958 , and since the 1992 awards the nickname has been adopted as the official name of the award . 
 In 1959 , though there were still no formal guidelines governing the awards , several rules were instated which thereafter became traditional . These included having a ballot for nominating works earlier in the year and separate from the voting ballot ; defining eligibility to include works published in the prior calendar year , rather than the previous rule of the " preceding year " ; and allowing voters to select " no award " as an option , which then won that year in two categories : Dramatic Presentation and Best New Author . The eligibility change additionally sparked a separate rule , prohibiting the nomination of works which had been nominated for the 1958 awards , as the two time periods overlapped . 
 = = = 1960s = = = 
 In 1961 , after the formation of the WSFS to oversee each Worldcon committee , formal rules were set down in the WSFS constitution mandating the presenting of the awards as one of the responsibilities of each Worldcon organizing committee . The rules restricted voting to members of the convention that the awards would be given at , while still allowing anyone to nominate works ; nominations were restricted to members of the convention or the previous year 's convention in 1963 . The guidelines also specified the categories that would be awarded , which could only be changed by the World Science Fiction Society board . These categories were for Best Novel , Short Fiction ( short stories , broadly defined ) , Dramatic Presentation , Professional Magazine , Professional Artist , and Best Fanzine ( fan magazine ) . 1963 was also the second year in which " no award " won a category , again for Dramatic Presentation . 
 In 1964 the guidelines were changed to allow individual conventions to create additional categories , which was codified as up to two categories for that year . These additional awards were officially designated as Hugo Awards , but were not required to be repeated by future conventions . This was later adjusted to only allow one additional category ; while these extra Hugo Awards have been given out in several categories , only a few were ever awarded for more than one year . 
 In 1967 categories for Novelette , Fan Writer , and Fan Artist were added , and a category for Best Novella was added the following year ; these new categories had the effect of providing a definition for what word count qualified a work for what category , which was previously left up to voters . Novelettes had also been awarded prior to the codification of the rules . The fan awards were initially conceived as separate from the Hugo Awards , with the award for Best Fanzine losing its status , but were instead absorbed into the regular Hugo Awards by the convention committee . 
 = = = 1970s = = = 
 While traditionally five works had been selected for nomination in each category out of the proposed nominees , in 1971 this was set down as a formal rule , barring ties . In 1973 , the WSFS removed the category for Best Professional Magazine , and a Best Professional Editor award was instated as its replacement , in order to recognize " the increasing importance of original anthologies " . 
 After that year the guidelines were changed again to remove the mandated awards and instead allow up to ten categories which would be chosen by each convention , though they were expected to be similar to those presented in the year before . Despite this change no new awards were added or previous awards removed before the guidelines were changed back to listing specific categories in 1977 . 1971 and 1977 both saw " no award " win the Dramatic Presentation category for the third and fourth time ; " no award " did not win any categories afterwards until 2015 . 
 = = = 1980s and 90s = = = 
 In 1980 the category for Best Non @-@ Fiction Book ( later renamed Best Related Work ) was added , followed by a category for Best <unk> ( semi @-@ professional magazine ) in 1984 . In 1983 , members of the Church of Scientology were encouraged by people such as Charles Platt to nominate as a bloc Battlefield Earth , written by the organization 's founder L. Ron Hubbard , for the Best Novel award ; it did not make the final ballot . Another campaign followed in 1987 to nominate Hubbard 's Black Genesis ; it made the final ballot but finished behind " no award " . 1989 saw a work — The Guardsman by Todd Hamilton and P. J. Beese — withdrawn by its authors from the final ballot after a fan bought numerous memberships under false names , all sent in on the same day , in order to get the work onto the ballot . 
 In 1990 the Best Original Art Work award was given as an extra Hugo Award , and was listed again in 1991 , though not actually awarded , and established afterward as an official Hugo Award . It was then removed from this status in 1996 , and has not been awarded since . The Retro Hugos were created in the mid @-@ 1990s , and were first awarded in 1996 . 
 = = = Since 2000 = = = 
 In 2003 , the Dramatic Presentation award was split into two categories , Long Form and Short Form . This was repeated with the Best Professional Editor category in 2007 . 2009 saw the addition of the Best Graphic Story category , while the most recent change to the Hugo Awards was in 2012 , when an award for Best Fancast was added . 
 In 2015 , two groups of science fiction writers , the " Sad Puppies " led by Brad R. Torgersen and Larry Correia , and the " Rabid Puppies " led by Vox Day , each put forward a similar slate of suggested nominations which came to dominate the ballot . The Sad Puppies campaign had run for two years prior on a smaller scale , with limited success . The leaders of the campaigns characterized them as a reaction to " niche , academic , overtly [ leftist ] " nominees and winners in opposition to " an affirmative action award " that preferred female and non @-@ white authors and characters . In response , five nominees declined their nomination before and , for the first time , two after the ballot was published . Multiple @-@ Hugo @-@ winner Connie Willis declined to present the awards . The slates were characterized by some journalists as a " right wing " , " orchestrated backlash " by a " group of white guys " and were linked with the Gamergate controversy . Multiple Hugo winner Samuel R. Delany characterized the campaigns as a response to " socio @-@ economic " changes such as minority authors gaining prominence and thus " economic heft " . In all but the Best Dramatic Presentation , Long Form category , " no award " placed above all nominees that were on either slate , and it won all five categories that only contained slate nominees . 
 = = Categories = = 
 The only discontinued awards which were instated in the WSFS constitution as permanent categories were the Best Professional Magazine and Best Original Art Work Hugo Awards . Worldcon committees may also give out special awards during the Hugo ceremony , which are not voted on . Unlike the additional Hugo categories which Worldcons may present , these awards are not officially Hugo Awards and do not use the same trophy , though they once did . An additional award , the John W. Campbell Award for Best New Writer , is presented at the Hugo Award ceremony and voted by the same process , but is not formally a Hugo Award . 
 = = Recognition = = 
 The Hugo Award is highly regarded by observers . The Los Angeles Times has termed it " among the highest honors bestowed in science fiction and fantasy writing " , a claim echoed by Wired , who said that it was " the premier award in the science fiction genre " . Justine Larbalestier , in The Battle of the Sexes in Science Fiction ( 2002 ) , referred to the awards as " the best known and most prestigious of the science fiction awards " , and Jo Walton , writing for Tor.com , said it was " undoubtedly science fiction ’ s premier award " . The Guardian similarly acknowledged it as " a fine showcase for speculative fiction " as well as " one of the most venerable , democratic and international " science fiction awards " in existence " . James Gunn , in The New Encyclopedia of Science Fiction ( 1988 ) , echoed The Guardian 's statement of the award 's democratic nature , saying that " because of its broad electorate " the Hugos were the awards most representative of " reader popularity " . Camille Bacon @-@ Smith , in Science Fiction Culture ( 2000 ) , said that at the time fewer than 1000 people voted on the final ballot ; she held , however , that this is a representative sample of the readership at large , given the number of winning novels that remain in print for decades or become notable outside of the science fiction genre , such as The Demolished Man or The Left Hand of Darkness . The 2014 awards saw over 1900 nomination submissions and over 3500 voters on the final slate , while the 1964 awards received 274 votes . The 2015 awards saw <unk> nominating ballots and <unk> votes . 
 Brian Aldiss , in his book Trillion Year Spree : The History of Science Fiction , claimed that the Hugo Award was a barometer of reader popularity , rather than artistic merit ; he contrasted it with the panel @-@ selected Nebula Award , which provided " more literary judgment " , though he did note that the winners of the two awards often overlapped . Along with the Hugo Award , the Nebula Award is also considered one of the premier awards in science fiction , with Laura Miller of Salon.com terming it " science fiction 's most prestigious award " . 
 The official logo of the Hugo Awards is often placed on the winning books ' cover as a promotional tool . Gahan Wilson , in First World Fantasy Awards ( 1977 ) , claimed that noting that a book had won the Hugo Award on the cover " demonstrably " increased sales for that novel , though Orson Scott Card said in his 1990 book How to Write Science Fiction & Fantasy that the award had a larger effect on foreign sales than in the United States . Spider Robinson , in 1992 , claimed that publishers were very interested in authors that won a Hugo Award , more so than for other awards such as the Nebula Award . Literary agent Richard Curtis said in his 1996 Mastering the Business of Writing that having the term Hugo Award on the cover , even as a nominee , was a " powerful inducement " to science fiction fans to buy a novel , while Jo Walton claimed in 2011 that the Hugo is the only science fiction award " that actually affects sales of a book " . 
 There have been several anthologies collecting Hugo @-@ winning short fiction . The series The Hugo Winners , edited by Isaac Asimov , was started in 1962 as a collection of short story winners up to the previous year , and concluded with the 1982 Hugos in Volume 5 . The New Hugo Winners , edited originally by Asimov , later by Connie Willis and finally by Gregory Benford , has four volumes collecting stories from the 1983 to the 1994 Hugos . The most recent anthology is The Hugo Award Showcase ( 2010 ) , edited by Mary Robinette Kowal , which contains most of the short stories , novelettes , and novellas that were nominated for the 2009 award . 
 = SpongeBob SquarePants ( season 4 ) = 
 The fourth season of the American animated television series SpongeBob SquarePants , created by former marine biologist and animator Stephen Hillenburg , aired on Nickelodeon from May 6 , 2005 to July 24 , 2007 , and contained 20 episodes , beginning with the episodes " Fear of a Krabby Patty " and " Shell of a Man " . The series chronicles the exploits and adventures of the title character and his various friends in the fictional underwater city of Bikini Bottom . The season was executive produced by series creator Hillenburg , while writer Paul Tibbitt acted as the showrunner . The show underwent a hiatus on television as Hillenburg halted the production in 2002 to work on the film adaptation of the series , The SpongeBob SquarePants Movie . Once the film was finalized and the previous season had completed broadcast on television , Hillenburg wanted to end the show , but the success of the series led to more episodes , so Tibbitt took over Hillenburg 's position as showrunner and began working on a fourth season for broadcast in 2005 . 
 The show itself received several recognition , including the three Kids ' Choice Awards for Favorite Cartoon from 2005 to 2007 . The episodes " Fear of a Krabby Patty " and " Shell of a Man " were nominated at the 57th Primetime Emmy Awards for Outstanding Animated Program ( for Programming Less Than One Hour ) . It also received a nomination for its episodes " Bummer Vacation " and " <unk> " at the 59th Primetime Emmy Awards for the same category . 
 Several compilation DVDs that contained episodes from the season were released . The SpongeBob SquarePants : Season 4 , Volume 1 and 2 DVDs were released in Region 1 on September 12 , 2006 and January 9 , 2007 , respectively , while the complete set was released in Region 2 on November 3 , 2008 and Region 4 on November 7 , 2008 . On November 13 , 2012 , The Complete Fourth Season DVD was released in Region 1 . 
 = = Production = = 
 The season aired on Nickelodeon , which is owned by Viacom , and was produced by United Plankton Pictures and Nickelodeon . The season 's executive producer was series creator Stephen Hillenburg . In 2002 , Hillenburg and the show 's staff members decided to stop making episodes to work on the 2004 film The SpongeBob SquarePants Movie , after completing the third season . As a result , the show went into a two @-@ year " self @-@ imposed " production hiatus . During the break on television , Nickelodeon expanded the programming for the third season to cover the delay , however , according to network executive Eric Coleman , " there certainly was a delay and a built @-@ up demand . " Nickelodeon announced nine " as @-@ yet @-@ unaired " episodes would be shown during the break . 
 Once the production on the film was completed , Hillenburg wanted to end the series " so the show wouldn 't jump the shark " , but Nickelodeon wanted to do more episodes . Hillenburg said " Well , there was concern when we did the movie [ in 2004 ] that the show had peaked . There were concerns among executives at Nickelodeon . " Hillenburg resigned as the series ' showrunner , and appointed Paul Tibbitt , who previously served as the show 's supervising producer , writer , director , and storyboard artist , to overtake the role . Hillenburg considered Tibbitt one of his favorite members of the show 's crew , and " totally trusted him " . Tibbitt still helmed the showrunner position , until October 2015 when Vincent Waller & Marc Ceccarelli took his position , and also functions as an executive producer . Hillenburg no longer writes or runs the show on a day @-@ to @-@ day basis , but reviews each episode and delivers suggestions . He said , " I figure when I 'm pretty old I can still paint . I don 't know about running shows . " 
 In 2004 , Tom Kenny , Bill Fagerbakke , and the rest of the crew confirmed they have completed four new episodes for broadcast on Nickelodeon in early 2005 , and planned to finish about 20 total for the then @-@ fourth season . In particular , Kenny said , " Kids were happy watching them for the 3,000th time . It was the parents who 've been busting my chops for new episodes . " He remarked that it would be " the same show , the same sponge " . On May 6 , 2005 , the season premiered with the episodes " Fear of a Krabby Patty " and " Shell of a Man " . " Fear of a Krabby Patty " was the first episode to be broadcast after the show 's intermission . It was written by C.H. Greenblatt and Paul Tibbitt , while Alan Smart served as animation director . 
 Animation was handled overseas in South Korea at Rough Draft Studios . Animation directors credited with episodes in the fourth season included Larry Leichliter , Andrew Overtoom , Smart , and Tom Yasumi . Starting with the episode " Fear of a Krabby Patty , " this is the first season to use the 3 @-@ D computer cel shading rather than digital ink and paint or traditional cel animation . The show would continue to be animated like this until the end of the eighth season . Episodes were written by a team of writers , which consisted of Casey Alexander , Steven Banks , Mike Bell , Luke Brookshier , Nate Cash , Zeus Cervas , Greenblatt , Tom King , Tim Hill , Kyle McCulloch , Dani Michaeli , Chris Mitchell , Mike Mitchell , Aaron Springer , Tibbitt , Vincent Waller , and Erik Wiese . The season was storyboarded by Alexander , Bell , Brookshier , Cash , Cervas , Greenblatt , King , Chris Mitchell , Springer , Tuck Tucker , Brad Vandergrift , Waller , and Wiese . 
 = = Cast = = 
 The fourth season had a cast of six main actors . Tom Kenny provided the voice of the title character SpongeBob SquarePants and his pet snail Gary . SpongeBob 's best friend , a starfish named Patrick Star , was voiced by Bill Fagerbakke , while Rodger Bumpass played the voice of Squidward Tentacles , an arrogant and ill @-@ tempered octopus . Other members of the cast were Carolyn Lawrence as Sandy Cheeks , a squirrel from Texas ; Clancy Brown as Mr. Krabs , a miserly crab obsessed with money and SpongeBob 's boss at the Krusty Krab ; and Mr. Lawrence as Plankton , a small green copepod and Mr. Krabs ' business rival . The season had a number of secondary characters including Jill Talley as Plankton 's computer wife , Karen ; Mary Jo Catlett as Mrs. Puff , SpongeBob 's driving instructor ; Lori Alan as Pearl , Mr. Krabs ' daughter ; and Brian Doyle @-@ Murray as the Flying Dutchman . 
 In addition to the regular cast members , episodes feature guest voices from many ranges of professions , including actors , musicians , and artists . For instance , in the episode " Have You Seen This Snail ? " , American comedian and actress Amy Poehler guest starred as the voice of Grandma , a sweet old woman who adopted Gary after he ran away . Musician Stew also appeared as a voice , performing the song " Gary , Come Home " . Show writer C.H. Greenblatt made an appearance in the episode " Selling Out " as Carl . Ernest Borgnine and Tim Conway returned in the episode " Mermaid Man and Barnacle Boy : VI The Motion Picture " , reprising their roles as Mermaid Man and Barnacle Boy , respectively . In " Mrs. Puff , You 're Fired " , English actor Robin Sachs voiced Sergeant Sam Roderick , a driving instructor who took over Mrs. Puff in teaching SpongeBob . Christopher Ryan , Nigel Planer and Rik Mayall appeared in the episode " <unk> Ahoy " as Sandy 's bosses — Professor Percy , Dr. Marmalade and Lord Reginald , respectively . In the entry " Karate Island " , Happy Days and The Karate Kid actor Pat Morita guest starred as Master Udon , a <unk> who kidnaps SpongeBob to make him buy real estate . Morita died in November 2005 , and the May 2006 episode was dedicated to Morita 's memory . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The season was well received by media critics and fans . Paul Mavis of DVD Talk gave both of the season 's volumes 4 1 / 2 stars . The episodes " Fear of a Krabby Patty " and " Shell of a Man " were nominated at the 57th Primetime Emmy Awards for Outstanding Animated Program ( for Programming Less Than One Hour ) , but lost to South Park 's " Best Friends Forever " . The show was also nominated at the 59th Primetime Emmy Awards for the same category for the episodes " Bummer Vacation " and " <unk> " . At the 33rd Annie Awards , C.H. Greenblatt , Paul Tibbitt , Mike Bell and Tim Hill were also nominated for Best Writing in an Animated Television Production for the episode " Fear of a Krabby Patty " . " Fear of a Krabby Patty " won for a Special Award at the 2005 Annecy International Animated Film Festival . At the 2006 Golden Reel Awards , the episode " Have You Seen This Snail ? " was nominated for Best Sound Editing in Television : Animated . The show itself received several recognition , including the three Kids ' Choice Awards for Favorite Cartoon from 2005 to 2007 . It also received a nomination at the 21st TCA Awards for Outstanding Achievement in Children 's Programming , but lost to Degrassi : The Next Generation , and at the 23rd TCA Awards for the same category . However , the series did not win . 
 = = Episodes = = 
 Key 
 The following episodes listed in the chart are arranged according to their production order , rather than by their original air dates . 
 = = DVD release = = 
 The first ten episodes of the fourth season were released on DVD by Paramount Home Entertainment in the United States and Canada on September 12 , 2006 . The " Volume 1 " DVD release features bonus material including animatics and featurettes . The remaining ten episodes of the season were also released under the title " Volume 2 " in the United States and Canada on January 9 , 2007 . The DVD release also features bonus material including music videos , shorts and featurettes . In Region 2 and 4 , the DVD release for the season was a complete set . On November 13 , 2012 , The Complete Fourth Season DVD was released in Region 1 , five years after the season had completed broadcast on television . 
 = HMS Dainty ( <unk> ) = 
 HMS Dainty was a D @-@ class destroyer built for the Royal Navy in the early 1930s . The ship was initially assigned to the Mediterranean Fleet before she was transferred to the China Station in early 1935 . She was temporarily deployed in the Red Sea during late 1935 during the Abyssinia Crisis , before returning to her assigned station where she remained until mid @-@ 1939 . Dainty was transferred back to the Mediterranean Fleet just before World War II began in September 1939 . She briefly was assigned to West Africa for convoy escort duties in 1940 before returning to the Mediterranean . The ship participated in the Battle of Calabria in July 1940 and was assigned to convoy escort and patrol duties until she was sunk by German bombers off Tobruk on 24 February 1941 . 
 = = Description = = 
 Dainty displaced 1 @,@ 375 long tons ( 1 @,@ 397 t ) at standard load and 1 @,@ 890 long tons ( 1 @,@ 920 t ) at deep load . The ship had an overall length of 329 feet ( 100 @.@ 3 m ) , a beam of 33 feet ( 10 @.@ 1 m ) and a draught of 12 feet 6 inches ( 3 @.@ 8 m ) . She was powered by Parsons geared steam turbines , driving two shafts , which developed a total of 36 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 27 @,@ 000 kW ) and gave a maximum speed of 36 knots ( 67 km / h ; 41 mph ) . Steam for the turbines was provided by three Admiralty 3 @-@ drum water @-@ tube boilers . Dainty carried a maximum of 473 long tons ( 481 t ) of fuel oil that gave her a range of 5 @,@ 870 nautical miles ( 10 @,@ 870 km ; 6 @,@ 760 mi ) at 15 knots ( 28 km / h ; 17 mph ) . The ship 's complement was 145 officers and men . 
 The ship mounted four 45 @-@ calibre QF 4 @.@ 7 @-@ inch Mark IX guns in single mounts . For anti @-@ aircraft ( AA ) defence , Dainty had a single 12 @-@ pounder ( 3 @-@ inch ( 76 @.@ 2 mm ) ) gun and two quadruple Mark I mounts for the QF 0 @.@ 5 @-@ inch Vickers Mark III machine gun . She was fitted with two above @-@ water quadruple torpedo tube mounts for 21 @-@ inch torpedoes . One depth charge rail and two throwers were fitted ; 20 depth charges were originally carried , but this increased to 35 shortly after the war began . 
 = = Career = = 
 Dainty was ordered on 2 February 1931 under the 1930 Naval Estimates and was laid down at the yards of the Fairfield Shipbuilding and Engineering Company , Govan , Scotstoun on 20 April 1931 . She was launched on 3 May 1932 and completed on 22 December 1932 , at a total cost of £ 229 @,@ 378 , excluding equipment supplied by the Admiralty , such as weapons , ammunition and wireless equipment . 
 The ship was initially assigned to the 1st Destroyer Flotilla in the Mediterranean and made a brief deployment to the Persian Gulf and Red Sea in October – November 1933 . Dainty was refitted at Portsmouth between 3 September and 23 October 1934 for service on the China Station with the 8th ( later the 21st ) Destroyer Flotilla and arrived there on 3 January 1935 . She was attached to the Mediterranean Fleet in the Red Sea from 30 September 1935 to June 1936 during the Abyssinian Crisis . The ship was refitted afterwards in Hong Kong between 21 September and 15 October and conducted anti @-@ piracy patrols after her refit was complete . On 21 January 1937 , the merchant ship SS Hsin Pekin grounded on the Nemesis Rock off Ningbo and Dainty posted a guard aboard her until she was refloated . The ship made a number of port visits in Sarawak , Singapore and the Philippines in January – March 1938 . As war loomed , she was transferred to the Mediterranean Fleet , arriving at Alexandria with her sister Duncan on 30 September 1939 , after the outbreak of World War II . 
 Dainty was assigned to search for contraband being shipped across the Mediterranean throughout October and November , before undergoing a refit at Malta from 8 – 30 December . On its completion she was transferred to the 2nd Destroyer Division , based in Freetown , Sierra Leone to search for German commerce raiders operating in the South Atlantic . The ship was transferred back to the Mediterranean Fleet in April and was given another refit at Malta from 21 April to 2 June 1940 . On its completion , Dainty was assigned to the 10th Destroyer Flotilla . 
 On 12 June , she rescued over 400 survivors from the light cruiser Calypso , which had been sunk off Crete . Eight days later , the ship , and three other destroyers , escorted the French battleship Lorraine and three British cruisers as they bombarded Bardia during the night of 20 / 21 June . On 27 June , Dainty , her sister Defender and the destroyer Ilex attacked the Italian submarine Console Generale Liuzzi and damaged her badly . The crew then scuttled Liuzzi . Two days later , Dainty and Ilex attacked the submarines Uebi Scebeli and <unk> , sinking Uebi Scebeli , although <unk> was able to escape . The British ships were able to salvage important encryption material , including the latest codebook . They may also have been responsible for the sinking of the Italian submarine Argonauta on 29 June as she returned from Tobruk . 
 Dainty participated in the Battle of Calabria on 9 July as an escort for the heavy ships of Force C and unsuccessfully engaged Italian destroyers and suffered no damage . Together with her sisters Defender and Diamond , the Australian destroyer Stuart , and the light cruisers Capetown and Liverpool , she escorted Convoy AN.2 from Egypt to various ports in the Aegean Sea in late July . On 29 August Dainty , Diamond and the destroyers Jervis , Juno escorted the Royal Fleet Auxiliary tanker <unk> and two merchant ships , SS Cornwall and SS Volo , from Egypt to Malta with relief supplies . Dainty and Ilex escorted the Australian light cruiser Sydney as she bombarded the Italian airfield on Scarpanto on 4 September . 
 Together with three Australian destroyers and two British anti @-@ aircraft cruisers , the ship escorted a convoy from Egypt to Suda Bay , Crete and then to Malta in early November . In December she was assigned to intercept enemy supply convoys along the North African coast and captured two schooners off Bardia on 31 December . In early January 1941 , Dainty escorted the capital ships of Force A during Operation Excess . She towed the disabled tanker <unk> to Suda Bay after the latter had been torpedoed by the Italian torpedo boat Lupo off Crete on 31 January . 
 = = = Sinking = = = 
 Shortly afterwards , Dainty returned to patrol the North African coast . In the late afternoon of 24 February she left Tobruk on a patrol , accompanied by the destroyer Hasty . The ships were attacked by 13 Junkers Ju 88 bombers of III . / Lehrgeschwader 1 and Dainty was hit by a 1 @,@ 000 lb ( 450 kg ) bomb which passed through the captain 's cabin and detonated in the fuel tanks . This started a big fire , which caused her after magazine to explode and the ship to sink . 16 of Dainty 's crew were killed in the attack and 18 were wounded . 
 = Panggilan Darah = 
 Panggilan Darah ( Indonesian for Call of Blood ) is a 1941 film from the Dutch East Indies ( now Indonesia ) written and directed by Sutan Usman Karim and produced by Tjho Seng Han for Oriental Film . The black @-@ and @-@ white film starred Dhalia and Soerip as orphaned sisters trying to make a living in the colonial capital of Batavia ( now Jakarta ) before moving to Kudus to work at a clove cigarette factory . 
 Shot on location at an orphanage and two factories in central Java , Panggilan Darah was a modest commercial success in the Indies and Singapore . Its soundtrack , which featured nine kroncong songs , received popular acclaim , and the film 's acting received critical praise . Despite this success , Oriental was unable to recoup its expenses , and merged into Multi Film soon afterwards . Panggilan Darah , which was screened as late as 1952 , may now be lost . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Orphaned sisters Dhalia and Soerip ( themselves ) leave their village in an attempt to make a living in the colonial capital of Batavia ( now Jakarta ) . After a long period of misery , they are accepted as housemaids at the home of Hajji Iskak ( Mochtar Widjaja ) . Although initially elated , they find that Iskak 's wife ( Wolly Sutinah ) is a cruel mistress who often beats them . Meanwhile , Iskak 's would @-@ be son @-@ in @-@ law is constantly flirting with Dhalia , much to his fiancée 's dismay . 
 The sisters decide to run away from Iskak 's home . They make their way to Kudus and find work at the Nitisemito clove cigarette factory with the help of their friend ( S. Poniman ) . Not long after their escape , Iskak receives a guest who reveals that the two were his nieces . This revelation spurs Iskak to take out advertisements in newspapers , looking for the young women and asking them to return to Batavia . 
 Iskak 's search has little success until the sisters receive news that he is looking for them , and they quickly return to Batavia . There , the sisters are greeted with open arms . Iskak 's wife regrets her earlier treatment of the girls and repents , treating them splendidly and supporting Dhalia 's plans to open an orphanage . 
 = = Production = = 
 Panggilan Darah was the directorial debut of Sutan Usman Karim , commonly known as Suska , a journalist and former member of the touring theatrical group Bolero under Andjar Asmara . With Panggilan Darah , which he also wrote , Suska became one of several reporters who entered the film industry in the 1940s . He directed the film for the Batavia @-@ based film company Oriental , run by the ethnic Chinese producer Tjho Seng Han . The production house had previously released three films , all directed by Njoo Cheong Seng , but after Njoo departed for Fred Young 's Majestic , Oriental had required a new director . 
 The film was shot in black @-@ and @-@ white by the Indo cameraman J. J. W. Steffens , with editing handled by Soemardjan . Scenes were shot at an orphanage for Muslims owned by S. Z. <unk> ( who played herself in the film ) , as well as at the Nitisemito cigarette factory in Kudus and at a batik factory in Pekalongan owned by Tan <unk> Lin . Writing in 2009 , the Indonesian film historian Misbach Yusa Biran suggested that the film may have been partly sponsored by Nitisemito — one of the largest cigarette factories in the Indies in the 1940s — based on the factory 's prominence in the plot . 
 Dhalia , Soerip , and S. Poniman , already known for their singing prowess , starred in Panggilan Darah , which featured nine kroncong songs . Additional roles were taken by Wolly Sutinah and Mochtar Widjaja . The film marked Sutinah 's debut for the company ; the other cast members had previous screen credits with Oriental . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 Panggilan Darah debuted at the Orion Theatre in Batavia on 30 June 1941 . It was reported as a modest success , making most of its money from lower class audiences . It was screened in Surabaya , East Java , by August , and by September it had been shown in Singapore , then part of British Malaya . A novelisation by Roestam Sutan Palindih was published by the Yogyakarta @-@ based Kolff @-@ Buning Publishers that year . 
 Reviews of Panggilan Darah were mixed to positive . The journalist <unk> , writing in the entertainment magazine Pertjatoeran Doenia dan Film , was pleased with the film 's depiction of the Islamic mandate to take care of orphans . An anonymous review in the Surabaya @-@ based daily Soerabaijasch Handelsblad found the film " something special " and praised Soerip 's spontaneity in her role . Biran wrote that lower @-@ class audiences enjoyed the film 's music , while the intelligentsia scoffed at the idea that a factory supervisor would bring a guitar to work . He found the plot illogical , asking why the sisters would not have worked in their own home village and how the destitute sisters could have made the journey from Batavia to Kudus , over 400 kilometres ( 250 mi ) away . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Unable to recoup its expenses , Oriental later merged into the Dutch @-@ owned Multi Film and ceased producing works of fiction . Suska left the company and joined The Teng Chun 's Java Industrial Film , for which he directed Ratna Moetoe Manikam . Most of the cast remained active in cinema for the remainder of their lives . Both Dhalia and Soerip remained in the film industry for the next fifty years ; they acted in their last feature films , Pendekar Jagad Kelana ( Warrior of Jagad Kelana ) and <unk> Cinta <unk> ( Since Love was Created ) respectively , in 1990 . Poniman and Sutinah would remain active in the industry until 1975 and 1986 . Only Widjaja is not recorded as performing in any more films . 
 Panggilan Darah was screened as late as August 1952 , but may now be lost . Movies in the Indies were recorded on highly flammable nitrate film , and after a fire destroyed much of Produksi Film Negara 's warehouse in 1952 , old films shot on nitrate were deliberately destroyed . The American visual anthropologist Karl G. Heider writes that all Indonesian films from before 1950 are lost . However , J. B. Kristanto 's Katalog Film Indonesia ( Indonesian Film Catalogue ) records several as having survived at Sinematek Indonesia 's archives , and Biran writes that several Japanese propaganda films have survived at the Netherlands Government Information Service . 
 = = Explanatory notes = = 
 = Sega v. Accolade = 
 Sega Enterprises Ltd. v. Accolade , Inc . , 977 F.2d 1510 ( 9th Cir . 1992 ) , is a case in which the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit applied American intellectual property law to the reverse engineering of computer software . Stemming from the publishing of several Sega Genesis games by video game publisher Accolade , which had disassembled Genesis software in order to publish games without being licensed by Sega , the case involved several overlapping issues , including the scope of copyright , permissible uses for trademarks , and the scope of the fair use doctrine for computer code . 
 The case was filed in the U.S. District Court for the Northern District of California , which ruled in favor of Sega and issued an injunction against Accolade preventing them from publishing any more games for the Genesis and requiring them to recall all the existing Genesis games they had for sale . Accolade appealed the decision to the Ninth Circuit on the grounds that their reverse engineering of the Genesis was protected under fair use . The Ninth Circuit reversed the district court 's order and ruled that Accolade 's use of reverse engineering to publish Genesis titles was protected under fair use , and that its alleged violation of Sega trademarks was the fault of Sega . The case is frequently cited in matters involving reverse engineering and fair use under copyright law . 
 = = Background = = 
 In March 1984 , Sega Enterprises Ltd. was purchased by its former CEO , David Rosen , along with a group of backers . Hayao Nakayama , one of these backers , was named the new CEO of Sega . Following the crash of the arcade industry , Nakayama decided to focus development efforts on the home console market . During this time , Sega became concerned about software and hardware piracy in Southeast Asia , and particularly in Taiwan . Taiwan was not a signatory of the Berne Convention on copyright , limiting Sega 's legal options in that region . However , Taiwan did allow prosecution for trademark infringement . Though Sega had created security systems in their consoles to keep their software from being pirated and to keep unlicensed publishers out , much like its competitor Nintendo , counterfeiters had discovered ways to prevent the Sega trademark from appearing on their games , bypassing the trademark altogether . 
 After the release of the Sega Genesis in 1989 , video game publisher Accolade began exploring options to release some of their PC game titles onto the console . At the time , however , Sega had a licensing deal in place for third @-@ party developers that increased the costs to the developer . According to Accolade co @-@ founder Alan Miller , " One pays them between $ 10 and $ 15 per cartridge on top of the real hardware manufacturing costs , so it about doubles the cost of goods to the independent publisher . " In addition to this , Sega required that it would be the exclusive publisher of Accolade 's games if Accolade were to be licensed , preventing Accolade from releasing its games to other systems . To get around licensing , Accolade chose to seek an alternative way to bring their games to the Genesis by purchasing a console in order to <unk> the executable code of three Genesis games and use it to program their new cartridges in a way that would allow them to disable the security lockouts that prevented playing of unlicensed games . This was done successfully to bring Ishido : The Way of Stones to the Genesis in 1990 . In doing so , Accolade had also copied Sega 's copyrighted game code multiple times in order to reverse engineer the software of Sega 's licensed Genesis games . 
 As a result of the piracy and unlicensed development issues , Sega incorporated a technical protection mechanism into a new edition of the Genesis released in 1990 , referred to as the Genesis III . This new variation of the Genesis included code known as the Trademark Security System ( TMSS ) , which , when a game cartridge was inserted into the console , would check for the presence of the string " SEGA " at a particular point in the memory contained in the cartridge . If and only if the string was present , the console would run the game , and would briefly display the message : " <unk> BY OR UNDER <unk> FROM SEGA <unk> LTD . " This system had a twofold effect : it added extra protection against unlicensed developers and software piracy , and it forced the Sega trademark to display when the game was powered up , making a lawsuit for trademark infringement possible if unlicensed software were to be developed . Accolade learned of this development at the Winter Consumer Electronics Show in January 1991 , at which Sega showed the new Genesis III and demonstrated it screening and rejecting an Ishido game cartridge . With more games planned for the following year , Accolade successfully identified the TMSS file . They later added this file to the games <unk> ! , Star Control , Mike Ditka Power Football , and Turrican . 
 = = Lawsuit = = 
 On October 31 , 1991 , Sega filed suit against Accolade in the United States District Court for the Northern District of California , on charges of trademark infringement and unfair competition in violation of the Lanham Act . Copyright infringement , a violation of the Copyright Act of 1976 , was added a month later to the list of charges . In response , Accolade filed a counterclaim for falsifying the source of its games by displaying the Sega trademark when the game was powered up . The case was heard by Judge Barbara A. Caulfield . 
 Sega argued that Accolade had infringed upon its copyrights because Accolade 's games contained Sega 's material . Accolade insisted that their use of Sega 's material constituted fair use . However , Judge Caulfield did not accept this explanation since Accolade was a game manufacturer , their works were for financial gain , and because their works competed directly with Sega 's licensed games , likely resulting in a sales decrease for Sega 's games . Accolade 's case was further hurt by a presentation by a Sega engineer named Takeshi Nagashima , who showed two Sega game cartridges that were able to run on the Genesis III without the trademark @-@ displaying TMSS , and offered them to Accolade 's defense team but would not reveal how that was possible . Ultimately , this would result in Accolade 's defeat on April 3 , 1992 , when Judge Caulfield ruled in favor of Sega and issued an injunction prohibiting future sales by Accolade of Genesis @-@ compatible games incorporating the Sega message or using the results of the reverse engineering . Almost a week later , Accolade was also required by the court to recall all of their Genesis @-@ compatible games . 
 = = Appeal = = 
 The decision in the district court ruling had been very costly to Accolade . According to Accolade co @-@ founder Alan Miller , " Just to fight the injunction , we had to pay at least half a million dollars in legal fees . " On April 14 , 1992 , Accolade filed for a stay on the injunction pending appeal in the district court , but when the court did not rule by April 21 , Accolade appealed the verdict to the Ninth Circuit of the U.S. Court of Appeals . A stay was granted on the mandate to recall all of Accolade 's Genesis games , but the injunction preventing further reverse engineering and development of Genesis software was maintained until August 28 , when the Ninth Circuit ordered it dissolved pending the appeal review . 
 In support of the appeal , the Computer & Communications Industry Association submitted an amicus curiae brief claiming that the district court had made errors in concluding that Accolade had infringed upon Sega 's copyright by reverse engineering its software , extending copyright protection to method of operation , and failing to consider whether Accolade 's games were substantially similar to Sega 's copyrighted material . Amicus briefs were also submitted by the American Committee for <unk> Systems , the Computer and Business Equipment Manufacturers Association , and copyright law professor Dennis S. Karjala from Arizona State University . 
 In reviewing the case , the court considered several factors in its own analysis , examining trademark and copyright issues separately . As in the district court trial , Nagashima showed the court a game cartridge that ran on the Genesis that did not display the trademark logo . However , the court was not moved by this , deciding that Nagashima 's cartridges showed what one could do with knowledge of the TMSS , which Accolade did not possess . According to the court , because knowledge of how to avoid displaying the trademark on the Genesis III was not information that was public to the industry , Sega 's attempt to prove that the display of their trademark was not required for games to be played on the console was insufficient . Writing for the opinion of the court , Judge Stephen Reinhardt stated , " Sega knowingly risked two significant consequences : the false labeling of some competitors ' products and the discouraging of other competitors from manufacturing Genesis @-@ compatible games . Under the Lanham Act , the former conduct , at least , is clearly unlawful . " The court then went on to cite Anti @-@ Monopoly v. General Mills Fun Group , which states in reference to the Lanham Act , " The trademark is misused if it serves to limit competition in the manufacture and sales of a product . That is the special province of the limited monopolies provided pursuant to the patent laws . " The judges in the case had decided that Sega had violated this provision of the act by utilizing its trademark to limit competition for software for its console . 
 To determine the status of Accolade 's claim of fair use of Sega 's copyrighted game code , the court reviewed four criteria of fair use : the nature of the copyrighted work , the amount of the copyrighted work used , the purpose of use , and the effects of use on the market for the work . Of note to the judges in reviewing Sega 's copyright claim was the difference in size between the TMSS file and the sizes of Accolade 's games . As noted by Judge Reinhardt in writing the opinion of the court , the TMSS file " contains approximately twenty to twenty @-@ five bytes of data . Each of Accolade 's games contains a total of 500 @,@ 000 to 1 @,@ 500 @,@ 000 bytes . According to Accolade employees , the header file is the only portion of Sega 's code that Accolade copied into its own game programs . " This made the games overwhelmingly original content , and according to Judge Reinhardt , to the benefit of the public to be able to compete with Sega 's licensed games , especially if the games were dissimilar as contended in the appeal . The court did not accept the argument that Accolade 's games competed directly with Sega 's , noting that there was no proof that any of Accolade 's published games had diminished the market for any of Sega 's games . Despite claims from Sega 's attorneys that the company had invested much time and effort into developing the Genesis , and that Accolade was capitalizing on this time and energy , the court rejected these claims under the notion that the console was largely functional , and its functional principles were not protected under the Copyright Act of 1976 . On the matter of reverse engineering as a process , the court concluded that " where disassembly is the only way to gain access to the ideas and functional elements embodied in a copyrighted computer program and where there is a legitimate reason for seeking such access , disassembly is a fair use of the copyrighted work , as a matter of law . " 
 On August 28 , 1992 , the Ninth Circuit overturned the district court 's verdict and ruled that Accolade 's <unk> of the Sega software constituted fair use . The court 's written opinion followed on October 20 and noted that the use of the software was non @-@ exploitative , despite being commercial , and that the trademark infringement , being required by the TMSS for a Genesis game to run on the system , was inadvertently triggered by a fair use act and the fault of Sega for causing false labeling . As a result of the verdict being overturned , the costs of the appeal were assessed to Sega . The injunction remained in force , however , because Sega petitioned the appeals court to rehear the case . 
 = = Settlement = = 
 On January 8 , 1993 , with Sega 's petition for a rehearing still pending , the court took the unusual step of amending its October 20 , 1992 opinion and lifted the injunction preventing Accolade from developing or selling Genesis software . This was followed by a formal denial of Sega 's petition for a rehearing on January 26 . As Accolade 's counterclaim for false labeling under the Lanham Act was declined by the Ninth Circuit , this essentially left " each party as free to act as it was before the issuance of preliminary injunctive relief " while the district court considered the counterclaim . Sega and Accolade ultimately settled on April 30 , 1993 . As a part of this settlement , Accolade became an official licensee of Sega , and later developed and released Barkley Shut Up and Jam ! while under license . The terms of the licensing , including whether or not any special arrangements or discounts were made to Accolade , were not released to the public . The financial terms of the settlement were also not disclosed , although both companies agreed to pay their own legal costs . 
 In an official statement , Sega of America chairman David Rosen expressed satisfaction with the settlement . According to Rosen , " This settlement is a satisfactory ending to what was a very complex set of issues . Not only are we pleased to settle this case amicably , we 've also turned a corner in our association with Accolade and now look forward to a healthy and mutually beneficial relationship in the future . " Accolade 's Alan Miller expressed more excitement with the settlement and the opportunities it presented for the company , saying in his statement , " We are very pleased with the settlement , and we 're excited about the new markets it opens to Accolade . Accolade currently experiences strong demand for its Sega Genesis products in North America and Europe . We will now be able to publish our products on the Sega Genesis and Game Gear systems throughout the world . " Despite the settlement , however , Accolade had lost somewhere between $ 15 million and $ 25 million during the injunction period , according to Miller . 
 = = Impact = = 
 Sega v. Accolade has been an influential case in matters involving reverse engineering of software and copyright infringement , and has been cited in numerous cases since 1993 . The case has redefined how reverse engineering with unlicensed products is seen in legal issues involving copyright . Legally , the decision concurred that the nature of Accolade 's work in reverse engineering the Sega Genesis was to access ideas that were deemed unprotected by copyright law , and could only be accessed by <unk> . By the verdict , the console 's functional principles were established not to be protected by copyright , and that when no other means were available , reverse engineering the copyrighted software to access information about the console 's functional principles is protected by the fair use doctrine . One such example of the precedent set by this case is Sony Computer Entertainment , Inc. v. <unk> Corporation , which cited Sega v. Accolade in deciding that reverse engineering the Sony PlayStation BIOS was protected by fair use and was non @-@ exploitative . 
 Among the influences of the verdict include Sega v. Accolade 's effect on the criteria for fair use and the responsibilities of trademark holders in legal examinations . Although Accolade had copied entire Genesis games in order to identify the TMSS , the court gave little weight to the criterion on the amount of the copyrighted work being copied , in light of the fact that Accolade had done so in order to create their own compatible software . Likewise , the nature of the work was also given less weight , essentially establishing a two @-@ factor approach to evaluating fair use in the purpose of use and impact on the market . It was also the first time that the Lanham Act was interpreted to mean that confusion resulting from the placement of one 's trademark on another work by means of a security program is the fault of the original registrant of the trademark . 
 Sega v. Accolade also served to help establish that the functional principles of computer software cannot be protected by copyright law . Rather , the only legal protection to such principles can be through holding a patent or by trade secret . This aspect of the verdict has received criticism as well , citing that though the functional principles are not protectable under copyright law , the TMSS code is protectable , and that by allowing reverse engineering as fair use despite this security , the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals has encouraged the copying of legally protected programs for the exploration of unprotected functionality . 
 = I Shall Not Be Moved ( poetry ) = 
 I Shall Not Be Moved is author and poet Maya Angelou 's fifth collection of poetry , published by Random House in 1990 . Angelou had written four autobiographies and published four other volumes of poetry up to that point . Angelou considered herself a poet and a playwright and her poetry has also been successful , but she is best known for her seven autobiographies , especially her first , I Know Why the Caged Bird Sings . She began , early in her writing career , of alternating the publication of an autobiography and a volume of poetry . Most critics agree that Angelou 's poems are more interesting when she recites them . 
 The poems in I Shall Not Be Moved focus on themes of hard work , universal experiences of humans , the struggle of African Americans , and love and relationships . Like most of her poetry , the collection has received little serious critical attention , although most reviews have been positive . 
 = = Background = = 
 I Shall Not Be Moved is Maya Angelou 's fifth volume of poetry . She studied and began writing poetry at a young age . After her rape at the age of eight , as recounted in her first autobiography I Know Why the Caged Bird Sings ( 1969 ) , she dealt with her trauma by memorizing and reciting great works of literature , including poetry , which helped bring her out of her self @-@ imposed muteness . 
 Although Angelou considered herself a playwright and poet when her editor Robert Loomis challenged her to write Caged Bird , she has been best known for her autobiographies , and many critics consider her autobiographies more important than her poetry . Critic William Sylvester agrees , and states that although her books have been best @-@ sellers , her poetry has " received little serious critical attention " . Bloom also believes that Angelou 's poems are more interesting when she recites them . Bloom calls her performances " characteristically dynamic " , and says that Angelou " moves exuberantly , vigorously to reinforce the rhythms of the lines , the tone of the words . Her singing and dancing and electrifying stage presence transcend the predictable words and phrases " . 
 Early in her writing career she began alternating the publication of an autobiography and a volume of poetry . By the time I Shall Not Be Moved was published in 1990 , she had published five autobiographies , eventually going on to publish seven . Her publisher , Random House , placed the poems in I Shall Not Be Moved in her first collection of poetry , The Complete Collected Poems of Maya Angelou ( 1994 ) , perhaps to capitalize on her popularity following her reading of her poem " On the Pulse of Morning " at President Bill Clinton 's inauguration in 1993 . Also in the 1994 collection were her four previous collections , Just Give Me a Cool Drink of Water ' fore I Diiie ( 1971 ) , Oh Pray My Wings Are Gonna Fit Me Well ( 1975 ) , And Still I Rise ( 1978 ) , and Shaker , Why Don 't You Sing ? ( 1983 ) . Angelou 's publisher placed four poems in a smaller volume entitled Phenomenal Woman in 1995 . 
 = = Themes = = 
 Critic Lyman B. Hagen states that much of Angelou 's poetry and most of her writings , especially " Worker 's Song " , the first poem in I Shall Not Be Moved , praises the laborer . He says , " In Angelou 's writings , rarely is there anyone who does not work . Everyone of her characters — singers , dancers , railway workers , etc . — works hard " . Critic Hazel Rochman , who calls the poem an " exquisitely simple <unk> " , states that Angelou connects physical action with wit and longing . She compares it to the performances of singer Paul Robeson and to Langston Hughes ' poem " Florida Road Workers " . Michele Howe calls I Shall Not Be Moved " a collection that testifies to the undaunted spirit of oppressed people everywhere " , and states that it " relates a history of hard work , pain , joy , and the affection and heartbreak often associated with love " . She also mentions " Worker 's Song " in her article in the New Jersey newspaper The Star @-@ Ledger , stating that it describes the struggles of the workers that " keep the whole world running " . 
 Howe says that although Angelou writes about the Black experience , she draws from the experiences of all ethnic backgrounds . Howe considers the poem " Our Grandmothers " , which relates the struggle of a woman attempting to overcome her enslavement and oppression , one of the most poignant poems in the volume and its focal point . The poem uses the title phrase ; according to Howe , Angelou 's use of the personal pronoun signifies the universal experience of mothers and grandmothers and their struggles to overcome obstacles . Howe also discusses the poem " Coleridge Jackson " , which she considers another significant poem in I Shall Not Be Moved . The poem describes a man who " wouldn 't take tea for the fever " — someone incapable of creatively dealing with his suffering at the hands of his employer . Angelou informed Howe that she believed that " Coleridge Jackson " was one of the most powerful poems she had ever recited in public . 
 In the poem " Love Letter " , Angelou describes the power of love to empower people to be themselves in their relationships , and to be equal with their partners . Angelou 's poem " Human Family " focuses on the similarities of all people , especially the line " We are more alike , my friends , than we are unalike " . According to Howe , this line sums the themes found throughout the volume . 
 = = Reviews = = 
 Rochman , when she compares " Worker 's Song " to Hughes ' " Florida Road Workers " , states that like Hughes , Angelou 's poem combines rhythm and sense . She considers the poem the best in the volume , calling many of the other poems in I Shall Not Be Moved " too polemical " . Rochman says that the sensuous details in Angelou 's best poems enlivens her abstractions , and finds no false sentiments in them . She also states , " The dying fall of many lines combined with the strong beat reinforces the feeling of struggle and uncertainty " . 
 = = Poems = = 
 The volume 's title , according to Angelou , comes from her desire to encourage young people to " have a moral stance " and never give up , despite the tendency for people in power to ignore , deny , or neglect their duty to use their positions and abilities to change the world . It is dedicated to her mother Vivian Baxter and Mildred Garris Tuttle . 
 = Newfoundland expedition ( 1702 ) = 
 The Newfoundland expedition was a naval raiding expedition led by English Captain John Leake between August and October 1702 that targeted French colonial settlements on the North Atlantic island of Newfoundland and its satellite Saint Pierre . The expedition occurred in the early days of Queen Anne 's War , as the North American theater of the War of the Spanish Succession is sometimes known . 
 Leake 's fleet descended on French settlements on the southern shore of Newfoundland , destroying fishing stages and other infrastructure . They captured fishing and trade ships , and destroyed most of the settlement at Saint Pierre . In a final flurry of activity before returning to England , Leake captured several ships from the French merchant convoy as it headed for Europe . More than 50 ships were taken in total , and six seasonal settlements were destroyed . The strongly fortified French base at Plaisance was not attacked . 
 = = Background = = 
 Hostilities in the War of the Spanish Succession had begun in 1701 , but England did not get involved until 1702 , planning a major naval expedition against targets in Spain . On 9 June 1702 ( Old Style ) Newfoundland also became a target when George Churchill , chief advisor to the Lord High Admiral , Prince George , informed Captain John Leake , " I have proposed to the Prince , your going to command a squadron to Newfoundland ; you will be a Chief of Squadron " . Leake 's commission , issued on 24 June , came with instructions to investigate the military strength of the French in Newfoundland , and to " annoy them there in their fishing harbours and at sea " . He was also to convoy merchant ships in both directions , report on the conditions of the English settlements and fisheries , and act as governor of the territory while he was there . To accomplish this he was given command of HMS Exeter and a small fleet of ships . On 22 July 1702 , he departed from Plymouth with a fleet of nine ships , including six ships of the line . His ships included ( in addition to Exeter ) the fourth rates HMS Assistance , HMS Montagu , HMS Lichfield , HMS Medway , and HMS Reserve . 
 Newfoundland had been the site of much conflict during King William 's War ( 1689 – 1697 ) . The most ambitious expedition had been conducted by French and Indian forces led by Pierre Le Moyne d 'Iberville in 1696 . His raiding expedition was highly destructive : it completely destroyed almost all of the English settlements on the island . Many of these were rebuilt shortly afterwards , and the chief English port at St. John 's was strongly fortified . 
 Permanent French settlements on Newfoundland were relatively few . Most of their settlements , such as those in Trepassey Bay and St. Mary 's , were only used in the summertime by fishermen who returned to Europe at the end of the season . The principal town of Plaisance was permanently settled , and its fortifications housed a small garrison . In 1702 it was temporarily under the command of Philippe Pastour de Costebelle , a captain of the colonial troupes de la marine , who was awaiting the arrival of the next governor , Daniel d 'Auger de Subercase ( who did not arrive until 1703 ) . The permanent French population of Newfoundland was fairly small — only 180 French settlers left Newfoundland when the colony was abandoned in 1713 . 
 The French also had a small settlement on the island of Saint Pierre , just south of Newfoundland in the Gulf of Saint Lawrence . Its governor , Sébastien Le <unk> , Sieur de <unk> , had only arrived in July 1702 , and erected a crude wooden fort armed with a few guns . 
 = = Raids = = 
 = = = Newfoundland = = = 
 Leake 's fleet arrived in late August at Bay Bulls . From the inhabitants they learned that two French fishing ships were loading at Trepassey Bay , and that two French warships were at anchor near the French capital at Plaisance . He also learned that the French routinely posted spies to observe activities at Bay Bulls , and were likely to report the fleet 's presence to Plaisance — a three @-@ day overland trek . 
