 Fellow piano player Ethan Iverson asserted that , " As a pianist , Tristano was in the top tier of technical accomplishment . He was born a prodigy and worked tirelessly to get better . " Tristano " had seemingly small but extremely flexible hands , which could expand to a phenomenal degree " , allowing him to reach large intervals . 
 = = Teaching = = 
 Tristano is regarded as one of the first to teach jazz , particularly improvisation , in a structured way . He taught musicians irrespective of their instrument and structured lessons to meet the needs of each individual . Lessons were typically 15 – 20 minutes in length . He did not teach the reading of music or the characteristics of different styles of jazz , instead challenging students in ways that would allow them to find and express their own musical feelings , or style . 
 <unk> elements for a student 's learning were having a concept of ( principally diatonic ) scales as music and a basis for harmony . One of the teaching tools often used by Tristano , including for scales , was the metronome . The student set the metronome at or near its slowest setting initially , and gradually increased its speed , allowing a sense of time to develop , along with confidence in placing each note . 
 Tristano encouraged his students to learn the melodies of jazz standards by singing them , then playing them , before working on playing them in all keys . He also often had his students learn to sing and play the improvised solos of some of the best @-@ known names in jazz , including Parker and Young . Some students first sang solos from a recording slowed to half the normal speed ; eventually they learned to sing and play them at normal speed . Tristano stressed that the student was not learning to imitate the artist , but should use the experience to gain insight into the musical feeling conveyed . Such activities stressed the value of ear training , and the idea of feeling being fundamental to musical expression . All of this preceded having the opportunity to improvise during lessons . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Critics disagree on Tristano 's importance in jazz history . Max Harrison indicated that the pianist had limited influence outside his own group of affiliated musicians ; Robert Palmer , who pointed out that only one of Tristano 's albums was in print at the time of his death , suggested that he was pivotal in the change from 1940s modern jazz to the freer styles of subsequent decades ; and Thomas Albright similarly believed that his improvising prepared and developed new ground in the history of the music . 
 Elements of Tristano 's early playing – counterpoint , <unk> , and strict time – influenced Miles Davis ' Birth of the Cool , and the playing of saxophonist Gerry Mulligan and pianist Dave Brubeck . Tristano 's early , more feelings @-@ based performances also influenced the style of pianist Bill Evans , who also used overdubbing and multitracking in his own recordings after Tristano had experimented with the techniques . Avant garde musician Anthony Braxton has often mentioned Tristano and some of his students as influences . 
 Pianist Mose Allison commented that Tristano and Powell " were the founders of modern piano playing , since nearly everyone was influenced by one or the other of them . " Albright cited Tristano as an influence on the pianists Paul <unk> , Andrew Hill , Mal Waldron , and Taylor . After Tristano 's death , jazz piano increasingly adopted aspects of his early playing , in Ted Gioia 's view : " younger players were coming to these same end points not because they had listened to Tristano [ ... ] but because these developments were logical extensions of the modern jazz idiom . " 
 In Ind 's opinion , Tristano 's legacy " is what he added technically to the jazz vocabulary and his vision of jazz as a serious musical craft " . Grove Music 's summary is that " Tristano 's influence is felt most strongly in the work of his best pupils [ ... ] and in his example of high @-@ mindedness and perfectionism , characteristics which presupposed for jazz the highest standards of music as art . " Shim too identified his teaching as part of his legacy : parts of his approach to teaching jazz have become standard practice ; and " the sheer number of students he taught , which may easily exceed a thousand " , tied to some of them going on to employ what they learned in their own playing and pedagogy , illustrate his influence . Tristano 's teaching also affected the art of painter Robert Ryman , who had music lessons with the pianist : Ryman 's " technique not only parallels music in general but shares the principles of kinesthetic and <unk> attention to detail that characterized the teaching of Lennie Tristano . " 
 Shim suggested that the common under @-@ appreciation of Tristano is attributable in part to his style being unusual and too difficult for jazz commentators to categorize . Ind also believed that Tristano 's reputation became less than was deserved – " He stuck with his convictions and would not commercialize . His dedication , plus the lack of general appreciation by many jazz critics , led inevitably to his being sidelined . " 
 = = Awards = = 
 Tristano was Metronome 's musician of the year in 1947 . He was elected to Down Beat 's Hall of Fame in 1979 . In 2013 Tristano was inducted into the Grammy Hall of Fame for <unk> , an album of recordings from 1949 . He was added to the Ertegun Hall of Fame in 2015 . 
 = = Discography = = 
 Only albums are listed . 
 = = = As leader / co @-@ leader = = = 
 = = = As sideman = = = 
 Main sources : 
 = Religious debates over the Harry Potter series = 
 Religious debates over the Harry Potter series of books by J. K. Rowling are based on claims that the novels contain occult or Satanic subtexts . A number of Protestant , Catholic , and Orthodox Christians have argued against the series , as have some Shia and Sunni Muslims . Supporters of the series have said that the magic in Harry Potter bears little resemblance to occultism , being more in the vein of fairy tales such as Cinderella and Snow White , or to the works of C. S. Lewis and J. R. R. Tolkien , the former known for writing fantasy novels with Christian subtexts . Far from promoting a particular religion , some argue , the Harry Potter novels go out of their way to avoid discussing religion at all . However , the author of the series , J. K. Rowling , describes herself as a practising Christian , and many have noted the Christian references which she includes in the final novel Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows . 
 In the United States , calls for the books to be banned from schools have led to legal challenges often on the grounds that witchcraft is a government @-@ recognised religion and that to allow the books to be held in public schools violates the separation of church and state . The Orthodox churches of Greece and Bulgaria have also campaigned against the series , and some Catholic writers and officials have voiced a critical stance . The books have been banned from private schools in the United Arab Emirates and criticised in the Iranian state @-@ run press . Religious responses to Harry Potter have not all been negative . " At least as much as they 've been attacked from a theological point of view , " notes Rowling , " [ the books ] have been lauded and taken into pulpit , and most interesting and satisfying for me , it 's been by several different faiths . " 
 = = Christianity = = 
 = = = Evangelicalism = = = 
 Most of the criticism of Harry Potter is from Fundamental Evangelical Christian groups , who believe the series ' alleged pagan imagery is dangerous to children . Paul Hetrick , spokesman for Focus on the Family , an American Evangelical Christian group based in Colorado Springs , Colorado , outlined the reasons for his opposition to them : " [ They contain ] some powerful and valuable lessons about love and courage and the ultimate victory of good over evil ; however , the positive messages are packaged in a medium – witchcraft – that is directly denounced in Scripture . " Harry Potter has been the subject of at least six book burnings in the U.S. In 2002 , Chick Publications produced a comic book tract titled " The Nervous Witch " that declared " the Potter books open a doorway that will put untold millions of kids into hell . " In 2007 Jacqui <unk> wrote an article in Christianity Today comparing Harry Potter to " rat poison mixed with orange soda , " and said , " We 're taking something deadly from our world and turning it into what some are calling ' merely a literary device . ' " 
 A common belief among fundamentalist Christians is that Harry Potter promotes the religion of Wicca , and so keeping them in public schools violates the Separation of church and state in the United States . In her response to Laura Mallory 's court case , education attorney Victoria Sweeny said that if schools were to remove all books containing reference to witches , they would have to ban Macbeth and Cinderella . Jeremiah Films , a Christian video company largely known for its Clinton Chronicles release , also released a DVD entitled Harry Potter : Witchcraft Repackaged which stated that " Harry 's world says that drinking dead animal blood gives power , a satanic human sacrifice and Harry 's powerful blood brings new life , demon possession is not spiritually dangerous , and that passing through fire , contacting the dead , and conversing with ghosts , others in the spirit world , and more , is normal and acceptable . " 
 In 2001 , Evangelical journalist Richard Abanes , who has written several books arguing against new religions and Mormonism , published a polemical text that made similar allegations to the video : Harry Potter and the Bible : The Menace Behind the Magick . Later editions incorporated comparisons and contrasts between Harry Potter and the more overtly Christian works of C. S. Lewis and J. R. R. Tolkien . In an interview with <unk> , Abanes remarked that , " One of the easiest ways to know whether a fantasy book or film has real world magick in it is to just ask a simple question , ' Can my child find information in a library or bookstore that will enable them to replicate what they are seeing in the film or the book ? ' If you go to The Chronicles of Narnia and The Lord of the Rings what you see in , story magic and imagination , it is not real . You can 't replicate it . But if you go to something like Harry Potter , you can find references to astrology , clairvoyance , and numerology . It takes seconds to go into a bookstore or library and get books on that and start investigating it , researching it , and doing it . " 
 Abanes writes : " The classic passage dealing with divination , along with several other forms of occultism , is Deuteronomy 18 : 10 @-@ 12 : 
 There shall not be found among you any one that maketh his son or his daughter pass through the fire , or that <unk> divination , or an observer of times , or an <unk> , or a witch , or a charmer , or a <unk> with familiar spirits , or a wizard , or a necromancer . For all that do these thing are an abomination unto the LORD . " 
 " If this were the only passage dealing with occultism , it would be enough to forbid all of the practices found in the Harry Potter series . But there are numerous other verses to consider ... " 
 The debate has inspired at least two satirical Internet urban legends . In 2001 , The Onion , an American satirical newspaper , published an article entitled " Harry Potter Sparks Rise in Satanism Among Children , " which said that the " High Priest of Satanism " had described Harry Potter as " an absolute godsend to our cause . " This article was actually copied into a chain letter and circulated among Christians as " proof " of their views . The following year the Canadian daily the National Post released a similar spoof article in its satirical column Post Morten , saying that " Rowling — or , as she shall henceforth be referred to and credited as , Mrs. J. K. Satan — said that as she sat in a coffee shop one grey day , wondering what to do with her empty , aimless life , it hit her , ' I 'll give myself , body and soul , to the Dark Master . And in return , he will give me absurd wealth and power over the weak and pitiful of the world . And he did ! ' " This article was also copied into a chain letter and released as " truth " onto the web . 
 In 2009 , Matt Latimer , a former speechwriter for US President George W. Bush , claimed that during the Bush administration , " people in the White House " had denied Rowling the Presidential Medal of Freedom because the books " encourage witchcraft . " 
 While some evangelical Christians consider Harry Potter related to Satanism , a poll in 2000 indicated that this position remains a minority view . Seven percent of Americans who have heard of the books have a negative view of them , with 52 percent having a positive opinion and the remaining 41 percent unsure . This compares with 33 percent of Americans who identify themselves as Evangelical and 39 percent who take the Bible literally . In 2001 the Alamogordo Christ Community Church in New Mexico burned hundreds of copies of the Harry Potter books . Jack Brock , leader of the church , said the books were an abomination because they inspired children to study the occult . He and his followers admitted they have never read any of the books , and tossed in some Stephen King novels . Venezuelan scholar Fernando Baez , in a study of the history of censorship and book destruction commented , " There is more than one way to destroy a book , upon being denied a city permit to burn books , the Rev. Douglas Taylor in Lewiston , Maine , has held several annual gatherings at which he cuts the Potter books up with scissors . " 
 Some evangelicals have supported the Potter books : evangelical author Connie Neal , in her books , What 's a Christian to Do with Harry Potter ? , The Gospel According to Harry Potter , and Wizards , <unk> , and <unk> : Navigating Good and Evil in Harry Potter , Narnia , and Star Wars , wrote that the books preach Christian values and can be used to educate children in Christian tenets . Mike <unk> of Cornerstone magazine , in his article " Harry Potter vs the Muggles , Myth , Magic & Joy , " uses the term ' Muggles , ' used in the books to describe non @-@ magical humans , to describe Christians without imagination . Christianity Today published an editorial in favour of the books in January 2000 , calling the series a " Book of Virtues " and averring that although " modern witchcraft is indeed an ensnaring , seductive false religion that we must protect our children from , " this does not represent the Potter books , which have " wonderful examples of compassion , loyalty , courage , friendship , and even self @-@ sacrifice . " Italian Methodist minister Peter <unk> analysed the relationship between J. K. Rowling 's work and Christian theology , stating that the Harry Potter series is the positive outcome of the encounter of the Jewish @-@ Christian tradition with other important features of the Western cultural heritage ( namely Celtic , Nordic and Classical ) . 
 = = = Catholicism = = = 
 The Catholic Church has taken no official position on the books , but various Catholics , including officials of the Roman Curia , the hierarchy , and other official bodies have presented mixed views on the subject . 
 Beginning in 2001 , Cardinal George Pell , Archbishop of Sydney , has occasionally written on the Harry Potter series in his regular column in The Sunday Telegraph . In his columns , he praised the books for displaying values that are " deeply compatible with Christianity . " In his book Be Not Afraid , Pell praised the books as having a " good dose of moral truth " and for being " a good yarn . " 
 In 2003 , Father Peter Fleetwood , a priest incardinated in the Archdiocese of Liverpool at the time serving as an official of the Pontifical Council for Culture , made comments supportive of the novels during a press conference announcing the release of Jesus Christ the Bearer of the Water of Life — A Christian reflection on the " New Age . " In response to a question asking if the magic presented in the Harry Potter series should be considered in the same light as some New Age practices warned against in the document , Fleetwood stated , " If I have understood well the intentions of Harry Potter 's author , they help children to see the difference between good and evil . And she is very clear on this . " He added that Rowling is " Christian by conviction , is Christian in her mode of living , even in her way of writing . " This comment was seized on by the media as an endorsement of the novels from the Catholic Church , and by extension , the Pope at that time , John Paul II , though there is no evidence that the Pope officially approved of the novels . 
 Also in 2003 , the Prefect of the Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith , Cardinal Joseph Ratzinger – who later became Pope Benedict XVI – received a manuscript of a book critical of the novels from a German author . He stated in a private letter expressing gratitude for the receipt of the book , " It is good that you enlighten people about Harry Potter , because those are subtle seductions , which act unnoticed and by this deeply distort Christianity in the soul , before it can grow properly . " He also recommended she send a copy of her book to Fleetwood at the Council for Culture . In a second letter , the cardinal gave the author permission to make his first letter public . These letters from Ratzinger prior to his elevation to the papacy have been used to suggest that the pontiff was officially opposed to the novels . 
 Criticism against the books also comes from one of the official exorcists of the Archdiocese of Rome , Father Gabriele Amorth , who believes that , " Behind Harry Potter hides the signature of the king of the darkness , the devil . " He further told the Daily Mail that the books make a false distinction between black and white magic , while , in reality , the distinction " does not exist , because magic is always a turn to the devil . " Amorth believes that the books can be a bad influence on children by getting them interested in the occult . 
 Before the release of Harry Potter and the Half @-@ Blood Prince in 2005 , Msgr. Fleetwood , then serving with the Council of European Episcopal Conferences , gave an interview with Vatican Radio . In the interview , Fleetwood reaffirmed his positive opinion of the books , and remarked that then @-@ Cardinal Ratzinger 's letters may have been written by a member of the congregation 's staff and simply signed by the prefect . He also stated that his and Amorth 's opinions are just that , conflicting personal opinions of priests . 
 For the film adaptations , the Office for Film and Broadcasting of the United States Conference of Catholic Bishops has rated each film either " A @-@ II " or " A @-@ III " , meaning the content was not found to be morally offensive . The Episcopal Conference named the film adaptation of Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban as one of the ten best family films of 2004 , and Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - Part 1 as one of the best movies of 2010 . 
 The Vatican newspaper , L 'Osservatore Romano , dedicated a full page to the debate in its 14 – 15 January 2008 issue . Essayist Paolo <unk> said the Harry Potter novels offer lessons in the importance of love and self @-@ giving , but Professor Edoardo <unk> described Harry Potter as " the wrong kind of hero " and said that , " Despite several positive values that can be found in the story , at the foundations of this tale is the proposal that of witchcraft as positive , the violent manipulation of things and people thanks to the knowledge of the occult , an advantage of a select few : the ends justify the means because the knowledgeable , the chosen ones , the intellectuals know how to control the dark powers and turn them into good … This is a grave and deep lie , because it is the old Gnostic temptation of confusing salvation and truth with a secret knowledge . " However , in July 2009 , L 'Osservatore Romano praised the moral stance of the sixth Harry Potter film , Harry Potter and the Half @-@ Blood Prince , saying , " There is a clear line of demarcation between good and evil and [ the film ] makes clear that good is right . One understands as well that sometimes this requires hard work and sacrifice . " It also noted that the film made clear that " the search for immortality epitomised by Lord Voldemort " was morally wrong . 
 A French Traditionalist Catholic circle has published a thorough critical study of the Harry Potter series along the lines of demonology , with the title - in English translation - Harry Potter and the Order of Darkness . 
 = = = Orthodox = = = 
 In 2002 , the Greek Orthodox Church authorities in Thrace released a statement denouncing the Harry Potter books as Satanic , saying that they " acquaint people with evil , wizardry , the occult and demonology . " The statement also criticised the purported similarities between Harry Potter and Jesus Christ , saying , " It is beyond doubt that Harry was made to resemble a young savior . Upon his birth people try to kill him , he is forever subjected to injustice but always supernaturally manages to prevail and save others . Let us reflect , who else … is held to be the unjustly treated God ? " 
 In June 2004 , soon after a native Bulgarian , Stanislav <unk> , had been cast to portray the character Viktor Krum in the film adaptation of Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire , the Bulgarian Orthodox Church printed a front @-@ page article in their official newspaper , claiming that " magic is not a children 's game , " and that the holy Synod had advised that a church in Sofia hold special liturgies every Thursday to cure those afflicted by spells or possessed by evil spirits . Pamphlets were posted throughout the city , claiming that reciting a Harry Potter spell " is as if you are praying to evil " , and that " God hates magic . " 
 However , the Russian Orthodox apologist deacon Andrei <unk> argued in his 2003 book Harry Potter in the Church : Between an Anathema and a Smile that the Harry Potter books are not dangerous . His arguments include the books ' similarity with traditional fairy tales and literary classics such as the Iliad which no @-@ one calls " Satanic " ; the difference between the books ' magic and real occult practices ; the presence of Christian values such as humility , love , sacrifice and choosing the right over the easy . He quotes other notable Orthodox priests and church officials such as M. Kozlov and S. <unk> as supporting his position . 
 The American academic and Orthodox Christian writer John Granger has analyzed the literature in a positive light . Granger , a Christian classicist , has defended the books in his book , Looking for God in Harry Potter . Granger argues that the books do not promote the occult because none of the magic is based on summoning any sort of demon or spirit ; he contrasts occult invocational magic ( calling up spirit beings to do your bidding ) with literature 's common <unk> magic ( saying a set phrase to use power from an unspecified source ) . Indeed , says Granger , the themes of love triumphing over death and choosing what is right instead of what is easy are very compatible with Christianity . 
 = = = Anglicanism = = = 
 In 2000 , the Dean of Canterbury Cathedral refused to allow his church to be filmed as part of Hogwarts in the Harry Potter film series , saying that it was unfitting for a Christian church to be used to promote pagan imagery . Gloucester Cathedral agreed to take its place ; the Dean of Gloucester , the Very Reverend Nicholas Bury , admitted to being a fan of the books ; " I think the book is a marvellous traditional children 's story and excellently written . It is also amusing , exciting and wholesome , and is just the sort of story families should be encouraged to read . " The decision still resulted in many angry letters to the local paper , the Gloucester Citizen . Said one honorary chaplain , " Oh yes , there was quite a to @-@ do . There was one particular man , very evangelical , writing in and complaining that it wasn 't right for such things to be going on . I don 't think it was so much the film 's subject matter but the fact that filming was happening at all . " Similarly , Durham Cathedral also allowed its use for two of the films . 
 Then @-@ Archbishop of Canterbury George Carey gave positive remarks about the Harry Potter and the Philosopher 's Stone film in his New Year Message for 2002 , calling it " great fun , " and a film that " asks some very real questions " on moral issues . 
 In June 2007 , the Anglican Church published Mixing it up with Harry Potter , a 48 @-@ page book designed to use parallels from the novels to teach the faith to 9 – 13 @-@ year @-@ olds . The author of the book , Kent youth worker Owen Smith , argued that , " These sessions draw parallels between events in the world of Harry and his friends , and the world in which we are seeking to proclaim the gospel to young people [ ... ] To say , as some have , that these books draw younger readers towards the occult seems to me both to malign J. K. Rowling and to vastly underestimate the ability of children and young people to separate the real from the imaginary . " 
 = = = Latter @-@ day Saint ( Mormon ) = = = 
 The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter @-@ day Saints ( LDS Church ) has expressed no official or unofficial reservations or cautions about the Harry Potter books and movies , all of which are freely sold at the Brigham Young University campus bookstore . At least two prominent leaders of the church have even recommended the series and spoke of being fans because they teach morality and show good victorious over evil . 
 = = Islam = = 
 The popular scholarly site Muslim Matters has spoken positively of both the books and the films . However a number of Islamic scholars have argued that the books ' magical themes conflict with Islamic teachings . A series of online <unk> have been logged by imams against Harry Potter , decrying it as un @-@ Islamic . 
 The Harry Potter books are banned in schools across the United Arab Emirates ( UAE ) . According to a spokesman from the education ministry of the UAE government , the books ' fantasy and magic elements were contrary to Islamic values . Despite being banned from schools in the Emirates , there are no plans to ban them from bookshops within the country . 
 In August 2007 , police in Karachi , Pakistan discovered and defused a car bomb located outside a shopping centre where , hours later , the final Harry Potter novel was scheduled to go on sale . The book launch was postponed in response . A local police superintendent commented that , " We are not sure so far whether the target of the bombing was the book launch , but the connection cannot be ruled out . " 
 While the Harry Potter books are available for sale in Iran , an editorial in the 26 July 2007 edition of the state @-@ run newspaper <unk> , which has ties to Iran 's Supreme Leader , the Ayatollah Ali Khamenei , criticised Iran 's Culture and Islamic Guidance Ministry for approving the distribution of the final Harry Potter novel . The editorial claimed that the book , " includes destructive words and sentences which oppose to the values [ of the Islamic Republic ] , " and that airport security had failed by " [ trusting ] the American @-@ British publisher which has Zionist collaborators , such as Warner Bros .. " The editorial described the books as a " Zionist project " and claimed that " Zionists had spent billions of dollars " on it . 
 Feiz Mohammad , the Australian radical Islamic preacher believed to have inspired Tamerlan and Dzhokhar Tsarnaev , the perpetrators of the Boston Marathon bombing , decried Harry Potter for " paganism , evil , magic and the drinking of unicorn blood " . 
 = = Judaism = = 
 Many prominent rabbis have described the Harry Potter books as , in the words of one , " a force for good " . In 2005 , a conference at the University of Reading debated whether Harry Potter had a " <unk> <unk> " ( Jewish soul ) . Sir Jonathan Sacks , the former chief Rabbi of the Commonwealth of Nations , claims that , in " a society in which adolescents are precociously adult , and adults are permanently adolescent " , Harry Potter has " reclaimed the kingdom of childhood , proving that you don ’ t have to betray to enchant " . 
 The decision to release the final volume of the Harry Potter series , Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows , in Israel at 2 AM on a Saturday morning briefly angered many of Israel 's rabbis , since it fell during the Jewish Sabbath , a time when business dealings are forbidden . 
 = = Book challenges = = 
 The books ' inclusion in public and school libraries has been frequently challenged for their focus on magic , particularly in the United States , where it was ranked seventh on the list of the most challenged books in American libraries between 1990 and 2000 despite having been first published in the United States in 1998 . In 1999 , the Harry Potter books were challenged 23 times in 13 states . According to the American Library Association , they are now the most challenged books of the 21st century . 
 However , the ALA notes that overall , opposition to Harry Potter in the US appears to be waning ; having topped the list of the most challenged books in American schools in many previous years , they have to date failed to reappear in the top ten since 2003 . Humanist commentator Austin Cline attributes this decline to school libraries employing " opt @-@ out " policies which allow parents to prohibit their children from reading books they do not wish them exposed to . 
 A selection follows of the more notable challenges to the books : 
 In 1999 , in response to complaints from three local parents , Zeeland , Michigan school superintendent Gary <unk> restricted access to the Harry Potter books to those pupils whose parents gave written permission . Later reports claimed that the parents were concerned about the books ' magical and witchcraft @-@ related themes . In response , children began a letter @-@ writing campaign , forming clubs and organising petitions , which ultimately merged into an internet site called Muggles for Harry Potter . Eventually the site took on a broader remit as <unk> ! , a forum for children to tackle censorship in general . 
 In 2000 , The Public Library system of Jacksonville , Florida was faced with a lawsuit from conservative Christian group Liberty Counsel of Orlando after they began awarding " Hogwarts ’ Certificate of Accomplishment " to young readers who completed the fourth Harry Potter novel , Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire . One parent complained that " If they are going to pass out witchcraft certificates they should also promote the Bible and pass out certificates of righteousness " . The lawsuit was averted after the Library agreed to stop awarding the certificate . That same year , Carol Rookwood , headmistress of St Mary 's Island Church of England Aided School in Chatham , Kent , England , banned the books from school grounds , saying that , " The Bible is very clear and consistent in its teachings that wizards , devils and demons exist and are very real , powerful and dangerous , and God 's people are told to have nothing to do with them " . In response , the chairman of the Church of England 's doctrine commission , Stephen Sykes , said , " The Church 's position is that magic and sorcery are contrary to the Christian religion , Mrs Rookwood is absolutely right . [ But ] children who are capable of reading Harry Potter could be told not to take witchcraft seriously , or might even realise that for themselves " . In July 2000 , Birkenhead Primary School in Auckland , New Zealand placed a ban on the Harry Potter novels being read aloud by teachers in class after parental complaints regarding the books ' supposedly occult content . However , the ban was lifted after a number of students and parents complained . Also in 2000 , Christian parents complained to the school board in Durham Region , Ontario about Harry Potter , and managed to get the books removed from school library shelves . The books were reinstated after a public outcry . 
 In 2002 , in York , Pennsylvania , local parent Deb <unk> , along with her pastor , attempted to have the books banned from her daughter 's school . <unk> said that " It 's against my daughter 's constitution , it 's evil , it 's witchcraft ... I 'm not paying taxes to teach my child witchcraft " . The school board eventually voted 7 – 2 to keep the books , with an opt @-@ out for concerned parents . 
 In 2003 , Billy Ray and Mary Nell Counts , a couple in Cedarville , Arkansas , brought suit against the local school board on behalf of their daughter to contest a rule requiring parents ' written consent to read the Harry Potter books . A parent , Angie Haney , had requested such a rule on the grounds that they were " not based on fiction , " at the prompting of Pastor Mark Hodges , who was also a member of the school board . A district court judge decided the rule was unconstitutional . The decision was cited as precedent in subsequent censorship cases . Also in 2003 , a Russian woman filed charges against <unk> Publishing , responsible for Harry Potter 's Russian translation , saying that the books " instilled religious extremism and prompted students to join religious organizations of Satanist followers " . A probe found that there were no grounds for a criminal prosecution . 
 In September 2005 , Laura Mallory , a mother of four children in <unk> , Georgia , attempted to have the Harry Potter books banned from her children 's school library on the grounds that they promoted a religion , Wicca , and thus for a public school library to hold them would violate the separation of church and state . On her website , she states , " Harry Potter is being used to teach and promote witchcraft , Wicca , a U.S. [ Government ] recognised religion , in our schools , classrooms , and to this entire generation . " Mallory said the books carry " evil themes , witchcraft , demonic activity , murder , evil blood sacrifice , spells and teaching children all of this . " Mallory , who is a Christian missionary , said that she believed the books encouraged children to practice religious witchcraft or become Wiccans . Mallory also commented that she has not read the entire book series because " they 're really very long and I have four kids . I 've put a lot of work into what I 've studied and read . I think it would be hypocritical for me to read all the books , honestly " . Following her case 's rejection by the school , Mallory then took her case to the school appeals committee , but was rejected again . On 20 April 2006 , Mallory took her case to the Gwinnett County School Board , but on 11 May , the board voted unanimously against her . In June 2006 , Mallory launched an appeal against the County Board 's decision with the Georgia State Board of Education ; that appeal was rejected the following December . In January 2007 , she appealed to the Gwinnett Superior Court ; that appeal too was rejected three months later . She considered taking the case to federal court , but spent the following summer with her husband and four children . She is now an ordained minister for children and young adults , claiming that her case against Harry Potter has inspired her to a new calling . 
 In July 2006 , <unk> Allan , a teaching assistant at Durand Primary School in Stockwell , South London , quit her job after she was suspended for refusing to listen to a seven @-@ year @-@ old pupil read a Harry Potter book in class . A practising Pentecostal , she told the girl that " I don 't do witchcraft in any form , " and that she would be " cursed " if she heard the novel recited . Allan took her dispute with the school to an Employment Tribunal , citing religious discrimination and claiming for damages . The school 's lawyer claimed that , " her suspension was due to her obstructive conduct over time . It was not down to that day alone . " The case was heard in June 2007 and the tribunal found in favour of the school . 
 In September 2007 , Pastor Ron Barker of St. Joseph Church in Wakefield , Massachusetts received international attention after pulling the books from the shelves of the parish 's K @-@ 8 school . According to the ALA , this was the first time the books were banned in Massachusetts . The Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Boston claimed this was an independent action in which the Church played no role . " It may be a great series , but for some it is a vehicle for entering into some occult practices , " he said . " Sorcery and witchcraft are not appropriate subjects for a Catholic school and I do not want parents or children thinking we approve of them in our library . " He claimed his actions were no different from protecting children with a peanut allergy ; " What I did is start a spiritual peanut butter ban on Harry Potter , " he said . 
 = = Responses to criticism = = 
 = = = Wicca = = = 
 In response to the criticism that the books promote Wicca , a number of Wiccans and other commenters have argued that the critics ' definition of Wicca tends to lump together many and various spiritualist practices that actually have little in common . They have also highlighted the differences between magic within Wicca , which is invocational and derives from the divine powers , and that depicted by the Harry Potter books , which is a purely mechanical application of spells without invoking any deities . A Wiccan review of Harry Potter : Witchcraft Repackaged pointed out that " <unk> with the dead and spirit world , sorcery , curses , occult symbology , black magic [ and ] demon possession " — all cited by the book as evidence of Harry Potter promoting Wicca — are not part of Wiccan belief . 
 <unk> practices such as scrying and astrology , although occasionally employed by characters in the books are neither unique nor central to the Wiccan religion and are treated in the novels in a condescending , tongue @-@ in @-@ cheek manner ; the school divination teacher is , according to writer Christine Schoeffer , " a misty , dreamy , dewy charlatan , " who is ridiculed by the students and staff alike . In the Harry Potter universe , Schoeffer claims , " the entire intuitive tradition of fortune @-@ telling … is discredited . " 
 The website <unk> says , in their analysis of Chick 's " The Nervous Witch " , that the comic 's heroine cries that ' she got into " The Craft " ( i.e. Wicca ) " Through the Harry Potter books ! We wanted his powers … so we called for spirit guides . Then they came into us . " In reality , spirit guides are unrelated to the Witchcraft in the Harry Potter books and are not sought by Wiccans . They are a New Age <unk> 
 = = = Occult vs. fantasy and fairytale magic = = = 
 Regardless , statements such as those in Witchcraft Repackaged that the books depict actual occultist practices of any kind have been roundly criticised . Christian writer Stephen D. Greydanus writes that the magic of the Harry Potter novels is not the ritualistic , <unk> magic of Wicca or occultism but the same " fantasy " magic practised in the works of J. R. R. Tolkien and C. S. Lewis ; " If anything , the magic in Rowling 's world is even more emphatically imaginary , even further removed from real @-@ world practices , than that of Tolkien or Lewis ; and , like theirs , presents no appreciable risk of direct imitative behaviour . " Christianity Today columnist Charles Colson asserts that the magic in Harry Potter is " purely mechanical , as opposed to <unk> . That is , Harry and his friends cast spells , read crystal balls , and turn themselves into animals — but they don 't make contact with a supernatural world . [ It 's not ] the kind of real @-@ life witchcraft the Bible condemns . " Austin Cline notes that , " The Harry Potter books simply aren 't about Wicca as it is currently practiced . <unk> Rowling researched Wiccan practices and incorporated a few elements in order to give her books a bit more of an air of reality , but she and Wicca are drawing upon the same corpus of ancient traditions and stories so similarities are inevitable . They certainly aren 't a sign that the books work to " indoctrinate " people into Wicca as a religion . " 
 In his book , John Granger makes what he thinks a critical distinction between what he calls the dangerous invocational magic ( calling a spirit ) and Rowling 's <unk> magic , in which the formula one speaks gets the job done , and says that her presentation to the materialistic world that there is more out there than is visible is doing a service for the cause of Christian evangelism . 
 Connie Neal has commented that , " there are 64 real references to witchcraft in the first four Harry Potter books , but you have to see them in context to know they are not teaching witchcraft or sorcery . Many of the detractors who have actually read the books already have made up their mind that Harry Potter is evil before they read . They have taken a magnifying glass and picked at the books , using literary reductionism to find what they want to find . You can pick up Dickens ' A Christmas Carol and do the same thing that these people have done with Harry Potter ; it is ridiculous . " 
 In 2001 , Massimo Introvigne , an Italian expert in emerging religious movements , criticised the Fundamentalist impulse to distrust fantasy . " <unk> reject , or even burn , all products of contemporary popular culture , because their modes of production , languages and styles are not intrinsically Christian [ ... ] Most children understand that magic is used in fairy tales and juvenile supernatural fiction as a century @-@ old language , and that this is fiction , not reality . If we dismiss the use of magic as a language , we should at least be fundamentalist to the bitter end , and go against " Mary Poppins , " " Peter Pan , " and " Sleeping Beauty , " and insist that Cinderella puts a <unk> on . " 
 = = = Secularism = = = 
 Another response to the claim that the books promote the religion of witchcraft , which has been raised as much by Christians critical of the books as those who support them , is that , far from promoting religion , the books do not promote religion in any way . Apart from celebrating Christmas and Easter and a non @-@ denominational clergyman presiding at both Dumbledore 's funeral and the Weasleys ' wedding , religious practices are largely absent from the books . In her critical editorial on the books , Focus on the Family 's Lindy Beam comments , " The spiritual fault of Harry Potter is not so much that Rowling is playing to dark supernatural powers , but that she doesn 't acknowledge any supernatural powers at all . These stories are not fueled by witchcraft , but by secularism . " The Harry Potter books have been lauded by atheists and secularists for their determinedly non @-@ religious outlook . Mika <unk> @-@ <unk> of the liberal website <unk> notes , " Religion plays no role in the books . There are no churches , no other religious institutions , nobody prays or meditates , and even funerals are non @-@ religious affairs . " When considering the role of religion within Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows , Christopher Hitchens observed the apparent secularism in the novel , stating that the characters of Harry and Hermione possess certain moral virtues while also expressing an ignorance of Christian ideas . In an article written for Time magazine before the publication of the seventh and final book in the series entitled " Who Dies in Harry Potter ? God , " Lev Grossman argues that , " Harry Potter lives in a world free of any religion or spirituality of any kind . He lives surrounded by ghosts but has no one to pray to , even if he were so inclined , which he isn 't . " Grossman goes on to contrast Harry Potter with other , more explicitly religious fantasies , such as C. S. Lewis ' The Chronicles of Narnia and J. R. R. Tolkien 's The Lord of the Rings . 
 = = = Rowling 's response = = = 
 J.K. Rowling has repeatedly denied that her books lead children into witchcraft . In an interview with CNN in 1999 , she said , 
 " I absolutely did not start writing these books to encourage any child into witchcraft . I 'm laughing slightly because to me , the idea is absurd . I have met thousands of children and not even one time has a child come up to me and said , " Ms Rowling , I 'm so glad I 've read these books because now I want to be a witch . " 
 In an interview on the Donny & Marie Show in 1999 , Rowling said that " You have a perfect right , of course , as every parent does , and I 'm a parent , to decide what your child is exposed to . You do not have the right to decide what everyone else 's children are exposed to . So that 's how I feel about it " . 
 " Practicing Wiccans think I 'm also a witch " , Rowling told Entertainment Weekly in 2000 . " I 'm not . " 
 " People underestimate children so hugely " , Rowling said when asked about the controversy in the 2001 documentary Harry Potter and Me , " They know it 's fiction . When people are arguing from that kind of standpoint , I don 't think reason works tremendously well . But I would be surprised if some of them had read the books at all . " 
 In a conversation on Twitter in December 2014 , Rowling tweeted , " To everyone asking whether their religion / belief / non @-@ belief system is represented at Hogwarts : the only people I never imagined there are <unk> . . . it 's a different concept of magic to the one laid out in the books , so I don 't really see how they can co @-@ exist . " 
 = = Christianity in the novels = = 
 While many describe the books as secular or Satanic , many writers , including Rowling herself , have gone to great lengths to demonstrate that the books actively promote Christian values . 
 Rowling attended a Church of Scotland congregation while writing Harry Potter and her eldest daughter , Jessica , was baptised into that faith . " I go to church myself " , she told MTV in 2007 , " I don 't take any responsibility for the lunatic fringes of my own religion " . In 2000 , when asked if she was a Christian by journalist Max Wyman of The Vancouver Sun , she replied , 
 " Yes , I am , which seems to offend the religious right far worse than if I said I thought there was no God . Every time I 've been asked if I believe in God , I 've said yes , because I do , but no one ever really has gone any more deeply into it than that , and I have to say that does suit me , because if I talk too freely about that I think the intelligent reader , whether 10 or 60 , will be able to guess what 's coming in the books . " 
 " Personally " , she said of her religious faith , " I think you can see that in the books . Of course , Hogwarts is a <unk> school . " Rowling claims to have been very careful not to colour her novels in an overtly religious way , lest one faith be given prominence over any other . Rowling said that to her , the moral significance of the tales seems " blindingly obvious " . The key for her was the choice between what is right and what is easy , " because that , that is how tyranny is started , with people being apathetic and taking the easy route and suddenly finding themselves in deep trouble . " In an interview with MTV after the publication of the last book , she is quoted as saying , " To me [ the religious parallels have ] always been obvious , but I never wanted to talk too openly about it because I thought it might show people who just wanted the story where we were going . " 
 In 2007 , Rowling described her religious background in an interview with the Dutch newspaper De Volkskrant : 
 " I was officially raised in the Church of England , but I was actually more of a freak in my family . We didn 't talk about religion in our home . My father didn 't believe in anything , neither did my sister . My mother would incidentally visit the church , but mostly during Christmas . And I was immensely curious . From when I was 13 , 14 I went to church alone . I found it very interesting what was being said there , and I believed in it . When I went to university , I became more critical . I got more annoyed with the smugness of religious people and I went to church less and less . Now I 'm at the point where I started : yes , I believe . And yes , I go to the church . A protestant church here in Edinburgh . My husband is also raised protestant , but he comes from a very strict Scottish group . One where they couldn 't sing and talk . " 
 Rowling has occasionally expressed ambivalence about her religious faith . In a 2006 interview with Tatler magazine , Rowling noted that , " like Graham Greene , my faith is sometimes about if my faith will return . It 's important to me . " In a British documentary , JK Rowling : A Year in the Life , when asked if she believed in God , she said , " Yes . I do struggle with it ; I couldn 't pretend that I 'm not doubt @-@ ridden about a lot of things and that would be one of them but I would say yes . " When asked if she believed in an afterlife , she said , " Yes ; I think I do . " In a 2008 interview with the Spanish newspaper El País , Rowling said , " I feel very drawn to religion , but at the same time I feel a lot of uncertainty . I live in a state of spiritual flux . I believe in the permanence of the soul . " 
 = = = Rowling and the Inklings = = = 
 Several Christian writers have compared Rowling to the Inklings , a group that included C. S. Lewis , J. R. R. Tolkien , and Charles Williams , who explored Christian themes and morality in a fantasy context . Dave Kopel , citing John Granger 's book , draws comparisons between Rowling 's and Lewis 's common usage of Christian symbols , such as lions , unicorns and stags . He compares the work to Lewis 's Christian allegory : " In the climax of Chamber of Secrets , Harry descends to a deep underworld , is confronted by two satanic minions ( Voldemort and a giant serpent ) , is saved from certain death by his faith in Dumbledore ( the bearded God the Father / Ancient of Days ) , rescues the virgin ( Virginia [ sic ] Weasley ) , and ascends in triumph . It 's Pilgrim 's Progress for a new audience . " ( This quotation predates Rowling 's revelation that Ginny Weasley 's full name is Ginevra , not Virginia . ) 
 Other Christian writers find Rowling 's treatment of magic less acceptable than Lewis 's and Tolkien 's . In his essay " Harry Potter vs. Gandalf , " Steven D. Greydanus notes that in the works of Tolkien and Lewis , magic is confined to alien realms with their own laws , whereas Rowling 's world coexists with our own ; he thinks this is wrong : " Lewis goes to great lengths to make clear just how dangerous and wrong , how incompatible with Christianity , is any form of attempted magic in our world . " John Andrew Murray similarly observes that Rowling 's work portrays magic as a natural force to be manipulated , while Lewis and Tolkien portray magic as a gift bestowed by a higher power : " Despite superficial similarities , Rowling 's and Lewis ' worlds are as far apart as east is from west . Rowling 's work invites children to a world where witchcraft is ' neutral ' and where authority is determined solely by one 's cleverness . Lewis invites readers to a world where God 's authority is not only recognised , but celebrated — a world that resounds with His goodness and care . " 
 Rowling 's attitude toward the Inklings , and to Lewis in particular , has undergone change . In 1998 , in one of her earliest interviews , she said that she had a lifelong love of C. S. Lewis . " Even now , if I was in a room with one of the Narnia books I would pick it up like a shot and re @-@ read it . " However , in later interviews she expressed a different opinion . " I adored [ Lewis ' books ] when I was a child , " she told the Sydney Morning Herald in 2001 , " I got so caught up I didn 't think C. S. Lewis was especially preachy . Reading them now I find that his subliminal message isn 't very subliminal . " In an interview with Lev Grossman in 2005 , she said , " There comes a point [ in Lewis ' The Last Battle ] where Susan , who was the older girl , is lost to Narnia because she becomes interested in lipstick . She 's become irreligious basically because she found sex . I have a big problem with that . " 
 " I did not set out to convert anyone to Christianity , " she told Time in 2007 ; " I wasn 't trying to do what C. S. Lewis did . It is perfectly possible to live a very moral life without a belief in God , and I think it 's perfectly possible to live a life peppered with ill @-@ doing and believe in God . " 
 As regards Tolkien , Rowling said in 2000 that " I didn 't read The Hobbit until after the first Harry book was written , though I read Lord of the Rings when I was nineteen . I think , setting aside the obvious fact that we both use myth and legend , that the similarities are fairly superficial . Tolkien created a whole new mythology , which I would never claim to have done . On the other hand , I think I have better jokes . " 
 = = = Christian allegories in Deathly Hallows = = = 
 A number of commentators have drawn attention to the Biblical themes and references in her final Harry Potter novel , Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows . In an August 2007 issue of Newsweek , Lisa Miller commented that Harry dies and then comes back to life to save mankind , like Christ . She points out the title of the chapter in which this occurs — " King 's Cross " — a possible allusion to Christ 's cross . Also , she outlines the scene in which Harry is temporarily dead , pointing out that it places Harry in a very heaven @-@ like setting where he talks to a father figure " whose supernatural powers are accompanied by a profound message of love " . Miller argues that these parallels make it difficult to believe that the basis of the stories is Satanic . There is also speculation from The Leaky Cauldron 's podcast , <unk> , episode 115 entitled " Those Deathly Hallows , " in the Canon Conclusion segment with Steve Vander Ark , that the Hallows act as a parallel to the Holy Trinity ; Harry accepts death as did Jesus , they both come back from death , and defeat the Devil / Voldemort . Jeffrey Weiss adds , in The Dallas Morning News , that the biblical quotation " And the last enemy that shall be defeated is death , " featured on the tombstones of Harry 's parents , refers to Christ 's victory over death at the end of the world . The quotation on Dumbledore 's family tomb , " Where your treasure is , there your heart will be also " , is from Matthew 6 : 21 , and refers to knowing which things in life are of true value . " They 're very British books , " Rowling revealed to an Open Book conference in October 2007 , " So on a very practical note Harry was going to find biblical quotations on tombstones , [ but ] I think those two particular quotations he finds on the tombstones at Godric 's Hollow , … almost epitomise the whole series . " 
 Deathly Hallows begins with a pair of epigraphs , one by Quaker leader William Penn and one from Aeschylus ' The Libation Bearers . " I really enjoyed choosing those two quotations because one is pagan , of course , and one is from a Christian tradition " , Rowling said . " I 'd known it was going to be those two passages since ' Chamber ' was published . I always knew [ that ] if I could use them at the beginning of book seven then I 'd cued up the ending perfectly . If they were relevant , then I went where I needed to go . They just say it all to me , they really do . " 
 Raymond Keating also outlines several Christian themes of the last book in an article in Newsday , concluding that " It 's possible to read Lord of the Rings and Narnia without recognizing the religious aspects . That 's even more so the case with Harry Potter . But Christian themes are there nonetheless " . Christian commentator Jerry Bowyer says of Rowling 's " fundamentalist bashers " , " So much of the religious right failed to see the Christianity in the Potter novels because it knows so little Christianity itself [ ... ] The gospel stories themselves , the various metaphors and figures of the Law and the Prophets , and their echoes down through the past two millennia of Christian literature and art are largely unknown to vast swaths of American Christendom . " As regards Rowling 's belief that discussing her faith would spoil the books , Bowyer says , " For once , I disagree with her : I don 't think [ the bashers ] would have guessed the ending . Most of them can 't recognise the ending of the story even after it 's been told . " 
 In her appraisal of the series , The Mystery of Harry Potter : A Catholic Family Guide , author Nancy Carpentier Brown writes , 
 " After burying the remains of Mad @-@ Eye Moody , Harry " marked the spot by gouging a small cross in the bark with his wand . " Now , if they were true Wiccans , wouldn ’ t he have gouged a pentagram ? When Harry finally has the chance to face Voldemort ( Tom Riddle ) and possibly kill him , Harry pauses and offers Voldemort a chance , saying , " Show some remorse . " ... Giving a person a chance to redeem themselves , to begin to realise your own sins , by showing remorse , shows a Christian theme to the story . " 
 = = Dumbledore 's sexual orientation = = 
 On 19 October 2007 , Rowling spoke at New York 's Carnegie Hall . When asked by a fan whether Albus Dumbledore , the books ' wise mentor @-@ figure , " who believed in the prevailing power of love , ever [ fell ] in love himself " , Rowling replied , 
 " My truthful answer to you … I always thought of Dumbledore as gay . … Dumbledore fell in love with Gellert Grindelwald , and that added to his horror when Grindelwald showed himself to be what he was … falling in love can blind us to an extent … he was very drawn to this brilliant person , and horribly , terribly let down by him . " 
 The statement was met with an ovation from the audience . " If I 'd known it would make you so happy , I would have announced it years ago ! " Rowling said . In an appearance three days later in Toronto , she responded to questions about Dumbledore 's " outing " by saying that she had decided his sexuality " from very early on . Probably before the first book was published . " 
 Christians critical of both Harry Potter and homosexuality responded pointedly to the revelation . Christian author Berit <unk> wrote , 
 " My first response was , " Thank you , Lord , " because this helps us show others that these books should not be used in the churches to illustrate Christianity . Because Dumbledore has been revealed as a homosexual , it helps me communicate my message . It helps Christians who are concerned about the use of Harry Potter books in churches , because it makes it very clear that these books are not intended to be Christian , that Rowling isn 't speaking as a Christian . She has introduced values that are contrary to the Biblical message . " 
 Laura Mallory responded to the Rowling 's statement by telling U.S. network ABC , " My prayer is that parents would wake up , that the subtle way this is presented as harmless fantasy would be exposed for what it really is : a subtle indoctrination into anti @-@ Christian values … A homosexual lifestyle is a harmful one . That 's proven , medically . " Linda Harvey , the president of Mission America , an organization which " monitors both the homosexual agenda directed at children as well as paganism among American youth , " wrote an opinion piece for WorldNetDaily , asking : 
 " Will we allow our kids to believe it would be perfectly appropriate for the headmaster of any school to be homosexual ? … Will some find ways to re @-@ cast homosexuality into something different than the " abomination " it 's called in Scripture ? Will it become something more like a sad disability , one that the " mean religious right " targets for nefarious purposes ? " 
 " It 's very disappointing that the author would have to make one of the characters gay , " said Roberta Combs , president of the Christian Coalition of America , " It 's not a good example for our children , who really like the books and the movies . It encourages homosexuality . " On 27 October 2007 , Pat Robertson 's Christian Broadcasting Network called for a ban on the books . 
 Rowling commented on the dispute in an interview with the BBC . " Do I think a gay person can be a moral compass ? I think it 's ludicrous that we are asking that question in the 21st century . The Christian fundamentalists were never my base . " 
 John Granger , in his blog , reposted the negative reactions of many Christians : 
 " The media presentation of the event as Ms. Rowling ’ s endorsement of homosexuality and an anti @-@ faith agenda was straight from Rita Skeeter ’ s notebook and part of their endless campaign to convince the public that Ms. Rowling is the enemy of their enemy , namely , the Church ; the anguished and disappointed response of many Christian readers to these reports was also according to Culture War formula and in keeping with a hyper @-@ extended understanding of the word gay . " Dumbledore is gay " no more makes the books an invitation to homosexuality or contrary to orthodox Christian belief than Sorcerer ’ s Stone made them a " gateway to the occult . " 
 Catholic fantasy author Regina Doman wrote an essay titled " In Defense of Dumbledore , " in which she argued that the books actually support Catholic teaching on homosexuality because Dumbledore 's relationship with the dark wizard Grindelwald leads to obviously terrible results , as he becomes interested in dark magic himself , neglects his responsibilities towards his younger sister and ultimately causes her death . 
 Despite Rowling stating that " he ( Dumbledore ) is my character and as my character , I have the right to know what I know about him and say what I say about him " , a number of commentators have argued that Rowling 's claim has no weight , as there is no indication anywhere in the novels of Dumbledore 's homosexuality . " Ms. Rowling may think of Dumbledore as gay , " said New York Times columnist Edward Rothstein , " but there is no reason why anyone else should . " According to John Mark Reynolds , assistant professor of philosophy at <unk> University and the founder of Torrey Honors Institute , " there is just no way to know this “ fact ” about Dumbledore from the books . It is not there , it is not relevant , and Rowling ’ s opinions about her characters are now only of historical interest " . Others doubted that Rowling 's claim was true to her original intent , and some considered it a publicity stunt . American writer Orson Scott Card criticised Rowling 's revelation as " appallingly hypocritical " , saying that " Instead of making us know and understand the character as a gay man , we are slapped with it at the end , as if being gay were just an afterthought " . 
 = Shelley Chaplin = 
 Shelley Chaplin ( born 4 September 1984 ) is an Australian 3 @.@ 5 @-@ point player wheelchair basketball player . She participated in the 2004 Summer Paralympics in Athens , where she won a silver medal ; in the 2008 Summer Paralympics in Beijing , where she won a bronze medal , and the 2012 Summer Paralympics in London , where she won a second silver medal , a win she dedicated to her lifelong friend Shannon . 
 Chaplin began playing wheelchair basketball in 1999 , after initially contemplating developing her archery skills , and made her debut in the Women 's National Wheelchair Basketball League ( WNWBL ) in 2000 . She was part of the WNWBL championship Dandenong Rangers sides in 2011 and 2012 . She was first selected for the Australia women 's national wheelchair basketball team , known as the Gliders , in 2001 , and first represented Australia in 2002 , winning a bronze medal as part of the team at the 2002 World Wheelchair Basketball Championship . She played for the University of Illinois at Urbana @-@ Champaign wheelchair basketball team , and was named an All @-@ American in the 2006 / 07 season . Her team won the national championships in 2009 . 
 = = Personal = = 
 Nicknamed <unk> , Chaplin was born in Bendigo , Victoria , on 4 September 1984 , with incomplete paraplegia . She grew up in Bendigo , and went to Girton Grammar School . In 2010 , she graduated from the University of Illinois at Urbana @-@ Champaign with a Bachelor of Science degree in Recreation , Sport and Tourism . 
 After completing her studies at the University of Illinois Chaplin took up a position at Australian Broadcasting Corporation . At the ABC Chaplin was a Production Assistant on Adam Hills Tonight in 2013 and <unk> and <unk> in 2014 . 
 = = Basketball = = 
 A 3 @.@ 5 @-@ point player , Chaplin began playing wheelchair basketball in 1999 . In financial year 2012 / 2013 , the Australian Sports Commission gave her a A $ 20 @,@ 000 grant as part of their Direct Athlete Support program . She received $ 20 @,@ 000 in 2012 / 13 , $ 17 @,@ 000 in 2011 / 12 and 2010 / 11 , $ 5 @,@ 571 @.@ 42 in 2009 / 10 and $ 5 @,@ 200 in 2008 / 09 . 
 = = = Club = = = 
 Chaplin made her debut in the Women 's National Wheelchair Basketball League ( WNWBL ) in 2000 when she played for the Whittlesea Pacers . She played for the Dandenong Rangers in 2011 when her team won the WNWBL title , and in 2012 was the captain of the Victoria Dandenong Rangers . In a round four game against Sydney Uni Flames that the Rangers won 55 – 44 , she scored 22 points . Her team qualified for the league finals , where she scored 16 points in the game against the Stacks Goudkamp Bears for her team to walk away as champions by a score of 77 – 54 . That season , she was named the league 's Most Valuable 3 Point Player and a member of the 2012 All Star Five . 
 = = = University = = = 
 Chaplin played for the University of Illinois Wheelchair Basketball team in the country 's first division . In 2006 / 07 , she was coached by Mike Frogley , and was the team 's starting point guard . Early in the 2006 / 07 season , her wheelchair broke and she had to play in one that was not hers . After three games played in the borrowed chair , she had bloody and bruised knees . She was named an All @-@ American in the 2006 / 07 season . 
 In two games that Chaplin 's team won against RIC Express and the University of Alabama in December 2006 , she scored 35 total points , made 13 rebounds and 7 assists . She was named the Most Valuable Player ( MVP ) of the series . Her team finished that series with a record of 10 – 0 . In a January 2009 game against 7th ranked Alabama that her team won 52 – 47 , she scored 22 points . The game was part of a tournament where her team also defeated Oklahoma State University 53 – 49 , and the University of Missouri , 48 – 27 . That season , her team won the national championships after defeating the Phoenix Mercury 53 – 36 in the championship game . 
 In 2007 / 08 , Chaplin 's team won the national championship and she was named the tournament 's MVP . In the team 's 44 – 43 victory over the University of Alabama , she scored 12 points . That year , she was a junior and played point guard for the team . Her team played against a number of men 's teams during that season . In January 2008 , the team lost three games to men 's teams , including a 61 – 41 loss to Southwest Minnesota State where she scored 14 points , a 54 – 35 loss to <unk> where she scored 10 points in a 74 – 20 loss to Wisconsin @-@ Whitewater . In April 2010 , Chaplin was named the First Team All @-@ Tournament at the national championships . For the 2009 / 10 season , she was also named the University of Illinois Women 's Wheelchair Basketball Player of the Year . 
 = = = National team = = = 
 Chaplin was first selected for the Australia women 's national wheelchair basketball team , known as the Gliders , in 2001 , and first represented Australia in 2002 , winning a bronze medal as part of the team at the 2002 World Wheelchair Basketball Championship . 
 Chaplin was part of the Gliders team at the 2010 IWBF World Championships where her team came fourth , and the team that won the Osaka Cup in Japan in 2008 , 2009 and 2010 . In February 2013 , she was captain of the Gliders at the Osaka Cup , where the Gliders successfully defended the title they had won in 2012 . Chaplin was named MVP of the tournament . 
 = = = Paralympics = = = 
 Chaplin was part of the Gliders at the 2004 Athens , 2008 Beijing , and 2012 London Paralympics , and won two silver medals , in 2004 and 2012 , and a bronze medal in 2008 as part of the team . 
 Chaplin competed with the Gliders at the 2012 Summer <unk> the group stage , the Australia women 's national wheelchair basketball team at the 2012 Summer Paralympics posted wins against Brazil , Great Britain , and the Netherlands , but lost to the Canada . This was enough to advance the Gliders to the quarter @-@ finals , where they beat Mexico . The Gliders then defeated the United States by a point to set up a final clash with Germany . In the gold medal game , the Gliders lost 44 – 58 , and earned a silver medal . She scored 8 points in the game , in which she played 26 : 58 minutes . 
 = = Statistics = = 
 = 61st Battalion ( Australia ) = 
 The 61st Battalion was an infantry battalion of the Australian Army . It was originally raised in 1917 during the First World War but was disbanded the same year without seeing active service . Later it was re @-@ raised as a part of the Militia in 1938 in Brisbane , Queensland . Upon the outbreak of the Second World War they initially undertook garrison duties in Australia , however , in 1942 they were deployed to New Guinea where they took part in the Battle of Milne Bay , during which the Japanese were defeated for the first time in a major land battle . In late 1943 , the 61st Battalion was withdrawn back to Australia for a period of re @-@ organisation and training before being deployed overseas again in late 1944 . This time they were deployed to Bougainville , where the Australian 3rd Division had taken over from the American garrison and the battalion joined the drive towards the Japanese stronghold at Buin in the south of the island . Following the end of the war , the 61st Battalion was disbanded as part of the demobilisation process on 8 January 1946 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Formation = = = 
 The 61st Battalion was initially raised in the United Kingdom in February 1917 as part of the Australian Imperial Force ( AIF ) during the First World War in an effort to raise the 6th Division . However , following manpower shortages that occurred as a result of heavy losses amongst the AIF on the Western Front in 1917 and the failure of attempts to introduce conscription in Australia , it was decided to disband the division and its subordinate units in September 1917 and use their personnel to reinforce other units . As a result , the 61st Battalion was disbanded without seeing active service . 
 In 1938 , the 61st Battalion was re @-@ raised as part of the Militia in response to growing tensions in Europe . At this time , the battalion was formed in the Brisbane – Ipswich area with a small detachment based in Toowoomba . The main driving force behind convincing the government to establish the battalion was Sir Donald Cameron , and from the outset it was intended that the unit should be a Scottish battalion and approval was gained for its personnel to be equipped with Scottish @-@ style uniforms including kilts and Glengarry caps . The funds for this equipment , however , were not provided for by the government and was a cost that the battalion had to meet itself , which it did so through an appeal for donations from the public . At this time many of the battalion 's initial personnel were men of Scottish birth or ancestry , although later intakes of personnel included men of diverse heritage . In 1939 , the battalion was officially bestowed with the title of the " Queensland Cameron Highlanders " , when an alliance with the Queen 's Own Cameron Highlanders was approved by King George VI . 
 Training was undertaken on a voluntary and unpaid basis with weekly parades being undertaken at Kelvin Grove , while field training took place at Fraser 's Paddock in Enoggera and Redbank . By July 1939 , the battalion 's strength was 550 officers and other ranks . 
 = = = Second World War = = = 
 = = = = Home duties = = = = 
 At the outset of the Second World War , due to the provisions of the Defence Act ( 1903 ) which prohibited sending the Militia to fight outside of Australian territory , the decision was made to raise an all volunteer force , the Second Australian Imperial Force ( 2nd AIF ) , to serve overseas — initial operations were conceived to be likely in the Middle East , France and later possibly England — while it was decided that the Militia would be used to defend the Australian mainland from possible attack and to improve Australia 's overall level of readiness through the reinstitution of compulsory military service and extended periods of continuous periods of training . 
 Although ultimately the number of men that joined the units of the 2nd AIF from the Militia was in fact lower than anticipated , a large number of such personnel left to seek an opportunity to serve overseas . In this time the 61st Battalion lost many of its experienced senior officers and non @-@ commissioned officers to the 2 / 25th and 2 / 33rd Battalions that were raised in Queensland , as well as to the Royal Australian Air Force . Of note was the loss of the battalion 's pipe and drum band , which joined the 2 / 25th en masse . A 61st Battalion officer , Major Charles Withy , also went across with them serving initially as the second in command and then later as the 2 / 25th 's commanding officer . 
 Nevertheless , despite this loss of personnel the battalion undertook a number of periods of continuous training throughout 1940 – 42 as the Militia were called up progressively for various periods of extended training consisting of between 70 to 90 days . During this time they joined the rest of the 7th Brigade , to which they were assigned , at Chermside , Queensland . While there , the battalion replaced its Scottish equipment with regular service gear . In September 1941 , as the strategic situation in the Pacific worsened , the battalion was " called up " to provide full @-@ time service for the duration of the war . As a result of this , the battalion was brought up to its full strength of 910 personnel of all ranks . In December , after the Japanese attacks on Pearl Harbor and Malaya , they undertook defensive duties around Caloundra before moving to Townsville in May 1942 to defend against a possible invasion . 
 = = = = Milne Bay , 1942 – 43 = = = = 
 In early 1942 , the situation in the Pacific grew worse as the garrison at Singapore fell and the Japanese began to advance south towards Australia . In March , they landed Lae and Salamaua on the north coast of New Guinea , and then later in July they landed at Buna and Gona in Papua . By this time the Australian government decided to bring the units of the 2nd AIF back from the Middle East to defend against a possible Japanese invasion of Australia and although this process had begun , the only troops available to respond immediately to the Japanese landings were units from the Militia . Troops from the 30th Brigade had already been deployed around Port Moresby , however , over the course of a month in July and August the 61st Battalion , along with the rest of the 7th Brigade , was moved to Milne Bay , situated on the eastern tip of New Guinea , where the 61st took up defensive duties around the airstrip at Gili Gili alongside the 25th Battalion . 
 On the night of 25 / 26 August 1942 about 2 @,@ 000 Japanese marines with tank support carried out an amphibious landing north of Milne Bay . As the Japanese advanced towards the 7th Brigade 's main defensive position from their beachhead around Waga Waga , the 61st Battalion bore the brunt of the initial assault and temporarily halted the Japanese advance with an ambush before launching a counterattack against them . The following morning , however , after the 2 / 10th Battalion had come under attack from Japanese armour , the 61st Battalion was also forced back towards the No. 3 airstrip , where they formed a defensive line against the main Japanese thrust which came on 31 August . With strong artillery support , the 61st and 25th Battalions managed to turn back the Japanese attack , inflicting heavy casualties and in the process seizing the initiative . Following this , elements of the 18th Brigade advanced towards the Japanese beachhead , which they subsequently captured on 6 September , inflicting upon the Japanese their first defeat in a major battle on land during the war . 
 During its involvement in the battle , the 61st Battalion suffered 19 killed and 27 wounded . They remained at Milne Bay until March 1943 , however , when they were withdrawn to <unk> , near Port Moresby where the battalion undertook training exercises and carried out patrols around the villages that were scattered around the start of the Kokoda Track . As the battalion was brought back up to full establishment , they were warned out for combat on a number of occasions , however , eventually it was decided to withdraw the 7th Brigade back to Australia in November 1943 . For his leadership of the battalion during this time , the 61st Battalion 's commanding officer , Lieutenant Colonel Alexander Meldrum , was awarded the Distinguished Service Order ( DSO ) . Captain Charles <unk> , who had commanded ' B ' Company during the fighting around Milne Bay , also received a DSO . 
 = = = = New Guinea and Bougainville , 1944 – 45 = = = = 
 After a period of leave , the battalion began to reform on the Atherton Tablelands in Queensland during February 1944 and for the next eight months they undertook a number of exercises and training periods as they prepared for the next stage of the war . During this time , the battalion 's authorised strength was reduced to 803 men of all ranks , as the 3rd Division was converted to the Jungle divisional establishment . On 20 July 1944 , the 61st Battalion embarked upon HMAT Katoomba in Cairns and proceeded overseas again . They arrived at Madang in New Guinea four days later . As it was considered that there were still isolated pockets of Japanese in the area , the battalion began patrolling operations almost as soon as they had landed . 
 They remained at Madang , undertaking garrison duties , until November 1944 when the 61st Battalion was transferred to Torokina on Bougainville Island as Australian troops took over responsibility of the island from the American garrison . Initial Allied intelligence estimates placed the size of the Japanese forces on Bougainville at around 18 @,@ 000 men , however , it was later determined that the number was closer to 40 @,@ 000 . Nevertheless , it was decided that the Australians would go on the offensive and would pursue a three pronged advance across the island , with the main effort being an advance in the southern sector along the narrow coastal plain towards the Japanese stronghold at Buin . Initially , the 7th Brigade , to which the battalion was attached , was employed in the northern sector holding positions along the Numa Numa trail , however , in January 1945 they took over from the 29th Brigade which had been operating in the southern sector and from then until March , the 61st Battalion took part in the advance inland from the Jaba River through Mosina , <unk> , and Mosigetta towards the Puriata River . 
 Advancing in bounds , occupying company bases and sending out patrols , the battalion began its move south on 15 January 1945 . Throughout the rest of the month , the battalion was involved in a number of relatively minor engagements with the Japanese as they carried out patrolling and ambush operations along the Australian line of advance . By the start of February they reached Mosina and after receiving intelligence that a Japanese force had been detected at <unk> , they sent out to raid their camp . Upon reaching <unk> the patrol set fire to the huts in which the Japanese force was billeted and then withdrew . Later reconnaissance determined that 15 Japanese had died in the blaze . By 12 February the battalion married up with patrols from the 25th Battalion that were moving along the Tavera River and then later , as the battalion continued on towards Mosigetta , one company linked up with patrols from the 9th Battalion on 17 February . 
 In late February , the Japanese forces around Mosigetta withdrew after pressure from Captain Ted Hutchinson 's company in an action for which he was later awarded the Military Cross . The 61st Battalion , after establishing its headquarters at Mosigetta , continued its advance alongside the 25th Battalion . After the 25th Battalion crossed the Puriata , a patrol from the 61st strove for the Hari where they clashed with a group of between 15 and 20 Japanese holding an entrenched position . Upon establishing contact , the patrol 's artillery forward observation officer called down indirect fire from the supporting artillery battery and as the patrol assaulted the position , the Japanese defenders withdrew , leaving six of their dead behind . The position was subsequently revealed to consist of four main pits and 20 other smaller ones . After this engagement the battalion was withdrawn from the line for a brief period due to concerns about its morale while the rest of the 7th Brigade continued the advance along the Buin road throughout February and into March . 
 Throughout March Japanese resistance steadily increased and during this time a number of attacks were made on the Australian rear areas and line of communications . As a result , the 61st Battalion was re @-@ committed to the advance , with a company being allocated to defend the 25th Battalion 's rear echelon along the Buin Road near a feature named " Slater 's Knoll " . As the Japanese launched a counteroffensive designed to check the Australian advance , the 61st Battalion 's main engagement came between 29 March and 5 April when they took part in the Battle of Slater 's Knoll . 
 On 30 March the battalion 's ' A ' Company was attacked six times by a Japanese force of about 300 men . This attack was repulsed for the loss of two Australians killed and two wounded . At dawn the following morning , ' A ' Company attempted to clear the Japanese from the track that led back to Slater 's Knoll , however , coming up against an entrenched force of about 70 Japanese , they were forced to abandon the attempt after exchanging fire for 45 minutes . Over the course of the next week , the Japanese launched a number of attacks on the Australians around Slater 's Knoll , during which time they suffered an estimated 620 men killed and over 1 @,@ 000 wounded . The main Japanese attacks , however , were concentrated on the 25th Battalion and for the majority of the battle the 61st took part in defensive operations on the periphery of the 25th 's position to protect their rear and to provide close infantry support to the Matilda tanks of the 2 / 4th Armoured Regiment . During this time , the 61st Battalion was involved in a number of " minor contacts " . 
 The incidents of disease and casualties , coupled with combat fatigue and poor leadership resulted in a poor state of morale in the battalion in this period . On 9 April , the 7th Brigade commander , Brigadier John Field , relieved the 61st Battalion 's commanding officer , Lieutenant Colonel Walter Dexter , who had been suffering from arthritis , of his command . Major William Fry , formerly of the 9th Battalion , was given the task of temporarily commanding the battalion until Lieutenant Colonel Terrence Farrell could take over the following month . As problems with men refusing to go on patrol and lax performance of duty continued throughout early April , the 61st Battalion remained in the role of rear area security for the remainder of the 7th Brigade 's involvement in the sector . 
 On 15 April , following the conclusion of the fighting around Slater 's Knoll , the 7th Brigade was relieved by the 29th and they returned to Torokina where they remained until the end of the war . Over the course of the campaign , the 61st Battalion lost 48 men killed or wounded . 
 = = = Disbandment = = = 
 Following the end of hostilities the 61st Battalion took part in the surrender ceremony that took place at Torokina . Later , as they were waiting for repatriation back to Australia , the battalion was employed guarding Japanese prisoners of war . In November orders arrived for the battalion to return to Australia and after embarking on the Westralia , they landed at Cairns on 19 November 1945 , and moved back to Brisbane by train . As the battalion 's strength dwindled as a result of the demobilisation process and men returned to civilian life , the decision was made to disband the unit . This occurred on 8 January 1946 at Victoria Barracks , Brisbane . 
 Casualties throughout the war consisted of 48 killed or died on active service and a further 56 wounded . Members of the battalion received the following decorations : two Distinguished Service Orders , three Military Crosses , eight Military Medals and 17 Mentioned in Despatches . 
 = = Alliances = = 
 The 61st Battalion held the following alliances : 
 United Kingdom – Queen 's Own Cameron Highlanders . 
 = = Battle honours = = 
 For their service during the Second World War , the 61st Battalion received five battle honours : 
 South @-@ West Pacific 1942 – 1945 , Milne Bay , Liberation of Australian New Guinea , Mosigetta and Puriata River . 
 = = Commanding officers = = 
 The 61st Battalion 's commanding officers between 1938 and 1945 were : 
 Lieutenant Colonel Alexander Meldrum , DSO ; 
 Lieutenant Colonel Harold Joseph Wiles , DSO ; 
 Lieutenant Colonel Walter <unk> Dexter , DSO ; 
 Lieutenant Colonel Terrence Joseph Farrell . 
 = Illegal ( song ) = 
 " Illegal " is a song recorded by Colombian singer @-@ songwriter Shakira for her seventh studio album , Oral Fixation , Vol . 2 ( 2005 ) . It was written and produced by Shakira and Lester Mendez and it features Mexican guitarist Carlos Santana . Epic Records released the song as the album 's third and final single on November 6 , 2006 , following the release of " Hips Don 't Lie " . " Illegal " is a pop and country ballad with lyrics concerning mourning of a past lover complete with an understated vocal performance by Shakira and an electric guitar riff by Santana throughout . It received mixed reviews from music critics , who compared it with Alanis Morissette 's material and were mixed towards Santana 's contribution . 
 The song achieved moderate success , topping the chart in Romania and the US Dance Club Songs chart and peaking <unk> the top ten in Austria , Italy , Netherlands , Hungary and Switzerland among other countries . The music video for the song , co @-@ directed by Jaume de Laiguana and Shakira , had its premiere on November 16 , 2006 on MTV 's Total Request Live ( TRL ) . It features the singer portraying a girlfriend of a boxer and follows a similar storyline to the song 's lyrics . " Illegal " has been performed by the singer live on few occasions , such as during the MTV 5 Star event ( 2005 ) and Good Morning America ( 2006 ) . 
 = = Composition and production = = 
 " Illegal " is a ballad with lyrics revolving around mourning for the loss of a lover , as seen in the lines , " It should be illegal to deceive a woman 's heart " . It contains elements of pop and country music . Spence D. of the website IGN felt that Shakira adopted an " almost modern day country @-@ styled pop aesthetic " . Throughout the song , her vocals are subdued , complete with " rolling delivering , breathy <unk> , and ... trill " . AllMusic reviewer Stephen Thomas Erlewine noted that the lyrics " You said you would love me until you died / And as far as I know you 're still alive " were similar to Alanis Morissette 's " You Oughta Know " ( 1995 ) . 
 " Illegal " was written and produced by Shakira and Lester Mendez , with all additional production handled by Jose " <unk> " Torres . Mexican guitarist Carlos Santana appears as a featured artist on the song , playing an electrical guitar throughout . The guitar was also played by Lyle Workman . The other instruments featured in the song are keyboards played by Lester Mendez , bass by Paul Bushnell , drums by Shawn Pelton and percussion by Luis <unk> . The mixing was done by Rob Jacobs while the audio engineering was finished by Kevin Killen , Serge " <unk> " Tsai and Vlado Meller , who mastered the song with the assistance of Mark <unk> . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 The song has received polarized reviews from music critics . A writer of Billboard was very positive towards the song , calling it " gorgeous " and Shakira 's " most understated performance to date " . He further praised Santana 's quiet guitar contribution , comparing it to " tears accompanying the loss " . The critic finished his review by concluding that time would be needed for channels streaming the song to propel it to the top 40 of the charts , " but this forlorn masterpiece is as instantly reactive on the slow side as ' Whenever , Wherever ' was on the fast " . In a review of Oral Fixation , Vol . 2 , Thomas Erlewine said that Shakira takes her music into unexpected directions with " Illegal " . Matt Cibula , in a review for PopMatters , found country music elements on the song , adding that its chorus could easily make it a CMT number @-@ one single . A Dotmusic journalist praised the singer 's vocal performance in the song as a proof that she " certainly has a sweet croon " . Spence D. of IGN also praised her vocals in the quiet song and complimented Santana 's performance for bringing " nice ambiance " . Entertainment Weekly 's David Browne gave a more mixed review , opining that " ' Don 't Bother ' and ' Illegal ' are sister @-@ of @-@ Alanis catfights we 've heard before " . Barry Walters from Rolling Stone said that Santana 's contribution in the song was " instantly recognizable and somewhat disruptive " . Similarly , Lauren Murphy from entertainment.ie felt that his " conscription " and riff contribution to the song was " somewhat lackluster " . A writer of E ! Online dubbed " Illegal " a " total buzzkill " . 
 Robert Copsey of the website Digital Spy placed the song seventh on his list of Shakira 's ten best songs , published in 2014 writing that " it hasn 't aged a day " . The same year , Emily Exton of VH1 placed the track on her list of Shakira 's best duets , summarizing " The pained musings of a woman scorned , punctuated by the legend ’ s iconic guitar groove " . A writer of the website Telemundo included " Illegal " on his list of Shakira 's best musical collaborations in 2015 . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 In the United States , " Illegal " managed to top the Billboard Dance Club Songs chart for the week of February 10 , 2007 . On the UK Singles Chart , the single debuted at the position of 94 on December 16 , 2006 and it moved to its peak position of 34 the following week . It spent a total of four weeks on the chart . On the charts in Austria , " Illegal " debuted at number nine on December 8 , 2006 which later became its peak position on the chart on which it gradually descended for seventeen weeks , appearing for the last time on the chart issue of April 13 , 2007 . At the end of 2007 , it emerged as the 66th top single in that country 's year @-@ end chart . The single debuted at number ten in its first week of charting on the Swiss Hitparade on December 3 , 2006 and it spent a total of 21 weeks in that country . In Germany , " Illegal " rose to the position of eleven and was ranked 76th on the 2007 year @-@ end chart in that country . On November 23 2006 , " Illegal " debuted at number nine on the Italian Singles Chart and then rose to number four in its ninth week of charting , on January 18 , 2007 . It spent fourteen consecutive weeks in the chart 's top twenty and was last seen on February 22 , 2007 . Inside the Romanian Top 100 , " Illegal " was Shakira 's fourth single to reach the number @-@ one position on January 22 , 2007 . It held the top spot for five non @-@ consecutive weeks . The single further peaked at numbers three , four and six on the charts in Slovakia , the Czech Republic and Hungary , respectively . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The music video for " Illegal " was shot in Mexico City on October 17 , 2006 , during a short break in the schedule of the Oral Fixation Tour , between concerts in Mexico and Guatemala . Jaume de Laiguana and Shakira were the co @-@ directors of the video . The filming took a full day , and some American and Mexican fans were invited over as extras . It officially premiered on November 16 , 2006 on MTV 's Total Request Live ( TRL ) . The video features Shakira as the girlfriend of a boxer . Throughout most of the video , she is shown in the empty boxing venue where her former boyfriend boxes . Through flashbacks , she remembers the good times in their relationship - including being alone in the ring , affectionately treating each other . At the end of the video , the reason behind their break @-@ up is shown . Shakira comes to see her boyfriend boxing in the championship match where he wins , unaware that Shakira is there watching him . Another girl steps in the ring and kisses the boxer , revealing to Shakira he is cheating on her . Her boyfriend , to his shock , finally sees that Shakira is watching him kiss the other girl . The video ends with her looking back at him , clearly hurt , before turning away and leaving . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 An MTV 5 Star performance of the song from 2005 , was uploaded to Shakira 's official Vevo account on March 24 , 2011 . In December , 2006 , " Illegal " was performed during the singer 's appearance at Good Morning America . 
 = = Track listing and formats = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits and personnel adapted from the liner notes of Oral Fixation Vol . 2 . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Release = = 
 = = = Process = = = 
 " Illegal " was released as a CD single on November 6 , 2006 . An EP of the song featuring two versions of the song and " La Tortura " was available for digital download on December 9 , 2006 . A second , enhanced CD single featuring two versions of the song along with " La Tortura " and its music video was released on December 18 , 2006 . 
 = = = History = = = 
 = Hog Island sheep = 
 Hog Island sheep are a breed of sheep descended from animals first brought to Virginia 's Hog Island in the 18th century . During the 1930s and 1940s , storm conditions forced the island 's residents to evacuate , leaving some sheep behind . These sheep adapted to the environment free of human intervention , becoming feral . 
 The breed is preserved by various organizations because of its relevance to American history and its resemblance to historical American sheep . It also possesses some traits that have been somewhat lost in more modern breeds . 
 = = Breed characteristics = = 
 The Hog Island sheep is a feral breed , descended from sheep abandoned on Hog Island in the 1930s and 1940s . It is believed that the breed was descended from the Merino breed , among others , possibly the Improved Leicester or other English breeds . The sheep is relatively small but tough and hardy . Rams weigh on average 125 pounds ( 57 kg ) and ewes 90 pounds ( 41 kg ) . Lambs are born with spotted or speckled fleece ; about 90 % of adults have white fleece and 10 % black . Both males and females can have horns , and about half the total population do . 
 The Hog Island sheep is not commonly used in modern agriculture , largely because of its endangered status and because more modern breeds have been bred for other characteristics , including maximum size and fleece yield . It is nevertheless considered important to preserve because of the insight it may give into American history and the traits it has that modern sheep might lack such as its toughness , foraging skill , efficient use of food , and easy lambing . 
 = = History = = 
 Hog Island was colonized in the 17th century . The sheep that colonists would have been using at the time would have been the contemporary English breeds , but Merinos were known to roam the barrier islands , taken there by Spanish ships that wrecked and let the sheep loose . The colonists would have used some combination of these sheep in their flocks . 
 As an island , Hog Island had open space and lacked predators , therefore the colonists allowed their livestock to roam free , rounding them up only to mark them or to use them for meat or wool . In 1933 a hurricane destroyed most of the island ; the inhabitants abandoned the settled areas and many sheep were left to fend for themselves , reverting to a feral state . The Nature Conservancy bought the island in the 1970s , rounded up the sheep , and removed them to prevent overgrazing . The breed is extremely rare today ; with fewer than 200 registered animals it is listed as " Critical " by The Livestock Conservancy . 
 = = = Research and conservation ( after rediscovery ) = = = 
 When the Nature Conservancy bought Hog Island , most of the sheep were bought by private owners . Some were taken to Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University , where they were studied to determine why they were relatively free of parasites ; the researchers concluded that the sheep had no special resistance to parasites but were simply isolated from them by their habitat . The sheep were then sent to institutions such as George Washington 's birthplace , Mount Vernon , and Colonial Williamsburg for preservation . The United States Department of Agriculture 's National Animal Germplasm Program has collected semen samples from several of the sheep as part of a program that aims to preserve the genetic material of animals significant to American history . Because Hog Island sheep resemble the small , short @-@ fleeced sheep that would have been raised in colonial farms for meat and wool , they ( or a cross between them and Dorset sheep , a combination called " American Site sheep " ) are used in exhibits to recreate the look and feel of a historical farm . 
 Because the Hog Island sheep population is so small , the preservation of the breed through a pure , inbred line would threaten the breed 's health by an increased risk of pairing of " bad genes " . <unk> and atypical @-@ looking sheep have been reported by some breeders . In response , some breeders have crossed Hog Island sheep with other breeds , including Gulf Coast Native sheep , and then bred the offspring with pure Hog Island sheep , producing almost pure Hog Island sheep except for the addition of some genetic diversity . 
 = Mitsubishi i @-@ MiEV = 
 The Mitsubishi i @-@ MiEV ( MiEV is an acronym for Mitsubishi innovative Electric Vehicle ) is a five @-@ door hatchback electric car produced by Mitsubishi Motors , and is the electric version of the Mitsubishi i . <unk> variants of the i @-@ MiEV are also sold in Europe by PSA Peugeot Citroën ( PSA ) as the Peugeot iOn and Citroën C @-@ Zero . The i @-@ MiEV is the world 's first modern highway @-@ capable mass production electric car . 
 The i @-@ MiEV was launched for fleet customers in Japan in July 2009 , and on April 1 , 2010 , for the wider public . International sales to Asia , Australia and Europe started in 2010 , with further markers in 2011 including Central and South America . Fleet and retail customer deliveries in the U.S. and Canada began in December 2011 . The American @-@ only version , called " i " , is larger than the Japanese version and has several additional features . 
 According to the manufacturer , the i @-@ MiEV all @-@ electric range is 160 kilometres ( 100 mi ) on the Japanese test cycle . The range for the 2012 model year American version is 62 miles ( 100 km ) on the United States Environmental Protection Agency 's ( US EPA ) cycle . In November 2011 the Mitsubishi i ranked first in EPA ’ s 2012 Annual Fuel Economy Guide , and became the most fuel efficient EPA certified vehicle in the U.S. for all fuels ever , until it was surpassed by the Honda Fit EV in June 2012 and the BMW i3 , Chevrolet Spark , Volkswagen e @-@ Golf , and Fiat <unk> in succeeding years . 
 As of July 2014 , about 32 @,@ 000 i @-@ MiEV family passenger vehicles have been sold worldwide , with Japan as the leading market with over 10 @,@ 000 i @-@ MiEVs sold , followed by Norway with more than 4 @,@ 900 units , France with over 4 @,@ 700 units , Germany with more than 2 @,@ 400 units , all three European countries accounting for the three variants of the i @-@ MiEV family sold in Europe ; and the United States with over 1 @,@ 800 i @-@ MiEVs sold through August 2014 . As of early March 2015 , and accounting for all variants of the i @-@ MiEV , including the two minicab MiEV versions sold in Japan , global sales totaled over 50 @,@ 000 units since 2009 . 
 = = History = = 
 Mitsubishi i @-@ MiEV , based on the Mitsubishi i kei car , was first exhibited at the 22nd International Battery , Hybrid and Fuel Cell Electric Vehicle Symposium & Exposition in Yokohama . Mitsubishi eschews the in @-@ wheel motors ( <unk> ) in favour of a more conventional array of batteries , motor and inverter to replace the " rear midship " engine and fuel tank of the conventional car . Mitsubishi Motors provided three power companies with vehicles in 2006 and 2007 in order to conduct joint research to evaluate how fast @-@ charge infrastructure may be developed for EVs . Fleet testing by five power companies was conducted in 2007 . The car had a range of 130 kilometres ( 80 mi ) for the 16 kW • h lithium @-@ ion battery pack and 160 kilometres ( 100 mi ) for the 20 kW • h pack . Top speed was 130 kilometres per hour ( 80 mph ) . 
 Plans were announced in 2008 to sell the i @-@ MiEV in European markets as the Peugeot iOn and Citroën C @-@ Zero . Mitsubishi began supplying the electric cars to PSA Peugeot Citroën ( PSA ) since 2010 , and PSA has a contractual commitment to buy 100 @,@ 000 i @-@ MiEVs over a period that remained confidential . 
 = = Specifications = = 
 = = = Powertrain = = = 
 The production version of the 2009 i @-@ MiEV has a single permanent magnet synchronous motor mounted on the rear axle with a power output of 47 kW and torque output 180 N • m . The motor is water cooled , there is a conventional automobile radiator in the front of the car with an electric fan . The coolant ( with antifreeze ) level is monitored via a tank under the rear load platform on the left hand side of the vehicle . ( See picture adjoining . ) 
 The vehicle uses a single @-@ speed reduction gear transmission driving the rear wheels and has a 16 kWh lithium @-@ ion battery pack . The car 's top speed is 130 kilometres per hour ( 80 mph ) . 
 Under its five @-@ cycle testing , the US EPA rated the American 2012 model year Mitsubishi i with a combined fuel economy equivalent of 112 MPGe ( 2 @.@ 1 L / 100 km ) , with an equivalent 126 mpg @-@ US ( 1 @.@ 87 L / 100 km ; 151 mpg @-@ imp ) in city driving and 99 mpg @-@ US ( 2 @.@ 4 L / 100 km ; 119 mpg @-@ imp ) on highways . This rating allowed the 2012 Mitsubishi i to get a higher MPG @-@ e rating than the 2011 Nissan Leaf , which was rated at 99 MPGe ( 2 @.@ 4 L / 100 km ) combined , but the Leaf rated a better range due to the Mitsubishi i 's smaller battery pack . 
 = = = Battery = = = 
 The 16 @-@ kilowatt @-@ hour ( 58 MJ ) lithium @-@ ion battery pack consists of 88 cells placed under the base floor . The pack has 22 cell modules connected in series at a nominal voltage of 330 V. There are two 4 @-@ cell modules placed vertically at the center of the pack and ten 8 @-@ cell modules placed horizontally . Developed by Mitsubishi and GS Yuasa for both high specific energy and high rate discharge and manufactured by Lithium Energy Japan , a joint venture of GS Yuasa Corporation , Mitsubishi Corporation and Mitsubishi Motors Corporation . The entire pack has a specific energy of 80 Wh / kg . The battery has a forced air cooling system to prevent overheating during high charge and discharge rates and consequent damage . There is an integral fan in the battery pack . For rapid charging , the battery pack is additionally cooled with refrigerated air from the cars air conditioning system . 
 In June 2011 Mitsubishi announced the introduction of lithium titanate oxide SCiB battery technology for its two new models of electric vehicles , the i @-@ MiEV and Minicab MiEV . The SCiB technology was developed by Toshiba , which stated that its SCiB batteries can withstand 2 @.@ 5 times more charge / discharge cycles than a typical lithium @-@ ion battery . In addition , recharging via CHAdeMO takes much less time than charging at the AC Level 2 rate used by most electric vehicle supply equipment ( EVSE ) , allowing the SCiB battery to reach 80 % capacity in 15 minutes , 50 % in 10 minutes and 25 % in 5 minutes . In terms of performance , the SCiB battery offers a higher effective capacity than a typical lithium @-@ ion battery , which combined with more efficient regenerative charging during braking or coasting downhill , allows the SCiB battery to deliver 1 @.@ 7 times the driving range per charge of a typical lithium @-@ ion battery of the same size . Alternatively , the carmaker could install a smaller battery with less weight and keep the same range to contribute to lower the vehicle price as compared to lithium @-@ ion batteries . Recharging is estimated to take 14 hours from a 110 volt power supply , 7 hours from a 220 volt power supply and as little as 30 minutes from a quick charging station . The SCiB is available in the Japanese market . The U.S. has a more typical lithium ion battery . 
 = = = Charging ( types and modes ) = = = 
 It includes two types of connectors : 
 <unk> : On the left hand side of the car towards the rear is the “ rapid ” DC CHAdeMO charging <unk> at 125 Amps . It is beneath a cover ( released from inside the car ) , there is a dust cover beneath to keep out insects etc . There are two large pins ( for the charging current ) and eight small ones for control circuitry . The cable used for this purpose is captive to the roadside charging point . When the car is on fast ( DC ) charge , the air conditioning system is automatically started and refrigerated air is blown through the battery pack for cooling purposes . There is a <unk> flap in the ventilation system for this . From depletion , the battery may be charged to 80 % full in 20 minutes using this socket . 
 Mennekes : On the right hand side of the car is the “ fast ” and “ slow ” AC charging point , accessed in a similar way to the DC charge point . This is a five pin <unk> @-@ 2 Type 2 point . Three large pins are the line , neutral and earth / ground . The two small pins are a control circuit . This circuit enables the charge current to be cut off when charging is complete , cuts off power if the plug is removed from the vehicle ( the plug and socket are both <unk> ) , prevents both rapid and fast charging being done simultaneously and also prevents the vehicle from being driven while the plug is inserted . For “ fast charging ” , the control box ( mounted at the roadside ) is limited to 20 amps enabling a charge time ( from depletion ) of four hours . For “ slow charging ” , a non @-@ captive lead / cord is provided with the car . It is intended for use in the home or other domestic places . This has a local plug at one end and a Mennekes connector at the other . The Mennekes plug has a retaining trigger with a hole for a padlock to prevent the plug from being removed from the car if deemed necessary . There is a “ floating ” control box in the middle of this lead / cord that functions similarly to the fast charger but limits current to 10 amps so enabling an eight @-@ hour charge time ( from complete depletion on 230 volts ) 
 = = = Emergency power supply and V2G = = = 
 In the aftermath of the 2011 Tōhoku earthquake and tsunami , Mitsubishi introduced one year ahead of schedule a device called MiEV Power Box that enables the i @-@ MiEV to supply power to home electric appliances in the event of a power outage or natural disasters . The device provides 100 @-@ volt outlets , converting the i @-@ MiEV 's direct current ( DC ) battery power into 100 volts alternating current ( AC ) to power up to 1 @,@ 500 watts of small electrical equipment . Mitsubishi estimates that the i @-@ MiEV total battery capacity is enough to provide power for between 5 and 6 hours , equivalent to one day of power consumed by an average Japanese home . The device was scheduled to be available by the end of April 2012 , at a cost of ¥ 149 @,@ 800 ( US $ 1 @,@ 800 ) but as of November 2013 it is not clear if this is widely available . 
 On the other hand , Mitsubishi <unk> ( Home Energy Management System ) , is the V2G system . 
 = = = Regeneration control = = = 
 The manufacturers have made every effort to make the very different technology of this car appear similar to conventional cars . The lever between the front seats appears to be an automatic transmission control but is not so , though it works in a similar fashion . It is in fact a switch which reverses the electric motor and also offers a degree of control ( European cars ) over the regeneration . Correct use of the regeneration control can influence the range of the car . As well as " park " " neutral " and " reverse " there are three regeneration positions , intended for city driving , hilly terrain , and flat terrain respectively . Used correctly , on most journeys , a large percentage of kinetic energy and potential energy can be returned to the battery . Lifting off the accelerator / ” gas ” pedal also induces regeneration as does light pressure on the foot brake . The only other mechanical losses are frictional . The main loss is aerodynamic drag which is proportional to the square of speed , hence high speeds are inefficient and reduce range . Regeneration and power consumption can be monitored by the driver with an analogue instrument on the dashboard / control panel which shows both instantaneous power consumed and regeneration . 
 = = = Electrical equipment = = = 
 The heating of the passenger cab is by a conventional " wet " automotive system . Heat is derived from the traction battery via a resistance element . Use of the heater significantly reduces range . The traction motor cooling system runs at much lower temperatures than in a conventional car and is therefore separate from the cab heating system . While the car is charging , the interior can be preheated to alleviate the range reduction problem . 
 The car is fitted with air conditioning . The compressor is located beneath the HVAC controls in the car and has its own electric motor driven from the traction battery via a dedicated inverter . The condenser is mounted in front of the traction cooling radiator at the front of the car . The evaporator is inside the HVAC control . Use of the air conditioning system can significantly reduce range . To alleviate this , the car can be set to " <unk> " whilst on charge . A remote control / timer device is provided that controls the preheat function , air conditioning and also controls and monitors battery charging . 
 There is an auxiliary , <unk> conventional lead acid battery under the bonnet / hood for the accessories . It is also needed to control and charge the main traction battery and to start the vehicle . It is charged from the main traction battery via a DC @-@ DC voltage reduction device . If it is discharged , the vehicle cannot be started , neither can the main traction battery be charged . Use of 12 volt " jump cables " from another vehicles is possible . 
 The steering is rack and pinion with electric power assistance . 
 An emergency cutoff for main battery is located under the front left hand seat . If the car is involved in a collision , there is a cutoff switch that is operated by the " G " forces involved . 
 = = = Wheels = = = 
 The front and rear wheels are different sizes . Instead of a spare wheel , a roadside repair kit with a 12 volt electric compressor ( plugs into cigarette lighter ) and a bottle of repair fluid is located under the cushion of the rear passenger seat . 
 = = = Braking system = = = 
 The braking system is conventional hydraulic ( Power assisted ) with disk brakes at the front and drum brakes at the rear . Anti @-@ lock Braking System and Traction Control System is fitted . The hand / parking brake is cable operated , acting on the rear wheels . The hydraulic fluid reservoir is under the front bonnet / hood . As there is no manifold vacuum , there is an electric vacuum pump located under the rear loading platform . There are interlocks on the braking system so that the starting up process can only be initiated when the brake pedal is pressed . 
 = = = Range = = = 
 The all @-@ electric range is 100 miles ( 160 km ) on the Japanese test cycle . Two additional trim levels will be available in Japan beginning in late July 2011 , the entry @-@ level “ M ” with a 10 @.@ 5 kWh battery pack has a reduced range of 120 kilometres ( 75 mi ) , and the higher @-@ level " G " with the same a 16 @.@ 0 kWh battery as the original i @-@ MiEV has a range of 180 kilometres ( 110 mi ) . The " G " trim will be available by mid August . 
 The US EPA official range for the 2012 model year American " i " version is 100 kilometres ( 62 mi ) based on the five @-@ cycle tests using varying driving conditions and climate controls . Under the <unk> driving cycle for city conditions , EPA 's rated range is 98 miles ( 158 km ) . According to the carmaker , the city range of the 2012 Mitsubishi i was improved as compared to the previous i @-@ MiEV versions , through software upgrades and a revamped regenerative braking system . 
 The Australian Government 's Green Vehicle Guide estimated the i @-@ MiEV 's range to be 155 kilometres ( 96 mi ) . 
 In practice range is affected by driving style , <unk> of the terrain , speed and use of passenger compartment heating and cooling . Strong head and following winds also make a noticeable difference . 
 = = = Towing the car ( breakdown ) = = = 
 The drive system is permanently connected to the rear wheels . This means that if there is mechanical damage to the power train the vehicle must be transported / towed with the rear ( driving ) wheels off the ground to prevent further damage . For other problems so long as power is available for the braking and steering system , the vehicle can be conventionally towed subject to instructions in the owner 's manual . Using the car to tow trailers is not recommended . 
 = = = Safety = = = 
 The European New Car Assessment Programme ( Euro NCAP ) awarded the i @-@ MiEV a four star car safety rating , earning the following ratings for each criteria . The tested model was a left @-@ hand @-@ drive 5 @-@ door hatchback registered in 2011 : 
 Euro NCAP also states that it " believes that the star rating of the i @-@ MiEV can also be applied to the Citroën C @-@ Zero " because the agency was informed that the Citroën C @-@ Zero is structurally identical to the Mitsubishi i @-@ MiEV and has the same interior fitting and levels of safety equipment . 
 The Australasian New Car Assessment Program ( ANCAP ) rated the i @-@ MiEV four out of five stars for crash safety , scoring 28 @.@ 35 out of 37 . This score takes into account a 10 @.@ 95 out of 16 rating in the frontal offset crash test , and a score of 14 @.@ 4 out of 16 received for the side impact test . 
 The U.S. National Highway Traffic Safety Administration ( NHTSA ) gave the 2012 model year i @-@ Miev a four out of five star crash rating . 
 = = = = Fire incident = = = = 
 In March 2013 Mitsubishi Motors reported two separate incidents with lithium @-@ ion batteries used in its plug @-@ in electric cars , one with an i @-@ MiEV and the other with an Outlander P @-@ HEV whose battery pack overheated and melted some of the battery cells . The battery packs are produced by GS Yuasa , the same company that supplies the batteries for the Boeing 787 Dreamliner , whose entire fleet was grounded in January 2013 for lithium @-@ ion battery problems . The lithium @-@ ion battery of an i @-@ MiEV caught fire at the Mizushima battery pack assembly plant on March 18 while connected to charge @-@ discharge test equipment . Mitsubishi did not issue a recall , but halted production and sales of the two models until it determines the causes of the battery problems . According to Mitsubishi , the problem with the i @-@ MiEV battery pack is related with a change in the GS Yuasa manufacturing process , and the carmaker notified fleet @-@ vehicle operators with i @-@ MiEVs whose batteries were made under the same process as those that overheated , and is working on a possible fix . 
 = = Production = = 
 Full production of the i @-@ MiEV started in July 2009 and Mitsubishi expected initial sales volume to be small , to sell up to 1 @,@ 400 vehicles by March 2010 , but expected sales to rise to 5 @,@ 000 vehicles in the following twelve months , once retail sales had started . Mitsubishi decided to target sales to corporate customers in Japan at first to allow local governments and businesses to set up recharging stations around the country . The company said initial sales were constrained by production capacity but expects production to ramp up quickly from 2 @,@ 000 units in 2009 / 10 to 30 @,@ 000 vehicles within three years as it expands production of lithium @-@ ion battery through Lithium Energy Japan , a joint venture with GS Yuasa Corporation and Mitsubishi Corporation . Production was projected to increase to 9 @,@ 000 units in its fiscal year 2010 / 11 , and to 18 @,@ 000 in the following twelve months . 
 Production of the left @-@ hand drive European @-@ spec i @-@ MiEV began in October 2010 . By the end of November 2010 cumulative production had reached 5 @,@ 000 units at <unk> 's Mizushima Plant . In May 2011 Mitsubishi announced a new production target of 25 @,@ 000 i @-@ MiEVs worldwide in fiscal year 2011 . The carmaker also plans to export about 15 @,@ 000 units overseas , mainly to Europe , where the company will promote sales to the European public sector , such as police departments and local governments . Production of the American @-@ spec i electric car began in late October 2011 . Since July 2009 Mitsubishi had manufactured more than 33 @,@ 000 i @-@ MiEVs and <unk> versions by March 2013 , including more than 11 @,@ 000 units rebadged in France as Peugeot iOn and Citroën C @-@ Zero , and sold in the European market . 
 In August 2012 , and as a result of Europe 's debt crisis that resulted in PSA Peugeot Citroen ( PSA ) Group slow sales , Mitsubishi Motors announced the suspension of its supply of the i @-@ MiEV electric vehicle to PSA , although the period for supplying vehicles under their contract as part of original equipment manufacturer agreements has not yet ended . The suspension is part of the decision of several Japanese manufacturers to suspend their joint development projects and contracts with several European partners . By early August 2012 , PSA had sold a total of 6 @,@ 575 Peugeot iOns and Citroën C @-@ Zeros since their launch in Europe in 2010 , while Mitsubishi had assembled almost 11 @,@ 000 electric cars destined to PSA , leaving the French carmaker with more than 4 @,@ 400 electric cars in unsold inventory . PSA only sold 50 % of the sales target set for 2011 and according to PSA the supply was only temporarily interrupted . 
 In May 2014 , PSA Peugeot Citroen Chief Executive , Carlos Tavares , announced that the carmaker will decide over the next 12 months whether to continue selling electric vehicles manufactured by its partner Mitsubishi . Sales of both of PSA rebadged electric cars fell significantly from 2012 to 2013 as a result of new competition from Nissan , Renault and BMW . 
 = = Markets and sales = = 
 The i @-@ MiEV was launched for fleet customers in Japan in July 2009 , becoming the world 's first modern highway @-@ capable mass production electric car . Sales to retail customers began in Japan in April 2010 . The Mitsubishi i MiEV was the first electric car to sell more than 10 @,@ 000 units , including the models badged in Europe as Citroën C @-@ Zero and Peugeot iOn . The record , officially registered by Guinness World Records , was reached on February 2011 . Several months later , the Nissan Leaf overtook the i MiEV as the best selling all @-@ electric car . 
 Accounting for all vehicles of the <unk> brand , Mitsubishi reported around 27 @,@ 200 units sold or exported since 2009 through December 2012 , including the minicab MiEVs sold in Japan , and the units rebadged and sold as Peugeot iOn and Citroën C @-@ Zero in the European market . As of July 2014 , about 32 @,@ 000 i @-@ MiEV family passenger cars have been sold worldwide since 2009 , with Japan as the top selling country market with 10 @,@ 011 i @-@ MiEVs sold . All three variants of the i @-@ MiEV family have sold over 17 @,@ 500 units in Europe as of July 2014 , with registrations led by Norway with 4 @,@ 920 units registered , followed by France with 4 @,@ 710 units , and Germany with 2 @,@ 419 units . The fifth largest country market is the United States , with 1 @,@ 831 i @-@ MiEVs sold through August 2014 . As of early March 2015 , and accounting for all variants of the i @-@ MiEV , including the two minicab versions sold in Japan , over 50 @,@ 000 units have been sold worldwide since 2009 . 
 = = = Australia = = = 
 During early 2009 the i @-@ MiEV was exhibited in Australia at the Melbourne International Motor Show , and afterwards was toured throughout the country . Beginning in mid 2009 , Mitsubishi conducted a twelve @-@ month field trial with potential electric vehicle customers , such as local , state and federal government bodies , and major fleet operators . 
 Sales for fleet customers began in Australia in August 2010 under leasing agreement at a price of A $ 1 @,@ 740 a month for 36 months , for a cumulative total of A $ 62 @,@ 640 after which the car has to be returned to the dealer . The initial shipment included only 40 units , but Mitsubishi Motors Australia reported that just before the launch it had received applications for more than 100 vehicles from private companies and government departments . The initial batch of vehicles leased to government and corporate fleets totals 112 vehicles . 
 Retail sales to the public began in August 2011 . Currently , there are no government incentive or rebate schemes for purchasing fuel @-@ efficient vehicles in the country . The new Australian i @-@ MiEV version is similar to the European @-@ spec model released in 2011 , with minor changes such as new three @-@ spoke alloy wheels , a few minor exterior tweaks including dark tinted headlights and a revised front bumper with fog lights . With an Australian Design Rules approved range of 155 km ( 96 mi ) , the Australian @-@ spec i @-@ MiEV is sold for A $ 48 @,@ 800 ( US $ 51 @,@ 444 as of July 2011 ) through specially equipped Mitsubishi dealerships ( one in each capital city and two in Sydney ) . Mitsubishi anticipates 5 sales to the public per month . Since then a large number of dealerships across Australia have purchased scoops of these vehicles and most dealerships ( mainly in Victoria ) have a single i @-@ Miev in their showrooms at prices never seen in this market before . During 2011 a total of 30 i MiEVs were sold , and cumulative sales reached 252 units through December 2013 . As of March 2014 , Mitsubishi is no longer selling the i @-@ MiEV due to slow sales . 
 = = = Canada = = = 
 In January 2009 , Hydro @-@ Québec and Mitsubishi signed an agreement to test 50 i @-@ MiEV , the largest pilot test of electric cars in Canada ever . The test 's goal was to allow a better understanding of winter usage of the technology . BC @-@ Hydro and Mitsubishi had previously tested a three @-@ vehicle fleet in British Columbia . The first five i @-@ MiEVs were delivered in December 2010 and were assigned to staff from the city of <unk> . In October 2010 , Transport Canada and Mitsubishi Motor Sales of Canada announced a partnership to test the Mitsubishi i @-@ MiEV . Transport Canada ’ s <unk> for Vehicles ( <unk> ) Program tested two i @-@ MiEVs in government facilities and in a variety of real @-@ world conditions . This program aim was to evaluate the i @-@ MiEV road performance and range . 
 Retail sales of the i @-@ MiEV began in December 2011 at a starting price of CA $ 32 @,@ 998 ( US $ 33 @,@ 891 ) before any government incentives available in Ontario and Quebec . Cumulative sales through December 2014 reached 496 units . 
 Mitsubishi sells the US i @-@ MiEV version in Canada , although the international version was used in test fleets , and two trims are offered , standard and premium . The premium package price is CA $ 35 @,@ 998 ( US $ 36 @,@ 972 ) and includes leather @-@ wrapped steering wheel and shift knob , 15 @-@ inch alloy wheels , premium audio system , HDD Navigation system , Bluetooth 2 @.@ 0 hands @-@ free cellular phone interface with streaming audio and USB input with voice control . 
 = = = Europe = = = 
 The European version of the i @-@ MiEV was introduced at the 2010 Paris Motor Show . Specific features of the European version include a new design to the front and rear bumpers to meet EU regulations , re @-@ arranged center stack in the instrument panel , improved interior comfort and both active and passive safety features have been improved with the addition of Active Stability Control ( ASC ) , as well as side and curtain airbags , all included as standard equipment . The European MiEV achieves an all @-@ electric range of 150 kilometres ( 93 mi ) under the European <unk> driving pattern . 
 Mass production of the European i @-@ MiEV began in October 2010 at Mitsubishi 's Mizushima plant , along with production of its siblings by PSA Peugeot Citroën , the Peugeot iOn and the Citroën C @-@ Zero . In January 2011 , Mitsubishi shipped 2 @,@ 500 i @-@ MiEVs from Japan and began sales in 15 countries : Austria , Belgium , Denmark , France , Germany , Ireland , Italy , the Netherlands , Norway , Poland , Portugal , Spain , Sweden , Switzerland , and the United Kingdom , and further expand the European roll out through 2011 . Mitsubishi also run demonstration programs with the i @-@ MiEV in the Principality of Monaco , Iceland , and Denmark . The price of the European version vary by country <unk> set to around € 33 @,@ 000 to € 35 @,@ 000 ( US $ 41 @,@ 900 to US $ 44 @,@ 400 ) . The carmaker aimed for a final cost to the customer of under € 30 @,@ 000 ( US $ 38 @,@ 000 ) or equivalent after government incentives . 
 = = = = Austria = = = = 
 Retail deliveries began in 2011 . A total of 704 units have been registered in Austria through December 2013 , including 332 C @-@ Zeros , 254 i MiEVs , and 118 iOns . 
 = = = = Denmark = = = = 
 Deliveries began in 2011 . A total of 550 units have been registered in Denmark through December 2013 , including 227 iOns , 202 C @-@ Zeros , and 121 i MiEVs . 
 = = = = Estonia = = = = 
 On March 3 , 2011 , the government of Estonia confirmed the sale to Mitsubishi Corporation of 10 million carbon dioxide credits in exchange for 507 i @-@ MiEV electric cars . The deal also includes funding to build 250 express charging stations in larger towns and main highways by 2013 , and will subsidize the first 500 private buyers of any electric car approved by the European Union . The first 50 i @-@ MiEVs were delivered in October 2011 and this official fleet will be assigned for use by municipal social workers . During the first round of allocations of the electric cars , municipalities requested only 336 of the 507 i @-@ MiEVs available . Several local authorities have stated concerns about the electric car performance during harsh winter conditions , maintenance costs and the i @-@ MiEV ' reliability on difficult countryside roads . 
 = = = = France = = = = 
 The i @-@ MiEV family sold 1 @,@ 326 units in 2011 , representing a market share of 50 @.@ 4 % of electric car sales in France . Sales were led by the Citroën C @-@ Zero with 645 units followed by the Peugeot iOns with 639 vehicles , and the i @-@ MiEVs with 42 units sold in 2011 . In 2011 PSA Peugeot Citroën was awarded a contract to supply 3 @,@ 900 electric cars to the French Government , to be used by government officials in Paris . Since its introduction in 2010 , the i @-@ MiEV family has sold 4 @,@ 772 units through December 2014 , including 2 @,@ 419 iOns , 2 @,@ 241 C @-@ Zeros , and 112 i @-@ MiEVs . 
 The C @-@ Zero is available for rental starting at € 35 ( US $ 51 ) for half a day . The electric car is rented by the <unk> vehicle rental service in selected French cities . The C @-@ Zero is available in the Paris region at six locations : the Gare Montparnasse , Gare de Lyon and Gare du Nord train stations , Paris @-@ Orly Airport , Porte <unk> and Nanterre . 
 = = = = Germany = = = = 
 The i @-@ MiEV was launched in Germany in December 2010 at a price of € 34 @,@ 990 ( ~ US $ 51 @,@ 000 ) . Germany does not have government purchase subsidies . The only incentive available is an exemption from the annual circulation tax for a period of five years from the date of first registration . On August 30 , 2012 , approximately 100 Citroen C @-@ Zeros were deployed in Berlin as part of the <unk> <unk> program . The number of cars is expected to grow to 500 by year end . Sales of the i @-@ MiEV family represented 50 @.@ 6 % of all electric car sales in the country in 2011 . Combined sales of the three variants peaked in 2011 , with 1 @,@ 146 units registered , and then fell to 788 units in 2012 and 413 in 2013 . As of December 2014 , a total of 2 @,@ 494 units have been sold consisting of 976 i @-@ MiEVs , 965 C @-@ Zeros , and 553 iOns . 
 = = = = Italy = = = = 
 Retail deliveries began in February 2011 . Cumulative sales totaled 540 units through December 2013 including 295 C @-@ Zeros , 189 iOns and 56 i @-@ MiEVs . 
 = = = = Netherlands = = = = 
 Since its launch in the Netherlands in 2011 , a total of 563 units have been sold through December 2013 , including 266 iOns , 166 C @-@ Zeros , and 131 i MiEVs . 
 = = = = Norway = = = = 
 Since deliveries began in January 2011 , the i @-@ MiEV became the best selling electric car in the country , and the 1000th i @-@ MiEV was delivered in November 2011 . A total of 2 @,@ 240 electric cars were sold in Norway during 2011 , of which , 1 @,@ 050 were i @-@ <unk> , 210 were Citroen C @-@ Zeros , and 217 Peugeot iOns , for combined sales of 1 @,@ 477 units representing together a 66 % share of all electric cars sold during the year . Registrations climbed to 1 @,@ 670 units in 2012 , then fell to 1 @,@ 094 in 2013 , and stabilized in 2014 with 1 @,@ 093 units . Cumulative registrations through December 2014 reached 5 @,@ 334 units , including 2 @,@ 589 i @-@ MiEVs , 1 @,@ 352 C @-@ Zeros , and 1 @,@ 393 iOns . 
 = = = = Spain = = = = 
 Retail sales began in December 2010 and the i @-@ MiEV price starts at € 29 @,@ 153 before sales tax or any government incentives . A total of 233 i @-@ MiEV family electric cars were sold during 2011 , representing 58 % of all electric vehicles sold in Spain that year . Cumulative sales through December 2013 reached 546 units including 204 iOns , 196 i @-@ MiEVs and 146 C @-@ Zeros . 
 = = = = Sweden = = = = 
 Since their inception a total of 196 units have been registered in Sweden through December 2013 , including 92 i MiEVs , 67 C @-@ Zeros , and 37 iOns . 
 = = = = Switzerland = = = = 
 Deliveries began in 2011 . Cumulative registrations totaled 615 units through December 2013 , including 342 i @-@ MiEVs , 155 C @-@ Zeros and 118 iOns . 
 = = = = United Kingdom = = = = 
 In December 2009 Mitsubishi began an electric vehicle trial in the UK with a fleet of 25 i @-@ MiEVs . The i @-@ MiEV demonstration is part of the project Coventry and Birmingham Low Emission Vehicle Demonstrators ( <unk> ) , which is running in the English Midlands with a variety of vehicles including plug @-@ in hybrids and the extended range electric Jaguar XJ . In March 2010 , the company reported that after the first three @-@ month period the trial fleet ran an average of 23 miles ( 37 km ) a day , have been parked 97 % of the time , and most of the individual trips were under 5 miles ( 8 km ) . Another key finding in the test report is that the vehicles were driven in temperatures as low as − 10 ° C ( 14 ° F ) during the winter period , and it was observed a drop @-@ off in usage during extremely cold weather , when only essential journeys are made . 
 In March 2010 , Mitsubishi announced that the i @-@ MiEV would be sold at a price of GB £ 38 @,@ 699 ( ~ US $ 55 @,@ 870 ) , but in August 2010 the company reduced the price to GB £ 28 @,@ 990 ( ~ US $ 45 @,@ 100 ) . Sales to the public in the UK began on January 2011 , which coincided with the date the GB £ 5 @,@ 000 Plug @-@ in Car Grant came into effect . Mitsubishi authorized 13 sales centres with two in London and the rest spread across England , Scotland and Northern Ireland . In April 2011 Hertz Rent @-@ a @-@ Car added two i @-@ MiEVs to its fleet of vehicles in London and intends to add more across the UK later in 2011 . The i @-@ MiEVs are offered as rental vehicles to Hertz on Demand members and these electric cars will be supported by 16 Hertz @-@ installed quick @-@ charge stations located in and around London . A total of 862 units have been registered in the UK through June 2013 , including 401 iOns , 260 i MiEVs , and 201 C @-@ Zeros . 
 In June 2016 , reports surfaced that the i @-@ Miev was no longer being sold in the UK , and no more new vehicles would be available . 
 = = = Japan = = = 
 The i @-@ MiEV was launched for fleet customers in Japan in late July 2009 , after Mitsubishi 's more than 40 years in development of electric vehicles . Initial price was set at ¥ 4 @,@ 590 @,@ 000 ( US $ 46 @,@ 500 ) . The Japanese government is offering subsidies of up to ¥ 1 @,@ 390 @,@ 000 , and some local governments are also offering additional subsidies that could bring the price down to as low as ¥ 2 @,@ 200 @,@ 000 . Mitsubishi reduced the price of the vehicle by ¥ 619 @,@ 000 ( US $ 6 @,@ 700 ) to just below ¥ 4 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 two days before it went for retail sales in Japan in April 2010 to compete with the Nissan Leaf . As of early 2010 there were 60 charging stations in Japan . 
 On June 2010 Mitsubishi Motors announced that is aiming to cut the price of its electric vehicles to ¥ 2 million ( US $ 21 @,@ 890 ) by fiscal year 2012 to obtain price parity in the showrooms with hybrid electric vehicles . Mitsubishi is expecting that mass production of lithium ion batteries from its battery plant coming online in April 2012 will allow to reduced battery cost from its current ¥ 2 @.@ 5 million to less than ¥ 1 million . On March 2010 , the company said it had received about 2 @,@ 000 advance orders in Japan for the vehicle . Cumulative sales reached 3 @,@ 000 units in Japan by October 2010 . Sales in the Japanese market raised from 986 in 2009 to 2 @,@ 340 in 2010 , and then stabilized at 2 @,@ 290 units in 2011 and 2 @,@ 295 in 2012 . Sales fell to 1 @,@ 491 units during 2013 , and to 1 @,@ 021 units during 2014 . As of December 2014 , cumulative sales reached 10 @,@ 423 i @-@ MiEVs since July 2009 . 
 Two new trims levels were launched in the Japanese market in the second half of 2011 . Beginning in July 25 , the lower @-@ level " M " trim will be sold for ¥ 1 @,@ 880 @,@ 000 ( US $ 23 @,@ 200 ) after the government subsidy . The " M " trim has a 10 @.@ 5 kWh battery and its equipment and trim specification were adjusted to allow a more accessible price . The " M " trim range is 120 km ( 75 mi ) on the <unk> @-@ cycle . The higher @-@ level " G " trim will be available by mid @-@ August at a price <unk> from ¥ 2 @,@ 600 @,@ 000 ( US $ 32 @,@ 100 ) to ¥ 3 @,@ 800 @,@ 000 ( US $ 47 @,@ 000 ) . The " G " trim has the same 16 @.@ 0 kWh battery as the original i @-@ MiEV , but the new trim realizes around a 20 % increase in its single charge range on the <unk> @-@ cycle , offering 180 km ( 110 mi ) . The " G " has LED headlamps and rear combination lamps , 15 @-@ inch alloy road wheels , leather @-@ wrapped steering wheel and shifter knob and other high @-@ grade equipment , such as a navigation system and heated seats for the driver and front passenger as standard . 
 = = = United States = = = 
 The first fleet and individual customer deliveries in the U.S. took place in December 2011 . Mitsubishi initially announced a base price of US $ 27 @,@ 990 , but in September 2011 raised the base price to US $ 29 @,@ 125 plus the destination charge and prior to the federal tax credit and other incentives available in California and other states . The American version of the Mitsubishi i @-@ MiEV was unveiled at the November 2010 Los Angeles Auto Show . During the LA show , Mitsubishi announced it decided to drop the " MiEV " from the name and the US version will be named simply as " i " electric vehicle . 
 The <unk> version is enlarged , has redesigned front and rear bumpers , and includes more features than the Japanese and European versions in order to meet crash standards , government mandates , and the preferences of the U.S. consumers . The American version is 285 millimetres ( 11 @.@ 2 in ) longer than the Japanese version , 110 millimetres ( 4 @.@ 3 in ) wider , and slightly taller . It also has advanced airbags and the mandated tire @-@ pressure monitoring system ( <unk> ) , has an upgraded interior and features more accessories . 
 The entry @-@ level ES trim starts at US $ 29 @,@ 125 , the SE trim is at US $ 31 @,@ 125 , and the SE Premium version is priced at US $ 33 @,@ 915 including an HDD navigation system and better entertainment and audio options . These prices do not include an US $ 850 destination charge . For either of the models , available options include a factory @-@ installed CHAdeMO fast @-@ charging port for US $ 750 and the Cold Zone package , which includes a battery warming system and heated outside mirrors for US $ 150 . The reservation process for the U.S. began on April 22 , 2011 , and customers were required to pay two deposits : US $ 299 for the car and US $ 99 @.@ 99 for a required home inspection . The carmaker decided to waive the US $ 100 fee for the first 2 @,@ 000 people who placed an order and then buy the car . Mitsubishi is only accepting PayPal as the method of payment for these online transactions . Mitsubishi began sending order confirmation emails and offering optional accessories by early September 2011 . In November 2010 , Mitsubishi announced partnerships with Eaton and Best Buy for sales and home installation of recharging units . 
 Initial availability is limited and the initial roll @-@ out markets include California , Hawaii , Oregon , and Washington , followed by the Northeastern states . Nationwide availability is expected by mid 2012 . The first delivery to a fleet customer took place on December 8 , 2011 in San Francisco . The first delivery went to City <unk> , a non @-@ profit carsharing service that operates in San Francisco , Oakland , and Berkeley . The first individual customer delivery took place on Honolulu , Hawaii , on December 12 , 2011 . Sales increased from 80 units in 2011 to 588 in 2012 , and rose to 1 @,@ 029 during 2013 . Sales fell to only 196 in 2014 . A total of 1 @,@ 893 i cars have been sold in the U.S. through December 2014 . 
 Changes to 2014 model year vehicle include driver and front passenger heated seats , CHAdeMO DC quick charge port , battery warming system , heated side view mirrors , rear door speakers , 8A / 12A switchable Level 1 charging cable ( approximate charge time from near empty to fully charged - 22 hours for 8 amp / 14 hours for 12 amp ) , charge port lamp , leather @-@ covered steering wheel and shift knob , passenger @-@ side vanity mirror with lid , numerous decorative color / trim upgrades , aluminum wheels , front fog lights , new daytime running lights ( <unk> ) , black @-@ out door sash trim , US $ 6 @,@ 130 lower price before incentives . 
 = = = Other countries = = = 
 Chile 
 The i @-@ MiEV was launched in May 2011 at a price of <unk> million ( US $ 60 @,@ 000 ) . Initial availability is limited to 25 units . The first public quick charging station in the country was opened in April 2011 in preparation for the arrival of the first i @-@ MiEV electric cars . As of August 2012 , only 10 units have been sold . As of 2015 the dealer is no longer selling the i @-@ MiEV , it has been replaced by the Outlander plug @-@ in hybrid . 
 Costa Rica 
 The i @-@ MiEV was launched in February 2011 at a price of US $ 61 @,@ 500 . Costa Rica does not have any government incentives for electric cars . According to Mitsubishi , Costa Rica was selected at the first market launch in the Americas due to its environmental record . Initial availability will be limited to 25 to 50 units . Sales are oriented to supply mainly fleet customers including government agencies and electric companies . 
 Hong Kong 
 On December 2009 , the Hong Kong Government and other corporation began testing the i @-@ MiEV , totaling 30 vehicles tested until May 2010 . Sales to the public in Hong Kong began in May 2010 at a price of HK $ 395 @,@ 000 ( ~ US $ 50 @,@ 631 ) . 
 Malaysia 
 The i @-@ MiEV was released in Malaysia in March 2013 at a price starting at <unk> ( approx US $ 43 @,@ 995 ) , becoming the first electric car sold in the country . Mitsubishi expects to sell more than 50 units during its first year in the market . The Penang Second Bridge highway patrol unit , <unk> Ronda using i @-@ <unk> for patrolling and to provide assistance to commuters on the bridge . Seven charging stations were also set up at the toll plaza on the mainland , two of them being rapid chargers which are able to give an 80 per cent charge in 30 minutes . 
 New Zealand 
 Between January and March 2009 the i @-@ MiEV was brought to New Zealand as part of an electric vehicle trial , during which the i @-@ MiEV travelled the entire country , testing infrastructure and demonstrating the vehicle to the public . As of March 2011 there were 8 i @-@ MiEV in use in Wellington , as a field trial sponsored by the Wellington City Council , New Zealand Post , Meridian Energy , The Wellington Company and Mitsubishi Motors . Sales to the public are scheduled for July 2011 at a price of NZ $ 59 @,@ 990 ( ~ US $ 51 @,@ 325 ) , and the number of units will be limited . 
 Russian Federation 
 The i @-@ MiEV was launched in June 2011 at a price of <unk> ( ~ US $ 64 @,@ 946 ) . The price would be sat at <unk> ( ~ US $ 28 @,@ 948 ) on 1 February 2014 . There were 211 cars sold in 2013 , many of them bought by government organizations . As of 2013 @-@ 2014 i @-@ <unk> is the only electric car sold in Russia . 
 Singapore 
 In November 2010 Mitsubishi signed an agreement with the Singaporean government to introduce electric vehicles in the country . Mitsubishi will supply 25 i @-@ MiEVs in 2011 to the Economic Development Board , the Energy Market Authority and the Land Transport Authority , which are part of a multi @-@ agency EV task force . This agreement is part of a three @-@ year US $ 20 million test program that will deploy charging infrastructure for electric vehicles and evaluate the cost benefits of EVs for future adoption . The delivery of the first batch of 10 i @-@ MiEV electric cars is scheduled for May 2011 . 
 Thailand 
 In December 2010 , Mitsubishi Motors and the government of Thailand agreed to start fleet testing electric vehicles for a possible launch of i @-@ MiEV . In July 2011 , a new agreement was signed to begin the trials with the participation of the Metropolitan Electricity Authority ( <unk> ) and PEA ENCOM International ( PEA ) , two of Thailand 's electricity distribution companies . 
 United Arab Emirates 
 A test fleet of 10 i @-@ MiEVs was deployed in <unk> City in Abu Dhabi in 2011 as part of a one @-@ year pilot to test a point @-@ to @-@ point transportation solution for the city as complement of its sustainable public transportation systems , the Personal Rapid Transit ( PRT ) and the Freight Rapid Transit ( <unk> ) , both of which consist of automated electric @-@ powered vehicles . 
 = = = Global sales = = = 
 As of July 2014 , about 32 @,@ 000 i @-@ MiEV family passenger cars have been sold worldwide since 2009 . The following table presents total retail sales by year since deliveries of the i @-@ MiEV began in July 2009 for the top selling national markets by variant ( Mitsubishi i @-@ MiEV / i , Peugeot iOn and Citroën C @-@ Zero ) through June 2014 . 
 = = Awards and recognition = = 
 " 2009 Japan Automotive Hall of Fame Car Technology of the Year " award in October 2009 . 
 " Japanese Car of the Year Most Advanced Technology " awarded during the 41st Tokyo Motor Show in October 2009 . 
 " <unk> 2009 " by <unk> in January 2010 . 
 " Environment Special Grand Prize " awarded during the 25th International Automobile Festival , Paris , France on February 2010 . 
 The i @-@ MiEV was one of the five finalists to the 2011 Green Car Vision Award . 
 The 2012 model year American @-@ spec i @-@ MiEV was one of the five finalists for the 2012 Green Car of the Year . 
 The American @-@ spec i @-@ MiEV was rated first in the " 2012 Greenest Vehicles of the Year " list elaborated by the American Council for an Energy @-@ Efficient Economy . 
 The 2012 model year American @-@ spec i @-@ MiEV ranked first in United States Environmental Protection Agency ’ s ( EPA ) 2012 Annual Fuel Economy Guide , and between November 2011 and June 2012 ranked as the most efficient EPA certified vehicle in the U.S. for all fuels ever , until it was surpassed by the Honda Fit EV . 
 = Trapped in the Sky = 
 " Trapped in the Sky " is the first episode of Thunderbirds , a British 1960s Supermarionation television series . Written by co @-@ creators Gerry and Sylvia Anderson , it was first broadcast on ATV Midlands on 30 September 1965 . The plot revolves around criminal mastermind the Hood , who sabotages the nuclear @-@ powered airliner Fireflash prior to her maiden flight . Unable to land for fear of detonating a motion @-@ sensitive bomb , and threatened by radiation leaking from Fireflash 's overworked atomic reactor , the crew and passengers ' only hope of survival is the newly formed International Rescue Organisation . 
 While drafting the episode , the Andersons found inspiration in Gerry 's experiences as a conscript in the RAF during the 1940s , when he witnessed the fatal crash of a Mosquito fighter and the controlled landing of a damaged Spitfire . Filmed mostly in late 1964 , " Trapped in the Sky " features pioneering work from series special effects director Derek Meddings , who used a looping " rolling road " mechanism to simplify the shooting of the Fireflash rescue . 
 Lew Grade , head of distributor ITC , was so pleased with the 25 @-@ minute pilot that he instructed the production staff to double the standard episode running length to fill a one @-@ hour commercial timeslot . This necessitated the writing of filler scenes and subplots . 
 Well received on its first broadcast , " Trapped in the Sky " remains critically acclaimed and is generally considered to be one of the best episodes of the series . It was adapted for audio by Century 21 Records in 1966 , transmitted on BBC Radio in revised form in 1990 , and had its first TV network broadcast on BBC2 in 1991 . In 2015 , " Trapped in the Sky " was remade as " Fireflash " , the fifth episode of the CGI reboot Thunderbirds Are Go . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Criminal mastermind the Hood ( voiced by Ray Barrett ) is telepathically linked to his half @-@ brother , Kyrano ( David Graham ) , the manservant on Tracy Island . Abusing this connection and inflicting severe psychological trauma on his sibling , he discovers that International Rescue – the Tracy family 's newly @-@ formed life @-@ saving organisation – is ready to start operations . Determined to steal the secrets of IR 's Thunderbird machines , the Hood plots to have the Tracys called to a disaster situation of his own design . Travelling from his temple hideout in the Malaysian jungle to London International Airport , he plants a bomb next to the landing gear hydraulics of Air <unk> 's new Fireflash – an atomic @-@ powered , hypersonic airliner departing for her maiden flight to Tokyo . One of the passengers is Kyrano 's daughter , Tin @-@ Tin . In an anonymous videophone call to London Tower , the Hood warns Commander Norman of Air Traffic Control that the motion @-@ sensitive device will detonate from the impact of landing . 
 Fireflash is recalled and Captain Hanson and his co @-@ pilot instructed to circle the airspace above the airport . The shielding on the airliner 's atomic reactor is weakening ; if Fireflash does not land within two hours , the passengers and crew will die of radiation exposure . Air Traffic Control commandeers an Air Force jet that docks with Fireflash in flight , allowing a Lieutenant Bob Meddings to board the hold and attempt to remove the bomb . Meddings is almost killed when he falls through the <unk> maintenance hatch and plummets to the ground ; moments before impact , however , he successfully deploys his parachute and ultimately survives . 
 IR 's John Tracy ( Barrett ) , who has been monitoring radio traffic from the space station Thunderbird 5 , relays news of the unfolding events to Tracy Island . Jeff ( Peter Dyneley ) immediately dispatches Scott ( Shane Rimmer ) and Virgil ( David Holliday ) in Thunderbirds 1 and 2 – the latter carrying Pod 3 – to London . Arriving at the danger zone , Scott assures Norman of IR 's good intentions , in return demanding his word that no photographs will be taken of either aircraft . However , the Hood , disguised as one of the airport police detachment , breaks into the unmanned Thunderbird 1 and photographs the cockpit . Scott is alerted by the Automatic Camera Detector and the Hood flees , chased along the M1 motorway by the police . 
 Arriving in Thunderbird 2 , Virgil deploys three Elevator Cars , two of which will be remote @-@ controlled from his master vehicle . Fireflash will be guided into a controlled landing on top of the cars , touching down with its undercarriage raised . Virgil and the Elevator Cars rush to intercept the inbound Fireflash on Runway 29 , but when one of the remote @-@ controlled cars malfunctions and crashes , the rescue attempt is aborted and the operation suspended while Virgil activates a reserve car . Fireflash starts a second run and successfully makes contact with all three vehicles . Applying brakes , Virgil loses control of the master car , which crashes into a trench ; he is uninjured , however , and Fireflash comes to a halt before reaching the end of the runway . The bomb is dislodged from its original position but ultimately fails to explode . 
 As the Hood has managed to evade the authorities , Scott leaves him to IR 's London agent , Lady Penelope Creighton @-@ Ward ( Sylvia Anderson ) . Chasing the enemy in their specially @-@ modified Rolls @-@ Royce , FAB 1 , Penelope and her butler , Parker ( Graham ) , blast him off the motorway using the car 's front @-@ mounted machine gun . Although the Hood survives the encounter , his photographs are destroyed . 
 Back on Tracy Island , Jeff implements " Operation Cover @-@ Up " to hide the existence of IR while Kyrano is examined by a doctor from the mainland , who dismisses the manservant 's prior nausea as a sign of stress . When the topic of the conversation shifts to the Fireflash incident , the doctor declares that he would be honoured to shake IR by the hand . With a parting handshake , Jeff grants the unknowing guest his wish , before announcing to his sons , " Boys , I think we 're in business . " 
 = = Production = = 
 Inspiration for the plot of " Trapped in the Sky " was derived from creator @-@ producer Gerry Anderson 's memories of his National Service . While stationed at RAF Manston in Kent from 1947 to 1949 , the young Anderson had witnessed a Battle of Britain @-@ themed air show coming to a fateful end : a Mosquito fighter had gone out of control and crashed to the ground , resulting in 20 fatalities . A few months after the Mosquito disaster , he saw a Spitfire with a damaged undercarriage make a successful emergency landing at the airbase . During the pre @-@ production of Thunderbirds , Anderson used his recollections of the events as the foundation of the bomb plot surrounding the Fireflash airliner . Anderson dictated the script to his wife , Sylvia , for typing at their villa in Portugal ; it was completed in four sessions during the spring of 1964 . As an in @-@ joke , the character of Lieutenant Meddings is named after Bob Bell , the AP Films art director , and Derek Meddings , the director of special effects . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Filming on the pilot episode of Thunderbirds commenced in the late summer of 1964 after five months of pre @-@ production . Between the scripting and filming stages , the name of the new TV series had been finalised , Thunderbirds having initially been titled International Rescue ; additionally , the fleet of star vehicles had originally been named the Rescues . Although there is no on @-@ screen title caption , the episode is referred to in all internal production documentation by the name " Trapped in the Sky " . 
 While preparing to film the Fireflash controlled landing sequence , Meddings was faced with the difficulty of having to build an extended , dynamic runway set in the limited shooting space available at AP Films Studios . His compact and cost @-@ efficient solution was to isolate the basic set elements – the grass verge foreground , the sky background and the tarmac separating them – and construct separate loops of canvas , all painted to represent one element ; these were fitted to rollers that , when run at speeds proportionate to their respective distances from the camera , simulated a continuous backdrop . This " rolling road " ( or " roller @-@ road " ) technique marked a progression from the " rolling sky " that had been pioneered in previous Anderson series , such as Stingray . 
 The crash of the left @-@ side remote @-@ controlled Elevator Car was originally a gaffe , caused when the wire pulling the scale model across the " rolling road " unexpectedly snapped . So satisfied was Meddings with the realism of the shot that he asked the Andersons to re @-@ write their script to accommodate the error . This was later supplemented with new footage of the rogue Elevator Car colliding with a parked aircraft , starting a fire on the tarmac ; in the episode , the stationary vehicles are left to burn since , as stated by Commander Norman , " Fireflash is carrying passengers – they 're not ! " 
 During the Tracy Island briefing scene , Alan Tracy 's voice is audibly lower and deeper than in later episodes . Since voice actor Matt Zimmerman had yet to be added to the regular cast at the time of dialogue recording , Ray Barrett ( who voiced John and the Hood ) supplied the character 's single line ( " OK , father " ) . Despite his absence , Zimmerman is listed in the closing credits of " Trapped in the Sky " . A second continuity error occurs during the concluding scene . When Jeff initiates the " Operation Cover @-@ up " security protocol to erase all sign of International Rescue 's presence for purposes of the doctor 's visit , the portraits on the wall change from photographs of the Tracy brothers in uniform to a different set in which civilian attire is worn ; however , in a subsequent shot , the edge of a blue uniform is still visible . 
 = = = Post @-@ production = = = 
 Barry Gray 's arrangements for the episode 's opening and closing theme music – based on the signature " The Thunderbirds March " , which accompanies the stock launch sequences of Thunderbirds 1 , 2 and 3 – are unique to " Trapped in the Sky " . As an end theme , " The Thunderbirds March " was a last @-@ minute substitute for " Flying High " ; this was a lyrical track , sung by Gary Miller , which was conceived to serve as a counterpoint to the instrumental opening music . It was judged by Anderson and Gray to be tonally unsuitable and was replaced two weeks before the first broadcast of " Trapped in the Sky " in September 1965 . Gray recorded the incidental music in December 1964 , at the Olympic Studios at Barnes , London , with an orchestra of 30 instrumentalists . 
 Thunderbirds was originally due to have a 25 @-@ minute episode running time ; this was doubled at the instruction of Lew Grade , Anderson 's financial backer at distributor ITC , after a preview screening of " Trapped in the Sky " . Praising the plot and special effects , Grade commented , " That 's not a television series , that 's a feature film ! " With the budget per episode also increased from £ 25 @,@ 000 to £ 38 @,@ 000 , the pilot and eight other unfinished episodes were extended and re @-@ edited to run for 50 minutes ( filling a one @-@ hour commercial timeslot ) . In the case of " Trapped in the Sky " , new footage was filmed during the shooting of " Operation Crash @-@ Dive " , which features the return of Fireflash and was written as a sequel to the first episode . Among the newly added scenes were the subplot concerning Meddings ' boarding of Fireflash , as well as the first rescue attempt involving the Elevator Cars . 
 = = Broadcast = = 
 " Trapped in the Sky " was first broadcast on ATV Midlands at 7 : 00 p.m. on 30 September 1965 . An alternative , two @-@ part format debuted on 20 October for the episode 's Granada Television première . The episode was networked nationwide for the first time on 20 September 1991 , after BBC2 acquired the broadcast rights to the series ; it achieved ratings of 6 @.@ 8 million viewers when it was repeated by the channel in 1992 . On 18 December 1994 , " Trapped in the Sky " was transmitted in a re @-@ edited format as the first episode of Turbocharged Thunderbirds ; broadcast on UPN in the United States , the programme combined footage drawn from the 1960s series with new , live @-@ action scenes . The episode was broadcast in surround sound for the first time on BBC Two on 3 September 2000 . 
 Additionally , the episode has re @-@ appeared several times in condensed audio form . The first adaptation , with narration from Shane Rimmer ( in character as Scott ) , was originally released as the mini @-@ album Thunderbird 1 ( MA 108 ) in April 1966 by Century 21 Records . With an introduction by Gerry Anderson and additional narration by Rimmer , Thunderbird 1 was broadcast on BBC Radio 5 as the first episode of a radio series in November 1990 . Most recently , " Trapped in the Sky " was adapted for Penguin Audiobooks . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Trapped in the Sky " received a positive , contemporary critical response from L. Marsland Gander of The Daily Telegraph , who commented , " It is a show that has to be seen to be disbelieved . " Writing for the same newspaper in 2011 , Simon Heffer remembered his enthusiastic impressions of watching " Trapped in the Sky " as a boy in 1965 , and how it endeared him to the rest of the series : " ... I had just watched the first episode of Thunderbirds . I felt as though the whole landscape of what passes for my imagination had been changed ... It caused an excitement of the sort that is possible only for the very young , and it lasted for days . Indeed , every Saturday night was a renewal of the miracle . " Co @-@ creator Sylvia Anderson observes that , by necessity , the pilot episode comprises many examples of exposition for the purposes of introducing the primary characters and vehicles . However , she considers the roles of Lady Penelope and Parker to be " brief but effective " . 
 The episode was listed as a series highlight in issue 61 of Cult Times , published in 2000 ; writer Mike Fillis referred to " Trapped in the Sky " as " riveting " , and its bomb plot premise as " very topical " . A BBC retrospective praises aspects of the episode 's futuristic design , describing Fireflash as a " beautifully @-@ envisioned , Concorde @-@ like craft " , and London Airport 's Air <unk> lounge , where the character of Tin @-@ Tin is first seen , as " like a set from a Dean Martin movie " . Model @-@ maker Martin Bower , who contributed to the special effects of the Andersons ' later series , Space : 1999 , comments positively on the " realistic " design of the Elevator Cars , writing that they are " to me , among the most memorable of vehicles " . 
 In 2004 , " Trapped in the Sky " was re @-@ issued on Region 1 DVD as part of A & E Video 's release The Best of Thunderbirds : The Favorite Episodes , whose content was selected based on the results of a fan poll hosted on the A & E website . Reviewing the product for DVD Verdict , David Gutierrez awarded " Trapped in the Sky " a grade of 95 ( out of 100 ) , commending the episode for the rescue itself ( considered " amazing " ) and adding : " Television rarely has moments as exciting as the Fireflash attempting a forced landing . " Stuart Galbraith IV of the DVD Talk website characterised the plot as " sort of an airborne version of Speed " . In a BBC Online review of the 2003 Thunderbirds soundtrack album , Morag Reavley commented positively on composer Barry Gray 's incidental piece " Fireflash Landing " , stating that it is one of several " catchy , pulse @-@ quickening tunes " that " come fast and furious " . 
 Vincent Law of the Andersonic website argues that the episode 's status as series pilot is not detrimental to the writing of the plot , which employs a theme – suggested to be common to many Anderson @-@ produced series – of " advanced technology , upon which the characters are reliant , going awry . " Among Law 's criticisms is the characterisation , which is considered , at times , to test the limits of credibility ; one example offered is the lack of emotional response from Tin @-@ Tin to the precarious position of the sabotaged Fireflash . On the subject of dialogue , he gives a summary of " limp and routine at times – lots of ' left left , two degrees ' – and overall much less witty than Stingray . " Law concludes that " Trapped in the Sky " overall is " a great opener , arguably the best episode of the series . " 
 Dr Phillip <unk> , an aerospace engineering lecturer at the University of Salford , has praised " Trapped in the Sky " for its depiction of commercial hypersonic flight . While discussing on the development of the Lockheed Martin SR @-@ 72 reconnaissance plane in 2013 , <unk> made reference to the episode and commented that the time necessary for the fictional Fireflash to fly from London to Tokyo ( two hours at a reported Mach 6 ) would be " surprisingly accurate " in reality . He also expressed the view that the altitude at which Fireflash is stated to be travelling – 250 @,@ 000 feet ( 76 @,@ 000 m ) – would be optimal for a passenger aircraft travelling at hypersonic speeds . 
 = = 2015 remake = = 
 In 2015 , " Trapped in the Sky " was remade as " Fireflash " , the fifth episode of Thunderbirds Are Go . Recurring plot elements include the character of Captain Hanson and the rescue involving the Elevator Cars . 
 = Leavin ' ( album ) = 
 Leavin ' is the twentieth studio album by American recording artist Natalie Cole , released on September 26 , 2006 , by Verve Records . The album consists of ten cover versions of various R & B and pop songs and two original songs : " 5 Minutes Away " and " Don 't Say Goodnight ( It 's Time for Love ) " . It was the second of Cole 's albums to be released by Verve Records , and her first album in four years , following Ask a Woman Who Knows ( 2002 ) . Cole promoted the album as a return to her R & B roots , distancing herself from an identification as a jazz artist . 
 After its release , critics gave the album generally positive reviews , praising Cole 's interpretations of the covered material , and comparing her favorably to contemporary R & B artists . The album had limited commercial success in the United States , peaking at number 97 on the Billboard 200 . Internationally , the album charted in Germany and Switzerland . The album spawned one single – Cole 's cover of Aretha Franklin 's " Day Dreaming " – with an accompanying music video . She performed the song at the BET special An Evening of Stars : Tribute to Aretha Franklin . She embarked on a theatre tour in the fall of 2006 to support the album . 
 = = Background and recording = = 
 The Huffington Post 's David Munk said that the idea for the record started after his suggestion that Cole " return to her R & B roots by recording an intimate , classic soul CD with a small group of sidemen and simple production " . Munk served as an executive producer for the album . He viewed the recording sessions in Atlanta as eclectic and described Cole 's ambition : " [ S ] he shared with me her hope of making a country @-@ soul record in Memphis ; she also spoke of doing a piano @-@ voice album and of recording in Spanish " . 
 In an interview with American Songwriter , Cole said the album " was born out of desperation " to record a pop / urban project rather than a jazz one . She sought to avoid being typecast as a jazz singer by returning to R & B and demanding more artistic control . By being an arranger on the album , she said the recording sessions reminded her of how she : " missed the freedom ... ad @-@ libbing , you know , and being able to holler every now and then ... all of that energy " . She initially looked for original songs to record for the album , but said " the songs being sent were pretty bad . " An article in Vibe said Cole 's decision to create a covers album was a marketing strategy to breed " a connection between song and interpreter and between singer and audience " and appeal to " fans yearning for the good old days before they had to hire a sitter to go see a show " . Cole later clarified she could not afford to record an album of original material , explaining " we 're doing a contemporary urban record on a jazz budget " . 
 While promoting the album , Cole said " R & B , rock and pop has always been my forte " and called the music something she wished she had recorded " at least five years ago " . She revealed her dissatisfaction with being labeled a jazz singer and her desire to showcase her versatility as an artist , saying she aimed to " put out some music that we hadn 't heard in a long time from anybody , really " . The project was Cole 's first collaboration with R & B producer Dallas Austin . Rashod <unk> of The Virginian @-@ Pilot wrote the album represented how " [ Cole ] ad hung up the gowns and returned to her soul roots " ; In past performances , Cole would wear gowns when singing jazz . Following Verve 's requirement that the album had to include original material , Cole described her experiences with Austin , and keyboard player <unk> Parkman , as the inspiration for " Five Minutes Away " . Prior to the album 's release , CBS News ' Caitlin Johnson wrote that it was " a sharp turn for a woman perhaps best known for singing jazz standards . " Johnson connected the project to Cole 's reinvention and its title to " leaving the past behind " . 
 = = Composition = = 
 Leavin ' is a contemporary R & B and pop music album consisting of twelve tracks , with an additional remix on digital copies . Cole said the material " has given me the opportunity to explore the greatness in the songs of some of our most talented and gifted songwriters , " emphasizing the album 's " fresh new twist on some great music " . The album opens with Cole 's cover of Fiona Apple 's " Criminal " . Len Righi of The Morning Call expressed surprise at Cole 's ability to transform the " agonizing , brazen lament " into " a funky , Tina Turner @-@ type , rump @-@ shaker . " The second track is a cover of Neil Young 's " Old Man " ; The Huffington Post 's David Munk called it " a personal rumination on her father " . The third song , a cover of Aretha Franklin 's " Day Dreaming " , was recorded after Austin sang it in the studio . Cole said she " added a little bit of a hip @-@ hop feel to it " . Richard Harrington of The Washington Post felt that the fourth track , a cover of Shelby Lynne 's " Leavin ' " , " metaphorically put a little distance between the original R & B diva and the pop star Cole " . The fifth song is a cover of Ronnie Dyson 's " The More You Do It ( The More I Like It Done To Me ) " ; NPR 's Jason King attributes the inclusion of " the saucy but largely forgotten Yancy @-@ Jackson mid- ' 70s track " to Cole 's A & R director . The song contains an homage to Cole 's previous single " This Will Be ( An Everlasting Love ) " . The seventh track is a cover of Kris Kristofferson and Rita Coolidge 's " Loving Arms " ( here titled " Lovin ' Arms " ) , which Verve marketed as inspired by Etta James , allowing Cole " the opportunity to move back to her 70 's roots with rich , shimmering vocals " . 
 <unk> 's Donna Kimura called Cole 's funky approach to the eighth track on the album , a cover of Bonnie Raitt 's " Love Letter " , as " a worthy , fresh interpretation instead of a copy " . " The Man with the Child in His Eyes " was described as an " ethereal " take on the Kate Bush song . Maura Johnston of Rolling Stone highlighted the original song " 5 Minutes Away " as one of Natalie Cole 's top ten essential songs , calling it " a wise rumination on love and life accented by dry horns and capped with a rousing call @-@ and @-@ response " . The tenth track is the original song " Don 't Say Goodnight ( It 's Time for Love ) " , written by Cole , Ernie Isley , and Chris Jasper . Cole explained that she included the cover of Des 'ree 's " You Gotta Be " as the eleventh song on the album because of positive fan response to her prior performances of it ; she described it as an example of her experimentation with " bringing a jazzy flavor to some pop songs " . The album concludes with a cover of Sting 's " If I Ever Lose My Faith in You " , which emphasizes its spiritual context through the addition of four Beatitudes . 
 = = Promotion = = 
 " Day Dreaming " was released as the lead single from the album on August 1 , 2006 . Director Doug <unk> shot the accompanying music video , which features Cole singing with her band in front of a white background . The song earned Cole a nomination at the 49th Annual Grammy Awards for Best Female R & B Vocal Performance , but she lost to Mary J. Blige 's " Be Without You " . Cole performed the single at the BET special An Evening of Stars : Tribute to Aretha Franklin along with her arrangement of Franklin 's 1970 single " Call Me " . 
 Following the release of Leavin ' , Cole was slated to appear on " a number of major morning and late night television programs " to perform " several intimate showcases " of her music . To further promote the album , she embarked on a theater tour in the fall of 2006 . It was her first club @-@ sized tour in almost two decades . Cole had chosen to sing her 1970s hits in an attempt to draw more R & B fans . She also decided to perform every song from the album , saying she couldn 't " remember when a performer took a whole album and performed it onstage " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Leavin ' received positive reviews from music critics . Andy Kellman of AllMusic praised the album as " a treat for any Cole fan " and drew attention to how it sounded like it was recorded at a " leisurely pace . " He noted that Cole sounded like she was " <unk> [ ing ] through an easygoing set of covers " . The BBC 's Chris Rogers defined the album as " an ultra smooth mix of standards both tasteful and obtuse " . He noted that Cole 's vocal performance had a " tasteful restraint " when recording covers instead of " the modulated warbling that seems to pass for contemporary R & B these days " . Rogers wrote that the album is a perfect fit for listeners of Joss Stone and Jamie Cullum Jay S. Jacobs of <unk> called the album " jazzy but decidedly more modern and surprisingly strong " , similar to Cole 's 1999 release , Snowfall on the Sahara . People 's Ralph Novak , Chuck Arnold , V. R. Peterson , and Monica Rizzo commended Cole 's decision to " ditch the evening @-@ gown fare on her new CD " by recording more contemporary songs . Gugu <unk> from <unk> awarded the album three out of five stars , describing the material as " pure old school with a modern twist " , with Cole providing " a touch of class and some depth to boot " . Daniel Garret of The Compulsive Reader also complimented the material , comparing it to Ella Fitzgerald 's 1993 album , The Best of the Song Books , and Diana Ross 's 2006 album , Blue and calling Cole one of the " three ladies of song " alongside Fitzgerald and Ross . Honolulu Star @-@ Bulletin 's Gary C.W. Chun favorably compared the album to Gladys Knight 's Before Me . 
 = = = Commercial performance = = = 
 The album had limited commercial success in the United States . It reached its peak positions on the Billboard 200 at number 97 and on Billboard 's R & B Albums at number 16 . Internationally , Leavin ' had a relatively limited commercial performance . In Germany , the album peaked on the German Album Charts at number 92 . In Switzerland , it reached a peak position of number 76 on the Swiss Album Charts . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All tracks except " 5 Minutes Away " were produced by Dallas Austin ; " 5 Minutes Away " was produced by Natalie Cole . 
 = = Credits = = 
 The following credits are adapted from AllMusic : 
 = = = Managerial = = = 
 = = = Performance credits = = = 
 = = = Visuals and imagery = = = 
 = = = Instruments = = = 
 = = = Production and composition = = = 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 The follow release history was adapted from Amazon . 
 = Binary search algorithm = 
 In computer science , binary search , also known as half @-@ interval search or logarithmic search , is a search algorithm that finds the position of a target value within a sorted array . It compares the target value to the middle element of the array ; if they are unequal , the half in which the target cannot lie is eliminated and the search continues on the remaining half until it is successful . 
 Binary search runs in at worst logarithmic time , making 
 O 
 ( 
 log 
 ⁡ 
 n 
 ) 
 { \ textstyle O ( \ log n ) } 
 comparisons , where 
 n 
 { \ textstyle n } 
 is the number of elements in the array and 
 log 
 { \ textstyle \ log } 
 is the binary logarithm ; and using only constant 
 ( 
 O 
 ( 
 1 
 ) 
 ) 
 { \ textstyle ( O ( 1 ) ) } 
 space . Although specialized data structures designed for fast searching — such as hash tables — can be searched more efficiently , binary search applies to a wider range of search problems . 
 Although the idea is simple , implementing binary search correctly requires attention to some subtleties about its exit conditions and midpoint calculation . 
 There exist numerous variations of binary search . One variation in particular ( fractional cascading ) speeds up binary searches for the same value in multiple arrays . 
 = = Algorithm = = 
 Binary search works on sorted arrays . A binary search begins by comparing the middle element of the array with the target value . If the target value matches the middle element , its position in the array is returned . If the target value is less or more than the middle element , the search continues the lower or upper half of the array respectively with a new middle element , eliminating the other half from consideration . 
 = = = Procedure = = = 
 Given an array A of n elements with values or records A0 ... An − 1 and target value T , the following subroutine uses binary search to find the index of T in A. 
 Set L to 0 and R to n − 1 . 
 If L > R , the search terminates as unsuccessful . Set m ( the position of the middle element ) to the floor of ( L + R ) / 2 . 
 If Am < T , set L to m + 1 and go to step 2 . 
 If Am > T , set R to m − 1 and go to step 2 . 
 If Am = T , the search is done ; return m . 
 This iterative procedure keeps track of the search boundaries via two variables ; a recursive version would keep its boundaries in its recursive calls . Some implementations may place the comparison for equality at the end of the algorithm , resulting in a faster comparison loop but costing one more iteration on average . 
 = = = Approximate matches = = = 
 The above procedure only performs exact matches , finding the position of a target value . However , due to the ordered nature of sorted arrays , it is trivial to extend binary search to perform approximate matches . Particularly , binary search can be used to compute , relative to a value , its rank ( the number of smaller elements ) , predecessor ( next @-@ smallest element ) , successor ( next @-@ largest element ) , and nearest neighbor . Range queries seeking the number of elements between two values can be performed with two rank queries . 
 Rank queries can be performed using a modified version of binary search . By returning m on a successful search , and L on an unsuccessful search , the number of elements less than the target value is returned instead . 
 Predecessor and successor queries can be performed with rank queries . Once the rank of the target value is known , its predecessor is the element at the position given by its rank ( as it is the largest element that is smaller than the target value ) . Its successor is the element after it ( if it is present in the array ) or at the next position after the predecessor ( otherwise ) . The nearest neighbor of the target value is either its predecessor or successor , whichever is closer . 
 Range queries are also straightforward . Once the ranks of the two values are known , the number of elements greater than or equal to the first value and less than the second is the difference of the two ranks . This count can be adjusted up or down by one according to whether the endpoints of the range should be considered to be part of the range and whether the array contains keys matching those endpoints . 
 = = Performance = = 
 The performance of binary search can be analyzed by reducing the procedure to a binary comparison tree , where the root node is the middle element of the array ; the middle element of the lower half is left of the root and the middle element of the upper half is right of the root . The rest of the tree is built in a similar fashion . This model represents binary search ; starting from the root node , the left or right <unk> are traversed depending on whether the target value is less or more than the node under consideration , representing the successive elimination of elements . 
 The worst case is 
 ⌊ 
 log 
 ⁡ 
 n 
 + 
 1 
 ⌋ 
 { \ textstyle \ lfloor \ log n + 1 \ rfloor } 
 iterations ( of the comparison loop ) , where the 
 ⌊ 
 ⌋ 
 { \ textstyle \ lfloor \ rfloor } 
 notation denotes the floor function that rounds its argument down to an integer . This is reached when the search reaches the deepest level of the tree , equivalent to a binary search that has reduced to one element and , in each iteration , always eliminates the smaller <unk> out of the two if they are not of equal size . 
 On average , assuming that each element is equally likely to be searched , by the time the search completes , the target value will most likely be found at the second @-@ deepest level of the tree . This is equivalent to a binary search that completes one iteration before the worst case , reached after 
 log 
 ⁡ 
 n 
 − 
 1 
 { \ textstyle \ log { n } -1 } 
 iterations . However , the tree may be unbalanced , with the deepest level partially filled , and equivalently , the array may not be divided perfectly by the search in some iterations , half of the time resulting in the smaller <unk> being eliminated . The actual number of average iterations is slightly higher , at 
 log 
 ⁡ 
 n 
 − 
 n 
 − 
 log 
 ⁡ 
 n 
 − 
 1 
 n 
 { \ textstyle \ log n- { \ <unk> { n- \ log n @-@ 1 } { n } } } 
 iterations . In the best case , where the first middle element selected is equal to the target value , its position is returned after one iteration . In terms of iterations , no search algorithm that is based solely on comparisons can exhibit better average and worst @-@ case performance than binary search . 
 Each iteration of the binary search algorithm defined above makes one or two comparisons , checking if the middle element is equal to the target value in each iteration . Again assuming that each element is equally likely to be searched , each iteration makes 1 @.@ 5 comparisons on average . A variation of the algorithm instead checks for equality at the very end of the search , eliminating on average half a comparison from each iteration . This decreases the time taken per iteration very slightly on most computers , while guaranteeing that the search takes the maximum number of iterations , on average adding one iteration to the search . Because the comparison loop is performed only 
 ⌊ 
 log 
 ⁡ 
 n 
 + 
 1 
 ⌋ 
 { \ textstyle \ lfloor \ log n + 1 \ rfloor } 
 times in the worst case , for all but enormous 
 n 
 { \ textstyle n } 
 , the slight increase in comparison loop efficiency does not compensate for the extra iteration . Knuth 1998 gives a value of 
 2 
 66 
 { \ textstyle 2 ^ { 66 } } 
 ( more than 73 quintillion ) elements for this variation to be faster . 
 The iterative version of binary search only requires three extra variables , taking constant extra space . When compiled with a compiler that does not support tail call elimination , the recursive version takes space proportional to the number of iterations as extra stack space is required to store the variables . If the array is passed by value instead of by reference to the binary search subroutine , the original array will have to be copied , costing 
 O 
 ( 
 n 
 ) 
 { \ textstyle O ( n ) } 
 extra time and space . Since binary search does not modify the elements of the array , it is safe to pass the array by reference . 
 Fractional cascading can be used to speed up searches of the same value in multiple arrays . Where 
 k 
 { \ textstyle k } 
 is the number of arrays , searching each array for the target value takes 
 O 
 ( 
 k 
 log 
 ⁡ 
 n 
 ) 
 { \ textstyle O ( k \ log n ) } 
 time ; fractional cascading reduces this to 
 O 
 ( 
 k 
 + 
 log 
 ⁡ 
 n 
 ) 
 { \ textstyle O ( k + \ log n ) } 
 . 
 = = Binary search versus other schemes = = 
 = = = Hash tables = = = 
 For implementing associative arrays , hash tables , a data structure that maps keys to records using a hash function , are generally faster than binary search on a sorted array of records ; most implementations require only amortized constant time on average . However , hashing is not useful for approximate matches , such as computing the next @-@ smallest , next @-@ largest , and nearest key , as the only information given on a failed search is that the target is not present in any record . Binary search is ideal for such matches , performing them in logarithmic time . In addition , all operations possible on a sorted array can be performed — such as finding the smallest and largest key and performing range searches . 
 = = = Binary search trees = = = 
 A binary search tree is a binary tree data structure that works based on the principle of binary search : the records of the tree are arranged in sorted order , and traversal of the tree is performed using a logarithmic time binary search @-@ like algorithm . Insertion and deletion also require logarithmic time in binary search trees . This is faster than the linear time insertion and deletion of sorted arrays , and binary trees retain the ability to perform all the operations possible on a sorted array . 
 However , binary search is usually more efficient for searching as binary search trees will most likely be imperfectly balanced , resulting in slightly worse performance than binary search . This applies even to balanced binary search trees , binary search trees that balance their own nodes — as they rarely produce optimally @-@ balanced trees — but to a lesser extent . Although unlikely , the tree may be severely imbalanced with few internal nodes with two children , resulting in the average and worst @-@ case search time approaching 
 n 
 { \ textstyle n } 
 comparisons . Binary search trees take more space than sorted arrays . 
 = = = Linear search = = = 
 Linear search is a simple search algorithm that checks every record until it finds the target value . Linear search can be done on a linked list , which allows for faster insertion and deletion than an array . Binary search is faster than linear search for sorted arrays except if the array is short . If the array must first be sorted , that cost must be amortized ( spread ) over any searches . Sorting the array also enables efficient approximate matches and other operations . 
 = = = Other data structures = = = 
 There exist data structures that may beat binary search in some cases for both searching and other operations available for sorted arrays . For example , searches , approximate matches , and the operations available to sorted arrays can be performed more efficiently than binary search on specialized data structures such as van Emde Boas trees , fusion trees , tries , and bit arrays . However , while these operations can always be done at least efficiently on a sorted array regardless of the keys , such data structures are usually only faster because they exploit the properties of keys with a certain attribute ( usually keys that are small integers ) , and thus will be time or space consuming for keys that do not have that attribute . 
 = = Variations = = 
 = = = Uniform binary search = = = 
 Uniform binary search stores , instead of the lower and upper bounds , the index of the middle element and the number of elements around the middle element that were not eliminated yet . Each step reduces the width by about half . This variation is uniform because the difference between the indices of middle elements and the preceding middle elements chosen remains constant between searches of arrays of the same length . 
 = = = Fibonacci search = = = 
 Fibonacci search is a method similar to binary search that successively shortens the interval in which the maximum of a <unk> function lies . Given a finite interval , a <unk> function , and the maximum length of the resulting interval , Fibonacci search finds a Fibonacci number such that if the interval is divided equally into that many subintervals , the subintervals would be shorter than the maximum length . After dividing the interval , it eliminates the subintervals in which the maximum cannot lie until one or more contiguous subintervals remain . 
 = = = Exponential search = = = 
 Exponential search is an algorithm for searching primarily in infinite lists , but it can be applied to select the upper bound for binary search . It starts by finding the first element with an index that is both a power of two and greater than the target value . Afterwards , it sets that index as the upper bound , and switches to binary search . A search takes 
 ⌊ 
 log 
 ⁡ 
 x 
 + 
 1 
 ⌋ 
 { \ textstyle \ lfloor \ log { x } + 1 \ rfloor } 
 iterations of the exponential search and at most 
 ⌊ 
 log 
 ⁡ 
 n 
 ⌋ 
 { \ textstyle \ lfloor \ log { n } \ rfloor } 
 iterations of the binary search , where 
 x 
 { \ textstyle x } 
 is the position of the target value . Only if the target value is near the beginning of the array is this variation more efficient than selecting the highest element as the upper bound . 
 = = = <unk> search = = = 
 Instead of merely calculating the midpoint , interpolation search attempts to calculate the position of the target value , taking into account the lowest and highest elements in the array and the length of the array . This is only possible if the array elements are numbers . It works on the basis that the midpoint is not the best guess in many cases ; for example , if the target value is close to the highest element in the array , it is likely to be located near the end of the array . When the distribution of the array elements is uniform or near uniform , it makes 
 O 
 ( 
 log 
 ⁡ 
 log 
 ⁡ 
 n 
 ) 
 { \ textstyle O ( \ log \ log n ) } 
 comparisons . 
 In practice , interpolation search is slower than binary search for small arrays , as interpolation search requires extra computation , and the slower growth rate of its time complexity compensates for this only for large arrays . 
 = = = Fractional cascading = = = 
