 Fractional cascading is a technique that speeds up binary searches for the same element for both exact and approximate matching in " catalogs " ( arrays of sorted elements ) associated with vertices in graphs . Searching each catalog separately requires 
 O 
 ( 
 k 
 log 
 ⁡ 
 n 
 ) 
 { \ textstyle O ( k \ log n ) } 
 time , where 
 k 
 { \ textstyle k } 
 is the number of catalogs . Fractional cascading reduces this to 
 O 
 ( 
 k 
 + 
 log 
 ⁡ 
 n 
 ) 
 { \ textstyle O ( k + \ log n ) } 
 by storing specific information in each catalog about other catalogs . 
 Fractional cascading was originally developed to efficiently solve various computational geometry problems , but it also has been applied elsewhere , in domains such as data mining and Internet Protocol routing . 
 = = History = = 
 In 1946 , John Mauchly made the first mention of binary search as part of the Moore School Lectures , the first ever set of lectures regarding any computer @-@ related topic . Every published binary search algorithm worked only for arrays whose length is one less than a power of two until 1960 , when Derrick Henry Lehmer published a binary search algorithm that worked on all arrays . In 1962 , Hermann <unk> presented an ALGOL 60 implementation of binary search that placed the comparison for equality at the end , increasing the average number of iterations by one , but reducing to one the number of comparisons per iteration . The uniform binary search was presented to Donald Knuth in 1971 by A. K. Chandra of Stanford University and published in Knuth 's The Art of Computer Programming . In 1986 , Bernard Chazelle and Leonidas J. <unk> introduced fractional cascading , a technique used to speed up binary searches in multiple arrays . 
 = = Implementation issues = = 
 Although the basic idea of binary search is comparatively straightforward , the details can be surprisingly tricky ... — Donald Knuth 
 When Jon Bentley assigned binary search as a problem in a course for professional programmers , he found that ninety percent failed to provide a correct solution after several hours of working on it , and another study published in 1988 shows that accurate code for it is only found in five out of twenty textbooks . Furthermore , Bentley 's own implementation of binary search , published in his 1986 book Programming Pearls , contained an overflow error that remained undetected for over twenty years . The Java programming language library implementation of binary search had the same overflow bug for more than nine years . 
 In a practical implementation , the variables used to represent the indices will often be of fixed size , and this can result in an arithmetic overflow for very large arrays . If the midpoint of the span is calculated as ( L + R ) / 2 , then the value of L + R may exceed the range of integers of the data type used to store the midpoint , even if L and R are within the range . This can be avoided by calculating the midpoint as L + ( R − L ) / 2 . 
 If the target value is greater than the highest value in the array , and the size of the array is the maximum representable integer , then an overflow will result if one @-@ based instead of zero @-@ based indexing is used . With one @-@ based indexing , R is set to the length to the array instead of one less than the length . Eventually L will equal R after the lower elements are eliminated , while R does not change . Because the target value exceeds the highest value in the array , the next iteration will set L to R + 1 . This results in an overflow because L exceeds R , which is equal to the maximum representable integer . This can be avoided by using zero @-@ based indexing or a larger data type for L so it can fit R + 1 . 
 An infinite loop may occur if the exit conditions for the loop — or equivalently , recursive step — are not defined correctly . Once L exceeds R , the search has failed and must convey the failure of the search . In addition , the loop must be exited when the target element is found , or in the case of an implementation where this check is moved to the end , checks for whether the search was successful or failed at the end must be in place . Bentley found that , in his assignment of binary search , this error was made by most of the programmers who failed to implement a binary search correctly . 
 = = Library support = = 
 Many languages ' standard libraries include binary search routines : 
 C provides the function <unk> ( ) in its standard library , which is typically implemented via binary search ( although the official standard does not require it so ) . 
 C + + ' s STL provides the functions binary _ search ( ) , lower _ bound ( ) , upper _ bound ( ) and equal _ range ( ) . 
 Java offers a set of overloaded <unk> ( ) static methods in the classes Arrays and Collections in the standard <unk> package for performing binary searches on Java arrays and on Lists , respectively . 
 Microsoft 's .NET Framework 2 @.@ 0 offers static generic versions of the binary search algorithm in its collection base classes . An example would be <unk> 's method <unk> < T > ( T [ ] array , T value ) . 
 Python provides the bisect module . 
 Ruby 's Array class includes a <unk> method with built @-@ in approximate matching . 
 Go 's sort standard library package contains the functions Search , <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> , which implement general binary search , as well as specific implementations for searching slices of integers , floating @-@ point numbers , and strings , respectively . 
 For Objective @-@ C , the Cocoa framework provides the <unk> <unk> : <unk> : options : <unk> : method in Mac OS X 10 @.@ 6 + . Apple 's Core Foundation C framework also contains a <unk> ( ) function . 
 = = = Works = = = 
 = Point Stephens Light = 
 Point Stephens Light is an active lighthouse located on Point Stephens , a point on an unnamed headland at the east of Fingal Bay , 4 @.@ 25 km ( 2 @.@ 64 mi ) south of the entrance of Port Stephens , New South Wales , Australia . It serves in assisting vessels entering Port Stephens . It is considered an endangered lighthouse due to remote location and old age . 
 Proposed in 1857 , the lighthouse was built in 1862 . Designed by Alexander Dawson , the New South Wales Government Architect at that time , both the lighthouse 's flared base and the keeper 's cottages combined terrace are unique architectural features for the period . The light source used was originally kerosene lamps , which upgraded in 1912 to a <unk> light , upgraded again to electric light in 1960 , automated in 1973 , and finally converted to solar power in 1990 . In 1991 the last caretaker withdrew from the premises and very soon after the keeper 's cottages were vandalised and burned . 
 The tower is designed in the form of a Doric column . It is divided into four stories with a spiral stairway , and topped by a gallery carrying the lantern . The keeper 's cottages are three one story cottages , sharing a roof . Other structures which still stand at the location are a circa 1930 privy and workshop built in the 1950s . 
 The lighthouse is managed as part of the Tomaree National Park . Access to the lighthouse is difficult , either through a narrow spit of sand at low tide or by boat . 
 = = History = = 
 As early as 1857 , the need for a lighthouse on Point Stephens was identified , due to the proximity to the entrance of Port Stephens , and the dangers of the local coastline to ships . Another reason was that mariners were mistaking the entrance to Fingal Bay for that of Port Stephens . At least twenty four vessels are known to have been wrecked in the area. the most serious being the Dove in 1828 with the loss of seven lives , and the Pandora in 1836 with five lives . Another notable wreck was the Florence Irving in 1877 . 
 The lighthouse was finally built in 1862 and first lit officially on 1 May 1862 . It was designed by Alexander Dawson , the New South Wales Government Architect at that time , with a flared base and an external stairwell , an unusual feature for lighthouses in the time and area . The lighthouse keepers ' cottages were also unique , built in Victorian Gothic style , with both the principal keeper and the two assistants sharing the same roof and a combined terrace . 
 The original apparatus was a 10 feet ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) H Wilkins & Co. <unk> . The light source was twelve kerosene lamps with a parabolic reflector for each lamp , on a revolving iron frame , in four groups of three . Two groups were white and two groups were red , resulting in a light characteristic of an alternating red and white , with intensities of 500 cd and 200 cd , respectively . It was originally manned by three keepers . 
 In 1901 the keeper 's quarters went through major repairs , replacing the original slate tiles with terracotta ones . This was followed with the replacement of the steps handrail in 1903 . A 1903 report criticised the light , saying that the red flashes were only visible for half the distance of the white ones , confusing navigators . This led to a recommendation to remove the red shades , resulting in a new characteristic of one white flash every minute , and later to upgrade the light to a quick group flashing dioptric light . Another report in 1912 stated that the station was in good condition , but criticised the low power of the light , and recommended withdrawing two of the keepers . However , all of these recommendations were not acted upon until 1 July 1922 , when the apparatus was upgraded to a revolving <unk> light with an intensity of 20 @,@ 000 cd , and the manning reduced to two keepers . In 1932 the original gallery handrails , also supplied by H Wilkins & Co . , were replaced with steel gas pipe and mild steel rods . 
 In 1960 the lighthouse was electrified and connected to the mains electricity through a submarine power cable , and a backup diesel generator was installed in the basement of the tower . In March 1973 the lantern was replaced with a smaller 7 feet ( 2 @.@ 1 m ) diameter fiberglass lantern ( NAL @-@ 1 type ) and a PRB @-@ 21 fully automated hexagonal lamp array with a rotating pedestal was installed . The lower part of the original H Wilkins & Co. lantern was retained , together with the 1932 railings . As the tower was now fully automated , the keepers were withdrawn , and the keeper 's quarters were no longer needed for the operation of the light . All logs , drawings and furniture were therefore burned as surplus by the Department of Transport 's employees , and the buildings were set ready for demolition . However , a last minutes campaign by one of the last keepers and by locals was successful , and the buildings were therefore leased to the National Trust of Australia ( NSW ) , which was responsible for its conservation , and a caretaker in turn leased them from the National Trust . 
 In 1990 , following a 1989 failure of the submarine cable and problems with the diesel generator , the light was converted to solar power with battery storage . The caretaker stayed in the premises until March 1991 , when lease arrangement difficulties and the previous failure of the mains forced the caretaker 's withdrawal . It only took until September 1991 for vandals to destroy the keepers ' cottages by fire . In 1992 the Australian Construction Services cleared the site and stabilised some of the building elements , and a security fence was installed . 
 In 1998 management of the Tomaree National Park , in which the lighthouse is located , was transferred to the National Parks and Wildlife Service and the tower received some long due restoration , which completed in October 1998 . At a cost of $ 85 @,@ 000 AUD the walls were cleaned and covered with a special waterproof membrane system , the cast steel staircase refitted and the lantern room resealed for waterproofing . 
 The current light source is a 12 Volt 55 Watt quartz halogen lamp . It revolves once every 30 seconds , showing a characteristic of four white flashes every 30 seconds ( Fl . ( 4 ) W. 30s ) . It has a range of 17 nautical miles ( 31 km ; 20 mi ) and an intensity of 40 @,@ 700 <unk> . 
 = = Structures = = 
 = = = The tower = = = 
 The lighthouse is located on the south @-@ east extremity of the point . The unusual design of the tower relates to the form of a Doric column , with a flared base and ramped approached enabled using of the base for equipment . 
 The walls of the tower are constructed of sandstone blocks , brought by ship as ballast from Sydney , dressed outside and inside , and painted white . The walls ' thickness varies from 2 metres ( 6 ft 7 in ) at the bottom , in a concave slope to 0 @.@ 6 metres ( 2 ft 0 in ) at the top . The tower walls are carried up above the lantern floor to support the metal framework for the lantern . The gallery is surrounded by the 1932 gas pipe railing . 
 The interior of the tower is divided by iron floors and spiral stairways into four stories . The ground floor was originally used for oil store , and it now houses the light equipment , including a generator . Access to the tower was originally through the ramped stone steps on the north , entering the first floor . This entrance was since sealed , and a steel door on the ground level is now used . 
 Originally , the tower was topped with a glass lantern , which was replaced with a fiberglass one in 1973 . The original lantern is now held by the Nelson Bay Historical Society . 
 = = = The keepers ' house = = = 
 The keeper 's house is located about 13 metres ( 43 ft ) north of the tower . It is the only example in Australia of a terrace of lighthouse keepers ' quarters . It was probably completed slightly later than the lighthouse , as building materials were continuing to be sent from Sydney after the official opening . 
 The terrace comprises three one story cottages , a six room cottage for the principal keeper and two three room cottages for the assistants , all sharing the same roof . Each of the cottages had a kitchen , a storeroom and a privy . The building was constructed of the same imported sandstone as the lighthouse , dressed outside and plastered inside . The roof was originally made of slate , replaced in 1901 with terracotta , with five chimneys along the ridge and a bay window and gables along the front . A low terrace was built at the rear from random stone . Photographs from the 1950s also show a rear addition with a <unk> roof infilling part of the verandah . 
 Water was originally supplied from two underground rainwater tanks , each 7 @,@ 650 imperial gallons ( 34 @,@ 800 l ; 9 @,@ 190 US gal ) . The residency was served by a single septic system , discharged via an infiltration bed to the north east of the property . 
 As mentioned above , the keeper 's house was gutted by vandal fire in September 1991 . In early 1992 a fence was installed and the chimneys and gables were stabilised by new brickwork . 
 = = = Other structures = = = 
 Several service structures used to be located behind the resident buildings , namely kitchen , privies and stores , and were destroyed in the 1991 fire , leaving only parts of the timber walls . 
 A brick privy with a gabled roof clad in corrugated asbestos sheeting is located to the north of the cottage building . It was probably constructed circa 1930 . Further north is the workshop building , which also housed the electricity generators at one point , dating from the 1950s . It features a flat and <unk> roof , and concrete mounting blocks . Its most recent use was as a fishermen 's cabin . 
 Other remains include a series of drystone walls near the lighthouse dating from 1865 , and the footings and stay rings of the flagstaff , which has been removed , located south of the lighthouse adjacent to a stone retaining wall . Also at the site are two other timber framed structures , one of which is a former fuel shed constructed circa 1970s , located south of the lighthouse . An above ground brick fuel bunker with a concrete roof and floor is located approximately 40 metres ( 130 ft ) south of the lighthouse , on a rock outcrop . 
 At the north of the island are the remains of a 19th @-@ century wharf including concrete tracks , rock cutting and iron <unk> ( several brackets and stumps ) . A concrete helipad west of the lighthouse was constructed in the 1970s . 
 = = Site operation and visiting = = 
 The light is operated by Roads and Maritime Services ( formerly NSW Maritime ) , while the site is managed by the National Parks and Wildlife Service as part of the Tomaree National Park , in which it is located . Visiting the lighthouse is difficult . The point is connected to the mainland with a narrow tombolo , and is only accessible by foot at low tide . It is accessible by boat , and the grounds are open , though the tower is closed to the public . 
 = Turning Point ( 2007 wrestling ) = 
 Turning Point ( 2007 ) was a professional wrestling pay @-@ per @-@ view ( PPV ) event produced and by the Total Nonstop Action Wrestling ( TNA ) promotion , which took place on December 2 , 2007 at the TNA Impact ! Zone in Orlando , Florida . It was the fourth event under the Turning Point chronology , and the twelfth and last event on the 2007 TNA PPV schedule . Eight professional wrestling matches were featured on the event 's card with only one featuring a championship . 
 The main event was a Six Man Tag Team match , in which the team of Samoa Joe , Kevin Nash , and Eric Young defeated The Angle Alliance ( Kurt Angle , A.J. Styles , and Tomko ) . In another tag team match , Christian Cage and Robert Roode were defeated by Booker T and Kaz . In a high profile match , Johnny Devine and Team 3D ( Brother Devon and Brother Ray ) wrestled Jay Lethal and The Motor City Machine Guns ( Alex Shelley and Chris Sabin ) in a Six Man Tag Team Tables Match . Devine and Team 3D won the contest . The contest between Abyss and Raven versus Black Reign and Rellik in a Match of 10 @,@ 000 Tacks was also featured on the card . Abyss and Raven won the encounter . 
 The event is remembered for Scott Hall 's failure to show up for the event and for Samoa Joe 's unscripted rant against the promotion . It also marks the first time the Feast or Fired match was held . The professional wrestling section of the Canadian Online Explorer website rated the entire event a six and a half out of ten , higher than the 2006 event 's rating of six . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 TNA announced in mid @-@ September 2007 that the fourth Turning Point event would take place on December 2 , 2007 . The location was not announced , but various news sites speculated that it would be held outside the TNA Impact Zone in Orlando , Florida . However , in mid @-@ October , TNA announced the event would be held at the TNA Impact ! Zone . TNA created a section on their official website for the event . The promotional poster was released through PPV providers featuring Abyss , Black Reign , and Judas Mesias and the tagline " Silent Night ... Bloody Night " . TNA held a thirty @-@ minute Road to Turning Point special on Spike TV to promote the event . 
 = = = Storylines = = = 
 Turning Point featured eight professional wrestling matches that involved different wrestlers from pre @-@ existing scripted feuds and storylines . Wrestlers portrayed villains , heroes , or less distinguishable characters in the scripted events that built tension and culminated in a wrestling match or series of matches . 
 The main event was a Six Man Tag Team match pitting The Angle Alliance ( Kurt Angle , A.J. Styles , Tomko ) against the team of Scott Hall , Kevin Nash , and Samoa Joe . Jim Cornette , Management Director , made the announcement on the November 15 episode of TNA 's television program TNA Impact ! . The match was at the request of Hall and Nash , with the stipulation that they would be able to choose a mystery partner . Their mystery partner was later revealed to be Joe during the same episode . The buildup to this encounter began on the November 8 episode of Impact ! , when Nash questioned if Hall was Sting 's mystery partner in a tag team match against Nash and Angle at TNA 's Genesis PPV event on November 11 . Hall denied he was Sting 's partner and at the <unk> mended an alliance with Nash . At Genesis , then @-@ champion Angle and Nash faced Sting and the debuting Booker T in a tag team match for the TNA World Heavyweight Championship . Nash almost won the encounter before being attacked by Angle , thus costing him the pinfall and the championship , and creating a rivalry between the two . 
 The match Kaz and Booker T versus Christian Cage and Robert Roode was also scheduled . On the November 15 episode of Impact ! , Booker T , along with his real @-@ life wife Sharmell , made their Impact ! debut signing talent contracts . They were interrupted by Cage , sparking a rivalry between Booker T and Cage . On the November 29 episode of Impact ! , Cage manipulated Roode into thinking that Booker T was trying to steal his spot at becoming a main star in the promotion . Roode went on to fight Booker T later in the episode in a losing effort . After the encounter , Cage and Roode attacked Booker T , which led Kaz to come to his aid in the situation . A tag team match between the four was later promoted by TNA for Turning Point . 
 Another featured match on the card was a Six Man Tag Team Tables match pitting the teams of Johnny Devine and Team 3D ( Brother Devon and Brother Ray ) against Jay Lethal and The Motor City Machine Guns ( Alex Shelley and Chris Sabin ) ( MCMG ) . On the October 18 episode of Impact ! , Team 3D attacked MCMG and declared they were going to destroy the X Division to which they belonged . This was due to MCMG helping The Steiner Brothers ( Rick and Scott Steiner ) defeat Team 3D at TNA 's Bound for Glory PPV event on October 14 . The two teams then fought at Genesis with MCMG winning the contest . Later in the event , Team 3D attacked and stole the TNA X Division Championship from then @-@ champion Lethal . On the November 15 episode of Impact ! , Devine , an X Division wrestler , turned on the division and joined Team 3D , helping to attack MCMG and Lethal . A Six Man Tag Team Tables match was later added to the Turning Point card . 
 Several lower profile matches were featured at Turning Point . Two were Gail Kim defending the TNA Women 's World Championship against Awesome Kong and the team of Abyss and Rhino versus the team of Black Reign and Rellik in a Match of 10 @,@ 000 Tacks . Also scheduled was the first @-@ ever Feast or Fired match . Kim 's title defense was announced on the November 22 episode of Impact ! and was the result of a brawl between the two on the November 15 episode of Impact ! . Four cases would be hung above four padded turnbuckles , with three holding a title shot while the last holding a pink slip . The Match of 10 @,@ 000 Tacks was the result of a Shop of Horrors match between Abyss and Reign at Genesis . Abyss won the match , but after the encounter Rellik debuted , creating an alliance with Reign by attacking Abyss . On the November 15 episode of Impact ! , Abyss defeated Reign and Rellik in a 3 @-@ Way Dance . Afterwards , Reign and Rellik attacked Abyss until Rhino came to Abyss ' aid . Impact ! commentator Mike Tenay later announced on the November 22 episode of Impact ! , that Rhino and Abyss were scheduled to face Reign and Rellik in a Match of 10 @,@ 000 Tacks at Turning Point 2007 . 
 = = Event = = 
 = = = On @-@ air employees = = = 
 The event featured employees other than the wrestlers involved in the matches . Mike Tenay and Don West were the commentators for the telecast . David Penzer was the ring announcer for all contests . Earl Hebner , Rudy Charles , Mark " Slick " Johnson , and Andrew Thomas were referees for the encounters . Jeremy Borash and Crystal Louthan conducted interviews throughout the event . Besides wrestlers who appeared in a wrestling role , Christy Hemme , Jackie Moore , Ms. Brooks , Karen Angle , and Sharmell were also featured on the broadcast . 
 = = = Preliminary matches = = = 
 The first match to take place on the event 's card was the Six Man Tag Team Tables match pitting the team of Johnny Devine and Team 3D against the team of Jay Lethal and MCMG . The match lasted fourteen minutes and fifty @-@ nine seconds . The objective of a Six Man Tag Team Tables match is to drive one of the members of the opposing team through a table . During the contest , Lethal drove Devine through a table with a driving elbow drop . However , as the referee was scripted to appear unconscious , this allowed Team 3D to knockout MCMG and Lethal with the X Division Championship belt . They followed by draping Devine over Lethal , making it appear as though Devine had drove Lethal through the table , thus winning the match for his team . 
 Velvet @-@ Love Entertainment ( Angelina Love and Velvet Sky ) faced off against the team of ODB and Roxxi Laveaux in a tag team match next . The duration of the contest was six minutes and two seconds . Velvet @-@ Love Entertainment were the victors by pinfall after Love kicked Laveaux in the face . 
 Eric Young fought James Storm , who was accompanied by Jackie Moore , in the third encounter which lasted twelve minutes and twenty @-@ one seconds . Young won the contest with a roll @-@ up pin while Storm was accidentally distracted by the referee . 
 TNA held the first @-@ ever Feast or Fired match next . In the Feast or Fired match , four briefcases are held above four different turnbuckles on poles , with three having future title shots for the TNA World Heavyweight , TNA X Division , and TNA World Tag Team Championships ; the remaining briefcase holds a pink slip , leading to that wrestler 's contract termination . A wrestler must retrieve the briefcase and then leave the ring in order to gain official possession of the case . The participants in the bout were Scott Steiner , Senshi , B.G. James , Petey Williams , Shark Boy , Lance Hoyt , Christopher Daniels , Elix Skipper , Homicide , Hernandez , Kip James , Jimmy Rave , Chris Harris , and Sonjay Dutt . The contest lasted eleven minutes and fifty @-@ five seconds . Christy Hemme accompanied Rave and Hoyt to the ring for the contest . Williams was the first to obtain a case in the match . Kip was the second ; however he threw it to his Voodoo Kin Mafia tag team partner B.G. James who was standing at ringside , thus giving B.G. James possession of the case . A short time later , Senshi retrieved the third case . The final case was collected by Steiner , after he took it from Kip , who had taken it from the retriever Daniels . 
 = = = Main event matches = = = 
 Gail Kim defended the TNA Women 's World Championship against Awesome Kong in the fifth bout . It lasted eight minutes and twenty @-@ three seconds . During the match , Kong repeatedly refused to listen to the referee 's orders , and eventually pushed the referee down , resulting in a disqualification and Kim retained the title . 
 The Match of 10 @,@ 000 Tacks was up next , pitting Abyss and Raven against Black Reign and Rellik . Rhino was originally supposed to be a part of the match , but was removed due to a neck injury he sustained in a previous match ; he was replaced with Raven . The encounter lasted fourteen minutes and forty @-@ one seconds . Raven forced Reign through a table covered with thumbtacks during the contest . The team of Abyss and Raven won the bout , after Abyss slammed Rellik into a pile of thumbtacks and then gained the pinfall victory . Abyss required stitches as a result of this match . 
 In the next match , the team of Kaz and Booker T , accompanied by Sharmell , fought the team of Christian Cage and Robert Roode , accompanied by Ms. Brooks . The duration of the bout was fifteen minutes and fifty seconds . Booker T won the match for his team by pinfall after slamming Cage into the mat face first with the his Axe Kick maneuver . Kaz cracked his skull during the encounter . 
 The main event was a Six Man Tag Team match originally planned to pit the team of Samoa Joe , Kevin Nash , and Scott Hall against The Angle Alliance ( Kurt Angle , A.J. Styles , and Tomko ) , who were accompanied by Karen Angle . Hall had announced that morning that he would not show up . Prior to the match , Joe delivered an unscheduled , unscripted speech to the crowd explaining his anger and distaste for Hall 's failure to show up for the event . He said that Hall " punked out on me and on every single fan in this building tonight " , and concluded : " Scott Hall , <unk> , kiss my ass , you punked out and you 're a punk " . He followed this by announcing Hall 's replacement in the match : Eric Young . The six men fought for a total of nine minutes and thirty @-@ one seconds , before Joe slammed Tomko into the mat with his Muscle Buster maneuver to gain the pinfall . 
 = = Reception = = 
 A total of nine hundred people attended the event . Canadian Online Explorer writer Chris Sokol rated the entire event a six and a half out of ten , which was the same rating given to the 2006 Turning Point event . It was higher than the six out of ten given to TNA 's next event Final Resolution . It was lower than the seven and a half out of ten given to TNA 's previous Genesis PPV event . Compared to rival World Wrestling Entertainment 's Armageddon PPV event held on December 16 , Turning Point was rated lower as Armageddon was given a seven out of ten by Bob Kapur . In Sokol 's review four matches were rated a seven out of ten , his overall highest rating given in the review . The first was the Six Man Tag Team Tables match , which Sokol felt " was a solid match . " The second match given this score was the Match of 10 @,@ 000 Tacks , which Sokol believed to be " just an all out brawl . " Sokol rated the Kaz and Booker T versus Christian Cage and Robert Roode bout seven out of ten and stated he thought it was a " good match . " The main event was the final one with this rating , which Sokol thought was a " decent " match . The women 's tag team match was the lowest rated match in Sokol 's review , with a 5 out of 10 . Regrading the entire event , Sokol thought that " despite all the chaos , the PPV still churned out some good matches . " Wade Keller of the Pro Wrestling Torch published a review of the event , in which his highest rating of two and a three @-@ quarter stars out of five was given to the Six Man Tag Team Tables match , while his lowest of half a star out of five was given to the women 's tag team match and the Storm versus Young bout . The Kaz and Booker T versus Cage and Roode bout was given a two and a half out of five stars . The main event was rated one and a half out of five stars . The event was released on DVD on February 5 , 2008 by TNA Home Video . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Following Turning Point , A.J. Styles tried to unite Christian 's Coalition and The Angle Alliance . On the December 6 , 2007 episode of Impact , Christian Cage became leader of a joint alliance , until Kurt Angle and Robert Roode attacked him at the end of the episode . This led to Angle defending the TNA World Heavyweight Championship against Cage at TNA 's Final Resolution PPV event on January 6 , 2008 . There , Angle defeated Cage after Styles attacked Cage , effectively siding with The Angle Alliance . The two fought again for the title at TNA 's Against All Odds PPV event on February 10 , 2008 , where Tomko cost Cage the title , siding with The Angle Alliance as well . 
 At Final Resolution , Roode and Booker T fought again in a Mixed Tag Team match . Sharmell had come to Roode 's manager Ms. Brooks ' defense on the December 13 , 2007 episode of Impact ! after Roode belittled her for losing a match , providing a reason for the encounter . At Final Resolution , Sharmell and Booker T defeated Roode and Ms. Brooks in a Mixed Tag Team match . After the encounter , Roode accidentally punched Sharmell , injuring her in the storyline . This led to a match between Roode and Booker T at Against All Odds , which ended in a double count @-@ out . At TNA 's Destination X PPV event on March 9 , 2008 , Roode defeated Booker T in a Stand By Your Man Strap match . Sharmell returned after this encounter , resulting in an Intergender Tag Team Six Sides of Steel Cage match at TNA 's Lockdown PPV event on April 13 , 2008 pitting Roode and his new manager Payton Banks against Booker T and Sharmell , which the later team won . 
 Team 3D 's feud with the X Division continued into Final Resolution . The two teams fought again on the December 6 , 2007 episode of Impact ! in a Six Man Tag Team Ladder match , which Johnny Devine and Team 3D won . On the December 20 , 2007 episode of Impact ! , Jay Lethal and MCMG defeated Devine and Team 3D in a Double North Pole match to determine the stipulation to their match at Final Resolution ; choosing an Ultimate X match over a Plate glass Tables match . On the January 3 , 2008 episode of Impact ! , Team 3D attacked and injured MCMG in the storyline by beating their hands with kendo sticks , which made it hard to compete in an Ultimate X match in storyline . At Final Resolution , Devine and Team 3D won the bout . The feud came to an end at Against All Odds , where Lethal and MCMG defeated Devine and Team 3D in a Street Fight to save the X Division from disbandment . 
 Gail Kim defended the newly named TNA Women 's Knockout Championship against Awesome Kong at Final Resolution in a No Disqualification match and successfully retained the title . This led to another fight between Kong and Kim on the January 10 , 2008 episode of Impact ! , in which Kong defeated Kim to win back the championship . 
 The contents of the Feast or Fired briefcases were revealed on the December 13 , 2007 episode of Impact ! . However , on the December 6 , 2007 episode of Impact ! , Christopher Daniels defeated Senshi with Elix Skipper as Special Guest Referee to win his briefcase . Prior to the unveiling , Scott Steiner defeated fellow briefcase holders Daniels , Petey Williams , and B.G. James to get to decide to either switch his briefcase with another or take a $ 50 @,@ 000 buyout . Steiner chose to switch his briefcase with Williams ' . Williams ' new and Steiner 's old briefcases were then opened , awarding Williams a future TNA World Heavyweight Championship match . James ' briefcase was next , giving him a future TNA World Tag Team Championship match with a partner of his choice . Steiner 's new and Williams ' old briefcase as well as Daniels ' case was open simultaneously next . Awarding Steiner a future TNA X Division Championship match and giving Daniels the pink slip , effectively firing him in storyline . After this segment , Steiner and Williams started a storyline over their briefcases , leading up to Against All Odds where Steiner defeated Williams to gain control over both cases . This led to Steiner and Williams starting a partnership , in which Steiner gave Williams the TNA X Division Championship title shot which he used on the April 17 , 2008 episode of Impact ! to win the title . Steiner went on to use his title shot at TNA 's Sacrifice PPV event on May 11 , 2008 in a losing effort against then @-@ champion Samoa Joe and Kaz in a 3 @-@ Way Dance . James announced his tag team partner on the January 17 , 2008 episode of Impact ! as his real @-@ life father Bob Armstrong . The two revealed on the January 24 , 2008 episode of Impact ! that they would use their title match at Against All Odds . The two failed to win the title from A.J. Styles and Tomko at the event . 
 = = = Effects of Scott Hall 's no @-@ showing = = = 
 Leading up to Turning Point 2007 , TNA officials began to suspect Scott Hall would not show up at the event , as the last contact with him prior to the event was earlier that morning . TNA officials soon received word from Hall that he was suffering from food poisoning and would not be able to attend . As a result of the no @-@ show , officials approached Samoa Joe and asked him to help take blame off the company for Hall 's no @-@ show and to help promote talent in TNA by giving an announcement before introducing Eric Young as Hall 's replacement . Joe 's announcement went five minutes longer than originally planned , which upset several individuals in TNA . At one point during his announcement , he asked a person off @-@ screen if they were angry and to go ahead and fire him , as he did not care ; this individual was the legitimate president of TNA , Dixie Carter . After the event went off the air , a heated exchange between Kevin Nash and Joe took place backstage . The next night , TNA held a meeting and announced that anyone unhappy with their job could void their contract with the company . Senshi was the only one who wished to void his contract . During the meeting , Joe apologized for his actions at the event . 
 Due to Joe 's rant at Turning Point , TNA created a storyline in which Joe was unhappy with his position in the company . On the January 3 , 2008 episode of Impact ! , Management Director Jim Cornette announced that Joe and Nash would team up to challenge for the TNA World Tag Team Championship at Final Resolution . At the event , Nash abandoned Joe , causing him to fight off both A.J. Styles and Tomko , before succumbing to defeat in the storyline . After this , Joe and Nash began a partnership , in which Nash tried to help Joe deal with his issues over the way he was treated by TNA , and secured him a new contract . Joe was soon given a TNA World Heavyweight Championship match at TNA 's Lockdown PPV event on the February 21 , 2008 episode of Impact ! by Cornette . At Lockdown , Joe defeated Angle in a Six Sides of Steel Cage match to win the TNA World Heavyweight Championship . Joe held the championship until TNA 's Bound for Glory IV PPV event on October 12 , 2008 , in which Sting defeated Joe with help from Nash ( who had been inactive since the summer ) . On the October 30 , 2008 episode of Impact ! , Nash said the reason Hall missed the match at Turning Point was that Hall did not believe that Joe was " worth the rub " . Joe and Nash fought at TNA 's Turning Point PPV event on November 9 , 2008 , which Nash won . Joe and Nash fought again several months later at TNA 's Sacrifice PPV event on May 24 , 2009 , where Joe won , thus ending the feud . 
 Those within TNA held strong negative feelings toward Hall for missing the event ; many felt he should have at least tried to make it to the show . Dixie Carter was upset at Joe 's comments prior to the main event , believing Joe tried to go " into business for himself . " Chris Sokol 's wrote in his review : " The old saying was , ' Don 't turn your back on the Wolfpack . ' However , thats just what Scott Hall did when he decided to no @-@ show his TNA PPV return . " 
 = = Results = = 
 = Beck = 
 Beck Hansen ( born Bek David Campbell ; July 8 , 1970 ) , known by stage name Beck , is an American singer , songwriter , producer and multi @-@ instrumentalist . He is mostly known for his musical composition , as well as a palette of sonic genres . 
 He rose to fame in the early 1990s with his sonically experimental and lo @-@ fi style , and became known for creating musical collages of wide genre styles . Today , he musically encompasses folk , funk , soul , hip hop , alternative rock , country and psychedelia . He has released 12 studio albums ( 3 of which were independently released ) , as well as several non @-@ album singles and a book of sheet music . 
 Born in Los Angeles in 1970 , Beck grew towards hip @-@ hop and folk in his teens and began to perform locally at coffeehouses and clubs . He moved to New York City in 1989 and became involved in the city 's small fiery anti @-@ folk movement . Returning to LA in the early 1990s , he cut his breakthrough single " Loser " , which became a worldwide hit in 1994 , and released his first major album , Mellow Gold , the same year . Odelay , released in 1996 , produced hit singles , topped critic polls and won several awards . He released the psychedelic Mutations in 1998 , and the funk @-@ infused Midnite Vultures in 1999 . The soft @-@ acoustic Sea Change in 2002 showcased a more serious Beck , and 2005 's Guero returned to Odelay 's sample @-@ based production . The Information in 2006 was inspired by electrofunk and hip hop , and 2008 's Modern Guilt by ' 60s music , and 2014 's folk @-@ infused Morning Phase , winning Album of the Year at the 57th Grammy Awards on February 8 , 2015 . He is reportedly working on a 13th studio album , with the singles " Dreams " and " Wow " released from it . 
 With a pop art collage of musical styles , <unk> ironic lyrics , and postmodern arrangements incorporating samples , drum machines , live instrumentation and sound effects , Beck has been hailed by critics and the public throughout his musical career as being among the most idiosyncratically creative musicians of 1990s and 2000s alternative rock . Two of Beck 's most popular and acclaimed recordings are Odelay and Sea Change , both of which were ranked on Rolling Stone 's list of the 500 greatest albums of all time . The four @-@ time platinum artist has collaborated with several artists and has made several contributions to soundtracks . 
 Beck is married to actress Marissa Ribisi , and is an active Scientologist . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Beck was born in Los Angeles , to David Campbell , a Canadian @-@ born musician , and Bibbe Hansen , a visual artist and former Warhol superstar . Bibbe 's mother was Jewish , while Bibbe 's father , Al Hansen , was partly of Norwegian descent . Beck has said that he was " raised celebrating Jewish holidays " , and that he considers himself Jewish . Beck 's mother grew up amid New York 's Andy Warhol Factory art scene of the 1960s , but moved to California at age 17 , where she met Campbell . His father is a Canadian @-@ born arranger , composer and conductor who worked on hundreds of albums and numerous films . 
 Beck began life in a rooming house near downtown Los Angeles . As a child , he lived in a declining neighborhood just off Hollywood Boulevard . " By the time we left there , they were ripping out miles of houses en masse and building low @-@ rent , giant apartment blocks , " he later recalled . The lower @-@ class family struggled financially , moving to Hoover and Ninth Street , a neighborhood populated primarily by Koreans and Salvadorian refugees . He was sent for a time to live with his paternal grandparents in Kansas , with Beck later remarking that " I think they were kind of concerned " about his " weird " home life . Since his paternal grandfather was a Presbyterian minister , Beck grew up influenced by church music and hymns . Beck also spent time in Europe with his maternal grandfather , Al Hansen , a visual collage artist and a pioneer in the avant @-@ garde Fluxus movement . 
 After his parents separated when he was ten , Beck stayed with his mother and brother in Los Angeles , where he was influenced by the city 's diverse musical offerings — everything from hip hop to Latin music and his mother 's art scene — all of which would later reappear in his recorded and published work . Beck obtained his first guitar at 16 and became a street musician , often playing Lead Belly covers at Lafayette Park . During his teens , Beck discovered the music of Sonic Youth , Pussy Galore and X , but remained uninterested in most music outside folk until many years into his career . The first contemporary music that made a direct connection with Beck was hip hop , which he first heard on Grandmaster Flash records in the early 1980s . Growing up in a predominantly Latin district , he found himself the only white child at his school , and he quickly learned to breakdance . When he was 17 , Beck grew fascinated after hearing a Mississippi John Hurt record at a friend 's house , and spent hours in his room trying to emulate the finger picking of the country @-@ blues guitarist . Shortly thereafter , Beck explored blues and folk music further , discovering Woody Guthrie and Blind Willie Johnson . 
 Feeling like " a total outcast " , Beck dropped out of school after junior high . He later said that although he felt school was important , he felt unsafe there . When he applied to the new performing arts high school downtown , he was rejected . His brother , Channing , took him to post @-@ Beat jazz places in Echo Park and Silver Lake . He hung out at the Los Angeles City College , perusing records , books and old sheet music in its library . He used a fake I.D. to sit in on classes there , and he also befriended a literature instructor and his poet wife . He soon began a stream of menial jobs , including loading trucks and operating a leaf blower . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Early performing and first releases ( 1985 – 93 ) = = = 
 Beck began as a folk musician , switching between country blues , Delta blues and more traditional rural folk music in his teens . He began performing on city buses , often covering Mississippi John Hurt alongside original , sometimes improvisational compositions . " I 'd get on the bus and start playing Mississippi John Hurt with totally improvised lyrics . Some drunk would start yelling at me , calling me Axl Rose . So I 'd start singing about Axl Rose and the levee and bus passes and strychnine , mixing the whole thing up , " he later recalled . He was also in a band called <unk> that hosted Dadaist @-@ inspired freeform events at city coffee shops . " We had Radio Shack mics and this homemade speaker and we 'd draft people in the audience to recite comic books or do a beatbox thing , or we 'd tie the whole audience up in masking tape , " Beck recalled . 
 In 1989 , Beck caught a bus to New York City with little more than eight dollars and a guitar . He spent the summer attempting to find a job and a place to live with little success . Beck eventually began to frequent Manhattan 's Lower East Side and stumbled upon the tail end of the East Village 's anti @-@ folk scene 's first wave . Beck became involved in a loose posse of acoustic musicians — including Cindy Lee Berryhill , Kirk Kelly , <unk> , and Lach , headed by Roger Manning — whose <unk> and eccentricity placed them well outside the acoustic mainstream . " The whole mission was to destroy all the clichés and make up some new ones , " said Beck of his New York years . " Everybody knew each other . You could go up onstage and say anything , and you wouldn 't feel weird or feel any pressure . " Inspired by that freedom and by the local spoken @-@ word performers , Beck began to write free @-@ associative , surrealistic songs about pizza , MTV , and working at McDonald 's , turning mundane thoughts into songs . Beck was roommates with <unk> , sleeping on his couch and attending open mic nights together . <unk> by the prospect of another homeless New York winter , Beck returned to his home of Los Angeles in early 1991 . " I was tired of being cold , tired of getting beat up , " he later remarked . " It was hard to be in New York with no money , no place [ .... ] I kinda used up all the friends I had . Everyone on the scene got sick of me . " 
 Back in Los Angeles , Beck began to work at a video store in Silver Lake " doing things like <unk> the pornography section " . He began performing in arthouse clubs and coffeehouses such as Al 's Bar and Raji 's . In order to keep indifferent audiences engaged in his music , Beck would play in a spontaneous , joking manner . " I 'd be banging away on a Son House tune and the whole audience would be talking . So maybe out of desperation or boredom , or the audience 's boredom , I 'd make up these ridiculous songs just to see if people were listening , " he later remarked . Virtually an unknown to the public and an enigma to those who met him , Beck would hop onstage between acts in local clubs and play " strange folk songs " , accompanied by " what could best be described as performance art " while sometimes wearing a Star Wars stormtrooper mask . Beck met someone who offered to help record demos in his living room , and he began to pass cassette tapes around . 
 Eventually , Beck gained key boosters in Margaret <unk> , the West Coast 's director of talent acquisitions for BMG Music Publishing , and the partners behind independent record label Bong Load Custom Records : Tom Rothrock , Rob Schnapf and Brad Lambert . Schnapf saw Beck perform at <unk> and felt he would suit their small venture . Beck expressed a loose interest in hip hop , and Rothrock introduced him to Carl Stephenson , a record producer for Rap @-@ A @-@ Lot Records . In 1992 , Beck visited Stephenson 's home to collaborate . The result — the slide @-@ sampling hip hop track " Loser " — was a one @-@ off experiment that Beck set aside , going back to his folk songs , making his home tapes , such as Golden Feelings , and releasing several independent singles . 
 = = = Mellow Gold , and independent albums ( 1993 – 94 ) = = = 
 By 1993 , Beck was living in a rat @-@ infested shed near a Los Angeles alleyway with little money . Bong Load issued " Loser " as a single in March 1993 on 12 " vinyl with only 500 copies pressed . Beck felt that " Loser " was mediocre , and only agreed to its release at Rothrock 's insistence . " Loser " unexpectedly received radio airplay , starting in Los Angeles , where college radio station <unk> was the first to play it , and later on Santa Monica College radio station KCRW , where radio host Chris Douridas played the song on Morning Becomes Eclectic , the station 's flagship music program . " I called the record label that day and asked to have Beck play live on the air , " Douridas said . " He came in that Friday , rapped to a tape of ' Loser ' and did his song ' MTV Makes Me Want to Smoke Crack . ' " That night , Beck performed at the Los Angeles club Cafe Troy to a packed audience and talent scouts from major labels . The song then spread to Seattle through KNDD , and KROQ @-@ FM began playing the song on an almost hourly basis . As Bong Load struggled to press more copies of " Loser " , Beck was beset with offers to sign with major labels . During the bidding war in November , Beck spent several days in Olympia , Washington , recording material with Calvin Johnson of Beat Happening , which would later see release the following year on Johnson 's K Records as One Foot in the Grave . 
 A fierce bidding war ensued , with Geffen Records A & R director Mark Kates signing Beck in December 1993 despite intense competition from Warner Bros. and Capitol . Beck 's non @-@ exclusive contract with Geffen allowed him an unusual amount of creative freedom , with Beck remaining free to release material through such small , independent labels as Flipside , which issued the sprawling , 25 @-@ track collection of pre- " Loser " recordings titled <unk> <unk> on February 22 the following year . By the time Beck released his first album for Geffen , the low @-@ budget , genre @-@ blending Mellow Gold on March 1 , " Loser " was already in the top 40 and its video in MTV 's Buzz Bin . " Loser " quickly ascended the charts in the U.S. , reaching a peak of number ten on the Billboard Hot 100 singles chart and topping the Modern Rock Tracks chart . The song also charted in the UK , Australia , New Zealand , and throughout Europe . Beck 's newfound position of attention led to his characterization as the " King of Slackers " , as the media dubbed him the center of the new so @-@ called " slacker " movement . Critics , feeling it the essential follow @-@ up to Radiohead 's " Creep " , found <unk> in the lyrics of " Loser " strongly associated with Generation X , although Beck himself strongly contested his position as the face of the " slacker " generation : " <unk> my ass . I mean , I never had any slack . I was working a $ 4 @-@ an @-@ hour job trying to stay alive . That slacker stuff is for people who have the time to be depressed about everything . " 
 = = = Backlash and Odelay ( 1994 – 97 ) = = = 
 Feeling as though he were " constantly trying to prove myself " , Beck suffered a backlash , with skeptics denouncing him as a self @-@ indulgent fake and the latest marketing opportunity . In the summer of 1994 , Beck was struggling and many of his fellow musicians thought he had lost his way . Combined with the song 's wildly popular music video and the world tour , Beck reacted believing the attention could not last , resulting in a status as a " one @-@ hit wonder " . At other concerts , crowds were treated to twenty minutes of reggae or Miles Davis or jazz @-@ punk iterations of " Loser " . At one @-@ day festivals in California , he surrounded himself with an <unk> combo . The drummer set fire to his cymbals ; the lead guitarist " played " his char with the strings faced towards his body ; and Beck changed the words to " Loser " so that nobody could sing along . " I can 't tell you how many times I was looking at faces that were looking back at me with complete bewilderment — or just pointing and shaking their heads and laughing — while performing during that period , " he later recalled . Despite this , Beck gained the respect of his peers , such as Tom Petty and Johnny Cash , and created an entire wave of bands determined to recapture the Mellow Gold sound . Feeling his previous releases were just collections of demos recorded over the course of several years , Beck desired to enter the studio and record an album in a continuous linear fashion , which became Odelay . 
 Beck blends country , blues , rap , jazz and rock on Odelay , the result of a year and half of feverish " cutting , pasting , layering , dubbing , and , of course , sampling " . Each day , the musicians started from scratch , often working on songs for 16 hours straight . Odelay 's conception lies in an unfinished studio album Beck first embarked on following the success of " Loser " , chronicling the difficult time he experienced : " There was a cycle of everyone dying around me , " he recalled later . He was constantly recording , and eventually put together an album of somber , orchestrated folk tunes ; one that , perhaps , " could have been a commercial blockbuster along with similarly themed work by Smashing Pumpkins , Nine Inch Nails and Nirvana " . Instead , Beck plucked one song from it — the Odelay album closer " <unk> " — and shelved the rest ( " Brother " and " Feather In Your Cap " were however later released as B @-@ Sides ) . Beck was introduced to the Dust Brothers , producers of the Beastie Boys ' album Paul 's Boutique , whose cut @-@ and @-@ paste , sample @-@ heavy production suited Beck 's vision of a more fun , accessible album . After a record executive explained that Odelay would be a " huge mistake " , he spent many months thinking " that I 'd blown it forever " . 
 Odelay was released on June 18 , 1996 , to commercial success and critical acclaim . The record produced several hit singles , including " Where It 's At " , " Devils Haircut " , and " The New Pollution " , and was nominated for the Grammy Award for Album of the Year in 1997 , winning a Grammy Award for Best Alternative Music Album as well as a Grammy Award for Best Male Rock Vocal Performance for " Where It 's At " . During one busy week in January 1997 , he landed his Grammy nominations , appeared on Saturday Night Live and Howard Stern , and did a last @-@ minute trot on The Rosie O 'Donnell Show . The combined buzz gave Odelay a second wind , leading to an expanded fan base and additional exposure . Beck enjoyed but , like several executives at Geffen , was bewildered by the success of Odelay . He would often get recognized in public , which made him feel strange . " It 's just weird . It doesn 't feel right . It doesn 't feel natural to me . I don 't think I was made for that . I was never good at that , " he later told Pitchfork . Odelay sold two million copies and put " one @-@ hit wonder " criticisms to rest . During this time , he contributed " Deadweight " to the soundtrack of the film A Life Less Ordinary ( 1997 ) . 
 = = = Mutations and Midnite Vultures ( 1998 – 2001 ) = = = 
 Having not been in a proper studio since " Deadweight " , Beck felt anxious to " go in and just do some stuff real quick " , and compiled several songs he had had for years . Beck and his bandmates hammered out fourteen songs in fourteen days , although just twelve made it onto the album , 1998 's Mutations . Beck decided on Nigel Godrich , producer for Radiohead 's OK Computer the previous year , to be behind the boards for the project . Godrich was leaving the United States for England in a short time , which led to the album 's quick production schedule — " No looking back , no doctoring anything " . The whole point of the record was to capture the performance of the musicians live , an uncharacteristic far @-@ cry from the cut @-@ and @-@ paste aesthetic of Odelay . Though the album was originally slated for release by Bong Load Records , Geffen intervened and issued the record against Beck 's wishes . The artist then sought to void his contracts with both record labels , and in turn the labels sued him for breach of contract . The litigation went on for years and it remains unclear to this day if it has ever been completely resolved . Beck was later awarded Best Alternative Music Performance for Mutations at the 42nd Grammy Awards . 
 Midnite Vultures , Beck 's next studio effort , was originally recorded as a double album , and more than 25 nearly completed songs were left behind . In the studio , Beck and producers studied contemporary hip hop and R & B , specifically R. Kelly , in order to embrace and incorporate those influences in the way Al Green and Stax records had done in previous decades . In July 1998 , a core group began to assemble at Beck 's Pasadena home : bassist Justin Meldal @-@ Johnsen , keyboardist Roger Joseph Manning Jr . , and producer @-@ engineers Mickey <unk> and Tony Hoffer . Dozens of session players passed through , including Beck 's father , David Campbell , who played viola and arranged some of the strings . The musicians held communal meals and mountain @-@ bike rides on dusty trails nearby , but remained focused on Beck 's instructions : to make an up @-@ tempo album that would be fun to play on tour night after night . " I had so many things going on " , said Beck of the recording process . " I had a couple of rooms of computers hooked up , I was doing B sides for Japan , I was programming beats in one room and someone would be cooking dinner in the other room . " In November 1999 , Geffen released the much @-@ anticipated Midnite Vultures , which attracted confusion : " fans and critics misguidedly worried whether it was serious or a goof , " and as a result , The New York Times wrote that the album " never won the audience it deserved " . The record was supported by an extensive world tour . For Beck , it was a return to the high @-@ energy performances that had been his trademark as far back as Lollapalooza . The live stage set included a red bed that descended from the ceiling for the song " Debra " , and the touring band was complemented by a brass section . Midnite Vultures was nominated for Best Album at the 43rd Annual Grammy Awards . 
 = = = Sea Change ( 2002 – 03 ) = = = 
 In 2000 , Beck and his fiancée , stylist Leigh Limon , ended their nine @-@ year relationship . Beck lapsed into a period of melancholy and introspection , during which he wrote the bleak , acoustic @-@ based tracks later found on Sea Change . Beck sat on the songs , not wanting to talk about his personal life ; he later said that he wanted to focus on music and " not really strew my baggage across the public lobby " . Eventually , however , he decided the songs spoke to a common experience ( a relationship breakup ) , and that it would not seem self @-@ indulgent to record them . In 2001 , Beck drifted back to the songs and called producer Nigel Godrich . 
 Retailers initially predicted that the album would not receive much radio support , but they also believed that Beck 's maverick reputation and critical acclaim , in addition to the possibility of multiple Grammy nominations , might offset Sea Change 's uncommercial sound . Sea Change , issued by Geffen in September 2002 , was regardless a commercial hit and critical darling , with Rolling Stone revering it as " the best album Beck has ever made , [ ... ] an impeccable album of truth and light from the end of love . This is his Blood on the Tracks . " The album was later listed by the magazine as one of the best records of the decade and of all @-@ time , and it also placed second on the year 's Pazz & Jop Critics Poll . Sea Change yielded a low @-@ key , theater @-@ based acoustic tour , as well as a larger tour with The Flaming Lips as Beck 's opening and backing band . Beck was playful and energetic , sometimes throwing in covers of The Rolling Stones , Big Star , The Zombies and The Velvet Underground . 
 Following the release of Sea Change , Beck felt newer compositions were sketches for something more evolved in the same direction , and wrote nearly 35 more songs in the coming months , keeping demos of them on tapes in a suitcase . During his solo tour , the tapes were left backstage during a stop in Washington , D.C. , and Beck was never able to recover them . It was disheartening to the musician , who felt the two years of songwriting represented something more technically complex . As a result , Beck took a break and wrote no original compositions in 2003 . Feeling as though it might take him a while to " get back to that [ songwriting ] territory " , he entered the studio with Dust Brothers to complete a project that dated back to Odelay . Nearly half of the songs had existed since the 1990s . 
 = = = Guero and The Information ( 2004 – 07 ) = = = 
 Guero , Beck 's eighth studio album , was recorded over the span of nine months during which several significant events occurred in his life : his girlfriend , Marissa Ribisi , became pregnant ; they were married ; their son , Cosimo , was born ; and they moved out of Silver Lake . The collaboration with the Dust Brothers , his second , was notable for their use of high @-@ tech measures to achieve a lo @-@ fi sound . For example , after recording a " sonically perfect " version of a song at one of the nicest recording studios in Hollywood , the Dust Brothers processed it in an Echoplex to create a gritty , reverb @-@ heavy sound : " We did this high @-@ tech recording and ran it through a transistor radio . It sounded too good , that was the problem . " Initially due to be released in October 2004 , Guero faced delays and did not come out till March 2005 , though unmastered copies of the tracks surfaced online in January . 
 Guero debuted at number two on the Billboard 200 , selling 162 @,@ 000 copies , an all @-@ time sales high . Lead single " E @-@ Pro " peaked at number one at Modern Rock radio , making it his first chart @-@ topper since " Loser " . Beck , inspired by the <unk> remix scene and feeling a connection with its lo @-@ fi , home @-@ recording method , collaborated with artists 8 @-@ Bit and <unk> on Hell Yes , an EP issued in February 2005 . In December 2005 , Geffen also issued <unk> , a fully reworked version of Guero featuring remixes by the Beastie Boys ' Ad @-@ Rock , the Dust Brothers ' John King and Scottish electronic duo Boards of Canada . <unk> combines remixes previously heard as B @-@ sides and new versions of album tracks to make a track @-@ by @-@ track reconfiguration of the album . Also released in 2005 was A Brief Overview , a 12 @-@ track promotional @-@ only " History of Beck " compilation CD sampler that featured a combination of older and newer Beck tracks . 
 The Information , Beck 's ninth studio album , began production around the same time as Guero , in 2003 . Working with producer Nigel Godrich , Beck built a studio in his garden , where they wrote many of the tracks . " The idea was to get people in a room together recording live , hitting bad notes and screaming , " said Beck , adding that the album is best described as " introspective hip hop " . Beck described the recording process as " painful " , noting that he edited down songs constantly and he perhaps recorded the album three times . For the release , Beck was allowed for the first time to fulfill a long @-@ running wish for an unconventional rollout : he made low @-@ budget videos to accompany each song , packaged the CD with sheets of stickers so buyers could customize the cover , and leaked tracks and videos on his website months ahead of the album 's release . Digital download releases automatically downloaded the song 's additional video for each single sale , and physical copies came bundled with an additional DVD featuring fifteen videos . 
 = = = Modern Guilt , Song Reader and independent production work ( 2008 – 12 ) = = = 
 In 2007 , Beck released the single " Timebomb " , which was nominated for a Grammy Award for Best Solo Rock Vocal Performance . For his next studio effort , his tenth , Beck tapped Danger Mouse to produce , and the two first met in December 2007 to record . The duo knocked out two tracks in two days , but the notion that the album would be finished in a timely fashion soon evaporated . Beck had known Danger Mouse casually before , as many of his former musicians ended up working with Danger Mouse 's side project , Gnarls Barkley . Still , the musicians were surprised at how well they got along . Following the grueling recording schedule , Beck was exhausted , calling it " the most intense work I 've ever done on anything " , relating that he " did at least 10 weeks with no days off , until four or five in the morning every night . " Beck 's original vision was a short 10 @-@ track burst with two @-@ minute songs , but the songs gradually grew as he fit ' two years of songwriting into two and a half months . " 
 Modern Guilt ( 2008 ) , " full of off @-@ kilter rhythms and left @-@ field breakdowns , with an overall 1960s vibe " , was the final release in his contract with Geffen Records . Beck , then 38 , had held the contract since his early 20s . Released from his label contract and going independent , Beck began working more heavily on his own seven @-@ year @-@ old label , which went through a variety of names . His focus on smaller , more quixotic projects , Beck <unk> as a producer , working with artists such as Charlotte Gainsbourg , Thurston Moore and Stephen Malkmus . He worked for five or six days a week at the small studio on his property in Malibu , and founded Record Club , a project whereby an entire classic album — by The Velvet Underground , Leonard Cohen , INXS , Yanni — would be covered by another singer in the span of a single day . Beck provided four songs for the film Scott Pilgrim vs. the World ( 2010 ) , each attributed to the title character 's fictional band , Sex Bob @-@ <unk> . Beck also collaborated with Philip Glass , Jack White , Tobacco of Black Moth Super Rainbow , Jamie Lidell , Seu Jorge , Childish Gambino , and The Lonely Island . 
 Song Reader , a project Beck released in December 2012 , is 20 songs presented only as sheet music , in the hopes that enterprising musicians will record their own versions . The idea of Song Reader came about nearly fifteen years prior , shortly after the release of Odelay . When sent a book of transcribed sheet music for that album , Beck decided to play through it and grew interested in the world before recorded sound . He aimed to keep the arrangements as open as possible , to re @-@ create the simplicity of the standards , and became preoccupied with creating only pieces that could fit within the Great American Songbook . In 2013 Beck began playing special Song Reader concerts with a variety of guests and announced he was working on a record of Song Reader material with other musicians as well as possibly a compilation of fan versions . 
 = = = Morning Phase and thirteenth studio album ( 2013 – present ) = = = 
 In the summer of 2013 , Beck was reported to be working on two new studio albums : one a more self @-@ contained acoustic disc in the vein of One Foot in the Grave and another described as a " proper follow @-@ up " to Modern Guilt . Beck expected to release both albums independently . He released two standalone singles over the course of the summer : the electro ballad " <unk> " and the chorus @-@ heavy " I Won 't Be Long " . A third single , " Gimme " , appeared on September 17 . 
 In October 2013 , it was announced that Beck signed to Capitol Records . Beck released his twelfth studio album , Morning Phase , on February 21 , 2014 . For the recording of Morning Phase , Beck reunited with many of the same musicians with whom he had worked on the critically acclaimed 2002 album Sea Change . On January 20 , 2014 , the album 's first single " Blue Moon " was released . Beck released the second single , " Waking Light " , on February 4 , 2014 . 
 In January 2015 , it was announced that Beck would be headlining the Boston Calling Music Festival in May 2015 . 
 On February 8 , 2015 , at the 57th Annual Grammy Awards , Morning Phase won three Grammys : Best Engineered Album , Non @-@ Classical ; Best Rock Album ; and Album of the Year . 
 On June 15 , 2015 , Beck released the first single titled " Dreams " off his upcoming thirteenth studio album . The song was reportedly made for the purpose of having something lively to play while on tour . The song has appeared on association football game FIFA 16 from developers EA Sports and 4th generation Apple TV commercial . On June 2 , 2016 , Beck released a new single titled " Wow " along with a lyric video of the song . Later that day , it was announced his still untitled thirteenth studio album would be released October 21 , 2016 . 
 = = Collaborations and contributions = = 
 In 1999 , Beck contributed to a tribute album for Bruce Haack and Esther Nelson and their label Dimension 5 Records . The album , Dimension Mix , released in 2005 , was a benefit for Cure Autism Now that was produced by Ross Harris , an early collaborator who designed the artwork for " Mellow Gold " . 
 On June 18 , 2009 , Beck announced that he was starting an experiment called Record Club , in which he and other musicians would record cover versions of entire albums in one day . The first album covered by Beck 's Record Club was The Velvet Underground & Nico . Starting on June 18 , the club began posting covers of songs from the album on Thursday evenings , each with its own video . On September 4 , 2009 , Beck announced the second Record Club album , Songs of Leonard Cohen . Contributors included MGMT , Devendra Banhart , Andrew Stockdale of Wolfmother and <unk> Shapiro of Little Joy . In the third Record Club venture , Wilco , Feist , Jamie Lidell and James Gadson joined Beck to cover Skip Spence 's Oar . The first song , " Little Hands " , was posted on Beck 's website on November 12 , 2009 . The Record Club has since covered albums by INXS and Yanni . 
 On June 19 , 2009 , Beck announced Planned Obsolescence , a weekly DJ set put together by Beck or guest DJs . Soon after , on July 7 , Beck announced that his website would be featuring " extended informal conversations with musicians , artists , filmmakers , and other various persons " in a section called Irrelevant Topics . Then , on July 12 , he added a section called <unk> , which he said would contain " promotional videos from each album , as well as live clips , TV show appearances and other rarities " . 
 Also in 2009 , Beck collaborated with Charlotte Gainsbourg on her album IRM , which was released in January 2010 . Beck wrote the music , co @-@ wrote the lyrics , and produced and mixed the album . The lead single , " Heaven Can Wait " , is a duet by Beck and Gainsbourg . 
 In late February 2010 , it was announced that electronic artist Tobacco of Black Moth Super Rainbow had collaborated with Beck on two songs , " Fresh Hex " and " Grape Aerosmith " , on his upcoming album Maniac Meat . Tobacco revealed that in making the album , Beck sent the vocal parts to him , and that they had never actually met . 
 In March 2010 , Beck revealed that he had produced songs for the new Jamie Lidell album , Compass . 
 In the summer of 2010 , Beck contributed songs to both The Twilight Saga : Eclipse soundtrack , with " Let 's Get Lost " ( a duet with Bat for Lashes ) , and True Blood ( HBO Original Series Soundtrack , Vol . 2 ) , with " Bad Blood " . He also contributed songs to the soundtrack of the movie Scott Pilgrim vs. the World , which was released in August 2010 . Two of the songs that Beck specifically wrote for the film appeared in its theatrical trailer . 
 In 2011 , he collaborated with Seu Jorge on a track titled " Tropicália ( Mario C. 2011 Remix ) " for the Red Hot Organization 's most recent charitable album Red Hot + Rio 2 . The album is a follow @-@ up to the 1996 Red Hot + Rio . Proceeds from the sales will be donated to raise awareness and money to fight AIDS / HIV and related health and social issues . He also contributed on the song " Attracted to Us " on <unk> & Chain , the second album from The Lonely Island . 
 Also in 2011 , Beck produced a solo album by Thurston Moore of Sonic Youth called Demolished Thoughts . An album he produced for Stephen Malkmus and the <unk> , Mirror Traffic , was released in August 2011 . 
 In October 2011 , it was widely reported that Beck and producer Hector Castillo were collaborating with American composer Philip Glass to produce a remix album of the composer 's works in honor of his 75th birthday . The album , Rework Philip Glass Remixed , was released on October 23 , 2012 , to critical acclaim , and featured Beck as both a curator and a performer . In particular , Pitchfork described Beck 's 22 @-@ minute contribution to the album , " NYC : 73 – 78 " , as " a fantasia ... the most startling and original piece of music with Beck 's name on it in a while , and the first new work to bear his own spirit in even longer . " Reflecting on Beck 's contribution to the album , Glass remarked that he was " impressed by the novelty and freshness of a lot of the ideas " . Beyond his work as a performer , Beck acted as the album 's curator , bringing together a diverse collection of artists — including Amon Tobin , <unk> Braxton , <unk> Thing , and Memory Tapes — whose work had also been influenced by Glass . In December 2012 , an interactive iPhone app titled " Rework _ " was released to complement the album . 
 Beck has contributed three new songs — " Cities " , " Touch the People " and " Spiral Staircase " — to the video game Sound Shapes for PlayStation 3 , PlayStation 4 , and PlayStation Vita . 
 Beck collaborated on two songs for Childish Gambino 's " Royalty " mixtape in 2012 . 
 In 2014 , Beck collaborated with Sia for the song " <unk> Lake " , which is featured in the soundtrack for the 2014 Annie film . 
 In 2015 , Beck collaborated with former <unk> frontman Nate <unk> on the single , " What This World Is Coming To " , which was one of the Grammy @-@ winning artist 's many works featured on his debut solo album " Grand Romantic " released in June 2015 . He also collaborated with electronic dance music duo The Chemical Brothers on their most recent album Born in the Echoes , providing lead vocals and also credited in writing for the track " Wide Open " , released in July . 
 In 2016 , Beck collaborated with French electronic music band M83 , providing vocals for the song " Time Wind " . 
 = = Musical style = = 
 Beck 's musical style has been considered alternative and indie . He has played many of the instruments in his music himself . Beck has also done some remixes for fellow artists , notably David Bowie and Björk . He has been known to synthesize several musical elements together in his music , including folk , psychedelia , electronic , country , Latin music , hip hop , funk , soul , blues , noise rock , and many types of rock . He has also taken music from Los Angeles as a reference point in his songs . 
 Beck has an irreverent style of sampling , often using such sources as obscure films to splice together cuts of people talking in the background of his music , or various other found sounds to create sound collages in the background of his music . 
 Pitchfork Media applauded Midnite Vultures , saying , " Beck wonderfully blends Prince , Talking Heads , Paul 's Boutique , ' Shake Your Bon @-@ Bon ' , and <unk> on Midnite Vultures , his most consistent and playful album yet . " The review continued to comment on Beck , saying that his mix of goofy piety and ambiguous intent helped the album . A Beck song called " Harry Partch " , a tribute to the composer and his " <unk> " music , employs Partch 's 43 @-@ tone scale . 
 = = Art career = = 
 During 1998 , Beck 's art collaborations with his grandfather Al Hansen were featured in an exhibition titled " Beck & Al Hansen : Playing With Matches " , which showcased solo and collaborative collage , assemblage , drawing and poetry works . The show toured from the Santa Monica Museum of Art to galleries in New York City and Winnipeg , Manitoba , in Canada . A catalog of the show was published by Plug in Editions / Smart Art Press . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Beck 's nine @-@ year relationship with designer Leigh Limon and their subsequent breakup is said to have inspired his 2002 album , Sea Change . He wrote most of the songs for the album in one week after the breakup . Beck married actress Marissa Ribisi , the twin sister of actor Giovanni Ribisi , in April 2004 , shortly before the birth of their son , Cosimo Henri . Ribisi gave birth to their daughter , Tuesday , in 2007 . Marissa and Giovanni Ribisi were delivered by Beck 's mother , Bibbe Hansen . 
 In November 2013 , Beck revealed that he had suffered a severe injury to his spine a few years earlier , but has since healed greatly . 
 Beck has self @-@ identified both as Jewish and as a Scientologist . 
 = = = Scientology = = = 
 Beck has been involved in Scientology for most of his life ; his wife , Marissa , is also a second @-@ generation Scientologist . Beck publicly acknowledged his affiliation with Scientology for the first time in an interview published in The New York Times Magazine on March 6 , 2005 . Further confirmation came in an interview with the Irish Sunday Tribune 's i Magazine on June 11 , 2005 , where he was quoted as saying , " Yeah , I 'm a Scientologist . My father has been a Scientologist for about 35 years , so I grew up in and around it . " When questioned by the interviewer about Scientology 's core beliefs , he replied : 
 What it actually is just sort of , uh , you know , I think it 's about philosophy and sort of , uh , all these kinds of , you know , ideals that are common to a lot of religions .... There 's nothing fantastical ... just a real deep grassroots concerted effort for humanitarian causes . I don 't know if you know the stuff they have . It 's unbelievable the stuff they are doing . Education ... they have free centres all over the place for poor kids . They have the number one drug rehabilitation programme in the entire world ( called Narconon ) . It has a 90 @-@ something percent success rate .... When you look at the actual facts and not what 's conjured in people 's minds that 's all bullshit to me because I 've actually seen stuff first hand . 
 = = Appearances in media = = 
 The 1986 punk rock musical film Population : 1 , starring <unk> du Plenty of The Screamers , features a young Beck in a small nonspeaking role . Beck also appears in <unk> ( 2001 ) , an American independent film by Steve <unk> and Ross Harris . 
 Beck has performed on Saturday Night Live seven times . During his 2006 performance in the Hugh Laurie episode , Beck was accompanied by the puppets that had been used onstage during his world tour . He has made two cameo appearances as himself on Saturday Night Live : one in a sketch about medicinal marijuana , and one in a VH1 Behind the Music parody that featured " Fat Albert & the Junkyard Gang " . 
 Beck performed a guest voice as himself on Matt Groening 's animated show Futurama , in the episode " <unk> ' in the Wind " . He performed in episode 11 of the fourth season of The Larry Sanders Show , in which the producer character Artie ( Rip Torn ) referred to him as a " hillbilly from outer space " . He also made a very brief voice appearance in the 1998 cartoon feature film The Rugrats Movie , and guest @-@ starred as himself in a 1997 episode of Space Ghost Coast to Coast titled " Edelweiss " . 
 Beck has also made appearances on the Adult Swim show Mission Hill . Accepting an award , he comes up onstage wearing the new " Spicy pants " trend . In consequence the main character begins throwing all of his " Beck " albums out his upper @-@ story window . 
 In an episode of Celebrity Deathmatch , Beck was featured fighting Björk in a " battle to be the best monosyllabic musician of all time " , which ended with both of them slain by Bach , who appeared via a time machine . 
 On January 22 , 2010 , Beck appeared on The Tonight Show with Conan O 'Brien 's last show as a backup guitarist for a Will Ferrell – led rendition of Lynyrd Skynyrd 's " Free Bird " alongside ZZ Top guitarist Billy Gibbons , Ben Harper , and O 'Brien himself on guitar . 
 On March 1 , 2014 , Beck was the musical guest on a Saturday Night Live episode hosted by Jim Parsons . 
 = = Discography = = 
 Studio albums 
 Golden Feelings ( 1993 ) 
 <unk> <unk> ( 1994 ) 
 Mellow Gold ( 1994 ) 
 One Foot in the Grave ( 1994 ) 
 Odelay ( 1996 ) 
 Mutations ( 1998 ) 
 Midnite Vultures ( 1999 ) 
 Sea Change ( 2002 ) 
 Guero ( 2005 ) 
 The Information ( 2006 ) 
 Modern Guilt ( 2008 ) 
 Morning Phase ( 2014 ) 
 = Charles XI of Sweden = 
 Charles XI , also Carl ( Swedish : Karl XI ; 24 November <unk> style – 5 April <unk> style ) , was King of Sweden from 1660 until his death , in a period of Swedish history known as the Swedish Empire ( 1611 – 1718 ) . 
 Charles was the only son of King Charles X of Sweden and Hedwig Eleonora of Holstein @-@ Gottorp . His father died when he was five years old , so Charles was educated by his governors until his coronation at the age of seventeen . Soon after , he was forced out on military expeditions to secure the recently acquired dominions from Danish troops in the Scanian War . Having successfully fought off the Danes , he returned to Stockholm and engaged in correcting the country 's neglected political , financial and economic situation , managing to sustain peace during the remaining 20 years of his reign . Changes in finance , commerce , national maritime and land armaments , judicial procedure , church government and education emerged during this period . Charles XI was succeeded by his only son Charles XII , who made use of the well @-@ trained army in battles throughout Europe . 
 The fact that Charles was crowned as Charles XI does not mean that he was the 11th king of Sweden who had the name Charles . His father 's name ( as the 10th ) was due to his great @-@ grandfather , King Charles IX of Sweden ( 1604 – 1611 ) , having adopted his own numeral by using a mythological History of Sweden . This descendant was actually the 5th King Charles . The numbering tradition thus begun still continues , with the present king of Sweden being Carl XVI Gustaf . 
 = = Under guardian rule = = 
 Charles was born in the Stockholm Palace Tre <unk> in November 1655 . His father , Charles X of Sweden , left Sweden in July to fight in the war against Poland . After several years of warfare , the king returned in the winter of 1659 and gathered his family and the Riksdag of the Estates in Gothenburg . In mid @-@ January 1660 he fell ill and one month later he wrote his last will and died . 
 Charles X Gustav 's will and testament left the administration of the Swedish Empire during Charles XI 's minority to a regency led by Queen Dowager Hedwig Eleonora as both formal regent and chair of a six @-@ member Regency Council with two votes and a final say over the rest of the council . Per Brahe was one member of the council . In addition , Charles X Gustav left command of the army and a seat on the council to his younger brother , Adolph John I , Count Palatine of <unk> . These provisions among others led to the remainder of the council immediately challenging the will . February 14 , the day after King Charles X 's death , Hedwig Eleonora sent a message to the council stating that she knew that they contested the will and that she demanded that it should be respected . The council answered that the will must first be discussed with the parliament , and at the following council in Stockholm on May 13 , the council tried to keep her from attending . The parliament questioned whether it would be good for her health or suitable for a widow to attend council , and that if not , it would be hard to keep sending a messenger to her quarters . Her reply that the council would be allowed to meet without her and only inform her when they considered it necessary was met with satisfaction from the council . Hedwig Eleonora 's ostensible indifference to politics came as a great relief to the lords of the guardian government . 
 His mother , Queen Hedvig Eleonora , remained the formal regent until Charles XI attained his majority on 18 December 1672 , but she was careful not to embroil herself in political conflicts . During his first appearances in parliament , Charles spoke to the government through her . He would whisper the questions he had in her ear , and she would ask them aloud and clearly for him . As an adolescent , Charles devoted himself to sports , exercise , and his favourite pastime of bear @-@ hunting . He appeared ignorant of the very rudiments of statecraft and almost illiterate . His main difficulties are now seen as evident signs of dyslexia , a disability that was poorly understood at the time . According to many contemporary sources , the king was considered poorly educated and therefore not qualified to conduct himself effectively in foreign affairs . Charles was dependent on his mother and advisors to interact with the foreign envoys since he had no foreign language skills apart from German and was ignorant of the world outside the Swedish borders . 
 Italian writer Lorenzo Magalotti visited Stockholm in 1674 and described the teenage Charles XI as " virtually afraid of everything , uneasy to talk to foreigners , and not daring to look anyone in the face " . Another trait was a deep religious devotion : he was God @-@ fearing , frequently prayed kneeling and attended sermons . Magalotti otherwise described the king 's main pursuits as hunting , the upcoming war , and jokes . 
 = = Scanian war = = 
 The situation in Europe was shaky during this time and Sweden was going through financial problems . Charles XI 's guardians decided to negotiate an alliance with France in 1671 . This would ensure that Sweden would not be isolated if there was a war , and that the national finances would improve thanks to French subsidies . France directed its aggression against the Dutch in 1672 , and by the spring of 1674 , Sweden was forced to take part by directing forces towards Brandenburg , under the lead of Karl Gustav Wrangel . 
 Denmark was an ally of the Habsburg Holy Roman Empire , and it was evident that Sweden was on the verge of yet another war with that country . A remedy was attempted by chancellor Nils Brahe , who traveled to Copenhagen in the spring of 1675 to try to get the Danish princess Ulrika Eleonora of Denmark engaged to the Swedish king . In mid @-@ June 1675 , the engagement was officially proclaimed . However , when news arrived of the Swedish defeat at the Battle of Fehrbellin , Danish king Christian V declared war on Sweden that September . 
 The Swedish Privy Council continued its internal feuds , and the king was forced to rule without them . The 20 @-@ year @-@ old king was inexperienced and considered ill @-@ served amidst what has been called the anarchy in the nation . He dedicated autumn in his newly formed camp in Scania to arm the Swedish nation for battle in the Scanian War . The Swedish soldiers in Scania were outnumbered and <unk> by the Danes . In May 1676 , they invaded Scania , taking Landskrona and Helsingborg , then proceeding through Bohuslän towards Halmstad . The King had to grow up quickly . He suddenly found himself alone and under great pressure . 
 Victory at the Battle of Halmstad ( 17 August 1676 ) , when Charles and his commander @-@ in @-@ chief Simon <unk> @-@ <unk> defeated a Danish division , was the king 's first glimmer of good luck . Charles continued south through Scania , arriving on the tableland of the flooded <unk> River – near Lund – on 11 November . The Danish army commanded by Christian V was positioned on the other side . It was impossible to cross the river and Charles had to wait for weeks until it froze over . This finally happened on 4 December and Charles launched a surprise attack on the Danish forces to fight the Battle of Lund . This was one of the bloodiest engagements of its time . Of the over 20 @,@ 000 combatants , about 8 @,@ 000 perished on the battlefield . All the Swedish commanders showed ability , but the chief glory of the day was attributed to Charles XI and his fighting spirit . The battle proved to be a decisive one for the rule of the Scanian lands and it has been described as the most significant event for Charles ' personality . Charles commemorated this date the rest of his life . 
 In the following year , 9 @,@ 000 men led by Charles routed 12 @,@ 000 Danes at the Battle of Landskrona . This proved to be the last pitched battle of the war since , in September 1678 , Christian V evacuated his army back to Zealand . In 1679 , Louis XIV of France dictated the terms of a general pacification , and Charles XI , who is said to have bitterly resented " the insufferable tutelage " of the French king , was forced at last to acquiesce to a peace that managed to leave his empire practically intact . Peace was made with Denmark in the treaties of Fontainebleau ( 1679 ) and Lund , and with Brandenburg in the Treaty of Saint @-@ Germain @-@ en @-@ Laye ( 1679 ) . 
 = = Post @-@ war actions = = 
 Charles devoted the rest of his life to avoiding further warfare by gaining larger independence in foreign affairs , while he also promoted economic stabilization and a reorganization of the military . His remaining 20 years on the throne were the longest peace time of the Swedish Empire ( 1611 – 1718 ) . 
 In the early years , he was assisted by the man who had become his trusted prime @-@ minister , Johan <unk> Gyllenstierna ( 1635 – 1680 ) . Some sources say the king was basically dependent on Gyllenstierna , . His sudden death in 1680 opened up the road to the monarch , and many men tried to get close to the king to take Gyllenstierna 's place . 
 = = = Financial restoration = = = 
 Sweden 's weak economy had suffered during the war and was now in a deep crisis . Charles assembled the Riksdag of the Estates in October 1680 . The assembly has been described as one of the most important held by the Riksdag of the Estates . Here , the king finally pushed through the reduction ordeal , something that had been discussed in the Riksdag since 1650 . It meant that any land or object previously owned by the crown and lent or given away — including counties , baronies and lordships — could be recovered . It affected many prominent members of the nobility , some of whom were ruined by it . One of them was the former guardian and Lord Chief Justice Magnus De La Gardie , who , among many other Estates , had to return the extravagant 248 @-@ room <unk> Castle . The reduction process involved the examination of every title deed in the kingdom , including the dominions , and it resulted in a complete readjustment of the nation 's finances . 
 = = = Greycoat = = = 
 According to Swedish legend , Charles XI travelled around the country dressed as a farmer or simple traveller . In the legend he is referred to as the Greycoat ( Swedish : <unk> ) . This was done to discover and identify corruption and oppression against the populace . There are many stories about him arriving in villages looking for corrupt church officials and sending them to the gallows . However , Charles XI never travelled alone . He was always followed by a military cortège but he was one of the kings in Sweden during this era that travelled the most throughout the country . The stories of the Greycoat were published in a book by Arvid August <unk> in the middle of the 19th century . 
 = = = Absolutism = = = 
 Another important decision made during the assembly was that of the Swedish Privy Council . Since 1634 , it had been mandatory for the king to take advice from the council . During the Scanian War , the members of the council were engaged in internal feuds , and the king more or less ruled without listening to their advice . At the 1680 assembly , he asked the Estates whether he was still bound to the council , to which the Estates responded with his desired reply : " he was not bound by anyone other than himself " ( " <unk> " ) , and thereby the absolute monarchy was formally established in Sweden . The Riksdag of the Estates confirmed his power in 1693 by officially proclaiming that the king was the sole ruler of Sweden . 
 = = = Military restructure = = = 
 In the 1682 assembly of the Riksdag of the Estates , the king put forth his suggestion for military reform , whereby each of the lands of Sweden were to have 1 @,@ 200 soldiers at the ready , at all times , and two farms were to provide accommodations for one soldier . His soldiers were known as <unk> , trained to be skilled and preferring to attack rather than defend . <unk> and looting were strictly forbidden . Soldier huts around the country were the most visible part of the new Swedish allotment system . However , Charles also modernized the military techniques and worked to improve the overall skill and knowledge of the officers by sending them abroad to study . 
 The Swedish navy suffered major defeats against Danish @-@ Dutch forces in the Scanian War , revealing weaknesses in organization and supply , and weaknesses in basing the fleet at Stockholm . The navy was bolstered with the founding of a naval base at Karlskrona in 1680 which became the main base of future operations . Today it is a UNESCO World Heritage Site . 
 = = = Assimilation of the newest dominions = = = 
 Charles believed it was very important to assimilate the new Swedish dominions of Scania , Blekinge , Halland , in southern Sweden ; Bohuslän and Jämtland , in southwest Sweden , and the island of Gotland . Some assimilation policies included : the ban of all books written in Danish or Norwegian , thus breaking the promise made at the Treaty of Roskilde ; the use of Swedish language in the conduct of sermons ; and all new priests and teachers having to come from Sweden . 
 The king had seen bitter resentment from the Scanian peasants during the Scanian War and was particularly tough on that province . The guerrilla <unk> movement , in northern Scania , had attacked his soldiers and stolen his money . They also had strong support from the local villages . Charles remained sceptical about the Scanian inhabitants throughout his life . He did not allow soldiers from Scania in his Scanian regiment : the 1 @,@ 200 soldiers that were to be stationed there had to be recruited from more northern provinces . He also advocated rough treatment of the inhabitants and the first Governor @-@ General of Scania , his trusted aide Johan Gyllenstierna ( governor @-@ general 1679 – 1680 ) , was notably brutal in his treatment of the locals . The rule of Rutger von Ascheberg ( governor @-@ general 1680 – 1693 ) , proved more lenient . 
 The assimilation was not as strongly implemented on the German dominions of Swedish Pomerania , Bremen @-@ Verden , and the Baltic dominions ( Estonia and Livonia ) . In Germany , Charles found himself being opposed by the Estates there . He was also bound by the law of the German emperor and the peace treaty . In the Baltic , the power structure was completely different , with a German @-@ descended nobility that used serfs , something that Charles abhorred and wanted to abolish but was unable to . Finally , Kexholm and Ingria were sparsely populated and not of great interest . 
 = = = Church = = = 
 Charles was a devoted Lutheran Christian . In February 1686 , a church law was put forth on his initiative . The church order declared that the king was ruler of the Church in the same way that he ruled the country and God ruled the world . Attending sermons on Sunday was made obligatory and ordinary people found walking around on the streets during that time risked being arrested . Three years later , he declared it obligatory for all commoners to learn to read a catechism written by archbishop Olov <unk> and then @-@ bishop <unk> <unk> so that they would understand the " magnificence of God " . 
 Charles encouraged the production of a hymnal ( <unk> ) to be printed and distributed to the churches ( completed 1693 ) , and a new printed version of the Bible that was completed in 1703 and named after his successor : Charles XII Bible . 
 = = Family matters = = 
 On 6 May 1680 , Charles married Ulrika Eleonora of Denmark ( 1656 – 1693 ) , daughter of King Frederick III of Denmark ( 1609 – 1670 ) . He had previously been engaged to his cousin , Juliana of Hesse @-@ <unk> , but the engagement was broken after a scandal . Charles and Ulrika were engaged in 1675 in an attempt to smooth over longstanding hostilities , but the Scanian War soon broke out . During the war , Ulrika Eleonora gained a reputation for loyalty to her future home country by exhibiting kindness to Swedish prisoners : she pawned her jewelry , even her engagement ring , to care for the Swedish prisoners of war . Her personal merits and continued charitable acts throughout her tenure endeared her to the Swedish people and eased some of the difficulties brought on by her Danish background . In the peace negotiations between Sweden and Denmark in 1679 , the marriage between her and Charles XI was on the agenda , and ratified on 26 September 1679 . They married in Stockholm on May 6 , 1680 in a hasty and humble ceremony . 
 Charles and Ulrika Eleonora were very different . He enjoyed hunting and riding , while she enjoyed reading and art , and is best remembered for her great charitable activity . She was also limited by ill @-@ health and numerous pregnancies . Charles was very active and busy and while Charles was away inspecting his troops or pursuing his pastimes , she was often lonely and sad . The marriage itself , however , is considered a success , with the King and Queen being very fond of each other . As queen , Ulrika Eleonora had little political involvement and was placed in the shadow of her mother @-@ in @-@ law . During " The Great Reversion " to the crown of counties , baronies and large lordships from the nobility , Ulrika tried to speak on the behalf of the people whose property was confiscated by the crown . But the king told her that the reason he had married her was not because he wanted her political advice . Instead , she helped people whose property had been confiscated by secretly compensating them economically from her own budget . However Charles XI 's confidence in her grew over time : in 1690 , he named her future Regent , should his son succeed him still a minor . Instead Ulrika Eleonora predeceased him by almost four years . At the time of her death she was personally supporting 17 @,@ 000 people . 
 It is said that on his death bed , Charles XI admitted to his mother that he hadn 't been happy since Ulrika Eleonora 's death . 
 The marriage produced seven children , of whom only three outlived Charles : 
 Hedwig Sophia ( 1681 – 1708 ) , duchess of Holstein @-@ Gottorp and grandmother of Tsar Peter III ; 
 Charles XII ( 1682 – 1718 ) , his only surviving son and the future king ; 
 Gustav ( 1683 – 1685 ) 
 Ulrik ( 1684 – 1685 ) 
 Frederick ( 1685 – 1685 ) 
 Charles Gustav ( 1686 – 1687 ) 
 Ulrika Eleonora ( " the younger " , 1688 – 1741 ) , who ultimately succeeded her brother on the Swedish throne . 
 Ulrika Eleonora ( the elder ) was sickly , and the many child births eventually broke her . When she became seriously ill , in 1693 , Charles finally dedicated his time and care to her . Her death in July that year shook him deeply and he never fully recovered . Her infant son Ulric ( 1684 – 1685 ) had been given <unk> Palace , which was renamed for him ( Ulric 's Dale ) . 
 = = Death = = 
 Charles XI had complained of stomach pains since 1694 . In the summer of 1696 , he asked his doctors for an opinion on the pain as it had continuously become worse , but they had no viable cure or treatment for it . He continued to perform his duties as usual , but , in February 1697 , the pains became too severe for him to cope and he returned to Stockholm where the doctors discovered he had a large , hard lump in his stomach . At this point there was little the doctors could do except alleviate the King 's pain as best they could . Charles XI died on 5 April 1697 , in his forty @-@ first year . An autopsy showed that the King had developed cancer and that it had spread through his entire abdominal cavity . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Charles XI has sometimes been described in Sweden as the greatest of all the Swedish kings , unduly eclipsed by his father and his son . In the first half of the 20th century , the view of him changed and he was regarded as dependent , uncertain , and easily influenced by others . In the most recent book , <unk> biography from 2003 , the king is again characterized as a strong @-@ willed shaper of Sweden through economic reforms and achievement of financial and military stability and strength . 
 Charles XI is commemorated on the 500 @-@ kronor bill . His portrait is taken from one of <unk> 's paintings , possibly the one displayed on this page . The king is pictured on the bill since the Bank of Sweden was founded in 1668 , during Charles ' reign . 
 The fortified town of <unk> near Bremen , at the site of modern Bremerhaven , was named after Charles XI . 
 Charles ' Church in Tallinn , Estonia , is dedicated to Charles XI . 
 = = Ancestors = = 
 = Music of the Final Fantasy VII series = 
 Final Fantasy VII is a role @-@ playing video game developed by Square / Squaresoft ( now Square Enix ) and published by Sony Computer Entertainment as the seventh installment in the Final Fantasy series . Released in 1997 , the game sparked the release of a collection of media centered on the game entitled the Compilation of Final Fantasy VII . The discography of the Final Fantasy VII series includes not only the albums based on the soundtrack to the original game , but also the music albums released for the titles in the collection . The first album produced was Final Fantasy VII Original Soundtrack , a compilation of all the music in the game . It was released as a soundtrack album on four CDs by DigiCube in 1997 . A selection of tracks from the album was released in the single @-@ disc Reunion Tracks by DigiCube the same year . Piano Collections Final Fantasy VII , an album featuring piano arrangements of pieces from the soundtrack , was released in 2003 by DigiCube , and Square Enix began reprinting all three albums in 2004 . To date , these are the only released albums based on the original game 's soundtrack , and were solely composed by regular series composer Nobuo Uematsu ; his role for the majority of subsequent albums has been filled by Masashi Hamauzu and Takeharu Ishimoto . 
 The Compilation of Final Fantasy VII began eight years after the release of Final Fantasy VII with the release of the animated film sequel Advent Children in 2005 . The soundtracks for each of the titles in the collection are included in an album , starting with the album release of the soundtrack to Advent Children that year . The following year , Nippon Crown released a soundtrack album to correspond with the video game Dirge of Cerberus , while Square Enix launched a download @-@ only collection of music from the multiplayer mode of the game , which was only released in Japan . After the launch of the game Crisis Core in 2007 , Warner Music Japan produced the title 's soundtrack . The latest album in the collection , Before Crisis : Final Fantasy VII & Last Order : Final Fantasy VII Original Soundtrack , was released by Square Enix the same year as a combined soundtrack album for the game Before Crisis and the animated movie Last Order . 
 The original music received highly positive reviews from critics , who found many of the tunes to be memorable and noted the emotional intensity of several of the tracks . The reception for the other albums has been mixed , with reactions ranging from enthusiastic praise to disappointment . Several pieces from the soundtrack , particularly " One @-@ Winged Angel " and " Aeris ' Theme " , remain popular and have been performed numerous times in orchestral concert series such as Dear Friends : Music from Final Fantasy and Tour de Japon : Music from Final Fantasy . Music from the Original Soundtrack has been included in arranged albums and compilations by Square as well as outside groups . 
 = = Creation and development = = 
 Nobuo Uematsu composed the music of Final Fantasy VII in less than one year , although he had taken two years to create the soundtrack for the previous title , Final Fantasy VI . Final Fantasy VII was the first game in the series to be developed for the PlayStation , and while the media capabilities of the console allowed for CD quality music , Uematsu opted instead to use MIDI sounds . This decision has been credited as giving the soundtrack " a very distinctive mood and feel " , forming a strong association for listeners between the game and its soundtrack . Uematsu has stated , however , that the move into the " PlayStation era " , which allowed video game composers to use sounds recorded in the studio rather than from synthesizers , had " definitely been the biggest change " to video game music . The first piece that Uematsu composed for the game was the opening theme ; game director Yoshinori Kitase showed him the opening cinematic to the game and asked him to begin the project there . The track was well received in the company , which gave Uematsu " a sense that it was going to be a really good project " . He later stated in the liner notes for the soundtrack album that the music for Final Fantasy VII was his " greatest harvest " to date . 
 Final Fantasy VII was the first game in the series to include a track with digitized vocals , " One @-@ Winged Angel " . The track has been called Uematsu 's " most recognizable contribution " to the music of the Final Fantasy series , though the composer did not expect it to gain such popularity . The piece , described as " a fanfare to impending doom " , is said to not " follow any normal genre rules " and has been termed " possibly the most innovative idea in the series ' musical history . " The lyrics of " One @-@ Winged Angel " , a Latin choral track that plays at the climax of the game , were taken from the medieval poetry on which Carl Orff based his Carmina Burana , specifically " Estuans Interius " , " O Fortuna " , " Veni , Veni , Venias " and " Ave Formosissima " . Uematsu has stated that the intro of " One @-@ Winged Angel " is based on Jimi Hendrix 's " Purple Haze " , and that the piece revolves around the image of Sephiroth and despite the chorus and orchestra , he still thinks of it as a " rock piece " . He has said that " One @-@ Winged Angel " is his favorite tune from the soundtrack , as well as his favorite battle theme from any Final Fantasy game . There was a plan to use a " famous vocalist " for the ending theme as a " theme song " for the game , but the idea was dropped due to time constraints and thematic concerns . Uematsu has said that the soundtrack has a feel of " realism " , which prevented him from using " exorbitant , crazy music " . 
 = = Albums = = 
 = = = Original Soundtrack = = = 
 Final Fantasy VII Original Soundtrack is a soundtrack album containing musical tracks from the game , composed by Nobuo Uematsu and produced by Uematsu and Minoru Akao . It was originally released on February 10 , 1997 through DigiCube and later reissued directly by Square Enix on May 10 , 2004 . The soundtrack spans 85 tracks over four discs and has a combined duration of 4 : 39 : 53 . A limited edition was produced along with the original album , containing illustrated liner notes with several pictures of Uematsu 's workspace and personal effects , various cutscenes and in @-@ game screen shots from the game , and a discography . 
 The soundtrack covers a wide variety of musical genres , including rock , techno , orchestral , and choral , although the soundtrack as a whole is primarily orchestral . While many of the tracks were intended as background music , reviewers noted the emotional intensity of several tracks , especially " Aerith 's Theme " , which plays during a moment described as " the most shocking moment in video games , " and has been described as the most memorable track from the album . The theme has become popular among fans , and has inspired various arrangements . Other notable tracks include " Main Theme of Final Fantasy VII " . Themes from this track play during several other tunes from the soundtrack , such as " Words Drowned by Fireworks " , to tie the soundtrack together . An analysis of " Main Theme of Final Fantasy VII " was written by Video Game Music Academy in 2014 . 
 The regular edition of the album reached # 3 on the Japan Oricon charts , while the limited edition reached # 19 . Overall , the album sold 148 @,@ 000 copies as of January 2010 . The album was well received by critics . Ben Schweitzer of RPGFan claimed that " for the most part , it 's a diamond " , with his primary complaint being the quality of the MIDI sound . He found the tracks to be " beautiful " and said that " One @-@ Winged Angel " was " possibly the most innovative idea in the series ' musical history " . Patrick Gann of RPGFan concurred and found all of the soundtrack 's tunes to be " memorable " and the Original Soundtrack to be " very worth the purchase " . Philip of Square Enix Music Online , however , disliked the sound quality of the soundtrack and saw several tracks as " trivial " , though he did note that Uematsu " has a flair for strong , memorable " pieces . In 2006 , IGN ranked the album as the best Final Fantasy soundtrack to date and cited the " gripping " character themes and " One @-@ Winged Angel " in particular as contributing factors . They also named " One @-@ Winged Angel " as the best piece of music from the entire Final Fantasy series . 
 The original CDs for both releases were only published in Japan and include only Japanese track names . The English track names were later published on iTunes . 
 Track listing 
 = = = = Reunion Tracks = = = = 
 Final Fantasy VII Reunion Tracks is a single @-@ disc album that comprises a selection of tracks from Final Fantasy VII Original Soundtrack . It was initially released through DigiCube on October 22 , 1997 and later reissued by Square Enix on February 23 , 2005 . While the record was never published outside Japan , the music is available in the North American iTunes Store . All of the pieces are the same as on the Original Soundtrack except for " Main Theme of Final Fantasy VII " , " One @-@ Winged Angel " , and " Aerith 's Theme " , which were re @-@ recorded with an orchestra and choir . Some versions of the album also contain a hidden pregap track , which can be accessed by rewinding from the start of the album . This track is an instrumental version of " One @-@ Winged Angel " without the choir . The new arrangements were created by Shirō Hamaguchi . The album spans 1 : 12 : 24 over 19 tracks . 
 Final Fantasy VII Reunion Tracks reached # 20 on the Japan Oricon charts . It received mixed reviews . Gann liked the newly orchestrated tracks , calling them " incredibly well @-@ done orchestrations " , and said that " depending on how willing you are to spend money " they made the album worth purchasing on their own , although he felt the other tracks offered nothing new to owners of the original soundtrack . Chris of Square Enix Music Online , however , felt that while the orchestrated tracks were well @-@ done , the selection of the other tracks was poor and that the album as a whole was " a lousy purchase for most who enjoyed Final Fantasy VII 's score " . 
 = = = = Piano Collections = = = = 
 Piano Collections Final Fantasy VII is an album featuring piano arrangements of selected Final Fantasy VII pieces composed by Nobuo Uematsu , arranged by Shirō Hamaguchi , and performed by Seiji Honda . The album was released through DigiCube on December 3 , 2003 and later reissued by Square Enix on May 10 , 2004 . It covers a duration of 47 : 37 over 13 tracks . The album includes light @-@ hearted tracks as well as slower , more emotional pieces , covering a variety of genres such as marches , new @-@ age themes , and jazz . Unlike previous and subsequent Final Fantasy piano albums , Piano Collections Final Fantasy VII was produced many years after the release of the original game . As three of the tracks from this album were reused in the soundtrack to Final Fantasy VII Advent Children , it has been speculated that the album was produced with the intention to provide tunes for Advent Children . 
 Piano Collections Final Fantasy VII reached # 228 on the Japan Oricon charts and was well received by reviewers , with Gann raving that the pieces were fun to listen to , the performer was " amazing " , the choice of tracks was " excellent " , and the album as a whole was a " spectacular CD " . Sophia of Soundtrack Central concurred and stated that the album was " quite fulfilling to listen to " and that it surpassed her expectations . 
 = = = Advent Children = = = 
 Final Fantasy VII Advent Children is the 2005 CGI film sequel to the original game , and the beginning of the Compilation of Final Fantasy VII . Its soundtrack album , Final Fantasy VII Advent Children Original Soundtrack , was released on September 28 , 2005 , containing new material created specifically for the movie , as well as arrangements of tunes from the Final Fantasy VII soundtrack . Both the original tracks and the arrangements cover a variety of musical styles , including orchestral , choral , classical piano , and rock music ; Variety noted that the styles vary between " sparse piano <unk> , pop metal thrashings and cloying power ballads " . The tracks were composed by Nobuo Uematsu , Keiji Kawamori , Kenichiro Fukui , and Tsuyoshi Sekito , and arranged by Fukui , Sekito , Kawamori , Shirō Hamaguchi , and Kazuhiko Toyama . The song " Calling " from 1989 by former Boøwy vocalist Kyosuke Himuro was used in the film 's credits . Some of the piano tracks are longer than what was included in the movie . The album spans 26 tracks on two discs , covers a duration of 1 : 21 : 41 . In addition to the regular release , a limited edition was produced with a foil slipcover . The album reached position # 15 on the Japanese Oricon music charts , and stayed on the charts for 10 weeks . 
 A mini @-@ album titled Final Fantasy VII Advent Children Complete Mini Album was released on April 10 , 2009 to coincide with the release of the Final Fantasy VII Advent Children Complete version of the movie . The new release of the movie included a new ending theme , " Safe and Sound " , Kyosuke Himuro and My Chemical Romance singer Gerard Way , and replaced " Water " with a new song , " Anxious Heart " . The mini @-@ album was five tracks and 29 : 17 long . The included tracks on the album were new versions of " The Chase of Highway " , " Those Who Fight Further " , " Sign " , " Advent : One @-@ Winged Angel " , and " On the Way to a Smile " , a piece from the Final Fantasy VII @-@ based anime On the Way to a Smile . A larger album , Final Fantasy VII Advent Children Complete : Reunion Tracks , was released with 21 tracks on September 16 , 2009 . This album contains the tracks from the mini @-@ album , as well as several pieces that were lengthened for the Complete film version but not rearranged . Reunion Tracks appeared on the Oricon charts for a single week at position # 108 . 
 Final Fantasy VII Advent Children Original Soundtrack was well received by critics . Gann said that Final Fantasy fans have " no excuse " not to buy the album and noted that his only disappointments were that three of the tracks were the same as on the Piano Collections album , and that as a film score , some of the shifts in the pieces make less sense outside of the context of the visuals . Chris Carle of IGN called it a " jagged but beautiful blend of opera , metal and electronica " , and a " richly @-@ layered , complex and utterly listenable soundtrack " while praising the variety of musical styles used and the quality of the pieces . In contrast to Gann , he felt that " divorced from the film , the score is still amazingly listenable " . 
 Track listing 
 = = = Dirge of Cerberus = = = 
 Dirge of Cerberus : Final Fantasy VII was released for the PlayStation 2 in January 2006 , and its soundtrack , Dirge of Cerberus : Final Fantasy VII Original Soundtrack , was released a month later . The tracks were composed by Masashi Hamauzu and orchestrations were provided by Yoshihisa Hirano , making it the first Final Fantasy VII @-@ related soundtrack to not include new material from Nobuo Uematsu . Koji Haishima conducted the Tokyo Philharmonic Orchestra , which performed the music for around half of the album . The soundtrack also contains the songs " Longing " and " Redemption " by Japanese musician and actor Gackt , and was released through the artist 's ex label , Nippon Crown . The album contains a mix of orchestral and rock tracks , with some orchestral performances of slow compositions and marches and both styles of music used for faster @-@ paced " threatening " and " dynamic " tunes . GameSpot describes the music as ranging from " quiet , almost nonexistent ambient tunes to dramatic , orchestrated tracks " . The album was launched on February 15 , 2006 , and spans 53 tracks over two discs , covering a duration of 2 : 14 : 22 . The limited edition of the soundtrack includes a case which is designed to hold the soundtrack , along with the game disc and the limited edition of the " Redemption " single and associated DVD , although these other albums must be purchased separately . 
 Dirge of Cerberus : Final Fantasy VII Original Soundtrack was given mixed reviews from critics . Gann called it " solid , [ ... ] , but not awe @-@ inspiring " and dismissed the limited edition extras as not worth the purchase . Eduardo of Square Enix Music Online , however , described it as " nearly perfect " and said that he " can , and will , run out of positive adjectives to describe the Dirge of Cerberus Final Fantasy VII Original Soundtrack . It 's a work of genius " . The album reached position # 19 on the Oricon charts . 
 Track listing 
 = = = = Dirge of Cerberus Multiplayer Mode = = = = 
 The Japanese version of Dirge of Cerberus included a multiplayer mode absent from other releases , which contained music tracks not used in the single @-@ player game . Dirge of Cerberus : Final Fantasy VII Multiplayer Mode Original Sound Collections is a download @-@ only soundtrack album for the multiplayer tracks released through the Japanese iTunes Store and the Square Enix Music Download website on August 22 , 2006 . It spans 1 : 07 : 07 over 27 tracks . The soundtrack includes all the music from the multiplayer mode and some music from the single @-@ player game which did not appear on the previous soundtrack album , including two tracks composed by Ryo Yamazaki for the North American release of the game . 
 Eduardo of Square Enix Music Online also appreciated Dirge of Cerberus : Final Fantasy VII Multiplayer Mode Original Sound Collections , saying that it accented the Original Soundtrack well and that " Hamauzu and Yamazaki have delivered strongly and , with a decent mix of electronica , orchestral music , and rock , the entirety of the Dirge of Cerberus musical experience cannot be missed " . 
 = = = Crisis Core = = = 
 Crisis Core : Final Fantasy VII Original Soundtrack is the soundtrack of the game Crisis Core : Final Fantasy VII . It was released on October 10 , 2007 by Warner Music Japan and covers 55 tracks over two discs with a total duration of 2 : 20 : 59 . The music was primarily composed by Takeharu Ishimoto , with a few tracks provided by Kazuhiko Toyama . It was Ishimoto 's second major work , after the soundtrack to The World Ends with You ; the only titles he had composed for previously were World <unk> , a little @-@ known soccer game for which he was a co @-@ composer , and the cell phone game Before Crisis : Final Fantasy VII . The tracks composed by Ishimoto cover a range of moods , from " harsh and in @-@ your @-@ face " to " stunning and lovely " , but were primarily used as ambient background music . The soundtrack also includes a large number of arrangements of tunes from the original Final Fantasy VII score , as well as a theme song entitled " Why " , performed by Ayaka . A variety of musical instruments were used for the soundtrack , including piano and synthesizers , but critics noted that Ishimoto used guitars , both electronic and acoustic , more and better than any previous Final Fantasy soundtrack . 
 Crisis Core : Final Fantasy VII Original Soundtrack received mixed reviews by critics , with Don of Square Enix Music Online stating that while some of Ishimoto 's and all of Toyama 's arrangements were excellent , the original pieces that made up the bulk of the album offered " very little that is actually worth a listen " . Gann was more lenient , praising Ishimoto for writing " an excellent soundtrack " and being especially happy with the quality of the arrangements of Uematsu 's pieces . Gann did , however , note that because Ishimoto 's original works were more ambient , his arrangements , and by extension Uematsu 's work , far outshone his own new contributions . He also felt that the theme song " Why " was " generic " and " bland " . Sophia Tong of IGN described the album as a " mixed bag " , stating that some of the arrangements and new tracks were " fantastic " while others were " not all that compelling " , and lamented the overuse of a few themes throughout the soundtrack . 
 Track listing 
 = = = Before Crisis and Last Order = = = 
 Before Crisis : Final Fantasy VII & Last Order : Final Fantasy VII Original Soundtrack is the combined soundtrack album of the original video animation Last Order : Final Fantasy VII and the game Before Crisis : Final Fantasy VII . Before Crisis serves as a prequel to Final Fantasy VII while Last Order is a side story to Final Fantasy VII , showing some of the same story elements from Crisis Core and Final Fantasy VII from an alternate viewpoint . The album spans 27 tracks , of which the first 12 are from the game and the remainder are from the animation . The album was released on December 19 , 2007 by Square Enix , and was mainly composed by Ishimoto , with some tunes based on works from Final Fantasy VII by Uematsu . Many of the pieces composed for the two works were used either directly or in an arranged form in Crisis Core . As this soundtrack album was released after the soundtrack to Crisis Core , these pieces were generally not included in the Before Crisis album . The album covers a duration of 63 : 48 . 
 Before Crisis : Final Fantasy VII & Last Order : Final Fantasy VII Original Soundtrack was poorly received by critics . Gann said that " the whole album is a flop compared to the quality composition of Crisis Core " and that the contents of the album were " the leftovers , B @-@ Sides , and less @-@ impressive tracks from Ishimoto 's arsenal of FFVII music " , especially as many tracks were used in the Crisis Core soundtrack and not repeated in this album . Chris ( also known as " Dark Cloud " ) of Square Enix Music Online agreed , saying that the album " is probably one of the worst I 've heard in a very long time " and recommended it only for listeners who like " loud music without much creativity " . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The Black Mages , a now defunct band led by Nobuo Uematsu that arranged music from the Final Fantasy series into a rock music style , has arranged four pieces from Final Fantasy VII . These are " J @-@ E @-@ N @-@ O @-@ V @-@ A " and " Those Who Fight Further " from The Black Mages , published in 2003 , " Advent One @-@ Winged Angel " from Final Fantasy VII Advent Children Original Soundtrack and " Opening ~ Bombing Mission " from Darkness and Starlight , published in 2008 . Music from Final Fantasy VII has also been used in other games , such as the fighting game Ehrgeiz , and the Kingdom Hearts series . 
 Uematsu continues to perform certain pieces in the Dear Friends -Music from Final Fantasy- concert series . The music of Final Fantasy VII has also appeared in various official concerts and live albums , such as 20020220 Music from Final Fantasy , a live recording of an orchestra performing music from the series including " Aerith 's Theme " and " One @-@ Winged Angel " . Additionally , several pieces from the game were performed by the New Japan Philharmonic Orchestra in the Tour de Japon : Music from Final Fantasy concert series , and in the Video Games Live international concert series . The Advent Children version of " One @-@ Winged Angel " was performed at the Press Start -Symphony of Games- 2007 concerts in Yokohama and Osaka , Japan , while The Black Mages performed " Those Who Fight Further " at the Extra : Hyper Game Music Event 2007 concert in Tokyo on July 7 , 2007 . Independent but officially licensed releases of Final Fantasy VII music have been composed by such groups as Project Majestic Mix , which focuses on arranging video game music . Selections also appear on Japanese remix albums , called dōjin music , and on English remixing websites , such as OverClocked ReMix . On September 14 , 2007 , the OverClocked ReMix community released an unofficial tribute album titled Voices of the Lifestream , a compilation containing 45 arrangements of Final Fantasy VII music . Aerith 's Theme was voted into Classic FM 's 2012 HOF in 16th place out of 300 compositions . 
 = Glenn & Viola Walters Cultural Arts Center = 
 The Glenn & Viola Walters Cultural Arts Center is a multi @-@ use arts and performance venue in downtown Hillsboro , Oregon , United States . Opened in 2004 , it is housed in a red @-@ colored stone building completed in 1949 as a Lutheran church . Hillsboro , a city on the west side of Portland , owns the three @-@ level facility and operates it through their Parks and Recreation Department . 
 Walters Cultural Arts Center includes gallery space , classroom space , and a 200 @-@ seat performance hall . With two above ground floors and one below ground level , the center has a total of 15 @,@ 664 square feet ( 1 @,@ 455 @.@ 2 m2 ) of space . Located on East Main Street , the Washington County Courthouse and the Hillsboro Civic Center are just to the west and the Edward Schulmerich House one block to the east on Main . The center is named in honor of a local couple who donated $ 1 million towards the project which included purchasing the property and US $ 2 @.@ 4 million worth of renovations . 
 = = History = = 
 The Trinity Lutheran Church congregation was founded in 1917 and acquired their first church in 1923 . By the 1940s the congregation needed a larger place to worship and bought a lot on the corner of Fifth Avenue and East Main Street in downtown Hillsboro in 1941 . A Camas , Washington , rock quarry offered the church an unlimited amount of red colored rock for $ 1 @,@ 000 as a long as the church transported the rock back to Hillsboro . Construction began in 1947 and the new church was completed in 1949 . By the late 1990s Trinity Lutheran had again outgrown their church and began building a new campus in the southeast part of the city . 
 The church did not want to sell its former home to just anyone , or for it to be torn down . At this time the city was looking for a space to use as an arts center . Plans for an arts and culture center in Hillsboro were made in the city ’ s Hillsboro 2020 Vision . This community plan was finalized in 2000 and designed to improve the livability of the city located in the Portland metropolitan area . Hillsboro purchased the property from the church for $ 1 @.@ 325 million in November 2000 . 
 Most of the purchase price came from a $ 1 million donation by Glenn and Viola Walters to the city to help pay for an arts center in 1999 . The <unk> had earned their money from operating a nursery in the surrounding community . The city had hoped to open a remodeled arts center during the winter of 2001 , but this was delayed with later estimates having the center opening in late 2002 . In December 2002 , construction began on the work to transform the church into a culture and arts center . <unk> Architecture & Interiors designed the changes to the building that sits on a 54 @,@ 648 square feet ( 5 @,@ 077 @.@ 0 m2 ) lot . 
 Renovations included adding a new roof , creating a new entrance , adding an elevator , among other changes . Creating a new entrance involved removing hand quarried stone from the walls to enlarge a window opening . The remodeling also brought the building up to modern seismic codes and to comply with the Americans with Disabilities Act ( ADA ) . City officials hoped to maintain the character of the original structure despite changes and upgrades . The total cost for renovations as of opening were $ 2 @.@ 4 million , with the city paying for 60 % of those costs . Some financing for the center came from selling bricks to the public that were then used on exterior spaces . 
 On March 16 , 2004 , the Glenn & Viola Walters Cultural Arts Center opened . Total cost for the project including buying the property was around $ 3 @.@ 5 million . The center ’ s operating budget comes from city funds and user generated fees . A new classical music concert series was started at the center in 2009 , as was a book club focusing on arts and culture titles . In April 2010 , the Oregon Mandolin Orchestra held their first ever concert at the center . 
 = = Building = = 
 Located on Main Street at Fifth Avenue in downtown Hillsboro , the center is two blocks from the Hillsboro Central / 3rd Avenue Transit Center MAX light rail station . The building covers 15 @,@ 664 square feet ( 1 @,@ 455 @.@ 2 m2 ) of space and contains five classrooms , a lobby , meeting rooms , a box office , exhibition gallery , and an auditorium . The main part of the building has rock walls , and the auditorium contains high , arched ceilings and stained @-@ glass windows . Once featuring a stone chimney , contractors removed the chimney during conversion to the center and inserted an elevator to comply with ADA requirements . 
 The T @-@ shaped center has three levels , which includes a basement that houses classrooms used for art instruction . Instruction includes courses on creating pottery , sculptures , and ceramics . The second story contains exhibition gallery space and multipurpose rooms , with the focus on visual arts . On the main level is the 2 @,@ 000 @-@ square @-@ foot ( 190 m2 ) auditorium where the church ’ s sanctuary was located . The auditorium seats up to 200 people and is used for concerts , lectures , plays , and other events . 
 On the outside is a garden , and a lawn area to the east with a small stage that is used for fair weather events such as summer concerts . Also outside the building is a new wheelchair ramp that was added to the east side where a new entrance was added . There are two terraces on the exterior of the building and the inside also has a kitchen area . 
 = = Operations = = 
 Walters Cultural Arts Center was designed to be a bookend , along with the Hillsboro Civic Center , to increased downtown development . The center is the city ’ s first dedicated arts facility . City officials hoped to create a magnet for artists and aficionados in the downtown area with the center and other developments that include a renovated Venetian Theatre . The goal was to have the center encourage art studios to open and for art related festivals to develop to attract people to downtown after most businesses closed . Traditionally , shops and businesses closed by 6 : 00 p.m. as workers in the county seat left for the day . The center also is rented out to groups for private functions . 
 Performances at the Walters Cultural Arts Center include opera , folk music , country music , and spoken word acts . These include poetry readings and lectures . Art exhibits have included " Organic , " " Questioning Functionality , " and " Questioning Functionality 2 ( <unk> ) " among others . These shows have included art forms such as interior design , crafts , sculpture , and fine art . 
 = Europa Point Lighthouse = 
 The Europa Point Lighthouse , also referred to as the Trinity Lighthouse at Europa Point and the Victoria Tower or La <unk> in Llanito , is a lighthouse at Europa Point , on the southeastern tip of the British Overseas Territory of Gibraltar , on the southern end of the Iberian Peninsula , at the entrance to the Mediterranean Sea . 
 Europa Lighthouse was inaugurated on 1 August 1841 in a brief ceremony witnessed by about 10 @,@ 000 people . The first upgrade of the lighthouse occurred in 1864 , when the single @-@ wick lamp was replaced with a Chance Brothers four @-@ wick burner , with further changes in 1875 and in 1894 when the amount of light emitted was increased . A three incandescent mantle burner was added in 1905 . Following further modernisation in the 20th century , the lighthouse was fully automated in 1994 . 
 Europa Point Lighthouse is operated by Trinity House . The cylindrical tower is painted white , with a wide red horizontal band in the middle . The lighthouse has a height of 20 metres ( 66 ft ) and is 49 metres ( 161 ft ) above the high @-@ water mark , and has a white light that occults every ten seconds . The Gibraltar Amateur Radio Society operates from the lighthouse during the third weekend of August each year . 
 The lighthouse 's beacon may soon be retired if plans for a new UEFA Category 4 stadium go ahead . 
 = = History = = 
 Also known as the Trinity Lighthouse at Europa Point and the Victoria Tower , the Europa Point Lighthouse , of classic British design , first underwent construction in 1838 . Sir Alexander George Woodford ( 1782 – 1870 ) , Governor and Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief of Gibraltar , set the first stone for the lighthouse 's foundation on 26 April 1838 , with the aid of the Masonic Order of Gibraltar . The inscription read : 
 This foundation @-@ stone of a light @-@ house , erected by order of the colonial government of her Majesty Victoria , Queen of Great Britain and Ireland and their dependencies , in the first year of her reign , was laid on the 26th day of April , A.D. 1838 , A.L. <unk> , with military and masonic honours , by his Excellency Major @-@ General Sir Alexander Woodford , <unk> & c. governor and commander @-@ in @-@ chief of the town and garrison of Gibraltar , assisted by the Rev. W. E. T. Burrow , D.D. <unk> Provincial Grand Master , for the protection of Mediterranean commerce , the saving of human life , and the honour of the British name . 
 A brief ceremony commemorated the event , which was witnessed by about 10 @,@ 000 people . Construction of the lighthouse was completed in 1841 , and was inaugurated according to schedule on 1 August that year . The first lighting of the Europa Point Lighthouse drew an audience of more than 2 @,@ 000 people . 
 To navigate the Bay of Gibraltar prior to the opening of the lighthouse sailors were dependent on the light emitted by the Shrine of Our Lady of Europe , Roman Catholic shrine , which was originally a mosque built after the victory of King Ferdinand IV of Spain over the Moors at the 1309 siege . They expressed their gratitude by leaving supplies of oil at the chapel , which also encouraged the continued burning of the lights . 
 At the time of the opening of the lighthouse in 1841 , a fixed light was emitted by an oil lamp with one wick . The intensity of the light was increased by a combination of a dioptric fixed lens and <unk> mirrors . On 25 April 1843 , lighting was upgraded to improve visibility from Sandy Bay , and in 1854 , the lighthouse had a reported visibility of 16 miles ( 26 km ) . 
 Repairs and alterations were made to the lighthouse in 1863 @-@ 64 by engineer Henry Norris , when the single @-@ wick lamp was replaced with a Chance Brothers four @-@ wick burner , as well as a new lens . The improvements included a red arc of light over the hazardous Pearl Rock region . An additional upgrade was made in 1875 when the lamp was switched out for a four @-@ wick mineral oil burner . 
 In 1894 , the lighthouse was further altered to increase the amount of light emitted . The four @-@ wick burner and mirrors were exchanged for a Douglass burner with eight wicks and an improved lantern ; the power of the light was increased to 35 @,@ 000 candela . The characteristic of the light changed from fixed to occulting . A foghorn was also installed , with two quick blasts every five minutes . The eight @-@ wick burner was exchanged for a three incandescent mantle burner in 1905 . In 1923 , the burner was replaced by a Hood petroleum vapour burner with one mantle . 
 Later , between 1954 and 1956 , further extensive changes were made , and the introduction of electric lighting further improved visibility . A much more powerful , revolving lens system was utilised for the primary optic , and a second light below the main light was included to cast a fixed red light to cover the Pearl Rock region . The height of the tower was increased by 6 feet ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) . 
 = = Description = = 
 The lighthouse is strategically located at the southeastern tip of the Rock of Gibraltar at Europa Point , between the Atlantic and Mediterranean , rising to 49 metres ( 161 ft ) above the high @-@ water mark . The Mediterranean is to the east , the Bay of Gibraltar to the northwest , and the Strait of Gibraltar to the southwest . 
 The lighthouse is locally known as " La <unk> " ( literally ' lamppost ' in Spanish ) in Llanito , Gibraltar 's spoken vernacular . 
 The lighthouse was fully automated in February 1994 . The extant optics were kept , but complemented with a three position <unk> . The foghorn was changed to an electric model , with a directional 500 Hz emitter stack that was installed on the gallery of the lantern room . The active lighthouse has a 19 metres ( 62 ft ) masonry tower with lantern and gallery . The tower is painted white , with a single wide red horizontal band in the middle . The lighthouse has a white light which occults every ten seconds . There is a continuous red light as well as an occulting red light which is on for 5 @.@ 8 seconds and off for 4 @.@ 2 seconds . In addition , a foghorn emits a blast every twenty seconds . 
 In February 2014 the Gibraltar Football Association unveiled its plans for the Europa Point Stadium , a proposed UEFA Category 4 multi @-@ function stadium , is planned for construction at Europa Point . If approved by the Development and Planning Commission , the beacon will soon be retired as the stadium will obstruct the lighthouse 's beam and a new beacon is to be installed on top of the proposed stadium whilst retaining the lighthouse building as a historic landmark . 
 = = Administration = = 
 The lighthouse is the only such building outside of the United Kingdom which is operated by Trinity House , a lighthouse agency based in England . Accordingly , it is also referred to as the Trinity Lighthouse . Trinity House became responsible for Europa Point Lighthouse at the time of an 1838 Act of Parliament . In addition , the Merchant Shipping Act of 1894 resulted in Trinity House becoming the General Lighthouse Authority ( GLA ) for Gibraltar . The site of the lighthouse is managed by the Government of Gibraltar , and monitoring of the lighthouse is through a reporting station connected by telephone to the Gibraltar Port Office . The United Kingdom Hydrographic Office Admiralty Digital Lists of Lights ( <unk> ) number for the Europa Point Lighthouse is <unk> . The United States National Geospatial @-@ Intelligence Agency ( NGA ) number is 4220 . 
 Soon after World War II , amateur radio , also called ham radio , made its appearance in Gibraltar . The Gibraltar Amateur Radio Society , with its headquarters on Coaling Island , operates from the lighthouse once annually , during the third weekend of August . The annual International Lighthouse and Lightship Weekend has as its goal in Gibraltar of putting the Europa Point Lighthouse on the air , using the call sign , <unk> . The Amateur Radio Lighthouse Society ( <unk> ) number for the lighthouse is <unk> @-@ 001 . 
 = RNA = 
 <unk> acid ( RNA ) is a polymeric molecule implicated in various biological roles in coding , decoding , regulation , and expression of genes . RNA and DNA are nucleic acids , and , along with proteins and carbohydrates , constitute the three major macromolecules essential for all known forms of life . Like DNA , RNA is assembled as a chain of nucleotides , but unlike DNA it is more often found in nature as a single @-@ strand folded onto itself , rather than a paired double @-@ strand . Cellular organisms use messenger RNA ( mRNA ) to convey genetic information ( using the letters G , U , A , and C to denote the nitrogenous bases guanine , uracil , adenine , and cytosine ) that directs synthesis of specific proteins . Many viruses encode their genetic information using an RNA genome . 
 Some RNA molecules play an active role within cells by catalyzing biological reactions , controlling gene expression , or sensing and communicating responses to cellular signals . One of these active processes is protein synthesis , a universal function wherein mRNA molecules direct the assembly of proteins on ribosomes . This process uses transfer RNA ( tRNA ) molecules to deliver amino acids to the ribosome , where ribosomal RNA ( rRNA ) then links amino acids together to form proteins . 
 = = Comparison with DNA = = 
 Like DNA , most biologically active RNAs , including mRNA , tRNA , rRNA , snRNAs , and other non @-@ coding RNAs , contain self @-@ complementary sequences that allow parts of the RNA to fold and pair with itself to form double helices . Analysis of these RNAs has revealed that they are highly structured . Unlike DNA , their structures do not consist of long double helices , but rather collections of short helices packed together into structures akin to proteins . In this fashion , RNAs can achieve chemical catalysis , like enzymes . For instance , determination of the structure of the ribosome — an enzyme that catalyzes peptide bond formation — revealed that its active site is composed entirely of RNA . 
 = = Structure = = 
 Each nucleotide in RNA contains a ribose sugar , with carbons numbered 1 ' through 5 ' . A base is attached to the 1 ' position , in general , adenine ( A ) , cytosine ( C ) , guanine ( G ) , or uracil ( U ) . Adenine and guanine are purines , cytosine and uracil are pyrimidines . A phosphate group is attached to the 3 ' position of one ribose and the 5 ' position of the next . The phosphate groups have a negative charge each , making RNA a charged molecule ( <unk> ) . The bases form hydrogen bonds between cytosine and guanine , between adenine and uracil and between guanine and uracil . However , other interactions are possible , such as a group of adenine bases binding to each other in a bulge , or the <unk> <unk> that has a guanine – adenine base @-@ pair . 
 An important structural feature of RNA that distinguishes it from DNA is the presence of a hydroxyl group at the 2 ' position of the ribose sugar . The presence of this functional group causes the helix to mostly adopt the A @-@ form geometry , although in single strand dinucleotide contexts , RNA can rarely also adopt the B @-@ form most commonly observed in DNA . The A @-@ form geometry results in a very deep and narrow major groove and a shallow and wide minor groove . A second consequence of the presence of the 2 ' -hydroxyl group is that in conformationally flexible regions of an RNA molecule ( that is , not involved in formation of a double helix ) , it can chemically attack the adjacent phosphodiester bond to cleave the backbone . 
 RNA is transcribed with only four bases ( adenine , cytosine , guanine and uracil ) , but these bases and attached sugars can be modified in numerous ways as the RNAs mature . <unk> ( Ψ ) , in which the linkage between uracil and ribose is changed from a C – N bond to a C – C bond , and <unk> ( T ) are found in various places ( the most notable ones being in the <unk> loop of tRNA ) . Another notable modified base is hypoxanthine , a deaminated adenine base whose nucleoside is called inosine ( I ) . <unk> plays a key role in the wobble hypothesis of the genetic code . 
 There are more than 100 other naturally occurring modified nucleosides , The greatest structural diversity of modifications can be found in tRNA , while <unk> and nucleosides with 2 ' -O @-@ <unk> often present in rRNA are the most common . The specific roles of many of these modifications in RNA are not fully understood . However , it is notable that , in ribosomal RNA , many of the post @-@ transcriptional modifications occur in highly functional regions , such as the peptidyl transferase center and the subunit interface , implying that they are important for normal function . 
 The functional form of single @-@ stranded RNA molecules , just like proteins , frequently requires a specific tertiary structure . The scaffold for this structure is provided by secondary structural elements that are hydrogen bonds within the molecule . This leads to several recognizable " domains " of secondary structure like hairpin loops , bulges , and internal loops . Since RNA is charged , metal ions such as Mg2 + are needed to stabilise many secondary and tertiary structures . 
 The naturally occurring enantiomer of RNA is D @-@ RNA composed of D @-@ ribonucleotides . All chirality centers are located in the D @-@ ribose . By the use of L @-@ ribose or rather L @-@ ribonucleotides , L @-@ RNA can be synthesized . L @-@ RNA is much more stable against degradation by RNase . 
 Like other structured biopolymers such as proteins , one can define topology of a folded RNA molecule . This is often done based on arrangement of intra @-@ chain contacts within a folded RNA , termed as circuit topology . 
 = = Synthesis = = 
 Synthesis of RNA is usually catalyzed by an enzyme — RNA polymerase — using DNA as a template , a process known as transcription . Initiation of transcription begins with the binding of the enzyme to a promoter sequence in the DNA ( usually found " upstream " of a gene ) . The DNA double helix is unwound by the helicase activity of the enzyme . The enzyme then progresses along the template strand in the 3 ’ to 5 ’ direction , synthesizing a complementary RNA molecule with elongation occurring in the 5 ’ to 3 ’ direction . The DNA sequence also dictates where termination of RNA synthesis will occur . 
 Primary transcript RNAs are often modified by enzymes after transcription . For example , a poly ( A ) tail and a 5 ' cap are added to eukaryotic pre @-@ mRNA and introns are removed by the spliceosome . 
 There are also a number of RNA @-@ dependent RNA polymerases that use RNA as their template for synthesis of a new strand of RNA . For instance , a number of RNA viruses ( such as poliovirus ) use this type of enzyme to replicate their genetic material . Also , RNA @-@ dependent RNA polymerase is part of the RNA interference pathway in many organisms . 
 = = Types of RNA = = 
 = = = Overview = = = 
 Messenger RNA ( mRNA ) is the RNA that carries information from DNA to the ribosome , the sites of protein synthesis ( translation ) in the cell . The coding sequence of the mRNA determines the amino acid sequence in the protein that is produced . However , many RNAs do not code for protein ( about 97 % of the transcriptional output is non @-@ protein @-@ coding in eukaryotes ) . 
 These so @-@ called non @-@ coding RNAs ( " <unk> " ) can be encoded by their own genes ( RNA genes ) , but can also derive from mRNA introns . The most prominent examples of non @-@ coding RNAs are transfer RNA ( tRNA ) and ribosomal RNA ( rRNA ) , both of which are involved in the process of translation . There are also non @-@ coding RNAs involved in gene regulation , RNA processing and other roles . Certain RNAs are able to catalyse chemical reactions such as cutting and ligating other RNA molecules , and the catalysis of peptide bond formation in the ribosome ; these are known as ribozymes . 
 = = = In length = = = 
 According to the length of RNA chain , RNA includes small RNA and long RNA . Usually , small RNAs are < 200 nt in length , and long RNA are > 200 nt . Long RNAs , also called large RNAs , mainly include long non @-@ coding RNA ( <unk> ) and mRNA . Small RNAs mainly include 5.8S ribosomal RNA ( rRNA ) , 5S rRNA , transfer RNA ( tRNA ) , microRNA ( miRNA ) , small interfering RNA ( siRNA ) , small nucleolar RNA ( snoRNAs ) , Piwi @-@ interacting RNA ( piRNA ) , tRNA @-@ derived small RNA ( <unk> ) and small rDNA @-@ derived RNA ( <unk> ) . 
 = = = In translation = = = 
 Messenger RNA ( mRNA ) carries information about a protein sequence to the ribosomes , the protein synthesis factories in the cell . It is coded so that every three nucleotides ( a codon ) correspond to one amino acid . In eukaryotic cells , once precursor mRNA ( pre @-@ mRNA ) has been transcribed from DNA , it is processed to mature mRNA . This removes its introns — non @-@ coding sections of the pre @-@ mRNA . The mRNA is then exported from the nucleus to the cytoplasm , where it is bound to ribosomes and translated into its corresponding protein form with the help of tRNA . In prokaryotic cells , which do not have nucleus and cytoplasm compartments , mRNA can bind to ribosomes while it is being transcribed from DNA . After a certain amount of time the message degrades into its component nucleotides with the assistance of ribonucleases . 
 Transfer RNA ( tRNA ) is a small RNA chain of about 80 nucleotides that transfers a specific amino acid to a growing polypeptide chain at the ribosomal site of protein synthesis during translation . It has sites for amino acid attachment and an anticodon region for codon recognition that binds to a specific sequence on the messenger RNA chain through hydrogen bonding . 
 <unk> RNA ( rRNA ) is the catalytic component of the ribosomes . Eukaryotic ribosomes contain four different rRNA molecules : 18S , 5.8S , 28S and 5S rRNA . Three of the rRNA molecules are synthesized in the nucleolus , and one is synthesized elsewhere . In the cytoplasm , ribosomal RNA and protein combine to form a nucleoprotein called a ribosome . The ribosome binds mRNA and carries out protein synthesis . Several ribosomes may be attached to a single mRNA at any time . Nearly all the RNA found in a typical eukaryotic cell is rRNA . 
 Transfer @-@ messenger RNA ( <unk> ) is found in many bacteria and plastids . It tags proteins encoded by mRNAs that lack stop codons for degradation and prevents the ribosome from stalling . 
 = = = Regulatory RNAs = = = 
 Several types of RNA can downregulate gene expression by being complementary to a part of an mRNA or a gene 's DNA . MicroRNAs ( miRNA ; 21 @-@ 22 nt ) are found in eukaryotes and act through RNA interference ( RNAi ) , where an effector complex of miRNA and enzymes can cleave complementary mRNA , block the mRNA from being translated , or accelerate its degradation . 
 While small interfering RNAs ( siRNA ; 20 @-@ 25 nt ) are often produced by breakdown of viral RNA , there are also endogenous sources of <unk> siRNAs act through RNA interference in a fashion similar to miRNAs . Some miRNAs and siRNAs can cause genes they target to be methylated , thereby decreasing or increasing transcription of those genes . Animals have Piwi @-@ interacting RNAs ( piRNA ; 29 @-@ 30 nt ) that are active in germline cells and are thought to be a defense against transposons and play a role in gametogenesis . 
 Many prokaryotes have CRISPR RNAs , a regulatory system similar to RNA interference . Antisense RNAs are widespread ; most downregulate a gene , but a few are activators of transcription . One way antisense RNA can act is by binding to an mRNA , forming double @-@ stranded RNA that is enzymatically degraded . There are many long noncoding RNAs that regulate genes in eukaryotes , one such RNA is Xist , which coats one X chromosome in female mammals and inactivates it . 
 An mRNA may contain regulatory elements itself , such as riboswitches , in the 5 ' untranslated region or 3 ' untranslated region ; these cis @-@ regulatory elements regulate the activity of that mRNA . The untranslated regions can also contain elements that regulate other genes . 
 = = = In RNA processing = = = 
 Many RNAs are involved in modifying other RNAs . Introns are spliced out of pre @-@ mRNA by spliceosomes , which contain several small nuclear RNAs ( snRNA ) , or the introns can be ribozymes that are spliced by themselves . RNA can also be altered by having its nucleotides modified to other nucleotides than A , C , G and U. In eukaryotes , modifications of RNA nucleotides are in general directed by small nucleolar RNAs ( snoRNA ; 60 @-@ 300 nt ) , found in the nucleolus and <unk> <unk> snoRNAs associate with enzymes and guide them to a spot on an RNA by basepairing to that RNA . These enzymes then perform the nucleotide <unk> rRNAs and tRNAs are extensively modified , but snRNAs and mRNAs can also be the target of base modification . RNA can also be methylated . 
 = = = RNA genomes = = = 
 Like DNA , RNA can carry genetic information . RNA viruses have genomes composed of RNA that encodes a number of proteins . The viral genome is replicated by some of those proteins , while other proteins protect the genome as the virus particle moves to a new host cell . Viroids are another group of pathogens , but they consist only of RNA , do not encode any protein and are replicated by a host plant cell 's polymerase . 
 = = = In reverse transcription = = = 
 Reverse transcribing viruses replicate their genomes by reverse transcribing DNA copies from their RNA ; these DNA copies are then transcribed to new RNA . <unk> also spread by copying DNA and RNA from one another , and telomerase contains an RNA that is used as template for building the ends of eukaryotic chromosomes . 
 = = = Double @-@ stranded RNA = = = 
 Double @-@ stranded RNA ( dsRNA ) is RNA with two complementary strands , similar to the DNA found in all <unk> dsRNA forms the genetic material of some viruses ( double @-@ stranded RNA viruses ) . Double @-@ stranded RNA such as viral RNA or siRNA can trigger RNA interference in eukaryotes , as well as interferon response in vertebrates . 
 = = = Circular RNA = = = 
 Recently , it was shown that there is a single stranded covalently closed , i.e. circular form of RNA expressed throughout the animal and plant kingdom ( see <unk> ) . circRNAs are thought to arise via a " back @-@ splice " reaction where the spliceosome joins a downstream donor to an upstream acceptor splice site . So far the function of circRNAs is largely unknown , although for few examples a microRNA sponging activity has been demonstrated . 
 = = Key discoveries in RNA biology = = 
 Research on RNA has led to many important biological discoveries and numerous Nobel Prizes . Nucleic acids were discovered in 1868 by Friedrich Miescher , who called the material ' nuclein ' since it was found in the nucleus . It was later discovered that prokaryotic cells , which do not have a nucleus , also contain nucleic acids . The role of RNA in protein synthesis was suspected already in 1939 . Severo Ochoa won the 1959 Nobel Prize in Medicine ( shared with Arthur Kornberg ) after he discovered an enzyme that can synthesize RNA in the laboratory . However , the enzyme discovered by Ochoa ( polynucleotide phosphorylase ) was later shown to be responsible for RNA degradation , not RNA synthesis . In 1956 Alex Rich and David Davies hybridized two separate strands of RNA to form the first crystal of RNA whose structure could be determined by X @-@ ray crystallography . 
 The sequence of the 77 nucleotides of a yeast tRNA was found by Robert W. Holley in 1965 , winning Holley the 1968 Nobel Prize in Medicine ( shared with Har Gobind Khorana and Marshall Nirenberg ) . In 1967 , Carl Woese hypothesized that RNA might be catalytic and suggested that the earliest forms of life ( self @-@ replicating molecules ) could have relied on RNA both to carry genetic information and to catalyze biochemical reactions — an RNA world . 
 During the early 1970s , retroviruses and reverse transcriptase were discovered , showing for the first time that enzymes could copy RNA into DNA ( the opposite of the usual route for transmission of genetic information ) . For this work , David Baltimore , Renato <unk> and Howard Temin were awarded a Nobel Prize in 1975 . In 1976 , Walter Fiers and his team determined the first complete nucleotide sequence of an RNA virus genome , that of bacteriophage MS2 . 
 In 1977 , introns and RNA splicing were discovered in both mammalian viruses and in cellular genes , resulting in a 1993 Nobel to Philip Sharp and Richard Roberts . Catalytic RNA molecules ( ribozymes ) were discovered in the early 1980s , leading to a 1989 Nobel award to Thomas Cech and Sidney Altman . In 1990 , it was found in Petunia that introduced genes can silence similar genes of the plant 's own , now known to be a result of RNA interference . 
 At about the same time , 22 nt long RNAs , now called microRNAs , were found to have a role in the development of C. elegans . Studies on RNA interference gleaned a Nobel Prize for Andrew Fire and Craig Mello in 2006 , and another Nobel was awarded for studies on the transcription of RNA to Roger Kornberg in the same year . The discovery of gene regulatory RNAs has led to attempts to develop drugs made of RNA , such as siRNA , to silence genes . 
 = = Evolution = = 
 In March 2015 , complex DNA and RNA organic compounds of life , including uracil , cytosine and thymine , were reportedly formed in the laboratory under outer space conditions , using starting chemicals , such as pyrimidine , found in meteorites . Pyrimidine , like polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons ( PAHs ) , the most carbon @-@ rich chemical found in the Universe , may have been formed in red giants or in interstellar dust and gas clouds , according to the scientists . 
 = Tropical Storm Danny ( 2009 ) = 
 Tropical Storm Danny was a weak and disorganized tropical cyclone that formed in August 2009 . The fourth tropical system and third named storm of the 2009 Atlantic hurricane season , Danny developed on August 26 from the interaction between a westward @-@ moving tropical wave and an upper @-@ level trough while situated east of the Bahamas . The storm never fully matured , and resembled a subtropical cyclone . It meandered generally northwestward before being absorbed into another weather system on August 29 . 
 Danny had only minor effects on land . However , it triggered high surf and rip currents from Florida through the Mid @-@ Atlantic states , leading to the death of a 12 @-@ year @-@ old boy in North Carolina . The cyclone 's remnants contributed to widespread rainfall in the northeast United States . At one point , some weather forecasts predicted Danny to rapidly strengthen , and hit Nantucket as a Category 1 Hurricane , although this never occurred . Localized flooding was reported , particularly in Pennsylvania . It later caused heavy precipitation and power outages in Atlantic Canada . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 Danny originated in a tropical wave that exited the west coast of Africa on August 18 and entered the Atlantic Ocean . Convective activity associated with the system briefly showed signs of organization on August 22 ; however , wind shear stunted further development . On August 24 , shower activity once again increased as the disturbance interacted with an upper @-@ level trough . On the afternoon of August 25 , the National Hurricane Center assessed a high chance of tropical cyclone formation within 48 hours . That same day , a Hurricane Hunters mission into the system revealed a broad area of tropical @-@ storm force winds , but no closed circulation center . However , around 0900 UTC on August 26 , satellite imagery and QuikSCAT information indicated that a closed circulation had formed . While situated about 430 mi ( 690 km ) to the east of Nassau , Bahamas , the feature was declared a tropical storm — skipping the tropical depression stage . 
 Due to the interaction of the initial wave and the upper @-@ level trough , Danny maintained a " non @-@ classical " structure resembling that of a subtropical cyclone . Even after its designation as a tropical storm , the storm was highly disorganized . Little or no deep thunderstorm activity surrounded the center , and the highest winds in relation to the cyclone were confined to a rainband in the northern semicircle . The storm moved erratically northwestward throughout the day , strengthening slightly . Danny 's center reformed several times , making it difficult to determine its exact forward motion . 
 By early on August 27 , the tropical storm became slightly better organized , although the most intense winds were still removed from the center . Danny peaked with maximum sustained winds of 60 mph ( 95 km / h ) and a minimum pressure of 1006 mbar ( hPa ; 29 @.@ 71 inHg ) . It held this strength for about 12 hours before wind shear caused the storm to gradually weaken as it meandered northward . By August 28 , Danny further deteriorated , and reconnaissance aircraft found that it was barely a tropical storm . After stalling during the afternoon , the center resumed a north or north @-@ northwestward drift . 
 A strong upper @-@ level trough moving through the southeastern United States forced Danny northeastward , which also triggered the formation of another low pressure system near the coast of North Carolina early on August 29 . Although this low formed within Danny 's cyclonic envelope , satellite imagery indicated that it did not have the characteristics of a tropical cyclone . Therefore , it is not considered to be a continuation of Danny . The new low caused the tropical storm to degenerate into a trough about 275 mi ( 445 km ) southeast of Wilmington , North Carolina , and Danny 's remnants were absorbed into a developing frontal zone shortly thereafter . 
 = = Impact = = 
 In advance of the cyclone , a tropical storm watch was posted for North Carolina from Cape Lookout to Duck at 2100 UTC on August 27 . It was discontinued on August 29 . 
 Since the storm remained offshore for the most part , its effects were limited . However , it generated strong rip currents and rough waves on the U.S. East Coast which may have resulted in the crowning death of a 12 @-@ year @-@ old boy near Corolla , North Carolina on August 28 . On September 1 , the Currituck County Sheriff 's Office reported that the boy 's body was found on the beach about 1 mi ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) north of where he went missing . Farther south , Danny generated waves 6 to 7 ft ( 1 @.@ 8 to 2 @.@ 1 m ) in height along Florida 's Atlantic coast . High surf and rip currents also affected the Mid @-@ Atlantic states , prompting officials to issue bathing restrictions . A surfer in Monmouth County broke his leg in the rough conditions . 
 The remnants of the storm interacted with a frontal boundary , triggering widespread rainfall in numerous states which led to localized flooding . In Delaware County , torrential rainfall produced flash flooding that trapped one family in their basement . A creek near Philadelphia overflowed its banks and caused minor flooding . Several roads in Lehigh County , including one lane of U.S. Route 222 , were closed due to flood waters . Flooding also took place in New Jersey ; numerous basements were submerged and water rescues from vehicles were performed in Camden County . Isolated reports of 7 in ( 180 mm ) of precipitation were received in Maryland . 
 Once extratropical , the system impacted New England with high winds and heavy rainfall . At least 2 in ( 51 mm ) of rain fell in Massachusetts and Rhode Island . Some roads throughout the region became impassable due to standing water . A site in the Nantucket Sound recorded a wind gust to 61 mph ( 98 km / h ) . The former tropical cyclone produced wind gusts of 60 mph ( 97 km / h ) in Maine , toppling trees and ripping boats from their moorings at a harbor in Eastport . The system also brought heavy rainfall to the area . 
 Danny 's remnants later caused heavy rain across Atlantic Canada . At Saint John , New Brunswick , 100 mm ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) of rain fell , and at least 50 basements were flooded . The Meteorological Service of Canada declared several weather advisories for New Brunswick , Newfoundland , Prince Edward Island and Nova Scotia . In Nova Scotia , during the storm 's worst , over 16 @,@ 000 residences lost power . 
 = FU ( song ) = 
 " FU " is a song by American singer Miley Cyrus , featuring American rapper French Montana for her fourth studio album , Bangerz ( 2013 ) . It was written by Cyrus , Rami Samir Afuni , Montana , and MoZella . Production was helmed by Afuni . The song is a dubstep influenced track about the dismissal of a cheating ex . 
 " FU " received generally favorable reviews from contemporary music critics . The song itself was compared to the music of Amy Winehouse , Lady Gaga and Skrillex . However , some criticized its lyrics and the appearance of French Montana . The song peaked at number one on the Billboard Bubbling Under Hot 100 Singles chart , number 22 on the Pop Digital Songs chart and number 85 in Canada . " FU " was used in the 2013 Victoria 's Secret Fashion Show . Cyrus performed the song during her Bangerz Tour . 
 = = Production and composition = = 
 " FU " was written by Cyrus , Rami Samir Afuni , French Montana and MoZella . It was produced by Afuni . Karl Petersen recorded the track with help from Matthew Testa , and Manny Marroquin mixed it with assistants Chris Galland and Delbert Bowers . According to the sheet music published at Musicnotes.com by Kobalt Music Publishing America , the track is written in the key of G minor with a tempo of 56 beats per minute . Critics identified elements of dubstep and EDM in the song . According to Kyle Fowle of Slant Magazine , the amalgamation of popular genres Cyrus employs throughout the album is perhaps best executed on " FU " . He further wrote that although " I 've got two , two , two letters for you / One of them is F , and the other is U " may not be wittiest couplet , but when sung by Cyrus atop a heavy dubstep wobble , it feels biting and ferocious . 
 Montana told MTV News about working with Cyrus , " I was in L.A. and she happened to be doing the ' Ain 't Worried About Nothin ' ' remix for me . She came by the studio and let me hear her album , which was crazy , and we just went through a couple tracks to see which one I fit on . " He continued , " Then she played ' FU ' and I fell in love with it . We just went in there and did it together . " Regarding the theme of the song , he explained , " It 's two letters ' F ' and ' U. ' You 've just got two letters for somebody when you get to that point , when somebody breaks your heart and you 're in a relationship which has gone sour . So now you 've only got two letters for them , ' F ' and ' U ' . " Its lyrics dismiss a cheating ex , as mentioned in the lines " I don 't really have much to say / I was over it the second that I saw her name / I got two letters for you / One of them is F / And the other one is U / ' Cause what you gotta do / is go get yourself a clue . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Critical reception to the song was mainly positive . Heather Phares of AllMusic gave the song a favorable review , calling it a " brassy empowerment jam which sells Cyrus as an independent woman . " Nick Catucci of Entertainment Weekly praised the song , describing it as folding " starry Adele @-@ style sass and a French Montana verse into expertly inlaid dubstep wub @-@ wubs . " Mikael Wood from the Los Angeles Times praised Cyrus ' vocals and compared the song to Amy Winehouse , writing " Her vocals are equally strong in the surprisingly Amy Winehouse @-@ like ' FU ' . " Caroline Sullivan from The Guardian deemed it one of the album 's best songs , writing " FU 's mix of raw heartbreak , sub @-@ bass and scathing rhyming from French Montana is devastating . " Kitty Empire from The Observer reviewed the song positively , writing " Cyrus liberates her inner Christina Aguilera in the company of rapper French Montana , blending old @-@ time jazzy balladry , I Put a Spell on You , romantic righteousness and dubstep sub @-@ bass . " Writing for MTV , John Walker reviewed the song positively , calling it an " innovative surprisingly cabaret @-@ friendly track " and compared it to the works of Amanda Palmer . John Murphy of musicOMH compared the song to works by Lady Gaga and called it " rather excellent . " Kyle Fowle from Slant Magazine heavily praised the track while comparing it to the works of Amy Winehouse and Skrillex , writing , " Cyrus plays the femme fatale with an exaggerated Southern drawl , ready to rip into male suitors and their tired pick @-@ up lines . " Catriona Wightman of Digital Spy speculated it to be inspired by Cyrus ' former fiancé Liam Hemsworth and deemed it the best song of the album . 
 Jason Lipshutz of Billboard gave the song a mixed review , calling it a " campy piano flare @-@ up " , but criticizing French Montana 's appearance , calling it " as inexplicable as the song itself . " Marah Eakin of The A.V. Club described it as " EDM @-@ aping " . She further stated that the song " seems perfect for the album , rather than just thrown in to stay with the times . " Channing Freeman from Sputnikmusic praised Cyrus ' vocals , writing , " the chorus is so good , with a pulsing beat that allows Miley plenty of room to show off her voice ( which is and always has been lovely ) " although criticized the lyrics . 
 = = = Commercial performance = = = 
 The song debuted at No. 3 on the Bubbling Under Hot 100 and at No. 22 on Billboard Pop Digital Songs Chart . When the song was used in the ' 2013 Victoria 's Secret Fashion Show ' , it reached number 1 on Bubbling Under Hot 100 . In Canada , the song debuted at No. 85 on the Canadian Hot 100 . 
 = = = = Charts = = = = 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Cyrus has performed the song during her Bangerz Tour . Critics praised her performance of the song , specifically praising Cyrus ' vocals and showmanship . While performing " FU " during the first leg of the tour , Cyrus wore a long red sequined skirt over a sequined red and white leotard designed by " The Blonds " . She also wore matching gloves and cowboy boots . During the second leg of the show , she replaced the center color of the leotard from red to neon yellow and wore a long feathery yellow skirt with yellow elbow @-@ length gloves . David Blond of The Blonds stated that the pave crystal bodysuit and the rip @-@ away sequin skirt were inspired by Jessica Rabbit . A Sesame Street @-@ esque , bi @-@ pod puppet joined her during the performance . Of her August 4 , 2014 performance at the Consol Energy Center in Pittsburgh , Scott Mervis of the Pittsburgh Post @-@ Gazette wrote that she bought the house down " with a show @-@ stopping cabaret vocal " during " FU " . 
 On June 8 , 2014 , during Cyrus ' performance of " FU " at Mediolanum Forum in Milan , Italy ; Cyrus performed the song with a fan made cardboard cutout of Selena Gomez wearing a poorly scrawled black bikini . In the middle of the performance , she threw the cardboard cutout back into the crowd . This incident lead to many outlets speculating that Cyrus specifically directed the performance at Gomez . Neither Cyrus nor Gomez responded to the speculations . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits are adapted from the liner notes of Bangerz . 
 Recording 
 Recorded at <unk> Studios Philadelphia , Pennsylvania and Westlake Recording Studios , Los Angeles , California 
 Mixed at Larrabee Sound Studios ( North Hollywood , California ) 
 Personnel 
 Miley Cyrus – lead vocals , songwriter 
 French Montana – featured lead vocals , songwriter 
 Rami Samir Afuni – songwriter 
 Maureen Anne McDonald - songwriter 
 Karl Petersen – recording 
 Matthew Testa – recording 
 Manny Marroquin – mixing 
 Chris Galland – assistant 
 Delbert Bowers – assistant 
 = Next to You ( Chris Brown song ) = 
 " Next to You " is a song by American recording artist Chris Brown , included as a track on his fourth studio album , F.A.M.E. , released on March 18 , 2011 . The song features Canadian singer Justin Bieber . Brown co @-@ wrote the song with its producers , The Messengers , with additional writing from Amber " Sevyn " Streeter of RichGirl . Brown first revealed plans to collaborate with Bieber in December 2010 , and the track is the first of two tracks they worked together on , the second being a remix of Bieber 's " Up . " 
 Musically , " Next to You " is a R & B and pop number , with lyrics pertaining to the love between two in a relationship . Most music critics positively reviewed the song , complimenting the blending of Brown and Bieber 's vocals . However a common criticism of the track was how it stood out in comparison into the more lyrically explicit music on F.A.M.E .. After the release of the album , the song appeared on the charts in the United States , Canada , and the United Kingdom . It was released for digital download on June 24 , 2011 , as the album 's fifth single . 
 = = Background = = 
 The song was written by Brown and Amber Streeter ( of American R & B girl group RichGirl ) with Nasri Atweh and Adam Messinger of production team The Messengers . The latter duo receive production credits on the track . In December 2010 , Brown tweeted that he would be collaborating with Bieber . The song first appeared online on March 8 , 2011 . The song was one of two collaborations between Bieber and Brown in 2011 , the other being a remix of " Up " from Bieber 's My World 2 @.@ 0 album , which was included as a track on his Never Say Never – The Remixes set . In an interview with MTV News , Brown revealed that the duo recorded the " Up " remix first , and Brown wanted Bieber on his album after their first collaboration . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Next to You " is a R & B and pop song . The song has lyrics about a relationship , but Eliot Glazer of MTV Buzzworthy said that the song also contained inspirational lyrics . It features " digitized " violins . According to the sheet music at Musicnotes.com by Sony / ATV Music Publishing , the song is set in common time with a moderate tempo of 116 beats per minute . It is composed in the key of E ♭ major with Bieber and Brown 's vocal ranges spanning from the low @-@ note of G3 to the high @-@ note of C6 . The song features the chord progression of E ♭ – B ♭ – Cm – A ♭ . Nadia Noir of WNOW @-@ FM said the song was a hybrid of a " dance @-@ jam " and " love @-@ song . " Furthermore , AOL Music 's Charley Rogulewski called the song a " dreamy pop love song . " The song sees Brown and Bieber trading verses and the chorus in lyrics like " I 'll be there when you 're insecure / Let you know that you 're always lovely / Girl , because you are the only thing that I got right now . " 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Brad Wete of Entertainment Weekly coined the song as " thumping " and said that " Brown and guest Justin Bieber trade verses assuring their ladies of their dedication . " Joanne Dorken of MTV News UK said " It seems that everything Justin Bieber touches turns to gold at the moment and this cutesy ballad is no exception . " Dorken complimented how well the song showed the blending of the pair 's voices , and she commented , as " the most ' pop ' song on the LP , we are hoping Chris decides to make this a single ... a sure fire hit . " Nadia Noir of WNOW @-@ FM wrote , " What do you get when you combine two of pop 's best @-@ looking / greatest dancers , the sexy rasp of Justin Bieber , and a dance @-@ jam / love @-@ song ? A combination of all the best elements of music ! " Nick Levine of BBC Music said the track was part of Brown 's identity crisis on the album , as " Next to You " was just two tracks after the " grisly sex jam " of " Wet the Bed " featuring Ludacris . Levine called the collaboration a " wholesome @-@ as @-@ homemade @-@ chutney hook @-@ up . " While complementing that the album had " something for everyone " , Jody Rosen of Rolling Stone called " Next to You " a " puppy @-@ love declaration . " Bri LaPelusa called the song a " dreamy ballad " and said it melted Brown and Bieber 's " angelic " voices . She went on to add that " Next to You " " might be affirmation that Chris Brown is once again an accepted celebrity . " 
 Concerning the lyrics , Eliot Glazer of MTV Buzzworthy said " It ain 't new , but it 's still cute . " Eric Henderson of Slant Magazine said Brown was unable to capture the " majesty of ' Forever ' " with the song , noting it was " rendered limp by the undercurrent of sincerity . " Jon Caramanica of The New York Times wrote that the song does not compliment Brown 's already weak voice , and called it " <unk> awful . " Caramanica also commented that Bieber was " apparently not worried about the stain this collaboration might leave . " 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 Due to digital sales after the release of F.A.M.E. , " Next to You " debuted on the US Billboard Hot 100 and the Canadian Hot 100 charts of the week ending April 9 , 2011 . The song debuted at number ten on the Hot Digital Songs chart in the US , and therefore consecutively appeared at number twenty @-@ six on the Hot 100 . The following week , the song fell to number ninety before falling off the chart the next week . On the Canadian Hot 100 , it debuted at number thirty @-@ six , and spent one week on the chart . In the United Kingdom , after the release of F.A.M.E. , " Next to You " appeared at number forty @-@ nine . It spent one week on the chart . After being released as a single , it appeared on the chart again and eventually peaked at number fourteen . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The music video for " Next to You " was directed by Colin Tilley and filmed at the Universal Studios in Los Angeles , and upper Manhattan . On May 10 , 2011 , Bieber 's manager confirmed plans for a music video via Twitter . In an interview with MTV News , Tilley spoke briefly about the video , saying " Tomorrow , I 'm shooting New Boyz and Chris Brown ... then Justin Bieber and Chris Brown , together ... I can 't tell you anything about that yet , but it 's going to happen . It 's gonna be big . It 's gonna be big . I can 't say anything else . " On May 21 , 2011 , Brown posted two photos from the shoot via Twitter , showing him and Bieber standing among overturned cars in a path of destruction . However , the unfinished version of the music video leaked onto the internet on June 6 , and the final cut was premiered on June 17 , 2011 . 
 The video begins with Brown and Bieber interacting with their girlfriends while the song " All Back " by Chris Brown is playing . Bieber 's love interest is removed by her father , who reprimands , " You will never see him again . You understand that ? " Brown is thinking of his girlfriend ( played by Shannon Elizabeth ) before the apocalypse occurs , which is characterized by land fissures , buildings toppling down and fiery scenery . Brown searches for his love interest who is then hit by the car that Bieber 's girlfriend is in . Brown saves her by leaping over the fissure . Near the end of the video , Bieber 's girlfriend finds him on top of the roof of a building and it ends with them reuniting and kissing . Interspersed are scenes of Brown and Bieber dancing amongst the destruction . Jamie Peck of MTV wrote of the video , " The whole thing is delightfully ridiculous in its cinematic drama " . The video is currently nominated for International Artist Video of the Year at the 2012 MuchMusic Video Awards . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Vocals - Chris Brown , Justin Bieber 
 Songwriting – Chris Brown , Nasri Atweh , Adam Messinger , Amber Streeter 
 Production – The Messengers 
 Vocal production – Kuk Harrell 
 Vocal recording – Kuk Harrell , Josh Gudwin 
 Mixing – Jaycen Joshua , assisted by Jesus <unk> 
 Source 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Digital download 
 " Next to You " featuring Justin Bieber – 4 : 25 
 Digital download / radio edit 
 " Next to You " featuring Justin Bieber ( Radio edit ) – 3 : 31 
 " Next to You " ( Radio edit ) – 3 : 30 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Bani Na 'im = 
 Bani Na 'im ( Arabic : <unk> <unk> , <unk> Na ‘ <unk> ) is a Palestinian town in the southern West Bank located 8 kilometers ( 5 @.@ 0 mi ) east of Hebron in the Hebron Governorate . Known as Brekke in the pre @-@ Roman era , it was later referred to as " <unk> Barucha " in the 4th @-@ century . The town is best known as the burial place of Lot . Following the Muslim conquest , its name was Arabized as " Kafr al @-@ Barik . " The tomb of Lot was turned into a mosque during Islamic rule and remained so under Crusader rule . Later , the Arab tribe of " Bani Nu 'aym " settled there , giving the town its current name " Bani Na 'im , " first used by Muslim scholar Abd al @-@ Ghani al @-@ Nabulsi in 1690 . 
 Bani Na 'im grew in population during the British Mandate for Palestine . It joined the 1936 – 39 Arab revolt as the site of a battle between the irregular Palestinian Arab forces of Abd al @-@ Qadir al @-@ Husayni and the British Army . Following the 1948 Arab – Israeli War , Bani Na 'im was annexed by Jordan . It came under Israeli occupation after Israel captured the West Bank during the Six @-@ Day War in 1967 . In 1997 , Bani Na 'im was transferred to Palestinian administration and consequently became a municipality . Today , it serves as a commercial center for Hebron area villages , although most government services are in Hebron . The town had a population of 20 @,@ 084 inhabitants in 2007 . It is situated at a higher elevation than most localities in the area with an altitude of 951 meters ( 3 @,@ 120 ft ) . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early history = = = 
 Bani Na 'im was known as " Brekke " in pre @-@ Ancient Roman times . Biblical scholar Edward Robinson identified the site with " <unk> Barucha " mentioned by Saint Jerome as the burial place of Lot in the 4th @-@ century CE . The modern town was built on the Roman Jewish village of " Kfar <unk> . " Jerome wrote that Saint Paula , departing from Hebron , stopped upon the height of <unk> Barucha and looked upon the surrounding region , remembering Lot . According to tradition , Abraham observed the destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah from that location . 
 Following the Muslim conquest of Syria in the mid @-@ 7th @-@ century , the village was known as " Kafr <unk> " or " Kafr al @-@ Barik . " Ali of Herat passed through the village in 1173 CE , noting that it was near Hebron and the burial place of Lot . Along with the town of Dura , Kafr al @-@ Barik became a part of the waqf ( " endowment " ) for the Ibrahimi Mosque ( Cave of the Patriarchs ) in Hebron on orders from the Ayyubid ruler of Damascus , al @-@ Mu 'azzam Isa on May 2 , 1215 . 15th @-@ century Muslim geographer Imam al @-@ Suyuti also acknowledged Lot was buried in Kafr al @-@ Barik and that in a cave west of the village , beneath an old mosque , laid " sixty prophets of whom twenty were Apostles . " He noted that Lot 's tomb was a site of " visitation and veneration from ancient times , the men of the age succeeding those who have gone before . " 
 = = = Ottoman era = = = 
 In 1517 the town was annexed to the Ottoman Empire along with the rest of the Levant . Both the names Kafr <unk> and Nabi Na 'im were indicated for the village in the Ottoman tax registers of 1596 , where it was listed in the Nahiya of Khalil in the <unk> of Quds . It had a population of 42 Muslim households and paid taxes on wheat , barley , vineyards or fruit trees , grape syrup or molasses , and goats or beehives . 
 The name " Bani Na 'im " was used by Muslim scholar Abd al @-@ Ghani al @-@ Nabulsi in 1690 during Ottoman rule . He wrote that the village had been known as " Kafr al @-@ Barik " and " now it is known as Qaryat Bani Nu 'aym in a diminutive form . " It received this name from the Arab tribe of Bani Nu 'aym , also referred to as Bani Na 'im , who settled there after migrating from the vicinity of Petra in Transjordan . Until the end of the 19th @-@ century , the early Arabic name was used by the residents and Western travelers . 
 Robinson visited Bani Na 'im in 1838 , noting that it was probably the " very highest point in the hill country of Judea . " When the French traveler Victor Guérin visited in 1860 , he found the village almost deserted since the population had left to live in tents as nomads to avoid military conscription . He found them living in a tent village one kilometer away , ready to flee to the desert if an attempt was made to enlist them . However , in 1874 the Palestine Exploration Fund 's Survey of Western Palestine ( SWP ) described it as " a good @-@ sized village " bordered by olive groves to the south and west with many structures built out of ancient materials . The residences there were mostly one @-@ story stone cabins . In their second visit in 1881 the SWP described Bani Na 'im as well @-@ cultivated with abundant flocks that grazed in desert areas east of the town . The town was a major supplier of sand for the Hebron glass industry . For much of the latter half of Ottoman rule , Bani Na 'im was under the administration of the <unk> of Jerusalem . 
 = = = Contemporary period = = = 
 Bani Na 'im grew considerably in population during the early 20th @-@ century . In 1936 , the town participated in the Arab revolt against the British authorities . In December 1937 , British forces ordered the demolition of a house whose owners were accused of involvement in an anti @-@ British incident near the town . They fined Bani Na 'im 's <unk> ( town chiefs ) 50 British pounds and ordered the residents to carry 200 kilograms of explosives to the building for its demolition and watch the explosion as a deterrent measure . 
 Palestinian Arab irregulars led by Abd al @-@ Qadir al @-@ Husayni and his local commander , Abd al @-@ Halim <unk> , battled British Army forces in Bani Na 'im in December 1938 . According to British military accounts , a resident of Bani Na 'im called for intervention when the rebels entered the town . Israeli scholar Hillel Cohen wrote that Fakhri Nashashibi , a political rival of al @-@ Husayni , informed military authorities on three rebel units forcing Bani Na 'im 's largely pro @-@ Nashashibi inhabitants to join the revolt . The British promptly confronted a force of 100 irregulars . With British Air Force assistance , al @-@ Husayni 's troops dispersed and fled east of Bani Na 'im where they were pinned down . British forces killed 60 rebels and captured 15 . One British soldier was killed . 
 Bani Na 'im was annexed by Jordan after the 1948 Arab – Israeli War . In June 1967 , after the Six @-@ Day War , the town came under Israeli rule . In 1982 , an 18 @-@ year @-@ old resident of the town was shot and killed by Jewish settlers from nearby Kiryat Arba . In 1987 , during the First Intifada , a committee against the Israeli occupation was set up in Bani Na 'im . In May 1988 , two residents were killed by the Israeli Army ( IDF ) in the center of the town . 
 In 1997 , in the wake of the 1995 Interim Agreement on the West Bank and the Gaza Strip , administrative control over Bani Na 'im was transferred to the jurisdiction of the Palestinian National Authority ( PNA ) . On August 31 , 2010 , four Israelis , two men and two women , were killed in a Hamas drive @-@ by shooting on the road between Kiryat Arba and Bani Naim . The attack was condemned by Israel and the PNA . 
 = = Tomb of Lot = = 
 Bani Na 'im houses the tomb of Lot , a prophet in Islam and a righteous person in Judaism and Christianity , in the center of the town . The tomb is located within a rectangular @-@ shaped mosque that contains an inner court and minaret . The lintel of the mosque 's northern gate is built from stones dating to the Byzantine era when a church had possibly stood at the site . Lot 's tomb was first mentioned by Saint Jerome , then by John of <unk> in 1100 , and Ali of Herat in 1173 . While the Crusaders , who ruled the area from 1148 to 1187 , were aware the tomb belonged to Lot , it remained a Muslim sanctuary unlike other Muslim edifices in Palestine which were converted to Christian use . In 1322 , writer Sir John Mandeville writes " two miles from Hebron , is the grave of Lot , Abraham 's brother . " Ibn Battuta noted in 1326 that the tomb was covered by a " fine building " made of white stone and without columns . Muslim writers al @-@ Suyuti and Mujir ad @-@ Din wrote in the 15th and 16th centuries , respectively , that Lot was buried in Bani Na 'im . Tawfiq Canaan , a researcher of Palestinian popular heritage , described the golden embroidered writing on the red silk cloth covering the tomb as reading , " This is the tomb of prophet <unk> , peace be upon him . " 
 Islamic @-@ era Kufic inscriptions on the front entrance to the mosque state that the Muslim scholar Abdullah bin Muhammad declared " the hills , the plains , the buildings , the paths , the gardens , the trees and the passage that <unk> it [ Bani Na 'im ] " are an endowment " for the prophet Lot , the son of Haran brother of Ibrahim ( Abraham ) , the friend of the Compassionate ( Allah ) , may the blessings of Allah be upon them ... " According to Muslim tradition , Lot lived in Bani Na 'im before moving to Sodom . The shrine encasing the tomb was restored in 1410 by the Mamluk sultan an @-@ Nasir Faraj , son of Sultan Barquq . The restoration work was entrusted by him to Shams al @-@ Din al @-@ Ansari , a member of the prominent Ansari family which specialized in religious endowments ( waqf ) . 
 The tomb of Lot 's daughters are on an opposite hill nearby . To the southeast of Bani Na 'im is a separate shrine dedicated to Lot , known as Maqam an @-@ Nabi <unk> ( " Shrine of the <unk> Prophet . " ) Local legend claims Lot prayed at the site and imprints of his feet in a rock there are visible . According to Muslim and Christian tradition , Bani Na 'im is the place where Abraham , after the departure of the angels , saw the smoke of Sodom and Gomorrah " rising as the smoke of a furnace . " 
 = = Geography and climate = = 
 Bani Naim forms a generally rough rectangular layout , and widens in the northwest and southwest . The town covers a mountainous area , with an average altitude of 958 meters ( 3 @,@ 143 ft ) above sea level . It is 7 kilometers ( 4 @.@ 3 mi ) to 8 kilometers ( 5 @.@ 0 mi ) southeast of Hebron , however the two localities have virtually merged with each other . The Israeli settlement of Kiryat Arba is situated northwest of Bani Na 'im , between it and Hebron . To its south lies the village of <unk> and the town of <unk> , to the north are Sa 'ir and ash @-@ <unk> , while <unk> and the forest of Hebron lie to the west . Bani Na 'im 's lands extend east to the mountains that overlook the Dead Sea . 
 Bani Na 'im 's total land area is about 157 @,@ 000 dunams , but the town 's built @-@ up areas amount to roughly 2 @,@ 500 dunams . The town itself is mostly located in Area A ( Palestinian security and civilian administration ) and Area B ( Palestinian civil administration and Israeli military control . ) The nearby town of ar @-@ Rawa 'in to the east is located within Bani Na 'im 's municipal jurisdiction and is under Area A. However , the Israeli settlement of Ma 'ale Hever which was established in 1982 , has a population of 400 and is also located within the Bani Na 'im 's municipal borders , comes under full Israeli control . Most of Bani Na 'im 's lands ( 59 @.@ 6 % ) fall under " Area C , " or full Israeli security and civilian administration . 
 Average annual rainfall in Bani Na 'im is 369 millimeters ( 14 @.@ 5 in ) . The average temperature is 16 ° C ( 61 ° F ) and the average annual humidity is 61 % . 
 = = Demographics = = 
 An Ottoman village list of about 1870 showed that Beni Na 'im had 67 houses and a population of 145 , though the population count included only men . In a census conducted in 1922 by the British Mandate authorities , Bani Na 'im had a population of 1 @,@ 279 Muslims , rising to 1 @,@ 646 Muslims in the 1931 census . By 1945 , it increased to 2 @,@ 160 according to an official land and population survey . Under Jordanian rule , in 1952 , the population surged to 5 @,@ 778 , partly due to large numbers of Palestinian refugees who settled in the town as a result of the 1948 Arab @-@ Israeli War . Later , the number of inhabitants declined due to the emigration of refugees from the town to other parts of the West Bank and Jordan . By 1967 , there were 4 @,@ 271 inhabitants in the town , gradually increasing to 6 @,@ 703 . In 1987 , the population rose to roughly 7 @,@ 600 people . In the 1997 census carried out by the Palestinian Central Bureau of Statistics ( PCBS ) , Bani Na 'im had 13 @,@ 535 inhabitants of which 604 were refugees . The gender distribution was 6 @,@ 779 males and 6 @,@ 756 females . 
 In the 2007 census , there were 20 @,@ 084 people living in the town and 217 in nearby <unk> Bani Na 'im which is located within the municipal jurisdiction . The gender makeup of Bani Na 'im 's population was 50 @.@ 2 % male and 49 @.@ 8 % female . There were 3 @,@ 490 housing units and the average household size consisted of 6 @.@ 5 family members . Bani Na 'im 's inhabitants accounted for 3 @.@ 67 % of the Hebron Governorate 's population and the town is officially considered an urban area . The inhabitants are Muslims and 16 mosques are present throughout the town . The main families are al @-@ <unk> ( the largest ) , Zeidan , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> and Amr . 
 = = Government = = 
 Bani Na 'im was established as a village council in 1971 . After most of the built @-@ up areas of Bani Na 'im were transferred to " Area A , " giving the Palestinian National Authority full control of the town , a municipal council was established on May 20 , 1997 . The first council was formed from the old members of the previous village council . The council was made up of seven members , while there were 18 municipal employees . 
 The amount of municipal seats was expanded to 13 during the Palestinian municipal elections in 2005 . A local group , the Bani Na 'im Martyrs list , won the most seats : five . The Al @-@ Aqsa list won three seats , Independent lists also won three and the Hamas @-@ backed Reform and Change list won the remaining two seats . Gender @-@ wise , females won two seats and males eleven . Issa Hassan al @-@ <unk> , member of the Bani Na 'im Martyrs , had the most votes ( 3 @,@ 281 ) , and thus became the head of the municipality . In addition , the number of municipal employees increased to 30 . 
 The municipal borders of Bani Na 'im extend beyond the town and include the following villages : <unk> , ar @-@ Rawa 'in and <unk> Bani Na 'im . The latter is a grouping of the following hamlets : Mantiqat al @-@ Ein , Mantiqat as @-@ Sahel , Mantiqat <unk> K <unk> , Mantiqat Hilmi , Mantiqat al @-@ Hamra , Mantiqat al @-@ <unk> , Mantiqat al @-@ <unk> , Mantiqat as @-@ <unk> , Mantiqat Um ar @-@ <unk> and Khor ' Atara . Despite having a municipality , most official services are provided by the city of Hebron . However , Bani Na 'im has a police station , a post office , and a local security office . 
 = = Education and health = = 
 Bani Na 'im has 14 schools : 7 boys schools , 5 girls schools and 2 co @-@ educational schools . The first school was established in 1929 . Consisting of one classroom , the enrollment at the time did not exceed 20 female and male students and the highest grade @-@ level was the fourth grade . 
 According to the 2007 census , 92 @.@ 2 % of the population was literate ; most of the illiterate population was female . A total of 3 @,@ 613 students were in elementary school , 3 @,@ 601 in preparatory school , and 1 @,@ 862 in high school . 958 people had college diplomas ; 49 had academic degrees higher than BA . 
 In 2009 , the municipality reported a shortage of classrooms . 
 Most of Bani Na 'im 's health facilities are privately owned . The town has a maternity hospital , five health clinics , three dental clinics and a physiotherapy center . The Palestinian Ministry of Health runs a childcare center and medical lab in the town while an additional health center as well as an x @-@ ray center are run by a charitable society . In addition , there are five pharmacies in Bani Na 'im . In 2009 , the town had one ambulance . Residents travel to Hebron for emergency treatment . 
 = = Economy and infrastructure = = 
 Bani Na 'im serves as a commercial center in the Hebron area . Approximately 50 % of the labor force is engaged in the industrial and civil service sector . About 20 % are employed in the Israeli labor market while 19 % work in agriculture . Economic enterprises include four stone @-@ cutting factories , a brick factory , a textile factory , an olive press , eleven metal workshops , four carpentry workshops , seven butcher shops , 13 clothing stores , and 110 other shops . 
 Decline in market demand combined with movement restrictions imposed by the Israeli military have led to a deterioration of the local economy , particularly in the trade and the stone @-@ cutting industries . In 2007 , unemployment reached 30 % . Consequently , many unemployed persons began looking into agriculture to earn income . The most cultivated crops are grains , especially barley , followed by lentils and chick peas . A sizable segment of the population raise livestock and 10 % breed their own domestic animals . In total , there are 144 cows , 7 @,@ 000 goats , 14 @,@ 000 sheep , and 500 beehives . Much of the town 's agricultural products are sold in Hebron . 
 There are 4 @,@ 244 buildings in Bani Na 'im , of which 3 @,@ 452 are houses and 213 are working establishments . Pipe water reaches more than 95 % of the residents . The water pipe line , 2 @.@ 5 kilometers ( 1 @.@ 6 mi ) in length , is linked to the main water supply of the Israeli settlement of Efrat , south of Bethlehem . Around 9 kilometers ( 5 @.@ 6 mi ) of main and sub lines were recently repaired . The cost of this project was roughly one million NIS . 
 In 1994 , Bani Na 'im was linked to the electricity grid and the municipality installed street lights . Before then , generators operated for five hours daily at most and for house use only . 
 = George I of Great Britain = 
 George I ( George Louis ; German : Georg Ludwig ; 28 May 1660 – 11 June 1727 ) was King of Great Britain and Ireland from 1 August 1714 until his death , and ruler of the Duchy and Electorate of Brunswick @-@ Lüneburg ( Hanover ) in the Holy Roman Empire from 1698 . 
 George was born in Hanover and inherited the titles and lands of the Duchy of Brunswick @-@ Lüneburg from his father and uncles . A succession of European wars expanded his German domains during his lifetime , and in 1708 he was ratified as prince @-@ elector of Hanover . At the age of 54 , after the death of Queen Anne of Great Britain , George ascended the British throne as the first monarch of the House of Hanover . Although over fifty Roman Catholics bore closer blood relationships to Anne , the Act of Settlement 1701 prohibited Catholics from inheriting the British throne ; George was Anne 's closest living Protestant relative . In reaction , Jacobites attempted to depose George and replace him with Anne 's Catholic half @-@ brother , James Francis Edward Stuart , but their attempts failed . 
 During George 's reign , the powers of the monarchy diminished and Britain began a transition to the modern system of cabinet government led by a prime minister . Towards the end of his reign , actual power was held by Sir Robert Walpole , now recognised as Britain 's first de facto prime minister . George died on a trip to his native Hanover , where he was buried . 
 = = Early life = = 
 George was born on 28 May 1660 in Hanover in the Holy Roman Empire . He was the eldest son of Ernest Augustus , Duke of Brunswick @-@ Lüneburg , and his wife , Sophia of the Palatinate . Sophia was the granddaughter of King James I of England through her mother , Elizabeth of Bohemia . 
 For the first year of his life , George was the only heir to the German territories of his father and three childless uncles . In 1661 George 's brother , Frederick Augustus , was born and the two boys ( known as <unk> and <unk> within the family ) were brought up together . Their mother was absent for almost a year ( 1664 – 65 ) during a long convalescent holiday in Italy , but she corresponded regularly with her sons ' governess and took a great interest in her sons ' upbringing , even more so on her return . After Sophia 's tour she bore Ernest Augustus another four sons and a daughter . In her letters , Sophia describes George as a responsible , conscientious child who set an example to his younger brothers and sisters . 
 By 1675 George 's eldest uncle had died without issue , but his remaining two uncles had married , putting George 's inheritance in jeopardy as his uncles ' estates might pass to their own sons , should they have had any , instead of to George . George 's father took him hunting and riding , and introduced him to military matters ; mindful of his uncertain future , Ernest Augustus took the fifteen @-@ year @-@ old George on campaign in the Franco @-@ Dutch War with the deliberate purpose of testing and training his son in battle . 
 In 1679 another uncle died unexpectedly without sons and Ernest Augustus became reigning Duke of <unk> @-@ Göttingen , with his capital at Hanover . George 's surviving uncle , George William of Celle , had married his mistress in order to legitimise his only daughter , Sophia Dorothea of Celle , but looked unlikely to have any further children . Under Salic law , where inheritance of territory was restricted to the male line , the succession of George and his brothers to the territories of their father and uncle now seemed secure . In 1682 , the family agreed to adopt the principle of primogeniture , meaning George would inherit all the territory and not have to share it with his brothers . 
 = = Marriage = = 
 The same year , George married his first cousin , Sophia Dorothea of Celle , thereby securing additional incomes that would have been outside Salic laws . The marriage of state was arranged primarily as it ensured a healthy annual income and assisted the eventual unification of Hanover and Celle . His mother was at first against the marriage because she looked down on Sophia Dorothea 's mother ( who was not of royal birth ) , and because she was concerned by Sophia Dorothea 's legitimated status . She was eventually won over by the advantages inherent in the marriage . 
 In 1683 , George and his brother , Frederick Augustus , served in the Great Turkish War at the Battle of Vienna , and Sophia Dorothea bore George a son , George Augustus . The following year , Frederick Augustus was informed of the adoption of primogeniture , meaning he would no longer receive part of his father 's territory as he had expected . It led to a breach between father and son , and between the brothers , that lasted until Frederick Augustus 's death in battle in 1690 . With the imminent formation of a single Hanoverian state , and the Hanoverians ' continuing contributions to the Empire 's wars , Ernest Augustus was made an Elector of the Holy Roman Empire in 1692 . George 's prospects were now better than ever as the sole heir to his father 's electorate and his uncle 's duchy . 
 Sophia Dorothea had a second child , a daughter named after her , in 1687 , but there were no other pregnancies . The couple became estranged — George preferred the company of his mistress , Melusine von der Schulenburg , by whom he had two daughters in 1692 and 1693 respectively ; and Sophia Dorothea , meanwhile , had her own romance with the Swedish Count Philip Christoph von Königsmarck . Threatened with the scandal of an elopement , the Hanoverian court , including George 's brothers and mother , urged the lovers to desist , but to no avail . According to diplomatic sources from Hanover 's enemies , in July 1694 the Swedish count was killed , possibly with the connivance of George , and his body thrown into the river Leine weighted with stones . The murder was claimed to have been committed by four of Ernest Augustus 's courtiers , one of whom ( Don Nicolò <unk> ) was paid the enormous sum of 150 @,@ 000 thalers , which was about one hundred times the annual salary of the highest paid minister . Later rumours supposed that Königsmarck was hacked to pieces and buried beneath the Hanover palace floorboards . However , sources in Hanover itself , including Sophia , denied any knowledge of Königsmarck 's whereabouts . 
 George 's marriage to Sophia Dorothea was dissolved , not on the grounds that either of them had committed adultery , but on the grounds that Sophia Dorothea had abandoned her husband . With the concurrence of her father , George had Sophia Dorothea imprisoned in <unk> House in her native Celle , where she stayed until she died more than thirty years later . She was denied access to her children and father , forbidden to remarry and only allowed to walk unaccompanied within the mansion courtyard . She was , however , endowed with an income , establishment , and servants , and was allowed to ride in a carriage outside her castle , albeit under supervision . 
 = = Electoral reign = = 
 Ernest Augustus died on 23 January 1698 leaving all of his territories to George with the exception of the Prince @-@ Bishopric of Osnabrück , an office he had held since 1661 . George thus became Duke of Brunswick @-@ Lüneburg ( also known as Hanover , after its capital ) as well as <unk> and a Prince @-@ Elector of the Holy Roman Empire . His court in Hanover was graced by many cultural icons such as the mathematician and philosopher Gottfried Leibniz and the composers George Frideric Händel and Agostino Steffani . 
 Shortly after George 's accession to his paternal dukedom , Prince William , Duke of Gloucester , who was second @-@ in @-@ line to the English and Scottish thrones , died . By the terms of the English Act of Settlement 1701 , George 's mother , Sophia , was designated as the heir to the English throne if the then reigning monarch ( William III ) and his sister @-@ in @-@ law , Princess Anne of Denmark ( later Queen Anne ) died without surviving issue . The succession was so designed because Sophia was the closest Protestant relative of the British royal family . Fifty @-@ six Catholics with superior hereditary claims were bypassed . The likelihood of any of them converting to Protestantism for the sake of the succession was remote ; some had already refused . 
 In August 1701 , George was invested with the Order of the Garter and , within six weeks , the nearest Catholic claimant to the thrones , the former king James II , died . William III died the following March and was succeeded by Anne . Sophia became heiress presumptive to the new Queen of England . Sophia was in her seventy @-@ first year , older than Anne by thirty @-@ five years , but she was very fit and healthy and invested time and energy in securing the succession either for herself or her son . However , it was George who understood the complexities of English politics and constitutional law , which required further acts in 1705 to naturalise Sophia and her heirs as English subjects , and to detail arrangements for the transfer of power through a Regency Council . In the same year , George 's surviving uncle died and he inherited further German dominions : the Principality of Lüneburg @-@ <unk> , centred at Celle . 
 Shortly after George 's accession in Hanover , the War of the Spanish Succession broke out . At issue was the right of Philip , the grandson of King Louis XIV of France , to succeed to the Spanish throne under the terms of King Charles II of Spain 's will . The Holy Roman Empire , the United Dutch Provinces , England , Hanover and many other German states opposed Philip 's right to succeed because they feared that the French House of Bourbon would become too powerful if it also controlled Spain . As part of the war effort , George invaded his neighbouring state , Brunswick @-@ Wolfenbüttel , which was pro @-@ French , writing out some of the battle orders himself . The invasion succeeded with few lives lost . As a reward , the prior Hanoverian annexation of the Duchy of Saxe @-@ Lauenburg by George 's uncle was recognised by the British and Dutch . 
 In 1706 , the Elector of Bavaria was deprived of his offices and titles for siding with Louis against the Empire . The following year , George was invested as an Imperial Field Marshal with command of the imperial army stationed along the Rhine . His tenure was not altogether successful , partly because he was deceived by his ally , the Duke of Marlborough , into a diversionary attack , and partly because Emperor Joseph I appropriated the funds necessary for George 's campaign for his own use . Despite this , the German princes thought that he had acquitted himself well . In 1708 they formally confirmed George 's position as a Prince @-@ Elector in recognition of , or because of , his service . George did not hold Marlborough 's actions against him which he understood were part of a plan to lure French forces from the main attack . 
 In 1709 , George resigned as field marshal , never to go on active service again . In 1710 , he was granted the dignity of Archtreasurer of the Empire , an office formerly held by the Elector Palatine — the absence of the Elector of Bavaria allowed a reshuffling of offices . The death of the Emperor in 1711 threatened to destroy the balance of power in the opposite direction , so the war ended in 1713 with the ratification of the Treaty of Utrecht . Philip was allowed to succeed to the Spanish throne but was removed from the French line of succession , and the Elector of Bavaria was restored . 
 = = Accession in Great Britain = = 
 Though both England and Scotland recognised Anne as their queen , only the English Parliament had settled on Sophia , Electress of Hanover , as the heir presumptive . The Parliament of Scotland ( the Estates ) had not formally settled the succession question for the Scottish throne . In 1703 , the Estates passed a bill that declared that their selection for Queen Anne 's successor would not be the same individual as the successor to the English throne , unless England granted full freedom of trade to Scottish merchants in England and its colonies . At first Royal Assent was withheld , but the following year Anne capitulated to the wishes of the Estates and assent was granted to the bill , which became the Act of Security 1704 . In response the English Parliament passed measures which threatened to restrict Anglo @-@ Scottish trade and cripple the Scottish economy if the Estates did not agree to the Hanoverian succession . Eventually , in 1707 , both Parliaments agreed on an Act of Union which united England and Scotland into a single political entity , the Kingdom of Great Britain , and established the rules of succession as laid down by the Act of Settlement 1701 . The union created the largest free trade area in eighteenth @-@ century Europe . 
 Whig politicians believed Parliament had the right to determine the succession , and bestow it on the nearest Protestant relative of the Queen , while many Tories were more inclined to believe in the hereditary right of the Catholic Stuarts , who were nearer relations . In 1710 , George announced that he would succeed in Britain by hereditary right , as the right had been removed from the Stuarts , and he retained it . " This declaration was meant to scotch any Whig interpretation that parliament had given him the kingdom [ and ] ... convince the Tories that he was no usurper . " 
 George 's mother , the Electress Sophia , died on 28 May 1714 at the age of 83 . She had collapsed in the gardens at Herrenhausen after rushing to shelter from a shower of rain . George was now Queen Anne 's direct heir . He swiftly revised the membership of the Regency Council that would take power after Anne 's death , as it was known that Anne 's health was failing and politicians in Britain were jostling for power . She suffered a stroke , which left her unable to speak , and died on 1 August 1714 . The list of regents was opened , the members sworn in , and George was proclaimed King of Great Britain and Ireland . Partly due to contrary winds , which kept him in The Hague awaiting passage , he did not arrive in Britain until 18 September . George was crowned at Westminster Abbey on 20 October . His coronation was accompanied by rioting in over twenty towns in England . 
 George mainly lived in Great Britain after 1714 though he visited his home in Hanover in 1716 , 1719 , 1720 , 1723 and 1725 ; in total George spent about one fifth of his reign as King in Germany . A clause in the Act of Settlement that forbade the British monarch from leaving the country without Parliament 's permission was unanimously repealed in 1716 . During all but the first of the King 's absences power was vested in a Regency Council rather than his son , George Augustus , Prince of Wales . 
 = = Wars and rebellions = = 
 Within a year of George 's accession the Whigs won an overwhelming victory in the general election of 1715 . Several members of the defeated Tory Party sympathised with the Jacobites , who sought to replace George with Anne 's Catholic half @-@ brother , James Francis Edward Stuart ( called " James III and VIII " by his supporters and " the Pretender " by his opponents ) . Some disgruntled Tories sided with a Jacobite rebellion , which became known as " The Fifteen " . James 's supporters , led by Lord Mar , an embittered Scottish nobleman who had previously served as a secretary of state , instigated rebellion in Scotland where support for Jacobitism was stronger than in England . " The Fifteen " , however , was a dismal failure ; Lord Mar 's battle plans were poor , and James arrived late with too little money and too few arms . By the end of the year the rebellion had all but collapsed . In February 1716 , faced with impending defeat , James and Lord Mar fled to France . After the rebellion was defeated , although there were some executions and forfeitures , George acted to moderate the Government 's response , showed leniency , and spent the income from the forfeited estates on schools for Scotland and paying off part of the national debt . 
 George 's distrust of the Tories aided the passing of power to the Whigs . Whig dominance would grow to be so great under George that the Tories would not return to power for another half @-@ century . After the election , the Whig @-@ dominated Parliament passed the Septennial Act 1715 , which extended the maximum duration of Parliament to seven years ( although it could be dissolved earlier by the Sovereign ) . Thus Whigs already in power could remain in such a position for a greater period of time . 
 After his accession in Great Britain , George 's relationship with his son ( which had always been poor ) worsened . George Augustus , Prince of Wales , encouraged opposition to his father 's policies , including measures designed to increase religious freedom in Britain and expand Hanover 's German territories at the expense of Sweden . In 1717 the birth of a grandson led to a major quarrel between George and the Prince of Wales . The King , supposedly following custom , appointed the Lord Chamberlain , the Duke of Newcastle , as one of the baptismal sponsors of the child . The King was angered when the Prince of Wales , disliking Newcastle , verbally insulted the Duke at the christening , which the Duke misunderstood as a challenge to a duel . The Prince was told to leave the royal residence , St. James 's Palace . The Prince 's new home , Leicester House , became a meeting place for the King 's political opponents . George and his son were later reconciled at the insistence of Robert Walpole and the desire of the Princess of Wales , who had moved out with her husband but missed her children who had been left in the care of the King . However , following the quarrel at the baptism , father and son would never again be on cordial terms . 
 George was active in directing British foreign policy during his early reign . In 1717 he contributed to the creation of the Triple Alliance , an anti @-@ Spanish league composed of Great Britain , France and the United Provinces . In 1718 the Holy Roman Empire was added to the body which became known as the Quadruple Alliance . The subsequent War of the Quadruple Alliance involved the same issue as the War of the Spanish Succession . The Treaty of Utrecht ( 1713 ) had recognised the grandson of King Louis XIV of France , Philip , as the King of Spain on the condition that he gave up his rights to succeed to the French throne . Upon the death of Louis XIV in 1715 , however , Philip sought to overturn the treaty . 
 Spain supported a Jacobite @-@ led invasion of Scotland in 1719 but stormy seas allowed only about three hundred Spanish troops to arrive in Scotland . A base was established at Eilean Donan Castle on the west Scottish coast in April , only for it to be destroyed by British ships a month later . Attempts by the Jacobites to recruit Scottish clansmen yielded a fighting force of only about a thousand men . The Jacobites were poorly equipped , and were easily defeated by British artillery at the Battle of Glen Shiel . The clansmen dispersed into the Highlands , and the Spaniards surrendered . The invasion never posed any serious threat to George 's government . With the French this time fighting against him in the War , Philip 's armies fared poorly . As a result , the Spanish and French thrones remained separate . Simultaneously Hanover gained from the resolution of the Great Northern War which had been caused by rivalry between Sweden and Russia for control of the Baltic . The Swedish territories of Bremen and Verden were ceded to Hanover in 1719 , with Hanover paying Sweden monetary compensation for the loss of territory . 
 = = Ministries = = 
 In Hanover , the King was absolute monarch . All government expenditure above 50 thalers ( between 12 and 13 British pounds ) , and the appointment of all army officers , all ministers , and even government officials above the level of copyist , was in his personal control . In contrast , in Great Britain George had to govern through Parliament . 
 In 1715 when the Whigs came to power , George 's chief ministers included Sir Robert Walpole , Lord Townshend ( Walpole 's brother @-@ in @-@ law ) , Lord Stanhope and Lord Sunderland . In 1717 Lord Townshend was dismissed and Walpole resigned from the Cabinet over disagreements with their colleagues ; Lord Stanhope became supreme in foreign affairs , and Lord Sunderland the same in domestic matters . 
 Lord Sunderland 's power began to wane in 1719 . He introduced a Peerage Bill which attempted to limit the size of the House of Lords by restricting new creations . The measure would have solidified Sunderland 's control of the House by preventing the creation of opposition peers but it was defeated after Walpole led the opposition to the bill by delivering what was considered " the most brilliant speech of his career " . Walpole and Townshend were reappointed as ministers the following year and a new , supposedly unified , Whig government formed . 
 Greater problems arose over financial speculation and the management of the national debt . Certain government bonds could not be redeemed without the consent of the bondholder and had been issued when interest rates were high ; consequently each bond represented a long @-@ term drain on public finances , as bonds were hardly ever redeemed . In 1719 the South Sea Company proposed to take over £ 31 million ( three fifths ) of the British national debt by exchanging government securities for stock in the company . The Company bribed Lord Sunderland , George 's mistress Melusine von der Schulenburg , and Lord Stanhope 's cousin , Charles Stanhope , who was Secretary of the Treasury , to support their plan . The Company enticed bondholders to convert their high @-@ interest , irredeemable bonds to low @-@ interest , easily tradeable stocks by offering apparently preferential financial gains . Company prices rose rapidly ; the shares had cost £ 128 on 1 January 1720 , but were valued at £ 500 when the conversion scheme opened in May . On 24 June the price reached a peak of £ 1050 . The company 's success led to the speculative flotation of other companies , some of a bogus nature , and the Government , in an attempt to suppress these schemes and with the support of the Company , passed the Bubble Act . With the rise in the market now halted , uncontrolled selling began in August , which caused the stock to plummet to £ 150 by the end of September . Many individuals — including aristocrats — lost vast sums and some were completely ruined . George , who had been in Hanover since June , returned to London in November — sooner than he wanted or was usual — at the request of the ministry . 
 The economic crisis , known as the South Sea Bubble , made George and his ministers extremely unpopular . In 1721 Lord Stanhope , though personally innocent , collapsed and died after a stressful debate in the House of Lords , and Lord Sunderland resigned from public office . 
 Sunderland , however , retained a degree of personal influence with George until his sudden death in 1722 allowed the rise of Sir Robert Walpole . Walpole became de facto Prime Minister , although the title was not formally applied to him ( officially , he was First Lord of the Treasury and Chancellor of the Exchequer ) . His management of the South Sea crisis , by rescheduling the debts and arranging some compensation , helped the return to financial stability . Through Walpole 's skilful management of Parliament , George managed to avoid direct implication in the Company 's fraudulent actions . Claims that George had received free stock as a bribe are not supported by evidence ; indeed receipts in the Royal Archives show that he paid for his subscriptions and that he lost money in the crash . 
 = = Later years = = 
 As requested by Walpole , George revived the Order of the Bath in 1725 , which enabled Walpole to reward or gain political supporters by offering them the honour . Walpole became extremely powerful and was largely able to appoint ministers of his own choosing . Unlike his predecessor , Queen Anne , George rarely attended meetings of the cabinet ; most of his communications were in private , and he only exercised substantial influence with respect to British foreign policy . With the aid of Lord Townshend , he arranged for the ratification by Great Britain , France and Prussia of the Treaty of Hanover , which was designed to counterbalance the Austro @-@ Spanish Treaty of Vienna and protect British trade . 
 George , although increasingly reliant on Walpole , could still have replaced his ministers at will . Walpole was actually afraid of being removed from office towards the end of George I 's reign , but such fears were put to an end when George died during his sixth trip to his native Hanover since his accession as king . He suffered a stroke on the road between <unk> and <unk> on 9 June 1727 , and was taken by carriage to the Prince @-@ Bishop 's palace at Osnabrück where he died in the early hours of 11 June 1727 . He was buried in the chapel of Leine Castle but his remains were moved to the chapel at Herrenhausen after World War II . 
 George was succeeded by his son , George Augustus , who took the throne as George II . It was widely assumed , even by Walpole for a time , that George II planned to remove Walpole from office but was prevented from doing so by his queen , Caroline of Ansbach . However , Walpole commanded a substantial majority in Parliament and George II had little choice but to retain him or risk ministerial instability . In subsequent reigns the power of the prime minister increased further at the expense of the power of the sovereign . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 George was ridiculed by his British subjects ; some of his contemporaries , such as Lady Mary Wortley Montagu , thought him unintelligent on the grounds that he was wooden in public . Though he was unpopular in Great Britain due to his supposed inability to speak English , such an inability may not have existed later in his reign as documents from that time show that he understood , spoke and wrote English . He certainly spoke fluent German and French , good Latin , and some Italian and Dutch . His treatment of his wife , Sophia Dorothea , became something of a scandal . 
 The British perceived him as too German , and in the opinion of historian Ragnhild Hatton , wrongly assumed that he had a succession of German mistresses . However , in mainland Europe , he was seen as a progressive ruler supportive of the Enlightenment who permitted his critics to publish without risk of severe censorship , and provided sanctuary to Voltaire when the philosopher was exiled from Paris in 1726 . European and British sources agree that George was reserved , temperate and financially prudent ; George disliked to be in the public light at social events , avoided the royal box at the opera and often travelled incognito to the house of a friend to play cards . Despite some unpopularity , the Protestant George I was seen by most of his subjects as a better alternative to the Roman Catholic Pretender James . William Makepeace Thackeray indicates such ambivalent feelings as he wrote : 
 His heart was in Hanover ... He was more than fifty years of age when he came amongst us : we took him because we wanted him , because he served our turn ; we laughed at his uncouth German ways , and sneered at him . He took our loyalty for what it was worth ; laid hands on what money he could ; kept us assuredly from Popery ... I , for one , would have been on his side in those days . Cynical and selfish , as he was , he was better than a king out of St. <unk> [ James , the Stuart Pretender ] with the French king 's orders in his pocket , and a swarm of Jesuits in his train . 
 Writers of the nineteenth century , such as Thackeray , Sir Walter Scott and Lord Mahon , were reliant on biased first @-@ hand accounts published in the previous century such as Lord Hervey 's memoirs , and looked back on the Jacobite cause with romantic , even sympathetic , eyes . They in turn , influenced British authors of the first half of the twentieth century such as G. K. Chesterton , who introduced further anti @-@ German and anti @-@ Protestant bias into the interpretation of George 's reign . However , in the wake of World War II continental European archives were opened to historians of the later twentieth century and nationalistic anti @-@ German feeling subsided . George 's life and reign were re @-@ explored by scholars such as Beattie and Hatton , and his character , abilities and motives re @-@ assessed in a more generous light . John H. Plumb noted that : 
 Some historians have exaggerated the king 's indifference to English affairs and made his ignorance of the English language seem more important than it was . He had little difficulty in communicating with his ministers in French , and his interest in all matters affecting both foreign policy and the court was profound . 
 Yet the character of George I remains elusive ; he was in turn genial and affectionate in private letters to his daughter , and then dull and awkward in public . Perhaps his own mother summed him up when " explaining to those who regarded him as cold and <unk> that he could be jolly , that he took things to heart , that he felt deeply and sincerely and was more sensitive than he cared to show . " Whatever his true character , he ascended a precarious throne , and either by political wisdom and guile , or through accident and indifference , he left it secure in the hands of the Hanoverians and of Parliament . 
 = = Titles , styles and arms = = 
 = = = Titles and styles = = = 
 28 May 1660 – 18 December 1679 : His Highness Duke George Louis of Brunswick @-@ Lüneburg 
 18 December 1679 – October 1692 : His Highness The Hereditary Prince of Brunswick @-@ Lüneburg 
 October 1692 – 23 January 1698 : His Serene Highness The Electoral Prince of Hanover 
 23 January 1698 – 1 August 1714 : His Most Serene Highness George Louis , <unk> of the Holy Roman Empire and Prince @-@ Elector , Duke of Brunswick @-@ Lüneburg 
 1 August 1714 – 11 June 1727 : His Majesty The King 
 In Great Britain George I used the official style " George , by the Grace of God , King of Great Britain , France and Ireland , Defender of the Faith , etc . " In some cases ( especially in treaties ) , the formula " Duke of Brunswick @-@ Lüneburg , Archtreasurer and Prince @-@ Elector of the Holy Roman Empire " was added before the phrase " etc . " 
 = = = Arms = = = 
 As King his arms were : Quarterly , I , Gules three lions passant guardant in pale Or ( for England ) impaling Or a lion rampant within a tressure flory @-@ counter @-@ flory Gules ( for Scotland ) ; II , Azure three fleurs @-@ de @-@ lis Or ( for France ) ; III , Azure a harp Or stringed Argent ( for Ireland ) ; IV , tierced per pale and per chevron ( for Hanover ) , I Gules two lions passant guardant Or ( for Brunswick ) , II Or a semy of hearts Gules a lion rampant Azure ( for Lüneburg ) , III Gules a horse courant Argent ( for Westphalia ) , overall an escutcheon Gules charged with the crown of Charlemagne Or ( for the dignity of Archtreasurer of the Holy Roman Empire ) . 
 = = Issue = = 
 = = Ancestry = = 
 = = = Family tree = = = 
 = M @-@ 154 ( Michigan highway ) = 
 M @-@ 154 is a state trunkline highway in the U.S. state of Michigan . It is entirely on Harsens Island at the mouth of the St. Clair River . It is one of only three trunklines in Michigan on islands . The other two are M @-@ 134 on Drummond Island and M @-@ 185 on Mackinac Island . Access to Harsens Island and M @-@ 154 is provided by ferry which runs year round . The highway was first designated in 1931 , and realigned on the island within the next two years . 
 = = Route description = = 
 M @-@ 154 begins where Green Road merges with South Channel Drive on Harsens Island at the mouth of the St. Clair River . From there the road travels northward around the east edge of the island for about 2 @.@ 5 miles ( 4 @.@ 0 km ) before it cuts a block inland . It continues on to the northeast , still as Green Road until it reaches an intersection with La Croix Road , at which point it turns northwest . It continues on this path before curving back around to the northeast on Columbine Street where it continues up to an intersection with Channel Drive , where it turns west and terminates at the Harsens Island Ferry dock . The road runs primarily through sparsely populated areas except where it abuts the shore lines where denser housing exists . 
 Like other state highways in Michigan , M @-@ 154 is maintained by the Michigan Department of Transportation ( MDOT ) . In 2011 , the department 's traffic surveys showed that on average , 1 @,@ 137 vehicles used the highway daily . No section of M @-@ 154 is listed on the National Highway System , a network of roads important to the country 's economy , defense , and mobility . Like M @-@ 154 , there are two other highways located on islands in the state , M @-@ 134 connects by ferry across the DeTour Passage to Drummond Island , and M @-@ 185 is located on Mackinac Island . 
 = = History = = 
 M @-@ 154 has existed on Harsens Island since 1931 . The original routing started in the northeast corner of the island travelling down Channel Drive to Little Avenue , which does not exist in its entirety today . From here it the connected LaCroix Road and matched up with the present day alignment at this point . In late 1932 or early 1933 , rather than routing M @-@ 154 onto Little Avenue , it was rerouted along LaCroix Road where it curves onto Columbine Street to North Channel Road where it terminates at the present day ferry dock . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire highway is on Harsens Island , St. Clair <unk> entire highway is in none . 
 = Hide and Q = 
 " Hide and Q " is the tenth episode of the first season of the science fiction television series Star Trek : The Next Generation , and originally aired on November 23 , 1987 , in broadcast syndication . The story was originally written by Maurice Hurley but went under numerous re @-@ writes by the show 's creator Gene Roddenberry . The episode was directed by Cliff Bole , and saw the return of John de Lancie as Q. 
 The series follows the adventures of the crew of the Starfleet starship Enterprise . In this episode , Q returns to the USS Enterprise following his original encounter with the crew in " Encounter at Farpoint " . Q transports the bridge crew to a landscape where they are attacked by humanoids and grants Commander Riker ( Jonathan Frakes ) the powers of a member of the Q Continuum , which he is forced to use to resurrect both Worf ( Michael Dorn ) and Wesley ( Wil Wheaton ) . Riker promises never to use the powers again , but after a rescue mission he breaks down and grants each of the bridge crew a wish , which they refuse , with Riker subsequently rejecting his new powers . Q is recalled to the Continuum in failure . 
 Writer Maurice Hurley requested that he be credited under the pseudonym C.J. Holland in protest against Roddenberry 's re @-@ writes , which he later regretted . The problems with the scripting of the episode changed the way the staff handled subsequent script developments for the series . Bole subsequently praised the abilities of de Lancie during the course of filming the episode . Reviewers thought that while the episode was predictable , the relationship between Q and Picard ( Patrick Stewart ) was praised , and " Hide and Q " received average overall scores . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The USS Enterprise is en route to Quadra Sigma to aid colonists caught in a methane explosion when Q re @-@ appears and demands that they abandon their mission to compete in a game . He teleports Commander Riker and the bridge crew , with the exception of Captain Picard , to a barren landscape and appears in front of them whilst wearing a uniform of a Napoleonic era French marshall . He explains the rule of the game is to stay alive , and after Yar ( Denise Crosby ) refuses to compete , he transports her back to the bridge of the Enterprise in a " penalty box " . 
 Q returns to the bridge too , to talk Picard into setting a wager . He explains that the Q Continuum is testing Commander Riker to see if he is worthy of being granted their powers . Picard , having the utmost faith in his First Officer , takes the bet , as winning it would mean Q would get off their backs . Meanwhile , Riker and his team are attacked by what Lt. Worf reports as " vicious animal things " wearing French soldier 's uniforms from the Napoleonic era and armed with muskets that fire energy bolts instead of the classic projectiles . Q returns to Riker and tells him that he has granted him the powers of the Continuum , and Riker promptly returns his crew mates to the ship but remains behind with Q to ultimately reject the powers . Q brings the crew back to the landscape , this time without their phasers and with Picard . The crew are attacked once more by the aliens , and both Worf and Wesley Crusher are killed . Riker uses the powers of the Q to return the crew again and bring both Worf and Wesley back to life . 
 Riker makes a promise to Picard never to use the powers again and the ship arrives at Quadra Sigma . A rescue team beams down and discovers a young girl who has died . Riker is tempted to save her , but in the end he refuses to do so out of respect for his promise ; however , he quickly shows signs of regret at this decision , which he expresses to the captain . Tension between Picard and his first officer grows as Riker now seems to be embracing his powers , and his behavior toward the crew begins to change . At Q 's suggestion , and with Picard 's blessing , Riker uses his powers to give his friends what he believes they want , turning Wesley into an adult , giving La Forge ( LeVar Burton ) his sight , and creating a Klingon female companion for Worf . All the recipients reject their gifts , however , with Data ( Brent Spiner ) even anticipating and declining Riker 's attempt to make him human . Picard declares that Q has failed , and when Q attempts to go back on his word , he is forcibly recalled to the Continuum . Picard is pleased to see Q gone , and praises Riker for confirming his trust in his " Number One " . 
 = = Production = = 
 Writer Maurice Hurley requested that his contributions to this episode appear under the name of C.J. Holland because of the number of extensive re @-@ writes by the show 's creator Gene Roddenberry . Hurley later described the situation as a " misunderstanding " as the situation was subsequently resolved and proved to be a turning point for the series in how scripts were produced . Subsequently Roddenberry spent less time conducting detailed re @-@ writes . Some of the elements of Hurley 's original story expanded on the back story of Q 's species , explaining that there were only three Qs but another hundred thousand residents on their planet who required relocation as the planet was dying . These elements didn 't subsequently make it into any future episodes . The episode marked the return of John De Lancie as Q. Cliff Bole was returning as a director for the series , and knowing that de Lancie would appear as Q , Bole watched " Encounter at Farpoint " in order to maintain Q 's tone . He found after shooting began that his research wasn 't required as de Lancie slotted back into his previous role naturally . Bole later described the episode as " a lot of fun " and de Lancie as " a joy and a creative guy to work with " . De Lancie would next return in the second season episode " Q Who " . Meanwhile , the removal of the character of Deanna Troi from this episode alongside three other episodes made actress Marina Sirtis believe at the time that she was about to be cut from the show . Elaine <unk> guest starred as a female survivor , while William A. Wallace appeared as the adult Wesley Crusher . 
 The theme of the episode , where a humanoid gains the powers of a god is a recurring theme from Star Trek : The Original Series , having featured in several episodes including the second pilot " Where No Man Has Gone Before " and " Charlie X " . The most similar episode from TOS is " Plato 's Stepchildren " , where the character Alexander also rejects god @-@ like powers in a similar manner to Riker in " Hide and Q " . The premise would once again be revisited in the season six episode " True Q " . 
 = = Reception and home media release = = 
 " Hide and Q " aired in broadcast syndication during the week commencing November 22 , 1987 . It received Nielsen ratings of 11 @.@ 0 , reflecting the percentage of all households watching the episode during its timeslot . This was the higher than both the episodes broadcast before and afterwards . 
 Several reviewers re @-@ watched Star Trek : The Next Generation after the end of the series . Keith DeCandido for Tor.com thought that the plot was predictable , describing Riker being written as " so paint @-@ by @-@ numbers the color is practically dripping off the screen " . He praised the relationship between Q and Picard , stating that de Lancie was having such " fun with the role that the episode itself is also fun despite its flaws " . He gave " Hide and Q " a score of five out of ten . Zack Handlen re @-@ watched the episode for the A.V. Club , and thought it was an example of where TNG avoided characterisation in favour of a morality play . He thought that the episode was a mess , with the highlights being Picard reciting Shakespeare and the Napoleonic monsters . He rated the episode as a C- . 
 Star Trek : The Next Generation actor Wil Wheaton reviewed the episode for the Huffington Post after the end of the series , describing John de Lancie in his role of Q as " brilliant casting and masterful acting " , and thought that overall the episode was reminiscent of the original series and had some good points . However he thought the script had the characters lecturing the viewer on occasion based on the idea that ultimate power will lead to corruption . He gave the episode a score of B- . 
 The first home media release of " Hide and Q " was on VHS cassette was on July 1 , 1992 . The episode was later included on the Star Trek : The Next Generation season one DVD box set , released in March 2002 , and in the Star Trek : Q DVD box set from the fan collection series of sets . It was released as part of the season one Blu @-@ ray set on July 24 , 2012 . 
 = Phantom 's Revenge = 
 Phantom 's Revenge ( formerly known as Steel Phantom ) is a steel roller coaster at Kennywood . When it opened in 1991 , it was the fastest roller coaster and had the longest drop of any roller coaster in the world . The ride was originally manufactured by Arrow Dynamics . After the 2000 season , D.H. Morgan Manufacturing was brought in to renovate the ride , most notably to remove the four inversions . Unlike most roller coasters , the ride 's second drop through Thunderbolt 's structure is longer than its first drop . 
 The ride has been ranked in the Golden Ticket Awards every year since 2000 . It was ranked in the top 10 every year from 2002 - 2011 . In addition , it has been ranked in the top 25 of Mitch Hawker 's Best Steel Roller Coaster Poll every year since 2001 and in the top 5 of the National Amusement Park Historical Association Favorite Steel Roller Coaster poll every year except 2008 . 
 = = History = = 
 Henry <unk> , the president of Kennywood Entertainment Company , wanted a large steel coaster in the late 1980s . The park had only built wooden roller coasters in the past . The park also had a very tight layout and they were not sure how to fit it into the park . On July 27 , 1990 , Kennywood announced the name of their new roller coaster would be Steel Phantom and it would use the same station as Laser Loop , which it replaced . The ride opened on May 10 , 1991 as the fastest and steepest steel roller coaster in the world . The inversions were a vertical loop , a Boomerang , and a corkscrew . As a result of the inversions , riders experienced more @-@ than @-@ usual head banging . Shortly after its debut , a trim brake was added because the coaster was going faster than it should through the inversions and riders were experiencing pain in their necks . 
 In March 2000 , Kennywood announced that they would dismantle Steel Phantom . A replacement for Steel Phantom was not announced at the time . " Just about anything is on the table " said Kennywood spokeswoman , Mary Lou Rosemeyer . After the decision to remove Steel Phantom was announced , the park started receiving complaints and emails about the decision . Kennywood ultimately decided to keep the roller coaster but make modifications to it . After the ride closed on Labor Day weekend in 2000 , Steel Phantom underwent extensive changes by D. H. Morgan Manufacturing , most notably the removal of all of its inversions . According to Kennywood , this was done because of many riders ' complaints of how rough the coaster was on their heads and necks . The modified coaster reopened on May 19 , 2001 as the Phantom 's Revenge . The coaster only operated with one train in its first season . In 2002 , magnetic brakes were added to the ride so a second train could be used . Phantom 's Revenge now has a top speed of 85 mph ( 137 km / h ) , putting it in a three @-@ way tie for 10th place of the world 's fastest steel coasters , along with Goliath at Six Flags Magic Mountain , and Titan at Six Flags Over Texas . Due to the modifications , both Morgan style and Arrow style track are used on the coaster . 
 = = Ride experience = = 
 The ride is considered to be a terrain roller coaster , meaning the ride experiences various elevation changes . Unlike most roller coasters , the ride 's second drop is longer than the first . It drops through Thunderbolt 's structure , which is located at the bottom of a hill in a ravine . 
 = = = Layout = = = 
 = = = = Phantom 's Revenge = = = = 
 After leaving the station , the train makes a slight turn to the right before climbing the 160 @-@ foot ( 49 m ) chain lift hill . After ascending the lift hill , the train drops to the right , reaching a speed of 60 miles per hour ( 97 km / h ) . Riders then enter a straightaway before climbing a second hill which drops them 228 feet ( 69 m ) under the Thunderbolt 's structure , reaching a top speed of 85 miles per hour ( 137 km / h ) . The train then makes a 360 degree turn , passing back under the Thunderbolt 's structure . Next , the train circles around the Turtle ride before traveling back under the second drop through a bunny @-@ hop . Riders then make a turn to the left , passing under the ride 's brake run and entering a second bunny @-@ hop . The train then enters a 180 degree curve , going through the last bunny @-@ hop and entering the brake run . One cycle of the ride takes approximately 1 minute and 57 seconds . 
 = = = = Steel Phantom = = = = 
 After leaving the station , the train made a slight turn to the right , climbing the 160 @-@ foot ( 49 m ) chain lift hill . After ascending the lift hill , the ride went down a banked drop to the right . After a straight section , the ride went up a second hill that turned slightly to the right . The train then dropped 225 feet ( 69 m ) through the Thunderbolt 's structure , reaching a top speed of 80 miles per hour ( 130 km / h ) . The train then turned to the left , entering a pair of trim brakes before heading into a vertical loop . After the loop , the train immediately went into a Boomerang , an element which turned riders upside down twice . The train then made a right turn into a corkscrew , the fourth and final inversion . After this , riders went through a right turn that passed under the corkscrew . After this , the ride ascended into the brake run . One cycle of the ride took approximately 2 minutes and 15 seconds . 
 = = = Trains = = = 
 Phantom 's Revenge operates with two trains . Each train has seven cars that seat two riders in two rows for a total of 28 riders per train . After the ride was renovated , the trains were also renovated . Steel Phantom 's chassis , that was built by Arrow remained but Morgan built new , aerodynamic fiberglass bodies . Morgan also replaced the over @-@ shoulder @-@ restraints with lap bars and seatbelts . 
 = = = Track = = = 
 Phantom 's Revenge 's steel track is approximately 3 @,@ 200 feet ( 980 m ) in length and the height of the lift is approximately 160 feet ( 49 m ) . Before the renovation , the length was 3 @,@ 000 feet ( 910 m ) and the lift remained unchanged . The track was originally manufactured by Arrow Dynamics and painted black with silver / grey rails and grey supports . After the renovation , D.H. Morgan Manufacturing replaced the majority of the track and it was painted green with black supports . The only Arrow Dynamics track that remains is the lift hill , the station and the brake run / transfer track . 
 = = Comparison = = 
 = = Awards and rankings = = 
 * At the time , the roller coaster was Steel Phantom . 
 = Battle of Pearl Ridge = 
 The Battle of Pearl Ridge ( 30 – 31 December 1944 ) was an engagement of the Second World War fought between Australian and Japanese forces on Bougainville Island . Part of the wider Bougainville Campaign , the battle took place in the central sector of the island , shortly after the Australians had taken over responsibility from the Americans . Believing that the ridge was held by less than a company of Japanese , on 30 December the Australian 25th Infantry Battalion launched a four @-@ pronged attacked the ridge . The defending force , however , had been greatly reinforced by elements of the 38th Independent Mixed Brigade and was closer to a battalion in strength . After being held up on the right of their advance , the Australians dug @-@ in overnight and repulsed a strong Japanese counterattack before resuming the attack on 31 December . By late in the afternoon , the Japanese had been swept off the ridge . The Australians later established an observation post on the ridge , which had commanding views of the whole island , and throughout the remainder of the campaign used it to control artillery fire as they advanced towards Japanese enclaves in the north and south of the island . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Strategic situation = = = 
 The Japanese had captured Bougainville in early 1942 , and had subsequently built it into a significant base with large numbers of aircraft and troops , in order to protect the fortress at Rabaul . Following this , Allied planners determined that their key strategy in the region would be reduction of the base at Rabaul . To do this , they needed airfields within range , and as such , it was decided to secure the western part of Bougainville , landing around Torokina in November 1943 . Heavy fighting followed the landing , but after a large @-@ scale Japanese counter @-@ attack was defeated in March 1944 , the Japanese withdrew from the US lodgement and subsequently a period of relative quiet followed as the US forces limited themselves to patrolling and establishing outposts , rather than large @-@ scale operations . 
 In late 1944 , as part of the buildup of US forces for an offensive in the Philippines , Allied planners decided to free up US forces in the region by having Australian forces replace them in the Aitape – Wewak area of New Guinea , Bougainville , and on New Britain . Advanced Australian elements began arriving on Bougainville in September and by November – December 1944 four brigades from the Australian II Corps took over responsibility for Bougainville from the divisions of US XIV Corps that had been stationed there previously . Allied intelligence reports and estimates regarding Japanese strength varied , but the considered position of the Australians was that there were around 17 @,@ 500 Japanese on the island . Although understrength , these troops were reported to still be capable of conducting effective combat operations and continued to pose a threat to the Allied base at Torokina . As such , in mid @-@ December , after a period of information gathering , it was decided that the Australian II Corps , consisting of Militiamen from the 3rd Division and the 11th Brigade would go on the offensive . A three @-@ pronged campaign was subsequently planned in the northern , central and southern sectors of the island . After the war , it was found that Australian intelligence estimates were significantly in error , with Japanese strength being more than 40 @,@ 000 . 
 = = = Preliminary moves = = = 
 Initially , Brigadier John Field 's 7th Brigade was given responsibility for the central sector , and in November the brigade began operations to clear the Japanese from the high features in the sector along the Numa Numa Trail . Due to the steep terrain , which was covered with thick jungle and punctuated with numerous waterways , the Australians could only establish a small frontage , with one battalion forward on the trail , with its constituent companies spread singly in a line across the razorback ridge line . On 23 November , in what was the first Australian operation of the campaign following the relief of the Americans , the Australian 9th Infantry Battalion captured a Japanese outpost on a feature known to the Australians as " Little George " , supported by machine guns , mortars and artillery . Two Australians were killed or died of wounds , while six others were wounded . This attack was followed up by a second in mid @-@ December , when the 9th captured a Japanese outpost on " Artillery Hill " . 
 Shortly after this , the Australian 25th Infantry Battalion — under Lieutenant Colonel John McKinna — relieved the 9th Infantry Battalion at Artillery Hill and began patrolling operations towards the Japanese position on " Pearl Ridge " , a feature which due to its height offered commanding views of the entire island . According to James , this ridge was one of the " strongest positions along the Numa Numa trail " and it " dominated the high ground across the Empire Range " . The Japanese had been using the ridge to observe Australian movements to the west and was also the point where the " three main east – west overland routes across the island converged " . 
 = = Battle = = 
 The Australians spent Christmas Day patrolling forward in concert with Royal Australian Air Force Boomerang fighters from No. 4 Squadron RAAF carrying out reconnaissance flights ahead of their position . Throughout the evening , the Japanese launched an attack against one of the Australian companies , but this was turned back by the defenders . For several days , the Australian battalion commander formulated a plan to capture Pearl Ridge , possession of which would enable the Australians to block Japanese attempts to approach the main Allied base around Torokina , and would disrupt the movement of Japanese troops along the north – south axis of the island , hindering their ability to reinforce isolated pockets . 
 Believing that the ridge was held by two understrength companies from the Japanese 81st Infantry Regiment — approximately 80 – 90 men — who had withdrawn there after the fighting on Little George and Artillery Hill , the Australians decided to commit only a battalion to capture it . On the morning of 30 December , after 40 minutes of airstrikes from Royal New Zealand Air Force Corsairs , who had been guided onto their targets by RAAF Boomerangs , the roughly 800 @-@ strong 25th Battalion carried out an attack supported by artillery and machine gun fire with four companies advancing across a 1 @,@ 000 @-@ yard ( 910 m ) frontage stretching across the ridge . Unbeknown to the Australians , however , the two companies from the 81st Infantry Regiment had been reinforced by men from the Japanese 38th Independent Mixed Brigade under Major General <unk> Kijima and they actually numbered 550 . They had heavily fortified the ridge , establishing a series of bunkers and pillboxes between weapons pits that were linked with trenches . However , due to the steep terrain , they were only able to move three mortars onto the position , and there were no other heavy weapons . They were also unable to haul bulk water to the position , and had to rely on constant resupply by foot . 
 Establishing air posts , and supply dumps on Artillery Hill and <unk> 's Knoll , the Australians advanced from Artillery Ridge , where the battalion headquarters was established well forward for the attack . A broad front assault with all four companies forward , the Australian commander 's tactic was a departure from the narrow front attacks that had been mounted against Little George and Artillery Hill . Although the left @-@ most Australian company — ' C ' Company under Captain Wallace Bruce , advancing from <unk> 's Knoll — managed to reach the ridge pushing through thick bamboo and killing several Japanese , due to the terrain Lieutenant Bruce Shaw 's ' A ' Company , on the far right of the Australian line and having stepped off from Artillery Hill , was forced into advancing across a narrow razorback only 12 ft ( 3 @.@ 7 m ) wide , along which the Japanese were able to concentrate a significant amount of fire from the north @-@ east from a feature dubbed " Pear Hill " . Confronted by a deep bomb crater , which blocked their path , the Australians became pinned . As more artillery fire was brought down on the ridge in support of the attack , an attempt was made to outflank the Japanese position in front of the razorback , although this too proved unsuccessful as the Japanese defenders began rolling grenades down the slope . After the Australians had suffered a number of casualties the attack on the right was called off and Shaw 's company was ordered to form a defensive position and await further orders . The Australian commander , McKinna , then ordered the two companies in the centre — Captain Charles Gabel 's ' B ' Company and ' D ' Company under Captain Malcolm Just — to dig @-@ in where they were , while the left @-@ most company under Bruce , who had reached the Japanese track on the north @-@ eastern side of the ridge , also dug @-@ in with the intention of holding its position until daybreak . 
 That night , the Japanese made a minor attack against ' C ' Company , but this was turned back with artillery and small arms . The following day the Australians resumed their attack . In doing so , McKinna ordered ' D ' Company to renew the assault , aiming for Pear Hill , on the right hand side of the Australian line . Although it required a more physically draining approach march over Artillery Hill and through dense scrub , the tactic proved to be more successful than the previous day 's efforts . Pear Hill was joined by a narrow razorback ridge that limited the Australian frontage to just three men side @-@ by @-@ side , who had to cut their way through the thick bamboo with machetes . <unk> down with full marching order and heavy weapons , including Vickers machine guns , the Australians found it heavy going . It took the majority of the afternoon to reach the crest of the hill where they were to form up for the final assault . A thirty @-@ minute pause followed , after which an artillery barrage was called down upon the Japanese defenders . On their right , ' A ' Company , began to draw the Japanese fire and at 15 : 30 hours ' D ' Company attacked the ridge , across a thin saddle . By late afternoon , the Japanese defenders had pulled back from the ridge , leaving the Australians in possession of it after heavy fighting with ' D ' Company securing the main position , while ' B ' Company skirted north of Barton 's Knoll and secured a secondary position below the ridge , which the Australians dubbed Baker 's Brow . Meanwhile , on the Australian left — the western side of the battlefield — a <unk> heavy machine and snipers held up ' C ' Company 's advance . 
 After dark , around 22 : 00 hours , the Japanese began probing the defences around the position that ' C ' Company had established . At first this was limited to minor harassment tactics in an effort to locate the Australian positions . ' A ' Company was also probed . In the early morning the Japanese launched a strong counter @-@ attack from the south and south @-@ east of ' C ' Company 's position . Amidst heavy fighting , the Japanese fought their way into the two forward Australian pits and close quarters fighting ensued . After an hour , the attack was repulsed with artillery support and at first light on the Australians sent out patrols , which found the ridge abandoned . Throughout the morning and into the early afternoon , the Australians undertook mopping up operations before the ridge was finally cleared in the early afternoon . With control of Pearl Ridge , the Australians secured a vantage point from where they could see from one side of Bougainville to the other , a distance of over 30 miles ( 48 km ) ; this would later facilitate further operations around the island providing the Australians were a vantage point for artillery observation . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 During the course of the battle , the Australians lost 10 killed and 25 wounded , while 34 Japanese bodies were found on the position , with several more lying in irretrievable positions down the steep slopes . In addition one Japanese soldier was taken prisoner . According to the Australian official historian , Gavin Long , the attack on Pearl Ridge was a significant gain for the Australians , not only strategically but morally . Having been put in against a force of roughly equal size , consisting of troops who were significantly more experienced than the Australians , whose only previous combat experience had been two years earlier during the Battle of Milne Bay , Long argues that the battle highlighted the effectiveness of the training the 25th Infantry Battalion had undertaken prior to deploying to Bougainville . James also supports this view , stating that McKinna 's skilled leadership and aggressive nature had also been a strong factor . Meanwhile , for the Japanese , the loss of Pearl Ridge damaged the prestige of the 38th Mixed Independent Brigade , with Japanese commanders ascribing the loss to poor support from their artillery and mortars . James attributes this to the limited infrastructure in the area , and the lack of defensive construction or development undertaken following the Japanese capture of the island in 1942 . 
 Following the battle of Pearl Ridge , the Australians launched a full @-@ scale offensive to counter the Japanese resistance on the island , focused on the southern sector . As a result of this decision , the 7th Brigade was moved from the central sector to the southern sector , where the majority of the Japanese forces were located . They would subsequently see heavy fighting around Slater 's Knoll in March and April 1945 . The 11th Brigade , under Brigadier John Stevenson , then took control of both the central and northern sectors in order to free up troops for the main offensive in the south , and the brigade subsequently cycled its three infantry battalions through the position , while pursuing a limited advance in the north , attacking Tsimba Ridge in January – February 1945 after advancing along the coast from Kuraio Mission . The brigade maintained a battalion @-@ group element on Pearl Ridge during this phase and carried out extensive patrols forward of the position , while artillery from the 4th Field Regiment was brought up to the foot of the <unk> escarpment from where they could fire on Japanese positions under the control of forward observers on Pearl Ridge . Initially , this artillery consisted of a battery of short 25 pounders , but it was later replaced by the longer @-@ range long 25 pounders . 
 In an effort to improve the Australian line of communications in the sector , engineers from the 16th Field Company later constructed a road using a bulldozer that had to haul itself up the ridge via a steel cable that was manhandled up to a point just below the ridge over the course of eight days . A light rail system was also established between Barges ' Hill and Pearl Ridge . 
 Due to the terrain around the ridge , the Australians had to allocate a significant amount of resources to bring in supplies to the forces later stationed around Pearl Ridge . The rate of effort required to bring stores forward was of significant concern to the Australian corps commander , Lieutenant General Stanley Savige , to the extent that his orders to the commander of the 11th Brigade stipulated no further advances in the sector , with the exception of patrolling to prevent the movement of Japanese reinforcements towards the south , and for information gathering purposes . These patrols subsequently went out with native police guides , exploiting quite deep into the jungle over several days over long distances — one was even pushed to the eastern coast around the Numa Numa Plantation — and proved quite successful for the Australians in harassing the Japanese in the area . Over the course of 14 weeks at least 236 Japanese were killed by these patrols , while the Australians lost four killed and 19 wounded . Four Japanese were also captured . In mid @-@ April , the 23rd Brigade , under Brigadier Arnold Potts , took control of the central sector and in June a new offensive was opened in the area . This lasted through until the end of the war in August . 
 After the war , the 25th Infantry Battalion was awarded the battle honour of " Pearl Ridge " for the battle . This honour was later inherited by units of the Royal Queensland Regiment . 
