 = = Possible detached objects = = 
 This is a list of known objects by decreasing perihelion , that could not be easily scattered by Neptune 's current orbit and therefore are likely to be detached objects , but that lie inside the perihelion gap of ≈ 50 – 75 AU that defines the sednoids : 
 = Lou Saban = 
 Louis Henry Saban ( October 13 , 1921 – March 29 , 2009 ) was an American football player and coach . He played for Indiana University in college and as a professional for the Cleveland Browns of the All @-@ America Football Conference between 1946 and 1949 . Saban then began a long coaching career . After numerous jobs at the college level , he became the first coach of the Boston Patriots in the American Football League ( AFL ) in 1960 . He joined the Buffalo Bills two years later , and led the team to consecutive AFL championships in 1964 and 1965 . After serving briefly as head coach at the University of Maryland , he was hired as head coach of the Denver Broncos in 1967 , where he remained for five years . Saban returned to the Bills — by then in the National Football League following the AFL – NFL merger — from 1972 to 1976 , reaching the playoffs once but failing to bring Buffalo another championship . 
 Following his departure from Buffalo , Saban returned to college coaching . He coached teams including the University of Miami , Army , University of Central Florida and Peru State College . He also coached at the high school level and for two Arena Football League teams . Saban switched jobs frequently and developed a reputation as an itinerant . At Central Florida , he was nicknamed Lou " two point two " Saban because he typically stayed in a coaching job for about 2 @.@ 2 years . Saban initially dismissed this characterization , but came to accept it later in life . He held 21 coaching jobs during his 50 @-@ year career , which ended with a job at Chowan University in North Carolina between 2001 and 2002 . Saban 's combined record as a coach in the AFL and NFL was 95 – 99 – 7 . His college football record was 94 – 99 – 4 . Saban suffered from heart problems and had a fall in his home that required hospitalization in 2009 . He died in March of that year . 
 = = Playing career = = 
 = = = High school and college = = = 
 Saban was the son of immigrants from Croatia and grew up near La Grange , Illinois , a suburb of Chicago . His first job , at age nine , was as a caddy for Al Capone 's brother Ralph at a Chicago golf course . He attended Lyons Township High School and joined the school 's football team . A runner and passer , he led his high school 's athletic conference in scoring as a senior and was named an all @-@ state and all @-@ conference halfback . 
 Saban 's high school coach was an Indiana University alumnus and convinced him to enroll there . Saban played for the Indiana Hoosiers football team starting in 1940 . He was used as a quarterback in 1941 , his sophomore year . He also played as a linebacker and a placekicker . Saban was named to the Associated Press All @-@ Big Ten second team as a quarterback in 1942 . He was the captain of Indiana 's 1942 team and was selected as its most valuable player . Saban was also a standout shot putter , winning a Big Ten Conference competition at Illinois Institute of Technology in 1943 with a throw of 48 feet and 11 1 / 2 inches . 
 Later in 1943 , Saban joined the U.S. Army as World War II intensified following the attack on Pearl Harbor . In 1944 , he was selected to compete in the College All @-@ Star Game , a now @-@ defunct annual contest between the National Football League champion and a selection of the best college players from around the country . Saban , then stationed at Fort Benning in Georgia , was named the college team 's second Most Valuable Player after quarterback Glenn Dobbs of the University of Tulsa . He kicked three extra points and played on the defensive line in the all @-@ stars ' 24 – 21 loss to the Chicago Bears . Saban played for Fort Benning 's 3rd Infantry <unk> , a military team , while stationed there . He also studied Chinese for five months at the University of California and served in China and India as an Army interpreter . 
 = = = Cleveland Browns = = = 
 Saban was selected in the 10th round of the 1944 NFL Draft by Card @-@ Pitt , a temporary merger between the Chicago Cardinals and Pittsburgh Steelers made necessary after the teams were gutted by players ' military service . Saban , however , did not sign with Card @-@ Pitt , and instead joined the Cleveland Browns , a team under formation in the new All @-@ America Football Conference ( AAFC ) and coached by Paul Brown . Brown said Saban would be used exclusively on defense as a linebacker and as a kicker of extra points . Saban was one of the first arrivals at the Browns ' training camp in Bowling Green , Ohio , having left China just three weeks before . 
 Despite Brown 's intentions , Saban was used occasionally on the Browns ' offense in 1946 . He caught a 44 @-@ yard pass from quarterback Otto Graham in a September game against the Buffalo Bisons . He was mainly used as a linebacker , however , and had four interceptions as the Browns won the first AAFC championship . In the offseason , he worked for Browns owner Mickey McBride 's Yellow Cab Company ; many of his teammates spent the offseason either at college making up for time lost to the war or taking jobs to supplement their football incomes . 
 Saban was named the Browns ' captain in 1946 after Jim Daniell , the first team captain , was arrested in a scuffle with Cleveland police and was kicked off the team at the end of the season . The following year , he filled in to kick extra points when the team 's regular placekicker , Lou Groza , was injured . The Browns amassed a 12 – 1 – 1 regular @-@ season record in 1947 and won the AAFC championship for the second time in a row . 
 Never having finished his degree at Indiana , Saban enrolled that summer at Baldwin Wallace University in Berea , Ohio . After the 1948 season , in which Cleveland won all of its games and a third championship , Saban was named to two news outlets ' all @-@ AAFC teams . Saban came into his own as a linebacker in 1948 . " Saban has been regarded as the best in football at his position for two years , " Brown said in November . " If anything , he 's even better this year . He has improved on covering pass receivers . " He was a unanimous all @-@ AAFC selection in 1949 , when the Browns won their fourth AAFC championship in a row . Saban announced his retirement before the championship game and said in December that he was seeking the head coaching job at the Case Institute of Technology in Cleveland before its merger with the Western Reserve University forming the Case Western Reserve University . 
 = = Coaching career = = 
 = = = College = = = 
 Saban beat more than 50 applicants to win the head coaching job at Case in February 1950 , thanks to what the university 's president called his " unusually sound knowledge of football " and his " leadership qualities " . Saban " possesses the sort of personality and character that is of great value in work with young men , " the president said . Saban was 28 years old at the time , and the appointment made him one of the youngest college head coaches in the country . Saban borrowed coaching techniques from Brown , alongside his version of the T formation offense . 
 Saban 's team finished the 1950 season with four wins and four losses . By 1951 , he was already under consideration for coaching jobs at bigger schools , including Indiana University and Toledo University , where he was mentioned as a " dark horse " candidate to replace former Browns teammate Don Greenwood . His Case teams compiled a 10 – 14 – 1 record during his tenure as head coach from 1950 to 1952 . Saban resigned in March 1953 to become an assistant at the University of Washington under head coach John <unk> . He spent just one year at Washington before getting a job as an assistant coach at Northwestern University , saying he wanted to return to the Midwest . 
 In February 1955 , Saban was promoted to head coach at Northwestern , succeeding Bob Voigts and becoming the youngest coach in the Big Ten Conference at 33 years old . Saban 's tenure as coach of the Northwestern Wildcats football team , however , was brief and unsuccessful . Hampered by injuries , the team lost all of its games in 1955 , and calls intensified for Saban 's firing as the season wore on . In December , Saban and his entire staff were fired by new athletic director Stu Holcomb . Ara Parseghian was named as his replacement . 
 Saban moved on to a job as head coach at Western Illinois University in 1957 , where he quickly built up a successful team . The Western Illinois <unk> finished with a record of 6 – 1 – 1 in 1958 , followed by an undefeated 9 – 0 season in 1959 , when Saban also served as an assistant under Otto Graham in the College All @-@ Star Game . Having built up a 20 – 5 – 1 record over three seasons as coach , Saban drew interest from the professional ranks , and the Boston Patriots of the newly formed American Football League ( AFL ) hired him as head coach before the circuit 's inaugural season in 1960 . 
 = = = Professional = = = 
 Led by quarterback Butch <unk> , Saban 's Patriots posted a 5 – 9 record in their first season . The following April , Saban brought in quarterback Babe Parilli , who formerly played for the Browns and Green Bay Packers , as a backup in the AFL 's biggest @-@ ever trade at the time . Five games into the season , however , with the Patriots at 2 – 3 , Saban was fired and replaced by assistant Mike <unk> . Patriots owner Billy Sullivan said the decision was made by a majority vote of the team 's board of directors , who " just simply felt all the talent on our team had not been used and felt Mike was the man who would be able to use the talent we had to the extent that it is capable of performing . " 
 In January 1962 , Saban was named the coach of the Buffalo Bills , another AFL team , signing a one @-@ year contract worth $ 20 @,@ 000 ( $ 156 @,@ 458 in 2016 dollars ) . The Bills had a 7 – 6 – 1 record in Saban 's first season and came in third in the AFL 's eastern division behind the Houston Oilers and the Patriots . Cookie Gilchrist , a running back who signed with the Bills after nine years in the Canadian Football League , won most valuable player honors that year and recorded the AFL 's first 1 @,@ 000 @-@ yard rushing season . Saban also acquired Jack Kemp , a quarterback , from the San Diego Chargers , who had put him out on waivers while he recovered from a finger injury . Sportswriter Randy Schultz called it one of the biggest bargains in professional football history . 
 The Bills posted a 7 – 6 – 1 record again in 1963 , but this time it was enough to tie with the Patriots for the best record in the eastern division . This set up the AFL 's first @-@ ever playoff game to decide which of the teams would win the division and compete in the championship . The Bills lost the game , 26 – 8 . 
 Helped by Gilchrist 's running and quarterback Kemp 's passing , the Bills finished the 1964 season with a 12 – 2 record and won the AFL championship . The team won despite drama involving Gilchrist , who came into conflict with Saban frequently and asked to be traded on numerous occasions . The Bills released him on waivers in November 1964 , but canceled the move when Gilchrist apologized . After the 1964 AFL championship win over the Chargers , Saban was named the league 's coach of the year . 
 Gilchrist was traded to the Denver Broncos in February 1965 , but the Bills continued to win , ending with a 10 – 3 – 1 record and winning the AFL championship for the second year in a row . In the 1965 AFL championship game against the Chargers , when offensive linemen Billy Shaw and Dave Behrman were injured , Saban inserted veteran Ernie <unk> opposite rookie Paul Costa in a double tight end formation , which helped the Bills win the game , 23 – 0 . Saban was named coach of the year for the second time in a row , silencing critics who had said he was indecisive , did not use his players properly and was not a good play @-@ caller . 
 Saban unexpectedly resigned as Buffalo 's head coach in January 1966 to take a job as the head football coach at the University of Maryland . He said he was leaving because " there can be little left to conquer in professional football " . His record at Buffalo was 36 – 17 – 3 . Saban , however , only stayed at Maryland for one season in which the team posted a 4 – 6 record . He returned to professional football as coach of the AFL 's Denver Broncos in December 1966 , signing a 10 @-@ year contract with an annual salary of $ 50 @,@ 000 ( $ 364 @,@ 667 in 2016 dollars ) . When he joined , the Broncos had never had a winning season in seven years of existence . He replaced Ray Malavasi , an assistant who took over after Saban 's former Browns teammate , Mac Speedie , resigned from the post . 
 Saban engineered a number of trades before the 1967 season . He brought Gilchrist to the team from Miami in a seven @-@ player deal ; Denver had sent Gilchrist to Miami the previous season . He also acquired quarterback Steve <unk> from the Chargers in August for first @-@ round draft picks in 1968 and 1969 . Denver won its first game , but proceeded to lose nine in a row and finish with a 3 – 11 record . The team improved only marginally in the ensuing years , posting losing records in 1968 and 1969 . The AFL and National Football League merged beginning in 1970 , but the Broncos continued to lose , posting a record of 5 – 8 – 1 in 1970 . Saban resigned after the Broncos got off to a 2 – 6 – 1 start in 1971 . He said resigning was " my responsibility to the team " and what while the club made progress , " my only regret is that we have not been able to give Denver a championship " . Saban 's record as Denver 's coach was 20 – 42 – 3 . Although he was not successful in Denver , Saban became well known for his intensity and occasional temper tantrums . A much @-@ watched clip of him bemoaning to Denver line coach Whitey Dovell that " They 're killin ' me out there , Whitey , they 're killin ' me ! " introduced Saban to a wider audience when it was aired by NFL Films . 
 Saban was named head coach of the Bills for a second time in late 1971 . When he arrived , Buffalo was coming off a 1 – 13 season , although the team had players including running back O.J. Simpson , who had run for 742 yards and five touchdowns that year . While the Bills had a 4 – 9 – 1 record , Simpson led the NFL in rushing yards in 1972 . Under Saban , Simpson continued to improve in 1973 , setting a single @-@ game rushing record with 250 yards in the season opener against the New England Patriots . He surpassed the single @-@ season rushing record later in the year with more than 2 @,@ 000 yards . Before Saban 's arrival , Simpson had never rushed for more than 742 yards in a season . Simpson credited Saban with helping him reach his potential . " He saved my career , " Simpson said in 1973 , when he was named the NFL 's most valuable player . " He promised me he 'd give me the football and give me an offensive line , and he sure kept his word . " The Bills had a 9 – 5 record that year but came in second in the AFC East and missed the playoffs . 
 Buffalo finished the following season with another 9 – 5 record and made the playoffs as the AFC 's wildcard team . The Bills , however , lost their first playoff game against the Pittsburgh Steelers and were eliminated from the tournament . Saban said after the game that the Steelers ' offensive domination was the deciding factor . " I 'm not sure how they did what they did against us , but they blew us out , " he said . Buffalo went on to an 8 – 6 season in 1975 , failing to make the playoffs . After the Bills got out to a 2 – 3 start in 1976 , Saban resigned . He was reportedly angry about how Bills owner Ralph Wilson handled the re @-@ signing of Simpson , who had demanded a trade at the beginning of the season . Saban was replaced by Jim Ringo , who he had hired as an assistant in 1972 . Wilson held a grudge against Saban for the rest of his life after his second resignation , refusing to put Saban on the Bills ' Wall of Fame because , in Wilson 's words , " he quit on me twice ! " 
 = = = Return to college ranks = = = 
 Following his resignation from the Bills , Saban took a post as athletic director at the University of Cincinnati in November 1976 . He resigned 19 days later , however , and took a job as the head coach at the University of Miami , reportedly for a $ 375 @,@ 000 salary ( $ 1 @,@ 559 @,@ 430 today ) . He had double @-@ bypass heart surgery at the Cleveland Clinic in the summer of 1977 , but recovered by the time Miami 's season began later that year . When Saban came to Miami , the football team had won just five games in the previous two seasons . 
 Miami posted a 3 – 8 record in Saban 's first year , but improved to 6 – 5 in 1978 . Saban instituted an extensive recruiting network to rebuild Miami 's program , and was named the school 's athletic director in early 1978 . One of his recruits was quarterback Jim Kelly , who starred at Miami and went on to a Pro Football Hall of Fame career with the Bills . 
 Despite Miami 's improvement in 1978 , Saban departed the school amid controversy . That April , three freshman Miami players attacked a 22 @-@ year @-@ old Jewish man wearing a <unk> who was walking to religious services on campus . They threw the man , who worked at a campus gathering place for UM 's Jewish community , into Lake Osceola at the center of campus . When Saban returned to campus a few days later , he was unaware the man was Jewish and reportedly said " Getting thrown in the lake ? Sounds like fun to me . " Miami 's Jewish community complained , and despite numerous apologies , Saban offered to resign mid @-@ season . Saban was convinced to remain through the end of the season , however , before leaving to coach at Army . 
 By the time Saban joined Army , he had developed a reputation as an itinerant coach , a " notorious job @-@ hopper " who was nevertheless respected for rebuilding teams in poor condition . Saban said he wanted to stay at Army " until they put me out to pasture " . Saban stayed at Army for only one season . He said he was unhappy with the academy 's unwillingness to invest more in its football program . " This is a desperate situation , " he said near the end of the 1979 season . " To fight alone as a football staff is impossible . " He resigned in July 1980 after leading Army to a 2 – 8 – 1 record the previous season . 
 Saban next worked for George Steinbrenner , first in 1980 as an executive at Steinbrenner 's Tampa Bay Downs racetrack and the following year as president of the New York Yankees of Major League Baseball . He took the post as a favor to Steinbrenner , a close friend who had served on his coaching staff at Northwestern in 1955 . 
 At the end of 1982 , Saban left the Yankees to take a job as head football coach at the University of Central Florida ( UCF ) , a Division II school that aspired to move its program to the top of the college ranks . He took over a team that had gone 0 – 10 in 1982 and led the Knights to a 5 – 6 record in 1983 . He resigned midway through the 1984 season with UCF 's record at 1 – 6 . Saban , by then 63 years old , said he had a meeting with school officials and felt he " had no part in their plans for the future " . At UCF , Saban was playfully referred to as Lou " two point two " Saban because his average tenure as a coach was 2 @.@ 2 years . He was replaced by his assistant , Jerry Anderson . 
 Saban retired in 1985 to Hendersonville , North Carolina . He came out of retirement in 1986 , however , to coach high school football in Stuart , Florida , serving as the defensive coordinator for the Martin County High School Fighting Tigers . He left after two seasons and was appointed head football coach at South Fork High School , a rival of Martin County that had a record of 1 – 9 the previous year . After just one season at South Fork , Saban resigned in March 1989 to take a job as head coach at Georgetown High School in Georgetown , South Carolina . Saban said he was there to have fun and enjoy life , and that his reputation as a coaching " nomad " bothered him . " I 've had no chance but to continue on , " he said . 
 Saban was hired in 1990 to coach the Middle Georgia Heat Wave , a semipro team in Macon , Georgia , but he left after just four games . Team officials said it was " not a firing " , while Saban said there were differences in philosophy and it was " not a resignation . " Saban next took a job in 1991 as head coach at Peru State College in Nebraska , compiling a 7 – 4 record . He resigned in January 1992 because of a new rule that required him to teach at the school , a responsibility he did not want to take on . 
 Saban next signed on as an assistant with the Tampa Bay Storm of the Arena Football League . Two years later , he was named as the coach of the arena league 's expansion Milwaukee Mustangs but was fired after the team started 0 – 4 . The team 's general manager said he wanted to be competitive and thought the club " needed a change " . Shortly after his firing , Saban signed on to help start a football program at Alfred State College , a two @-@ year technology school southeast of Buffalo . In 1995 , Saban was named the first head football coach at SUNY Canton , a two @-@ year college where he stayed for six seasons . His Canton team was an immediate success , posting a 7 – 0 record in 1995 and a 34 – 16 overall record during Saban 's time as coach . The school named its football field after Saban in the late 1990s . 
 Saban 's final job , which he took at 80 years old , was as head coach at Chowan University in Murfreesboro , North Carolina . He compiled a 2 – 13 record at Chowan between 2001 and 2002 . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 In his later years , Saban had heart problems and a fall in his home that required hospitalization . He died at his home in North Myrtle Beach , South Carolina on March 29 , 2009 . He was married to his first wife , Lorraine , and had a son , Thomas . Lorraine committed suicide at their home in Orchard Park , New York in the summer of 1977 while readying to join Lou at his new job in Miami . He shared seven children with his second wife , Joyce but did not have any children together . 
 Lou Saban shares his last name with another famous football coach , Nick Saban . They were called " distant cousins " in a 2005 article where Lou comments on the younger Saban 's success . Upon the death of Lou Saban , his widow , Joyce Saban said the two men might have been second cousins . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Including his stops at both two- and four @-@ year schools , Saban 's overall collegiate coaching record was 94 – 99 – 4 . Including playoffs , his professional football record stands at 97 – 101 – 7 . Saban had periods of success as a player and as a coach at the college and professional levels , but his constant moves from job to job eventually came to define him . " I have been known as a peripatetic coach , " he said in 1994 . " The first time I was called that , I thought it was a dirty word . I looked it up in the dictionary and found it meant I moved around a lot . " Saban was inducted into the Greater Buffalo Sports Hall of Fame in 1994 and , in a surprise move , was added to the Buffalo Bills Wall of Fame in 2015 . 
 = = = Professional football coaching tree = = = 
 Marty Schottenheimer , who played for Saban from 1965 to 1968 with the AFL 's Bills , was influenced by Saban 's coaching philosophy . Schottenheimer and the coaches he influenced are considered to be in Saban 's coaching tree . 
 = = Head coaching record = = 
 = = = College = = = 
 = = = AFL / NFL = = = 
 = 12 Gauge ( Kalmah album ) = 
 12 Gauge is the sixth studio album by the Finnish melodic death metal band Kalmah , released on February 24 , 2010 . The album was recorded with more thrash metal elements than their previous releases , while the melodies that the band is known for and environmental themes regarding the swamps of Finland were retained . 12 Gauge was recorded in three sessions over a four @-@ month period at Tico @-@ Tico Studios in Finland . 
 Each of the band members kept in touch with their fans by keeping track of their recording sessions online at the official website 's studio diary . In addition , guitarist Antti Kokko videotaped the recording and photo shoot sessions . Seven videos were posted online during the months leading up to the album 's release . Promotion for the album was otherwise minimal . There were no official singles , but the track " Bullets Are Blind " was released on a 2 @-@ CD compilation included with Soundi magazine 's 35th anniversary issue , and a music video to the album 's title track was produced and posted online . 
 12 Gauge received generally favorable reviews by European and American critics , with a few considering it better than either of its immediate predecessors , For the Revolution and The Black Waltz . It was agreed that the band succeeded in producing a thrashier album , but most critics found the music to be less sophisticated than the band 's previous efforts . 12 Gauge charted in two countries , peaking at number 32 in Canada and number 15 in the band 's homeland . Because the band had not been offered a worldwide tour , support for the album would be limited to Europe and Canada . 
 = = Background = = 
 When Kalmah began writing music for their melodic death metal album , their intent was to incorporate more " aggressive thrash material " than their previous recordings had . As a result , the songs were going to be , as vocalist Pekka Kokko described , " quite straightforward " , but the band did not want to lose the melodies they were known for . The album would not be entirely thrash metal , since the band planned on adding acoustic guitar sections and also trumpets . 
 Antti Kokko , the primary songwriter for 12 Gauge , composed the riffs and melodies at his home . These ideas were developed into complete songs during rehearsals . Guitar and keyboard solos were then written , sometimes with both instruments soloing in the same song , trading off repeatedly . Two of the tracks , " <unk> " and " <unk> " , were composed entirely by keyboardist Marco Sneck , including the solos . 
 When the music was completed , Pekka began working on the lyrics , which were inspired by various topics , including " politics , religion ... drinking , failure , [ and ] pessimism " . Several of the songs shared an environmental theme . " Hook the Monster " was about fishing , " 12 Gauge " was inspired by hunting , and the impact of land development in the swamps of Finland was the subject of " <unk> " . Commenting further on the swamps , Pekka remarked , " [ those ] valuable areas are a part of our northern wilderness and [ are ] always threatened to be ditched or drained . People are interested in those areas [ to use ] as a source of energy . " 
 = = Production = = 
 Recording and mixing took place at Tico @-@ Tico Studios in Kemi , Finland . The studio 's schedule was too full for a single recording session , so Kalmah had to book time to record the album in three separate sessions , between the months of May and August , 2009 . The majority of tracks were recorded in May , beginning with Janne <unk> 's drums , which were completed by May 12 . <unk> was not able to play as well as he had hoped because he had not been practicing . As a result , several of his drum parts were changed . 
 By the following week , Timo Lehtinen had finished laying down the bass tracks . His technique was to play nearly all his parts with downstrokes to bring " more balls to the sound " . He continued recording even after his thumb had formed a blister . According to Lehtinen , he used only two bass string sets and broke five picks . 
 Pekka and Antti took turns recording their rhythm and lead guitar parts , respectively . Both guitarists played by striking the guitar strings at a 45 @-@ degree angle to achieve a more aggressive sound . Several of the guitar techniques used on the album had specific names : " <unk> " described the rapid succession of downstrokes , and a slower version of this technique was called " <unk> . " Speed @-@ picking with alternating <unk> and downstrokes was referred to as " <unk> " , Finnish for grinding . Some of the techniques used were difficult for Pekka , and his brother Antti took the time to show him proper fingering and grasps . 
 The acoustic guitars were played by Antti . Ahti <unk> , the album 's recording engineer , was credited by the band for his input on how the acoustic guitars were recorded , especially for the song " <unk> " . All the guitar tracks , excluding the solos , were finished by May 28 . 
 By the middle of June , Pekka had recorded vocals for five tracks , which Antti described as " very raw ... the way we want them to be " . Pekka 's vocals would continue to be recorded in August , and he completed them on August 20 . Antti had also completed his guitar solos by June and was pleased with the results . " For me , the solos are [ the ] best that I have ever managed to create , and I 'm very satisfied . " After a summer break , the band returned to record Sneck 's keyboards , which took place over three days , August 17 – 19 . Sneck worked with software effects for the first time , along with sound modules . He introduced synthesized horns to the band 's instrumentation , but an actual trumpet was used for the intro to " Rust Never Sleeps " . 
 Although the band produced the album , Pekka stated that Antti was the main producer since he was present at every step of the production , including mixing and mastering . Because they were comfortable self @-@ producing on all their previous albums , they refused to bring in an outside record producer for 12 Gauge . " This concept has worked for us since the beginning and we just want to trust it . Everything goes easy with this setup and we don ’ t want any extra risk factors " . Mastering for the disc took place at the Cutting Room in Stockholm , Sweden . 
 The title of the album was chosen by Pekka and Antti , who both enjoy hunting . They wanted to draw a comparison between the shotgun shells and the music . Pekka added that the title also alludes to " unpleasant matters " that the listener can infer from his lyrics . When it came time to design the album cover , the band decided against using computer @-@ generated graphics . They commissioned Rami <unk> to create a hand @-@ drawn piece of artwork , depicting a man emerging from the swamp to fight a beast . Pekka explained the symbolism : " In Kalmah 's mindset , there is <unk> defending his marshlands against [ the ] monster created by common materialism , industrial pollution and [ the ] world @-@ wide nausea of globalism . " The layout was inspired by <unk> Gallen @-@ <unk> 's 1896 painting , The Defense of the <unk> . 
 = = Promotion = = 
 Images used in the album artwork were photographed by Vesa Ranta at one of Finland 's many swamps . The photo session was documented by Antti in a two @-@ part video , titled " The Call of the Wild . " These , and five other short videos documenting the recording of 12 Gauge , were uploaded in the months leading up to the album 's release . 
 There was no official single , but in December 2009 , the track " Bullets Are Blind " was included on a 2 @-@ CD collection released as a companion to the 35th anniversary issue of Soundi magazine , and a music video was shot and posted online for the track " 12 Gauge " . In February 2010 , Kalmah launched a second MySpace page solely dedicated to the new album . The album was released on CD and digital download in Japan in February , followed by releases in Canada and Europe in March , and in the US in April . A vinyl pressing was also made available in April , limited to 500 copies . 
 There would not be a worldwide tour to promote the album because the band had not received a " decent offer " . The 12 Gauge promotion was therefore limited to several gigs in Finland and a brief 10 @-@ show tour in Canada . The March 4 show in Jyväskylä , Finland , was considered to be the album 's release party . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Allmusic 's Eduardo Rivadavia said Kalmah 's sixth album was " more aggressive than its immediate predecessors " . David E. Gehlke of Blistering was already devoted to Kalmah 's previous album , For the Revolution , so he had high expectations for 12 Gauge . He found the album full of " break @-@ neck riff action " , " visceral melodies " , and " daring " dueling between Antti 's guitar and Sneck 's keyboard . Although Gehlke believed that Kalmah gets better with each output , he decided that 12 Gauge did not " match the ... glory " of For the Revolution . 
 Jussi <unk> of <unk> said that Pekka 's vocals harkened back to the band 's 2006 album , The Black Waltz . He said the album was not anything new , but he found the production to be the best of Kalmah 's releases . <unk> 's Sean Bester decided Kalmah 's strength lay in their consistency : " releasing energetic and melodic music with consistent intervals of time between them , delivering tracks that are consistently likable , and each one is consistent with the sound they 've firmly established for themselves . " <unk> gave the album a perfect score , because it was " beautifully arranged " , " wonderfully varied " , did not contain any filler material , and it succeeded at combining melodic thrash with blackened death metal ( a combination of black metal and death metal ) . 
 Chris Colgan , writing for PopMatters , found the album to have the longest and most intricate solos yet , and he , too , mentioned the increased trading off between Antti 's and Sneck 's solos . He thought it important that Kalmah had " not fallen prey to the tendency of introducing American metal elements or becoming more mainstream with their sound . Their music now is as unique as it was in their early years , if not more so " . Marko <unk> of Soundi described the performances as " controlled " , " burly " , and " performed effortlessly " . Stalker 's Kathleen <unk> admitted that she was unfamiliar with Kalmah 's previous work , but she was nevertheless impressed with its technicality , double @-@ guitar melodies , fast solos , and the combining of genres . She called the album " a lot of fun to listen to " . 
 = = " 12 Gauge " music video = = 
 A music video was created for the song " 12 Gauge " , though the acoustic intro was excised from the final version . It was shot on February 20 , 2010 in <unk> , Finland , in some of the coldest temperatures the country had had in decades . The morning temperature when the band began filming was recorded at − 37 ° C ( − 35 ° F ) , rising only to − 27 ° C ( − 17 ° F ) at the end of the day . The band and camera operator were kept warm by a bonfire , though Antti said that they were used to cold temperatures . 
 The video , which debuted online on March 1 , was produced by the record label , Spinefarm , and Kalmah . The camera and Steadicam operator was Markus <unk> , and Kalmah 's bassist , Timo Lehtinen , edited and color @-@ timed the final product . 
 The video cuts between two narratives . In the first , a hunter ( uncredited actor ) straps a 16 @-@ gauge shotgun around his shoulder , and tracks footsteps through the snow , eventually finding the <unk> ( the band 's mascot , here as depicted on the covers of The Black Waltz and For the Revolution ) . In the second narrative , the band members , dressed warmly in heavy clothing , are sitting around a campfire , preparing a kettle of an unknown drink . As each person takes a sip , they begin convulsing . To simulate the drink 's effects , the camera used shaking and rapid zooming . As the song finishes , Pekka pours himself a drink and is the only one immune to its effects . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All lyrics written by Pekka Kokko . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Bob Windle = 
 Robert George " Bob " Windle ( born 7 November 1944 ) is an Australian freestyle swimmer of the 1960s , who won four Olympic medals , including an individual gold medal . Windle won the 1500 m freestyle and took bronze in the 4 × 100 m freestyle relay at the 1964 Summer Olympics in Tokyo , and silver and bronze in the 4 × 200 m and 4 × 100 m freestyle relays respectively at the 1968 Summer Olympics . Known for his versatility , he is the only male swimmer to represent Australia at the Olympics in all freestyle distances from 100 m to 1500 m . During his career , Windle set six world records and won six Commonwealth Games gold medals . He won 19 Australian championships in all distances from 220 yd to 1650 yd . 
 Growing up in eastern Sydney , Windle was trained by Frank Guthrie from the age of 12 . Windle 's first major swimming competition was the 1960 Australian Championships . Aged 15 , his second @-@ place finish in the 1650 yd freestyle earned him a place on the team for the 1960 Summer Olympics in Rome . However , the Australian coaches only took him along to gain experience and he did not compete . He won his first national title in 1961 — the 1650 yd freestyle — and claimed the 220 – 440 – 1650 yd treble in 1962 . Windle made his international debut at the 1962 British Empire and Commonwealth Games in Perth , winning gold in the 4 × 220 yd freestyle and silver and bronze in the 1650 and 440 yd freestyle respectively . In 1963 , he won four individual national titles , adding the 880 yd event to the successful defence of his three titles . He won three individual titles in 1964 and proceeded to the Tokyo Olympics where he was eliminated in the heats of the 400 m freestyle after attempting to save energy for the final . In response , Windle took an aggressive approach in the 1500 m and set Olympic records in the heats and final to win gold . He added a bronze in the 4 × 100 m freestyle relay . 
 After the Olympics , Windle enrolled at Indiana University , where he trained under Doc Counsilman . While in the United States , Windle converted to sprint swimming . He competed in the 1966 British Empire and Commonwealth Games in Kingston , Jamaica , winning the 440 yd freestyle , 4 × 110 yd and 4 × 220 yd freestyle relays , all in world @-@ record times . He competed in his second Olympics in Mexico City in 1968 , racing the 100 m and 200 m freestyle and the corresponding relays , having completed his transition to sprinting . He won a bronze and silver in the respective relays and retired after the games . In retirement , he worked for Allis @-@ Chalmers in the United States , before being transferred to their Australian division . 
 = = Early years = = 
 Born in Sydney on 7 November 1944 , Windle grew up in the eastern Sydney suburb of Waverley . Windle and his sister Norma learnt to swim at nearby Bronte Beach . His family later relocated to Bexley North , and he swam for his school team at Marist College Kogarah . Windle was coached by Frank Guthrie at the Enfield pool from the age of 12 . After a fortnight of training , he entered the district age group championships and won a place in the top three . From then on , he began training three or four times a week , and his father drove him to Enfield for morning training . By the age of 15 , he was training every day . 
 A turning point for Windle was the 1960 Australian Championships ; he came second in the 1650 yd freestyle behind John Konrads and was selected for the 1960 Summer Olympics in Rome . He dropped out of high school to attend a three @-@ month training camp in Queensland with the Olympic swimming team . Windle did not swim in Rome ; team officials merely wanted him to learn from the routine and atmosphere of Olympic swimming . On his return to Australia , he switched to the tutelage of Don Talbot , who also coached Konrads . 
 Talbot nicknamed Windle " the greyhound " because of his thin and angular build . As a result of Windle 's small build , he took between 45 and 47 strokes to complete a lap , but fellow distance swimmer Murray Rose needed only 35 to 37 strokes . Talbot said that Windle was the most thinly built elite swimmer that he had trained , and had great trouble in trying to increase Windle 's frame . Talbot motivated Windle and instilled him with a greater level of self belief . For his part , Windle responded by increasing his workload , and was regarded as Talbot 's most diligent student . Windle trained with a determination that often saw him swim through others who were in his training lane . These collisions led to complaints by recreational swimmers that Windle was too aggressive . He often did twice as much pre @-@ season training as the other swimmers in Talbot 's squad . According to Talbot , Windle 's weakness was that he was only capable of swimming in two ways , flat out or very slowly . Windle had trouble in pacing himself to conserve energy for later events . Talbot lamented to " never [ being ] astute enough to realise that he [ Windle ] didn 't have the subtleties of pace that would have added to his armament as a swimmer " . 
 = = First national title and international medals = = 
 At the 1961 Australian Championships , Windle won the 1500 m in a time of 17 min 37 @.@ 7 s to claim his first Australian title at the age of 16 . However , his victory was overshadowed when his bathers partly fell off during the race . In the following year , Windle showed his versatility by winning the 220 yd , 440 yd and 1650 yd freestyle events , in times of 2 min 2 @.@ 9 s , 4 min 25 @.@ 0 s and 17 min 53 @.@ 3 s respectively . He also anchored the New South Wales team to victory in the 4 × 220 yd freestyle relay . Selected for the 1962 British Empire and Commonwealth Games in Perth , he marked his international debut with silver and bronze in the 1650 yd and 440 yd freestyle respectively . Murray Rose , who had returned from competition in the United States college system , won both events . Rose won the 1650 yd event , finishing in 17 min 18 @.@ 1 s , with Windle 26 @.@ 4 s in arrears . In the 440 yd event , Rose finished in a time of 4 min 20 @.@ 0 s , 3 @.@ 1 s ahead of the third @-@ placed Windle . Windle also won gold in the 4 × 220 yd freestyle relay , along with Rose , Allan Wood and Anthony Strahan , setting a world record in the process . 
 With Rose absent in the United States , Windle won the 220 yd , 440 yd , 880 yd and 1650 yd freestyle at the 1963 Australian Championships , in times of 2 min 2 @.@ 8 s , 4 min 23 @.@ 0 s , 9 min 10 @.@ 5 s and 17 min 59 @.@ 6 s respectively . His quest to sweep all of the freestyle events failed when David Dickson defeated him in a touch finish in the 110 yd race . The pair were neck and neck but Dickson judged the finishing touch on the wall better . Windle collected two more wins as part of the New South Wales team in the 4 × 220 yd and the 4 × 110 yd freestyle relays , anchoring both quartets . 
 Windle set world records in the 200 m and 220 yd freestyle in 1963 , posting times of 2 min 0 @.@ 3 s and 2 min 1 @.@ 1 s respectively . He won three individual titles at the 1964 Australian Championships , the 200 m , 400 m and 1500 m freestyle in times of 2 min 0 @.@ 0 s , 4 min 17 @.@ 6 s and 17 min 9 @.@ 4 s respectively . As it was an Olympic year , the competition was held over metric distances , in conformance with Olympic standards . Windle was a member of all three New South Wales relay teams as they swept the relay events , winning the 400 m and 800 m freestyle and 400 m medley relays . 
 = = Olympic gold = = 
 Windle 's performances qualified him for the 1964 Summer Olympics in Tokyo , where he was slated to swim four events : the 400 m and 1500 m freestyle and the 4 × 100 m and 4 × 200 m freestyle relays . Windle 's first event was the 4 × 100 m freestyle relay , where he combined with Dickson , Peter Doak , and John Ryan to win Australia 's heat in a time of 3 min 40 @.@ 6 s , which lagged behind the United States ' winning heat time by 1 @.@ 8 s . Windle anchored the team as Australia came from second at the halfway point to win their heat . The Australians were the second fastest qualifier for the finals . However , the United States improved their time by a further 5 @.@ 6 s in the final , but Australia could only improve their time to 3 min 39 @.@ 1 s , leaving them third behind the Americans and Germans . Australia were in second place for the first two legs , until Germany moved into the silver medal position at the last change by 0 @.@ 1 s . A distance swimmer , Windle could not keep up with his German anchorman counterpart , and Australia fell 1 @.@ 9 s behind the silver medalists by the end of the race . 
 In the 400 m freestyle heats , Windle and Talbot made a misjudgement ; in an attempt to conserve his energy for the final they decided that Windle should not go flat out , and Windle was four seconds slower than he was at the Australian Championships . Windle was one of the top seeds for the race , and Talbot advised him to swim hard in the first half of the race before slowing down . However , he swam too slowly and missed the final completely . Although he won his heat by seven seconds in a time of 4 min 21 @.@ 6 s , he was the ninth fastest overall , so he missed the final by one position with a time deficit of 0 @.@ 5 s . The slowest qualifier was Tsuyoshi Yamanaka , who had been prevented from withdrawing from the race by his coaches . On the other hand , the two other Australian representatives who he defeated at the national championships did make the final , including Wood , who went on to win bronze . Talbot said that the tactical error was mostly his responsibility and that he learnt a lot from it . 
 In the 1500 m , Talbot decided that Windle would attack from the outset and attempt to hang on in the latter stages of the race . They also worked on Windle 's technique , curing his habit of dropping his elbow to a lower position when he was tired . Windle broke the Olympic record in the heats with a time of 17 min 15 @.@ 9 s to qualify fastest for the final by more than six seconds . In the final , Windle repeated the strategy of sprinting from the start , leading throughout to lower his own Olympic record to 17 min 1 @.@ 7 s and holding off American John Nelson by 1 @.@ 3 s . Windle 's tactics disrupted the <unk> of the Americans ; Nelson and world record holder Roy Saari had planned to pace each other throughout the race , but ended up reacting to Windle instead of swimming their own race . As a result , Saari finished in seventh place , far outside his global standard . 
 Windle later combined with Wood , Ryan and Dickson in the 4 × 200 m freestyle relay final . Having rested their two individual medalists — Wood and Windle — in the heats , Australia struggled to fourth place and were the slowest qualifier for the final . In the decider , Australia were fourth when Windle dived in for the anchor leg , 3 @.@ 7 s behind the third @-@ placed Japan . Windle posted a time of 1 min 58 @.@ 7 s , the sixth fastest split in the race and the fastest Australian leg by 3 @.@ 0 s . Although he made up 1 @.@ 8 s on the Japanese anchor swimmer , it was not enough and Australia finished fourth , 1 @.@ 9 s out of the medals . 
 = = US college career = = 
 After the Olympics , Windle enrolled at Indiana University — whose Indiana Hoosiers swimming team was coached by Doc Counsilman — on an athletic scholarship . He did so after getting advice from Australian team @-@ mate , Olympic gold medallist and Indiana student Kevin Berry . He studied business while competing for the university , where he switched his focus to shorter sprint distances . Windle did not enjoy as much success at short @-@ course swimming in the United States as he did in long @-@ course swimming . He cited the lack of enjoyment for switching to shorter distances , quipping " Why swim 30 laps for a gold , when you can get one for swimming two laps ? " However , Windle enjoyed his time in the United States , approving of the additional emphasis on relays and team spirit and the social life that it entailed . Windle also enjoyed learning from Counsilman , who was regarded as an expert in mechanics , resulting in an improvement in his swimming technique . 
 Windle 's performances in the United States for Indiana earned him selection for the 1966 Commonwealth Games in Kingston , Jamaica . He won the 440 yd freestyle in a world record time of 4 min 15 @.@ 0 s , but with his focus now on the shorter distances , only managed fourth in the 1650 yd freestyle with a time of 17 min 49 @.@ 2 s , 4 % slower than his personal best for the distance . He won golds in the 4 × 110 yd freestyle relay with Ryan , Dickson and Michael Wenden and the 4 × 220 yd freestyle with Wenden , Dickson and Peter Reynolds . The times of 3 min 35 @.@ 6 s and 7 min 59 @.@ 5 s , respectively , were world records . 
 = = International farewell = = 
 In 1967 , Windle retired , but made a comeback to compete in the shorter distances after being persuaded by Talbot . In 1968 , Windle anchored Indiana 's 880 yd freestyle relay to victory at the National Collegiate Athletic Association Men 's Swimming and Diving Championships , sealing what would be the first of six consecutive men 's team titles for the university . He then competed in the Australian Championships for the first time in four years . Although he did not win any individual events , he was part of New South Wales ' winning quartets in the 4 × 100 m and 4 × 200 m freestyle relays . Windle was appointed the captain of the men 's Olympic swimming team , gaining selection for the 100 m and 200 m freestyle events and the respective freestyle relays . He was not selected for the 1500 m freestyle , ending the defence of his Olympic title before the team had reached Mexico City . 
 In the 100 m freestyle , Windle came second in his heat in a time of 54 @.@ 8 s , making him the sixth fastest qualifier for the semifinals . He improved his time to 54 @.@ 6 s in the semifinals , but this placed him only 11th and he missed the final by 0 @.@ 5 s . In the 200 m freestyle , Windle came second in his heat behind Wenden and scraped into the final by 0 @.@ 3 s as the seventh fastest qualifier . He improved his time by 0 @.@ 1 s in the final to finish sixth in 2 min 0 @.@ 9 s . Wenden won both events . After the 200 m final , Wenden lost consciousness due to exhaustion and sank underwater . Wenden was pulled from the water and saved after Windle noticed the incident . 
 In the 4 × 100 m freestyle , Windle combined with Wenden , Robert Cusack and Greg Rogers to win bronze behind the United States and the Soviet Union . Australia used the same team and swimming order in both the heats and finals , with Windle doing the third leg . Australia came second in their heat behind the United States and qualified third overall , and the Soviet Union were the second fastest . It was a similar story in the final ; Australia were third at every change . Despite Wenden anchoring the Australians with the fastest split among all 32 swimmers in the race , the Australians missed the silver medal by just 0 @.@ 5 s . In the 4 × 200 m freestyle relay , Windle won a silver along with Wenden , Rogers and Graham White . The quartet won their heat and qualified fastest , while the Americans qualified second with their second @-@ choice team . However , using their full @-@ strength team in the final , the Americans won by 1 @.@ 4 s . Australia were 2 @.@ 5 s behind at the halfway point of the race , but the Americans were able to hold on , despite the gains made by Windle and Wenden in the last two legs . 
 Windle retired after the Games , noting that " I have swum to that point when I could hardly lift myself out of the water . I have seen John Konrads to that point also . I would always give 110 % . There is no substitute for hard and honest work " . Windle was usually regarded as the fittest and hardest @-@ working member of the Australian swimming team . In retirement , Windle stayed in the United States for a few more years , working for Allis @-@ Chalmers , an agricultural equipment corporation . He returned home after being transferred to the Australian division of the firm 's operations . Windle was inducted into the Sport Australia Hall of Fame in 1987 and the International Swimming Hall of Fame in 1990 . 
 = Typhoon Nanmadol ( 2004 ) = 
 Typhoon Nanmadol , known in the Philippines as Typhoon <unk> , was the last of four consecutive tropical cyclones to strike the Philippines in 2004 . A quickly moving system , Nanmadol brought heavy rainfall and strong winds over the same regions impacted by the previous storms , exacerbating flood conditions in Luzon and surrounding regions . Together Nanmadol and these systems accounted for around 1 @,@ 000 deaths in the Philippines . The typhoon later became the first December tropical cyclone to strike Taiwan since record keeping began , bringing along with it heavy rain , which also affected nearby regions of eastern China . As an extratropical storm , Nanmadol brought gusty winds and rain to Japan . 
 Nanmadol developed from an isolated area of convection south @-@ southwest of Pohnpei that became classified as a tropical depression on November 28 . Within highly conducive conditions for development , the system reached tropical storm intensity the following day , followed by typhoon intensity on November 30 . Quickly pacing towards the north @-@ northwest about the periphery of a nearby subtropical ridge , Nanmadol reached its peak intensity on December 1 with winds of 165 km / h ( 105 mph ) and a minimum barometric pressure of 935 mbar ( hPa ; 27 @.@ 61 inHg ) . Shortly after , the typhoon made landfall at a similar intensity on Casiguran , Aurora , quickly moving over Luzon before reaching the South China Sea , where it recurved northward into hostile atmospheric conditions . Over the next few days , Nanmadol weakened and later transitioned into an extratropical cyclone near Taiwan on December 4 , whereafter it merged with another <unk> system . 
 With the typhoon approaching landfall in an area still recovering from previous storms , relief agencies already servicing the region were forced to allocate additional resources to prepare for Nanmadol . Evacuation efforts assisted in moving almost 100 @,@ 000 people into shelters . Effects from Nanmadol were most severe in Cagayan Valley , where 14 people were killed . Power outages were widespread across several islands . Overall , damage from the typhoon in the Philippines totaled ₱ 2 @.@ 23 billion ( US $ 39 @.@ 3 million ) . Heavy rainfall , peaking at 1 @,@ 090 mm ( 43 in ) , was documented in Taiwan . Agricultural damage in Taiwan alone reached NT $ 670 million ( US $ 20 @.@ 8 million ) . Similar effects were felt in Japan , where the remnants of Nanmadol produced record @-@ breaking rainfall and wind . Damage was particularly significant in Aichi Prefecture , totaling JP ¥ 69 @.@ 8 million ( US $ 680 @,@ 000 ) . Overall , Nanmadol resulted in 77 fatalities and US $ 60 @.@ 8 million in damage across three countries . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 The progenitor to Typhoon Nanmadol was first noted by the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) as an isolated cluster of thunderstorms roughly 290 km ( 180 mi ) south @-@ southwest of Pohnpei at 2200 UTC on November 27 , 2004 . With convection consolidating about a potential center of circulation , the Japan Meteorological Agency ( JMA ) classified the broad system as a tropical depression the following day . Rapid development of storms and organization ensued following classification , spurred by favorable conditions . Tracking northwestward due to the presence of a nearby subtropical ridge to its north , the depression continued to strengthen , reaching tropical storm intensity on November 29 while 860 km ( 530 mi ) south @-@ southeast of Guam . At this point the tropical cyclone was assigned the name Nanmadol . 
 <unk> atmospheric conditions around Nanmadol on November 29 led to the development of a central dense overcast , followed shortly thereafter by the formation of an eye . Nanmadol was upgraded to severe tropical storm intensity at 0000 UTC on November 30 and became a typhoon twelve hours later , tracking near Satawal , Woleai , and Yap State during this intensification phase . Following the upgrade to typhoon status , intensification briefly slowed but continued soon thereafter . At 0600 UTC on December 1 , Nanmadol reached peak intensity with maximum sustained winds of 165 km / h ( 105 mph ) and a minimum barometric pressure of 935 mbar ( hPa ; 27 @.@ 61 inHg ) , still east of the Philippines . The typhoon maintained this strength for roughly twelve hours before slightly weakening as it neared Luzon . At approximately 1200 UTC on December 2 , Nanmadol made landfall near Casiguran , Aurora with winds of 140 km / h ( 85 mph ) . 
 Due to the rapid motion of Nanmadol , the typhoon crossed Luzon in under six hours , emerging into the South China Sea before 1800 UTC on December 2 . Though land interaction with the Philippines did not significantly affect the cyclone , a shortwave trough forced Nanmadol to sharply curve northward , bringing it into hostile atmospheric conditions within the Luzon Strait . At 0000 UTC on December 3 , the JMA downgraded Nanmadol to severe tropical storm status . Increased wind shear and the advection of dry air further weakened the tropical cyclone , and by midday on December 3 , the storm 's center of circulation became decoupled from the rest of the convection . At 2340 UTC that day , Nanmadol made landfall near <unk> , Pingtung in Taiwan , becoming the first December tropical cyclone to strike the island in 108 years of record @-@ keeping . Roughly six hours later on December 4 , the JMA determined that Nanmadol had transitioned into an extratropical cyclone . These remnants soon merged with another low @-@ pressure area , creating a more powerful system that later tracked over Japan . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 Initial forecasts following the formation of Nanmadol over open waters anticipated the typhoon to track directly into Luzon . On December 1 , government sessions in Manila were temporarily suspended . Some commercial flights traversing to and from Luzon were cancelled in addition to ferry service between the eastern Bicol Region and Manila , stranding hundreds of passengers . Flight cancellations were primarily targeted at propeller aircraft as they were more susceptible to typhoon conditions . This impacted ongoing relief efforts , as the Philippine Air Force 's fleet of rescue planes were also grounded . The impending storm also delayed the reopening of financial markets in Manila until December 3 . 
 Then @-@ Philippines president Gloria Macapagal @-@ Arroyo ordered for precautionary measures to be undertaken by agencies under the purview of the National Disaster Coordinating Council ( NDCC ) . In response , the German Foreign Office allocated € 50 @,@ 000 ( US $ 67 @,@ 000 ) to assist in preparations for Nanmadol . The Spanish Red Cross were forced to maintain relief supplies in the provinces of Aurora and Quezon in addition to managing ongoing relief efforts for regions impacted by Tropical Depression Winnie . Individual Red Cross chapters were tasked with closely monitoring the movement of relief stockpiles during these preparatory measures . 
 The NDCC also called for the evacuation of persons in potentially affected areas . Large @-@ scale evacuations took place in Real , Quezon ahead of the approaching typhoon . According to the NDCC , 97 @,@ 238 persons were evacuated in the lead @-@ up to Nanmadol 's Luzon landfall , with nearly 40 @,@ 000 evacuating from the Bicol Region . However , the Office of Civil Defense documented the evacuation of approximately 168 @,@ 000 civilians . Government shelters initially made to house displaced residents due to previous storms were adjusted to accommodate additional refugees evacuating due to the typhoon . In Catanduanes , 1 @,@ 500 persons evacuated to these shelters . Other evacuees sought refuge in well @-@ constructed buildings , as was the case in Mercedes , Eastern Samar , where 2 @,@ 000 civilians stayed inside a school . 
 In Taiwan , the Central Weather Bureau issued a land warning for the island in advance of the typhoon . Potential impacts , which would likely be enhanced by the East Asian Monsoon , prompted Taiwanese president Chen Shui @-@ bian to postpone political marches and campaign rallies intended for the upcoming presidential elections . In anticipation for the typhoon , schools and businesses in southern and eastern Taiwan were closed , along with the delaying of rail and air traffic . Kaohsiung International Airport was closed during the morning of December 4 . 
 = = Impact and aftermath = = 
 = = = Philippines = = = 
 Damage assessments of Nanmadol 's impacts in the Philippines found difficulty in distinguishing the storm 's impacts from those of Typhoon <unk> , Tropical Storm <unk> , and Tropical Depression Winnie due to their rapid succession of effects . The NDCC , however , noted 70 fatalities as a result of Nanmadol alone , coupled with 157 injuries . The majority of deaths were associated with electrocutions or drownings . Approximately 160 @,@ 000 people were displaced as well . Overall , the typhoon destroyed 10 @,@ 457 households and damaged another 57 @,@ 435 . Damage was estimated at ₱ 2 @.@ 23 billion ( US $ 39 @.@ 3 million ) . Precipitation peaked at 228 mm ( 9 @.@ 0 in ) in Daet , Camarines Norte , observed over a 24 @-@ hour period . 
 Even prior to the Philippine landfall of Nanmadol , ongoing relief operations were hampered by the storm 's overreaching effects . Search and rescue helicopters failed to reach planned destinations , which was also due in part to the country 's small helicopter fleet . A navy gunboat refitted as a relief ship headed for Real , Quezon was forced to turn back due to high waves onset by the approaching typhoon which swept potentially hazardous logs into sea . 
 The first Philippine provinces to be impacted by the typhoon were Albay and Catanduanes , which suffered power outages after strong winds tore down power lines . One person was killed in <unk> , Catanduanes after being electrocuted by a felled power line . In order to prevent more widespread outages , electrical service in some locations was deliberately shut down . Landslides triggered by Nanmadol in Aurora killed 25 people . On the Bicol Peninsula , eight fatalities occurred due to drowning , electrocution , or hypothermia . 
 In the aftermath of the typhoon , the Philippine Red Cross made a full emergency appeal for funding to assist in recovery from Nanmadol and preceding storms . The Philippines government declared a state of calamity for fifteen provinces , cities , and municipalities . Medical personnel were deployed to mitigate potential outbreaks of disease and transport injured persons to hospitals . The NDCC distributed 14 @,@ 065 sacks of rice worth roughly ₱ 11 million ( US $ 200 @,@ 000 ) . 
 = = = Elsewhere = = = 
 Shortly before transitioning into an extratropical cyclone , Nanmadol made landfall in <unk> , Taiwan as a tropical storm . This made Nanmadol the first recorded tropical cyclone to strike Taiwan in the month of December since records began in 1896 . Heavy precipitation associated with the typhoon was reported , peaking at 1 @,@ 090 mm ( 43 in ) in <unk> . The highest documented 24 @-@ hour rainfall total was at a station in Hualien County , which recorded 907 mm ( 35 @.@ 7 in ) in that timeframe . Power outages disrupted electrical supply to 26 @,@ 588 households , and agricultural losses in Taiwan as a result of Nanmadol equated to NT $ 670 million ( US $ 20 @.@ 8 million ) . Two people were killed on the island . The typhoon 's swath of rainfall also extended to East China , which was also climatologically abnormal . Rainfall in Fuzhou peaked at 52 @.@ 3 mm ( 2 @.@ 06 in ) , almost double the average for the month of December . In Zhejiang , rainfall peaked at 106 mm ( 4 @.@ 2 in ) . 
 The extratropical remnants of Nanmadol brought record breaking rainfall and winds to Japan . A station in <unk> , Tokushima received 269 mm ( 10 @.@ 6 in ) of rain , the highest amount documented in the country . Several other stations recorded rainfall totals in excess of 200 mm ( 7 @.@ 9 in ) . Maximum sustained winds clocked at 88 km / h ( 55 mph ) in Chiba , Chiba and <unk> , Tokyo , were the strongest ever recorded in December for those locations . The same station in Chiba clocked a wind gust at 176 km / h ( 109 mph ) , another record for the month of December and the highest reported wind gust in Japan from Nanmadol 's remnants . A 145 km / h ( 90 mph ) wind gust was recorded in Tokyo ; this gust broke the record for the strongest gust recorded in the city since record @-@ keeping began . Offshore Kagoshima Prefecture , a ferry capsized in rough waters , killing five . The captain of the ferry was later charged with professional negligence . In Aomori Prefecture , widespread power outages resulted from the strong winds . Heavy rains in Aichi Prefecture flooded several roads and damaged fisheries and agricultural land . One person was injured there , and damage totaled JP ¥ 69 @.@ 8 million ( US $ 680 @,@ 000 ) . 
 = Dan Dugan ( audio engineer ) = 
 Dan Dugan ( born March 20 , 1943 ) is an American audio engineer , inventor , and nature sounds recordist . He was the first person in regional theatre to be called a sound designer , and he developed the first effective automatic microphone mixer : the automixer . Dugan 's sound design work was acknowledged in 2003 with a Distinguished Career Award by the United States Institute for Theatre Technology . 
 In his youth , Dugan was fascinated by the technical aspects of theatre . He worked as a lighting designer then transitioned to sound design in 1967 . Dugan became interested in achieving the automatic adjustment of sound controls after a frustrating experience staging the musical Hair . His first automixer design was not fully practical but his second design was successful ; it used a reference derived from a total of all of its microphone signals . Dugan devised a third improvement which helped prevent audio feedback in the presence of sound reinforcement loudspeakers . Dugan next produced an automixer design that could be inserted into an existing mixing console . This proved popular for broadcast and live sound applications . Each of Dugan 's subsequent automixer models has been of the <unk> type . 
 Dugan first recorded sounds in the late 1960s to augment his sound designs . He continued making recordings , concentrating on capturing the sounds of nature . Dugan records outdoors in a variety of locations including national parks and nature preserves . He has assisted in research related to the harmful effects of human @-@ generated sound in nature . Dugan is a co @-@ founder and current secretary of People for Legal and <unk> Schools ( PLANS ) , a California non @-@ profit organization incorporated in 1997 . 
 = = Early career = = 
 Daniel W. Dugan was born in Los Angeles , California , on March 20 , 1943 , after his father , U.S. Navy Commander P. F. Dugan , had been activated for service in the Pacific War . " Dan " Dugan was raised in San Diego where his parents took him to the Old Globe Theatre and summer musicals at the Ford Bowl — he always wanted to go backstage to see the lighting control equipment . As a young man he sang bass in the church choir , in the San Diego Bach Chorus , in choral workshops under Roger Wagner at San Diego State University , and in madrigal groups for " Dancing on the Green " , an Elizabethan @-@ era folk dancing event held in front of the Old Globe . Dugan obtained a four @-@ year scholarship to the University of San Francisco and majored in physics and math . He dropped out in 1963 to pursue stagecraft , specifically lighting design . His early lighting designs include ones for the San Diego National Shakespeare Festival at the Old Globe Theatre , the San Diego Opera , and the Actor 's Workshop in San Francisco . 
 = = Sound design = = 
 Dugan changed from lighting design to sound design in 1967 . The state of sound design at the time was mostly occasional sound effects performed live or played back on record players or tape machines . Dugan 's first efforts in sound involved designing sound solutions for the Shakespeare festival in San Diego and for the American Conservatory Theatre ( ACT ) in San Francisco . Dugan 's complex and atmospheric theatrical soundscapes led to a new title : during ACT 's 1968 – 69 season , he was the first regional theatre person to be called a " sound designer " . He presented a paper about his sound design to the Audio Engineering Society ( AES ) at their 37th convention , and his paper was published in the Journal of the Audio Engineering Society in December 1969 . Dugan described a system in which the signals from three stereo tape players were routed to ten loudspeaker zones in the theater . 
 Dugan designed sound for three regional productions of Hair , the musical : ones in Chicago , Las Vegas and Toronto . The Chicago production ran in 1969 and 1970 at the Blackstone Theatre , operated at that time by The Shubert Organization . Dugan was able to design sound but not allowed to operate the mixing console because he was not in the stagehands union : International Alliance of Theatrical Stage Employees ( IATSE ) . 
 When Margrit Mondavi founded the Mondavi Summer Music Festival in 1969 at the Robert Mondavi Winery , primarily featuring jazz artists , Dugan supplied sound services at the outdoor venue in Napa , California . He recorded independent record albums , including Kate Wolf 's first two : Back Roads ( 1976 ) and Lines on the Paper ( 1977 ) and designed sound for the Sacramento Music Circus . 
 Dugan occasionally delivered speeches at conferences of the United States Institute for Theatre Technology ( <unk> ) in the 1980s and 1990s . In 2003 the <unk> honored Dugan with the Harold Burris @-@ Meyer Distinguished Career in Sound Design Award , given for " a lifetime spent establishing the field of sound design for the performing arts , as both artist and innovator in audio engineering and technology . " Previous winners of the award were Abe Jacob , John Bracewell , Charlie Richmond and Tony Meola . 
 = = <unk> = = 
 While designing sound for the musical Hair , Dugan began to appreciate the human operator 's inability to act quickly enough to control multiple microphones . He saw the show 's audio mixing person " working rotary knobs for 16 area mics , 9 hand mics , and 10 mics in the band " . Dugan thought that a microphone should not be turned on unless it was getting some worthwhile signal , more than just the room ambiance . His frustration with microphone mixing led him to experiment for a few years with microphone signals controlled automatically by voltage @-@ controlled amplifiers ( <unk> ) , finally developing the " Dugan Music System " , shown to the AES at their 49th convention , held in New York in 1974 . This system used a novel proportional gain algorithm whereby the total gain was divided between all active microphones . The microphones were " continuously and automatically adjusted " by a set of <unk> to bring each microphone up or down in the mix , based on how much signal it was sending relative to the signal received by a reference microphone placed somewhat distant from the other microphones . Dugan 's patent application for a " Control Apparatus for Sound Reinforcement Systems " was accepted and published on June 4 , 1974 . This was the first useful automatic microphone mixing algorithm , the basis for all of Dugan 's later systems . 
 Though the algorithm was good , the reference microphone was an unpredictable variable : it had practical placement problems . If it was near the audience , audience noise would skew the algorithm . If placed backstage , crew and equipment noises could be a factor . Thus , the Dugan Music System was not immediately developed into a product . Dugan studied the problem , researching alternative solutions . In 1975 , Dugan filed a patent for the " Dugan Speech System " , and in 1976 produced 60 copies of what he named the Dugan Model A. The automixer with serial number 1 , a unit Dugan fabricated by hand , " was installed in the conference room of Bell Labs by Harvey Fletcher " . Significantly , the external microphone reference of the Dugan Music System was replaced by a reference composed of the total signal received from all of the active microphones . Dugan described the process some three decades later : 
 " I was messing around with logarithmic level detection , seeing what would happen if I used the sum of all the inputs as a reference . That 's when I accidentally came upon the system . It was really discovered , not invented . I didn 't really know what I had , just that it worked like gangbusters . " 
 Dugan licensed this more practical system to Altec who produced 4- and 8 @-@ channel automixers for commercial installations such as hotels , conference rooms , courtrooms and city council chambers . The Dugan Speech System was the first commercially successful <unk> algorithm . Over the next 15 years , other manufacturers designed competing automixers , and the market segment was born . 
 In the late 1980s , Dugan developed a gain limiting improvement to the <unk> algorithm . The Dugan Gain Limiting System was patented in September 1989 and presented to the 87th AES convention in October . Dugan described for the AES his prototype of an automixer to be inserted into selected microphone channels of a mixing console , operated by a person , to help in mixing multiple live microphones to have less reverberation and noise , more focus on the desired sound , eliminating the mixing engineer 's problem of too @-@ slow human reaction time . The gain limiting system provided smooth , continuous control over the equivalent number of open microphones ( NOM ) that the automixer would send at its outputs . The NOM could be set anywhere between 1 and 10 , with higher settings sounding more natural for a recording in a studio , and lower settings offering greater control of acoustic feedback in the presence of sound reinforcement loudspeakers . An embodiment of Dugan 's three patents was produced as the Model D Automatic Mixing Controller , a <unk> rack unit handling 8 channels which could be linked with up to 11 other Model Ds to automatically mix as many as 96 channels simultaneously . 
 Dugan 's original 1974 patent expired in 1991 , and the Dugan Speech System patent in 1993 . Other manufacturers began to sell automixers incorporating the Dugan algorithm . In 1996 , Dugan produced the Model D @-@ 1 , an automixer for speech @-@ only applications . The Model D @-@ 2 returned to having applicability for both speech and music , as did the Model D @-@ 3 . In 1997 , Dugan licensed his system to Protech Audio of Indian Lake , New York , yielding the Protech 2000 model series . 
 In September 2006 , Dugan produced the Model E , the E standing for economy . This half @-@ rack @-@ sized automixer was much smaller and less expensive than previous ones . It could be linked with another Model E to control up to 16 channels ; two units could be mounted side @-@ by @-@ side in only 1U of rack space . The Model E 's popularity came with many critical requests for features , and in May 2008 the Model E @-@ 1 was introduced ; an incremental improvement to replace the Model E. It allowed ADAT <unk> interconnections between linked units and a digital mixing console , helpful with Yamaha , Mackie and other digital audio gear containing ADAT inputs and outputs . Its user interface was a simple web browser page , accessible by computer connected with Category 5 cable . 
 In February 2011 , Dugan demonstrated an automixer card , marketed by Yamaha , to plug into the accessory slot of a Yamaha digital mixer such as the <unk> , <unk> , <unk> or <unk> . This card , the Dugan @-@ <unk> , could mix up to 16 channels of microphone inputs , assigned to selected inserts in the mixer 's graphic user interface . Like the Model E @-@ 1 , the automixer could be adjusted through a web browser interface , allowing remote control with an iPad , touchscreen computer or laptop over wireless network . 
 = = Nature sounds = = 
 Dugan made his first sound effects recordings to augment his theatrical sound designs . As he grew more interested in field recording , he was attracted to the sounds found in pristine natural settings — environments without human noise . A board member and webmaster of Nature Sounds Society , Dugan has conducted equipment training sessions since 1994 , and has given talks about his experiences in nature recording . He has traveled to New Zealand in pursuit of recordings , but mainly devotes himself to U.S. National Parks and Monuments such as Yosemite and Muir Woods . Other national parks and monuments at which he has recorded sound include Joshua Tree , Pinnacles , Lassen Volcanic , Yellowstone , Haleakala , Olympic , Zion , Bryce Canyon , Kings Canyon , Sequoia and Lava Beds . 
 Dugan and his wife Sharon Perry , the Nature Sounds Society chair , recorded the dawn chorus of Cathedral Grove in Muir Woods once each month for a year . He has partnered with the National Park Service and the California Library of Natural Sounds to document the various sounds heard in U.S. parks . Regarding his reasons for doing so , Dugan wrote in 2008 : 
 " There are three potential values in soundscape recording in a National Park . Scientific , to document the <unk> at that place and time . Political , to document the <unk> , collecting evidence that might be useful in policy @-@ making about aircraft and visitor traffic . Artistic , to use in natural sound compositions . " 
 In 2006 , Dugan assisted a group of researchers studying soundscapes and human use at Muir Woods . The researchers presented their findings at the Northeastern Recreation Research Symposium , produced by the United States Forest Service , a work titled , " From Landscapes to <unk> : Understanding and Managing Natural Quiet in the National Parks " . They concluded that human @-@ generated noise " is a potentially important indicator of quality " of soundscapes in parks . 
 = = PLANS , Inc . = = 
 In 1998 an organization he co @-@ founded , People for Legal and <unk> Schools ( PLANS , Inc . ) , filed a federal lawsuit against Sacramento City Unified School District and Twin Ridges Elementary School District in California arguing that their Waldorf @-@ methods @-@ inspired schools violated the First and Fourteenth Amendments of the United States Constitution and Article IX of the California Constitution . Dugan participated in the court proceedings . After years of litigation , the 9th circuit court dismissed the case on its merits in 2012 . 
 As co @-@ founder and Secretary of PLANS , Dugan has given media interviews and was quoted in the book The Flickering Mind : The False Promise of Technology in the Classroom and How Learning Can Be Saved . He said Waldorf schools are " faith @-@ based " and draw from an educational theory that is " frozen " in 1925 . 
 = Photon = 
 A photon is an elementary particle , the quantum of all forms of electromagnetic radiation including light . It is the force carrier for electromagnetic force , even when static via virtual photons . The photon has zero rest mass and as a result , the interactions of this force with matter at long distance are observable at the microscopic and macroscopic levels . Like all elementary particles , photons are currently best explained by quantum mechanics but exhibit wave – particle duality , exhibiting properties of both waves and particles . For example , a single photon may be refracted by a lens and exhibit wave interference with itself , and it can behave as a particle with definite and finite measurable position and momentum . The photon 's wave and quanta qualities are two observable aspects of a single phenomenon , and cannot be described by any mechanical model ; a representation of this dual property of light , which assumes certain points on the wavefront to be the seat of the energy , is not possible . The quanta in a light wave cannot be spatially localized . Some defined physical parameters of a photon are listed . 
 The modern concept of the photon was developed gradually by Albert Einstein in the early 20th century to explain experimental observations that did not fit the classical wave model of light . The benefit of the photon model was that it accounted for the frequency dependence of light 's energy , and explained the ability of matter and electromagnetic radiation to be in thermal equilibrium . The photon model accounted for anomalous observations , including the properties of black @-@ body radiation , that others ( notably Max Planck ) had tried to explain using semiclassical models . In that model , light was described by Maxwell 's equations , but material objects emitted and absorbed light in quantized amounts ( i.e. , they change energy only by certain particular discrete amounts ) . Although these semiclassical models contributed to the development of quantum mechanics , many further experiments beginning with the phenomenon of Compton scattering of single photons by electrons , validated Einstein 's hypothesis that light itself is quantized . In 1926 the optical physicist Frithiof Wolfers and the chemist Gilbert N. Lewis coined the name photon for these particles . After Arthur H. Compton won the Nobel Prize in 1927 for his scattering studies , most scientists accepted that light quanta have an independent existence , and the term photon was accepted . 
 In the Standard Model of particle physics , photons and other elementary particles are described as a necessary consequence of physical laws having a certain symmetry at every point in spacetime . The intrinsic properties of particles , such as charge , mass and spin , are determined by this gauge symmetry . The photon concept has led to momentous advances in experimental and theoretical physics , including as lasers , Bose – Einstein condensation , quantum field theory , and the probabilistic interpretation of quantum mechanics . It has been applied to photochemistry , high @-@ resolution microscopy , and measurements of molecular distances . Recently , photons have been studied as elements of quantum computers , and for applications in optical imaging and optical communication such as quantum cryptography . 
 = = Nomenclature = = 
 In 1900 , the German physicist Max Planck was studying black @-@ body radiation and suggested that the energy carried by electromagnetic waves could only be released in " packets " of energy . In his 1901 article in Annalen der Physik he called these packets " energy elements " . The word quanta ( singular quantum , Latin for how much ) was used before 1900 to mean particles or amounts of different quantities , including electricity . In 1905 , Albert Einstein suggested that electromagnetic waves could only exist as discrete wave @-@ packets . He called such a wave @-@ packet the light quantum ( German : das <unk> ) . The name photon derives from the Greek word for light , <unk> ( transliterated <unk> ) . Arthur Compton used photon in 1928 , referring to Gilbert N. Lewis . The same name was used earlier , by the American physicist and psychologist Leonard T. <unk> , who coined the word in 1916 , in 1921 by the Irish physicist John Joly , in 1924 by the French physiologist René Wurmser ( 1890 @-@ 1993 ) and in 1926 by the French physicist Frithiof Wolfers ( 1891 @-@ 1971 ) . The name was suggested initially as a unit related to the illumination of the eye and the resulting sensation of light and was used later in a physiological context . Although Wolfers 's and Lewis 's theories were contradicted by many experiments and never accepted , the new name was adopted very soon by most physicists after Compton used it . 
 In physics , a photon is usually denoted by the symbol γ ( the Greek letter gamma ) . This symbol for the photon probably derives from gamma rays , which were discovered in 1900 by Paul Villard , named by Ernest Rutherford in 1903 , and shown to be a form of electromagnetic radiation in 1914 by Rutherford and Edward Andrade . In chemistry and optical engineering , photons are usually symbolized by <unk> , the energy of a photon , where h is Planck 's constant and the Greek letter ν ( nu ) is the photon 's frequency . Much less commonly , the photon can be symbolized by <unk> , where its frequency is denoted by f . 
 = = Physical properties = = 
 A photon is massless , has no electric charge , and is a stable particle . A photon has two possible polarization states . In the momentum representation of the photon , which is preferred in quantum field theory , a photon is described by its wave vector , which determines its wavelength λ and its direction of propagation . A photon 's wave vector may not be zero and can be represented either as a spatial 3 @-@ vector or as a ( relativistic ) four @-@ vector ; in the latter case it belongs to the light cone ( pictured ) . Different signs of the four @-@ vector denote different circular polarizations , but in the 3 @-@ vector representation one should account for the polarization state separately ; it actually is a spin quantum number . In both cases the space of possible wave vectors is three @-@ dimensional . 
 The photon is the gauge boson for electromagnetism , and therefore all other quantum numbers of the photon ( such as lepton number , baryon number , and flavour quantum numbers ) are zero . Also , the photon does not obey the Pauli exclusion principle . 
 Photons are emitted in many natural processes . For example , when a charge is accelerated it emits synchrotron radiation . During a molecular , atomic or nuclear transition to a lower energy level , photons of various energy will be emitted , ranging from radio waves to gamma rays . A photon can also be emitted when a particle and its corresponding antiparticle are annihilated ( for example , electron – positron annihilation ) . 
 In empty space , the photon moves at c ( the speed of light ) and its energy and momentum are related by E 
 = pc , where p is the magnitude of the momentum vector p . This derives from the following relativistic relation , with m = 
 0 : 
 <formula> 
 The energy and momentum of a photon depend only on its frequency ( ν ) or inversely , its wavelength ( λ ) : 
 <formula> 
 <formula> 
 where k is the wave vector ( where the wave number k 
 = | k | = 
 2π / λ ) , ω 
 = <unk> is the angular frequency , and ħ = 
 h / 2π is the reduced Planck constant . 
 Since p points in the direction of the photon 's propagation , the magnitude of the momentum is 
 <formula> 
 The photon also carries a quantity called spin angular momentum that does not depend on its frequency . The magnitude of its spin is <formula> and the component measured along its direction of motion , its helicity , must be ± ħ . These two possible <unk> , called right @-@ handed and left @-@ handed , correspond to the two possible circular polarization states of the photon . 
 To illustrate the significance of these formulae , the annihilation of a particle with its antiparticle in free space must result in the creation of at least two photons for the following reason . In the center of momentum frame , the colliding antiparticles have no net momentum , whereas a single photon always has momentum ( since , as we have seen , it is determined by the photon 's frequency or wavelength , which cannot be zero ) . Hence , conservation of momentum ( or equivalently , translational invariance ) requires that at least two photons are created , with zero net momentum . ( However , it is possible if the system interacts with another particle or field for the annihilation to produce one photon , as when a positron annihilates with a bound atomic electron , it is possible for only one photon to be emitted , as the nuclear Coulomb field breaks translational symmetry . ) The energy of the two photons , or , equivalently , their frequency , may be determined from conservation of four @-@ momentum . Seen another way , the photon can be considered as its own antiparticle . The reverse process , pair production , is the dominant mechanism by which high @-@ energy photons such as gamma rays lose energy while passing through matter . That process is the reverse of " annihilation to one photon " allowed in the electric field of an atomic nucleus . 
 The classical formulae for the energy and momentum of electromagnetic radiation can be re @-@ expressed in terms of photon events . For example , the pressure of electromagnetic radiation on an object derives from the transfer of photon momentum per unit time and unit area to that object , since pressure is force per unit area and force is the change in momentum per unit time . 
 = = = Experimental checks on photon mass = = = 
 Current commonly accepted physical theories imply or assume the photon to be strictly massless . If the photon is not a strictly massless particle , it would not move at the exact speed of light , c in vacuum . Its speed would be lower and depend on its frequency . Relativity would be unaffected by this ; the so @-@ called speed of light , c , would then not be the actual speed at which light moves , but a constant of nature which is the maximum speed that any object could theoretically attain in space @-@ time . Thus , it would still be the speed of space @-@ time ripples ( gravitational waves and <unk> ) , but it would not be the speed of photons . 
 If a photon did have non @-@ zero mass , there would be other effects as well . Coulomb 's law would be modified and the electromagnetic field would have an extra physical degree of freedom . These effects yield more sensitive experimental probes of the photon mass than the frequency dependence of the speed of light . If Coulomb 's law is not exactly valid , then that would allow the presence of an electric field to exist within a hollow conductor when it is subjected to an external electric field . This thus allows one to test Coulomb 's law to very high precision . A null result of such an experiment has set a limit of m <unk> 10 − 14 eV / c2 . 
 Sharper upper limits on the speed of light have been obtained in experiments designed to detect effects caused by the galactic vector potential . Although the galactic vector potential is very large because the galactic magnetic field exists on very great length scales , only the magnetic field would be observable if the photon is massless . In the case that the photon has mass , the mass term <formula> would affect the galactic plasma . The fact that no such effects are seen implies an upper bound on the photon mass of m < 3 × 10 − 27 eV / c2 . The galactic vector potential can also be probed directly by measuring the torque exerted on a magnetized ring . Such methods were used to obtain the sharper upper limit of 10 − <unk> / c2 ( the equivalent of 1 @.@ 07 × 10 − 27 atomic mass units ) given by the Particle Data Group . 
 These sharp limits from the non @-@ observation of the effects caused by the galactic vector potential have been shown to be model dependent . If the photon mass is generated via the Higgs mechanism then the upper limit of m <unk> 10 − 14 eV / c2 from the test of Coulomb 's law is valid . 
 Photons inside superconductors do develop a nonzero effective rest mass ; as a result , electromagnetic forces become short @-@ range inside superconductors . 
 = = Historical development = = 
 In most theories up to the eighteenth century , light was pictured as being made up of particles . Since particle models cannot easily account for the refraction , diffraction and birefringence of light , wave theories of light were proposed by René Descartes ( 1637 ) , Robert Hooke ( 1665 ) , and Christiaan Huygens ( 1678 ) ; however , particle models remained dominant , chiefly due to the influence of Isaac Newton . In the early nineteenth century , Thomas Young and August Fresnel clearly demonstrated the interference and diffraction of light and by 1850 wave models were generally accepted . In 1865 , James Clerk Maxwell 's prediction that light was an electromagnetic wave — which was confirmed experimentally in 1888 by Heinrich Hertz 's detection of radio waves — seemed to be the final blow to particle models of light . 
 The Maxwell wave theory , however , does not account for all properties of light . The Maxwell theory predicts that the energy of a light wave depends only on its intensity , not on its frequency ; nevertheless , several independent types of experiments show that the energy imparted by light to atoms depends only on the light 's frequency , not on its intensity . For example , some chemical reactions are provoked only by light of frequency higher than a certain threshold ; light of frequency lower than the threshold , no matter how intense , does not initiate the reaction . Similarly , electrons can be ejected from a metal plate by shining light of sufficiently high frequency on it ( the photoelectric effect ) ; the energy of the ejected electron is related only to the light 's frequency , not to its intensity . 
 At the same time , investigations of blackbody radiation carried out over four decades ( 1860 – 1900 ) by various researchers culminated in Max Planck 's hypothesis that the energy of any system that absorbs or emits electromagnetic radiation of frequency ν is an integer multiple of an energy quantum E 
 = <unk> . As shown by Albert Einstein , some form of energy quantization must be assumed to account for the thermal equilibrium observed between matter and electromagnetic radiation ; for this explanation of the photoelectric effect , Einstein received the 1921 Nobel Prize in physics . 
 Since the Maxwell theory of light allows for all possible energies of electromagnetic radiation , most physicists assumed initially that the energy quantization resulted from some unknown constraint on the matter that absorbs or emits the radiation . In 1905 , Einstein was the first to propose that energy quantization was a property of electromagnetic radiation itself . Although he accepted the validity of Maxwell 's theory , Einstein pointed out that many anomalous experiments could be explained if the energy of a Maxwellian light wave were localized into point @-@ like quanta that move independently of one another , even if the wave itself is spread continuously over space . In 1909 and 1916 , Einstein showed that , if Planck 's law of black @-@ body radiation is accepted , the energy quanta must also carry momentum p = 
 h / λ , making them full @-@ fledged particles . This photon momentum was observed experimentally by Arthur Compton , for which he received the Nobel Prize in 1927 . The pivotal question was then : how to unify Maxwell 's wave theory of light with its experimentally observed particle nature ? The answer to this question occupied Albert Einstein for the rest of his life , and was solved in quantum electrodynamics and its successor , the Standard Model ( see Second quantization and The photon as a gauge boson , below ) . 
 = = Einstein 's light quantum = = 
 Unlike Planck , Einstein entertained the possibility that there might be actual physical quanta of light — what we now call photons . He noticed that a light quantum with energy proportional to its frequency would explain a number of troubling puzzles and paradoxes , including an unpublished law by Stokes , the ultraviolet catastrophe , and the photoelectric effect . Stokes 's law said simply that the frequency of fluorescent light cannot be greater than the frequency of the light ( usually ultraviolet ) inducing it . Einstein eliminated the ultraviolet catastrophe by imagining a gas of photons behaving like a gas of electrons that he had previously considered . He was advised by a colleague to be careful how he wrote up this paper , in order to not challenge Planck , a powerful figure in physics , too directly , and indeed the warning was justified , as Planck never forgave him for writing it . 
 = = Early objections = = 
 Einstein 's 1905 predictions were verified experimentally in several ways in the first two decades of the 20th century , as recounted in Robert Millikan 's Nobel lecture . However , before Compton 's experiment showed that photons carried momentum proportional to their wave number ( 1922 ) , most physicists were reluctant to believe that electromagnetic radiation itself might be particulate . ( See , for example , the Nobel lectures of Wien , Planck and Millikan . ) Instead , there was a widespread belief that energy quantization resulted from some unknown constraint on the matter that absorbed or emitted radiation . Attitudes changed over time . In part , the change can be traced to experiments such as Compton scattering , where it was much more difficult not to ascribe quantization to light itself to explain the observed results . 
 Even after Compton 's experiment , Niels Bohr , Hendrik Kramers and John Slater made one last attempt to preserve the Maxwellian continuous electromagnetic field model of light , the so @-@ called BKS model . To account for the data then available , two drastic hypotheses had to be made : 
 Energy and momentum are conserved only on the average in interactions between matter and radiation , but not in elementary processes such as absorption and emission . This allows one to reconcile the discontinuously changing energy of the atom ( the jump between energy states ) with the continuous release of energy as radiation . 
 <unk> is abandoned . For example , spontaneous emissions are merely emissions stimulated by a " virtual " electromagnetic field . 
 However , refined Compton experiments showed that energy – momentum is conserved extraordinarily well in elementary processes ; and also that the jolting of the electron and the generation of a new photon in Compton scattering obey causality to within 10 ps . Accordingly , Bohr and his co @-@ workers gave their model " as honorable a funeral as possible " . Nevertheless , the failures of the BKS model inspired Werner Heisenberg in his development of matrix mechanics . 
 A few physicists persisted in developing semiclassical models in which electromagnetic radiation is not quantized , but matter appears to obey the laws of quantum mechanics . Although the evidence from chemical and physical experiments for the existence of photons was overwhelming by the 1970s , this evidence could not be considered as absolutely definitive ; since it relied on the interaction of light with matter , and a sufficiently complete theory of matter could in principle account for the evidence . Nevertheless , all semiclassical theories were refuted definitively in the 1970s and 1980s by photon @-@ correlation experiments . Hence , Einstein 's hypothesis that quantization is a property of light itself is considered to be proven . 
 = = Wave – particle duality and uncertainty principles = = 
 Photons , like all quantum objects , exhibit wave @-@ like and particle @-@ like properties . Their dual wave – particle nature can be difficult to visualize . The photon displays clearly wave @-@ like phenomena such as diffraction and interference on the length scale of its wavelength . For example , a single photon passing through a double @-@ slit experiment exhibits interference phenomena but only if no measure was made at the slit . A single photon passing through a double @-@ slit experiment lands on the screen with a probability distribution given by its interference pattern determined by Maxwell 's equations . However , experiments confirm that the photon is not a short pulse of electromagnetic radiation ; it does not spread out as it propagates , nor does it divide when it encounters a beam splitter . Rather , the photon seems to be a point @-@ like particle since it is absorbed or emitted as a whole by arbitrarily small systems , systems much smaller than its wavelength , such as an atomic nucleus ( ≈ 10 − 15 m across ) or even the point @-@ like electron . Nevertheless , the photon is not a point @-@ like particle whose trajectory is shaped <unk> by the electromagnetic field , as conceived by Einstein and others ; that hypothesis was also refuted by the photon @-@ correlation experiments cited above . According to our present understanding , the electromagnetic field itself is produced by photons , which in turn result from a local gauge symmetry and the laws of quantum field theory ( see the Second quantization and Gauge boson sections below ) . 
 A key element of quantum mechanics is Heisenberg 's uncertainty principle , which forbids the simultaneous measurement of the position and momentum of a particle along the same direction . Remarkably , the uncertainty principle for charged , material particles requires the quantization of light into photons , and even the frequency dependence of the photon 's energy and momentum . 
 An elegant illustration of the uncertainty principle is Heisenberg 's thought experiment for locating an electron with an ideal microscope . The position of the electron can be determined to within the resolving power of the microscope , which is given by a formula from classical optics 
 <formula> 
 where θ is the aperture angle of the microscope and λ is the wavelength of the light used to observe the electron . Thus , the position uncertainty <formula> can be made arbitrarily small by reducing the wavelength λ . Even if the momentum of the electron is initially known , the light impinging on the electron will give it a momentum " kick " <formula> of some unknown amount , rendering the momentum of the electron uncertain . If light were not quantized into photons , the uncertainty <formula> could be made arbitrarily small by reducing the light 's intensity . In that case , since the wavelength and intensity of light can be varied independently , one could simultaneously determine the position and momentum to arbitrarily high accuracy , violating the uncertainty principle . By contrast , Einstein 's formula for photon momentum preserves the uncertainty principle ; since the photon is scattered anywhere within the aperture , the uncertainty of momentum transferred equals 
 <formula> 
 giving the product <formula> , which is Heisenberg 's uncertainty principle . Thus , the entire world is quantized ; both matter and fields must obey a consistent set of quantum laws , if either one is to be quantized . 
 The analogous uncertainty principle for photons forbids the simultaneous measurement of the number <formula> of photons ( see Fock state and the Second quantization section below ) in an electromagnetic wave and the phase <formula> of that wave 
 <formula> 
 See coherent state and squeezed coherent state for more details . 
 Both photons and electrons create analogous interference patterns when passed through a double @-@ slit experiment . For photons , this corresponds to the interference of a Maxwell light wave whereas , for material particles ( electron ) , this corresponds to the interference of the Schrödinger wave equation . Although this similarity might suggest that Maxwell 's equations describing the photon 's electromagnetic wave are simply Schrödinger 's equation for photons , most physicists do not agree . For one thing , they are mathematically different ; most obviously , Schrödinger 's one equation for the electron solves for a complex field , whereas Maxwell 's four equations solve for real fields . More generally , the normal concept of a Schrödinger probability wave function cannot be applied to photons . As photons are massless , they cannot be localized without being destroyed ; technically , photons cannot have a position eigenstate <formula> , and , thus , the normal Heisenberg uncertainty principle <formula> does not pertain to photons . A few substitute wave functions have been suggested for the photon , but they have not come into general use . Instead , physicists generally accept the second @-@ quantized theory of photons described below , quantum electrodynamics , in which photons are quantized excitations of electromagnetic modes . 
 Another interpretation , that avoids duality , is the De Broglie – Bohm theory : known also as the pilot @-@ wave model . In that theory , the photon is both , wave and particle . " This idea seems to me so natural and simple , to resolve the wave @-@ particle dilemma in such a clear and ordinary way , that it is a great mystery to me that it was so generally ignored " , <unk> 
 = = Bose – Einstein model of a photon gas = = 
 In 1924 , Satyendra Nath Bose derived Planck 's law of black @-@ body radiation without using any electromagnetism , but rather by using a modification of coarse @-@ grained counting of phase space . Einstein showed that this modification is equivalent to assuming that photons are rigorously identical and that it implied a " mysterious non @-@ local interaction " , now understood as the requirement for a symmetric quantum mechanical state . This work led to the concept of coherent states and the development of the laser . In the same papers , Einstein extended Bose 's formalism to material particles ( bosons ) and predicted that they would condense into their lowest quantum state at low enough temperatures ; this Bose – Einstein condensation was observed experimentally in 1995 . It was later used by Lene Hau to slow , and then completely stop , light in 1999 and 2001 . 
 The modern view on this is that photons are , by virtue of their integer spin , bosons ( as opposed to fermions with half @-@ integer spin ) . By the spin @-@ statistics theorem , all bosons obey Bose – Einstein statistics ( whereas all fermions obey Fermi – Dirac statistics ) . 
 = = Stimulated and spontaneous emission = = 
 In 1916 , Einstein showed that Planck 's radiation law could be derived from a semi @-@ classical , statistical treatment of photons and atoms , which implies a link between the rates at which atoms emit and absorb photons . The condition follows from the assumption that functions of the emission and absorption of radiation by the atoms are independent of each other , and that thermal equilibrium is made by way of the radiation 's interaction with the atoms . Consider a cavity in thermal equilibrium with all parts of itself and filled with electromagnetic radiation and that the atoms can emit and absorb that radiation . Thermal equilibrium requires that the energy density <formula> of photons with frequency <formula> ( which is proportional to their number density ) is , on average , constant in time ; hence , the rate at which photons of any particular frequency are emitted must equal the rate at which they absorb them . 
 Einstein began by postulating simple proportionality relations for the different reaction rates involved . In his model , the rate <formula> for a system to absorb a photon of frequency <formula> and transition from a lower energy <formula> to a higher energy <formula> is proportional to the number <formula> of atoms with energy <formula> and to the energy density <formula> of ambient photons of that frequency , 
 <formula> 
 where <formula> is the rate constant for absorption . For the reverse process , there are two possibilities : spontaneous emission of a photon , or the emission of a photon initiated by the interaction of the atom with a passing photon and the return of the atom to the lower @-@ energy state . Following Einstein 's approach , the corresponding rate <formula> for the emission of photons of frequency <formula> and transition from a higher energy <formula> to a lower energy <formula> is 
 <formula> 
 where <formula> is the rate constant for emitting a photon spontaneously , and <formula> is the rate constant for emissions in response to ambient photons ( induced or stimulated emission ) . In thermodynamic equilibrium , the number of atoms in state i and those in state j must , on average , be constant ; hence , the rates <formula> and <formula> must be equal . Also , by arguments analogous to the derivation of Boltzmann statistics , the ratio of <formula> and <formula> is <formula> where <formula> are the degeneracy of the state i and that of j , respectively , <formula> their energies , k the Boltzmann constant and T the system 's temperature . From this , it is readily derived that <formula> and 
 <formula> 
 The A and Bs are collectively known as the Einstein coefficients . 
 Einstein could not fully justify his rate equations , but claimed that it should be possible to calculate the coefficients <formula> , <formula> and <formula> once physicists had obtained " mechanics and electrodynamics modified to accommodate the quantum hypothesis " . In fact , in 1926 , Paul Dirac derived the <formula> rate constants by using a semiclassical approach , and , in 1927 , succeeded in deriving all the rate constants from first principles within the framework of quantum theory . Dirac 's work was the foundation of quantum electrodynamics , i.e. , the quantization of the electromagnetic field itself . Dirac 's approach is also called second quantization or quantum field theory ; earlier quantum mechanical treatments only treat material particles as quantum mechanical , not the electromagnetic field . 
 Einstein was troubled by the fact that his theory seemed incomplete , since it did not determine the direction of a spontaneously emitted photon . A probabilistic nature of light @-@ particle motion was first considered by Newton in his treatment of birefringence and , more generally , of the splitting of light beams at interfaces into a transmitted beam and a reflected beam . Newton hypothesized that hidden variables in the light particle determined which of the two paths a single photon would take . Similarly , Einstein hoped for a more complete theory that would leave nothing to chance , beginning his separation from quantum mechanics . Ironically , Max Born 's probabilistic interpretation of the wave function was inspired by Einstein 's later work searching for a more complete theory . 
 = = Second quantization and high energy photon interactions = = 
 In 1910 , Peter Debye derived Planck 's law of black @-@ body radiation from a relatively simple assumption . He correctly decomposed the electromagnetic field in a cavity into its Fourier modes , and assumed that the energy in any mode was an integer multiple of <formula> , where <formula> is the frequency of the electromagnetic mode . Planck 's law of black @-@ body radiation follows immediately as a geometric sum . However , Debye 's approach failed to give the correct formula for the energy fluctuations of blackbody radiation , which were derived by Einstein in 1909 . 
 In 1925 , Born , Heisenberg and Jordan reinterpreted Debye 's concept in a key way . As may be shown classically , the Fourier modes of the electromagnetic field — a complete set of electromagnetic plane waves indexed by their wave vector k and polarization state — are equivalent to a set of uncoupled simple harmonic oscillators . Treated quantum mechanically , the energy levels of such oscillators are known to be <formula> , where <formula> is the oscillator frequency . The key new step was to identify an electromagnetic mode with energy <formula> as a state with <formula> photons , each of energy <formula> . This approach gives the correct energy fluctuation formula . 
 Dirac took this one step further . He treated the interaction between a charge and an electromagnetic field as a small perturbation that induces transitions in the photon states , changing the numbers of photons in the modes , while conserving energy and momentum overall . Dirac was able to derive Einstein 's <formula> and <formula> coefficients from first principles , and showed that the Bose – Einstein statistics of photons is a natural consequence of quantizing the electromagnetic field correctly ( Bose 's reasoning went in the opposite direction ; he derived Planck 's law of black @-@ body radiation by assuming B – E statistics ) . In Dirac 's time , it was not yet known that all bosons , including photons , must obey Bose – Einstein statistics . 
 Dirac 's second @-@ order perturbation theory can involve virtual photons , transient intermediate states of the electromagnetic field ; the static electric and magnetic interactions are mediated by such virtual photons . In such quantum field theories , the probability amplitude of observable events is calculated by summing over all possible intermediate steps , even ones that are unphysical ; hence , virtual photons are not constrained to satisfy <formula> , and may have extra polarization states ; depending on the gauge used , virtual photons may have three or four polarization states , instead of the two states of real photons . Although these transient virtual photons can never be observed , they contribute measurably to the probabilities of observable events . Indeed , such second @-@ order and higher @-@ order perturbation calculations can give apparently infinite contributions to the sum . Such unphysical results are corrected for using the technique of renormalization . 
 Other virtual particles may contribute to the summation as well ; for example , two photons may interact indirectly through virtual electron – positron pairs . In fact , such photon @-@ photon scattering ( see two @-@ photon physics ) , as well as electron @-@ photon scattering , is meant to be one of the modes of operations of the planned particle accelerator , the International Linear Collider . 
 In modern physics notation , the quantum state of the electromagnetic field is written as a Fock state , a tensor product of the states for each electromagnetic mode 
 <formula> 
 where <formula> represents the state in which <formula> photons are in the mode <formula> . In this notation , the creation of a new photon in mode <formula> ( e.g. , emitted from an atomic transition ) is written as <formula> . This notation merely expresses the concept of Born , Heisenberg and Jordan described above , and does not add any physics . 
 = = The <unk> properties of the photon = = 
 Measurements of the interaction between energetic photons and hadrons show that the interaction is much more intense than expected by the interaction of merely photons with the hadron 's electric charge . Furthermore , the interaction of energetic photons with protons is similar to the interaction of photons with neutrons in spite of the fact that the electric charge structures of protons and neutrons are substantially different . A theory called Vector Meson Dominance ( <unk> ) was developed to explain this effect . According to <unk> , the photon is a superposition of the pure electromagnetic photon which interacts only with electric charges and vector meson . However , if experimentally probed at very short distances , the intrinsic structure of the photon is recognized as a flux of quark and gluon components , quasi @-@ free according to asymptotic freedom in QCD and described by the photon structure function . A comprehensive comparison of data with theoretical predictions is presented in a recent review . 
 = = The photon as a gauge boson = = 
 The electromagnetic field can be understood as a gauge field , i.e. , as a field that results from requiring that a gauge symmetry holds independently at every position in spacetime . For the electromagnetic field , this gauge symmetry is the Abelian U ( 1 ) symmetry of complex numbers of absolute value 1 , which reflects the ability to vary the phase of a complex field without affecting observables or real valued functions made from it , such as the energy or the Lagrangian . 
 The quanta of an Abelian gauge field must be massless , uncharged bosons , as long as the symmetry is not broken ; hence , the photon is predicted to be massless , and to have zero electric charge and integer spin . The particular form of the electromagnetic interaction specifies that the photon must have spin ± 1 ; thus , its helicity must be <formula> . These two spin components correspond to the classical concepts of right @-@ handed and left @-@ handed circularly polarized light . However , the transient virtual photons of quantum electrodynamics may also adopt unphysical polarization states . 
 In the prevailing Standard Model of physics , the photon is one of four gauge bosons in the electroweak interaction ; the other three are denoted W + , W − and Z0 and are responsible for the weak interaction . Unlike the photon , these gauge bosons have mass , owing to a mechanism that breaks their SU ( 2 ) gauge symmetry . The unification of the photon with W and Z gauge bosons in the electroweak interaction was accomplished by Sheldon Glashow , Abdus Salam and Steven Weinberg , for which they were awarded the 1979 Nobel Prize in physics . Physicists continue to hypothesize grand unified theories that connect these four gauge bosons with the eight gluon gauge bosons of quantum chromodynamics ; however , key predictions of these theories , such as proton decay , have not been observed experimentally . 
 = = Contributions to the mass of a system = = 
 The energy of a system that emits a photon is decreased by the energy <formula> of the photon as measured in the rest frame of the emitting system , which may result in a reduction in mass in the amount <formula> . Similarly , the mass of a system that absorbs a photon is increased by a corresponding amount . As an application , the energy balance of nuclear reactions involving photons is commonly written in terms of the masses of the nuclei involved , and terms of the form <formula> for the gamma photons ( and for other relevant energies , such as the recoil energy of nuclei ) . 
 This concept is applied in key predictions of quantum electrodynamics ( QED , see above ) . In that theory , the mass of electrons ( or , more generally , leptons ) is modified by including the mass contributions of virtual photons , in a technique known as renormalization . Such " radiative corrections " contribute to a number of predictions of QED , such as the magnetic dipole moment of leptons , the Lamb shift , and the hyperfine structure of bound lepton pairs , such as <unk> and positronium . 
 Since photons contribute to the stress – energy tensor , they exert a gravitational attraction on other objects , according to the theory of general relativity . Conversely , photons are themselves affected by gravity ; their normally straight trajectories may be bent by warped spacetime , as in gravitational lensing , and their frequencies may be lowered by moving to a higher gravitational potential , as in the Pound – Rebka experiment . However , these effects are not specific to photons ; exactly the same effects would be predicted for classical electromagnetic waves . 
 = = Photons in matter = = 
 Light that travels through transparent matter does so at a lower speed than c , the speed of light in a vacuum . For example , photons engage in so many collisions on the way from the core of the sun that radiant energy can take about a million years to reach the surface ; however , once in open space , a photon takes only 8 @.@ 3 minutes to reach Earth . The factor by which the speed is decreased is called the refractive index of the material . In a classical wave picture , the slowing can be explained by the light inducing electric polarization in the matter , the polarized matter radiating new light , and that new light interfering with the original light wave to form a delayed wave . In a particle picture , the slowing can instead be described as a blending of the photon with quantum excitations of the matter to produce quasi @-@ particles known as <unk> ( other quasi @-@ particles are phonons and excitons ) ; this <unk> has a nonzero effective mass , which means that it cannot travel at c . Light of different frequencies may travel through matter at different speeds ; this is called dispersion ( not to be confused with scattering ) . In some cases , it can result in extremely slow speeds of light in matter . The effects of photon interactions with other quasi @-@ particles may be observed directly in Raman scattering and Brillouin scattering . 
 Photons can also be absorbed by nuclei , atoms or molecules , provoking transitions between their energy levels . A classic example is the molecular transition of retinal ( <unk> ) , which is responsible for vision , as discovered in 1958 by Nobel laureate biochemist George Wald and co @-@ workers . The absorption provokes a cis @-@ trans isomerization that , in combination with other such transitions , is transduced into nerve impulses . The absorption of photons can even break chemical bonds , as in the photodissociation of chlorine ; this is the subject of photochemistry . 
 = = Technological applications = = 
 Photons have many applications in technology . These examples are chosen to illustrate applications of photons per se , rather than general optical devices such as lenses , etc. that could operate under a classical theory of light . The laser is an extremely important application and is discussed above under stimulated emission . 
 Individual photons can be detected by several methods . The classic photomultiplier tube exploits the photoelectric effect : a photon of sufficient energy strikes a metal plate and knocks free an electron , initiating an ever @-@ amplifying avalanche of electrons . Semiconductor charge @-@ coupled device chips use a similar effect : an incident photon generates a charge on a microscopic capacitor that can be detected . Other detectors such as Geiger counters use the ability of photons to ionize gas molecules contained in the device , causing a detectable change of conductivity of the gas . 
 Planck 's energy formula <formula> is often used by engineers and chemists in design , both to compute the change in energy resulting from a photon absorption and to determine the frequency of the light emitted from a given photon emission . For example , the emission spectrum of a gas @-@ discharge lamp can be altered by filling it with ( mixtures of ) gases with different electronic energy level configurations . 
 Under some conditions , an energy transition can be excited by " two " photons that individually would be insufficient . This allows for higher resolution microscopy , because the sample absorbs energy only in the spectrum where two beams of different colors overlap significantly , which can be made much smaller than the excitation volume of a single beam ( see two @-@ photon excitation microscopy ) . Moreover , these photons cause less damage to the sample , since they are of lower energy . 
 In some cases , two energy transitions can be coupled so that , as one system absorbs a photon , another nearby system " steals " its energy and re @-@ emits a photon of a different frequency . This is the basis of fluorescence resonance energy transfer , a technique that is used in molecular biology to study the interaction of suitable proteins . 
 Several different kinds of hardware random number generators involve the detection of single photons . In one example , for each bit in the random sequence that is to be produced , a photon is sent to a beam @-@ splitter . In such a situation , there are two possible outcomes of equal probability . The actual outcome is used to determine whether the next bit in the sequence is " 0 " or " 1 " . 
 = = Recent research = = 
 Much research has been devoted to applications of photons in the field of quantum optics . Photons seem well @-@ suited to be elements of an extremely fast quantum computer , and the quantum entanglement of photons is a focus of research . Nonlinear optical processes are another active research area , with topics such as two @-@ photon absorption , self @-@ phase modulation , <unk> instability and optical parametric oscillators . However , such processes generally do not require the assumption of photons per se ; they may often be modeled by treating atoms as nonlinear oscillators . The nonlinear process of spontaneous parametric down conversion is often used to produce single @-@ photon states . Finally , photons are essential in some aspects of optical communication , especially for quantum cryptography . 
 = = Additional references = = 
 = Common torpedo = 
 The common torpedo , <unk> torpedo , or eyed electric ray ( Torpedo torpedo ) is a species of electric ray in the family Torpedinidae , found in the Mediterranean Sea and the eastern Atlantic Ocean from the Bay of Biscay to Angola . It is a benthic fish typically encountered over soft substrates in fairly shallow , coastal waters . Growing to 60 cm ( 24 in ) long , this species has a nearly circular pectoral fin disc and a short , thick tail with two dorsal fins of nearly equal size and a large caudal fin . It can be identified by the prominent blue spots on its back , which usually number five but may vary from zero to nine , as well as by the small knobs on the rims of its spiracles . 
 For attack and defense , the common torpedo can deliver a strong electric shock of up to 200 volts . It is a solitary , nocturnal ambush predator that feeds mainly on bony fishes and crustaceans . This species is aplacental viviparous , with the developing embryos nourished by yolk and histotroph ( " uterine milk " ) produced by the mother . Females produce litters of up to 28 young every year in late summer or autumn , after a gestation period of 4 – 8 months ; the specifics vary between geographical regions . The common torpedo 's shock is painful but otherwise of little danger to humans . Its electrogenic properties led it to be used in medicine by the ancient Greeks and Romans . In modern times , it has no economic value and is mostly discarded when caught as bycatch in fisheries . The impact of fishing on its population is uncertain , and pending more data the International Union for Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) has listed it as Data Deficient . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The common torpedo and other electric rays were familiar to the peoples of classical antiquity . Torpedo was the Roman name for electric rays , derived from Latin <unk> meaning " to be numb " . Carl Linnaeus , known as the " father of taxonomy " , scientifically described the common torpedo as Raja torpedo in the 1758 tenth edition of his Systema Naturae . However , the common torpedo also appeared in at least 52 pre @-@ Linnaean sources under various names such as Torpedo , Raja tota <unk> , Torpedo maculosa , and Torpedo <unk> <unk> . These early accounts , including Linnaeus 's , confounded the common torpedo with other electric ray species . As Linnaeus did not indicate any type specimens , the designation of a lectotype or neotype is warranted in the interest of taxonomic stability . This measure has yet to be taken . 
 André Marie Constant Duméril was the first author to refer to Torpedo as a genus , in his 1806 Zoologie analytique , ou méthode naturelle de classification des animaux . Duméril did not name any Torpedo species ; the first author to do so was probably Charles Lucien Bonaparte , who assigned Linnaeus 's Raja torpedo to the genus Torpedo in 1838 . Since at the time T. torpedo was the only member of the genus , it became the type species . Within the genus Torpedo , the common torpedo is placed within the subgenus Torpedo , which differs from the other subgenus Tetronarce in having spiracles with papillate rims and ornate dorsal coloration . This species may also be referred colloquially to as crampfish , cramp ray , or torpedo ray . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 Native to the eastern Atlantic Ocean , the common torpedo occurs from the Bay of Biscay to Angola , including all around the Mediterranean Sea . A single record from Belgian waters was most likely erroneous . In European waters , it is encountered less frequently than other electric ray species . This species prefers warmer temperatures . It is rare north of the Mediterranean , and within the Mediterranean it is more common off North Africa than off southern Europe . The common torpedo is a bottom @-@ dweller usually found close to shore at depths of 2 – 70 m ( 6 @.@ 6 – 229 @.@ 7 ft ) , though it has occasionally been reported from as deep as 400 m ( 1 @,@ 300 ft ) . It inhabits soft @-@ bottomed habitats such as sandy flats and seagrass beds . 
 = = Description = = 
 The pectoral fin disc of the common torpedo is almost circular in shape and about 1 @.@ 3 – 1 @.@ 4 times wider than long . The front margin of the disc is nearly straight . The two large , kidney @-@ shaped electric organs are visible beneath the skin on either side of the head . The eyes are small and followed by spiracles of comparable size . The lateral and posterior rims of the spiracles bear small , low knobs , which diminish in size with age and may be indiscernible in larger individuals . On the " nape " behind the spiracles , there is a pair of prominent mucous pores . There is a wide , quadrangular flap of skin between the nostrils that almost reaches the mouth . The teeth are small and arranged in a dense quincunx pattern ; each tooth has a single sharp cusp . There are around 22 – 24 and 20 – 22 tooth rows in the upper and lower jaws respectively . The five pairs of gill slits are placed on the underside of the disc . 
 The pelvic fins are distinct from the disc and have rounded outer margins . The short and thick tail bears skin folds along either side and two dorsal fins on top . The first dorsal fin is slightly larger than the second . The well @-@ developed caudal fin is triangular with blunt corners , and is approximately as long as the space between it and first dorsal fin . The skin is smooth and soft , entirely lacking dermal denticles . The dorsal coloration of the common torpedo is light to dark brown , with distinctive large spots ( " ocellae " ) on the disc ; each ocellus is blue and encircled by darker and lighter rings . Typically there are five ocellae arranged symmetrically in a row of three and another of two ; rays with 0 – 4 ocellae are less common , and those with more than five are rarer still . An unusual male with eight ocellae was caught off Tunisia , and another with nine off southern France . When present , the sixth ocellus is similarly sized to the first five and positioned at their center ; any additional ocellae tend to be smaller than the first six and placed asymmetrically towards the snout . The underside is cream @-@ colored , with dark disc margins . An adult albino female was captured off Tunisia . Males and females typically measure 30 and 39 cm ( 12 and 15 in ) long respectively ; the largest individual on record was 60 cm ( 24 in ) long . Rays from off West Africa grow larger than those from the Mediterranean . 
 = = Biology and ecology = = 
 As with other members of its family , the common torpedo can subdue prey and deter threats with strong electric shocks generated from a pair of large electric organs . Derived from muscle tissue , each organ is made up of 400 – 500 columns , each column constituting a stack of around 400 jelly @-@ filled disks ( " <unk> " ) . The columns together essentially act as batteries connected in parallel . The discharge of the electric organs can reach 200 volts , and may occur singly or in bursts ( " trains " ) . Experiments in vitro have found that the nerves <unk> the electric organ essentially stop functioning at temperatures below 15 ° C ( 59 ° F ) . Winter water temperatures regularly drop below this threshold in the wild , suggesting the ray may not use its electric organs for part of the year , or has a yet @-@ unknown physiological mechanism to adapt electric organ function to colder conditions . 
 Solitary and nocturnal , the common torpedo spends much time resting on the sea floor , often buried in sediment . It is an ambush predator that pounces onto prey and stuns them with electricity , the process taking only a fraction of a second . Once the prey is immobilized , it is manipulated to the mouth with motions of the disc , and swallowed whole . Adults feed almost entirely on small benthic bony fishes , including soles , herring , mullet , gobies , <unk> , porgies , <unk> , and jack mackerels . Large decapod crustaceans are a minor secondary food source , while very rarely skates may be consumed . Juveniles are less exclusively piscivorous than the adults and feed on a variety of invertebrates as well . The most significant prey species differ between seasons and geographic regions . For example , in the Tyrrhenian Sea , juvenile common sole ( Solea <unk> ) are by far the most important prey item in autumn and winter , but in spring and summer they become less available and other fishes figure more prominently in the ray 's diet . Known parasites of this species include the tapeworm Phyllobothrium lactuca , and the monogeneans Amphibdella <unk> and Amphibdelloides <unk> . 
 = = = Life history = = = 
 The common torpedo is aplacental viviparous , in which the embryos are sustained by yolk , supplemented by histotroph ( " uterine milk " ) secreted by the mother . However , the organic content of the histotroph in this species is only 1 @.@ 2 % , much lower than in stingrays , and the embryo loses mass over the course of development as its initial yolk supply is expended for metabolic processes . Adult females have two functional ovaries and two functional uteruses , though the reproductive tract on the right side is more developed and consequently tends to carry more embryos . It has an annual reproductive cycle with well @-@ defined seasonality , though the details differ between geographic regions . In the Mediterranean , mating occurs from December to February and birthing from late August to early September after a gestation period of 4 – 6 months ; litter sizes range up to 19 and the newborns measure 8 @.@ 0 – 9 @.@ 7 cm ( 3 @.@ 1 – 3 @.@ 8 in ) long . By contrast , off West Africa the gestation period lasts 6 – 8 months and birthing occurs from September to October ; litter sizes range up to 28 and the newborns measure 10 @.@ 2 – 12 @.@ 5 cm ( 4 @.@ 0 – 4 @.@ 9 in ) long . The litter size increases with female size . 
 Sexual segregation occurs during the breeding season as pregnant females move into shallow coastal waters . The common torpedo is unusual among sharks and rays in that birthing has been documented both at higher and at lower salinities than seawater , in estuaries and lagoons . Immediately after birth , this species is capable of producing electric shocks of up to four volts . Newborns grow rapidly , with a commensurate increase in electrogenic capacity : after four months , they almost double in weight and can generate 26 volts . Males and females mature sexually at similar lengths : 25 and 26 cm ( 9 @.@ 8 and 10 @.@ 2 in ) respectively in the Tyrrhenian Sea , 18 and 22 cm ( 7 @.@ 1 and 8 @.@ 7 in ) respectively off Egypt , 19 cm ( 7 @.@ 5 in ) for both off Tunisia , and 30 and 31 cm ( 12 and 12 in ) respectively off Senegal . 
 = = Human interactions = = 
 The electric shock of the common torpedo can be severe , but is not life @-@ threatening . In classical antiquity , the electrogenic properties of this species led it ( and other strongly electric fishes ) to be used in medicine for the treatment of pain and diseases such as gout . For example , the Roman physician Scribonius Largus , in his <unk> <unk> ( c . 50 AD ) , recommended that chronic headaches be treated by the application of a live torpedo to the affected area . The common torpedo is edible , but is little @-@ valued by commercial or artisanal fisheries and is mostly discarded when caught . Because of its shallow @-@ water habits , it may survive being captured and discarded relatively well . It is susceptible to several types of demersal fishing gear , including bottom trawls and trammel nets ; fishing activity is heavy within its range but no specific data regarding this species are available . As a result , the International Union for Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) has listed it under Data Deficient . The common torpedo has been kept in aquariums , but requires live fish for food . 
 = Valérian and Laureline = 
 Valérian and Laureline ( French : Valérian et Laureline ) , also known as Valérian : Spatio @-@ Temporal Agent ( French : Valérian , agent spatio @-@ <unk> ) or just Valérian , is a French science fiction comics series , created by writer Pierre Christin and artist Jean @-@ Claude Mézières . First published in Pilote magazine in 1967 , the final installment was published in 2010 . All of the Valérian stories have been collected in graphic novel album format , comprising some twenty @-@ one volumes plus a short story collection and an encyclopaedia . Valérian is one of the top five biggest selling Franco @-@ Belgian comics titles of its publisher , Dargaud . 
 The series focuses on the adventures of the dark @-@ haired Valérian , a spatio @-@ temporal agent , and his redheaded female colleague , Laureline , as they travel the universe through space and time . Valérian is a classical hero , kind @-@ hearted , strong and brave who follows the orders of his superiors even if he feels , deep down , that it is the wrong thing to do . On the other hand , his partner Laureline combines her superior intelligence , determination and independence with sex @-@ appeal . Influenced by classic literary science fiction , the series mixes space opera with time travel plots . Christin 's scripts are noted for their humour , complexity and strongly humanist and left @-@ wing liberal political ideas while Mézières ' art is characterised by its vivid depictions of the alien worlds and species Valérian and Laureline encounter on their adventures . The series is considered a landmark in European comics and pop culture , and influenced other media as well : traces of its concepts , storylines and designs can be found on science fiction films such as Star Wars , The Fifth Element , and Avatar . 
 Many of the stories have been translated into several languages , including English . The series has received recognition through a number of prestigious awards , including the Grand Prix de la ville d 'Angoulême . An animated television series , Time Jam : Valerian & Laureline , was released in 2007 . 
 = = Concept and setting = = 
 The original setting for the series was the 28th century . Humanity has discovered the means of travelling instantaneously in time and space . The capital of Earth , Galaxity , is the centre of the vast Terran Galactic Empire . Earth itself has become a virtual utopia with most of the population living a life of leisure in a virtual reality dream @-@ state while ruled by the benign <unk> of the First Circle . The Spatio @-@ Temporal Service protects the planets of the Terran Empire and guards against temporal paradoxes caused by rogue time @-@ travellers . Valérian and Laureline are two such spatio @-@ temporal agents . 
 However , since the end of the story The Wrath of Hypsis ( Les <unk> d <unk> ) in which Galaxity disappears from space @-@ time as a result of a temporal paradox the pair have become freelance trouble @-@ shooters travelling space and time offering their services to anyone willing to hire them while also searching for their lost home . 
 In the first two albums Valérian travels through time in a two @-@ seater device , the <unk> , which transports him to the various relay stations that Galaxity has hidden throughout time ( e.g. in Bad Dreams ( Les <unk> Rêves ) the relay is hidden below a tavern ) . In subsequent stories Valérian and Laureline use the saucer @-@ shaped <unk> <unk> ( which made its debut appearance in 1969 in the short story The Great Collector ( Le Grand <unk> ) . The astroship is able to travel anywhere using a spatio @-@ temporal jump , a sort of hyperspace drive enabling near @-@ instant transportation anywhere in space and time . 
 The initial albums were generally straightforward good versus evil adventure stories that employed a great many well @-@ worn clichés . However , thanks to Pierre Christin 's interests in politics , sociology and ethnology , as the series progressed the situations typically arose from misunderstandings or ideological differences between various groups that could be resolved through reason and perseverance . The core theme of the stories is an optimistic liberal humanism : the adventures are not about defeating enemies but about exploring , facing challenges , and celebrating diversity . Thus , according to academic John Dean , Christin " as a rule works into his narratives political , environmental and feminist concerns – thereby showing social ills are universal , no matter on what planet you land " . 
 Another concept that developed was Galaxity as a proxy for Western democracy ; contrary to its benign self @-@ opinion it is imperialistic and prone to a corrupt real @-@ <unk> . Other themes include : 
 Natural simplicity as superior to technological complexity . 
 Rejection of machismo , violence and war in favour of femininity and nature . 
 Distrust of power and the suppression of individuality . 
 Women being able to manipulate males sexually without being manipulated themselves . 
 These themes are underpinned by the vivid drawings of Jean @-@ Claude Mézières whose " visually stunning backgrounds : complex architecture , futuristic machines , otherworldly landscapes and odd @-@ looking aliens " , are what John Dean calls " staples of Mézières ' seeming boundless visual inventiveness " , resulting in what the artist Pepo Pérez likens to " National Geographic , but on a cosmic scale " . 
 = = Principal characters = = 
 = = = Valérian = = = 
 Valérian was born on Earth , in Galaxity , capital of the Terran Galactic Empire in the 28th century . He joined the Spatio @-@ Temporal Service in the year <unk> . He has been trained to think that Galaxity is always right – even when he receives orders that go against his morals he will , reluctantly , follow them . He much prefers to be a man of action than sitting around pondering what course to take next . 
 The early stories present Valérian as a typical square @-@ jawed hero figure , who is strong and dependable ( although an early running joke was that despite being a time @-@ traveller he is always running late , especially when summoned by his boss ) . However , as the series progresses , he is increasingly portrayed as somewhat knuckle @-@ headed . In World Without Stars ( Le Pays sans <unk> ) , he gets recklessly drunk on the colonists ' home @-@ made booze , in On the False Earths ( Sur les <unk> <unk> ) , the historian , <unk> , views him as useful only as cannon fodder and nothing else while in Heroes of the Equinox ( Les Héros de l <unk> ) , he comes across as woefully inadequate compared with the champions he is competing against . Although devoted to Laureline , he has been led astray by other women , such as in Heroes of the Equinox and Brooklyn Station , Terminus Cosmos . 
 When Galaxity disappears in The Wrath of Hypsis he contemplates following his fellows into oblivion , much to Laureline 's horror . Even afterwards , he feels the loss of Galaxity much more than Laureline , as it is his birthplace . 
 The name Valérian comes from Eastern Europe , although its origin is Latin , from <unk> ( " to be strong " ) . Valérian was created by Mézières and Christin as a reaction to the fearless boy @-@ scout ( e.g. The Adventures of Tintin ) and American superhero characters that were prevalent in comics available in France at the time . Instead they sought to devise a " banal character " with " no extraordinary means of action " . Eventually , with Christin feeling that they had gone too far with this angle and that the Valérian character had become too stupid , from The Ghosts of <unk> ( Les Spectres d <unk> ) onwards , Valérian was made more sympathetic and given a greater piece of the action . 
 = = = Laureline = = = 
 Laureline is a peasant girl from 11th century France . In the debut adventure , Bad Dreams , she rescues Valérian from the enchanted Forest of <unk> . When she accidentally discovers Valérian is a time @-@ traveller , he is forced to bring her back with him to Galaxity where she is trained as a Spatio @-@ Temporal Agent and assigned as his partner . 
 In the early stories Laureline generally sits in the background while Valérian saves the day in whatever situation the pair have found themselves in , but her position changes as the series develops . World Without Stars , in which the two characters are separated for most of the adventure , allows Laureline to step out from under Valérian 's shadow for the first time , and she proves to be more than an equal to Valérian in ensuring that their mission succeeds . 
 Welcome to Alflolol ( Bienvenue sur Alflolol ) brings Laureline 's rebellious nature to the fore ; unlike Valérian , she has not been born and raised by Galaxity and is prepared not only to question Galaxity 's authorities but to rebel openly against them when their orders run contrary to her sense of morality . It also demonstrates her impulsive streak ; she sides with the native <unk> against Galaxity and Valérian with no thought for the personal consequences she may have to face herself . Her position as the true star of the series is cemented in Ambassador of the Shadows ( L <unk> des <unk> ) , which is virtually a solo adventure for her as she searches the vast space station Point Central for the kidnapped Valérian and the Earth Ambassador . Later , when acting as independent agents , it is Laureline who questions the ethics of some of the jobs they are forced to take to make ends meet , notably in The Living Weapons ( Les Armes <unk> ) . 
 Despite being independent and efficacious , Laureline is not afraid to exploit her considerable sex appeal if it is to her advantage . For example , she attracts the attention of the Emperor of <unk> in World Without Stars and , dressed in leather gear and boots , she manipulates <unk> and <unk> in Brooklyn Station , Terminus Cosmos and regularly charms the Shingouz when negotiating with them for information . She has appeared nude in some adventures . Mézières drew a picture of her for the French edition of Playboy in 1987 . 
 She also has a certain affinity for animals such as the <unk> <unk> in Welcome to Alflolol , the Grumpy Converter from <unk> , first seen in Ambassador of the Shadows , and the <unk> <unk> ( de <unk> ) and the <unk> @-@ Tracer , both introduced in On the Frontiers ( Sur les Frontières ) . 
 The name " Laureline " was invented by Mézières and Christin who were seeking a name that would sound " medieval " and " soft " . The name has proven popular and there are now several thousand women in France named Laureline , the first one born in 1968 just a year after the publication of Bad Dreams . There have also been variations such as " <unk> " and " <unk> " . Laureline was initially created just for the first story , Bad Dreams , but recognising that they had a female character who was different from the bimbo types common to comics of the time , Mézières and Christin fell for her and , in response to positive reader feedback , retained her for the subsequent stories . 
 = = = Other characters = = = 
 = = = = Mr Albert = = = = 
 Mr Albert is Galaxity 's contact on 20th century Earth . He makes his first appearance in Métro Châtelet , Direction Cassiopeia . He is a retired gentleman who drives an obsolete Renault <unk> and lives in the suburbs of Paris , France . He maintains a wide range of contacts in government and scientific circles as well as with many experts in fields outside the mainstream such as ufology , telepathy , and sorcery . He is also a pigeon fancier and uses his carrier pigeons to relay messages between some of his contacts . Unlike Valérian he tries to avoid getting involved in the thick of the action and never acts impulsively , always preferring to take his time about things . He enjoys the finer things in life : gourmet cuisine , fine wines and likes to take things easy . 
 The character of Albert is partially influenced by that of August Faust , the main character in the strip The Extraordinary and <unk> Adventure of Mr August Faust ( L 'extraordinaire et <unk> Aventure de M. August Faust ) , written by Fred and drawn by Mézières in 1967 . 
 = = = = The Shingouz = = = = 
 The Shingouz are aliens who make their first appearance in Ambassador of the Shadows and re @-@ appear regularly throughout the subsequent albums . They are brown , short @-@ furred creatures , slightly less than a metre tall , resembling flightless birds with a snout instead of a beak . Their appearance is reminiscent of the main characters in the Mad magazine comic strip Spy vs. Spy . 
 Shingouz have a high alcohol tolerance and preference for strong alcoholic beverages , which they consume in large quantities . The Shingouz society is capitalist to the extreme . Shingouz want a profit from everything they do . They are especially adept in trading important and sensitive information to interested parties . Valérian and Laureline have struck up a relationship with a group of three Shingouz who have a particularly useful network of contacts in all the major space communities . They are especially fond of Laureline , which she often uses to her advantage in striking favourable deals with them . 
 = = Origins = = 
 Childhood friends Jean @-@ Claude Mézières and Pierre Christin had previously collaborated on the comic strip Le Rhum du Punch ( Rum Punch ) in 1966 while both were living and working in the United States . Upon their return to France they initially intended to create a Western strip but , with the genre already well represented in French comics thanks to Lucky Luke , Blueberry and Jerry Spring , Christin instead proposed that they turn their hand to science fiction , a genre he felt was unrepresented in French comics at the time . The decision to work in the science fiction genre was also influenced by the political climate in France at the time ; Mézières and Christin saw Valérian as a " backdoor " means to react against the prevailing doctrine of <unk> . Although science fiction was not a favourite of Pilote editor René Goscinny , Goscinny wanted his magazine to be diverse and innovative and so agreed to commission Valérian . 
 There had been French science fiction comics before Valérian such as Kline 's <unk> the Martian ( a childhood favourite of Mézières ) , Roger <unk> and Raymond <unk> 's Les <unk> de l 'Espérance ( The Pioneers of Hope ) ( which Christin found tired and repetitive ) and Jean @-@ Claude Forest 's Barbarella . Barbarella is famous for its strong , female , titular character , but Christin has denied any influence on the character of Laureline stating that she was inspired by Simone de Beauvoir 's The Second Sex as well as the burgeoning feminist movement of the late 1960s and early 1970s . However , contemporary reviews of the early stories by Jean @-@ Pierre Andrevon describe the books as " <unk> " . Mézières and Christin were also heavily influenced by literary science fiction such as that by Isaac Asimov ( especially The End of Eternity ) , Jack Vance ( especially The Blue World ) , and John Brunner . Jean @-@ Marc and Randy Lofficier have also suggested that Poul Anderson 's Time Patrol books , about an official organization dedicated to protecting time from interference , are a major influence on the series . 
 Christin has also cited the whodunit genre — notably novels by Georges Simenon and Ed McBain — as an influence on Valérian since they taught him , as a writer , that all characters in a narrative must be seen to have motivations . 
 Mézières ' drawings in the early albums were influenced by such " comic @-@ dynamic " artists as Morris ( Lucky Luke ) , André Franquin ( Spirou et Fantasio ) and Jack Davis ( Mad magazine ) , leading Jean @-@ Pierre Andrevon to refer to Valérian as " a kind of Lucky Luke of space @-@ time " . As the series progressed , Mézières developed a more realistic style , akin to that of Jijé , though in more recent albums he has returned to the more cartoonish style of the earlier stories . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 = = = In comics = = = 
 Valérian 's arrival on the French comics scene was contemporaneous with the debuts of other notable French science fiction strips including Luc Orient by Greg and Eddy <unk> and Lone Sloane by Philippe <unk> . The success of these strips would eventually lead to the creation of Métal Hurlant , the highly influential French comics magazine dedicated to science fiction . The influence of Valérian has been noticed in such strips as Dani Futuro ( by Víctor Mora and Carlos Giménez ) and <unk> ( by Mora and José Maria Cardona ) . The visual style of Valérian has also had an impact on some American comics artists , notably Walt Simonson and Gil Kane . Sometimes the impact of Valérian has gone beyond mere influence ; following a complaint by Mézières , the artist Angus McKie admitted that several panels of his strip So Beautiful and So Dangerous were copied from Ambassador of the Shadows . 
 = = = In other media = = = 
 Outside of comics , the Valérian series has been particularly influential on science fiction and fantasy film . 
 Several commentators , such as Kim Thompson of The Comics Journal , film critic Jean @-@ Philippe Guerand and the newspaper Libération , have noted certain similarities between the Valérian albums and the Star Wars film series . Both series are noted for the " lived @-@ in " look given to their various settings and for the diverse alien creatures they feature . Particular instances of similarities between the two series , which the above have cited , include : 
 The design of Valérian and Laureline 's <unk> astroship and the Millennium Falcon spaceship that appears in Episodes III – VII of Star Wars . 
 A scene in There 's No Time Like the Present where Valerian escapes by falling into a laundry washing vat , exits through a portal at the bottom of the vat , and falls out of a hole at the bottom of the space station hanging from a sheet with The Empire Strikes Back where the character Luke Skywalker escapes Darth Vader by falling down a chasm , goes through a vent , and falls out of Cloud City hanging from an antenna . 
 A scene in Empire of a Thousand Planets ( L <unk> des Mille <unk> ) where Valérian is encased in a liquid plastic and a scene in The Empire Strikes Back where the character Han Solo is encased in a substance called carbonite . 
 The slave @-@ girl costume worn by Laureline in World Without Stars and the costume worn by the character Leia Organa in the scenes where she is enslaved by Jabba the Hutt in Return of the Jedi 
 A scene in Empire of a Thousand Planets where one of the Authorities removes his helmet to reveal his burned and scarred face underneath and a scene in Return of the Jedi where the character Darth Vader removes his helmet to reveal the burned face of Anakin Skywalker . 
 The alien Shingouz and the <unk> character Watto seen in The Phantom Menace . 
 The concept of the Clone wars , where a whole army has the face of a cloned single man ( Valerian himself ) is featured in the final scene of On the False Earths . 
 Mézières ' response upon seeing Star Wars was that he was " dazzled , jealous ... and furious ! " . As a riposte , Mézières produced an illustration for Pilote magazine in 1983 depicting the Star Wars characters Luke Skywalker and Leia Organa meeting Valérian and Laureline in a bar surrounded by a bestiary of alien creatures typical of that seen in both series . " Fancy meeting you here ! " says Leia . " Oh , we 've been hanging around here for a long time ! " retorts Laureline . Mézières has since been informed that Doug Chiang , design director on The Phantom Menace , kept a set of Valérian albums in his library . 
 Mézières has also noticed similarities between some of the sets in the 1982 film Conan the Barbarian and the planet seen in Birds of the Master ( Les Oiseaux du Maître ) and between some of the production sketches for the alien fighters in the 1996 film Independence Day and Valérian and Laureline 's astroship . 
 The 1999 Danish film Mifune 's Last Song , directed by Søren <unk> @-@ Jacobsen , features a character , Rud , who is a fan of Linda and Valentin ( as Valérian is known in Denmark ) who believes the character of Liva is in fact Linda ( i.e. Laureline ) . 
 Jean @-@ Claude Mézières himself has worked as a concept artist on a number of science fiction film projects . The first of these was in 1984 for director Jeremy Kagan who was attempting to adapt René <unk> 's novel La Nuit des temps ( The Ice People ) . The film was never made . This was followed , in 1985 , by a proposed adaptation of Arkady and Boris Strugatsky 's novel Hard to Be a God for director Peter Fleischmann . This film was eventually finished in 1989 though Mézières ' concepts for the film were barely used . The art Mézières produced for both projects was later published in Mézières Extras . 
 In 1991 Mézières began work producing concept art for the director Luc Besson for his film The Fifth Element . When the project stalled and Besson moved on to work on the film Léon in 1994 , Mézières returned to Valérian for the album The Circles of Power ( Les <unk> du <unk> ) . This featured a character , S 'Traks , who drove a flying taxi around a great metropolis on the planet Rubanis . Mézières sent a copy of the album to Besson who was inspired to change the background of Korben Dallas , the lead character of The Fifth Element , from a worker in a rocketship factory to that of a taxi driver who flies his cab around a Rubanis @-@ inspired futuristic New York . Mézières produced further concept drawings for Besson , including flying taxi cabs . He also re @-@ used certain aspects of the design of the space liner seen in the 1988 Valérian album On the Frontiers for the Fhloston Paradise liner seen in second half of the film . The Fifth Element was finally completed and released in 1997 . The importance of the four classical elements to the film is similar to the significance the elements have in the two @-@ part Valérian story Métro Châtelet , Direction Cassiopeia and Brooklyn Station , Terminus Cosmos . However , Besson has claimed that he first came up with the idea for the film at the age of 16 which would pre @-@ date the publication of these two albums . 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 Valérian and its creators have also received recognition through a number of prestigious awards . Most notably , in 1984 , Jean @-@ Claude Mézières was honoured with the Grand Prix de la ville d 'Angoulême for his comics work , including Valérian . Mézières and Christin also received a European Science Fiction Society award for Valérian in 1987 and the album Hostages of the <unk> ( <unk> de l <unk> ) won a <unk> award , given to the comic that best reflects the ideals of the Green Party , at the 1997 Angoulême International Comics Festival . The encyclopedia of the alien creatures found in the Valérian universe Les Habitants du Ciel : Atlas <unk> de Valérian et Laureline ( The Inhabitants of the Sky : The Cosmic Atlas of Valerian and Laureline ) received a special mention by the jury at the 1992 Angoulême International Comics Festival in the Prix Jeunesse 9 – 12 ans ( Youth Prize 9 – 12 years ) category . 
 Valérian has also been nominated for a Haxtur Award in 1995 for The Circles of Power and for a Harvey Award in 2005 for The New Future Trilogy , an English @-@ language compilation of three of the albums . 
 = = Publication history = = 
 = = = Original publication = = = 
 Valérian first appeared on 9 November 1967 in issue # 420 of the Franco @-@ Belgian comics magazine Pilote , and every Valérian story from Bad Dreams to The Rage of Hypsis was initially serialised in Pilote . The second Valérian story , The City of Shifting Waters ( La Cité des Eaux <unk> ) , was the first to be collected in graphic novel album format by Dargaud . Since On the Frontiers , every Valérian story has debuted in album format . Seven short stories were also published in the digest @-@ sized Super Pocket Pilote in 1969 and 1970 and later collected in Across the Pathways of Space ( Par Les Chemins De l ’ Espace ) in 1997 . The series was originally published under the title Valérian : Spatio @-@ Temporal Agent . However , with the publication of The Order of the Stones in 2007 , the series now goes under the title Valérian and Laureline . 
 On 22 January 2010 , the last album , L <unk> ( The Time Opener ) , was published . With this album the authors concluded the entire comic series with the intention to prevent the series from becoming weak , or staggering behind newer comics . However , Christin has written a 270 @-@ page Valérian and Laureline novel , <unk> a <unk> ( <unk> has disappeared ) , and indicated that Valérian and Laureline will continue to live on in a yet unspecified form . 
 = = = English translations = = = 
 The first Valérian album to be translated into English was Ambassador of the Shadows which was serialised across four issues of the magazine Heavy Metal in 1981 ( Volume 4 , Number 10 ( January 1981 ) to Volume 5 , Number 1 ( April 1981 ) ) . 
 Ambassador of the Shadows was later republished in English in album format as were World Without Stars , Welcome to Alflolol and Heroes of the Equinox by the short @-@ lived Dargaud @-@ USA and Dargaud @-@ Canada between 1981 and 1984 and in the United Kingdom by Hodder @-@ Dargaud in 1984 and 1985 . 
 In 1989 it was announced that <unk> Publishing were going to reissue the four English language albums published by Dargaud @-@ USA and also release a translation of Empire of a Thousand Planets but nothing seems to have come of this . 
 Heroes of the Equinox was republished in July 1996 in black and white by Fantasy Flight Publishing ( an offshoot of Fantasy Flight Games ) in two issues as standard American sized comic @-@ books as part of an unsuccessful attempt to translate and print several European comic book series including Spirou et Fantasio and Lucky Luke . 
 In November 2004 , iBooks published Valérian : The New Future Trilogy , collecting the albums On the Frontiers , The Living Weapons and The Circles of Power in one volume reduced to standard American graphic novel size . These were the only Valérian stories iBooks published and the company has since declared bankruptcy . 
 UK publisher <unk> is currently publishing English language editions of Valérian at a rate of one volume every six months . Ten volumes had been published by the end of 2015 . 
 = = = In other languages = = = 
 Many of the Valérian stories have been translated from their original French into several other languages , including German ( as Valerian und Veronique ) , Dutch ( as <unk> : Tijd / <unk> @-@ agent ) , the Scandinavian languages ( Danish , Icelandic , Norwegian and Swedish ) ( as Linda og / och Valentin ) , Finnish ( as <unk> <unk> <unk> ) , Spanish , Portuguese ( as Valérian , <unk> <unk> @-@ temporal ) , Italian , Turkish , Polish , and Indonesian : . 
 = = Adaptations to other media = = 
 = = = Animated television series = = = 
 The notion of making an animated adaptation of Valérian dates back to at least 1976 . In 1982 , Mézières produced concept art for an episode titled The Asteroids of <unk> ( Les <unk> de <unk> ) which was later published in 2000 as an appendix to the album release of Bad Dreams . In 1991 , Dargaud Films financed the production of a three @-@ minute pilot , directed by Bernard <unk> and animated by Studio 32 in Paris and Luxembourg , but nothing came of this venture . Several stills from this pilot episode were published in Mézières Extras . Another pilot , directed by <unk> Ferrier , was made by the French animation studio 2 Minutes in 2001 . Nothing came of this attempt either . 
 An animated series entitled Time Jam : Valerian and Laureline made its debut on Canal + Family in France on 20 October 2007 . In total , forty 26 @-@ minute episodes have been made . The series is a Franco – Japanese co @-@ production , directed by Philippe Vidal . 
 The scripts have been written by a French team under the supervision of Peter <unk> while Charles <unk> was responsible for the realisation of the characters and Vincent <unk> was responsible for the design of the locations and spacecraft . Music is by Alexandre <unk> . In the French dub of the series Valérian is voiced by <unk> Anglade and Laureline by <unk> <unk> . Three trailers were released to promote the series : the first on 24 April 2006 , the second on 10 October 2006 and the third on 30 August 2007 . 
 The series differs from the original comics in that Valerian comes from the year <unk> , instead of 2720 , and meets Laureline in the year 912 instead of 1000 . Whereas in the comics Valerian takes Laureline back to the 28th century without any trouble , in the animated series this results in Earth disappearing from the solar system . 
 According to Animation World Network , " Time Jam - Valerian & Laureline sets out to answer the question : Where on Earth has Earth gone ? Valerian and Laureline , our two young heroes , seem to be the only representatives of the human race in the unsafe galaxy where the nightmarish <unk> are conspiring to control the world . Sent out on an assignment by the head of STS ( the Spatial @-@ Temporal Service ) , Valerian and Laureline discover the existence of a time @-@ portal , a mysterious phenomenon , which may hold the key to the recovery of Earth . The series from Dargaud Marina mixes 2D and CGI animation with an anime touch " . The series has also been sold to Belgium , Spain , Israel and Morocco . 
 = = = Feature film = = = 
 In 2012 , it was announced that Luc Besson planned to make a movie for the big screen of Valérian and Laureline . The film will start shooting in January 2016 and will star Dane DeHaan and Cara Delevingne . It is to be released on July 21 , 2017 . 
 = 12 Monkeys = 
 12 Monkeys , also known as Twelve Monkeys , is a 1995 American neo @-@ noir science fiction film directed by Terry Gilliam , inspired by Chris Marker 's 1962 short film La Jetée , and starring Bruce Willis , Madeleine Stowe , and Brad Pitt , with Christopher Plummer and David Morse in supporting roles . After Universal Studios acquired the rights to remake La Jetée as a full @-@ length film , David and Janet Peoples were hired to write the script . 
 Under Gilliam 's direction , Universal granted the filmmakers a $ 29 @.@ 5 million budget , and filming lasted from February to May 1995 . The film was shot mostly in Philadelphia and Baltimore , where the story was set . 
 The film was released to critical praise and grossed $ 168 million worldwide . Pitt was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor , and won a Golden Globe for his performance . The film also won and was nominated for various categories at the Saturn Awards . 
 = = Plot = = 
 A deadly virus wipes out almost all of humanity in 1996 , forcing remaining survivors to live underground . A mysterious group known as the Army of the Twelve Monkeys is believed to be behind the virus . In 2035 , James Cole ( Willis ) is a prisoner living in a subterranean shelter beneath the ruins of Philadelphia . Cole is selected for a mission , where he is trained and sent back in time to collect information on the virus in order to help scientists develop a cure . Meanwhile , Cole is troubled by recurring dreams involving a foot chase and an airport shooting . 
 Cole arrives in Baltimore in 1990 , not 1996 as planned . He is arrested , then hospitalized in a mental institution on the diagnosis of Dr. Kathryn Railly ( Stowe ) . There he encounters Jeffrey Goines ( Pitt ) , a fellow mental patient with fanatical views . After an escape attempt , Cole is locked in a cell , but soon disappears , returning to the future . Back in his own time , Cole is interviewed by the scientists , who play a distorted voicemail message which discloses the location of the Army of the Twelve Monkeys and asserts their association with the virus . He is also shown photos of numerous people suspected of being involved , including Goines . He is given a second chance to go back in time , but another error results in him arriving at a battlefield of World War I. He is wounded in the leg and then suddenly sent to 1996 . 
 In 1996 , Railly gives a lecture about the Cassandra complex to a group of scientists . At the post @-@ lecture book signing , Dr. Peters ( Morse ) questions her about mankind 's sustainability on earth and points out that humanity 's gradual destruction of the environment may be the real lunacy . Cole arrives at the venue after seeing flyers publicizing it , and when Railly departs , he kidnaps her and forces her to take him to Philadelphia . They learn that Goines is the founder of the Army of the Twelve Monkeys , and set out in search of him . When they confront him , however , Goines denies any involvement with the virus and says that wiping out humanity was Cole 's idea at the asylum in 1990 . 
 Cole convinces himself that he is insane , but Railly confronts him with evidence of his time travel . They decide to spend their remaining time together in the Florida Keys before the onset of the plague . On their way to the airport , they learn that the Army of the Twelve Monkeys was not the source of the epidemic ; the group 's major act of protest is releasing animals from a zoo and placing Goines ' Nobel Prize winning virologist father ( Plummer ) in an animal cage . 
 At the airport , Cole leaves a last message telling the scientists that in following the Army of the Twelve Monkeys they are on the wrong track , and that he will not return . He is soon confronted by Jose ( Seda ) , an acquaintance from his own time , who gives Cole a handgun and ambiguously instructs him to follow orders . At the same time , Railly spots Dr. Peters , and recognizes him from a newspaper photograph as an assistant at Goines ' father 's virology lab . Peters is about to embark on a tour of several cities that match the locations and sequence of the viral outbreaks . 
 Cole forces his way through a security checkpoint in pursuit of Peters . After drawing the gun he was given , Cole is fatally shot by police . As Cole lies dying in Railly 's arms , she makes eye contact with a small boy — the young James Cole witnessing the scene of his own death , which will replay in his dreams for years to come . Peters , aboard the plane with the virus , sits down next to Jones ( Florence ) , one of the scientists from the future . 
 = = Cast = = 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 The genesis of 12 Monkeys came from executive producer Robert Kosberg , who had been a fan of the French short film La Jetée ( 1962 ) . Kosberg persuaded the film 's director , Chris Marker , to let him pitch the project to Universal Pictures , seeing it as a perfect basis for a full @-@ length science fiction film . Universal reluctantly agreed to purchase the remake rights and hired David and Janet Peoples to write the screenplay . Producer Charles Roven chose Terry Gilliam to direct , because he believed the filmmaker 's style was perfect for 12 Monkeys ' nonlinear storyline and time travel subplot . Gilliam had just abandoned a film adaptation of A Tale of Two Cities when he signed to direct 12 Monkeys . The film also represents the second film for which Gilliam did not write or co @-@ write the screenplay . Although he prefers to direct his own scripts , he was captivated by Peoples ' " intriguing and intelligent script . The story is disconcerting . It deals with time , madness and a perception of what the world is or isn 't . It is a study of madness and dreams , of death and re @-@ birth , set in a world coming apart . " 
 Universal took longer than expected to approve 12 Monkeys , although Gilliam had two stars ( Willis and Pitt ) and a firm budget of $ 29 @.@ 5 million ( low for a Hollywood science fiction film ) . Universal 's production of Waterworld ( 1995 ) had resulted in various cost overruns . To get 12 Monkeys approved for production , Gilliam persuaded Willis to lower his normal asking price . Because of Universal 's strict production incentives and his history with the studio on Brazil , Gilliam received final cut privilege . The Writers Guild of America was skeptical of the " inspired by " credit for La Jetée and Chris Marker . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Gilliam 's initial casting choices were Nick Nolte as James Cole and Jeff Bridges as Jeffrey Goines , but Universal objected . Gilliam , who first met Bruce Willis while casting Jeff Bridges ' role in The Fisher King ( 1991 ) , believed Willis evoked Cole 's characterization as being " somebody who is strong and dangerous but also vulnerable . " The actor had a trio of tattoos drawn onto his scalp and neck each day when filming : one that indicated his prisoner number , and a pair of barcodes on each side of his neck . 
 Gilliam cast Madeleine Stowe as Dr. Kathryn Railly because he was impressed by her performance in Blink ( 1994 ) . The director first met Stowe when he was casting his abandoned film adaptation of A Tale of Two Cities . " She has this incredible ethereal beauty and she 's incredibly intelligent " , Gilliam said of Stowe . " Those two things rest very easily with her , and the film needed those elements because it has to be romantic . " 
 Gilliam originally believed that Pitt was not right for the role of Jeffrey Goines , but the casting director convinced him otherwise . Pitt was cast for a comparatively small salary , as he was still relatively unknown at the time . By the time of 12 Monkeys ' release , however , Interview with the Vampire : The Vampire Chronicles ( 1994 ) , Legends of the Fall ( 1994 ) , and Se7en ( 1995 ) had been released , making Pitt an A @-@ list actor , which drew greater attention to the film and boosted its box @-@ office standing . In Philadelphia , months before filming , Pitt spent weeks at Temple University 's hospital , visiting and studying the psychiatric ward to prepare for his role . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Principal photography lasted from February 8 to May 6 , 1995 . Shooting on location in Philadelphia and Baltimore ( including the Senator Theatre ) in winter was fraught with weather problems . There were also technical glitches with the futuristic mechanical props . Because the film has a nonlinear storyline , continuity errors occurred , and some scenes had to be reshot . Gilliam also injured himself when he went horseback riding . Despite setbacks , however , the director managed to stay within the budget and was only a week behind his shooting schedule . " It was a tough shoot " , acknowledged Jeffrey Beecroft ( Mr. Brooks , Dances with Wolves ) , the production designer . " There wasn 't a lot of money or enough time . Terry is a perfectionist , but he was really adamant about not going over budget . He got crucified for Munchausen , and that still haunts him . " 
 The filmmakers were not allowed the luxury of sound stages ; thus , they had to find abandoned buildings or landmarks to use . The exteriors of the climactic airport scene were shot at the Baltimore @-@ Washington International Airport , while the interior scenes were shot at the Pennsylvania Convention Center ( formerly , Reading Terminal ) . Filming at the psychiatric hospital was done at the Eastern State Penitentiary . 
 = = = Design = = = 
 Gilliam used the same filmmaking style as he had in Brazil ( 1985 ) , including the art direction and cinematography ( specifically using fresnel lenses ) . The appearance of the interrogation room where Cole is being interviewed by the scientists was based on the work of Lebbeus Woods ; these scenes were shot at three different power stations ( two in Philadelphia and one in Baltimore ) . Gilliam intended to show Cole being interviewed through a multi @-@ screen interrogation TV set because he felt the machinery evoked a " nightmarish intervention of technology . You try to see the faces on the screens in front of you , but the real faces and voices are down there and you have these tiny voices in your ear . To me that 's the world we live in , the way we communicate these days , through technical devices that pretend to be about communication but may not be . " 
 The art department made sure that the 2035 underground world would only use pre @-@ 1996 technology as a means to depict the bleakness of the future . Gilliam , Beecroft , and <unk> Sallis ( set decorator ) went to several flea markets and salvage warehouses looking for materials to decorate the sets . The majority of visual effects sequences were created by Peerless Camera , the London @-@ based effects studio that Gilliam founded in the late 1970s with visual effects supervisor Kent Houston ( The Golden Compass , Casino Royale ) . Additional digital compositing was done by The Mill , while Cinesite provided film scanning services . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The film 's score was composed , arranged , and conducted by English musician Paul Buckmaster . The main theme is based on Argentine tango musician / composer Ástor Piazzolla 's Suite Punta del Este . 
 = = Themes = = 
 = = = Memory , time , and technology = = = 
 12 Monkeys studies the subjective nature of memories and their effect upon perceptions of reality . Examples of false memories include Cole 's recollection of the airport shooting , altered each time he has the dream , and a " mentally divergent " man at the asylum who has false memories . 
 References to time , time travel , and monkeys are scattered throughout the film , including the Woody Woodpecker cartoon " Time Tunnel " playing on the TV in a hotel room , the Marx Brothers film Monkey Business ( 1931 ) on TV in the asylum and the subplots of monkeys ( drug testing , news stories and animal rights ) . The film is also a study of modern civilization 's declining efforts to communicate with each other due to the interference of technology . 
 = = = Allusions to other films and media = = = 
 12 Monkeys is inspired by the French short film La Jetée ( 1962 ) ; as in La Jetée , characters are haunted by the image of their own death . Like La Jetée , 12 Monkeys contains references to Alfred Hitchcock 's Vertigo ( 1958 ) . Toward the end of the film , Cole and Railly hide in a theater showing a 24 @-@ hour Hitchcock marathon and watch a scene from Vertigo . Railly then transforms herself with a blonde wig , as Judy ( Kim Novak ) transformed herself into blonde Madeleine in Vertigo ; Cole sees her emerge within a red light , as Scottie ( James Stewart ) saw Judy emerge within a green light . Brief notes of Bernard Herrmann 's film score can also be heard . Railly also wears the same coat Novak wore in the first part of Vertigo . The scene at Muir Woods National Monument , where Judy ( as Madeleine ) looks at the growth rings of a felled redwood and traces back events in her past life , resonates with larger themes in 12 Monkeys . Cole and Railly later have a similar conversation while the same music from Vertigo is repeated . The Muir Woods scene in Vertigo is also re @-@ enacted in La Jetée . In a previous scene in the film , Cole wakes up in a hospital bed with scientists of the future talking to him in chorus . This is a direct homage to the " Dry Bones " scene in Dennis Potter 's The Singing Detective . Posters for the recently renamed English rock band Muse cover the buildings in 1996 Philadelphia with a modified version of their 1998 EP . The then @-@ obscure band would later win the Grammy Award for Best Rock Album in 2011 and 2016 . The character James Cole is a notable christ figure in film . The film is significant in the genre of science @-@ fiction film noir , and it alludes to various " canonical noir " films . 
 = = Release = = 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 12 Monkeys was given a limited release in the United States on December 29 , 1995 . When the 1 @,@ 629 theater wide release came on January 5 , 1996 , the film earned $ 13 @.@ 84 million in its opening weekend . 12 Monkeys eventually grossed $ 57 @,@ 141 @,@ 459 in US totals and $ 111 @,@ 698 @,@ 000 in other countries , coming to a worldwide total of $ 168 @,@ 839 @,@ 459 . The film was able to hold the # 1 spot on box office charts for two weeks in January , before dropping due to competition from From Dusk till Dawn , Mr. Holland 's Opus and Black Sheep . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Based on 59 reviews collected by Rotten Tomatoes , 88 % of the critics gave the film positive reviews , with an average rating of 7 @.@ 4 / 10 . The consensus reads : " The plot 's a bit of a jumble , but excellent performances and mind @-@ blowing plot twists make 12 Monkeys a kooky , effective experience . " By comparison , Metacritic calculated a 74 out of 100 rating , based on 20 reviews . 
 Roger Ebert observed 12 Monkeys ' depiction of the future , finding similarities with Blade Runner ( 1982 ; also scripted by David Peoples ) and Brazil ( 1985 ; also directed by Terry Gilliam ) . " The film is a celebration of madness and doom , with a hero who tries to prevail against the chaos of his condition , and is inadequate " , Ebert wrote . " This vision is a cold , dark , damp one , and even the romance between Willis and Stowe feels desperate rather than joyous . All of this is done very well , and the more you know about movies ( especially the technical side ) , the more you 're likely to admire it . And as entertainment , it appeals more to the mind than to the senses . " 
 Desson Thomson of The Washington Post praised the art direction and set design . " Willis and Pitts 's performances , Gilliam 's atmospherics and an exhilarating momentum easily outweigh such trifling flaws in the script " , Thomson reasoned . Peter Travers from Rolling Stone magazine cited the film 's success on Gilliam 's direction and Willis ' performance . Internet reviewer James Berardinelli believed the filmmakers took an intelligent and creative motive for the time travel subplot . Rather than being sent to change the past , James Cole is instead observing it to make a better future . Richard Corliss of Time magazine felt the film 's time travel aspect and apocalyptic depiction of a bleaker future were clichés . " In its frantic mix of chaos , carnage and zoo animals , 12 Monkeys is Jumanji for adults " , Corliss wrote . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 Pitt was nominated for an Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor , but lost to Kevin Spacey in The Usual Suspects . Costume designer Julie Weiss was also nominated for her work , but lost to James Acheson of Restoration . However , Pitt was able to win a Golden Globe Award for Best Supporting Actor in a Motion Picture . 
 Gilliam was honored for his directing duties at the 46th Berlin International Film Festival . 12 Monkeys received positive notices from the science fiction community . The film was nominated for the Hugo Award for Best Dramatic Presentation and the Academy of Science Fiction , Fantasy & Horror Films awarded 12 Monkeys the Saturn Award for Best Science Fiction Film . Pitt and Weiss also won awards at the 22nd Saturn Awards . Bruce Willis , Madeleine Stowe , Gilliam and writers David and Janet Peoples received nominations . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 Universal Studios Home Entertainment 's special edition of 12 Monkeys , released on May 10 , 2005 , contains an audio commentary by director Terry Gilliam and producer Charles Roven , The Hamster Factor and Other Tales of Twelve Monkeys ( a making @-@ of documentary ) and production notes . An HD DVD of 12 Monkeys was released on March 4 , 2008 , and includes the same special features as the special edition DVD . A Blu @-@ ray Disc of 12 Monkeys was released on July 28 , 2009 , and includes the same special features as the previous special edition DVD and HD DVD . 
 = = Post @-@ release = = 
 = = = Lebbeus Woods lawsuit = = = 
 In the beginning of the film , Cole is brought into the interrogation room and told to sit in a chair attached to a vertical rail on the wall . A sphere supported by a metal armature is suspended directly in front of him , probing for weaknesses as the inquisitors interrogate him . Architect Lebbeus Woods filed a lawsuit against Universal in February 1996 , claiming that his work " <unk> Tower ( Upper ) Chamber " was used without permission . Woods won his lawsuit , requiring Universal to remove the scenes , but he ultimately allowed their inclusion in exchange for a " high six @-@ figure cash settlement " from Universal . 
 = = = Trilogy claims = = = 
 After the release of The Zero Theorem in 2013 , claims were made that Gilliam had meant it as part of a trilogy . A 2013 review for The Guardian newspaper said ; " Calling it [ The Zero Theorem ] the third part of a trilogy formed by earlier dystopian satires Brazil and Twelve Monkeys [ sic ] [ ... ] " ; however , Gilliam was interviewed by Alex Suskind for Indiewire in late 2014 , saying " Well , it ’ s funny , this trilogy was never something I ever said , but it ’ s been repeated so often it ’ s clearly true [ laughs ] . I don ’ t know who started it but once it started it never stopped " . 
 = = = TV adaptation = = = 
 On August 26 , 2013 , Entertainment Weekly announced that Syfy was developing a 12 Monkeys television series based on the film . Production began in November 2013 . The pilot was written by Terry <unk> and Travis Fickett , who had written for the series Terra Nova . Due to the series being labeled as " cast contingent " , the series did not move forward until the roles of Cole and Goines were cast . In April 2014 , Syfy green @-@ lighted the first season , which consisted of 13 episodes , including the pilot filmed in 2013 . The series premiered on January 16 , 2015 . On March 12 , 2015 , the series was renewed for a second season that began airing in April 2016 . On June 29 , 2016 , the series was renewed for a 10 @-@ episode third season , set to premiere in 2017 . 
 = Brett Hull = 
 Brett Andrew Hull ( born August 9 , 1964 ) is a Canadian @-@ American former National Hockey League ( NHL ) player and general manager , and currently an executive vice president of the St. Louis Blues . He played for the Calgary Flames , St. Louis Blues , Dallas Stars , Detroit Red Wings and Phoenix Coyotes between 1986 and 2005 . His career total of 741 goals is the fourth highest in NHL history , and he is one of five players to score 50 goals in 50 games . He was a member of two Stanley Cup winning teams - 1999 with the Dallas Stars and 2002 with the Detroit Red Wings . His championship winning goal for Dallas in overtime of game six of the 1999 Stanley Cup Finals remains the focus of debate over whether it was scored within the rules of the time . 
 Known as one of the game 's greatest snipers , Hull was an elite scorer at all levels of the game . He played college hockey for the University of Minnesota @-@ Duluth Bulldogs , where he scored 52 goals in 1985 – 86 . He scored 50 the following year with the Moncton Golden Flames of the American Hockey League ( AHL ) and had five consecutive NHL seasons of at least 50 goals . His 86 goals in 1990 – 91 is the third highest single @-@ season total in NHL history . Hull won the Hart Memorial Trophy and Lester B. Pearson Award that year as the league 's most valuable player . He was named a first team all @-@ star on three occasions and played in eight NHL All @-@ Star Games . 
 A dual citizen , Hull was eligible to play for either Canada or the United States internationally and chose to join the American National Team . He was a member of team that won the 1996 World Cup of Hockey and was a two @-@ time Olympian , winning a silver medal at the 2002 Winter Olympics . Hull was inducted into the Hockey Hall of Fame in 2009 , joining his father Bobby to become the first father @-@ and @-@ son pair of players in the Hall . They are the only pair to each score 1 @,@ 000 career points in the NHL . Hull 's nickname , " the Golden Brett " is a reference to his father 's nickname of " the Golden Jet " . His jersey number 16 was retired by the St. Louis Blues . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Hull was born August 9 , 1964 , in Belleville , Ontario . His father , Bobby , was a long @-@ time professional hockey player in both the National Hockey League ( NHL ) and World Hockey Association ( WHA ) . His mother , Joanne , was an American professional figure skater and taught him how to skate . He has three brothers : Bobby Jr . , Blake and Bart , and a younger sister : Michelle . Bart played professional football in the Canadian Football League . His uncle Dennis was also a long @-@ time NHL player . 
 As his father was playing for the Chicago Blackhawks , Hull 's early life was spent in Illinois , and he first played organized hockey in the Chicago area at the age of four . He and his brothers often skated with the Black Hawks where they watched their father play . The family moved back to Canada when Bobby signed with the original Winnipeg Jets in 1972 . Brett moved to Vancouver with his mother and two youngest siblings shortly before his parents ' acrimonious divorce in 1979 . Hull was not close to his father following the breakup , though the two spoke periodically . 
 = = Playing career = = 
 = = = Junior and college = = = 
 Admitting that he was viewed as a " pudgy , fun @-@ loving , music @-@ crazed bum " in his youth , Hull stated in his autobiography that he was not surprised when he failed to attract the attention of a junior team . He was first eligible for the NHL Entry Draft in 1982 , but as he was still playing in a juvenile league , was passed over without interest . He joined the Penticton Knights of the tier @-@ II British Columbia Junior Hockey League ( BCJHL ) in the 1982 – 83 season where he scored 48 goals in 50 games . He was again passed over at the 1983 Entry Draft as teams remained unconvinced of his commitment to the game and his conditioning . NHL teams finally took notice of Hull following his 1983 – 84 season in which he scored 105 goals in 56 games and broke the BCJHL scoring record with 188 points . The Calgary Flames selected him in the sixth round of the 1984 NHL Entry Draft , 117th overall . 
 Hull accepted a scholarship to play for the University of Minnesota @-@ Duluth ( UMD ) , and in 1984 – 85 , scored 32 goals as a freshman . The power of his shot terrorized opposition goaltenders . He was awarded the Jerry <unk> Award as the school 's rookie of the year and received similar honors from the Western Collegiate Hockey Association ( WCHA ) . His coaches at Minnesota @-@ Duluth impressed on Hull the need to improve his skating , and in 1985 – 86 , he broke the school record of 49 goals in one season , reaching 52 for the campaign . Hull was named the WCHA first team all @-@ star at right wing and was a finalist for the Hobey Baker Award as the top player in the National Collegiate Athletic Association ( NCAA ) . 
 In his two seasons at UMD , Hull set numerous school scoring records . He holds the records for most goals by a rookie ( 32 ) and most goals in one season ( 52 ) . His 20 power play goals , seven hat tricks and 13 multiple @-@ goal games in 1985 – 86 are all records , and he shares the school 's single @-@ game playoff record of four goals . The school retired his jersey number 29 in 2006 . 
 = = = Calgary Flames = = = 
 Choosing to turn professional following his sophomore season , Hull signed a contract with the Calgary Flames and joined the team during the 1986 Stanley Cup Playoffs . He made his NHL debut on May 20 , 1986 , in game three of the Stanley Cup Finals against the Montreal Canadiens . His best scoring opportunity came when he hit the post in his first shift of the game . He appeared in two games of the Flames ' five @-@ game series loss to Montreal . 
 The Flames assigned Hull to their American Hockey League ( AHL ) affiliate , the Moncton Golden Flames , for the majority of the 1986 – 87 season . He scored 50 goals , tying an AHL rookie record , and his 93 points was third best in the league . He won the Dudley " Red " Garrett Memorial Award as the league 's rookie of the year and was named to the first all @-@ star team . He earned a brief recall to Calgary during the season . He made his regular season debut on November 13 , 1986 , against the Hartford Whalers and scored his first NHL goal against Steve Weeks on a breakaway . It was the game @-@ winning goal in a 4 – 3 victory . Hull appeared in five regular season games for the Flames and played in four playoff games where he scored two goals and added an assist . 
 Hull earned a spot on the Flames for the 1987 – 88 NHL season , though the team continued to work with him on his conditioning . He appeared in 52 games for the Flames , scoring 26 goals and 50 points . He did not finish the season in Calgary however . On March 7 , 1988 , Hull was traded , along with Steve Bozek , to the St. Louis Blues in exchange for defenseman Rob Ramage and goaltender Rick Wamsley . 
 = = = St. Louis Blues = = = 
 Hull led the St. Louis Blues with 41 goals in 1988 – 89 , but his poor skating and inattention to his defensive responsibilities concerned the club . Head coach Brian Sutter convinced Hull to improve his conditioning over the summer . He arrived to begin the 1989 – 90 in much better shape and showed a marked improvement in his skating . Center Adam Oates , acquired over the summer , joined Hull on the top line . The pair , dubbed " Hull and Oates " as a play on the band Hall and Oates , were prolific scorers . Hull scored 228 goals between 1989 – 90 and 1991 – 92 , the second @-@ highest three @-@ season total of any player in NHL history , behind only Wayne Gretzky 's 250 tallies between 1981 – 82 and 1983 – 84 . He became the fifth player in NHL history to score 50 goals in 50 games in 1990 – 91 , — joining Maurice Richard , Mike Bossy , Gretzky , and Mario Lemieux — then repeated the feat in 1991 – 92 . 
 He led the league in goal scoring all three seasons and was named to the First All @-@ Star Team each year . He collected numerous league awards , winning the Lady Byng Memorial Trophy in 1990 as the league 's most sportsmanlike player , then in 1991 , won the Hart Memorial Trophy and Lester B. Pearson Award as the NHL 's most valuable player as selected by the league and his fellow players respectively . His total of 86 goals in 1990 – 91 is the third highest for a single season in NHL history , after Gretzky 's 92 goals in 1981 – 82 and 87 in 1983 – 84 . Oates left the Blues midway through the 1991 – 92 season , and while Hull 's offensive production dropped , he remained the Blues ' top offensive threat . He recorded his fourth and fifth consecutive 50 @-@ goal seasons , scoring 54 in 1992 – 93 and 57 in 1993 – 94 . 
 Hull clashed with head coach Mike Keenan , who joined the team in 1994 – 95 , primarily over the latter 's changes to team personnel . Hull , who had been named team captain in 1992 , was stripped of the captaincy . By early 1996 , the two were publicly criticizing each other in the media . Forced to choose between the player and coach , the Blues fired Keenan on December 19 , 1996 . Hull responded three nights later with a hat trick against the Los Angeles Kings to reach 500 goals for his NHL career . He and Bobby are the only father @-@ son pair to both reach that total . 
 After <unk> and 42 @-@ goal seasons in 1995 – 96 and 1996 – 97 , Hull scored only 27 in 1997 – 98 . He became an unrestricted free agent following the season after rejecting a three @-@ year , $ 15 million offer from the Blues because the team refused to include a no @-@ trade clause . He left St. Louis , signing a three @-@ year , $ 17 million contract with the Dallas Stars on July 2 , 1998 . 
 = = = Dallas Stars = = = 
 Hull reached 1 @,@ 000 points in his career when he notched a goal and an assist in a 3 – 1 victory with the Dallas Stars over the Boston Bruins on November 14 , 1998 . He then scored his 600th goal on December 31 , 1999 . He scored 32 goals in 1998 – 99 despite struggling with a groin injury for much of the season . The Stars reached the 1999 Stanley Cup Finals , against the Buffalo Sabres . The sixth game of the series went to overtime tied 1 – 1 while Dallas held a 3 – 2 series lead . At 14 : 51 of the third overtime period , Hull collected a rebound in front of the Buffalo net and put the puck past goaltender Dominik Hašek to win the game , and the Stanley Cup , for Dallas . 
 The Sabres immediately protested the goal , as NHL rules of the time stated that a player could not score a goal if any part of his body was within the goal crease . Replays showed that Hull 's skate was within the crease when he scored ; however , the NHL ruled that he had possession of the puck prior to entering the crease , making the goal legal . League officials stated that that very scenario was addressed in a memo sent to the league 's on @-@ ice officials prior to the start of the playoffs . Hull himself states the goal was legal , supporting the claim that the NHL had altered the rules in a private memo sent to all teams but not released to the public . Media , fans and players across the league remain divided on the goal , some claiming that the league altered the rule after the fact . It remains especially controversial in Buffalo , where fans and former players continue to maintain that the play should have been ruled " no goal " . The NHL formally abolished the crease rule prior to the next season , allowing players to score from within the crease freely as long as they did not interfere with the goaltender . 
 Though he appeared in 79 games in 1999 – 2000 , Hull had what coach Ken Hitchcock called " a disappointing season " , struggling defensively and scoring only 24 goals . His offensive production improved in the 2000 Stanley Cup Playoffs as he led the league in post @-@ season scoring with 10 goals and 23 points . The Stars again reached the finals , but lost the series in six games to the New Jersey Devils . Hull scored 39 goals in 2000 – 01 , his best total in four years . He surpassed his father 's career total when he scored his <unk> goal in a 3 – 1 victory over the Toronto Maple Leafs on October 10 , 2000 . Hull played his 1,000th career game on February 25 , 2001 , in Calgary . 
 = = = Detroit Red Wings = = = 
 The Stars chose not to exercise their option on Hull 's contract that would have paid him $ 7 million for the 2001 – 02 NHL season , making him a free agent . Although he received superior financial offers from the Montreal Canadiens and New York Rangers , Hull chose to sign a two @-@ year , $ 9 million contract with the Detroit Red Wings to pursue a second Stanley Cup championship . He scored 30 goals in the regular season , then added a league @-@ leading 10 in the 2002 Stanley Cup Playoffs . He scored key goals in Detroit 's game three and four victories against the Carolina Hurricanes in the finals series ; the latter was the 100th playoff goal of his career . Hull won his second career championship as the Red Wings won the series in five games . 
 Hull posted a 37 @-@ goal , 76 @-@ point campaign in 2002 – 03 . He became the sixth player in NHL history to score 700 career goals on February 11 , 2003 , against the San Jose Sharks . At age 38 , Hull signed a one @-@ year , $ 5 million extension with the Red Wings . After scoring 25 goals in 2003 – 04 , Hull left Detroit as a free agent . 
 = = = Phoenix Coyotes = = = 
 The Stars thought they were on the verge of signing Hull to a one @-@ year contract for 2004 – 05 , but he instead accepted a two @-@ year , $ 4 @.@ 5 million contract with the Phoenix Coyotes . The first year of the contract was wiped out when the season was cancelled due a labor stoppage . When play resumed in 2005 – 06 , Hull returned to the ice wearing his father 's jersey number 9 . The Coyotes franchise , which had relocated from Winnipeg in 1996 , continued to honor the Jets ' retired numbers , including the elder Hull 's . Bobby requested that the team un @-@ retire his uniform and allow his son to wear it . However , after playing just five games and recording one assist , Hull felt that he was no longer able to play at the level he expected of himself . On October 15 , 2005 , he announced his retirement as a player . 
 = = International play = = 
 As a dual Canadian and American citizen , Hull was eligible to play for either country internationally . While playing at UMD , he was passed over by officials with Team Canada when they selected their roster for the 1986 World Ice Hockey Championships . However , the American national team invited him to join their squad . Hull accepted and led the team in scoring with 7 goals and 11 points for the sixth place Americans . Hull later said the faith shown in him by American officials gave him the confidence to excel in his career . He played with Team USA for the rest of his career , and at the 1986 Calgary Cup tournament , played a pivotal role in a 5 – 3 upset of Canada by the Americans . Following the game , he said " I don 't feel more like an American than a Canadian . I just want to play . " 
 Hull tied Mike Modano for the American scoring lead at the 1991 Canada Cup with nine points . He led the Americans into the tournament final against Canada , but was held pointless in the decisive game as Canada won the tournament with a 4 – 2 game . Canadian fans turned on Hull at the inaugural World Cup of Hockey in 1996 . In the semifinal against Russia , fans in Ottawa loudly booed Hull and chanted " traitor " towards him as he scored two goals to lead the United States to the final against Canada . In the deciding game of the best @-@ of @-@ three final , Hull scored a key goal as the Americans turned a 2 – 1 deficit with five minutes to play into a 5 – 2 victory and captured the championship . Hull led all players with 11 points and was a tournament all @-@ star at forward . 
 Making his Olympic debut at the 1998 Winter Games , Hull scored two goals in four games . The Americans were quickly eliminated from the tournament and were criticized for their lack of desire and leadership . The team was further embarrassed when it was discovered some members had trashed their hotel room following their elimination . Hull was initially blamed as being a culprit . He angrily denied the accusation and claimed it was an invention of Canadian media upset that he was playing for the United States . Hull , Modano and John LeClair formed the American 's top line for the 2002 Olympics . The trio were dominant throughout most of the tournament , leading Team USA to the gold medal game against Canada . Hull and LeClair finished second and third in overall scoring , respectively ; however they were held pointless against Team Canada in the final . Hull and the Americans settled for the silver medal following a 5 – 2 defeat . 
 Team USA named Hull an alternate captain of its veteran @-@ laden team for the 2004 World Cup of Hockey . However , he was benched by head coach Ron Wilson following two indifferent games in which he did not register a point and never returned to the active lineup . 
 = = Playing style = = 
 Upon his arrival in the NHL , Hull was considered a " one @-@ dimensional player " . He was a natural goal scorer with a reputation for being uninterested in <unk> and playing defense . He was nicknamed " The Incredible Hull " in college for his scoring exploits and was referred to in the NHL as the " The Golden Brett " , a play on his father 's nickname of " The Golden Jet " . Brett was often compared to Bobby in his early years , though the two shared few similarities on the ice . Both were known for their shooting ability , particularly the power of their slapshot , which Terry Crisp – who played against Bobby and coached Brett – described as " explosive " . But while Bobby was a left wing known for both his conditioning and skating ability , Brett played right wing , was a poorer skater and lacked his father 's physique . 
 His reputation for defensive indifference persisted through much of his career . In his 72 @-@ goal season of 1989 @-@ 90 , Hull 's plus @-@ minus ( net difference of even strength and shorthanded goals scored for and against while he was on the ice ) was − 1 . He was a − 27 four years later despite scoring 54 goals . Hull also carried a reputation as a player who could not win as his Blues ' teams rarely achieved success in the playoffs . He shed that reputation after leading his teams to championships at the 1996 World Cup of Hockey and the 1999 Stanley Cup Finals . To win that 1999 championship , Hull also had to fit in with the Dallas Stars ' defense @-@ oriented system . He finished that season with a career best plus @-@ minus of + 19 . 
 Known as an outspoken player , Hull earned a reputation on and off the ice for speaking bluntly and without regard for whom it might offend . He chastised his own fans in 1992 – later backtracking – when they booed Adam Oates following Oates ' trade request , calling them " losers " and stating he wanted to rip one particular fan 's head off . Hull was a consistent critic of the NHL 's defensive , " clutch and grab " era of the late 1990s , raising the ire of commissioner Gary Bettman in 1998 when he said " I wouldn 't pay to watch . It 's boring . The whole style of the game is terrible . There 's no flow . When a guy like [ Mario ] Lemieux leaves the game and tells you why he 's leaving , and you don 't address it , that 's stupid . But the players don 't say crap . That 's why I always look like the big mouth . " 
 Hull played in eight NHL All @-@ Star Games , and was named the most valuable player of the 1992 game in Philadelphia . As of 2012 , his 741 career goals is the fourth highest total in NHL history , and Hull was the second @-@ fastest ( behind Wayne Gretzky ) to reach 700 goals , doing so in 1 @,@ 157 games . He is also second all @-@ time in power play goals with 265 and third in game @-@ winning goals with 110 . With 24 career game @-@ winning playoff goals , he is tied with Gretzky for the most all @-@ time . He scored 33 hat tricks in his career , the fourth highest in NHL history . Hull holds numerous St. Louis Blues franchise records , including goals ( 527 ) , power play goals ( 195 ) , game @-@ winning goals ( 70 ) and hat tricks ( 27 ) . He also holds the organization 's single @-@ season records of goals ( 86 ) and points ( 131 ) . In honor of his achievements with the team , the Blues retired his jersey number 16 in 2006 . The team also arranged to have a portion of the street that runs alongside the Scottrade Center renamed " Brett Hull Way " . In 2010 , the team unveiled a statue of him in front of the arena . Hull was inducted into the United States Hockey Hall of Fame in 2008 , and into the Hockey Hall of Fame in 2009 . 
 = = Management career = = 
 Hull worked two jobs in 2006 – 07 . He served as a special assistant to the team president of the Dallas Stars and provided studio analysis for NHL on NBC telecasts . He left NBC after one season when he was named a special adviser to the team 's hockey operations department . Hull was promoted to interim co @-@ general manager of the Stars , sharing the role with Les Jackson after Doug Armstrong was fired on November 13 , 2007 . ESPN analyst Scott Burnside criticized the promotion of Hull , noting his lack of front office experience and questionable work ethic . 
 The pair made one of the most prominent trades in the 2007 – 08 NHL season , acquiring Brad Richards from the Tampa Bay Lightning as part of a five @-@ player trade . The team went on to reach the Western Conference Final of the 2008 Stanley Cup Playoffs , the Stars ' deepest playoff run in eight years . Team owner Tom Hicks rewarded the pair with three @-@ year contracts and named them permanent co @-@ general managers . He credited Hull for his positive relationship with the players and his " unconventional wisdom " . 
 The signing of controversial forward Sean Avery prior to the 2008 – 09 season proved a turning point for Hull and Jackson . Avery 's erratic behavior created divisions within the team 's locker room , particularly after he made derogatory comments towards another player 's girlfriend in the media . The Stars missed the playoffs that season , leading the team to replace Hull and Jackson as general manager with Joe Nieuwendyk . Hull remained with the organization , serving as an adviser to Hicks and team president Jeff <unk> . Hull has since been hired by the St. Louis Blues as their Executive Vice President over business development . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Hull currently lives in St. Louis with his second wife , Darcie . He has three children by his first wife , Alison : son Jude and daughters Jayde and Crosby , who is the youngest . Jude also plays hockey , though unlike his father and grandfather , he chose to be a goaltender and attends St. Olaf College . Jayde attends Colgate University where she has frequently been spotted with up and coming broadway star , Meredith Clark . 
 In business , Hull was twice involved in the operation of restaurants . He owned two eateries in St. Louis while he was a member of the Blues , and partnered with Mike Modano and others on a Dallas restaurant called " Hully and Mo Restaurant and Tap Room " following his playing career . He lent his name to a 1995 Super Nintendo Entertainment System video game called Brett Hull Hockey . Hull was a co @-@ owner of the St. Louis Bandits , a junior team in the North American Hockey League . 
 Hull is an avid golfer , often stating during his career that he preferred the sport to hockey . He is a frequent participant in the American Century Celebrity Golf Classic and his best finish at the tournament is a tie for fifth in 2008 . He competes in several charity and celebrity tournaments , and in 2009 was ranked as the sixth best athlete golfer in North America by Golf Digest . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = = Regular season and playoffs = = = 
 = = = International = = = 
 = = Awards and achievements = = 
 = Canvassing ( Parks and Recreation ) = 
 " Canvassing " is the second episode of the first season of the American comedy television series Parks and Recreation . It originally aired on NBC in the United States on April 16 , 2009 . The episode was written by Rachel Axler and directed by Seth Gordon . In the episode , Deputy Director of Parks and Recreation Leslie and her staff canvas the neighborhood to seek support for an upcoming town meeting on their park proposal but end up drawing more critics than allies . 
 The episode was originally supposed to be the third episode of the series , but the broadcast order was changed and " Canvassing " was switched with " The Reporter " . The episode received generally mixed reviews . According to Nielsen Media Research , " Canvassing " was watched by 5 @.@ 92 million households in its original airing , which media outlets said was commendable , although it was about 900 @,@ 000 less households than the pilot episode received the previous week . " Canvassing " and the rest of the first season of Parks and Recreation was released on DVD in the United States on September 8 , 2009 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The episode begins with Leslie Knope ( Amy Poehler ) , Deputy Director of the Department of Parks and Recreation for Pawnee , Indiana explaining to a documentary crew about the Annual Easter Egg Hunt , in which her colleague , Tom Haverford ( Aziz Ansari ) , has hidden the eggs , and Leslie notes that nobody is able to find them . Tom secretly confesses to the documentary crew that he forgot to plant the eggs . 
 Leslie plans for an upcoming town hall meeting about her proposal to turn a construction pit into a park . She invites her mother Marlene Griggs @-@ Knope ( Pamela Reed ) , an official with the county school system , but she does not appear supportive and tells Leslie she may be too busy to attend . Leslie holds a subcommittee meeting with Tom , interested citizen Ann Perkins ( Rashida Jones ) , intern April Ludgate ( Aubrey Plaza ) and city planner Mark Brendanawicz ( Paul Schneider ) . Mark warns her it might be too early for a meeting with the public , who could opt to vote the proposal down if they are unhappy with it . Leslie remains confident about the meeting and says the group will be doing neighborhood canvassing to try to win support . 
 The canvassing is largely unsuccessful . Most of the supporters of the park say they will not be able to attend the meeting . Mark , April and Tom speak with one seemingly interested resident , who is implied to be a pedophile . Leslie becomes frustrated with the lack of success and attempts to push poll the community residents . She suggests phrasing the question , " Wouldn 't you rather have a park than a storage facility for nuclear waste ? " Tom leaves the canvassing group to call prospective contractors about the park project , hinting at accepting bribes and making corrupt deals . Several residents express a lack of support for the park . Resident Kate Speevak ( Lennon Parham ) vows to attend the public meeting and voice her disapproval after a frustrated Leslie says , " You don 't care about your kids if you don 't support this park " . The canvassing ends with an angry Leslie finding Mark and April playing Rock Band with Ann 's boyfriend , Andy Dwyer ( Chris Pratt ) at Ann 's house . 
 Leslie tries to get her boss Ron Swanson ( Nick Offerman ) to postpone the town hall meeting , but Ron says he cannot because the town manager Paul Iaresco ( Phil Reeves ) has " fast @-@ tracked " the project . As the meeting begins , Leslie notices her mother has attended after all , along with many of the people critical of the project . Led by Kate Speevak , the crowd says they do not support the proposal and are angry an environmental study has not been conducted . Leslie tries to pretend April is a supportive resident , but one of the audience members recognizes her from the canvassing . 
 When Ron tells Leslie to try to place a positive spin on the meeting and prevent a vote from occurring , Leslie attempts to filibuster the meeting . Kate pushes for a vote , but Leslie says she will not hold one until she has heard from each audience member individually . They criticize and yell at Leslie until 9 p.m. , when she announces time is up and ends the meeting . Marlene , who privately described the meeting as a " train @-@ wreck " , nevertheless expresses her pride for Leslie with a smile . Although frustrated with the meeting itself , Leslie says she is happy to have hosted her first subcommittee meeting . When one resident , Lawrence ( Eric Edelstein ) says , " Hey park lady , you suck " , Leslie says with pride , " Hear that ? He called me ' park lady ' " . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Conception and filming = = = 
 " Canvassing " was written by Rachel Axler and directed by Seth Gordon , who the cast and crew of Parks and Recreation admired for his documentary , The King of Kong : A Fistful of Quarters . It was originally supposed to be the third episode shown in the series , but the broadcast schedule was changed and it was switched with " The Reporter " , the original second episode . Series co @-@ creator Michael Schur said the plot for " Canvassing " was conceived early in the Parks and Recreation brainstorming process because the staff wanted to demonstrate Leslie 's optimism and strong resolve in the face of harsh public criticism . Schur said he felt like Leslie " hangs in and ends up like Rocky : beaten and bloodied , but on her feet " . Schur said during his research about municipal government , he received a lot of feedback that community meetings are seldom attended except by those opposed to a proposal , and those in favor of it or neutral about it tend not to attend . This was the inspiration behind the public forum at the end of " Canvassing " , which was attended almost entirely by opponents of Leslie 's proposed park . Alan Yang , a Parks and Recreation writer , conceived the idea of Leslie using a filibuster at her own public meeting . 
 Like most episodes of Parks and Recreation , a great deal of the scenes in " Canvassing " were improvised by the actors . The scenes with Tom hinting at bribes and corrupt deals with developers was largely improvised by actor Aziz Ansari . The producers were concerned the subplot would make Tom too unlikeable , but instead audiences responded positively because they felt it was an accurate portrayal of some aspects of small town government . Aziz also improvised the lines in which he brown @-@ nosed to the developers as they entered the public forum . In one talking head @-@ style documentary interview , Leslie insists a park like the one she envisioned for Pawnee could not be built in communist Russia , and she goes on to impersonate Russian children playing in a park . The scene was completely improvised by Poehler during multiple takes , and Michael Schur called it " my favorite talking head that Amy has done " . The cold open of the episode features Leslie wearing bunny ears and helping children on an Easter egg hunt at a park . Since Tom forgot to hide any eggs , Leslie and the children assume it is an extremely difficult egg hunt . The cold open was the last scene shot for " Canvassing " , and was conceived at the last moment because the production date was near Easter , and series co @-@ creator Michael Schur said he " thought it would be funny to put Amy ( Poehler ) in bunny ears " . Since it was shot after the majority of the episode , Seth Gordon was not available to direct it . 
 All outdoor canvassing scenes were shot in a neighborhood of Los Angeles , California , outside the Parks and Recreation studio . Michael Schur said they wanted to establish the type of groundwork public servants often had to conduct in a small town . Seth Gordon sought to make the canvassing scenes as realistic as possible , so he allowed a large amount of improvisation among the actors . The Pawnee residents who are vocally opposed to parks were based on real @-@ life California residents the Parks and Recreation producers encountered who opposed the construction of parks in their hometown . One such group , " The Committee for a Better Park " , was actually a group of residents opposed to parks in general , and the deceptiveness of their name and mission inspired the Parks producers while writing " Canvassing " . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 " Canvassing " marked the first appearance of Marlene Griggs @-@ Knope , Leslie 's mother and an important public figure in the Pawnee school system . Marlene was played by Pamela Reed , who would continue to make several guest appearances as the character . During the casting auditions , Seth Gordon interviewed Reed as if she were playing the character and Reed improvised a great deal , creating many personality elements that were eventually incorporated into Marlene Knope 's character . Gordon said , " Pamela was especially sort of nimble on her feet at inventing a character in the room on the fly , and I thought that was really impressive . " During the audition , Reed was asked whether she was proud of her daughter , and Reed replied , " I want my daughter to be successful , which is why I always tell her , there 's nothing wrong with being a wife and mother . " The improvised line , which was based on something her father @-@ in @-@ law said to her , so impressed the producers that they incorporated it into the episode . Schur said the producers sought to establish Leslie 's mother early in the series , and he felt her relationship to Leslie was the center of the entire " Canvassing " episode . Schur said of Leslie 's attempts to impress her mom at her public forum , " We imagined it in the writer 's room that she is eight years old and doing a piano recital , and she 's nervous because her mom 's there . " 
 Lennon Parham , an actress and comedian who worked with Amy Poehler on the Upright Citizens Brigade sketch comedy troupe , made a guest appearance in " Canvassing " as Kate Speevak . Michael Schur said early on in the brainstorming process , the Parks and Recreation producers decided to establish an antagonist for Leslie named Kate Speevak , simply because they thought the name was funny . Seth Gordon said Poehler and Parham worked especially well together during their largely improvised scenes , which he attributed to their past work together on the Upright Citizens Brigade . The resident who appeared to be a sex offender during the canvassing was played by Brian Huskey , who Schur called a " fantastic improviser " . Eric Edelstein portrayed Lawrence , a resident who antagonizes Leslie and Andy during the public meeting . Edelstein was not originally the actor assigned the " Hey parks lady , you suck " line , but the Parks and Recreation producers like Edelstein so much they gave it to him . Leslie 's response line , " Hear that ? He called me park lady " , was improvised by Poehler . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 During office hours , Leslie catches Mark , April and Andy playing Rock Band , a popular music video game in which the players perform rock music using guitar , drum and microphone controllers ; during the game , Andy sings the song " My Own Worst Enemy " by Lit . Seth Gordon said the Parks and Recreation producers almost opted not to include a singing part due to concerns about the legalities of using the song , but they ultimately decided to use it . During Leslie 's filibuster at the town hall meeting , she begins reading The Phantom Tollbooth , a children 's adventure novel written by Norton Juster . The final scene of the episode , with Tom discussing how much he enjoyed The Phantom Tollbooth , was a last minute addition when the Parks and Recreation producers realized they had six possible seconds left to add to the episode . 
 During the canvassing , Leslie says she may resort to the tactics of Karl Rove , advisor to former President George W. Bush , in phrasing her questions to guarantee positive responses . Leslie refers to Andy as " a cute FDR " , a reference to former President Franklin D. Roosevelt . Leslie says her mother is as respected as charity worker Mother Teresa , as powerful as Soviet Union dictator Joseph Stalin and as beautiful as British politician Margaret Thatcher . A PDF copy of the town hall meeting flyer was posted on NBC 's official Parks and Recreation website about Pawnee , Indiana ; it included before @-@ and @-@ after pictures of the proposed park . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original American broadcast on April 16 , 2009 , " Canvassing " was watched by 5 @.@ 92 million households , according to Nielsen Media Research , earning a 2 @.@ 5 rating / 7 share among viewers aged between 18 and 49 , and a 2 @.@ 5 rating / 8 share among viewers between 18 and 34 . Although the episode attracted about 900 @,@ 000 fewer household viewers than the pilot episode the previous week , media outlets said the rating was still commendable ; " Canvassing " aired following an episode of My Name is Earl which had a series @-@ low rating among viewers aged between 18 and 49 , whereas the pilot episode aired between two episodes of the popular series , The Office . Additionally , " Canvassing " was viewed by almost one million more households than Samantha Who ? , which ran in the same 8 : 30 to 9 p.m. timeslot as Parks and Recreation . " Canvassing " also captured a full 18 to 49 ratings point more than Samantha Who ? . 
 The episode received generally mixed reviews . Alan Sepinwall of The Star @-@ Ledger said he thought the episode was an improvement over the pilot episode , which he also enjoyed . Sepinwall said the episode seemed to distance the Leslie character from Michael Scott , Steve Carell 's character on The Office , and gave more for the supporting cast to do ; he particularly praised Schneider and Ansari . Matt Fowler of IGN said Amy Poehler " remains frighteningly unflappable " and said he enjoyed how disastrous the town hall meeting turned out to be , but said supporting characters like Mark and Ron " need to be fleshed out a bit more and made ... well , funnier . " Josh McAuliffe of The Times @-@ Tribune said " Canvassing " was funnier than the pilot episode , but still lacked big laughs and " I think the writers can do some interesting things with the whole playground plot , among them introducing us to some of Pawnee 's more colorful denizens . " 
 Keith Phipps of The A.V. Club said although he liked the pilot episode , he thought jokes in " Canvassing " were " pretty thin on the ground " , the supporting cast lacked good material and the Leslie character was less likable than the previous week . Phipps , who gave the episode a C grade , said , " This wasn ’ t a terrible half @-@ hour of comedy by any stretch . It drifted by easily enough . But I ’ m already having to scour my notes to remind myself of the stuff that was funny . " " Canvassing " was first broadcast in Australia on Channel Seven on December 8 , 2009 , and received a positive review from The Sydney Morning Herald writer Mark Ellis . He particularly praised Poehler and Ansari , and said of the episode , " Tune in just to hear her say to her canvassing companion , who complains it 's hot and wants to cool off : ' We could blow in each other 's faces . ' " 
 = = DVD release = = 
 " Canvassing " , along with the five other first season episodes of Parks and Recreation , was released on a one @-@ disc DVD set in the United States on September 8 , 2009 . The DVD included cast and crew commentary tracks for each episode , as well as about 30 minutes of deleted scenes . 
 The deleted scenes included on the DVD were originally featured on the official Parks and Recreation website after the episode aired . In the first , a minute @-@ long clip , Ron tries to take a job offer that was previously offered to him at an Internet flower company web site , but when he finds the business is doing so poorly , he sadly realizes he will be in his government job for a long time . In a second minute @-@ long clip , Leslie talks about her very detailed life plan , which involves eventually becoming head of the parks department , then governor of Indiana , then U.S. vice president and then getting married at age 84 . The deleted clips were featured on the Parks and Recreation official website within a week of the episode 's original production date . 
 = Fort Lauderdale , Florida = 
 Fort Lauderdale / <unk> <unk> / ( frequently abbreviated as Ft . Lauderdale ) is a city in the U.S. state of Florida , 28 miles ( 45 km ) north of Miami . It is the county seat of Broward County . As of the 2010 census , the city had a population of 165 @,@ 521 . It is a principal city of the South Florida metropolitan area , which was home to 5 @,@ 564 @,@ 635 people at the 2010 census . 
 The city is a popular tourist destination , with an average year @-@ round temperature of 75 @.@ 5 ° F ( 24 @.@ 2 ° C ) , and 3 @,@ 000 hours of sunshine per year . Greater Fort Lauderdale which takes in all of Broward County hosted 12 million visitors in 2012 , including 2 @.@ 8 million international visitors . The city and county in 2012 collected $ 43 @.@ 9 million from the 5 % bed tax it charges , after hotels in the area recorded an occupancy rate for the year of 72 @.@ 7 percent and an average daily rate of $ 114 @.@ 48 . The district has 561 hotels and motels comprising nearly 35 @,@ 000 rooms . Forty six cruise ships sailed from Port Everglades in 2012 . Greater Fort Lauderdale has over 4 @,@ 000 restaurants , 63 golf courses , 12 shopping malls , 16 museums , 132 nightclubs , 278 parkland campsites , and 100 marinas housing 45 @,@ 000 resident yachts . 
 Fort Lauderdale is named after a series of forts built by the United States during the Second Seminole War . The forts took their name from Major William Lauderdale ( 1782 – 1838 ) , younger brother of Lieutenant Colonel James Lauderdale . William Lauderdale was the commander of the detachment of soldiers who built the first fort . However , development of the city did not begin until 50 years after the forts were abandoned at the end of the conflict . Three forts named " Fort Lauderdale " were constructed ; the first was at the fork of the New River , the second at Tarpon Bend on the New River between the Colee Hammock and Rio Vista neighborhoods , and the third near the site of the Bahia Mar Marina . 
 = = History = = 
 The area in which the city of Fort Lauderdale would later be founded was inhabited for more than two thousand years by the Tequesta Indians . Contact with Spanish explorers in the 16th century proved disastrous for the Tequesta , as the Europeans unwittingly brought with them diseases , such as smallpox , to which the native populations possessed no resistance . For the Tequesta , disease , coupled with continuing conflict with their Calusa neighbors , contributed greatly to their decline over the next two centuries . By 1763 , there were only a few Tequesta left in Florida , and most of them were evacuated to Cuba when the Spanish ceded Florida to the British in 1763 , under the terms of the Treaty of Paris ( 1763 ) , which ended the Seven Years ' War . Although control of the area changed between Spain , United Kingdom , the United States , and the Confederate States of America , it remained largely undeveloped until the 20th century . 
 The Fort Lauderdale area was known as the " New River Settlement " before the 20th century . In the 1830s there were approximately 70 settlers living along the New River . William Cooley , the local Justice of the Peace , was a farmer and wrecker , who traded with the Seminole Indians . On January 6 , 1836 , while Cooley was leading an attempt to salvage a wrecked ship , a band of Seminoles attacked his farm , killing his wife and children , and the children 's tutor . The other farms in the settlement were not attacked , but all the white residents in the area abandoned the settlement , fleeing first to the Cape Florida Lighthouse on Key Biscayne , and then to Key West . 
 The first United States stockade named Fort Lauderdale was built in 1838 , and subsequently was a site of fighting during the Second Seminole War . The fort was abandoned in 1842 , after the end of the war , and the area remained virtually unpopulated until the 1890s . It was not until Frank Stranahan arrived in the area in 1893 to operate a ferry across the New River , and the Florida East Coast Railroad 's completion of a route through the area in 1896 , that any organized development began . The city was incorporated in 1911 , and in 1915 was designated the county seat of newly formed Broward County . 
 Fort Lauderdale 's first major development began in the 1920s , during the Florida land boom of the 1920s . The 1926 Miami Hurricane and the Great Depression of the 1930s caused a great deal of economic dislocation . In July 1935 , an African @-@ American man named Rubin Stacy was accused of robbing a white woman at knife point . He was arrested and being transported to a Miami jail when police were run off the road by a mob . A group of 100 white men proceeded to hang Stacy from a tree near the scene of his alleged robbery . His body was riddled with some twenty bullets . The murder was subsequently used by the press in Nazi Germany to discredit US critiques of its own persecution of Jews , Communists , and Catholics . 
 When World War II began , Fort Lauderdale became a major US base , with a Naval Air Station to train pilots , radar operators , and fire control operators . A Coast Guard base at Port Everglades was also established . 
 On 4 July 1961 African Americans started a series of protests , wade @-@ ins , at beaches that were off @-@ limits to them , to protest " the failure of the county to build a road to the Negro beach " . On 11 July 1962 a verdict by Ted Cabot went against the city 's policy of racial segregation of public beaches . 
 Today , Fort Lauderdale is a major yachting center , one of the nation 's largest tourist destinations , and the center of a metropolitan division with 1 @.@ 8 million people . 
 = = = Population size = = = 
 After the war ended , service members returned to the area , spurring an enormous population explosion which dwarfed the 1920s boom . The 1960 Census counted 83 @,@ 648 people in the city , about 230 % of the 1950 figure . A 1967 report estimated that the city was approximately 85 % developed , and the 1970 population figure was 139 @,@ 590 . 
 After 1970 , as Fort Lauderdale became essentially built out , growth in the area shifted to suburbs to the west . As cities such as Coral Springs , Miramar , and Pembroke Pines experienced explosive growth , Fort Lauderdale 's population stagnated , and the city actually shrank by almost 4 @,@ 000 people between 1980 , when the city had 153 @,@ 279 people , and 1990 , when the population was 149 @,@ 377 . A slight rebound brought the population back up to 152 @,@ 397 at the 2000 census . Since 2000 , Fort Lauderdale has gained slightly over 18 @,@ 000 residents through annexation of seven neighborhoods in unincorporated Broward County . 
 = = Geography and climate = = 
 = = = Location = = = 
 According to the United States Census Bureau , the city has a total area of 38 @.@ 6 square miles ( 99 @.@ 9 km2 ) , 34 @.@ 7 square miles ( 90 @.@ 0 km2 ) of which is land and 3 @.@ 8 square miles ( 9 @.@ 9 km2 ) of which is water ( 9 @.@ 87 % ) . Fort Lauderdale is known for its extensive network of canals ; there are 165 miles ( 266 km ) of waterways within the city limits . 
 The city of Fort Lauderdale is adjacent to the Atlantic Ocean , includes 7 miles ( 11 km ) of beaches , and borders the following municipalities : 
 The northwestern section of Fort Lauderdale is separate from the remainder of the city , connected only by the Cypress Creek Canal as it flows under I @-@ 95 . This section of Fort Lauderdale borders the cities of Tamarac and Oakland Park on its south side . Oakland Park also borders Fort Lauderdale on the west side of its northeastern portion . The greater portion of Fort Lauderdale in the south is bordered , along its north side by Wilton Manors . 
 Off the coast of Fort Lauderdale is the Osborne Reef , an artificial reef made of discarded tires that has proven to be an ecological disaster . The dumping began in the 1960s , with the intent to provide habitat for fish while disposing of trash from the land . However , in the rugged and corrosive environment of the ocean , nylon straps used to secure the tires wore out , cables rusted , and tires broke free . The tires posed a particular threat after breaking free from their restraints . The tires then migrated shoreward and ran into a living reef tract , washed up on its slope and killed many things in their path . In recent years , thousands of tires have also washed up on nearby beaches , especially during hurricanes . Local authorities are now working to remove the 700 @,@ 000 tires , in cooperation with the U.S. Army , Navy and Coast Guard . 
 = = = Neighborhoods = = = 
 Fort Lauderdale has an official program for designating and recognizing neighborhoods . Under the Neighborhood Organization Recognition Program , more than 60 distinct neighborhoods have received official recognition from the city . An additional 25 – 30 neighborhoods exist without official recognition , although the city 's neighborhood map displays them as well . 
 = = = Climate = = = 
 Fort Lauderdale features a tropical rainforest climate ( Köppen Af ) with little seasonal variation in temperature . Average monthly temperatures are always above 65 ° F ( 18 @.@ 3 ° C ) and average monthly precipitation is above 2 @.@ 39 inches ( 60 @.@ 71 mm ) . This qualifies the city 's climate as a tropical climate , and the city does not have a true dry season . While some rain does fall in winter , the majority of precipitation is received during the summer months ( see climate chart below ) . 
 Summers from May through October are hot , humid , and wet with average high temperatures of 86 – 90 ° F ( 30 – 32 ° C ) and lows of 71 – 76 ° F ( 22 – 24 ° C ) . During this period , more than half of summer days may bring afternoon or evening thunderstorms . The record high temperature of 100 ° F ( 38 ° C ) was recorded on June 22 , 2009 . 
 Winters from November through April are warm and mostly dry with average high temperatures of 75 – 82 ° F ( 24 – 28 ° C ) and lows of 59 – 67 ° F ( 15 – 19 ° C ) . However , the city experiences occasional cold fronts during this period , bringing high temperatures in the 60s ° F ( 16 @-@ 21 ° C ) and lows in the 40s ° F ( 4 @-@ 10 ° C ) , lasting only for a day or so . Rare frosts occur every few decades . Only once in reported history have snow flurries been reported in the air or trace amounts on the ground – on January 19 , 1977 . During the dry season ( winter ) , brush fires can be a concern in many years . 
 Annual average precipitation is 64 @.@ 2 inches ( 1 @,@ 630 mm ) , with most of it occurring during the wet season from May through October . However , rainfall occurs in all months , even during the drier months from November through April , mainly as short @-@ lived heavy afternoon thunderstorms . Fort Lauderdale has an average of 143 rain days and 250 sunshine days annually . The hurricane season is between June 1 and November 30 with major hurricanes most likely to affect the city or state in September and October . The most recent storms to directly affect the city were Hurricane Katrina and Hurricane Wilma , both of which struck the city in 2005 . Other direct hits were Hurricane Cleo in 1964 , Hurricane King in 1950 , and the 1947 Fort Lauderdale Hurricane . 
 = = Demographics = = 
 As of 2010 , those of Hispanic or Latino ancestry ancestry accounted for 13 @.@ 7 % of Fort Lauderdale 's population . Out of the 13 @.@ 7 % , 2 @.@ 5 % were Cuban , 2 @.@ 3 % Puerto Rican , 1 @.@ 7 % Mexican , 1 @.@ 1 % Colombian , 0 @.@ 9 % Guatemalan , 0 @.@ 8 % Salvadoran , 0 @.@ 6 % Honduran , and 0 @.@ 6 % were Peruvian . 
 As of 2010 , those of African ancestry accounted for 31 @.@ 0 % of Fort Lauderdale 's population , which includes African Americans . Out of the 31 @.@ 0 % , 10 @.@ 0 % were West Indian or Afro @-@ Caribbean American ( 6 @.@ 4 % Haitian , 2 @.@ 5 % Jamaican , 0 @.@ 4 % Bahamian , 0 @.@ 2 % Other or Unspecified West Indian , 0 @.@ 2 % British West Indian , 0 @.@ 1 % Trinidadian and <unk> , 0 @.@ 1 % Barbadian ) , 0 @.@ 6 % were Black Hispanics , and 0 @.@ 5 % were Subsaharan African . 
 As of 2010 , those of ( non @-@ Hispanic white ) European ancestry accounted for 52 @.@ 5 % of Fort Lauderdale 's population . Out of the 52 @.@ 5 % , 10 @.@ 3 % were Irish , 10 @.@ 1 % German , 8 @.@ 1 % Italian , 7 @.@ 1 % English , 3 @.@ 0 % Polish , 2 @.@ 1 % French , 1 @.@ 9 % Russian , 1 @.@ 7 % Scottish , 1 @.@ 2 % Scotch @-@ Irish , 1 @.@ 0 % Dutch , 1 @.@ 0 % Swedish , 0 @.@ 6 % Greek , 0 @.@ 6 % Hungarian , 0 @.@ 5 % Norwegian , and 0 @.@ 5 % were French Canadian . 
 As of 2010 , those of Asian ancestry accounted for 1 @.@ 5 % of Fort Lauderdale 's population . Out of the 1 @.@ 5 % , 0 @.@ 4 % were Indian , 0 @.@ 3 % Filipino , 0 @.@ 3 % Other Asian , 0 @.@ 2 % Chinese , 0 @.@ 1 % Vietnamese , 0 @.@ 1 % Japanese , and 0 @.@ 1 % were Korean . 
 In 2010 , 7 @.@ 1 % of the population considered themselves to be of only American ancestry ( regardless of race or ethnicity . ) And 0 @.@ 6 % were of Arab ancestry , as of 2010 . 
 As of 2010 , there were 74 @,@ 786 occupied households , while 19 @.@ 7 % were vacant . 17 @.@ 7 % had children under the age of 18 living with them , 30 @.@ 4 % were married couples living together , 12 @.@ 3 % have a female head of household with no husband present , and 52 @.@ 4 % were non @-@ families . 39 @.@ 4 % of all households were made up of individuals and 11 @.@ 1 % had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older ( 4 @.@ 8 % male and 6 @.@ 3 % female . ) The average household size was 2 @.@ 17 and the average family size was 3 @.@ 00 . 
 In 2010 , the city population was spread out with 17 @.@ 6 % under the age of 18 , 8 @.@ 1 % from 18 to 24 , 28 @.@ 4 % from 25 to 44 , 30 @.@ 6 % from 45 to 64 , and 15 @.@ 3 % who were 65 years of age or older . The median age was 42 @.@ 2 years . For every 100 females there were 111 @.@ 8 males . For every 100 females age 18 and over , there were 113 @.@ 1 males . 
 As of 2010 , the median income for a household in the city was $ 49 @,@ 818 , and the median income for a family was $ 59 @,@ 238 . Males had a median income of $ 46 @,@ 706 versus $ 37 @,@ 324 for females . The per capita income for the city was $ 35 @,@ 828 . About 13 @.@ 1 % of families and 18 @.@ 2 % of the population were below the poverty line , including 30 @.@ 3 % of those under age 18 and 12 @.@ 5 % of those aged 65 or over . 
 In 2010 , 21 @.@ 3 % of the city 's population was foreign @-@ born . Of foreign @-@ born residents , 69 @.@ 6 % were born in Latin America and 15 @.@ 3 % were born in Europe , with smaller percentages from North America , Africa , Asia , and Oceania . 
 In 2000 , Fort Lauderdale had the twenty @-@ sixth highest percentage of Haitian residents in the US , at 6 @.@ 9 % of the city 's population , and the 127th highest percentage of Cuban residents , at 1 @.@ 7 % of the city 's residents . 
 Like South Florida in general , Fort Lauderdale has many residents who can speak languages other than English , although its proportion is lower than the county average . As of 2000 , 75 @.@ 63 % of the population spoke only English at home , while 24 @.@ 37 % spoke other first languages . Speakers of Spanish were 9 @.@ 43 % , French Creole ( mostly Haitian Creole ) 7 @.@ 52 % , French 2 @.@ 04 % , Portuguese 1 @.@ 02 % , Italian 0 @.@ 82 % , and German at 0 @.@ 80 % . 
 The city , along with adjacent small cities Oakland Park and Wilton Manors , is known for its large LGBT community and has one of the highest ratios of gay men and lesbians , with gay men being more largely present , in the United States . The city is also known as a popular vacation spot for gays and lesbians , with many LGBT or LGBT @-@ friendly hotels and guesthouses . Fort Lauderdale hosts the Stonewall Library & Archives , and in neighboring Wilton Manors there is a large LGBT community center , the Pride Center , and the World AIDS Museum and Educational Center . 
 = = Economy = = 
 Fort Lauderdale 's economy has diversified over <unk> the 1940s through the 1980s , the city was known as a spring break destination for college students . However , the college crowd has since dwindled , with the city now attracting wealthier tourists . Cruise ships and nautical recreation provide the basis for much of the revenue raised by tourism . There is a convention center located west of the beach and southeast of downtown , with 600 @,@ 000 square feet ( 55 @,@ 742 m2 ) of space , including a 200 @,@ 000 @-@ square @-@ foot ( 18 @,@ 581 m2 ) main exhibit hall . Approximately 30 % of the city 's 10 million annual visitors attend conventions at the center . 
 The downtown area , especially around Las Olas Boulevard , first underwent redevelopment starting in 2002 and now hosts many new hotels and high @-@ rise condominium developments . The downtown area is the largest in Broward County , although there are other cities in the county with commercial centers . Office buildings and highrises include Las Olas River House , Las Olas Grand , 110 Tower ( formerly AutoNation Tower ) , Bank of America Plaza , One Financial Plaza , Broward Financial Center , One East Broward Boulevard , Barnett Bank Plaza , PNC Center , New River Center , One Corporate Center , SunTrust Centre , 101 Tower , and <unk> Tower . 
 The Fort Lauderdale metropolitan area foreclosures increased 127 @.@ 4 % from 2006 to 2007 , or one filing per 48 households in the quarter . Fort Lauderdale ranks fourth in the list of top 10 metropolitan areas ranked by foreclosure filings per household for the third quarter of 2007 . 
 Fort Lauderdale is a major manufacturing and maintenance center for yachts . The boating industry is responsible for over 109 @,@ 000 jobs in the county . With its many canals , and proximity to the Bahamas and Caribbean , it is also a popular yachting vacation stop , and home port for 42 @,@ 000 boats , and approximately 100 marinas and boatyards . Additionally , the annual Fort Lauderdale International Boat Show , the world 's largest boat show , brings over 125 @,@ 000 people to the city each year . 
 Companies based in the Fort Lauderdale area include AutoNation , Citrix Systems , DHL Express , Spirit Airlines , and National Beverage Corporation . The largest employers in the county are Tenet Healthcare , which employs 5 @,@ 000 people ; American Express , which employs 4 @,@ 200 ; The Continental Group , which employs 3 @,@ 900 ; Motorola , which employs 3 @,@ 000 , and Maxim Integrated Products , which employs 2 @,@ 000 . 
 Gulfstream International Airlines , a commuter airline , is headquartered in nearby Dania Beach . An Online Trading Academy center is also located in the city . 
 = = Government = = 
 Fort Lauderdale has a Commission @-@ Manager form of government . City policy is set by a city commission of five elected members : the mayor and four district commission members . In 1998 , the municipal code was amended to limit the mayoral term . The mayor of Fort Lauderdale now serves a three @-@ year term and cannot serve more than three consecutive terms . The current mayor is John P. " Jack " Seiler . He succeeds the longest serving mayor , Jim <unk> , 1991 @-@ 2009 . Administrative functions are performed by a city manager , who is appointed by the city commission . Fort Lauderdale Fire @-@ Rescue Department provides Fire and Emergency Medical Services . 
 = = = Federal representation = = = 
 The United States Postal Service operates post offices in Fort Lauderdale . The Fort Lauderdale Main Post Office is located at 1900 West Oakland Park Boulevard in the city of Oakland Park . Post offices within the city limits include <unk> , Colee , Coral Ridge , Gateway Station , Melrose Vista , and Southside Station . 
 = = Education = = 
 According to 2000 census data , 79 @.@ 0 % of the city 's population aged 25 or older were high school graduates , slightly below the national figure of 80 @.@ 4 % . 27 @.@ 9 % held at least a baccalaureate , slightly higher than the national figure of 24 @.@ 4 % . Broward County Public Schools operates 23 public schools in Fort Lauderdale . 2007 Florida Comprehensive Assessment Test ( <unk> ) results for Fort Lauderdale 's public schools were mixed ; while ten ( of sixteen ) elementary schools and one ( of four ) middle schools received " A " or " B " grades , Sunland Park Elementary School and Arthur Ashe Middle School received failing grades . Boyd Anderson High School , which is located in Lauderdale Lakes but whose attendance zone includes part of Fort Lauderdale , also received a failing grade . None of the three failing schools have failed twice in a four @-@ year period , thus triggering the " Opportunity Scholarship Program " school choice provisions of the Florida 's education plan . 
 Nine institutions of higher learning have main or satellite campuses in the city : 
 Broward College BC ( Willis Holcombe Downtown Center ) 
 City College 
 Florida Atlantic University FAU ( satellite campus ) 
 Florida International University FIU ( satellite campus ) 
 Keiser University 
 Nova Southeastern University NSU ( satellite campus ) 
 The Art Institute of Fort Lauderdale 
 University of Phoenix ( Cypress Creek Learning Center ) 
 Jersey College 
 Additionally , the Davenport , Iowa @-@ based Kaplan University 's Corporate headquarters and an academic support center are located in the city . 
 = = Transportation = = 
 Local bus transportation is provided by Broward County Transit ( BCT ) , the county bus system . BCT provides for connections with the bus systems in other parts of the metropolitan area : Metrobus in Dade County and Palm Tran in Palm Beach County . Tri @-@ Rail , a commuter rail system , connects the major cities and airports of South Florida . In November 2006 , Broward County voters rejected a one @-@ cent @-@ per @-@ hundred sales tax increase intended to fund transportation projects such as light rail and expansion of the bus system . 
 Four railroads serve Fort Lauderdale . Florida East Coast Railroad ( FEC ) and CSX Transportation are freight lines , Amtrak provides passenger service to other cities on the Atlantic coast via the Fort Lauderdale station , and Tri @-@ Rail provides commuter service between Palm Beach County , Broward County ( including two stations in Fort Lauderdale ) , and Miami @-@ Dade County . All Aboard Florida is constructing a new station in downtown Fort Lauderdale for its <unk> rail service connecting Miami and Orlando , Florida . 
 The Wave ( streetcar ) , a new 2 @.@ 7 @-@ mile ( 4 @.@ 3 km ) electric streetcar system costing $ 125 million , is being planned for the downtown . Most of the construction funding will come from federal ( $ 62 @.@ 5 million ) , state ( $ 37 million ) and city taxpayers ( $ 10 @.@ 5 million ) , with approximately $ 15 million from assessments on properties located within the Downtown Development Authority . Broward County ( BCT ) has committed to operating the system for the first 10 years at an expected annual cost of $ 2 million , and has guaranteed funding to cover any shortfall in ridership revenues . The construction cost of $ 50 million per mile is considerably higher than other recently built streetcar projects , in part due to the challenges of building an electric transit system over the 3rd Avenue drawbridge . 
 Fort Lauderdale @-@ Hollywood International Airport , in neighboring Dania Beach , Florida , is the city 's main airport and is the fastest @-@ growing major airport in the country . This is , in part , attributable to service by low @-@ cost carriers such as Spirit Airlines , JetBlue , Southwest Airlines and Virgin America , resulting in lower airfares than nearby Miami International Airport . Fort Lauderdale @-@ Hollywood is an emerging international gateway for the Caribbean and Latin America . Miami International Airport and Palm Beach International Airport also serve the city . 
 Fort Lauderdale is home to Port Everglades , the nation 's third busiest cruise port . It is Florida 's deepest port , and is an integral petroleum receiving point . Broward County is served by three major Interstate Highways ( I @-@ 75 , I @-@ 95 , I @-@ 595 ) and U.S. Highways such as U.S. 1 , US 27 and US 441 . The interchange between I @-@ 95 and I @-@ 595 / SR 862 is known as the Rainbow Interchange . It is also served by Florida 's Turnpike and State Highway 869 , also known as the Sawgrass Expressway . 
 = = Healthcare = = 
 Fort Lauderdale is served by Broward General Medical Center and Imperial Point Medical Center , which are operated by Broward Health , the third largest hospital consortium in the United States . Broward General is a 716 @-@ bed acute care facility which is designated as a Level I trauma center . It is also home to Chris Evert Children 's Hospital and a Heart Center of Excellence . The hospital serves as a major training site for medical students from Nova Southeastern University 's College of Osteopathic Medicine , as well as nursing and paramedic programs from throughout the area . Imperial Point Medical Center is a 204 @-@ bed facility with a hyperbaric medicine program . Holy Cross Hospital , a 571 @-@ bed hospital operated by the Sisters of Mercy , was named by HealthGrades as one of the 50 best hospitals in the country for 2007 . 
 = = Lifestyle , media , and culture = = 
 = = = Lifestyle = = = 
 As is true of many parts of Florida , the city 's population has a strong seasonal variation , as snowbirds from the north spend the winter and early spring in Florida . The city is also sometimes referred to as " Fort <unk> " because of its beaches , bars , nightclubs , and history as a spring break location , in the 1960s and 1970s , for tens of thousands of college students . However , the city has actively discouraged college students from visiting the area since the mid @-@ 1980s , passing strict laws aimed at preventing the mayhem that regularly occurred each year . The city had an estimated 350 @,@ 000 college visitors for spring break 1985 ; by 2006 , that number had declined to about 10 @,@ 000 . 
 = = = Media = = = 
 Fort Lauderdale is served by English @-@ language newspapers South Florida @-@ Sun Sentinel and The Miami Herald , Spanish @-@ language newspapers El Sentinel and El Nuevo Herald , alternative newspaper New Times Broward @-@ Palm Beach and city monthly Fort Lauderdale Magazine . 
 = = = Culture = = = 
 Fort Lauderdale 's arts and entertainment district , otherwise known as the Riverwalk Arts & Entertainment District , runs east @-@ west along Las Olas Boulevard , from the beach to the heart of downtown . The district is anchored in the West by the Broward Center for the Performing Arts , and runs through the city to the intersection of Las Olas and A1A . This intersection is the " ground zero " of Fort Lauderdale Beach , and is the site of the <unk> Room bar featured in the 1960 film Where the Boys Are , which led in large measure to the city 's former reputation as a spring break mecca . The city and its suburbs host over 4 @,@ 100 restaurants and over 120 nightclubs , many of them in the arts and entertainment district . The city is also the setting for the 1986 movie Flight of the Navigator , and host of <unk> , an annual music festival . In 2013 , the county welcomed about 1 @.@ 3 million LGBT travelers who spent about $ 1 @.@ 5 billion in area restaurants , hotels , attractions and shops , according to the Greater Fort Lauderdale Convention & Visitors Bureau . 
 = = Sports = = 
 Lockhart Stadium in Fort Lauderdale , is the current home of the Fort Lauderdale Strikers which play in the current incarnation of the North American Soccer League . It was previously the home of the original Fort Lauderdale Strikers , which played in the previous version of the North American Soccer League . The Miami Fusion of Major League Soccer played at this stadium from 1998 to 2001 . The Florida Atlantic University Owls football team played its home games at Lockhart Stadium from 2003 through 2010 . 
 Although Fort Lauderdale does not host any top division professional sports teams , the Florida Panthers of the National Hockey League play at BB & T Center in suburban Sunrise . Major League Baseball 's Miami Marlins , the National Football League 's Miami Dolphins and the Miami Heat of the National Basketball Association all play in neighboring Dade County . 
 The New York Yankees , Baltimore Orioles , and Kansas City Royals used to conduct spring training in the city at Fort Lauderdale Stadium , and NCAA Division I college sports teams of Florida International University and University of Miami play in Dade County . Florida Atlantic University 's athletic programs are located in neighboring Palm Beach County . 
 Fort Lauderdale is also home to the Fort Lauderdale Aquatic Complex , which is located at the International Swimming Hall of Fame . It contains two 25 @-@ yard ( 23 m ) by 50 @-@ meter competition pools , as well as one 20 by 25 @-@ yard ( 23 m ) diving well . The complex is open to Fort Lauderdale residents , and has also been used in many different national and international competitions since its opening in 1965 . 10 world records have been set there , from Catie Ball 's 100 m breaststroke in 1966 to Michael Phelps ' 400 m individual medley in 2002 . 
 <unk> Gaming 's Dota 2 squad is currently based in Fort Lauderdale . 
 = = Sites of interest = = 
 In addition to its museums , beaches , and nightlife , Fort Lauderdale is home to the Fort Lauderdale Swap Shop , a large indoor / outdoor flea market and the site of the world 's largest drive @-@ in movie theater , with 13 screens . 
 The International Swimming Hall of Fame is located on Fort Lauderdale beach , and houses a large aquatic complex as well as a museum , theater , and research library . 
 Hugh Taylor Birch State Park is a 180 @-@ acre ( 0 @.@ 73 km2 ) park along the beach , with nature trails , camping and picnicking areas , canoeing , and features the <unk> Visitor Center , with exhibits about the ecosystem of the park . Hugh Taylor Birch came to Florida in 1893 . He purchased ocean @-@ front property for about a dollar per acre , he eventually owned a 3 @.@ 5 @-@ mile stretch of beachfront . The Bonnet House is a historic home in Fort Lauderdale , Florida , United States . Bonnet House 's modern history began when Birch gave the Bonnet House property as a wedding gift to his daughter Helen and her husband , Chicago artist Frederic Clay Bartlett in 1919 . The site was listed on the National Register of Historic places in 1984 and declared a historic landmark by the City of Fort Lauderdale in 2002 . 
 Henry E. Kinney Tunnel on U.S. Route 1 is the only tunnel on a state road in the state of Florida . It was constructed in 1960 , and its 864 @-@ foot ( 263 m ) length travels underneath the New River and Las Olas Boulevard . 
 The Florida Everglades is one of the most popular sites of interest among visitors to Fort Lauderdale . There are numerous services available to bring visitors from Fort Lauderdale Beach to the Everglades . Just minutes from the beach is the Riverwalk Arts and Entertainment District in downtown Fort Lauderdale , home to cultural attractions , shops , parks and restaurants . Along Riverwalk , the brick @-@ lined meandering promenade , discover the Broward Center for the Performing Arts , Museum of Discovery and Science with its AutoNation 3D IMAX Theater , Florida Grand Opera , Fort Lauderdale Historical Center , Stranahan House and the Museum of Art . 
 Las Olas Boulevard is a popular thoroughfare in downtown Fort Lauderdale that runs from Andrews Avenue in the Central Business District to A1A and Fort Lauderdale Beach . The boulevard is a popular attraction for locals and visitors , being ideally situated close to Fort Lauderdale beach , Fort Lauderdale @-@ Hollywood International Airport and Port Everglades . It is considered to be South Florida 's most architecturally unique , authentic , and eclectic shopping and dining district . 
 = Khalid al @-@ Mihdhar = 
 Khalid Muhammad Abdallah al @-@ Mihdhar ( Arabic : خالد <unk> , Khālid al @-@ <unk> ; also transliterated as <unk> ) ( May 16 , 1975 – September 11 , 2001 ) was one of five hijackers of American Airlines Flight 77 , which was flown into the Pentagon as part of the September 11 attacks . 
 Mihdhar was born in Saudi Arabia and fought in the Bosnian War during the 1990s . In early 1999 , he traveled to Afghanistan where , as an experienced and respected jihadist , he was selected by Osama bin Laden to participate in the attacks . Mihdhar arrived in California with fellow hijacker Nawaf al @-@ Hazmi in January 2000 , after traveling to Malaysia for the Kuala Lumpur al @-@ Qaeda Summit . At this point , the CIA was aware of Mihdhar , and he was photographed in Malaysia with another al @-@ Qaeda member who was involved in the USS Cole bombing . The CIA did not inform the FBI when it learned that Mihdhar and Hazmi had entered the United States , and Mihdhar was not placed on any watchlists until late August 2001 . 
 Upon arriving in San Diego , California , Mihdhar and Hazmi were to train as pilots , but spoke English poorly and did not do well with flight lessons . In June 2000 , Mihdhar left the United States for Yemen , leaving Hazmi behind in San Diego . Mihdhar spent some time in Afghanistan in early 2001 and returned to the United States in early July 2001 . He stayed in New Jersey in July and August , before arriving in the Washington , D.C. area at the beginning of September . 
 On the morning of September 11 , 2001 , Mihdhar boarded American Airlines Flight 77 , which was hijacked approximately 30 minutes after take off . The plane was deliberately crashed into the Pentagon , killing all 64 people aboard the flight , along with 125 on the ground . 
 = = Background = = 
 Khalid al @-@ Mihdhar was born on May 16 , 1975 in Mecca , Saudi Arabia to a prominent family , related to the Quraysh tribe of Mecca . Little is known about his life before the age of 20 , when he and childhood friend Nawaf al @-@ Hazmi went to Bosnia to fight with the mujahideen in the Bosnian War . After the war , Mihdhar and Hazmi went to Afghanistan where they fought alongside the Taliban against the Northern Alliance , and al @-@ Qaeda would later dub Nawaf his " second in command " . In 1997 , Mihdhar told his family that he was leaving to fight in Chechnya , though it is not certain that he actually went to Chechnya . The same year , both men attracted the attention of Saudi intelligence , who believed they were involved in arms smuggling , and the following year they were eyed as possible collaborators in the 1998 United States embassy bombings in East Africa after it emerged that Mohamed Rashed Daoud Al @-@ <unk> had given the FBI the phone number of Mihdhar 's father @-@ in @-@ law ; 967 @-@ 1 @-@ <unk> , which turned out to be a key communications hub for al @-@ Qaeda militants , and eventually tipped off the Americans about the upcoming Kuala Lumpur al @-@ Qaeda Summit . 
 In the late 1990s , Mihdhar married Hoda al @-@ Hada , who was the sister of a comrade from Yemen , and they had two daughters . Through marriage , Mihdhar was related to a number of individuals involved with al @-@ Qaeda in some way . Mihdhar 's father @-@ in @-@ law , Ahmad Mohammad Ali al @-@ Hada , helped facilitate al @-@ Qaeda communications in Yemen , and in late 2001 , Mihdhar 's brother @-@ in @-@ law , Ahmed al @-@ <unk> , was captured in Azerbaijan and sent to Guantanamo Bay on charges of supporting a plot to bomb ships in the Strait of Hormuz . 
 = = = Selection for the attacks = = = 
 In Spring 1999 , al @-@ Qaeda founder Osama bin Laden committed to support the 9 / 11 attacks plot , which was largely organized by prominent al @-@ Qaeda member Khalid Sheikh Mohammed . Mihdhar and Hazmi were among the first group of participants selected for the operation , along with Tawfiq bin Attash and Abu Bara al Yemeni , al @-@ Qaeda members from Yemen . Mihdhar , who had spent time in al @-@ Qaeda camps in the 1990s , was known and highly regarded by Bin Laden . Mihdhar was so eager to participate in jihad operations in the United States that he had already obtained a one @-@ year B @-@ 1 / B @-@ 2 ( tourist / business ) multiple @-@ entry visa from the consulate in Jeddah , Saudi Arabia on April 7 , 1999 , one day after obtaining a new passport . Mihdhar listed the Los Angeles Sheraton as his intended destination . 
 Once selected , Mihdhar and Hazmi were sent to the Mes <unk> training camp in Afghanistan . In late 1999 , Hazmi , Attash and Yemeni went to Karachi , Pakistan to see Mohammed , who instructed them on Western culture and travel ; however , Mihdhar did not go to Karachi , instead returning to Yemen . He was known as <unk> during the preparations . 
 = = 2000 = = 
 = = = Malaysia summit = = = 
 The CIA was aware of Mihdhar and Hazmi 's involvement with al @-@ Qaeda , having been informed by Saudi intelligence during a 1999 meeting in Riyadh . Based on information uncovered by the FBI in the 1998 United States embassy bombings case , the National Security Agency ( NSA ) began tracking the communications of Hada , Mihdhar 's father @-@ in @-@ law . In late 1999 , the NSA informed the CIA of an upcoming meeting in Malaysia , which Hada mentioned would involve " Khalid " , " Nawaf " , and " Salem " , who was Hazmi 's younger brother , Salem al @-@ Hazmi . 
 On January 4 , 2000 , Mihdhar left Yemen and flew to Dubai , United Arab Emirates , where he spent the night . The CIA broke into his hotel room and photocopied his passport , which gave them his full name , birth information and passport number for the first time , and alerted them that he held an entry visa to the United States . The photocopy was sent to the CIA 's Alec Station , which was tracking al @-@ Qaeda . 
 On January 5 , 2000 , Mihdhar traveled to Kuala Lumpur , where he joined Hazmi , Attash and Yemeni , who were all arriving from Pakistan . Hamburg cell member Ramzi bin al @-@ Shibh was also at the summit , and Mohammed possibly attended . The group was in Malaysia to meet with <unk> , the leader of Jemaah Islamiyah , an Asian al @-@ Qaeda affiliate . During the Kuala Lumpur al @-@ Qaeda Summit , many key details of the 9 / 11 attacks may have been arranged . At the time , the attacks plot had an additional component involving hijacking aircraft in Asia , as well as in the United States . Attash and Yemeni were slated for this part of the plot , however , it was later canceled by Bin Laden for being too difficult to coordinate with United States operations . 
 In Malaysia , the group stayed with Yazid <unk> , a local Jemaah Islamiyah member , who provided accommodation at <unk> 's request . Both Mihdhar and Hazmi were secretly photographed at the meeting by Malaysian authorities , whom the CIA had asked to provide surveillance . The Malaysians reported that Mihdhar spoke at length with Attash , and he met with Fahd al @-@ Quso and others who were later involved in the USS Cole bombing . After the meeting , Mihdhar and Hazmi traveled to Bangkok , Thailand on January 8 and left a week later on January 15 for the United States . 
 = = = United States entry = = = 
 On January 15 , 2000 , Mihdhar and Hazmi arrived at Los Angeles International Airport from Bangkok and were admitted as tourists for a period of six months . Immediately after entering the country , Mihdhar and Hazmi met Omar al @-@ Bayoumi in an airport restaurant . Bayoumi claimed he was merely being charitable in assisting the two seemingly out @-@ of @-@ place Muslims with moving to San Diego , where he helped them find an apartment near his own , co @-@ signed their lease , and gave them $ 1 @,@ 500 to help pay their rent . Mohammed later claimed that he suggested San Diego as their destination , based on information gleaned from a San Diego phone book that listed language and flight schools . Mohammed also recommended that the two seek assistance from the local Muslim community , since neither spoke English nor had experience with Western culture . 
 While in San Diego , witnesses told the FBI he and Hazmi had a close relationship with Anwar Al Awlaki , an imam who served as their spiritual advisor . Authorities say the two regularly attended the Masjid Ar @-@ <unk> al @-@ Islami mosque Awlaki led in San Diego , and Awlaki had many closed @-@ door meetings with them , which led investigators to believe Awlaki knew about the 9 / 11 attacks in advance . 
 In early February 2000 , Mihdhar and Hazmi rented an apartment at the Parkwood Apartments complex in the Clairemont Mesa area of San Diego , and Mihdhar purchased a used 1988 Toyota Corolla . Neighbors thought that Mihdhar and Hazmi were odd because months passed without the men getting any furniture , and they slept on mattresses on the floor , yet they carried briefcases , were frequently on their mobile phones , and were occasionally picked up by a limousine . Those who met Mihdhar in San Diego described him as " dark and brooding , with a disdain for American culture " . Neighbors also said that the pair constantly played flight simulator games . 
 Mihdhar and Hazmi took flight lessons on May 5 , 2000 at the <unk> Flying Club in San Diego , with Mihdhar flying an aircraft for 42 minutes . They took additional lessons on May 10 ; however , with poor English skills , they did not do well with flight lessons . Mihdhar and Hazmi raised some suspicion when they offered extra money to their flight instructor , Richard Garza , if he would train them to fly jets . Garza refused the offer but did not report them to authorities . After the 9 / 11 attacks , Garza described the two men as " impatient students " who " wanted to learn to fly jets , specifically <unk> " . 
 = = = Return to Yemen = = = 
 Mihdhar and Hazmi moved out of the Parkwood Apartments at the end of May 2000 , and Mihdhar transferred registration for the Toyota Corolla to Hazmi . On June 10 , 2000 , Mihdhar left the United States and returned to Yemen to visit his wife , against the wishes of Mohammed who wanted him to remain in the United States to help Hazmi adapt . Mohammed was so angered by this that he decided to remove Mihdhar from the 9 / 11 plot , but he was overruled by Bin Laden . Mihdhar remained part of the plot as a muscle hijacker , who would help take over the aircraft . On October 12 , 2000 , the USS Cole was bombed by a small boat laden with explosives . After the bombing , Yemeni Prime Minister Abdul Karim al @-@ Iryani reported that Mihdhar had been one of the key planners of the attack and had been in the country at the time of the attacks . In late 2000 , Mihdhar was back in Saudi Arabia , staying with a cousin in Mecca . 
 = = 2001 = = 
 In February 2001 , Mihdhar returned to Afghanistan for several months , possibly entering across the Iranian border after a flight from Syria . FBI director Robert Mueller later stated his belief that Mihdhar served as the coordinator and organizer for the muscle hijackers . He was the last of the muscle hijackers to return to the United States . On June 10 , he returned to Saudi Arabia for a month , where he applied to re @-@ enter the United States through the Visa Express program , indicating that he intended to stay at a Marriott hotel in New York City . On his visa application , Mihdhar falsely stated that he had never previously traveled to the United States . 
 On July 4 , Mihdhar returned to the United States , arriving at New York City 's John F. Kennedy International Airport , using a new passport obtained the previous month . A digital copy of one of Mihdhar 's passports was later recovered during a search of an al @-@ Qaeda safe house in Afghanistan , which held indicators , such as fake or altered passport stamps , that Mihdhar was a member of a known terrorist group . At the time when Mihdhar was admitted to the United States , immigration inspectors had not been trained to look for such indicators . Upon arriving , Mihdhar did not check into the Marriott but instead spent a night at another hotel in the city . 
 Mihdhar bought a fake ID on July 10 from All Services Plus in Passaic County , New Jersey , which was in the business of selling counterfeit documents , including another ID to Flight 11 hijacker Abdulaziz al @-@ Omari . On August 1 , Mihdhar and fellow Flight 77 hijacker Hani Hanjour drove to Virginia in order to obtain driver 's licenses . Once they arrived , they scouted out a 7 @-@ Eleven convenience store and a dollar store in Falls Church , and found two Salvadoran immigrants who , for $ 50 each , were willing to vouch for Mihdhar and Hanjour as Virginia residents . With notarized residency forms , Mihdhar and Hanjour were able to obtain driver 's licenses at a Virginia motor vehicle office . Flight 77 hijackers Salem al @-@ Hazmi and Majed Moqed , and United Airlines Flight 93 hijacker Ziad Jarrah used the same addresses obtained from the Salvadorans to obtain Virginia driver 's licenses . 
 In August 2001 , Mihdhar and Hazmi made several visits to the library at William Paterson University in Wayne , New Jersey , where they used computers to look up travel information and book flights . On August 22 , Mihdhar and Hazmi tried to purchase flight tickets from the American Airlines online ticket @-@ merchant , but had technical difficulties and gave up . Mihdhar and Moqed were able to make flight reservations for Flight 77 on August 25 , using Moqed 's credit card ; however , the transaction did not fully go through because the billing address and the shipment address for the tickets did not match . 
 On August 31 , Mihdhar closed an account at Hudson United Bank in New Jersey , having opened the account when he arrived in July , and was with Hanjour when he made a withdrawal from an ATM in Paterson on September 1 . The next day , Mihdhar , Moqed and Hanjour traveled to Maryland , where they stayed at budget motels in Laurel . Mihdhar was among the muscle hijackers who worked out at a Gold 's Gym in Greenbelt in early September . On September 5 , Mihdhar and Moqed went to the American Airlines ticket counter at Baltimore @-@ Washington International Airport to pick up their tickets for Flight 77 , paying $ 2 @,@ 300 in cash . 
 = = = Intelligence leads = = = 
 Mihdhar was placed on a CIA watchlist on August 21 , 2001 , and a note was sent on August 23 to the Department of State and the Immigration and Naturalization Service ( INS ) suggesting that Mihdhar and Hazmi be added to their watchlists . The Federal Aviation Administration ( FAA ) was not notified about the two men . On August 23 , the CIA informed the FBI that Mihdhar had obtained a U.S. visa in Jeddah . The FBI headquarters received a copy of the Visa Express application from the Jeddah embassy on August 24 , showing the New York Marriott as Mihdhar 's destination . 
 On August 28 , the FBI New York field office requested that a criminal case be opened to determine whether Mihdhar was still in the United States , but the request was refused . The FBI ended up treating Mihdhar as an intelligence case , which meant that the FBI 's criminal investigators could not work on the case , due to the barrier separating intelligence and criminal case operations . An agent in the New York office sent an e @-@ mail to FBI headquarters saying , " Whatever has happened to this , someday someone will die , and the public will not understand why we were not more effective and throwing every resource we had at certain ' problems . ' " The reply from headquarters was , " we [ at headquarters ] are all frustrated with this issue ... [ t ] hese are the rules . <unk> does not make them up . " 
 The FBI contacted Marriott on August 30 , requesting that they check guest records , and on September 5 , they reported that no Marriott hotels had any record of Mihdhar checking in . The day before the attacks , Robert Fuller of the New York office requested that the Los Angeles FBI office check all local Sheraton Hotels , as well as Lufthansa and United Airlines bookings , because those were the two airlines Mihdhar had used to enter the country . Neither the Treasury Department 's Financial Crimes Enforcement Network nor the FBI 's Financial Review Group , which have access to credit card and other private financial records , were notified about Mihdhar prior to September 11 . 
 Regarding the CIA 's refusal to inform the FBI about Mihdhar and Hazmi , author Lawrence Wright suggests the CIA wanted to protect its turf and was concerned about giving sensitive intelligence to FBI Agent John P. O 'Neill , who Alec Station chief Michael Scheuer described as duplicitous . Wright also speculates that the CIA may have been protecting intelligence operations overseas , and might have been eying Mihdhar and Hazmi as recruitment targets to obtain intelligence on al @-@ Qaeda , although the CIA was not authorized to operate in the United States and might have been leaving them for Saudi intelligence to recruit . 
 = = September 11th attacks = = 
 On September 10 , 2001 , Mihdhar and the other hijackers checked into the Marriott Residence Inn in Herndon , Virginia , near Washington Dulles International Airport . Saleh Ibn Abdul Rahman <unk> , a prominent Saudi government official , was staying at the same hotel that night , although there is no evidence that they met or knew of each other 's presence . 
 At 06 : 22 on September 11 , 2001 , the group checked out of the hotel and headed to Dulles airport . At 07 : 15 , Mihdhar and Moqed checked in at the American Airlines ticket counter and arrived at the passenger security checkpoint at 07 : 20 . Both men set off the metal detector and were put through secondary screening . Security video footage later released shows that Moqed was <unk> , but the screener did not identify what set off the alarm , and both Moqed and Mihdhar were able to proceed without further hindrance . Mihdhar was also selected by the Computer Assisted Passenger Prescreening System ( CAPPS ) , which involved extra screening of his luggage ; however , because Mihdhar did not check any luggage , this had no effect . By 07 : 50 , Mihdhar and the other hijackers , carrying knives and box cutters , had made it through the airport security checkpoint and boarded Flight 77 to Los Angeles . Mihdhar was seated in seat 12B , next to Moqed . 
 The flight was scheduled to depart from Gate <unk> at 08 : 10 but was delayed by 10 minutes . The last routine radio communication from the plane to air traffic control occurred at 08 : 50 : 51 . At 08 : 54 , Flight 77 deviated from its assigned flight path and began to turn south , at which point the hijackers set the flight 's autopilot setting for Washington , D.C. Passenger Barbara Olson called her husband , United States Solicitor General Ted Olson ( who 's 61st birthday was on that day ) , and reported that the plane had been hijacked . At 09 : 37 : 45 , Flight 77 crashed into the west facade of the Pentagon , killing all 64 people aboard , along with 125 in the Pentagon . In the recovery process , remains of the five hijackers were identified through a process of elimination , since their DNA did not match any from the victims , and put into the custody of the FBI . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 After the attacks , the identification of Mihdhar was one of the first links suggesting that Bin Laden had played a role in their organization , since Mihdhar had been seen at the Malaysian conference speaking to Bin Laden 's associates . The FBI interrogated Quso , who was arrested following the USS Cole bombing and in custody in Yemen . Quso was able to identify Mihdhar , Hazmi and Attash in photos provided by the FBI , and he also knew Marwan al @-@ Shehhi , a hijacker aboard United Airlines Flight 175 . From Quso , the FBI was able to establish an al @-@ Qaeda link to the attacks . 
 On September 12 , 2001 , the Toyota Corolla purchased by Mihdhar was found in Dulles International Airport 's hourly parking lot . Inside the vehicle , authorities found a letter written by Mohamed Atta , a hijacker aboard American Airlines Flight 11 ; maps of Washington , D.C. and New York City ; a cashier 's check made out to a Phoenix , Arizona flight school ; four drawings of a Boeing 757 cockpit ; a box cutter ; and a page with notes and phone numbers , which contained evidence that led investigators to San Diego . 
 On September 19 , 2001 , the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation ( FDIC ) distributed a special alert that listed Mihdhar as still alive , and other reports began suggesting that a number of the alleged hijackers were likewise still alive . For instance , on September 23 , 2001 , the BBC published an article that suggested Mihdhar and others named as hijackers were still at large . The German magazine Der Spiegel later investigated the BBC 's claims of " living " hijackers and reported they were cases of mistaken identities . In 2002 , Saudi officials stated that the names of the hijackers were correct and that 15 of the 19 hijackers were Saudi . In 2006 , in response to 9 / 11 conspiracy theories surrounding its original news story , the BBC said that confusion had arisen with the common Arabic names , and that its later reports on the hijackers superseded its original story . 
 In 2005 , Army Lt. Col. Anthony Shaffer and Congressman Curt Weldon alleged that the Defense Department data mining project Able Danger identified Mihdhar , Hazmi , Shehhi and Atta as members of a Brooklyn @-@ based al @-@ Qaeda cell in early 2000 . Shaffer largely based his allegations on the recollections of Navy Captain Scott <unk> , who later recanted his recollection , telling investigators that he was " convinced that Atta was not on the chart that we had " . <unk> said that Shaffer was " relying on my recollection 100 percent " , and the Defense Department Inspector General 's report indicated that Philpott strongly supported the social network analysis techniques used in Able Danger , and might have exaggerated claims of identifying the hijackers . 
 = Say It Right = 
 " Say It Right " is a song by Canadian singer Nelly Furtado from her third studio album Loose ( 2006 ) . Written by Furtado , Tim " Timbaland " Mosley and Nate " Danja " Hills , the song was inspired by , as Furtado described it , the " spooky , keyboard @-@ driven pop sound " of the band Eurythmics , specifically their 1983 song titled , " Here Comes the Rain Again " . The song released as the album 's third single in North America and Australia ( see 2006 in music ) . The song served as the album 's fourth single in certain European and Asian countries . It was released digitally in the United Kingdom in March 2007 . It was the album 's fifth single in Latin America . 
 " Say It Right " attained worldwide success , topping the charts in more than seven countries , including the United States , France , New Zealand and many European countries . The accompanying music video for the song , directed by Rankin & Chris , portrays Furtado singing in various costumes and in various locations . The song has been performed on a number of live appearances by Furtado , including her third headlining Get Loose Tour . 
 It received a Grammy Award nomination for Best Female Pop Vocal Performance at the 2008 Grammy Awards but lost to Amy Winehouse 's " Rehab " . 
 = = Background and writing = = 
 The process of creating the song began in the recording studio one morning at around 4 : 00 a.m. , when Timbaland recommended that Furtado should go home because she was tired . Furtado , who had heard that the band U2 ( a band she says she deeply admires ) wrote many of their songs in the studio control room , said " Really ? I 'll show you " , put on her hoodie and began to " jam " . Nate Hills and Timbaland soon joined her , writing and producing as they went , and according to Furtado , this process intensified as she sang . The team used four microphones in the live room and moved them around during recording , about which Furtado said , " ... when you listen to it — there 's a lot of dimension . It kind of sounds like [ Timbaland is ] in another country " . Afterwards , they picked the best vocals and " perfected " them , before inserting " reverbs and weird alien sounds " onto them . " [ W ] e experimented a lot with depth and different sounds " , Furtado said of the making of the song . " [ It ] affected my vocals a whole lot . " 
 " Say It Right " is performed with a moderate techno groove and is written in F minor . It is set in common time ; in 4 / 4 count . The chord progression is Fm – E ♭ – D ♭ – B ♭ m . Furtado 's vocal range spans from Ab3 to F5 . Furtado has cited the " spooky , keyboard @-@ driven pop sound " of the band Eurythmics , particularly their 1983 song " Here Comes the Rain Again " , as an influence on " Say It Right " and other tracks on Loose . " I 'm not 100 percent sure what [ " Here Comes the Rain Again " is ] about , but it always takes me away to another place , and I love it " , she said . In fact the song deals with mystic or transcendental experiences as she explains in an interview in 2007 . " It is a kind of a magical song . It has a mystery to it , that I have not quite figured out . It has a haunting twist to it . " 
 In other interviews she said that she does not really know what " Say It Right " is about , " but it captures the feeling I had when I wrote it , and it taps into this other sphere . " The song was played during the Miss Universe 2007 Introductory Ceremony , the 2006 American Music Awards , and Concert for Diana . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Billboard magazine called the song " a Pussycat Dolls @-@ inspired contempo jam , high on hooks and of @-@ the @-@ moment production . Well done , if in the most generic sense . " About.com 's Bill Lamb gave the song 4 / 5 stars , saying that with " Say It Right " , " many pop music fans are likely to take a second look at purchasing [ Loose ] " . He described the song as " the foundation of Loose " and " a welcomed presence in the pop top 40 " . IGN Music calls the song " ... one of the brightest moments on the album " and " another throwback to the ' 80s " which " ... lets loose with the most hypnotic chorus " . Allmusic 's Stephen Thomas Erlewine considered the song " a dark meditative piece that would have fit on [ Furtado 's ] previous records " . The New York Times described the song as " building a groove from hard drums and ghostly , multitracked voices , and Ms. Furtado sings a melancholy chorus she doesn 't quite believe " , comparing the coda , with music getting louder and then slowly fading , " the way the best — and worst — nights out often do " . Also , DJ Z 's reviewed the song as " the only single in the world to work at both a club in Manhattan , and on a safari through the natives land of ( fill in the blank ) . " The song received a nomination for Best Female Pop Vocal Performance at the 50th Annual Grammy Awards , losing to Amy Winehouse 's " Rehab " . It was also nominated for two MuchMusic Video Awards . 
