 = = Chart performance = = 
 In the United States , the song was made available for airplay at mainstream contemporary hit radio stations on 30 October 2006 . Geffen Records withdrew from radio the second single from Loose , " Maneater " , before promoting " Say It Right " . The song debuted on the Billboard Bubbling Under Hot 100 Singles chart at number twenty @-@ two in the issue dated 18 November . It entered the Billboard Hot 100 in late @-@ November at number ninety @-@ three , and it reached number one in its fourteenth week , becoming Furtado 's second number @-@ one single after " Promiscuous " ( 2006 ) . The song stayed at number one for one week , in the top ten for fourteen weeks and on the Hot 100 for thirty weeks . " Say It Right " contributed to sales of the album Loose , and was credited as being responsible for its return to the top ten on the U.S. Billboard 200 . According to Nielsen Broadcast Data Systems , " Say It Right " was the second most @-@ played song on U.S. radio in 2007 with 364 @,@ 000 plays through 2 December , and it was at number four on R & R magazine 's 2007 year @-@ end all @-@ format top 100 songs list . On the Billboard Hot 100 year @-@ end chart , it was ranked ninth . The RIAA certified " Say It Right " platinum in December 2007 . " Say It Right " peaked at number one for ten weeks on the Canadian BDS Airplay Chart , which it entered in early December , becoming Furtado 's third Canadian number @-@ one single . According to BDS , it was the fourth most @-@ played song of 2007 on Canadian radio , amassing around 56 @,@ 900 detections . The song charted on the BDS Airplay Chart for sixty @-@ two weeks . 
 The song had equal success on Billboard 's Canadian Hot 100 ; it reached number five on unpublished versions of the chart , and debuted when the chart was introduced the week of 2 June 2007 . The song remained on the Canadian Hot 100 for over six months after the chart was officially introduced . " Say It Right " peaked at number two for three consecutive weeks on the Australian ARIA Singles Chart , giving Loose a " second wind " on the albums chart , according to the Herald Sun ; ARIA accredited it as a platinum single . The single debuted at number 37 on the UK Singles Chart in February 2007 , before reaching its peak ; ten , a month later , and by doing so , it broke the record for the highest chart placing for a download @-@ only single , after chart regulations were changed to allow songs not accompanied by a physical format to chart . Since then , the record was broken by the Coldplay with their number @-@ one hit " Viva la Vida " . The popularity of " Say It Right " contributed to sales of Loose in the UK , according to Music Week , helping the album reach its highest chart position since its first week of release . The song was the twenty @-@ ninth best @-@ selling single of 2007 in the UK . The song also spent 37 weeks on the UK Singles Chart , which is twice as long as any other of Furtado 's songs ( 23 of those in the top 40 ) . 
 In France , the song debuted at number one with 8 @,@ 100 copies sold on its release , becoming the lowest selling number @-@ one in a week . In Germany , it debuted at number two , where it stayed for nine non @-@ consecutive weeks , behind DJ Ötzi and Nik P. ' s Ein Stern ( ... der deinen <unk> <unk> ) which topped the German chart for several months . It became the third most successful song of 2007 in Germany . It was the most successful single of 2007 in the European Hit Radio . In Spain , the song enjoyed a great success , reaching number one on the singles chart for two @-@ consecutive weeks . The song became her fourth number one hit on the country after " Fotografía " , " Te Busqué " and " All Good Things ( Come to an End ) " . " Say It Right " is Nelly Furtado 's most successful song in Australia , Austria , Romania , Switzerland and Sweden . It is Furtado 's second most successful single in Norway , the Netherlands , France ( after " All Good Things ( Come to an End ) " ) . New Zealand ( after " Turn Off the Light " ) , and United States ( after " Promiscuous " ) . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The music video for " Say It Right " was directed by British duo Rankin & Chris and filmed in Los Angeles , California in late October 2006 . It was shot back @-@ to @-@ back with the video for " All Good Things ( Come to an End ) " , the album 's third single in Europe . Furtado called the video her " first action thing " since the video for her 2000 single , " I 'm like a Bird " , and said that it featured her experiencing what she called " a total rock @-@ star moment . It 's so iconic . " The mini @-@ feathered cocktail dress Furtado wears at the opening of the video was designed specifically for her by Australian designer Alex Perry , who said , " It 's so cool because she 's just undergone a bit of a revamp from what her previous image was ; she 's become a little more sexy and glamorous . " 
 The clip starts with a helicopter landing on a black helipad bearing Furtado 's name on top of a building , and Furtado getting out . She is shown on the roof of the building throughout the video , with the Los Angeles skyline in the background . The video features mostly face shots of her and Timbaland intercut with shots of dancers , under the careful guidance of internationally acclaimed Puerto Rican choreographer Gabriel Rivera . Furtado described the clip as " a throwback to the ' 80s ... the more surreal side " because the shots of her and Timbaland reminded her much of those of Annie Lennox and Dave Stewart in videos for Eurythmics ' singles , and " the strange relationship [ they ] had , where ... you get this intense vibe from it . And Tim and me , we 're partners , we vibe on a serious creative level , so the video captures that energy . " The video ends with Furtado climbing back into the helicopter , which flies off . 
 The video debuted on MTV 's Total Request Live in the U.S. on 6 November and on Canada 's MuchMusic in the week ending 16 November . It reached number nine on the Total Request Live top ten video countdown on 8 November , its first day on the countdown ; it returned to the countdown on 14 December and peaked at number one twice . The video reached number one on the MuchMusic series Countdown for the week ending 16 February . The " Say It Right " video was retired from TRL after spending forty days on the countdown . At the 2007 MTV Video Music Awards , Furtado was nominated in the category of Female Artist of the Year for " Say It Right " and " Maneater " . " Say It Right " was nominated for the MuchMoreMusic Award and in the Best International Video by a Canadian category at the 2007 MuchMusic Video Awards . MTV International certified the " Say It Right " video platinum for more than 6 @,@ 000 plays on the MTV network . 
 = = Remixes and covers = = 
 The official Spanish remix features <unk> . Dummies , <unk> & Lamboy , Menage Music and Peter Rauhofer produced dance remixes of " Say It Right " . Juan Martinez of Universal Music Group , the A & R person who enlisted the producers of the remixes for each single from Loose , said that the " Say It Right " remixes had received " the strongest reaction " . South African Pop Star Nic Billington covered the song as a single back in 2007 . Bloc Party covered the song on Jo Whiley 's radio show on 11 April 2007 , and Marié Digby released a version on her YouTube channel in 2007 . Swedish heavy metal band Civil War covered " Say It Right " on their debut EP , Civil War , released 13 November 2012 on Spotify . 
 = = Track listings = = 
 = = Credits = = 
 Credits are adapted from the Loose liner notes . 
 Technical 
 Recorded and mixed at : The Hit Factory , Miami , Florida 
 Personnel 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Dietrich v The Queen = 
 Dietrich v The Queen is an important legal case , stemming from an incident that took place on 17 December 1986 , that was decided in the High Court of Australia on 13 November 1992 . It concerned the nature of the right to a fair trial , and under what circumstances indigent defendants ( defendants who cannot afford legal representation ) should be provided with legal aid by the state . The case determined that although there is no absolute right to have publicly funded counsel , in most circumstances a judge should grant any request for an adjournment or stay when an accused is unrepresented . It is an important case in Australian criminal law , and also in Australian constitutional law , since it is one of a number of cases in which some members of the High Court have found implied human rights in the Australian Constitution . 
 = = Background to the case = = 
 On 17 December 1986 , the accused , a career criminal named Olaf Dietrich ( born 1952 ) , flew from Bangkok , Thailand , to Melbourne Airport . He had imported at least seventy grams of heroin , which he concealed within condoms that he had swallowed . He was arrested the next morning by the Australian Federal Police , who searched his flat and found one of the condoms in the kitchen , and some heroin in a plastic bag under a rug in another room . He was taken into custody , and passed the remainder of the condoms during the night at the hospital in Pentridge Prison . Dietrich alleged that the drugs had been planted by the police . 
 Dietrich was tried in the County Court of Victoria in 1988 for a trafficking offence under the Customs Act 1901 and certain less serious charges . During the lengthy trial the accused had no legal representation . Although he had applied to the Legal Aid Commission of Victoria for assistance , they said that they would only help him if he pleaded guilty , an option which Dietrich did not want to take . He applied to the Supreme Court of Victoria for legal assistance , but was again turned down . Although Dietrich was acquitted of the fourth charge — regarding the possession of a quantity of heroin separate to that which was involved in the first three charges — he was convicted of the principal charge in the County Court . Dietrich brought an appeal in the Supreme Court , but that court refused to hear his appeal . He then sought leave to appeal to the High Court of Australia . 
 = = Arguments = = 
 In his High Court appeal Dietrich was represented by David Grace , QC . The main argument advanced on Dietrich 's behalf was that his trial was a miscarriage of justice , since he did not have legal representation . He argued that he should have been provided with counsel at public expense , given the seriousness of the crime with which he was charged . Alternatively , he argued that the judge should have stayed or adjourned the trial until he was able to obtain counsel himself . His argument was based on the common law tradition that an accused is entitled to a fair trial . 
 = = = The right to a fair trial = = = 
 Dietrich suggested three different sources in law for the right to counsel that he asserted . The first was section 397 of the Victorian Crimes Act 1958 , ( now repealed ) , which provided that " every accused person shall be admitted after the close of the case for the prosecution to make full answer and defence thereto by legal practitioner " . However , the court found that this provision only means that an accused is entitled to counsel paid for by themselves or someone else , and not counsel provided by the state . 
 The second source that Dietrich proposed was Australia 's obligations under international law , particularly under the United Nations International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights ( ICCPR ) , to which Australia is a signatory . Article 14 ( 3 ) of the Covenant provides that an accused should have legal assistance provided for them " in any case where the interests of justice so require " . Article 6 of the European Convention of Human Rights , to which Australia is not a party , also guarantees that defendants should be provided with legal aid " when the interests of justice so require " . 
 Australia has not incorporated the ICCPR into its domestic law with any specific legislation , unlike some other international treaties , such as World Heritage treaties ( see Commonwealth v Tasmania ) . However , Dietrich argued that the common law of Australia should be developed in accordance with the principles in the ICCPR , as well as other international treaties to which Australia is a party . This is the approach used in the United Kingdom , in relation to decisions of the European Court of Human Rights , for example . But the court pointed out that this practice was usually done in relation to interpreting legislation , and in this case the court was being asked " to declare that a right which has hitherto never been recognised should now be taken to exist . " 
 The third source that Dietrich suggested was a group of similar cases in other common law countries such as the United States and Canada . In the United States , the right to counsel was guaranteed in the Sixth Amendment to the United States Constitution , part of the United States Bill of Rights . The Amendment says that " In all criminal prosecutions , the accused shall enjoy the right ... to have the Assistance of Counsel for his defence . " However , this did not necessarily mean that counsel had to be provided by the state . 
 In the case of Powell v. Alabama in 1932 , the United States Supreme Court held that the court must provide counsel to defendants in capital trials , that is trials where capital punishment was a possible sentence , if the defendants were too poor to afford their own counsel . In Johnson v. Zerbst ( 1938 ) , the Supreme Court expanded this principle to cover all federal trials , and in Gideon v. Wainwright ( 1963 ) the Court held that under the Fourteenth Amendment , the principle also applied to State courts . More recently , the Supreme Court has recognised the right of people to have counsel at other stages of criminal investigations . For example , the court has affirmed the right of indigent defendants to have counsel provided for them in interrogation after they have been arrested ( Miranda v. Arizona ) , and for line @-@ ups ( United States v. Wade ) . 
 In Canada , Section Ten of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms guarantees the right " to retain and instruct counsel without delay and to be informed of that right " , and Canadian case law has found that as a corollary of this right , there is a right to legal aid . 
 Although it is common for Australian courts to acknowledge developments in other common law countries , including the United States and Canada , the law in those countries on the right to counsel were based on particular provisions of the Constitutions or Bills of Rights of those countries . Australia did not , and still does not , have any such provisions of rights in either the Constitution or in legislation . In taking this into account , it was argued by the court that : 
 " In this respect , our constitutional law differs from the constitutional law of some of the great common law countries which , by incorporating a Bill of Rights in their Constitutions , have empowered their Courts to construe broadly expressed guarantees of individual rights to include a right to counsel . Having no comparable constitutional foundation , the Courts of this country cannot translate the rights declared by the Courts of those other countries into the municipal law of Australia . " 
 The High Court also examined a number of related propositions . In particular , they pointed out that when interpreting the legislation which established legal aid services , Australian courts did not recognise an absolute right to counsel in all circumstances , and thus the State does not need to provide counsel for the duration of the trial . The court also raised the question of what a right to counsel would actually mean in practice : that is , would a right to counsel at public expense entitle a person to counsel of a certain degree of experience ? Furthermore , the court suggested that having a right to representation would necessarily imply that a trial conducted without the accused being legally represented would necessarily be unfair , an idea which has been rejected by the Australian courts . The accused must have lost a " real chance of acquittal " before a trial can be regarded as unfair . Essentially , Australian common law recognised a right to a fair trial , but the question of whether the lack of representation caused an unfair trial had to be based on the particular circumstances of each case . 
 = = = Miscarriage of justice = = = 
 Dietrich 's other argument was that the trial judge should have used discretionary powers and granted an adjournment until Dietrich was able to provide counsel himself , and that the failure to do so caused a miscarriage of justice . Dietrich had asked the trial judge for an adjournment during the trial , but the judge said that since more than a year had passed since the offence occurred , it was in the interests of the community that the matter be dealt with promptly . 
 The High Court said that the trial judge did not seem to be aware that he had the authority to adjourn the trial . Another factor which complicated the case was that although the jury found Dietrich guilty of importing the heroin in the condoms , they found him not guilty of owning the heroin which had been hidden in a plastic bag . For the High Court , this uncertainty meant that it was possible that Dietrich could also have been acquitted of the other charges , if he had been legally represented : 
 " Central to this conclusion is the not guilty verdict returned by the jury on count four . The evidence against the applicant appears strong on all counts but , in circumstances where the jury found him not guilty on one count , how can this Court conclude that , even with the benefit of counsel , the applicant did not have any prospect of acquittal on count one , of which he was then deprived by being forced to trial unrepresented ? " 
 Significantly , the possibility that Dietrich may have been acquitted differentiates this case from the unsuccessful 1979 McInnis v R. appeal . McInnis , like Dietrich , had appealed to the High Court against his conviction , arguing that the failure to adjourn the proceedings while McInnis sought legal representation resulted in a miscarriage of justice . However , the majority in the McInnis appeal found that McInnis was very unlikely to have been acquitted , even with full representation . This was clearly not the case with Dietrich . 
 = = Judgment = = 
 The majority in the High Court decided that although there was no right at common law to have publicly provided legal representation in all cases , in some cases representation is appropriate to ensure a fair trial . Although judges no longer have the power to appoint counsel for an accused , since that function has been largely taken over by legal aid agencies , a trial judge should use their power to adjourn a case if it is in the interests of fairness that an accused have representation , which would encourage the legal aid agencies to provide counsel . 
 Two of the judges , Justice Deane and Justice Gaudron , went further and suggested that the right to representation in some circumstances is founded in the Constitution . They said that Chapter Three of the Constitution , which represents the Judicature with the notion of separation of powers , and vests judicial power exclusively in the courts , requires that judicial process and fairness be observed . 
 Another two judges , Justice Brennan and Justice Dawson , dissented , Justice Brennan arguing that it would not be proper for judges to use their power to adjourn trials to put pressure on the various legal aid agencies to change their decisions . 
 As a result of the majority decision , the court ordered that the application to appeal be granted , that the conviction be quashed , and that there be a new trial . 
 = = Consequences = = 
 The case reinvigorated debate about who should be provided with legal aid , and raised the possibility that those charged with serious offences could escape conviction if legal aid was not provided . This placed pressure on the legal aid authorities to fund these cases , and fears emerged that they would need to pull funds from other cases to meet the new demands , especially when faced with " complex criminal cases " which may entail high costs over extended periods of time . Although there are no precise figures about the effect of the decision on legal aid budgets , a Senate inquiry agreed that the decision had the potential to divert legal aid funding towards criminal cases at the expense of civil or family law matters . Among the solutions to these problems were proposals for the state legal aid commissions to maintain " emergency funds " that could be used in major criminal cases ; the South Australian Criminal Law ( Legal Representation ) Act 2002 , which was designed to allow the courts to seize a defendant 's assets to prevent false claims under the Dietrich principle ; and the introduction of legislation in the Parliament of Victoria amending the Crimes Act 1958 to allow judges to directly order that legal aid funding be granted , rather than to simply order a stay . 
 = = = Olaf Dietrich = = = 
 Although the High Court ordered that the verdict of the original conviction be overturned and that a retrial be conducted , there was never any retrial since Dietrich had already served his sentence . Dietrich was released on parole in July 1990 , and he subsequently changed his name by deed poll to Hugo Rich . 
 In 1995 he was convicted of three armed robberies and jailed for 13 years . Upon appeal two of those convictions were quashed and retrials were ordered , while a third was upheld . Only one of these counts was retried , and once again a guilty verdict was returned . In 2001 he was eligible for day leave , and he gained media attention by leaving the decision as to whether or not he should be allowed to do so up to the readers of the Herald Sun . A poll conducted by that newspaper returned a convincing " no " . 
 After his release in October 2004 , he once again faced court for firearms charges and , later , for the murder of security guard Erwin <unk> during an armed robbery in Blackburn North , Victoria on 8 March 2005 . He was found guilty of the murder of Erwin <unk> in the Supreme Court of Victoria on 12 June 2009 , and he was subsequently jailed for life with a non @-@ parole period of 30 years . 
 = 16 Cygni Bb = 
 16 Cygni Bb or HD <unk> b is an extrasolar planet approximately 69 light @-@ years away in the constellation of Cygnus . The planet was discovered orbiting the Sun @-@ like star 16 Cygni B , one of two solar @-@ mass ( M ☉ ) components of the triple star system 16 Cygni . It makes one revolution every 799 days and was the first eccentric Jupiter and planet in a triple star system to be discovered . 
 = = Discovery = = 
 In October 1996 the discovery of a planetary @-@ mass companion to the star 16 Cygni B was announced , with a mass at least 1 @.@ 68 times that of Jupiter ( MJ ) . At the time , it had the highest orbital eccentricity of any known extrasolar planet . The discovery was made by measuring the star 's radial velocity . 
 As the inclination of the orbit cannot be directly measured and as no dynamic model of the system was then published , only a lower limit on the mass could then be determined . 
 = = Orbit and mass = = 
 Unlike the planets in the Solar System , the planet 's orbit is highly elliptical , and its distance varies from 0 @.@ 54 AU at periastron to 2 @.@ 8 AU at apastron . This high eccentricity may have been caused by tidal interactions in the binary star system , and the planet 's orbit may vary chaotically between low and high @-@ eccentricity states over a period of tens of millions of years . 
 Preliminary astrometric measurements in 2001 suggested the orbit of 16 Cygni Bb may be highly inclined with respect to our line of sight ( at around 173 ° ) . This would mean the object 's mass may be around 14 MJ ; the dividing line between planets and brown dwarfs is at 13 MJ . However these measurements were later proved useful only for upper limits . 
 A mathematical study in 2012 showed that a mass of about 2 @.@ 4 MJ would be most stable in this system . This would make the body a true planet . With these tidal effects at that age , a gas giant would be most stable . 
 = = Physical characteristics = = 
 Because the planet has only been detected indirectly by measurements of its parent star , properties such as its radius , composition and temperature are unknown . 
 = = = Habitable zone = = = 
 The planet 's highly eccentric orbit means the planet would experience extreme seasonal effects . Despite this , simulations suggest that an Earth @-@ like moon would be able to support liquid water at its surface over the course of a year . Due to the eccentric orbit of this massive gas giant , it is unlikely that a habitable planet could survive in this system . 
 = Dwight Johns = 
 Brigadier General Dwight Frederick Johns ( 16 May 1894 – 8 November 1977 ) was an American soldier and general in the first half of the 20th century . He is best known for his service in the South West Pacific Area during World War II , where he headed the Advance Base and the Combined Operations Service Command during the Kokoda Track campaign and the Battle of Buna @-@ Gona . He later commanded the Advance Base at Lae and Finschhafen , and the Engineer School at Fort Belvoir . After the war he headed the Pacific Engineer Division , where he was responsible for a number of important flood control and irrigation projects . 
 = = Education and early life = = 
 Dwight Frederick Johns was born in Rockford , Illinois on 16 May 1894 . He entered the United States Military Academy at West Point as an appointee from Illinois in 1912 and graduated sixth in the class of 1916 . He was commissioned as a second lieutenant in the United States Army Corps of Engineers in June 1916 . 
 = = World War I = = 
 Johns initially served at the United States Military Academy as an instructor in the Department of Tactics but in July 1916 he was posted to the 1st Battalion of Mounted Engineers on the Mexican Border . He served with the Pancho Villa Expedition from November 1916 to February 1917 , when the 8th Engineers returned to El Paso , Texas . Johns was promoted to captain in May 1917 and major in May 1918 . He commanded the 8th Engineers from April to August 1918 . Returning to the United States Military Academy in August 1918 , he became an instructor in Drawing from August to December 1918 , and in Tactics from November to December 1918 . From December 1918 to mid @-@ 1919 he was an instructor in Mathematics . 
 = = Between the wars = = 
 Like most officers in the aftermath of World war I , Johns was reduced in rank to his substantive rank of captain in August 1919 , but was promoted to major again in February 1921 . In June 1921 he entered the Massachusetts Institute of Technology , from which he graduated in June 1922 with a Bachelor of Science degree , majoring in civil engineering . He then became Assistant District Engineer of the Detroit River and Harbour District . In 1924 he was posted to the 11th Engineers , based in the Panama Canal Zone . He returned to the United States in 1927 to take up an appointment in the Office of the Chief of Engineers . From 1931 to 1933 he was a student at the Command and General Staff College at Fort Leavenworth . After graduating , he became District Engineer at St Paul , Minnesota . On 1 July 1937 , he was promoted to lieutenant colonel . He attended the U.S. Army War College from 1937 to 1938 , then became at instructor at the Command and General Staff College . 
 = = World War II = = 
 In 1940 Johns became commanding officer of the 21st Engineers . The 21st Engineers were assigned the task of investigating techniques for the rapid construction of air bases . As such , Johns was involved in the development of a number of new construction techniques , most notably the use of Marston Mat . 
 His expertise in airbase construction led to Johns being sent to the South West Pacific as Chief Engineer , American Forces in Java . Departing Washington , D.C. by air on 14 January 1942 , Johns arrived in Surabaya nine days later . His first mission was to provide airfield facilities on Java for 2 @,@ 000 aircraft . Tapping into the vast resources of labour available in one of the world 's most densely populated regions , Johns set about readying the required airfields . However , Java was captured by the Japanese before the aircraft arrived . 
 Johns reached Australia on 28 February 1942 and became Chief Engineer , United States Army Forces in Australia ( USAFIA ) , with the rank of brigadier general . As such , Johns represented the US Army on the Allied Works Council , the body controlling and coordinating all construction activities in Australia . With the arrival in Australia of General Douglas MacArthur , Brigadier General Hugh John Casey , who had accompanied MacArthur from the Philippines , became Chief Engineer at General Headquarters ( GHQ ) , South West Pacific Area ( SWPA ) . Johns , who was in an earlier class at West Point than Casey , remained Chief of Engineers , USAFIA until 25 May 1942 , when he became Chief of Staff of US Army Services of Supply ( USASOS ) . 
 When the Kokoda Track campaign became mired in logistical difficulties , MacArthur and General Sir Thomas Blamey agreed to establish a Combined Operations Service Command ( COSC ) under New Guinea Force to co @-@ ordinate logistical activities in Papua @-@ New Guinea . Johns was designated commander of both COSC and the Advance Base , New Guinea on 8 October 1942 . He was given an Australian deputy , Brigadier Victor Secombe , a Royal Australian Engineers officer . All Australian and American logistical units were placed under COSC but Johns chose to exercise command of the Australian units through Secombe . They built an organization that " was a radical departure from that which the Australian Army considered normal administrative procedure , but was adequately to meet the novel demands of a campaign in a country lacking roads and railways , in which all transport had to be by sea or air , and in which often the administrative or base areas coincided with the operational areas . " Johns later wrote that : 
 [ COSC ] had the responsibility - and the authority - to get the maximum utilization out of what means were available . The commander of COSC had the authority , with the approval of GOC New Guinea Force , to call on the local commanders of the Allied Ground Forces , Air Forces , Naval Forces or United States Army Services of Supply for such means as were available to assist in meeting any service problem . GHQ directive provided that such local commander , when called upon , " will furnish " . Therein lay the authority of COSC . 
 Johns impressed Australian officers with his sensitive handling of inter @-@ Allied issues , his co @-@ operative nature , and his ability to get the job done . Lieutenant General Edmund Herring , who came to regard Johns as a close friend , later described Johns and Secombe as " born co @-@ operators . " One of Johns ' most important decisions involved the construction of a new deep @-@ water berth for Liberty ships at Tatana Island . This involved building a causeway out to the island . The project would double the capacity of the port of Port Moresby , but in order to build it Johns had to divert the African @-@ American 96th Engineers from work on the airfields around Port Moresby , raising fears from airmen like Brigadier General Ennis Whitehead that the airfields would not be ready for all @-@ weather operations by the time that the rainy season arrived . Rains in late October did indeed close three airfields but the causeway opened on 30 October and the wharf accepted its first ship on 3 November . 
 Johns relinquished his roles in Papua and resumed his former post at USASOS in March 1943 , being replaced by Brigadier General Hanford MacNider . In turn , he replaced MacNider as GHQ Coordinator , Milne Bay in October 1943 . As such , he was responsible for all logistical activities at what was now the major US base in Papua @-@ New Guinea . On 15 December 1943 , he became Coordinator , Finschhafen . Finschhafen was destined to become the new hub of US activity in Papua @-@ New Guinea ; but an enormous amount of work was required to get the base ready for action . For his service in New Guinea , Johns was awarded the Distinguished Service Medal . 
 In 1944 , Johns became commandant of the Engineer School at Fort Belvoir . The wartime Engineer School was responsible for the training of officers . Some were engineers in civilian life who were trained as officers ; other were officers transferred from other arms who were given training in engineering subjects . The Officer Candidate School ( OCS ) prepared enlisted men for commissioning as officers . There had been strong criticism of the content of training courses from SWPA , where it was the norm for machinery to be operated around the clock and for engineer officers to supervise all manner of construction tasks . The commanders there felt that the training courses taught by the Engineer School were concentrating too much on leadership in combat , and not enough on technical matters , such the operation and maintenance of construction equipment . Johns reformed the curriculum , but by this time it was too late for the changes to have much effect in the overseas theaters of operations . For his work at Fort Belvoir , Johns was awarded the Legion of Merit . 
 = = Later life = = 
 Johns was Assistant Chief of Engineers for Military Operations from June 1945 to March 1947 . He reverted to his permanent rank of colonel in March 1946 . In June 1947 Johns became commander of the Pacific Engineer Division , based in San Francisco , responsible for the southern half of the Pacific coast . As such he was involved with a number of important construction projects , including the Sacramento Deep Water Ship Channel , the Folsom Dam , the Isabella Dam , the Pine Flat Lake , and the Merced River projects . Johns retired from the army as a brigadier general on 31 December 1949 . In retirement , Johns was awarded the Gold Medal from the Society of American Military Engineers in 1950 , and served as its president in 1953 . Johns maintained the wartime friendships he had made , and with his wife Laura he entertained Australian general Sir Edmund Herring in their home in Los Angeles in 1967 . Johns died on 8 November 1977 . 
 = The Lie ( Lost ) = 
 " The Lie " is the second episode of the fifth season of ABC 's science fiction drama television series Lost . The 88th episode of the show overall , " The Lie " aired on January 21 , 2009 , on ABC in the United States , being simulcast on A in Canada . It aired immediately after the previous episode , " Because You Left " and a clip @-@ show that recapped the first four seasons . " The Lie " was written by Edward Kitsis and Adam Horowitz , who were named executive producers prior to the start of production on season five ; and directed by executive producer Jack Bender . 
 In 2007 , Hugo " Hurley " Reyes has trouble concealing the lie of the Oceanic 6 . Kate Austen meets Sun @-@ Hwa Kwon . At the island , the survivors come under attack by a large unseen force . The episode received mainly positive reviews from critics , with IGN giving the episode 7 @.@ 8 out of 10 , and The A.V. Club awarded it a B + . 
 = = Plot = = 
 On the island , the remaining survivors are back in the past , attempting to start a fire , when they are attacked by a barrage of flaming arrows . Some of the survivors are able to escape , but Neil " Frogurt " and a few others are killed , and James " Sawyer " Ford ( Josh Holloway ) and Juliet Burke ( Elizabeth Mitchell ) are separated from the group . Lost in the jungle , they are captured by a group of armed military men who demand to know who they are , asserting that the island is theirs . The men are about to cut off Juliet 's hand to extract information , when John Locke ( Terry O 'Quinn ) ambushes them , helping Sawyer and Juliet free themselves . 
 In 2007 , following the events of " Because You Left " , Jack Shephard ( Matthew Fox ) and Ben Linus ( Michael Emerson ) part ways , with Ben taking Locke 's body to a butcher for safekeeping . Ben tells Jack to collect any personal items he really wants and meet up with him in six hours . Meanwhile , Kate Austen ( Evangeline Lilly ) and Aaron Littleton , her adoptive son , have fled their home to escape lawyers demanding a maternity test . They meet up with Sun @-@ Hwa Kwon ( Yunjin Kim ) at a hotel , who implies that Kate should take whatever measures are necessary to protect Aaron . Sun forgives Kate for leaving her husband , Jin @-@ Soo Kwon ( Daniel Dae Kim ) , on the freighter when it exploded ( as seen in " There 's No Place Like Home " ) . 
 Meanwhile , Hugo " Hurley " Reyes ( Jorge Garcia ) and Sayid Jarrah ( Naveen Andrews ) are on the run after they are attacked at their safehouse ; Hurley drives the unconscious Sayid , who has been hit by two drugged darts , to his parents ' house . On the way , Hurley is pulled over by deceased Oceanic Flight 815 survivor and former police officer Ana Lucia Cortez ( Michelle Rodriguez ) , who gives him advice on how to avoid the real cops . Upon arriving home , Hurley 's dad , David , covers for them when the police show up and suggests that Hurley take Sayid to the hospital . Hurley refuses , and David ends up taking Sayid to Jack , who is successful in reviving him . At home , Hurley confesses to his mother Carmen that the Oceanic Six have been lying ; she believes him , though doesn 't understand his disjointed story . Later , Ben unexpectedly shows up at the house and tries to convince Hurley to go with him to meet up with the rest of the Oceanic Six , saying they all want the same thing — to go back to the island . Hurley wavers for a moment , then runs outside and turns himself in to police watching the house , having been advised by Sayid to do the opposite of whatever Ben asks . Later , Ben visits Ms. Hawking , who tells him she has found the island and that Ben only has seventy hours to return to it with Locke 's corpse and the Oceanic Six . 
 = = Production = = 
 " The Lie " was written by Edward Kitsis and Adam Horowitz , who were named executive producers prior to the start of production on season five ; and directed by executive producer Jack Bender . 
 When handing out scripts for the attack on the beach , Bender told the crew he and others " wanted this to be really big and really dramatic " . They used arrows on wires to simulate hitting the fleeing victims , which included Neil Frogurt ( Sean Whalen ) . A stunt double , Kim <unk> , was hired for the scene to stand in for Whalen ; he applied anti @-@ burn cream over his face and body for protection , and crew members waited nearby to quickly extinguish the flames once a scene was finished shooting . Due to the abundance of wires , the actors had to be careful when running , or risk tripping over them . 
 " The Lie " features the first appearance of main cast member Michelle Rodriguez since the second season episode " ? " . Rodriguez 's character , Ana Lucia Cortez , was written to have a one season arc and was subsequently killed off at the end of the second season of Lost . Dressed as a police officer , Ana Lucia 's " ghost " appears in " The Lie " , telling Hurley to " stay away from the cops " . The scene makes use of the Cheap Trick song " Dream Police " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Because You Left " and " The Lie " were uploaded to ABC 's Medianet website on December 29 , 2008 to be viewed by members of the press for advance reviews attached to limited confidentiality agreements . Matt Mitovich of TV Guide stated that " [ t ] he first hour is the stronger of the two " , and that the " showstopper [ is ] one of Lost 's most electric and intense action scenes ever . " " The Lie " aired on January 21 , 2009 on ABC in the United States , being simulcast on A in Canada . " The Lie " , as well as the previous episode , " Because You Left " was viewed by 11 @.@ 347 million in the US , and by 1 @.@ 195 million in the UK . In Australia , the episode was aired separately to " Because You Left " and brought in 516 @,@ 000 viewers . 
 IGN gave the episode a " Good " rating of 7 @.@ 8 out of 10 and summarized the episode as being " a much more focused story than ' Because You Left ' but in the shadow of the season premiere 's revelations and grandeur it is ultimately the weaker of the two . The comedic moments that string together Hurley 's journey only go so far and the rest feels a bit too much like filler ... If the conclusion of ' The Lie ' is any indication though , the outside world may prove to be just as strange as the island . " IGN later ranked " The Lie " 84th out of the 115 Lost episodes , writing " this isn 't a terrible episode , but it feels like a bit of a stop @-@ gap , in the midst of a very cool run of episodes . On the Island , we do get to see a pretty cool looking Flaming Arrow attack , that kills the uber @-@ annoying Frogurt , but the encounter the group has at the end with some men dressed as soldiers is just set up for the awesome " Jughead . " 
 On a similar list , the Los Angeles Times ranked it at number 69 , explaining " this isn 't a bad episode . Like most Hurley episodes , it features a lot of very sweet , funny material . But it is a bit of a time killer between two really fantastic hours . " The A.V. Club gave the episode a B + rating and stated that " it 's enough for me . I don 't know about you , but I 'm ready to get Lost again . " 
 = 1903 Florida hurricane = 
 The 1903 Florida hurricane was an Atlantic hurricane that caused extensive wind and flood damage on the Florida peninsula and over the adjourning Southeastern United States in early to mid September 1903 . The third tropical cyclone and third hurricane of the season , this storm was first observed near Mayaguana island in the Bahamas early on September 9 . Moving northwestward , it became a hurricane the next day and passed near Nassau . The cyclone then turned to the west @-@ northwest on September 11 and passed just north of the Bimini Islands . As it crossed the Bahamas , the cyclone produced hurricane @-@ force winds that caused damage to crops and buildings , but no deaths were reported over the island chain . 
 Late on September 11 , the cyclone struck near Fort Lauderdale , Florida . The Inchulva capsized near Delray Beach , drowning nine of her crew members . The cyclone caused severe wind damage in present @-@ day Broward and Palm Beach counties , although most of the losses were to crops such as sugarcane . The cyclone weakened to a tropical storm while crossing Florida , but re @-@ intensified into a hurricane over the Gulf of Mexico on September 17 . Peaking at 90 mph ( 150 km / h ) , equivalent to a strong Category 1 hurricane on the Saffir – Simpson hurricane wind scale , the storm made landfall near Panama City early on September 14 . In Northwest Florida , Alabama , and Georgia , the cyclone produced widespread rainfall , causing some crop damage . Additionally , a storm surge caused boats to be blown ashore in the Florida Panhandle . In all , the storm killed 14 people in Florida and produced $ 500 @,@ 000 in damage . After falling to tropical storm intensity early on September 14 , the storm weakened to a tropical depression on September 16 , several hours before dissipating over South Carolina . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 Based upon scientific research conducted by the National Oceanographic and Atmospheric Administration 's Hurricane Research Division in 2003 , the cyclone is estimated to have first begun as a 60 mph ( 100 km / h ) tropical storm south of Mayaguana in the Bahamas early on September 9 . However , due to scarce observations , its genesis likely occurred earlier than this time but was undetected operationally . Moving slowly northwest , the cyclone quickly strengthened into a hurricane with winds of 75 mph ( 120 km / h ) , equivalent to Category 1 on the Saffir – Simpson hurricane wind scale , early the next day . By 00 : 00 UTC on September 11 , it reached sustained winds of 85 mph ( 140 km / h ) while centered about 15 miles ( 25 km ) west of New Providence Island . Turning to the west @-@ northwest , the cyclone maintained its intensity while passing just north of the Bimini Islands . Around 23 : 00 UTC on September 12 , the cyclone struck South Florida near Fort Lauderdale with winds of 85 mph ( 140 km / h ) . Thereafter , the hurricane weakened upon crossing the Everglades , weakening to a tropical storm at 06 : 00 UTC on September 12 . 
 The cyclone entered the Gulf of Mexico near Egmont Key , south of Saint Petersburg in the Tampa Bay region , with winds of 60 mph ( 100 km / h ) . At this time , the cyclone was still moving west @-@ northwest as it had started nearly two days earlier . Although diminished in intensity after its passage over the Florida peninsula , the cyclone quickly re @-@ organized and began to re @-@ intensify over the Gulf of Mexico . Early on September 13 , it regained hurricane intensity while centered about 100 mi ( 160 km ) south of St. Marks in the Big Bend area of Florida . Curving to the northwest and increasing its forward speed , the hurricane peaked with maximum sustained winds of 90 mph ( 140 km / h ) as it neared the Florida Panhandle . On the afternoon of September 13 , the hurricane passed just west of Cape San Blas , but did not strike there . As its heading backed to the north @-@ northwest , the cyclone moved made landfall near Panama City at the same intensity around 00 : 00 UTC on September 14 . It is estimated that the storm reached peak intensity at landfall , with the peripheral pressure and storm tide observations suggesting winds of 90 mph ( 140 km / h ) , while the pressure @-@ wind relationship indicating a minimum barometric pressure of 974 mbar ( 28 @.@ 8 inHg ) . After moving inland , the cyclone rapidly diminished to a strong tropical storm and continued to weaken as it entered southern Alabama early on September 14 . The next day , it turned northeast and then east @-@ northeast , and by 00 : 00 UTC on September 16 , it degenerated into a tropical depression . Less than 24 hours later , the system dissipated just east of the Georgia – South Carolina border . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 Between 06 : 00 and 12 : 00 UTC on September 10 , the United States Weather Bureau issued storm signals , equivalent to a tropical storm warning in 2016 , from Cedar Key , Florida , to Charleston , South Carolina . These were later upgraded to hurricane warnings in South Florida . Due to inclement weather conditions in West Palm Beach , which had been newly incorporated as a town just days earlier , businesses suspended their normal operations and people boarded up buildings , even as the strongest winds arrived . As the cyclone moved into the Gulf of Mexico , reports from September 12 through September 14 helped ships prepare for the storm . 
 = = Impact = = 
 In the Bahamas , the cyclone produced a barometric pressure at or below 990 mbar ( 29 @.@ 5 inHg ) on Cat Cay for about 10 hours beginning at 11 : 00 UTC on September 11 . For a period of 30 minutes after 15 : 00 UTC , the pressure dropped to 976 mbar ( 28 @.@ 82 inHg ) , after which hurricane @-@ force winds decreased substantially , shifting from northeast to southwest via north , before restrengthening just after 16 : 00 UTC . The entire storm practically ceased by 23 : 00 UTC late that day . Only 0 @.@ 84 inches ( 21 @.@ 34 mm ) of rain attended the passage of the hurricane on the island . On New Providence Island , Nassau recorded a pressure of 988 @.@ 8 mbar ( 29 @.@ 2 inHg ) and winds of 60 mph ( 97 km / h ) at 00 : 00 UTC on September 11 , shortly before the anemometer blew away . Afterward , the winds shifted from east to south and were estimated to be as high as 90 mph ( 140 km / h ) . On the island , the hurricane destroyed the fruit crop and caused considerable damage to small structures . The storm also caused heavy damage to local shipping . 
 In southeast Florida , no wind or pressure observations were available within 50 mi ( 80 km ) of the location where the eye of the cyclone struck the coast . However , the cyclone did produce a storm surge up to 8 feet ( 2 @.@ 4 m ) at Jupiter , which was near the radius of maximum wind , then estimated to be about 50 mi ( 80 km ) , and reported peak sustained winds of 84 mph ( 135 km / h ) . Winds of damaging force extended 30 mi ( 48 km ) north of Jupiter , and the preponderance of the damage was limited to areas south of that settlement . Only pineapple sheds were damaged at Jupiter . About 9 mi ( 14 km ) south , the schooner Martha T. Thomas blown ashore , without loss of crew members . 
 In West Palm Beach , as northeast winds reached their peak between 21 : 00 UTC on September 11 and 01 : 00 UTC the next day , parts of buildings blew away . Many buildings were unroofed , while rainfall and winds subsequently caused further damage to the interiors , such as at The Tropical Sun office building , the Seminole Hotel , the Palms Hotel , Schmid 's Commercial Hotel , and properties owned by former mayor Marion E. Gruber . Several other businesses suffered similar damage . Much debris , including roofing materials , branches , paper , and driftwood , was thrown into the streets . In the African American section of the town , several buildings were destroyed . Just one of the four churches stood after the hurricane . Damage there ran " way up in the thousands . " 
 Hotels on the nearby island of Palm Beach survived , but many coconut palms and other vegetation were prostrated . On the west shoreline of Lake Worth Lagoon , homes were swept off their foundations and their interiors flooded . Coconut trees and shrubbery were also toppled on <unk> Island . All three of the cottages were blown into the Lake Worth Lagoon , while the hotel also suffered some damage . The Lake Worth News building in Lake Worth was severely damaged by flooding . Destruction in Boynton Beach was " almost indescribable . " Dozens of homes were damaged to some degree . The ground was " literally covered " with fruit , including guava , lemons , and lime , while pineapple fields were flattened . Power and telegraph lines and trees , including many large pine trees , were toppled throughout the city . Offshore , a Standard Oil barge was beached against a reef ; the crew of eleven men were forced to swim ashore . 
 The settlements of Pompano , where the eye was believed to have come ashore , and Delray Beach were nearly destroyed , with trees defoliated and many buildings dismantled . Offshore Delray Beach , the British steamship Inchulva , wrecked near the Orange Grove House of Refuge . Nine crew members aboard the Inchulva drowned as she stranded just 200 yards ( 180 m ) off the beach . The wreck was later salvaged and transformed into an underwater diving attraction . Damage in the Miami area was mainly confined to small buildings overturned , trees uprooted , smokestacks downed , metal awnings broken , and metal roofs scattered . Only two or three homes were blown off their foundations in the northern part of the area . At the new building for The Miami Metropolis , the wall on the west side collapsed . Telegraph and electrical lines were downed throughout the city , leaving the streets " a tangle of wires . " The loss of electricity was restored by the night of September 12 . Damage in South Florida reached $ 100 @,@ 000 , mainly to crops such as sugarcane in the Everglades . 
 In Central Florida , the cyclone only caused minor damage to structures and blew down trees , but at least two people died in Tampa . The storm also damaged businesses in the area and reportedly blew down half the local orange crop . Heavy rainfall occurred along the path , peaking at 11 @.@ 40 in ( 289 @.@ 56 mm ) at Fort Meade . In the Florida Panhandle , the hurricane produced a pressure of 984 @.@ 8 mbar ( 29 @.@ 08 inHg ) and winds up to 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) at St. Andrews settlement , near Panama City . The peak storm surge was measured at up to 10 ft ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) in the town of Apalachicola . Up to 50 % of the cotton crop was destroyed , but overall structural damage was minor , though ships were grounded near Apalachicola . As the cyclone moved inland over Alabama and Georgia on September 14 and 15 , it produced widespread rains peaking at 5 @.@ 42 in ( 140 mm ) at Griffin , Georgia . Minor crop damage occurred in low @-@ lying areas , but advance warning reduced the potential damage . In all , the hurricane killed 14 people , all in Florida . 
 = Siege of Damascus ( 634 ) = 
 The Siege of Damascus ( 634 ) lasted from 21 August to 19 September 634 AD before the city fell to the Rashidun Caliphate . Damascus was the first major city of the Byzantine ( Roman ) empire to fall in the Muslim conquest of Syria . 
 The last of the Roman @-@ Persian Wars ended in 627 , when Heraclius concluded a successful campaign against the Persians in Mesopotamia . At the same time , Mohammad united the Arabs under the banner of Islam . After his death in 632 , Abu Bakr succeeded him as the first Rashidun Caliph . Suppressing several internal revolts , Abu Bakr sought to expand the empire beyond the confines of the Arabian Peninsula . 
 In April 634 , Abu Bakr invaded the Byzantine Empire in the Levant and decisively defeated a Byzantine army at the Battle of Ajnadayn . The Muslim armies marched north and laid siege to Damascus . The city was taken after a <unk> bishop informed Khalid ibn al @-@ Walid , the Muslim commander in chief , that it was possible to breach city walls by attacking a position only lightly defended at night . While Khalid entered the city by assault from the Eastern gate , Thomas , commander of the Byzantine garrison , negotiated a peaceful surrender at the Jabiyah gate with Abu Ubaidah , Khalid 's second in command . After the surrender of the city , the commanders disputed the terms of the peace agreement . The commanders finally agreed that the peace terms given by Abu Ubaidah would be met . The peace terms included an assurance that no pursuit will be undertaken by Muslims against the departing Roman convoy for three days . Having acquiesced to the peace terms , it was three days after the surrender of the city that Khalid set out after the <unk> refugees towards Antioch and defeated them in battle six days later , near present day Al <unk> . 
 = = Background = = 
 In 610 , during the Byzantine – Sasanian War of 602 – 628 , Heraclius became the emperor of the Byzantine Empire after overthrowing Phocas . While Heraclius focused his attention on the internal affairs of his empire , the Sassanid Persians conquered Mesopotamia , overran Syria in 611 , and entered Anatolia to occupy Caesarea Mazaca . In 612 , Heraclius expelled the Persians from Anatolia . In 613 , he launched a counter offensive against Syria , but was decisively defeated . 
 Over the next decade , the Persians conquered Palestine and Egypt and Heraclius rebuilt his army , preparing for a new offensive , which he launched in 622 . He achieved substantial victories over the Persians and their allies in the Caucasus and Armenia . In 627 , he launched a daring winter offensive against Persia in Mesopotamia , and won a decisive victory at the Battle of Nineveh . This victory threatened the Persian capital city of Ctesiphon . 
 Discredited by this series of disasters , Khosrau II was killed in a coup led by his son Kavadh II , who at once sued for peace , agreeing to withdraw from all occupied territories of the Byzantine empire . Heraclius restored the True Cross to Jerusalem with an elaborate ceremony in 629 . 
 In Arabia , the Prophet Mohammad had united most of Arabia under a single religious and political authority . When Mohammed died in June 632 , Abu Bakr was elected to the newly formed office of Caliph , becoming Mohammad 's political and religious successor . Several Arabic tribes revolted against Abu Bakr . In the Ridda wars ( Arabic for the Wars of Apostasy ) , Abu Bakr quelled the revolt . By 633 , Arabia was firmly united under the central authority of the Caliph in Medina . In 633 , Abu Bakr initiated a war of conquest against the neighboring Sassanian and Byzantine empires . After a successful conquest of the Persian province of Iraq , Abu Bakr 's confidence grew and in April 634 his armies invaded the Byzantine Levant from four different routes . These armies proved to be too small for the task , necessitating reinforcements from Iraq , led by Abu Bakr 's capable general Khalid ibn Walid Crossing the desert , Khalid ibn Walid entered Syria from an unexpected route in a bold move . He attacked and overthrew the Byzantine defenses of Levant and quickly captured the Ghassanid capital city of Bosra . In July 634 , the Muslim army under Khalid 's command defeated another Byzantine army in the Battle of Ajnadayn . After clearing their southern flank , the Muslims laid siege to Damascus . 
 = = = Siege site = = = 
 Strategically located , Damascus attracted merchants from all over the world . The city was known as the paradise of Syria . 
 The fortifications matched its importance . The main part of the city was enclosed by a massive 11 m ( 36 ft ) high wall . The fortified city was approximately 1 @,@ 500 m ( 4 @,@ 900 ft ) long and 800 m ( 2 @,@ 600 ft ) wide . 
 The wall had six gates : 
 The East Gate ( Bab <unk> ) 
 The Gate of Thomas ( Bab <unk> ) 
 The Jabiya Gate ( Bab al @-@ Jabiya ) 
 The Gate of Paradise ( Bab al @-@ Faradis ) 
 The Keisan Gate ( Bab Kisan ) 
 The Small Gate ( Bab al @-@ Saghir ) 
 Although the River Barada ran along the north wall of <unk> , it was too shallow to be of defensive importance . 
 At the time of the Syrian campaign , the Byzantine Commander of Damascus was Thomas , son @-@ in @-@ law of Emperor Heraclius . A devout Christian , he was known for his courage and skill at command , and also for his intelligence and learning . 
 = = Dispositions = = 
 Seventh @-@ century Muslim armies had no siege equipment , and typically employed siege tactics only when there were no other options . Without the necessary siege equipment , armies of the early Muslim expansion would surround a city , denying it supplies until the city 's defenders surrendered . Meanwhile any chance of breaking into the city would be availed , if possible , using stealth and espionage . Muslim armies would usually isolate the city from the rest of the region and deploy scouts along vital routes . 
 To isolate Damascus , Khalid cut the lines of transportation and communication to northern Syria . To the west , a detachment of cavalry at <unk> occupied the attention of the Byzantine garrison . This detachment also protected the Muslim supply lines to Madinah . Thus this cavalry detachment functioned as the rearguard of the Muslim forces on the Syrian front . Another detachment was sent on the road to Emesa to take up a position near Bait <unk> , approximately 10 miles ( 16 km ) from the city . Its instructions were to reconnoiter for any Byzantine relief columns . If unable to defeat or repel a Byzantine rescue effort , the detachment commander was instructed to send for reinforcements from Khalid . 
 Having isolated Damascus , Khalid ordered his army to surround the city on August 21 , 634 ( the 20th of <unk> @-@ ul @-@ Akhir , 13 Hijri ) . The corps commanders were instructed to repel any Byzantine attack from the respective gates , and seeking assistance in the case of heavy attack . Dharar bin al @-@ Azwar commanded 2 @.@ 000 horsemen from the mobile guard to patrol in the empty areas between the gates at night and to reinforce any corps attacked by the Byzantines . 
 The following Muslim generals held the siege of the six gates of the Damascus . Each commander at the gate had 4 @,@ 000 – 5 @,@ 000 forces under his command : 
 Gate of Thomas : Shurahbil 
 Jabiya Gate : Abu Ubaidah 
 Gate of Faradis : Amr 
 Keisan Gate : Yazid 
 Small Gate : Yazid 
 Eastern Gate : Rafay bin Umayr . 
 Khalid placed the main body of his forces under the command of Rafay bin Umayr at the eastern gate . He established his headquarters a short distance away from the eastern gate in a monastery , known since then as Deir al Khalid , the monastery of Khalid . Khalid 's army had encircled the city , halting the flow of supplies into Damascus while the Ghouta of Damascus provided the Muslim army with all the supplies Khalid needed for his men and their mounts . 
 = = = Byzantine relief = = = 
 Emperor Heraclius was at Antioch at the beginning of the siege and on September 9 , 634 , he dispatched a relief force , thought to have numbered around 12 @,@ 000 men . Scouts posted on the road from Emesa to Damascus reported the approach of a Byzantine army . Upon hearing this news , Khalid sent Rafay bin Umayr with 5 @,@ 000 troops . They met 20 miles ( 32 km ) north of Damascus at Uqab Pass ( Eagle Pass ) on the Damascus @-@ Emesa road . That force proved insufficient and soon surrounded by the Byzantine troops . However before the Byzantines could defeat the Muslim detachment , Khalid arrived with another column of 4 @,@ 000 men and routed them . It has since come to be known as Battle of the pass of Uqab . 
 The Muslim siege forces had been weakened by the withdrawal of 9 @,@ 000 men to repel the Byzantine relief force . If the Byzantine garrison had sallied out against the Muslim army , historians suspect the defenders would have broken through the Muslim lines and lifted the siege . Understanding the danger of the situation , Khalid hurriedly returned to Damascus . 
 = = = First Byzantine attack = = = 
 After realizing that no reinforcements would come , Thomas decided to launch a counter offensive . Early in the third week of September 634 , Thomas drew men from all sectors of the city to form a force strong enough to break through the Gate of Thomas . He was there faced by Shurahbil with his corps of about 5 @,@ 000 men . The Byzantine attack began with a concentrated shower of arrows against the Muslims . The Byzantine infantry , covered by the archers on the wall , rushed through the gate and fanned out into battle formation . Thomas himself led the assault . During this action , Thomas was struck in his right eye by an arrow . Unsuccessful in breaking the Muslim lines , the Byzantines retreated back to the fortress . The wounded Thomas is said to have sworn to take a thousand eyes in return . He ordered another great sortie for that night . 
 = = = Second Byzantine attack = = = 
 This time Thomas planned to launch simultaneous sorties from four gates . The main sector was to be again the Thomas gate , to take full advantage of the exhausted Muslim corps stationed there . The attacks from the other gates — Jabiya Gate , the Small Gate and the Eastern Gate — were intended to tie down the other Muslim corps so that they could not aid Shurhabil 's corps at the Thomas gate . 
 At the Eastern Gate , Thomas assembled more forces than at the other gates , so that Khalid would be unable to move to Shurahbil 's assistance and take command in that decisive sector . Thomas ' attack at several gates also gave more flexibility to the operation : if success were achieved in any sector other than the Gate of Thomas , such success could be exploited by sending troops to that sector to achieve the breakthrough . Thomas ordered Khalid to be taken alive . 
 After some hard fighting at the Jabiya Gate , commander Abu Ubaidah and his men , repulsed the sally and the Byzantines hastened back to the city . The battle was intense at the Small Gate , which was guarded by commander Yazid and his men . Yazid had fewer troops but Dharar came to Yazid 's aid with his 2 @,@ 000 cavalry of the Mobile Guard . The cavalry attacked the flank of the Byzantine sortie force and repulsed the sally . 
 At the East Gate , the situation also became serious , for a larger Roman force had been assigned to this sector . Rafay was unable to withstand their attacks . The timely arrival of Khalid with his reserve of 400 veteran cavalry and his subsequent attack on the Roman flank , marked the turning point in the sally at the Eastern Gate . 
 The heaviest fighting occurred at the Thomas gate , where Thomas again commanded the sally in person . After intense fighting , Thomas , seeing that there was no weakening in the Muslim front , decided that continuing the attack would be fruitless and would lead to even heavier casualties among his men . He ordered a withdrawal and the Romans moved back at a steady pace , during which they were subjected to a concentrated shower of arrows by the Muslims . This was the last attempt by Thomas to break the siege . The attempt had failed . He had lost thousands of men in these sallies , and could no longer afford to fight outside the walls of the city . 
 = = Khalid 's attack = = 
 On September 18 , a Syriac <unk> priest named Jonah informed Khalid about a festival celebration in the city that night . The festivities offered Khalid an opportunity to capture the city in a surprise attack on the relatively lightly defended walls . In return , Jonah requested immunity for himself and his fiance . According to Muslim chronicles , she was still not handed over to him because of the arrival of the Muslim army that was to besiege Damascus , and according to the narrations he came to Khalid with this information only to get his beloved wife soon . Jonah also converted to Islam . 
 With no time to make a coordinated plan of attack for the whole army , Khalid decided to storm the East Gate himself . He , Qa <unk> ibn Amr , and Mazur ibn Adi climbed the wall hand @-@ by @-@ hand from the side of the gate . This part of the wall was the strongest , no guard was stationed at the top . They secured ropes to the wall and dropped them to 100 selected soldiers waiting at the base . Leaving a few men to assist the climbers , Khalid descended into the city , killing the guards at the inside of the East Gate . Khalid and Qa <unk> flung the gate open and the remainder of Khalid 's men entered the city . An intense battle ensued . 
 When Thomas saw that the rest of the army did not move from the other gates , he assumed first that only Khalid 's army had entered the city and second that the other corps commanders were unaware of this sudden attack . Muslim practice was specific : if a city surrendered , the inhabitants would be spared , but if a city resisted , the resisters would be killed . Thomas tried to save Damascus for one last time . He sent envoys to the Jabiya Gate to talk with Abu Ubaidah , the second in command to Khalid , and offered to surrender the fort peacefully and to pay the Jizya . Abu Ubaidah , who was well known for his peace @-@ loving nature , accepted the terms , thinking that Khalid would also agree . 
 The news was sent to all the corps commanders . After dawn Abu Ubaidah entered Damascus from Jabiyah gate and the other commanders from their respective gates , while Khalid 's corps was still battling in the city from the East Gate . Abu Ubaidah marched peacefully with his corps , accompanied by Thomas , Harbees , several dignitaries , and the bishops of Damascus , toward the center of city . From the East Gate , Khalid and his men fought their way towards the center of Damascus , killing all who resisted . The commanders met at the Church of Mary in the center of the city . 
 = = = Capture of the city = = = 
 Khalid argued that he had conquered the city by force . Abu Ubaidah maintained the city had capitulated , through the peace agreement between him and Thomas . The corps commanders discussed the situation , and reportedly told Khalid that the peace agreement must be honored . Their rationale had logic : if the Romans in Syria heard that the Muslims had given a guarantee of safety to a surrendered city and then had slaughtered those whose safety had been guaranteed , no other city would ever surrender to the Muslims . This would make the task of conquering Syria immeasurably more difficult . Khalid , though not happy , agreed to honor the peace agreement . 
 The terms of the peace agreement were that no one would be enslaved , no harm would be done to the temples , nothing would be taken as booty and that safe passage was given to Thomas , Harbees , and every citizen of Damascus who was not willing to live under Muslim rule . The peace agreement also stated that the peace would end after three days and that the Muslims could attack after these three days without violating the agreement . 
 The following pact was drawn up and signed by Khalid bin Walid : 
 In the name of Allah , the Beneficent , the Merciful . This is given by Khalid bin Al Waleed [ sic ] to the people of Damascus . When the Muslims enter , they ( the people ) shall have safety for themselves , their property , their temples and the walls of their city , of which nothing shall be destroyed . They have this guarantee on behalf of Allah , the Messenger of Allah , the Caliph and the Muslims , from whom they shall receive nothing but good so long as they pay the Jizya . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The Syriac , Jonah , who had helped Khalid enter the city by the East Gate , showed him a short @-@ cut to Antioch . Leading a cavalry regiment , Khalid caught up with a convoy of Byzantine refugees from Damascus at the sea , near Antioch . The three @-@ day truce had passed ; Khalid 's cavalry attacked the convoy during a heavy rain . In the subsequent battle , Khalid reportedly killed both Thomas and Harbees in a duel . After the Battle , known as the Battle of Marj @-@ ud @-@ <unk> ( Battle of <unk> Meadow ) , the Muslims took a great amount of brocade as booty . In addition , Thomas ' wife , the daughter of Heraclius , was captured . According to chronicles , the Greek man Jonah , who guided Khalid on the short cut to Antioch , got his fiance , but she committed suicide . Khalid offered Jonah the daughter of Emperor Heraclius , whom he refused . Khalid sent her back to her father . Jonah died two years later in the Battle of Yarmuk . 
 Caliph Abu Bakr died in Madinah , making Umar his successor . Umar removed Khalid from command of the Muslim army and appointed Abu Ubaidah as the new commander in chief . In later years , following the Battle of Yarmuk , the Rashidun Caliphate annexed the whole Levant , followed by the conquest of Antioch in 638 . By 639 , the Byzantines had lost Armenia and Mesopotamia . Emperor Heraclius concentrated on the defenses of Egypt and Anatolia , creating a buffer @-@ zone in Anatolia west of Caesarea by abandoning all the Byzantine fortifications there . The Muslims never invaded Anatolia . However , by 642 the Byzantines lost Egypt and Tripolitania to the Caliphate . 
 While the Arabs administered the city of Damascus , the population of Damascus remained mostly Christian — Eastern Orthodox and Monophysite — with a growing community of Arab Muslims from Makkah , Madinah , and the Syrian Desert . 
 The city was chosen as the capital of Islamic Syria . Its first Muslim governor was Yazid ibn Abu Sufyan , one of the commanders of the Muslim army that captured the city . Yazid died of plague in 640 and his younger brother , Mu 'awiya I , succeeded him . After the murder of the last Rashidun Caliph , Caliph Ali in 661 , Mu 'awiya installed himself as the caliph of the Islamic empire founding the Umayyad dynasty . 
 Damascus subsequently became the capital of the Ummayad Caliphate and all of the surplus revenue of the Ummayad Caliphate 's provinces were forwarded to the treasury of Damascus . Arabic was also established as the official language , giving the Arab minority of the city an advantage over the Greek @-@ speaking Christians in administrative affairs . 
 Trade and economics prospered in the city and under the Umayyads , Damascus remained one of the most dazzling cities of the world , until in 750 , when it fell to the Abbasids . On August 25 , 750 , the Abbasids , having already beaten the Umayyads in the Battle of the Zab in Iraq , conquered Damascus after facing little resistance . With the heralding of the Abbasid Caliphate , Damascus became eclipsed and subordinated by Baghdad , the new Islamic capital . 
 = = = Ancient sources = = = 
 Al @-@ Waqidi , Abu Abdullah Muhammad Ibn Umar ( 8th century ) , <unk> al Sham ( Conquest of Syria ) 
 Ibn Ishaq , Sirah Rasul Allah , 750 . 
 Theophanes the Confessor , <unk> , 810 – 815 . 
 Muhammad ibn <unk> al @-@ Tabari , History of the Prophets and Kings , 915 . 
 = = = Modern sources = = = 
 Akram , Agha Ibrahim ( 2004 ) , The Sword of Allah : Khalid bin al @-@ Waleed - His Life and Campaigns , Oxford University Press : Pakistan , ISBN 0 @-@ 19 @-@ <unk> @-@ 9 
 Archer , Christon I ( 2008 ) , World History of Warfare , University of Nevada Press , ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 8032 @-@ 1941 @-@ 0 
 Avi @-@ Yonah , Michael ( 2003 ) , History of Israel and the Holy Land , Continuum International Publishing Group , ISBN <unk> 
 Burns , Ross ( 2007 ) , Damascus : A History , Routledge , ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 415 @-@ <unk> @-@ 6 
 Crowdy , Terry ( 2006 ) , The enemy within : a history of espionage , Osprey Publishing , ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ 84176 @-@ 933 @-@ 2 
 Greatrex – Lieu ; Lieu , Samuel N. C. ( 2002 ) , The Roman Eastern Frontier and the Persian Wars ( Part II , 363 – 630 AD ) , Routledge , ISBN 0 @-@ 415 @-@ <unk> @-@ 9 
 Haldon , John ( 1997 ) , Byzantium in the Seventh Century : the Transformation of a Culture , Cambridge , ISBN 0 @-@ 521 @-@ <unk> @-@ X 
 Kennedy , Hugh N. ( 2006 ) , The Byzantine and early Islamic Near East , Ashgate Publishing , ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 7546 @-@ <unk> @-@ 9 
 Milman , Edward Gibbon ( revised by Henry Hart Milman ) ( illustrated 2009 edition ) , The Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire , <unk> , ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ 113 @-@ <unk> @-@ 7 
 Nicolle , David ( 1994 ) , Yarmuk 636 A.D. : The Muslim Conquest of Syria , Osprey Publishing , ISBN 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 414 @-@ 8 
 <unk> , Daniel J ( 1972 ) , John of Damascus on Islam : The " Heresy of the Ishmaelites . " , BRILL , ISBN 978 @-@ 90 @-@ 04 @-@ <unk> @-@ 2 
 <unk> , Martin ( 2000 ) , The Islamic world in ascendancy : from the Arab conquests to the siege of Vienna , Greenwood Publishing Group , ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 275 @-@ <unk> @-@ 2 
 = Court of Common Pleas ( England ) = 
 The Court of Common Pleas , or Common Bench , was a common law court in the English legal system that covered " common pleas " ; actions between subject and subject , which did not concern the king . Created in the late 12th to early 13th century after splitting from the Exchequer of Pleas , the Common Pleas served as one of the central English courts for around 600 years . Authorised by Magna Carta to sit in a fixed location , the Common Pleas sat in Westminster Hall for its entire existence , joined by the Exchequer of Pleas and Court of King 's Bench . 
 The court 's jurisdiction was gradually undercut by the King 's Bench and Exchequer of Pleas with legal fictions , the Bill of Middlesex and Writ of Quominus respectively . The Common Pleas maintained its exclusive jurisdiction over matters of real property until its dissolution , and due to its wide remit was considered by Sir Edward Coke to be the " lock and key of the common law " . It was staffed by one Chief Justice and a varying number of puisne justices , who were required to be Serjeants @-@ at @-@ Law , and until the mid 19th century only Serjeants were allowed to plead there . 
 As one of the two principal common law courts with the King 's Bench , the Common Pleas fought to maintain its jurisdiction and caseload , in a way that during the 16th and 17th centuries was categorised as conservative and reactionary . Reaching an acceptable medium with the King 's Bench and Exchequer of Pleas proved to be the downfall of all three courts ; with several courts of near @-@ identical jurisdiction , there was little need for separate bodies , and the superior courts of Westminster were merged by the Supreme Court of Judicature Act 1873 into a single High Court of Justice . With an Order in Council issued on 16 December 1880 , the Common Pleas Division of the High Court ceased to exist , marking the end of the Court of Common Pleas . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Origin = = = 
 Originally , the sole fixed " court " was the curia regis , one of the three central administrative bodies along with the Exchequer and Chancery , from which the Court of Chancery formed . This curia was the king 's court , composed of those advisers and courtiers who followed the king as he travelled around the country . This was not a dedicated court of law , instead a descendant of the witenagemot . In concert with the curia regis , eyre circuits staffed by itinerant judges dispensed justice throughout the country , operating on fixed paths at certain times . These judges were also members of the curia , and would hear cases on the king 's behalf in the " lesser curia regis " . Gradually , the curia split into two distinct branches , the coram rege ( King 's Bench ) and de <unk> ( Common Bench , or Common Pleas ) . Much academic discussion occurs over the circumstances and times of their founding . In 1178 , a chronicler recorded that when Henry II : 
 learned that the land and the men of the land were burdened by so great a number of justices , for there were , eighteen , chose with the counsel of the wise men of his kingdom five only , two clerks three and laymen , all of his private family , and decreed that these five should hear all complaints of the kingdom and should do right and should not depart from the king 's court but should remain there to hear the complaints of men , with this understanding that , if there should come up among them any question which could not be brought to a conclusion by them , it should be presented to a royal hearing and be determined by the king and the wiser men of the kingdom " . 
 This was originally interpreted as the foundation of the King 's Bench , with the Court of Common Pleas not coming into existence until the signing of Magna Carta , which mandated in Section 17 that common pleas ( cases between subject and subject , as opposed to cases involving the king ) be heard in " some fixed place " . This ensured that rather than the source of justice moving from place to place as the king did , there would be a fixed location that claimants and defendants could travel to that would address their problems . The later theory was that Henry II 's decree created the Court of Common Pleas , not the King 's Bench , and that the King 's Bench instead split from the Common Pleas at some later time . In the 20th century , with better access to historical documents , legal historians have come to a different conclusion . Rather than the Common Pleas being created out of the curia regis directly , it instead arose out of the Exchequer of Pleas , another body split from the curia regis . By the beginning of the 13th century , a split began ; chronicles from 1201 identify the " bench " and " exchequer " as distinct bodies , and records of Barons of the Exchequer and Justices of the Common Pleas show a distinct lack of overlap . 
 The Court of Common Pleas , along with the other superior courts , sat in Westminster Hall from its creation . Due to the provisions in Magna Carta , it was bound to sit there ; an apocryphal story says that Orlando Bridgeman refused to move the court a few feet to avoid the draught from the north entrance , fearing that to do so would be to infringe on Magna Carta . The court sat in a space marked off by a wooden bar ( which counsel stood behind ) with the court officials sitting at a large oak table covered in green cloth and the justices on a raised platform ( or " bench " ) at the rear of the court . 
 = = = Struggle with the King 's Bench = = = 
 During the 15th century , the common law courts were challenged by the civil law and equity found in the Chancery and similar courts . These courts and legal methods were much faster than the common law courts , so lawyers and claimants flocked to them . This was perceived as a threat to the common law courts , for good reason ; between 1460 and 1540 , the business of the common law courts significantly dropped , while the Chancery 's cases rose massively in number . In reaction to this , the Court of King 's Bench developed its own , faster system , intent on winning cases back , and through procedures such as the Writ of Quominus and Bill of Middlesex acquired a wider jurisdiction . While this succeeded in forming an equilibrium between the old common law courts and the new courts , it was viewed with suspicion by the Common Pleas , who became highly reactionary to the changes the King 's Bench attempted to introduce . When the King 's Bench attempted to use the Bill of Middlesex to widen its jurisdiction , the Common Pleas became increasingly conservative in its attempts to avoid ceding cases . This was limited by the fact that the three Common Pleas <unk> could not agree on how to cut costs , leaving the court both expensive and of limited malleability while the King 's Bench became faster , cheaper and more varied in its jurisdiction . 
 The troubles during this period are best illustrated by Slade 's Case . Under the medieval common law , claims seeking the repayment of a debt or other matters could only be pursued through a writ of debt in the Common Pleas , a problematic and archaic process . By 1558 the lawyers had succeeded in creating another method , enforced by the Court of King 's Bench , through the action of assumpsit , which was technically for deceit . The legal fiction used was that by failing to pay after promising to do so , a defendant had committed deceit , and was liable to the plaintiff . The conservative Common Pleas , through the appellate court the Court of Exchequer Chamber , began to overrule decisions made by the King 's Bench on assumpsit , causing friction between the courts . In Slade 's Case , the Chief Justice of the King 's Bench , John Popham , deliberately provoked the Common Pleas into bringing an assumpsit action to a higher court where the Justices of the King 's Bench could vote , allowing them to overrule the Common Pleas and establish assumpsit as the main contractual action . After the death of Edmund Anderson , the more activist Francis Gawdy became Chief Justice of the Common Pleas , which briefly led to a less reactionary and more revolutionary court . 
 The Interregnum granted some respite to the Common Pleas , which abolished fines on original writs , hurting the King 's Bench , but in 1660 the fines were reinstated and " then the very attorneys of the Common Pleas boggled at them and carried all their finable business to the King 's Bench " . In 1661 the Common Pleas attempted to reverse this by pushing for an Act of Parliament to abolish <unk> based on legal fictions , forbidding " special bail " in any case where " the true cause of action " was not expressed in the process . The King 's Bench got around this in the 1670s ; the Act did not say that the process had to be true , so the court continued to use legal fictions , simply ensuring that the true cause of action was expressed in the process , regardless of whether or not it was correct . The Bill of <unk> disclosed the true cause of action , satisfying the 1661 statute , but did not require a valid complaint . This caused severe friction within the court system , and Francis North , Chief Justice of the Common Pleas , eventually reached a compromise by allowing such legal fictions in the Common Pleas as well as the King 's Bench . 
 = = = Unity and dissolution = = = 
 The unintended outcome of these compromises was that by the end of Charles II 's reign , all three common law courts had a similar jurisdiction over most common pleas , with similar processes . By the 18th century , it was customary to speak of the " twelve justices " of the three courts , not distinguishing them , and assize cases were shared equally between them . In 1828 , Henry Brougham complained that 
 The jurisdiction of the Court of King 's Bench , for example , was originally confined to pleas of the Crown , and then extended to actions where violence was used - actions of trespass , by force ; but now , all actions are admissible within its walls , through the medium of a legal fiction , which was adopted for the purpose of enlarging its authority , that every person sued is in the custody of the marshal of the court and may , therefore , be proceeded against for any personal cause of actions . Thus , by degrees , this court has drawn over to itself actions which really belong to ... the Court of Common Pleas . The Court of Common Pleas , however ... never was able to obtain cognizance of - the peculiar subject of King 's Bench jurisdiction - Crown Pleas ... the Exchequer has adopted a similar course for , though it was originally confined to the trial of revenue cases , it has , by means of another fiction - the supposition that everybody sued is a debtor to the Crown , and further , that he cannot pay his debt , because the other party will not pay him , - opened its doors to every suitor , and so drawn to itself the right of trying cases , that were never intended to be placed within its jurisdiction . 
 The purpose of Brougham 's speech was to illustrate that three courts of identical jurisdiction were unnecessary , and further that it would create a situation where the best judges , lawyers and cases would eventually go to one court , overburdening that body and leaving the others near @-@ useless . In 1823 , 43 @,@ 465 actions were brought in the King 's Bench , 13 @,@ 009 in the Common Pleas and 6 @,@ 778 in the Exchequer of Pleas . Not surprisingly , the King 's Bench judges were " immoderately over burdened " , the Common Pleas judges were " fully occupied in term , and much engaged in vacation also " and the Barons of the Exchequer were " comparatively little occupied either in term or vacation " . 
 In response to this and the report of a committee investigating the slow pace of the Court of Chancery , the Judicature Commission was formed in 1867 , and given a wide remit to investigate reform of the courts , the law , and the legal profession . Five reports were issued , from 25 March 1869 to 10 July 1874 , with the first ( dealing with the formation of a single Supreme Court of Judicature ) considered the most influential . The report disposed of the previous idea of merging the common law and equity , and instead suggested a single Supreme Court capable of utilising both . In 1870 the Lord Chancellor , Lord Hatherly , attempted to bring the recommendations into law through an Act of Parliament , but did not go to the trouble of consulting the judiciary or the leader of the Conservatives , who controlled the House of Lords . The bill ran into strong opposition from lawyers and judges , particularly Alexander Cockburn . After Hatherly was replaced by Lord Selbourne in September 1872 , a second bill was introduced after consultation with the judiciary ; although along the same lines , it was far more detailed . 
 The Act , finally passed as the Supreme Court of Judicature Act 1873 , merged the Common Pleas , Exchequer , King 's Bench and Court of Chancery into one body , the High Court of Justice , with the divisions between the courts to remain . The Court of Common Pleas thus ceased to exist , except as the Common Pleas Division of the High Court . The existence of the same courts under one unified head was a quirk of constitutional law , which prevented the compulsory demotion or retirement of Chief Justices . By sheer chance , both the Lord Chief Justice of England and Wales and Chief Baron of the Exchequer died in 1880 , allowing for the abolition of the Common Pleas Division and Exchequer Division by Order in Council on 16 December 1880 , with their functions merged into the King 's Bench Division , with the Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas becoming Lord Chief Justice of England and Wales . 
 = = Jurisdiction = = 
 The Common Pleas ' jurisdiction was over " common pleas , " cases where the king had no interest . This in practice meant cases between subject and subject , including all actions taken under <unk> to recover debts or property , which made up the vast majority of civil cases . As such , the Common Pleas " was the court which more than any other shaped the medieval common law " . It was the court where most students went to learn , and the majority of the early case reports come from the Common Pleas . The court was called " the lock and key of the common law " by Sir Edward Coke , since throughout its history it was the only court where claims involving real property could be brought , giving it a wider remit to set precedent than the other courts . For almost all of its history , Serjeants at Law and King 's Serjeants were the only advocates given rights of audience in the Court of Common Pleas . As part of the Court of Common Pleas the Serjeants also performed some judicial duties , such as levying fines . In 1834 Lord Brougham issued a mandate which opened up pleading in the Court of Common Pleas to every barrister , Serjeant or not , and this was followed for six years until the Serjeants successfully petitioned the Queen to overturn it as invalid . The Serjeants only enjoyed their returned status for another six years , however , before Parliament intervened . The Practitioners in Common Pleas Act 1846 , from 18 August 1846 , allowed all barristers to practice in the Court of Common Pleas . 
 From the 13th century onwards , the Court of Common Pleas could issue its own writs , and was not dependent on the Court of Chancery , where such documents usually originated . These were sealed with the Great Seal of the King until at least 1338 , along with the seal of the justices ; the Chancery writs had their own independent seal . Documents were , from 1350 , considered acceptable if only marked with the seal of the justices . In 1344 , the king created a separate seal for the Common Pleas , allowing them to process cases without involving the Chancery or the king . The court stood on an equal footing with the Exchequer of Pleas , Court of Chancery and King 's Bench in relation to transferring cases between them . Any errors on the part of the Common Pleas would be corrected by the King 's Bench through a separate action brought there . Thanks to the Bill of Middlesex and other legal fictions , the King 's Bench gained much of the Common Pleas 's jurisdiction , although the Common Pleas remained the sole place where real property claims could be brought . 
 = = Structure = = 
 = = = Justices = = = 
 The Common Pleas was staffed by a number of Justices , under one Chief Justice . The number of Justices at any one time varied ; between 1377 and 1420 there were generally four , switching to five from 1420 to 1471 . From 1471 onwards , the number was fixed at 3 . This changed in the 19th century ; provisions were made for the appointment of a Fourth Justice and Fifth Justice in 1830 and 1868 respectively . From the start of the 14th century , Justices were appointed via letters patent made under the Great Seal , and held their appointments " under the pleasure of the King " . Justices received the same remuneration as judges of the Exchequer of Pleas and Court of King 's Bench ; £ 1 @,@ 000 in 1660 , increased to £ 2 @,@ 000 in 1759 and £ 4 @,@ 000 in 1809 . From 1799 , pensions were also awarded to retiring Justices . The Chief Justice was one of the highest judicial officials in England , behind only the Lord High Chancellor and the Lord Chief Justice of the King 's ( or Queen 's ) Bench . Initially the position of Chief Justice was not an appointment ; of the justices serving in the court , one would become more respected than his peers , and was therefore considered the " chief " justice . The position was formalised in 1272 with the raising of Sir Gilbert of Preston to Chief Justice , and from then on it was considered a formally appointed role similar to the positions of Chief Justice of the King 's Bench and Chief Baron of the Exchequer . 
 Both the puisne and Chief justices were required to be Serjeants @-@ at @-@ Law , and were appointed by letters patent . The Serjeant would then be greeted by the Lord Chancellor , who would inform him of his new position ; the letters patent would then be read out in court , and the new justice would swear an oath to do " justice without favour , to all men pleading before him , friends and foes alike " , not to " delay to do so even though the king should command him by his letters or by word of mouth to the contrary " or " receive from anyone except the king any fee or other pension or livery nor take any gift from the <unk> before him , except food and drink of no great price " . The innovation of appointment by letters patent was a scheme of Edward III 's to avoid the potential for bribery , by providing a method through which judges could be paid . This income was supplemented through work on commissions of assize , goal deliveries , and oyer and terminer . The justice would also receive fees from the parties in court , through the costs of judicial writs . 
 = = = Other offices = = = 
 The justices were assisted by a staff of over 50 officials , most of whom sat in Westminster Hall but also kept offices at the various Inns of Court . The Chief Clerk was the Custos Brevium , appointed by the crown , but in practice clerking matters were handled by his deputy , as the office was a royal favour rather than a serious judicial appointment . The crown also appointed the court <unk> , responsible for noting final concords and filing records of fines . Another high @-@ ranking clerk was the Clerk of the <unk> , an under @-@ clerk of the Attorney General for England and Wales , who was tasked with recording recognizances to protect the interests of the King in common law matters . In 1541 his position was replaced with the office of Clerk of the King 's Process . Other offices created during the reign of Henry VIII include the Clerk of the <unk> in 1432 , who recorded debts secured by recognizances and the office of Receiver of Debts , who was tasked with receiving and recording money coming into the court via debts and fines , and was first appointed in 1536 . 
 Due to their technical knowledge , the most important officers were the three <unk> , the first and third of whom were appointed by the Chief Justice and the second by the Chief Justice on the advice of the Custos Brevium . They were responsible for enrolling records of litigation , including anything that raised a point of law , and were often consulted by the court due to their detailed technical knowledge . The Chief Justice also appointed the Clerk of the Warrants , Clerk of the Treasury ( also known as the Clerk of Hell ) , the Keeper of the Seal , the Clerk of <unk> and the Clerk of Acknowledgments of Fines and <unk> ( who was officially the Chief Justice 's own clerk , rather than that of the court ) , as well as other officials . The Custos Brevium appointed the Clerk of the Juries , responsible for issuing writs of Habeas Corpus . 
 There were four <unk> tasked with issuing and controlling the process of declaring someone an Outlaw , with each <unk> assigned a set of counties . The most valuable of the <unk> was that for London , Middlesex , Sussex , Kent , Dorset , Somerset , Devon , Cambridgeshire , Huntingdonshire , Bristol and Exeter due to the number of processes each year , with London alone handling over 100 documents a year by the mid @-@ 1550s . By tradition the <unk> for Yorkshire and the other northern counties was also <unk> for Northumberland , Westmorland , Cumberland and Newcastle , and Clerk of the King 's Silver for the entire country . There were also thirteen <unk> , who shared counties between them according to historical divisions , and were tasked with filing judicial writs for their counties and transferring them to the Custos Brevium for filing . A fourteenth <unk> was appointed for Monmouthshire in 1542 , but other than this there were no changes to the position until the abolition of the court . 
 The Warden of the Fleet Prison , who was also keeper of Westminster Hall , was tasked with keeping it clean and letting the shops and booths along the sides . Despite acting as gaoler to the Exchequer of Pleas , Court of Chancery and Star Chamber as part of his duties the Warden was considered an officer of the Court of Common Pleas . All court officers were appointed for life , and could only be removed for misbehaviour . Despite this , the sheer number of positions meant that several came up for reappointment in each Chief Justice 's tenure , and selling them could be very profitable . 
 = USS Parker ( DD @-@ 48 ) = 
 USS Parker ( Destroyer No. 48 / DD @-@ 48 ) was an Aylwin @-@ class destroyer built for the United States Navy prior to the American entry into World War I. The ship was the first U.S. Navy vessel named in honor of Foxhall A. Parker , Jr . , a U.S. Navy officer who served in the American Civil War , and as Superintendent of United States Naval Academy . 
 Parker was laid down by William Cramp and Sons of Philadelphia in March 1912 and launched in February 1913 . The ship was a little more than 305 ft ( 93 m ) in length , just over 30 ft ( 9 @.@ 1 m ) abeam , and had a standard displacement of 1 @,@ 036 long tons ( 1 @,@ 053 t ) . She was armed with four 4 in ( 100 mm ) guns and had eight 18 in ( 460 mm ) torpedo tubes . Parker was powered by a pair of steam turbines that propelled her at up to 29 @.@ 5 kn ( 33 @.@ 9 mph ; 54 @.@ 6 km / h ) . 
 After her January 1914 commissioning , she assisted her sister ship Aylwin when that ship suffered an explosion in one of her fire rooms in April . After the U.S. entered World War I in April 1917 , Parker served as an escort for the fourth group of the first American troop convoy of the war . Afterwards , she patrolled the Irish Sea out of Queenstown , Ireland . Parker rescued nine survivors of a torpedoed British hospital ship in February 1918 , and her crew received accolades from the British Parliament , the Admiralty , and U.S. Navy officials . 
 Upon returning to the U.S. after the war in July 1919 , Parker rejoined the Atlantic Fleet . Parker was decommissioned in June 1922 . She was struck from the Naval Vessel Register in March 1935 , and ordered scrapped in April . 
 = = Design and construction = = 
 Parker was authorized in March 1911 as the third of four ships of the Aylwin class , which was almost identical to the Cassin @-@ class destroyers authorized at the same time . Construction of the vessel — like her three sister ships — was awarded to William Cramp and Sons of Philadelphia which laid down her keel on 11 March 1912 . On 8 February 1913 , Parker was launched by sponsor Mrs. Henry W. Hand , wife of the vice president of the Cramp shipyard . The ship was the first U.S. Navy vessel to be named for Foxhall A. Parker , Jr . , a U.S. Navy officer who served in the American Civil War , and as Superintendent of United States Naval Academy ; he was also a co @-@ founder of the United States Naval Institute . As built , the destroyer was 305 ft 3 in ( 93 @.@ 04 m ) in length , 30 ft 4 in ( 9 @.@ 25 m ) abeam , and drew 9 ft 5 in ( 2 @.@ 87 m ) . The ship had a standard displacement of 1 @,@ 036 long tons ( 1 @,@ 053 t ) and displaced 1 @,@ 235 long tons ( 1 @,@ 255 t ) when fully loaded . 
 Parker had two steam turbines that drove her two screw propellers , and an additional pair triple @-@ expansion steam engines , each connected to one of the propeller shafts , for cruising purposes . Four oil @-@ burning boilers powered the engines , which could generate 16 @,@ 000 shp ( 12 @,@ 000 kW ) , moving the ship at the design speed of 29 @.@ 5 kn ( 33 @.@ 9 mph ; 54 @.@ 6 km / h ) ; After sister ship Aylwin failed to meet the design speed in her July 1913 builder 's trials , Parker was outfitted with redesigned propellers , and exceeded the contracted speed in her trials in November , when she topped out at 30 @.@ 33 kn ( 34 @.@ 90 mph ; 56 @.@ 17 km / h ) during runs off the Delaware Breakwater . 
 Parker 's main battery consisted of four 4 in ( 100 mm ) / 50 caliber Mark 9 guns , with each gun weighing in excess of 6 @,@ 100 lb ( 2 @,@ 800 kg ) . The guns fired 33 lb ( 15 kg ) armor @-@ piercing projectiles at 2 @,@ 900 ft / s ( 880 m / s ) . At an elevation of 20 ° , the guns had a range of 15 @,@ 920 yd ( 14 @,@ 560 m ) . Parker was also equipped with four twin mount 18 in ( 460 mm ) torpedo tubes . 
 = = Pre @-@ World War I = = 
 Parker was commissioned into the United States Navy on 30 December 1913 under the command of Lieutenant Commander C. P. Nelson . Parker was attached to the Torpedo Flotilla , Atlantic Fleet , operating off the Atlantic coast during the years of American neutrality in World War I. On 6 April 1914 , Parker and sister ships Aylwin and Benham were exercising off the North Carolina coast , about 15 nmi ( 17 mi ; 28 km ) off the Diamond Shoals lightship . An explosion ripped through the forward fire room on Aylwin , injuring three men . Benham loaded the three wounded sailors and sped to the naval hospital at Norfolk , Virginia , while Parker took on the remainder of Aylwin 's crew . One of the injured men died on Benham before landfall was made in Virginia ; another died a short time later . Aylwin remained afloat but , unmanned , was towed into Norfolk by Parker and U.S. Navy tug Sonoma . The crews of all three destroyers raised $ 250 to help defray funeral expenses for the widow of one of the men . 
 In early April 1915 , Parker and destroyer McDougal were temporarily assigned to patrol near the New York City Quarantine Station . There were concerns by Dudley Field Malone , the local port collector , that some of the interned German steamships at New York might try to slip out during a heavy snowstorm . As a part of these patrols , Malone discovered what The New York Times termed a " widespread conspiracy " intended to supply British warships outside U.S. territorial waters , in violation of the American neutrality in World War I. 
 After participating in winter maneuvers in Cuban waters in early 1917 , Parker joined the fleet at Yorktown , Virginia , in March , immediately prior to the American entry into World War I. 
 = = World War I = = 
 After the U.S. entered World War I on 6 April 1917 , Parker was selected for overseas duty . She sailed on 17 June as an escort for the fourth group of the first American convoy , which carried units of the American Expeditionary Force . The convoy consisted of United States Army transports Montanan , Dakotan , El Occidente , and Edward Luckenbach ; U.S. Navy transport Hancock ; and oiler Kanawha . The escorts — in addition to Parker — were the cruisers St. Louis , and destroyers Ammen , Flusser , and Shaw . The group departed from New York for Brest , France , steaming at an 11 kn ( 13 mph ; 20 km / h ) pace . A thwarted submarine attack on the first convoy group , and reports of heavy submarine activity off of Brest , resulted in a change in the convoy 's destination to Saint @-@ Nazaire where the convoy arrived 2 July . 
 From St. Nazaire , Parker steamed to Queenstown , Ireland , joining the U.S. Naval Forces patrolling the Irish Coast . There she escorted convoys safely through the war zone , and assisted vessels in distress . From July – November 1918 , Parker was attached to the base at Plymouth , England , and operated with U.S. submarine chasers . Parker made contact with German submarines on several occasions during the war . She was credited with probably seriously damaging an enemy submarine on 3 August 1917 . 
 On 26 February 1918 , Parker assisted in rescuing nine survivors of British hospital ship <unk> Castle , which had been torpedoed by German submarine UC @-@ 56 . The men of Parker were commended by the British Parliament , the Admiralty , and the U.S. naval authorities . On 1 November , Parker sailed from Plymouth for Gibraltar but returned to Plymouth at the end of the war . 
 = = Postwar = = 
 After returning to Plymouth after the Armistice was signed , Parker carried mail and passengers between Plymouth and Brest . She made a cruise to German ports in early 1919 to implement the terms of the armistice , before steaming to the Baltic Sea to assist members and vessels of the American Relief Administration . Parker sailed for New York on 20 July 1919 and , upon arrival , was assigned to Destroyer Squadron 1 , Atlantic Fleet . 
 The destroyer was based out of Norfolk , Virginia from 1919 @-@ mid @-@ 1921 . In July 1920 , Parker was operating in the Mediterranean when she played a role in the search for an American missionary couple , Paul Nilson and Harriet Fisher Nilson , thought abducted by Turkish Nationalists . Parker was sent to <unk> to demand the release of the pair , and dispatched messages by airplane to Tarsus and Adana to that effect . 
 After making a final cruise to Newport , Rhode Island , in mid 1921 , Parker was decommissioned on 6 June 1922 . After 13 years in reserve , the ship was struck from the Naval Vessel Register on 8 March 1935 , and , on 23 April , was ordered scrapped . 
 = Fatinitza = 
 Fatinitza was the first full @-@ length , three @-@ act operetta by Franz von Suppé . The libretto by F. Zell ( a pseudonym for Camillo Walzel ) and Richard Genée was based on the libretto to La <unk> by Eugène Scribe ( which had been set to music by Daniel Auber in 1861 ) , but with the lead role of Wladimir , a young Russian lieutenant who has to disguise himself as a woman , changed to a trousers role ; in other words , a woman played the part of the man who pretended to be a woman . 
 It premièred on 5 January 1876 , at the Carltheater Vienna , and proved a huge success , running for more than a hundred performances , with the march " Vorwärts mit <unk> <unk> " , proving a particular hit . The opera as a whole is no longer in the popular repertory , but the overture is performed as a stand @-@ alone piece . 
 = = Background = = 
 Viennese operetta sprang out of an attempt by Viennese composers to imitate Jacques Offenbach 's works , after the highly successful performance of Le mariage aux <unk> at the Carltheater in 1858 . Franz von Suppé was the most notable of these early composers , and proved instrumental in defining the new subgenre . Grove Music Online names Suppé 's Das <unk> ( 1860 ) as " the first successful attempt at a genuine Viennese operetta " , and this was followed by several more successes , for Suppé , including <unk> <unk> ( 1863 ) and Die schöne <unk> ( 1865 ) . However , until Fatinitza in 1876 , Suppé did not write a full @-@ length operetta , and , despite the successes of his shorter works , neither he , nor other Viennese composers such as Giovanni von <unk> , were able to compete with Offenbach for popularity throughout the 1860s . 
 Offenbach 's dominance was finally challenged with the arrival of Johann Strauss II upon the scene in the 1870s , with works such as Indigo und die <unk> <unk> , Der <unk> in Rom , Die Fledermaus , and others serving to develop and codify the genre Suppé had begun laying out . 
 Suppé finally tried his hand at a full @-@ length operetta in 1876 . F. Zell ( a pseudonym for Camillo Walzel ) and Richard Genée , who had previously adapted the French play Le <unk> into Strauss 's Die Fledermaus – the " most celebrated of all Viennese operas " according to the musicologist Andrew Lamb – returned to French sources , adapting Eugène Scribe 's libretto from Daniel Auber 's La <unk> ( 1861 ) into Fatinitza . The work premièred at the Carltheater on January 5 , 1876 , and would prove to be an international success . 
 = = Roles = = 
 Note : This article uses the names found in the original German libretto . Translations of Fatinitza may change characters ' names to a greater or lesser extent . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 Before the piece begins , Wladimir <unk> , a young Russian Lieutenant , had an adventure in which he ended up disguising himself as a woman ( who he named Fatinitza ) , and met with the hot @-@ tempered elderly General <unk> , who fell in love with his disguise . Wladimir , however , is in love with the General 's niece , Lydia . 
 The opera opens on a camp of Russian soldiers near <unk> , where Wladimir has been assigned . His friend , Julian , a special newspaper correspondent , is mistaken for a spy and dragged to the camp , but Wladimir defuses the situation . Julian and Wladimir reminisce about his Fatinitza disguise , which eventually leads the soldiers to consider some amateur theatre , to relieve the boredom . As no women are present , Wladimir resumes his Fatinitza disguise . 
 The General arrives , and recognises " Fatinitza " as his lost love , and Wladimir finds himself needing to play along in order to protect his men from the general 's anger at the theatrical costumes , which are not the regulation uniform . His niece Lydia soon arrives , and recognises Wladimir under the disguise . Julian tells the two that Fatinitza is Wladimir 's sister . The general temporarily leaves the three to see how the other soldiers are getting on , but , as the first act ends , a band of bashi @-@ <unk> manage to catch the camp by surprise , and take " Fatinitza " , and Lydia prisoner . Julian scrambles the Russian soldiers to return the attack , but the General refuses to allow them to fire , lest they hit Fatinitza . 
 The second act opens in the Turkish fortress , run by <unk> Pascha . Pascha has four wives , and wishes to add Lydia to his harem . His wives are highly upset at this , and " Fatinitza " persuades them to aid in his and Lydia 's escape , revealing his true identity at the end . 
 Julian and a Russian Sergeant , <unk> , arrive to attempt to negotiate Lydia and " Fatinitza " ' s freedom , but Pascha will only release Lydia . However , Wladimir is able to pass on a message , and , while Julian distracts Pascha , <unk> arranges for the soldiers to slip into the fortress , effecting a rescue . 
 However , all is not well with the love triangle as the third act opens . The General sent out news of rewards should Fatinitza be found , and has now received word that she has been found ( much to Julian and Wladimir 's confusion ) . As Lydia lives with him , the General , unaware of Wladimir 's love for her , but wanting to be alone with Fatinitza , has promised Lydia in marriage to an old , crippled friend of his , who had the advantage of being available for marriage . He does not want to break his word to his friend , but when Wladimir announces he has promised his " sister " to one of his friends , the General agrees to break Lydia 's betrothal if Wladimir will break Fatinitza 's . 
 The promised Fatinitza arrives , but turns out to be an old woman of the same name . Julian and Wladimir produce a letter from the " real " Fatinitza , " discovering " that she died of grief when separated from the General . In her memory , he gives his niece to " Fatinitza 's brother " . 
 = = = Legacy = = = 
 Although rarely performed today , at the time , Fatinitza was an international success . The composer , lyricists , and theatre would reunite for two more international successes in their next two productions : Boccaccio ( 1879 ) , Suppé 's best @-@ known and most popular operetta ; and another cross @-@ dressing army opera in Donna Juanita ( 1880 ) . However , after these successes , Suppé 's later operettas proved less popular with audiences , and , according to the musicologist Andrew Lamb , were also of lower quality . 
 The work was translated back to French by Felix <unk> for a production at the <unk> @-@ Parisiennes in Brussels , which opened on 28 December 1878 , despite concerns from Scribe 's widow . However , in Paris , she refused permission for the Gaîté to mount the work in that form , and the directors of the Théâtre des <unk> , Boulevard des <unk> therefore procured a much altered libretto from Alfred Delacour and Victor Wilder , and in this form the Paris première was produced at that theatre on 15 March 1879 , with costumes by <unk> , running for 59 nights . Revived in April 1882 , the production received 55 more performances , with Marguerite Ugalde in the title role . 
 Other early translations include an 1876 Czech translation by E. <unk> for a performance in Prague ; two Swedish versions for 1876 Stockholm performances by A. Lindgren and E. A. <unk> , respectively ; an 1877 Italian translation by V. A. <unk> for a performance in the Teatro <unk> , Naples ; English translations for the Alhambra Theatre , London in 1878 by H. S. Leigh ; and by J. B. Polk for an 1879 New York production ; an 1879 Polish translation performed in Lemberg ; a Portuguese translation by Ed . Garrido and A. Azevedo for an 1881 Rio de Janeiro production ; an 1887 Estonian translation performed in Tartu , and an 1899 Croatian translation by V. <unk> , for a Zagreb production . 
 = = Recordings = = 
 1910 : Fatinitza selection ( musical excerpts in English ) : Luigi <unk> , Maria Costa , Ruth Peter , soloists ; Associated Light Opera Company ; Eugene <unk> , conductor ; Arthur Pryor 's Band . New York : Associated Music Publishers A @-@ 448 ( matrix ) / A @-@ 450 ( matrix ) ; 2 sound discs ( 20 min . , 40 sec . ) ; analogue , 33 1 / 3 rpm , mono ; 16 @-@ inch distributed electrical transcription recordings ; vertical recording ; production level cataloguing ; Library of Congress . 
 2006 : Stephanie <unk> , mezzo @-@ soprano ( Wladimir / Fatinitza ) ; Steven <unk> , baritone ( General <unk> ) ; Bernhard <unk> bass @-@ baritone ( Izzet Pascha ) ; Zora <unk> , soprano ( Lydia ) ; Christian Bauer , tenor ( Julian von Goltz ) ; Chor des Lehár Festivals Bad Ischl ; Franz Lehár @-@ Orchester ; <unk> <unk> , conductor ; dialogue version by Leonard C. and Sabine Prinsloo ; programme notes and synopsis in English , German and French ; <unk> 777 202 @-@ 2 ( 2 CDs ) . 
 = Clevedon Pier = 
 Clevedon Pier is a seaside pier in the town of Clevedon , Somerset , England on the east shore of the Severn Estuary . It has been described by Sir John Betjeman , as " the most beautiful pier in England " and was designated a Grade I listed building in 2001 . 
 The pier was built during the 1860s to attract tourists and provide a ferry port for rail passengers to South Wales . The pier is 312 m ( 1 @,@ 024 ft ) long and consists of eight spans supported by steel rails covered by wooden decking , with a pavilion on the pier head . 
 The pier opened in 1869 and served as an embarkation point for paddle steamer excursions for almost exactly 100 years . Two of the spans collapsed during stress testing in 1970 and demolition was proposed , but local fund raising and heritage grants allowed the pier to be dismantled for restoration and reassembled . It reopened in 1989 , and ten years later was awarded the Pier of the Year from the National Piers Society , and a Civic Trust Award . The pier now , once again , offers a landing stage for steamers and is a popular attraction for tourists and anglers . 
 = = Location = = 
 The pier projects from the seafront at Clevedon into the Severn Estuary , which separates South West England from South Wales . The pier and toll house , where entry fees are collected , are adjacent to the Royal Pier Hotel , originally known as The Rock House and built in 1823 by Thomas <unk> . 
 The shore at Clevedon is a mixture of pebbled beaches and low rocky cliffs , with the old harbour being at the western edge of the town at the mouth of the Land Yeo river . The rocky beach has been designated as the Clevedon Shore geological Site of Special Scientific Interest . It is the side of a mineralised fault , which runs east @-@ west adjacent to the pier , and forms a small cliff feature in Dolomitic Conglomerate on the north side of Clevedon Beach , containing cream to pink baryte together with sulfides . The minerals identified at the site include : haematite , chalcopyrite , <unk> , galena , tetrahedrite , <unk> , pyrite , marcasite , <unk> and sphalerite . Secondary alteration of this assemblage has produced <unk> , <unk> and other copper sulfides . The nearest parking to the pier entrance is on an esplanade above the rocky beach . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Construction = = = 
 During the Victorian era , Clevedon became a popular seaside town , having previously been an agricultural village . Due to improving transport links , via the Clevedon Branch Line , Clevedon was able to cater for the late 19th century craze for bathing in the sea with saltwater baths adjacent to the pier ( since demolished , though the foundations can still be seen ) , and bathing machines on the main beach . Many English seaside resorts built piers in the 1850s to attract tourists . At Clevedon tourism grew following the opening of a branch line from Yatton railway station which connected it to the Bristol to Exeter Line , enabling travel from the rest of the country . It was also proposed that a pier could form part of a route from London to South Wales with the use of steamers to cross the Severn Estuary . An enabling act was submitted to parliament in 1864 . 
 In November 1866 , the Clevedon Pier Company was formed at a public meeting in the town . The directors included Sir Arthur Elton of Clevedon Court . Construction of the pier started at a cost of £ 10 @,@ 000 , with John William Grover and Richard Ward as the engineers and Hans Price as the architect . The erection of the iron pillars was undertaken by Hamilton Windsor Ironworks Co. of Garston , Liverpool . The legs were constructed from Barlow rail which had previously been used on Isambard Kingdom Brunel 's South Wales Railway , with wood planks for the decking . By August 1868 600 ft ( 183 m ) of the pier had been built and the final section was completed by February 1869 . 
 = = Engineering = = 
 The pier is 312 m ( 1 @,@ 024 ft ) long and 48 ft ( 15 m ) above high water . Each of the eight spans is 100 ft ( 30 m ) long . The legs are made up of Barlow rails which are riveted together ; one of the rails separates from the main support close to the deck at the top , forming a transverse truss joining a rail from the opposite leg of the pier and longitudinal bracing is provided by further rails . The supporting piles , which are made of cast iron , are 2 ft ( 0 @.@ 6 m ) in diameter at the seabed . In total approximately 370 tons of wrought iron was used . 
 The Severn Estuary has one of the highest tidal ranges in the world , up to 48 ft ( 15 m ) , second only to the Bay of Fundy in Eastern Canada . The estuary 's funnel shape , its tidal range , and the underlying geology of rock , gravel and sand , produce strong tidal streams and high turbidity , giving the water a notably brown colouration . The tidal range means that the legs of the pier are largely exposed at low tide and hidden at high tide and the landing stage at the end of the pier has several levels to allow boats to dock at all stages of the tide . 
 = = = Opening and operation = = = 
 The pier was officially opened on 29 March 1869 , with a parade , bands and a cannon volley by the First Somerset Artillery . 
 The number of rail passengers crossing to South Wales , which had been envisaged , was reduced after the opening of the Severn Tunnel in 1886 . The tunnel linked South Gloucestershire in the west of England to Monmouthshire in south Wales , under the estuary of the River Severn . The paddle steamer Waverley first visited the pier to take on passengers in 1886 , and along with sister ships of the White Funnel Fleet belonging to P and A Campbell provided excursions around the Bristol Channel . Other ships of the fleet including Ravenswood , Westward Ho , Cambria and Britannia regularly called at Clevedon . Other companies , including the Cardiff @-@ based Edwards , Robertson & Co . , eventually taken over by Campbells , visited Clevedon Pier . 
 In 1893 the pier head was replaced in cast iron with a new timber landing stage , and the pier head pavilion was completed in 1894 . The Toll House on the pier and the adjacent Royal Pier Hotel were both designed by local architect Hans Price . In 1899 , 20 ft ( 6 m ) of the decking was washed away by a storm , and in 1910 , part of the landing stage was damaged in another storm and replaced by a concrete landing stage in 1913 . 
 The pier continued to flourish between the First and Second World Wars and into the 1960s , and was visited frequently by P & A Campbell 's steamers . The PS Bristol Queen ( 1946 ) and PS Cardiff Queen ( 1947 ) were regular visitors . 
 = = = Collapse = = = 
 On 16 October 1970 , spans 7 and 8 of the pier collapsed during stress testing , which had been introduced in the 1950s as a requirement for obtaining insurance cover . The tests involved the placement of polythene tanks 50 ft ( 15 @.@ 2 m ) long , 5 ft ( 1 @.@ 5 m ) wide and 2 ft ( 0 @.@ 6 m ) deep filled to a depth of 10 in ( 25 @.@ 4 cm ) , which created a pressure of 50 <unk> ( 2 kPa ) . This simulated the required load agreed with the Ministry of Transport . 
 Six tanks were used for each span and left in place for three hours ; the 18 tanks used in total allowed three spans to be tested simultaneously . At the end of the three hours the tanks were emptied and dragged along the deck to test further spans . The first six spans passed without problems , but under load the seventh span collapsed , bringing down the eighth and final span , leaving the pier head and pavilion standing . 
 = = = Restoration = = = 
 The Clevedon Pier Preservation Society was formed in 1972 and started campaigning for the restoration of the pier . The district council applied for permission to demolish the pier in 1979 , but a public enquiry the following year ruled that it should be retained . The pavilions from the end of the pier were taken ashore in 1982 for storage in anticipation of eventual restoration ; insufficient funds were available to complete restoration and the first stage was to open the Toll House as an exhibition centre in 1984 . 
 A major breakthrough came in 1984 , when English Heritage and the National Heritage Memorial Fund granted a million pounds towards the restoration , with smaller sums from Woodspring District Council and other funding bodies . The trust , which had been formed by the preservation society , also obtained a 99 @-@ year lease . The pier was dismantled in 1985 , taken to Portishead dock for restoration , and reconstructed in 1986 . 
 After a long campaign by local people to raise funds for restoration ( supported by Sir John Betjeman , who described Clevedon as " the most beautiful pier in England " ) , the pier eventually reopened . Some funds were raised by " sponsored planks " – small brass plaques with names or messages are inlaid on the wooden planks and benches , recording donations . Reconstruction of the pier spans and decking was completed on 27 May 1989 , and the pier was reopened to great enthusiasm . The pierhead was still shut , however , and it was not until 23 May 1998 that it was finally restored and opened to the public , as a result of funding from the Heritage Lottery Fund . In 1999 the National Piers Society awarded Clevedon Pier the title of Pier of the Year , and it also won a Civic Trust Award . The pier was re @-@ designated a Grade 1 listed building in 2001 , the only other pier with this status being Brighton 's West Pier ( largely destroyed by fire and storms between 2002 and 2004 ) . 
 The landing stage at the end of the pier is used throughout the summer season ( June to September ) by the Waverley and her sister ship , the Balmoral , and is a popular spot for angling . There is a cafe at the pierhead , and a souvenir shop at the toll house . The upper floor of the toll house is an art gallery with a different exhibition every month . The pier is open every day of the year except Christmas Day . Scenes from the 2010 film , Never Let Me Go , starring Keira Knightley were filmed near Clevedon pier during 2009 , and the pier also featured on the promotional posters . One Direction 's music video for their single " You & I " was filmed on Clevedon Pier . An appeal was launched in 2012 to raise £ 1 @.@ 6 million for a new visitor centre and educational facility , an additional £ 800 @,@ 000 of grants have been applied for to cover the cost of repainting the legs of the structure . In December 2012 it was announced that the pier had received £ 720 @,@ 000 of funding from the Heritage Lottery Fund to improve the visitor centre . 
 = = Photo Gallery = = 
 = Homer Simpson , This Is Your Wife = 
 " Homer Simpson , This Is Your Wife " is the fifteenth episode of the seventeenth season of the American animated television sitcom The Simpsons . It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on March 26 , 2006 , and was watched by around ten million people during that broadcast . In the episode , Homer signs the Simpson family up for a reality show in which the mothers of two families switch places . Marge gets to live with a friendly man named Charles and his perfect son , while Homer , Bart , and Lisa must spend time with Charles ' strict wife Verity . 
 English comedian Ricky Gervais contributed to the writing of the episode and guest starred in it as Charles . As a big fan of The Simpsons , he felt it was " a dream come true . " He was given the offer to write and guest star by The Simpsons creator Matt Groening , who was a fan of Gervais ' British comedy series The Office . After meeting Groening and executive producer Al Jean in early 2004 , Gervais set out to come up with the storyline for the episode . He was inspired by the British reality show Wife Swap . Though Gervais contributed a large part to the episode , the script was a joint effort with the regular writing staff of the show . 
 Gervais ' performance has been praised by critics , being listed as one of the best guest appearances on The Simpsons by writers for Entertainment Weekly and The Times . Groening also liked the performance and invited Gervais to appear on the show again . The episode as a whole , however , received mixed reviews from critics . A live @-@ action remake of the regular animated opening sequence of The Simpsons aired at the beginning of the episode . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Lenny invites his friends in Springfield to a party at his apartment , where he tells them that he has adopted a new faith in the form of a brand new plasma screen television . Homer immediately falls in love with its high @-@ definition picture , and begins to spend all his time at Lenny 's home watching television . Marge sends over Bart and Lisa to convince him to come back but they too become enthralled . After a few days , Homer is kicked out by Lenny , and when he returns home he no longer enjoys watching his regular CRT television . Marge tells him that she has entered the family in a contest where first prize is a plasma screen television . Later , they get a call and discover that instead of first prize , they won the third prize : a trip to the studios of Fox Broadcasting Company . There , Homer learns of a reality show called Mother Flippers in which the mothers of two families switch places , and the grand prize happens to be enough money to buy a new plasma screen television . 
 Homer signs his family up for the show . Marge is traded to a nice , easygoing man named Charles <unk> and his perfect son , while Homer gets Charles ' strict wife Verity . Charles seems to be a husband who dislikes his wife and is constantly told by her what to do , so he is surprised to see that Marge is understanding and kind . As Marge enjoys her time with Charles , he begins to develop an infatuation for her . Meanwhile , Homer , Bart , and Lisa are having major troubles with Verity , who disciplines them and objects to everything they do . 
 Charles writes a love song for Marge , who seems completely oblivious to him until he tells her that he is in love with her . She explains to him that she loves Homer , and that he should tell his wife how he feels about her . He agrees , and decides to take Marge back to Homer and then get rid of Verity . When the two arrive in Springfield , Homer and the children are ecstatic to see Marge . However , Verity has already decided to leave Charles , and has found a new partner : Marge 's sister Patty . They were brought together by their hatred for Homer and begin to insult him . When an offended Homer threatens to vote in favor of a law that prohibits same @-@ sex couples from adopting children , Patty forces Homer into confessing that he is too lazy to actually do it . At the end of the episode , Homer plays a guitar and expresses his undying love for his newly bought plasma television and ( to a lesser extent ) Marge . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Many Simpsons staff members were fans of English comedian Ricky Gervais and his British comedy series The Office that he created and starred . In January 2004 , The Simpsons creator Matt Groening called Gervais to congratulate him on his double Golden Globe win . During the phone call , Gervais was invited to lunch with Groening and executive producer Al Jean since they were big fans and wanted to meet him . At this lunch , he was offered a chance to appear in and write an episode of The Simpsons . Groening first asked Gervais for just a guest appearance , but came to the conclusion that he might be interested in writing an episode too . Gervais told The Independent that when he got the offer , " well , I knew I had to say yes , but fear kicked in at exactly the same time . " He became the first person to be credited with simultaneously writing and guest @-@ starring in an episode of The Simpsons . He was also the first Briton to write an episode for the show . As a big follower of The Simpsons , Gervais saw the experience as " a dream come true . " 
 = = = Writing process = = = 
 After the lunch with Groening and Jean in early 2004 , Gervais began coming up with a storyline . Because The Simpsons had been airing for such a long time , he found it difficult to think of a story that had not been done before . He finally based the plot on the British reality series Wife Swap after a suggestion from his girlfriend Jane Fallon , and wrote the character Charles to resemble David Brent , the character Gervais played on The Office . While working on the episode , Gervais made sure to make use of his favorite characters from The Simpsons , such as Lenny . He revealed to the press for the first time in December 2004 that he was writing an episode , commenting that " I 've got the rough idea but this is the most intimidating project of my career . The Simpsons is the greatest TV show of all time . " When he showed his first work to Groening and Jean , they liked it . Groening told the press that " we could never have written his character the way he did " and that " he caught our tone exactly , and then added his own Ricky Gervais / David Brent <unk> . " 
 Although Gervais came up with the plot of the episode and wrote parts of it on his own , the whole writing team of The Simpsons worked on the script and pitched ideas , as is done with all episodes . Gervais has said in interviews that he thinks he received too much credit for writing the episode , claiming he merely sent his plot ideas , along with some written scenes , to Jean through email , and it was then the staff of the show that " made it look like a Simpsons script . " He commented in a Dazed & Confused article that " I 'm going to get the credit , but I think everyone in the industry knows it was a joint effort . " One of the scenes that Gervais wrote himself was Charles ' love song for Marge , which later appeared on the 2007 soundtrack album The Simpsons : Testify . 
 " Matt Groening rang me up because he 'd seen The Office on a flight , ages before it was shown in America . I did a very rough sketch and wrote a song . So the only things that were mine were the song , a couple of jokes and the Wife Swap idea , which was Jane 's anyway . So I mustn 't take too much credit – I said as much once , but they said no , no , that 's always the case . Whoever it says ' wrote ' the episode goes through the same process . So that made me feel slightly less guilty . " 
 = = = Impact = = = 
 When asked in an interview if the Simpsons staff learned anything from the experience of having Gervais contribute to the show , Groening said they found out " that we could stay true to The Simpsons ' sensibility , with high @-@ velocity visual gags , but also honor what Ricky does with subtlety and nuance . " Jean added that " there was a scene with Ricky and Julie Kavner [ who plays Marge ] , which was longer than scenes we normally do , and slower @-@ paced , but it got a bigger laugh . " According to Don Kaplan , writing for the New York Post , Gervais said to a British newspaper in late 2005 that as a result of working on The Simpsons and other American shows , his connection with American television is deeper than his connection with British television . 
 In July 2007 , Groening stated that he would like to see Gervais appear on the show again because the staff enjoyed his performance . He also said that Gervais could decide himself if he wanted to return as Charles or a new character , should he choose to lend his voice again . Gervais did make another guest appearance on the show in an episode entitled " Angry Dad : The Movie " that was broadcast in the United States on February 20 , 2011 . This time he played himself . 
 = = Release = = 
 " Homer Simpson , This Is Your Wife " was originally broadcast on the Fox network in the United States on March 26 , 2006 . With a total of 10 @.@ 09 million viewers , the episode finished 38th in the ratings for the week of March 20 – 26 , 2006 . It was the seventh highest @-@ rated broadcast on Fox that week . During the episode 's first airing in the United Kingdom on April 23 , 2006 , it was watched by 2 @.@ 18 million people . At the time , this made it the second most @-@ watched broadcast in the history of Sky1 , after a Friends episode from 2000 that drew 2 @.@ 8 million viewers . The large amount of viewers of " Homer Simpson , This Is Your Wife " was the result of Gervais ' involvement — new episodes of the show were usually seen by approximately one million people on Sky1 at the time . 
 Instead of the usual animated opening sequence that is played in front of The Simpsons episodes , this episode began with a live @-@ action opening sequence . The sequence , which mirrors the normal opening but with real @-@ life actors and locations , was originally created by British Sky Broadcasting for Sky1 's promotion of The Simpsons . The live @-@ action opening had already become an Internet hit before it was aired in front of " Homer Simpson , This Is Your Wife " , and it was Groening 's decision to use it . Jean commented in a press statement that he was " just amazed there are people who want to be known for looking like the Simpsons . " 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Gervais has been praised by critics for his performance in the episode . In a 2012 article , Mike Bruno of Entertainment Weekly named Gervais one of the 21 best The Simpsons guest stars , and in 2007 Simon Crerar of The Times listed the performance as one of the funniest cameos in the history of the show . Gervais ' character Charles was cited by The Guardian 's Johnny Dee as one of the most memorable characters from The Simpsons . The episode , on the other hand , has received mixed response . Larissa Dubecki of The Age gave it a negative review , commenting that " this cross @-@ pollination of stellar US and British comedies [ The Simpsons and The Office ] gives rise to great expectations but there 's a massive letdown in store for anyone hoping for something approaching even the middling efforts of the two comedic benchmarks . " She added that " this effort proves that The Office and The Simpsons are the comedic equivalent of oil and water , with the former 's wry observational style sitting oddly with the latter 's pop @-@ culture pie @-@ eating competition . " 
 Dee was more positive , writing that he " enjoyed it very much " and that " there were some lovely gags . " He noted , however , that he felt it took slightly too much time to set up the episode , though after the wife swap , " it marched along . " The Times critic Dominic Maxwell thought the " languid timing that Gervais brings to Extras and The Office was wrong here . Simpsons cameos are normally lean , but Gervais 's shtick ran rampant through the second half , turning the regulars into extras . " Maxwell did find the episode entertaining though , stating that " it was a decent late @-@ period Simpsons episode " and that it featured " some fine jokes . " He concluded that " even a middling Simpsons episode is still bright and tight and brilliantly rendered . So even if this one didn ’ t really work , it was still a lot more fun than a lot of [ other things on television ] that do . " 
 = 2011 Grand National = 
 The 2011 Grand National ( known as the John Smith 's Grand National for sponsorship reasons ) was the 164th renewal of the world @-@ famous Grand National horse race held at Aintree Racecourse near Liverpool , England . 
 The showpiece steeplechase began at 4 : 15 pm BST on 9 April 2011 , the final day of the three @-@ day annual meeting . The maximum permitted field of forty runners competed for prize money totalling a record £ 950 @,@ 000 , making it the highest valued National Hunt race in the United Kingdom . 
 Nineteen of the forty participants completed the 4 ½ <unk> course ; of the 21 who did not , two suffered fatal falls on the first circuit , reigniting debates over the safety of the event . Irish horse Ballabriggs won the race , securing the first @-@ place prize money of £ 535 @,@ 135 and a first Grand National win for trainer Donald McCain , Jr . , the son of four @-@ time winning trainer Ginger McCain . Owned by Trevor Hemmings , Ballabriggs was ridden by Irish jockey Jason Maguire and was sent off at odds of 14 / 1 . The pairing completed the race in 9 minutes 1 @.@ 2 seconds , the second @-@ fastest time in Grand National history . 
 = = Race card = = 
 On 2 February 2011 Aintree released the names of 102 horses submitted to enter , including 34 Irish @-@ trained and three French @-@ trained horses . Ten were trained by Paul Nicholls , including a leading contender in Niche Market ; nine were handled by Irish trainer Willie Mullins , and three by Jonjo O 'Neill , the trainer of last year 's winner . Ballabriggs , another leading contender , was trained by Donald McCain , Jr . , the son of Ginger McCain who trained Red Rum to three National victories in the 1970s and returned with another winner , <unk> House , in 2004 . 
 20 contenders were withdrawn in the first scratchings . After a second scratchings deadline on 24 March , 74 horses remained on the list of entrants , with the top weight handicap of 11 st 10 lb allocated to last year 's winner Don 't Push It . The official odds on 24 March placed Mullins @-@ trained The Midnight Club at 10 / 1 favourite . Backstage and Oscar Time were given joint @-@ second favourite odds of 12 / 1 . 
 At the five @-@ day deadline on 4 April , nine further withdrawals since the second scratchings left a total of 65 contenders still in the running to compete . Nina Carberry , the sister of 1999 winner Paul Carberry , became the first female jockey to take a third ride in the Grand National . Four amateur jockeys lined up to compete . Official odds on favourite The Midnight Club were cut to 8 / 1 , while What A Friend replaced Oscar Time as a joint @-@ second favourite with Backstage on odds of 11 / 1 . 
 On 7 April , Aintree declared the final confirmed list of 40 runners and four reserves as follows . The reserves would replace any withdrawals prior to 9 am on 8 April . None of the reserves , however , were required . 
 * Barry Geraghty rode Or Noir de Somoza after his original jockey , Tom Scudamore , withdrew due to an injury sustained in a race the day prior to the National . 
 = = Finishing order = = 
 Ten @-@ year @-@ old Ballabriggs led for much of the race , and the gelding eventually saw off a strong run @-@ in challenge from amateur jockey Sam Waley @-@ Cohen on Oscar Time who secured second place . Third was 2010 winner Tony McCoy on Don 't Push It , twelve lengths behind the second . 15 / 2 favourite The Midnight Club made a mistake at the third fence and finished sixth . 
 State of Play , the eleven @-@ year @-@ old 28 / 1 shot trained by Welshman Evan Williams , finished in the top four for the third successive National . 
 Nineteen runners completed the course , including three of the six 100 / 1 shots . This was the highest number of finishers since 2005 when twenty @-@ one horses passed the finishing post . 
 = = Non @-@ finishers = = 
 Ten horses fell during the race , four unseated their riders , two were brought down by other <unk> and five were pulled up . 
 The 100 / 1 outsider Santa 's Son had led the field over the Canal Turn , but the short @-@ distance runner eventually fell out of contention and jockey Jamie Moore pulled him up before the 27th fence . <unk> fell at the 27th , having been close to leader Ballabriggs at the beginning of the second circuit . 
 Ornais and Dooneys Gate both suffered fatal falls on the first circuit . Ornais incurred a cervical fracture at the fourth fence ( a plain 4 ft 10 inch obstacle ) and Dooneys Gate fractured his <unk> at fence six ( the 5 ft Becher 's Brook ) . Aintree had made significant modifications to its National Course in recent years , including improving veterinary facilities and reducing the severity of some fences , but another notable change was highlighted in this race — that the course has been widened to allow more fences to be bypassed if necessary . As the remaining contenders on the second circuit approached the 20th fence , <unk> signposts and marshals waving chequered flags signalled them to bypass on the outside as Ornais ' body was covered by a tarpaulin on the landing side . Two jumps later and they were again diverted , this time around the famous Becher 's Brook , where veterinary staff attended to Dooneys Gate . This was the first time since the modern course was finalised in the 1880s that only 28 fences were jumped . 
 = = Broadcasting = = 
 The Grand National has the status of being an event of significant national interest within the United Kingdom and thus is listed on the Ofcom Code on Sports and Other Listed and Designated Events . The race therefore must be covered live on free @-@ to @-@ air terrestrial television in the UK . The BBC aired the race on radio for the 80th consecutive year and on television for the 52nd year . 
 Clare Balding presented the BBC 's television coverage , supported by Rishi <unk> and retired jockey Richard Pitman , which was broadcast on BBC One and , for the second year , BBC HD . Former National @-@ winning jockeys Richard Dunwoody and Mick Fitzgerald provided expert analysis , while betting news was provided by Gary Wiltshire and John Parrott . Suzi Perry was due to be providing soundbites from spectators but did not take part in the programme . Her place was taken by last @-@ minute replacement Dan Walker who had been at Aintree to present Football Focus , aired prior to the National . 
 The race commentary team was led by Jim McGrath , who called the winner home for the 14th consecutive year ; he was supported by Ian Bartlett and Darren Owen . 
 As well as being streamed to UK viewers on BBC Online , BBC Radio 5 Live also aired the race , presented by Mark Chapman . 
 The BBC later received some criticism for failing to mention the deaths of Ornais and Dooneys Gate until the end of its broadcast . A spokesman later said : " During the race and the re @-@ run [ the fatalities were ] covered with as much sensitivity as possible . " 
 = = Quotes = = 
 Selected quotes of participating jockeys speaking after the race : 
 Jason Maguire ( Ballabriggs , 1st ) : " He loved it ... I got him to the front to get him relaxed and put breathers into him and that helped him get the trip . " 
 Sam Waley @-@ Cohen ( Oscar Time , 2nd ) : " The plan was always to come with one smooth run . We knew he had a huge jump in him so I was just trying to get him to pop a little bit and save and not get too keen . He did everything I asked of him . " 
 Tony McCoy ( Don 't Push It , 3rd ) : " He ran a great race and all credit to the horse . He was off the bridle a little bit early and he got a little bit low at a couple of fences late on which was energy @-@ sapping . " 
 Paul Moloney ( State of Play , 4th ) : " He 's an incredible horse - he 's just a little bit slower this year because time is catching up with him . He couldn 't lay up with the pace and the ground was probably a little slower than ideal , but he 's a fabulous horse . " 
 Harry Skelton ( Niche Market , 5th ) : " He ran an absolute blinder and has given me a tremendous ride . " 
 Denis O 'Regan ( King Fontaine , 11th ) : " My horse ran a blinder . I was a bit slow earlier and nearly got brought down . He jumped like a buck . He 's only a novice and will be an ideal spin next year . " 
 Andrew McNamara ( <unk> Cracker , 14th ) : " The ground was a bit quick for her . " 
 Nina Carberry ( Character Building , 15th ) : " I was nearly brought down at Becher 's and that was his race over . " 
 Hadden Frost ( Calgary Bay , fell at the 4th fence ) : " He jumped the fence fine , but landed a bit steep , which any horse could do . We were just behind Ballabriggs at the time so we were in the right place . Maybe we 'll come back and try again . " 
 Robbie McNamara ( Majestic Concorde , unseated rider at 24th ) : " We were too keen early . I was just starting to get him switched off when we came into the Canal Turn and got in too close and tipped up . " 
 Timmy Murphy ( <unk> or Die , pulled up before 28th ) : " I would say that 's his last race . He got very tired and he 's not getting any younger , but he 's a special horse to me and it 's nice to think he 's ended up at the course where we achieved our finest hour . " 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The unusually warm and sunny weather conditions were credited with helping the 2011 meeting set a Grand National attendance record . A crowd of 70 @,@ 291 people attended the main Saturday race day , and a total of 153 @,@ 583 attended over the course of the three @-@ day meeting , beating the previous record of 151 @,@ 660 set in 2005 . 
 The Grand National is always a major event for bookmakers , particularly in the United Kingdom . An estimated £ 300 million in bets were said to have been placed on the 2011 race , including some from as far afield as Australia , Bermuda and Kazakhstan , with British troops in Afghanistan also joining in . It is estimated that nearly half of the adult population of the UK bets on the Grand National . 
 The race received a significant amount of negative media coverage over the two equine fatalities , which were more publicly noticeable than in prior Nationals due to two fences being bypassed for the first time . Those watching the race on television were given clear views of the tarpaulin @-@ covered body of Ornais at the fourth fence , and an aerial shot at Becher 's showed veterinary staff attending to the fatally @-@ injured Dooneys Gate , while the remaining runners diverted around them . 
 Andrew Taylor , director of the animal rights group Animal Aid , called for an outright ban of the Grand National , saying : " It 's a deliberately hazardous , challenging and predictably lethal event . " The RSPCA 's equine consultant David Muir stated : " I was gutted that two horses died ... What I will do now is go back and have a look at each element , with the BHA and the racecourse management , to see if the jump contributed to what happened , look at the take @-@ off and landing side and so on , and see if the evidence suggests something can be done about it . I 'm trying to make the race better , safer where I can , but the one thing I can never do is eliminate risk : that 's always going to be there . " Muir did however add : " There 's no way I 'm going to get the National banned . " 
 Aintree 's managing director Julian Thick said : " We are desperately sad at the accidents during the running of the Grand National today and our thoughts go out to the connections of Ornais and Dooneys Gate ... Only the best horses and the best jockeys are allowed to enter and all horses are inspected by the vet when they arrive at Aintree to ensure that they are fit to race . This year we had 20 horse @-@ catchers , at least two attendants at each of the 16 fences , four stewards to inspect the course , two BHA course inspectors , ten vets , 50 ground staff and 35 ground repair staff ... We work closely with animal welfare organisations , such as the RSPCA and World Horse Welfare , to make sure we are up to date with the latest thinking and research ... and to make sure that the horses are looked after properly and that the race is run as safely as possible . " 
 Veteran trainer Ginger McCain queried the suggestion of reducing the size of the fences in the aftermath of the race . McCain said : " You don 't make things better by making it easier . Its speed that does the damage . " Champion jockey Tony McCoy also defended the National , saying , " I personally don 't think the sport could be in any better shape for horses or jockeys . " Ornais 's owner , Andy Stewart , later said : " We 're still grieving but I think this whole hyped up situation regarding the Grand National is totally wrong ... National Hunt racing is safer and compliant with every single sport that goes along . My son <unk> in France and , unfortunately , he had an accident and he 'll never walk again . Why don 't we just get on with it and enjoy the sport ? " 
 Winning jockey Jason Maguire was subsequently handed a five @-@ day ban by the stewards for excessive use of the whip on Ballabriggs . The horse 's trainer , Donald McCain , Jr . , indicated that he will likely return to Aintree for the 2012 National seeking the first back @-@ to @-@ back wins since Red Rum in 1974 : " I 'd have thought next season will revolve around the National and he may well go to the Becher Chase [ in December ] as well . " 
 = USS Wisconsin ( BB @-@ 64 ) = 
 USS Wisconsin ( BB @-@ 64 ) is an Iowa @-@ class battleship , the second ship of the United States Navy to be named in honor of the U.S. state of Wisconsin . She was built at the Philadelphia Naval Shipyard in Philadelphia , Pennsylvania and launched on 7 December 1943 ( the second anniversary of the Pearl Harbor raid ) , sponsored by the wife of Governor Walter Goodland of Wisconsin . 
 During her career , Wisconsin served in the Pacific Theater of World War II , where she shelled Japanese fortifications and screened United States aircraft carriers as they conducted air raids against enemy positions . During the Korean War , Wisconsin shelled North Korean targets in support of United Nations and South Korean ground operations , after which she was decommissioned . She was reactivated on 1 August 1986 ; after a modernization program , she participated in Operation Desert Storm in January and February 1991 . 
 Wisconsin was last decommissioned in September 1991 , having earned a total of six battle stars for service in World War II and Korea , as well as a Navy Unit Commendation for service during the January / February 1991 Gulf War . She currently functions as a museum ship operated by Nauticus , The National Maritime Center in Norfolk , Virginia . Wisconsin was struck from the Naval Vessel Register ( NVR ) 17 March 2006 , and , as of 14 December 2009 , has been donated for permanent use as a museum ship . On 15 April 2010 , the City of Norfolk officially took over ownership of the ship . 
 = = Construction = = 
 Wisconsin was one of the " fast battleship " designs planned in 1938 by the Preliminary Design Branch at the Bureau of Construction and Repair . She was the third of four completed ships of the Iowa class of battleships . Her keel was laid down on 25 January 1941 , at the Philadelphia Navy Yard . She was launched on 7 December 1943 , sponsored by Mrs. Goodland , wife of Walter S. Goodland , the Governor of Wisconsin , and commissioned on 16 April 1944 , with Captain Earl E. Stone in command . 
 Wisconsin 's main battery consisted of nine 16 in ( 406 mm ) / 50 cal Mark 7 guns , which could hurl 2 @,@ 700 lb ( 1 @,@ 200 kg ) armor @-@ piercing shells some 20 mi ( 32 km ) . The secondary battery consisted of 20 5 in ( 127 mm ) / 38 cal guns in ten twin turrets , which could fire at targets up to 10 mi ( 16 km ) away . With the advent of air power and the need to gain and maintain air superiority came a need to protect the growing fleet of allied aircraft carriers ; to this end , Wisconsin was fitted with an array of Oerlikon 20 mm and Bofors 40 mm anti @-@ aircraft guns to defend allied carriers from enemy airstrikes . When reactivated in 1986 , Wisconsin had her 20 mm and 40 mm AA guns removed , and was outfitted with Phalanx CIWS mounts for protection against enemy missiles and aircraft , and Armored Box Launchers and Quad Cell Launchers designed to fire Tomahawk missiles and Harpoon missiles , respectively . 
 Wisconsin is numerically the highest numbered US battleship built . Although her keel was laid after the USS Missouri 's , she was commissioned before the Missouri 's commissioning date . Thus , Wisconsin 's construction began after Missouri 's , and finished earlier . Iowa and Wisconsin were finally stricken from the Naval Vessel Registry on 17 March 2006 making them the last battleships in commission in the world . 
 = = World War II ( 1944 – 1945 ) = = 
 = = = Shakedown and service with 3rd Fleet , Admiral Halsey = = = 
 After the ship 's trials and initial training in the Chesapeake Bay , Wisconsin departed Norfolk , Virginia , on 7 July 1944 , bound for the British West Indies . Following her shakedown cruise ( conducted out of Trinidad ) she returned to the builder 's yard for alterations and repairs . 
 On 24 September 1944 , Wisconsin sailed for the west coast , transiting the Panama Canal , and reporting for duty with the Pacific Fleet on 2 October . The battleship later moved to Hawaiian waters for training exercises and then headed for the Western Caroline Islands . Upon reaching the Caroline Island Ulithi she joined Admiral William F. Halsey 's 3rd Fleet on 9 December . 
 Due to the length of time it took to build her , Wisconsin missed much of the initial thrust into Japanese @-@ held territory , having arrived at a time when the reconquest of the Philippines was well underway . As a part of that movement , the planners had envisioned landings on the southwest coast of Mindoro , south of Luzon . From that point , American forces could threaten Japanese shipping lanes through the South China Sea . In preparation for the coming invasion of Mindoro , Wisconsin was assigned to protect the 3rd Fleet 's Fast Carrier Task Force ( TF 38 ) , as they conducted air raids at Manila to soften up Japanese positions . 
 On 18 December , the ships of TF 38 unexpectedly found themselves in a fight for their lives when Typhoon Cobra overtook the force – seven fleet and six light carriers , eight battleships , 15 cruisers , and about 50 destroyers – during their attempt to refuel at sea . At the time the ships were operating about 300 mi ( 480 km ) east of Luzon in the Philippine Sea . The carriers had just completed three days of heavy raids against Japanese airfields , suppressing enemy aircraft during the American amphibious operations against Mindoro in the Philippines . The task force rendezvoused with Captain Jasper T. Acuff and his fueling group 17 December with the intention of refueling all ships in the task force and replacing lost aircraft . Although the sea had been growing rougher all day , the nearby cyclonic disturbance gave relatively little warning of its approach . On 18 December , the small but violent typhoon overtook the Task Force while many of the ships were attempting to refuel . Many of the ships were caught near the center of the storm and buffeted by extreme seas and hurricane @-@ force winds . Three destroyers , Hull , Monaghan , and Spence , capsized and sank with nearly all hands , while a cruiser , five aircraft carriers , and three destroyers suffered serious damage . Approximately 790 officers and men were lost or killed , with another 80 injured . Fires occurred in three carriers when planes broke loose in their hangars and some 146 planes on various ships were lost or damaged beyond economical repair by fires , impact damage , or by being swept overboard . Wisconsin reported two injured sailors as a result of the typhoon , but otherwise proved her seaworthiness as she escaped the storm unscathed . 
 Wisconsin 's next operation was to assist with the occupation of Luzon . Bypassing the southern beaches , American amphibious forces went ashore at Lingayen Gulf , the scene of initial Japanese assaults to take Luzon nearly three years before . 
 Wisconsin , armed with heavy anti @-@ aircraft batteries , performed escort duty for TF 38 's fast carriers during air strikes against Formosa , Luzon , and the Nansei Shoto to neutralize Japanese forces there and to cover the unfolding Allied Lingayen Gulf operations . Those strikes , lasting from 3 – 22 January 1945 , included a thrust into the South China Sea , in the hope that major units of the Imperial Japanese Navy could be drawn into battle . 
 Wisconsin 's carrier group launched air strikes between Saigon and Camranh Bay , French Indochina , on 12 January , resulting in severe losses for the enemy . TF 38 's warplanes sank 41 ships and heavily damaged docks , storage areas , and aircraft facilities . Formosa , already struck on 3 – 4 January , was raided again on 9 January 15 January , and 21 January . Throughout January Wisconsin shielded the carriers as they conducted air raids at Hong Kong , Canton , Hainan Island , the Canton oil refineries , the Hong Kong Naval Station , and Okinawa . 
 = = = Service with 5th Fleet , Admiral Spruance = = = 
 Wisconsin was assigned to the 5th Fleet when Admiral Raymond A. Spruance relieved Admiral Halsey as Commander of the Fleet . She moved northward with the redesignated TF 58 as the carriers headed for the Tokyo area . On 16 February , the task force approached the Japanese coast under cover of adverse weather conditions and achieved complete tactical surprise . As a result , Wisconsin and the other ships shot down 322 enemy planes and destroyed 177 more on the ground . Japanese shipping , both naval and merchant , also suffered drastically , as did hangars and aircraft installations . 
 Wisconsin and the task force moved to Iwo Jima on 17 February to provide direct support for the landings slated to take place on 19 February . They revisited Tokyo on 25 February and hit the island of <unk> off the coast of Honshū the next day , resulting in heavy damage to ground facilities ; additionally , American planes sank five small vessels and destroyed 158 planes . 
 Wisconsin 's task force stood out of Ulithi on 14 March bound for Japan . The mission of that group was to eliminate airborne resistance from the Japanese homeland to American forces off Okinawa . Enemy fleet units at Kure and Kobe , on southern Honshū , reeled under the impact of the explosive blows delivered by TF 58 's airmen . On 18 – 19 March , from a point 100 mi ( 160 km ) southwest of Kyūshū , TF 58 hit enemy airfields on that island ; unfortunately , allied anti @-@ aircraft fire on 19 March failed to stop an attack on the carrier Franklin . That afternoon , Wisconsin and the task force retired from Kyūshū , screening the blazing and battered flattop , and shooting down 48 attackers . 
 On 24 March , Wisconsin trained her 16 in ( 410 mm ) guns on targets ashore on Okinawa . Together with the other battle @-@ wagons of the task force , she pounded Japanese positions and installations in preparation for the landings . Japanese resistance , while fierce , was doomed to failure by dwindling numbers of aircraft and trained pilots . 
 While TF 58 's planes were dealing with Yamato and her escorts , enemy aircraft attacked the American surface units . Combat air patrols ( CAP ) shot down 15 enemy planes , and ships ' gunfire shot down another three , but not before one kamikaze attack penetrated the CAP and screen to crash on the flight deck of the fleet carrier Hancock . On 11 April , the Japanese renewed their kamikaze attacks ; and only drastic maneuvers and heavy barrages of gunfire saved the task force . Combat air patrols shot down 17 planes , and ships ' gunfire shot down 12 . The next day , 151 enemy aircraft attacked TF 58 , but Wisconsin , together with other units of the screens for the vital carriers , kept the kamikaze pilots at bay and destroyed them before they could reach their targets . Over the days that ensued , Japanese kamikaze attacks managed to crash into three carriers — Intrepid , Bunker Hill and Enterprise — on successive days . 
 By 4 June , a typhoon was swirling through the Fleet . Wisconsin rode out the storm unscathed , but three cruisers , two carriers , and a destroyer suffered serious damage . Offensive operations were resumed on 8 June with a final aerial assault on Kyūshū . Japanese aerial response was virtually nonexistent ; 29 planes were located and destroyed . On that day , one of Wisconsin 's floatplanes landed and rescued a downed pilot from the carrier Shangri @-@ La . 
 = = = Bombardment of Japan = = = 
 Wisconsin ultimately put into Leyte Gulf and dropped anchor there on 13 June for repairs and replenishment . Three weeks later , on 1 July , the battleship and her escorts sailed once more for Japanese home waters for carrier air strikes on the enemy 's heartland . Nine days later , carrier planes from TF 38 destroyed 72 enemy aircraft on the ground and smashed industrial sites in the Tokyo area . Wisconsin and the other ships made no attempt whatsoever to conceal the location of their armada , due in large part to a weak Japanese response to their presence . 
 On 16 July , Wisconsin fired her 16 in ( 410 mm ) guns at the steel mills and oil refineries at Muroran , Hokkaido . Two days later , she wrecked industrial facilities in the Hitachi Miro area , on the coast of <unk> , northeast of Tokyo itself . During that bombardment , British battleships of the British Pacific Fleet contributed their heavy shellfire . By that point in the war , Allied warships such as Wisconsin were able to shell the Japanese homeland almost at will . 
 TF 38 's planes subsequently blasted the Japanese naval base at Yokosuka , and put the former fleet flagship Nagato out of action , one of the two remaining Japanese battleships . Throughout July and into August , Admiral Halsey 's airmen visited destruction upon the Japanese , the last instance being against Tokyo on 13 August . Two days later , the Japanese surrendered , ending World War II . 
 Wisconsin , as part of the occupying force , arrived at Tokyo Bay on 5 September , three days after the formal surrender occurred on board the battleship Missouri . During Wisconsin 's brief career in World War II , she had steamed 105 @,@ 831 mi ( 170 @,@ 318 km ) since commissioning ; had shot down three enemy planes ; had claimed assists on four occasions ; and had fueled her screening destroyers on some 250 occasions . 
 = = = Post World War II ( 1945 – 1950 ) = = = 
 Shifting subsequently to Okinawa , the battleship embarked homeward @-@ bound GIs on 22 September 1945 , as part of Operation Magic Carpet staged to bring soldiers , sailors , and marines home from the far @-@ flung battlefronts of the Pacific . Departing Okinawa on 23 September , Wisconsin reached Pearl Harbor on 4 October , remaining there for five days before she pushed on for the west coast on the last leg of her state @-@ side bound voyage . She reached San Francisco on 15 October . 
 Heading for the east coast of the United States soon after the start of the new year , 1946 , Wisconsin transited the Panama Canal from 11 – 13 January and reached Hampton Roads , Virginia on 18 January . Following a cruise south to Guantánamo Bay , Cuba , the battleship entered the Norfolk Naval Shipyard for overhaul . After repairs and alterations that consumed the summer months , Wisconsin sailed for South American waters . 
 Over the weeks that ensued , the battleship visited Valparaíso , Chile , from 1 – 6 November ; Callao , Peru , from 9 – 13 November ; Balboa , Canal Zone , from 16 – 20 November ; and La Guaira , Venezuela , from 22 – 26 November , before returning to Norfolk on 2 December 1946 . 
 Wisconsin spent nearly all of 1947 as a training ship , taking naval reservists on two @-@ week cruises throughout the year . Those voyages commenced at Bayonne , New Jersey , and saw visits conducted at Guantánamo Bay , Cuba , and the Panama Canal Zone . While underway at sea , the ship would perform various drills and exercises before the cruise would end where it had started , at Bayonne . During June and July 1947 , Wisconsin took United States Naval Academy midshipmen on cruises to northern European waters . 
 In January 1948 , Wisconsin reported to the Atlantic Reserve Fleet at Norfolk for inactivation . Placed out of commission , in reserve on 1 July , Wisconsin was assigned to the Norfolk group of the Atlantic Reserve Fleet . 
 = = The Korean War ( 1950 – 1952 ) = = 
 Her sojourn in " mothballs " , however , was comparatively brief , due to the North Korean invasion of South Korea in late June 1950 . Wisconsin was recommissioned on 3 March 1951 with Captain Thomas Burrowes in command . After shakedown training , the revitalized battleship conducted two midshipmen training cruises , taking the officers @-@ to @-@ be to Edinburgh , Scotland ; Lisbon , Portugal ; Halifax , Nova Scotia ; New York City ; and Guantánamo Bay , Cuba , before she returned to Norfolk . While leaving New York , Wisconsin was accidentally grounded on mud flats in New York Harbor , but was freed on 23 August 1951 with no damage to the ship . 
 Wisconsin departed Norfolk on 25 October , bound for the Pacific . She transited the Panama Canal on 29 October and reached Yokosuka , Japan , on 21 November . There , she relieved New Jersey as flagship for Vice Admiral H. M. Martin , Commander , 7th Fleet . 
 On 26 November , with Vice Admiral Martin and Rear Admiral F.P. <unk> , Commander , Service Force , Pacific , embarked , Wisconsin departed Yokosuka for Korean waters to support the fast carrier operations of TF 77 . She left the company of the carrier force on 2 December and , screened by the destroyer <unk> , provided gunfire support for the Republic of Korea ( ROK ) Corps in the Kasong @-@ Kosong area . After disembarking Admiral <unk> on 3 December at <unk> , the battleship resumed station on the Korean " bombline " , providing gunfire support for the American 1st Marine Division . Wisconsin 's shelling accounted for a tank , two gun emplacements , and a building . She continued her gunfire support task for the 1st Marine Division and 1st ROK Corps through 6 December , accounting for enemy bunkers , artillery positions , and troop concentrations . On one occasion during that time , the battleship received a request for call @-@ fire support and provided three star @-@ shells for the 1st ROK Corps , illuminating an enemy attack that was consequently repulsed with considerable enemy casualties . 
 After being relieved on the gunline by the heavy cruiser Saint Paul on 6 December , Wisconsin briefly retired from gunfire support duties . She resumed them , however , in the Kasong @-@ Kosong area on 11 December screened by the destroyer Twining . The following day , 12 December , saw the embarkation in Wisconsin of Rear Admiral H. R. Thurber , Commander , Battleship Division 2 ( BatDiv 2 ) . The admiral came on board via helicopter , incident to his inspection trip in the Far East . 
 Wisconsin continued her naval gunfire support duties on the " bombline , " shelling enemy bunkers , command posts , artillery positions , and trench systems through 14 December . She departed the " bombline " on that day to render special gunfire support duties in the Kojo area blasting coastal targets in support of United Nations ( UN ) troops ashore . That same day , Wisconsin returned to the Kasong @-@ Kosong area . On 15 December , she disembarked Admiral Thurber by helicopter . The next day , Wisconsin departed Korean waters , heading for Sasebo to rearm . 
 Returning to the combat zone on 17 December , Wisconsin embarked United States Senator Homer Ferguson of Michigan on 18 December . That day , the battleship supported the 11th ROK invasion with night illumination fire that enabled the ROK troops to repulse a North Korean assault with heavy enemy casualties . Departing the " bombline " on 19 December , the battleship transferred her distinguished passenger , Senator Ferguson , by helicopter to the carrier Valley Forge . 
 On 20 December , Wisconsin participated in a coordinated air @-@ surface bombardment of Wonsan to neutralize pre @-@ selected targets in the <unk> area . The ship shifted its bombardment station to the western end of Wonsan harbor , hitting boats and small craft in the inner swept channel with her 5 @-@ inch ( <unk> ) guns during the afternoon . Such activities helped to forestall any attempts to assault the friendly @-@ held islands in the Wonsan area . Wisconsin then made an anti @-@ boat sweep to the north , firing her 5 @-@ inch batteries on suspected boat concentrations . She then provided gunfire support to UN troops operating at the " bombline " until 22 December , when she rejoined the carrier task force . 
 On 28 December , Cardinal Francis Spellman , on a Korean tour over the Christmas holidays , visited the ship , coming on board by helicopter to celebrate Mass for the Catholic members of the crew . He left the ship by helicopter off Pohang . Three days later , on the last day of the year , Wisconsin put into Yokosuka . 
 Wisconsin departed that Japanese port on 8 January 1952 and headed for Korean waters once more . She reached Pusan the following day and entertained the President of South Korea , Syngman Rhee , and his wife , on 10 January . President and Mrs. Rhee received full military honors as they came on board , and he reciprocated by awarding Vice Admiral Martin the ROK Order of the Military Merit . 
 Wisconsin returned to the " bombline " on 11 January , and over the ensuing days delivered heavy gunfire support for the 1st Marine Division and the 1st ROK Corps . As before , her primary targets were command posts , shelters , bunkers , troop concentrations and mortar positions . As before , she stood ready to deliver call @-@ fire support as needed . One such occasion occurred ; on 14 January when she shelled enemy troops in the open at the request of the ROK 1st Corps . 
 <unk> at Sasebo and once more joining TF 77 off the coast of Korea soon thereafter , Wisconsin resumed support at the " bombline " on 23 January . Three days later , she shifted once more to the Kojo region , to participate in a coordinated air and gun strike . That same day , the battleship returned to the " bombline " and shelled the command post and communications center for the 15th North Korean Division during call @-@ fire missions for the 1st Marine Division . 
 Returning to Wonsan at the end of January , Wisconsin bombarded enemy guns at Hodo Pando before she was rearmed at Sasebo . The battleship rejoined TF 77 on 2 February , and the next day blasted railway buildings and marshaling yards at Hodo Pando and Kojo before rejoining TF 77 . After replenishment at Yokosuka a few days later , she returned to the Kosong area and resumed gunfire support . During that time , she destroyed railway bridges and a small shipyard while conducting call @-@ fire missions on enemy command posts , bunkers , and personnel shelters , making numerous cuts on enemy trench lines in the process . 
 On 26 February , Wisconsin arrived at Pusan where Vice Admiral Shon , the ROK Chief of Naval Operations ; United States Ambassador J.J. Muccio ; and Rear Admiral Scott @-@ <unk> , Royal Navy , Commander , Task Group 95 @.@ 12 ( TG 95 @.@ 12 ) , visited the battleship . Departing that South Korean port the following day , Wisconsin reached Yokosuka on 2 March , and a week later she shifted to Sasebo to prepare to return to Korean waters . 
 Wisconsin arrived off Songjin , Korea on 15 March and concentrated her gunfire on enemy railway transport . Early that morning , she destroyed a communist troop train trapped outside a destroyed tunnel . That afternoon , she received the first direct hit in her history , when one of four shells from a North Korean <unk> gun battery struck the shield of a starboard 40 mm mount ; Although little material damage resulted , three men were injured . Wisconsin subsequently destroyed that battery with a full 16 @-@ inch ( 406 mm ) salvo before continuing her mission . After lending a hand to support once more the 1st Marine Division with her heavy rifles , the battleship returned to Japan on 19 March . 
 Relieved as flagship of the 7th Fleet on 1 April by sister ship Iowa , Wisconsin departed Yokosuka , bound for the United States . En route home , she touched briefly at Guam , where she took part in the successful test of the Navy 's largest floating dry @-@ dock on 4 – 5 April , marking the first time that an Iowa @-@ class battleship had ever utilized that type of facility . She continued her homeward @-@ bound voyage , via Pearl Harbor , and arrived at Long Beach , California on 19 April ; she then sailed for Norfolk . 
 = = = Post Korean War ( 1952 – 1981 ) = = = 
 On 9 June , Wisconsin resumed her role as a training ship , taking midshipmen to Greenock , Scotland ; Brest , France ; and Guantánamo Bay , Cuba , before returning to Norfolk . She departed Hampton Roads on 25 August and participated in the NATO exercise Operation <unk> , which was held out of Greenock , Scotland . After her return to Norfolk , Wisconsin underwent an overhaul in the naval shipyard there . Wisconsin remained in the Atlantic fleet throughout 1952 and into 1953 , training midshipmen and conducting exercises . After a month of routine maintenance Wisconsin departed Norfolk on 9 September 1953 , bound for the Far East . 
 Sailing via the Panama Canal to Japan , Wisconsin relieved New Jersey as 7th Fleet flagship on 12 October . During the months that followed , Wisconsin visited the Japanese ports of Kobe , Sasebo Navy Yard , Yokosuka , Otaru , and Nagasaki . She spent Christmas at Hong Kong and was ultimately relieved of flagship duties on 1 April 1954 and returned to the United States soon thereafter , reaching Norfolk , via Long Beach and the Panama Canal , on 4 May . 
 Entering the Norfolk Naval Shipyard on 11 June , Wisconsin underwent a brief overhaul and commenced a midshipman training cruise on 12 July . After revisiting Greenock , Brest , and Guantánamo Bay , the ship returned to the Norfolk Naval Shipyard for repairs . Shortly thereafter , Wisconsin participated in Atlantic Fleet exercises as flagship for Commander , Second Fleet . Departing Norfolk in January 1955 , Wisconsin took part in Operation Springboard , during which time she visited Port @-@ au @-@ Prince , Haiti . Then , upon returning to Norfolk , the battleship conducted another midshipman 's cruise that summer , visiting Edinburgh ; Copenhagen , Denmark ; and Guantánamo Bay before returning to the United States . 
 Upon completion of a major overhaul at the New York Naval Shipyard , Wisconsin headed south for refresher training in the Caribbean Sea , later taking part in another Springboard exercise . During that cruise , she again visited Port @-@ au @-@ Prince and added Tampico , Mexico , and Cartagena , Colombia , to her list of ports of call . She returned to Norfolk on the last day of March 1955 for local operations . On 19 October , while operating in the East River in New York Harbor , Wisconsin was accidentally grounded . However , the ship was freed in about an hour without any serious damage . 
 Throughout April 1956 and into May , Wisconsin operated locally off the Virginia Capes . On 6 May , the battleship collided with the destroyer Eaton in a heavy fog ; Wisconsin put into Norfolk with extensive damage to her bow , and one week later entered dry dock at the Norfolk Naval Shipyard . A novel expedient sped her repairs and enabled the ship to carry out her scheduled midshipman training cruise that summer . A 120 ton , 68 foot ( 21 m ) section of the bow of the uncompleted Iowa @-@ class battleship Kentucky was transported by barge , in one section , from Newport News Shipbuilding and Drydock Corporation of Newport News , Virginia , across Hampton Roads to the Norfolk Naval Shipyard . Working around the clock , Wisconsin 's ship ’ s force and shipyard personnel completed the operation which grafted the new bow on the old battleship in 16 days . On 28 June 1956 , the ship was ready for sea . 
 Wisconsin resumed her midshipman training on 9 July 1956 . That autumn , Wisconsin participated in Atlantic Fleet exercises off the coast of the Carolinas , returning to port on 8 November 1956 . Entering the Norfolk Naval Shipyard a week later , the battleship underwent major repairs that were not finished until 2 January 1957 . 
 After local operations off the Virginia capes on 3 – 4 January 1957 and from 9 – 11 January , Wisconsin departed Norfolk on 16 January , reporting to Commander , Fleet Training Group , at Naval Station Guantánamo Bay , Cuba . Wisconsin served as Admiral Henry Crommelin 's flagship during the ensuing shore bombardment practices and other exercises held off the isle of Culebra , Puerto Rico , from 2 – 4 February . Sailing for Norfolk upon completion of the training period , the battleship arrived on 7 February and resumed local operations off Norfolk . On 27 March , Wisconsin sailed for the Mediterranean Sea , reaching Gibraltar on 6 April , she pushed on that day to rendezvous with TF 60 in the Aegean Sea before reporting to Turkey for the NATO Exercise Red Pivot . 
 Departing <unk> Bay on 14 April , she arrived at Naples four days later , Wisconsin conducted exercises in the eastern Mediterranean . In the course of those operational training evolutions , she rescued a pilot and crewman who survived the crash of a plane from the aircraft carrier Forrestal . Wisconsin reached Valencia , Spain , on 10 May and , three days later , entertained prominent civilian and military officials of the city . 
 Departing Valencia on 17 April , Wisconsin reached Norfolk on 27 May . En route , she was called upon to sink a Boeing KC @-@ <unk> @-@ 55 @-@ BO Stratofreighter , 51 @-@ <unk> , which had ditched in the Atlantic on 9 May , 550 km ( 343 @.@ 8 <unk> ) SE of the Azores Islands following a double engine failure , and subsequently floated for ten days . 
 On 27 May , Rear Admiral L.S. Parks relieved Rear Admiral Crommelin as Commander , BatDiv 2 . Departing Norfolk on 19 June , the battleship , over the ensuing weeks , conducted a midshipman training cruise through the Panama Canal to South American waters , and reached Valparaiso on 3 July . Eight days later , the battleship headed back to the Panama Canal and the Atlantic . 
 After exercises at Guantánamo Bay and off Culebra , Wisconsin reached Norfolk on 5 August and conducted local operations that lasted into September . She then participated in NATO exercises which took her across the North Atlantic to the British Isles . 
 Wisconsin 's days as an active fleet unit were numbered , and she prepared to make her last cruise . On 4 November , she departed Norfolk with a large group of prominent guests on board . Reaching New York City on 6 November , the battleship disembarked her guests and , on 8 November , headed for Bayonne , New Jersey , to commence a pre @-@ inactivation overhaul . She was placed out of commission at Bayonne on 8 March 1958 , and joined the United States Navy reserve fleet ( better known as the " Mothball Fleet " ) there , leaving the United States Navy without an active battleship for the first time since 1895 . Subsequently taken to the Philadelphia Naval Shipyard , Wisconsin remained there with her sister ship Iowa into the 1980s . While berthed in the Philadelphia Naval Yard , an electrical fire damaged the ship and left her as the Iowa @-@ class battleship in the worst material condition prior to her 1980s reactivation . 
 = = Reactivation ( 1986 – 1990 ) = = 
 As part of President Ronald Reagan 's Navy Secretary John F. Lehman 's effort to create a " 600 @-@ ship Navy , " Wisconsin was reactivated 1 August 1986 , a Pre @-@ Commissioning Unit ( <unk> ) crew established , and the ship moved under tow to the Avondale Shipyard in New Orleans , Louisiana , to commence pre @-@ recommissioning <unk> . The battleship was then towed from the Avondale Shipyard and arrived at Ingalls Shipbuilding in Pascagoula , Mississippi on 2 January 1987 to receive weapons system upgrades for her modernization . During the modernization , Wisconsin had all of her remaining 20 mm Oerlikon and 40 mm Bofors anti @-@ aircraft guns removed , due to their ineffectiveness against modern jet fighters and enemy anti @-@ ship missiles ; additionally , the two 5 in ( 130 mm ) gun mounts located at mid @-@ ship and in the aft on the port and starboard side of the battleship were removed . 
 Over the next several months , the ship was upgraded with the most advanced weaponry available . Among the new weapon systems installed were four MK 141 quad cell launchers for 16 AGM @-@ 84 Harpoon anti @-@ ship missiles , eight Armored Box Launcher ( ABL ) mounts for 32 BGM @-@ 109 Tomahawk missiles , and a quartet of the United States Navy 's Phalanx Close in Weapon System ( CIWS ) 20mm Gatling guns for defense against enemy anti @-@ ship missiles and enemy aircraft . Wisconsin also received eight RQ @-@ 2 Pioneer Unmanned Aerial Vehicles , which are remotely controlled drones that replaced the helicopters previously used to spot for her nine 16 in ( 410 mm ) guns . Also included in her modernization were upgrades to radar and fire control systems for her guns and missiles , and improved electronic warfare capabilities . Armed as such , Wisconsin was formally recommissioned on 22 October 1988 in Pascagoula , Mississippi under the command of Captain Jerry M. <unk> , USN . Assigned to the United States Atlantic Fleet , she was subsequently homeported at Naval Station Norfolk , Virginia , where she became the centerpiece of her own surface action group ( SAG ) , also referred to as a battleship battle group ( <unk> ) . 
 During the renovation , pieces of the teak deck were removed and made into commemorative pieces , but they were not marked with an edition number indicating how many were actually created . A brass plaque with the ships name appears on the left and an inscription reading : 
 Mobile Council of Navy League Celebrates Recommissioning USS Wisconsin BB @-@ <unk> teak was removed from original deck during 1987 @-@ 1988 reactivation . 
 Wisconsin spent the first part of 1989 conducting training exercises in the Atlantic Ocean and off the coast of Puerto Rico before returning to the Philadelphia Naval Shipyard for a post recommissioning shakedown that lasted the rest of the year . In mid @-@ 1990 the battleship participated in a fleet exercise . 
 = = Gulf War ( January / February 1991 ) = = 
 On 2 August 1990 , Iraq invaded Kuwait . In the middle of the month , President George H. W. Bush , in keeping with the Carter Doctrine , sent the first of several hundred thousand troops , along with a strong force of naval support to Saudi Arabia and the Persian Gulf area to support a multi @-@ national force in a standoff with Iraqi dictator Saddam Hussein . On 7 August , Wisconsin and her battle group were ordered to deploy in defense of Kuwait for Operation Desert Shield , and they arrived in the Persian Gulf on 23 August . On 15 January 1991 , Operation Desert Storm commenced operations , and Wisconsin found herself serving alongside her younger sister Missouri , just as she had done in Korea forty years previously . Both Wisconsin and Missouri launched Tomahawk Missile attacks against Iraq ; they were among the first ships to fire cruise missiles during the 1991 Gulf War . Wisconsin served as the Tomahawk Land Attack Missile ( TLAM ) strike commander for the Persian Gulf , directing the sequence of launches that marked the opening of Operation Desert Storm and firing a total of 24 of her own TLAMs during the first two days of the campaign . Wisconsin also assumed the responsibility of the local anti @-@ surface warfare coordinator for the Northern Persian Gulf Surface Action Group . 
 Wisconsin , escorted by Nicholas , relieved Missouri on 6 February , then answered her first combat call for gunfire support since March 1952 . The most recently recommissioned battleship sent 11 shells across 19 mi ( 31 km ) of space to destroy an Iraqi artillery battery in southern Kuwait during a mission called in by USMC OV @-@ 10 Bronco aircraft . Using an Unmanned Aerial Vehicle ( UAV ) as a spotter in combat for the first time , Wisconsin pounded an Iraqi communications compound on 7 February . Her main guns lobbed 24 shells on Iraqi artillery sites , missile facilities , and electronic warfare sites along the coast . That evening she targeted naval sites with her 16 in ( 410 mm ) guns , firing 50 rounds which severely damaged or sunk 15 Iraqi boats , and destroyed several piers at the <unk> al @-@ <unk> marina . In response to calls for fire support from US and coalition forces , Wisconsin 's turrets boomed again on 9 February , blasting bunkers and artillery sites , and shelling Iraqi troop positions near Khafji after the Iraqis were ousted from the city by Saudi and Qatari armor . On 21 February , one of Wisconsin 's UAVs observed several trucks resupplying an Iraqi command post ; in response , Wisconsin trained her 16 in ( 410 mm ) guns on the complex , leveling or heavily damaging 10 of the buildings . Wisconsin and Missouri alternated positions on the gun line , using their 16 in ( 410 mm ) guns to destroy enemy targets and soften defenses along the Kuwait coastline for a possible amphibious assault . 
 On the night of 23 February , Missouri and Wisconsin turned their big guns on Kuwait 's Faylaka Island to support the US @-@ led coalition ground offensive to free Kuwait from the Iraqi occupation forces . The two ships were to conduct a diversionary assault aimed at convincing the Iraqi forces arrayed along the shores of Faylaka Island that Coalition forces were preparing to launch an amphibious invasion . As part of this attack , Missouri and Wisconsin were directed to shell known Iraqi defensive positions on the island . Shortly after Missouri completed her shelling of Faylaka Island , Wisconsin , while still over the horizon ( and thus out of visual range of the Iraqi forces ) launched her RQ @-@ 2 Pioneer Unmanned Aerial Vehicle to spot for her 16 in ( 410 mm ) guns . As Wisconsin 's drone approached Faylaka Island , the pilot of the drone was instructed to fly the vehicle low over Iraqi positions so that the soldiers would know that they were once again being targeted by a battleship . Iraqi troops on the ground heard the Pioneer ’ s distinctive buzzing sound , and having witnessed the effects of Missouri 's artillery strike on their trench line , the Iraqi troops decided to signal their willingness to surrender by waving makeshift white flags , an action dutifully noted aboard Wisconsin . Amused at this sudden development , the men assigned to the drone ’ s aircrew called Wisconsin 's commanding officer , Captain David S. Bill III , and asked , " Sir , they want to surrender , what should I do with them ? " This surrender to Wisconsin 's Pioneer has since become one of the most remembered moments of the Gulf War ; the incident was also the first @-@ ever surrender of enemy troops to an unmanned aircraft controlled by a ship . Wisconsin drone also carried out a number of reconnaissance missions on occupied Kuwait before the coalition 's ground offensive . 
 The next day , Wisconsin answered two separate call fire support missions for coalition forces by suppressing Iraqi troops barricaded in a pair of bunkers . After witnessing the effects of Wisconsin 's strike against the Iraqi positions an elated Saudi marine commander commented over the radio , " I wish we had a battleship in our navy . " 
 Both Wisconsin and Missouri passed the million @-@ pound mark of ordnance delivered on Iraqi targets by the time president George H. W. Bush ended hostilities on 28 February . With one last salvo from her big guns , Wisconsin fired the last naval gunfire support mission of the war , and thus was the final battleship in world history to see action . Wisconsin remained in the Persian Gulf after the cease @-@ fire took effect , and returned home on 28 March 1991 . During the eight months Wisconsin spent in the Persian Gulf , she had flown 348 UAV hours , recorded 661 safe helicopter landings , steamed 46 @,@ 000 nmi ( 53 @,@ 000 mi ; 85 @,@ 000 km ) , fired 319 16 in ( 410 mm ) rounds , 881 5 @-@ inch ( 130 mm ) rounds , 5 @,@ 200 20 mm Phalanx CIWS rounds . , and launched 24 Tomahawk cruise missiles . Since all four remaining battleships were decommissioned and stricken following the Gulf War , this was the last time that United States battleships actively participated in a war . 
 = = Museum ship ( 1992 – present ) = = 
 With the collapse of the Soviet Union in the early 1990s and the absence of a perceived threat to the United States came drastic cuts in the defense budget . The high cost of maintaining and operating battleships as part of the United States Navy 's active fleet became uneconomical ; as a result , Wisconsin was decommissioned on 30 September 1991 after 14 total years of active service , and was stricken from the Naval Vessel Register ( NVR ) on 12 January 1995 . On 15 October 1996 , she was moved to the Norfolk Naval Shipyard , and on 12 February 1998 , she was restored to the Naval Vessel Register . On 7 December 2000 , the battleship was towed from Portsmouth , Virginia and berthed adjacent to Nauticus , The National Maritime Center in Norfolk . On 16 April 2001 the battleship 's weather decks were opened to the public by the Hampton Roads Naval Museum , a U.S. Navy museum charged with Wisconsin 's interpretation and public visitation . The ship was still owned by the Navy and was considered part of the mothball fleet . 
 Wisconsin was named as one of two US Navy battleships that were to be maintained in accordance with the National Defense Authorization Act of 1996 ( the other was Iowa ) . Both battleships were maintained in the United States Navy reserve fleets for use as shore bombardment vessels since their 16 in ( 410 mm ) guns are capable of firing 2 @,@ 700 lb ( 1 @,@ 200 kg ) projectiles approximately 24 nmi ( 28 mi ; 44 km ) inland ; however , Wisconsin is now over 60 years old and would require extensive modernization to return to the fleet since most of her technology dates back to World War II , and the missile and electronic warfare equipment added to the battleship during her 1988 @-@ 89 modernization are now considered obsolete . Furthermore , during the 1991 Gulf War , she was said to be hindered by Iraqi naval mines , and reports on the Internet suggest that the majority of the shore bombardments were successfully carried out by US Oliver Hazard Perry @-@ class frigates and their 3 in ( 76 mm ) guns . In addition , the cost of modernizing Iowa and Wisconsin is estimated to be somewhere around $ 500 million for reactivation and $ 1 @.@ 5 billion for a full modernization program . 
 On 17 March 2006 , the Secretary of the Navy exercised his authority to strike Iowa and Wisconsin from the NVR , which cleared the way for both ships to be donated for use as museums ; however , the United States Congress remains " deeply concerned " over the loss of naval surface gunfire support that the battleships provided , and has noted that " ... navy efforts to improve upon , much less replace , this capability have been highly problematic . " Partially as a consequence , Congress passed Pub.L. 109 – 163 , the National Defense Authorization Act 2006 , requiring that the battleships be kept and maintained in a state of readiness should they ever be needed again . Congress had ordered that the following measures be implemented to ensure that , if need be , Wisconsin could be returned to active duty : 
 Wisconsin must not be altered in any way that would impair her military utility ; 
 The battleship must be preserved in her present condition through the continued use of cathodic protection , dehumidification systems , and any other preservation methods as needed ; 
 Spare parts and unique equipment such as the 16 in ( 410 mm ) gun barrels and projectiles be preserved in adequate numbers to support Wisconsin , if reactivated ; 
 The Navy must prepare plans for the rapid reactivation of Wisconsin should she be returned to the Navy in the event of a national emergency . 
 These four conditions closely mirror the original three conditions that the Nation Defense Authorization Act of 1996 laid out for the maintenance of Wisconsin while she was in the Mothball Fleet . It was unlikely that these conditions would impede a plan to turn Wisconsin into a permanent museum ship at her berth in Norfolk . 
 On 14 December 2009 the US Navy officially transferred Wisconsin to the city of Norfolk , ending the requirement for the ship to be preserved for possible recall to active duty . The US Navy had paid the city of Norfolk $ 2 @.@ 8 million between 2000 and 2009 to maintain the ship . A formal ceremony transferring the ship to the city of Norfolk took place on 16 April 2010 . Wisconsin was listed on the National Register of Historic Places on 28 March 2012 . 
 On 11 August 2012 , GOP presidential candidate Mitt Romney announced his running mate , Paul Ryan , from the pier alongside the dock where the Wisconsin is moored . 
 = = Awards = = 
 Wisconsin earned five battle stars for her World War II service , and one for the Korean War . The ship also received the Combat Action Ribbon and Navy Unit Commendation for actions in the Korean War and Operation Desert Storm in 1991 . She also received over a dozen more awards for World War II , the Korean War and Operations Desert Shield / Desert Storm . 
 = Chris Lu = 
 Christopher P. Lu ( simplified Chinese : <unk> ; traditional Chinese : <unk> ; pinyin : <unk> <unk> ; born June 12 , 1966 ) is the United States Deputy Secretary of Labor . He also served as Assistant to the President and Cabinet Secretary for United States President Barack Obama from 2009 to 2013 , as well as the co @-@ chair of the White House Initiative on Asian Americans and Pacific Islanders . Lu graduated from the Woodrow Wilson School at Princeton University and from Harvard Law School , where he was a classmate of Obama 's . 
 After serving briefly as an advisor on Senator John Kerry 's 2004 presidential campaign , Lu began working for Barack Obama in 2005 in his U.S. Senate office , where Lu served as legislative director and acting chief of staff . Following Obama 's successful 2008 campaign for presidency , Lu was appointed executive director of the Obama @-@ Biden Transition Project . When Obama appointed Lu as Cabinet Secretary , The New York Times described him as " one of the highest @-@ ranking Asian Americans in the Obama administration " . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Chris Lu was born on June 12 , 1966 in New Jersey . In 1974 , his family moved to the <unk> neighborhood of Rockville , Maryland , where he graduated from Thomas S. Wootton High School in 1984 . Lu is the son of Eileen and Chien @-@ Yang Lu , both of whom were born in China and lived in Taiwan until the 1950s when they emigrated to the United States to attend college . Lu 's grandfather , Wang Ren @-@ Yuan , was the Minister of Justice of the Taiwan from 1970 to 1976 and was elected to the first Legislative Yuan in 1948 to represent Tianjin . Lu said he was heavily influenced by his father , who worked as an electrical engineer but loved literature and history ; the two would read biographies of politicians and watch the evening news together . 
 Lu attended the Woodrow Wilson School at Princeton University , where he was the senior news editor of the Daily Princetonian . Lu 's ambition for a political career developed at Princeton , particularly during his internship in the Capitol Hill office of Senator Charles Mathias . He graduated magna cum laude in 1988 , after writing a senior thesis on press coverage of presidential campaigns . After graduating from Princeton , Lu attended Harvard Law School , where he was one of Barack Obama 's classmates from 1988 to 1991 . 
 = = Career = = 
 After graduating cum laude from Harvard in 1991 , Lu started his career as a law clerk to Judge Robert Cowen in the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit . In 1992 , he began working as a litigation attorney at the Washington , D.C. office of Sidley Austin , a large Chicago @-@ based law firm . Barack Obama and his wife , Michelle , also worked at Sidley Austin , in the firm 's Chicago office . 
 In 1997 , Lu left Sidley Austin and took his first job in the political arena as deputy chief counsel for Representative Henry Waxman and the Democratic staff of the Oversight and Government Reform Committee of the House of Representatives . Phil <unk> , Waxman 's chief of staff , had a large part in the decision to hire Lu ; the two would work together again later on the Obama administration ; Lu later said he considers <unk> and Pete Rouse , another future White House staffer , among his most influential mentors . During his tenure with the Government Reform Committee , Lu conducted several high @-@ profile investigations , including investigations into campaign fundraising during the 1996 presidential election , the collapse of Enron , and substandard nursing home conditions . Lu also served as special adviser for communications to Senator John Kerry during the 2004 presidential election . One of his primary duties there was coordinating the activities of families of September 11 attack victims supporting the Kerry campaign . 
 = = Barack Obama 's Senate office = = 
 After Barack Obama was elected as U.S. Senator of Illinois , Lu joined Obama 's office in early 2005 as legislative director . Lu developed a strong admiration for Obama , of whom he said , " With his quick and incisive mind , Obama is the most intelligent person that I have ever met ( in the political arena ) . " As legislative director , Lu led a 15 @-@ person group and was responsible for overseeing the drafting of all legislation and advising Obama on votes and policy decisions . When weighing difficult votes , Obama had Lu and his other staff members assemble together and argue about the issue in front of him . David Mendell , a Chicago Tribune reporter and Obama biographer , said Lu was among the " moderate voices in this atmosphere of smart young staffers . " Lu advised Obama to vote in favor of the Military Commissions Act of 2006 because he felt it would have been politically wiser to support it , but Obama ultimately voted against it . 
 Lu said of his role as legislative director , " It 's one of the most fun jobs in the Senate ( but ) it 's also an incredibly difficult job because you have to know something about any given thing going on in the Senate at the time ... It takes a couple years off your life . " Lu , along with Robert Gibbs and several other Obama staffers , read Obama 's manuscript for The Audacity of Hope and provided him with several editorial suggestions . 
 Lu eventually became acting chief of staff in Obama 's Senate office . When Obama announced his candidacy for president in February 2007 , Lu did not move over to the campaign , but remained to continue running Obama 's operations in the Senate ; Lu said of Obama at that time , " Even while he was running for president , he had a day job [ in the Senate ] . " 
 = = Obama administration = = 
 In May 2008 , Obama asked Lu to begin planning for a possible presidential transition . Obama warned him to tell no one about the nascent operation , even his own wife , so Lu quietly rented a small office in D.C. and secretly met with people who had worked on previous Democratic presidential transition efforts . The planning efforts produced policy options on a wide range of topics , compiled names of and began vetting potential political appointees for top jobs , arranged over 100 security clearances , and managed the logistics for expanding the operations after Election Day . 
 After Obama 's victory , Lu became executive director of the Obama @-@ Biden Transition Project , a position that was responsible for the day @-@ to @-@ day operations of the transition . During the transition period , Lu was in daily contact with Bush administration officials , managed the $ 9 million budget , and negotiated the ground rules for Obama transition representatives to gather information on federal agency operations and programs . 
 Obama selected Lu to serve as Cabinet Secretary , making him one of the highest @-@ ranking Asian Americans in the administration , along with Secretary of Commerce Gary Locke and Secretary of Energy Steven Chu . At the time of his selection , New York Times reporter Michael Falcone wrote , " By now , Mr. Lu knows the president @-@ elect 's record better than almost anyone . " 
 Lu 's responsibilities included representing Obama 's positions to each of the Cabinet secretaries and agencies and coordinating a common White House agenda among them . Marc Ambinder , associate editor of The Atlantic , said of Lu , " when agency heads have a problem , or when the White House has a problem with an agency head , Mr. Lu will be the first person who 's called , or calls . " 
 In 2009 , Lu visited China in July 2009 as part of an official delegation for the Obama administration , along with Locke and Chu . Although his parents were born there , it was the first time Lu had set foot on Chinese soil . Lu was introduced to Chinese Premier Wen Jiabao , who said upon meeting Lu , " I know the name and also the importance of his position . " In July 2010 , Lu was a member of the official U.S. delegation to the Shanghai Expo , along with former Secretary of State Madeleine Albright . 
 On January 8 , 2014 , Lu was nominated by President Obama to be the Deputy Secretary for the United States Department of Labor . He was unanimously confirmed by the United States Senate on April 1 , 2014 . Lu is the first Asian American to hold the position , and only the second Asian American in history to serve as deputy secretary of a cabinet department , after Elaine Chao . 
 = Crystal Tools = 
 Crystal Tools is a game engine created and used internally by the Japanese company Square Enix . It combines standard libraries for elements such as graphics , sound and artificial intelligence while providing game developers with various authoring tools . The target systems of Crystal Tools are the PlayStation 3 , the Xbox 360 , Microsoft Windows and the Wii . This was decided with the intention of making cross @-@ platform production more feasible . The idea for the engine sprang from Square Enix 's desire to have a unified game development environment in order to effectively share the technology and know @-@ how of the company 's individual teams . 
 Crystal Tools entered development in August 2005 under the code name White Engine . It was intended for the then PlayStation 3 @-@ exclusive role @-@ playing game Final Fantasy XIII . The decision to expand Crystal Tools ' compatibility to other game projects and systems marked the official project start for a company @-@ wide engine . Development was carried out by the Research and Development Division headed by Taku Murata , which was specifically established for this purpose . As Square Enix 's biggest project to date , the creation of Crystal Tools caused substantial problems in the simultaneous production of several flagship titles ; various critics cited the engine as the primary cause of significant delays in the release of Final Fantasy XIII . 
 = = Features = = 
 Crystal Tools is a unified game engine by Japanese developer and publisher Square Enix that combines standard libraries for graphics rendering , physics processing , motion control , cinematics , visual effects , sound , artificial intelligence and networking . Its target systems are the PlayStation 3 ( PS3 ) , the Xbox 360 , Microsoft Windows and the Wii . On the development side , the engine takes the form of various authoring tools focused on large @-@ scale game projects . It encompasses a character viewer for 3D models , an effects and a cutscene editor , a previsualization tool , and a sound maker . Usage of the third @-@ party programs Autodesk Maya , Autodesk Softimage and Adobe Photoshop is supported via plug @-@ ins . The individual authoring tools are connected over a communications server called <unk> which reads all the different data formats , processes them and gives an instant preview of the final game . The engine is highly customizable and can be expanded with new functions and tools should the need for them arise . Although Crystal Tools allows for easier cross @-@ platform development , the differences in the target systems ' video memory and processor architecture still necessitate fine @-@ tuning adjustments in the games , for example concerning texture sizes . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Origins = = = 
 As a video game company with different production teams , Square had wished for its employees to efficiently share their know @-@ how and technology even before the merger with its competitor Enix . The desire for a common development infrastructure and engine dates back to the 1997 role @-@ playing game ( RPG ) Final Fantasy Tactics , which was created in the transitional period from 2D to 3D game production . Back then , the artists working on the game asked programmer Taku Murata for a fast way to check how their work would look in the final game . As the development was carried out on personal computers , the graphics were displayed on computer monitors . This looked very different from the PlayStation console 's actual graphics displayed on a television screen . Initially , a faithful preview of the game 's visuals was too time @-@ consuming because all data had to be transferred from PC to console first . To evade this step , Murata created an instant preview tool . With this , he soon witnessed a boost in the artists ' productivity and in the quality of their work . For 2000 's Vagrant Story , the developers opted to reuse this instant preview tool rather than programming a new one from scratch . Murata and his colleagues added new functions to create a unified preview and cutscene tool tailored to the game 's fully polygonal 3D graphics . With 2001 's PlayOnline service , the company then made its first foray into introducing a common software for all its divisions . 
 After the Square Enix merger , however , the individual teams still continued to program and customize their own tools for each game , which would eventually go to waste as only their respective creators knew how to use them . With the amount of assets and tools required by the in @-@ development Final Fantasy XII and the impending advent of the seventh console generation , a common data format for the company was proposed in 2004 . It was to be developed in @-@ house and replace general @-@ purpose formats such as <unk> and <unk> . Realizing the goal of an engine with a common set of tools proved to be difficult , as many production teams wanted to further their own interests rather than those of the company as a whole . Select staff members from different company divisions teamed up to work on the project on a voluntary basis , but their loose organizational structure failed to yield results . Nevertheless , Murata considered this group effort a first step in the right direction . In 2005 , he was appointed general manager of the newly formed Technology Division . Although this enabled Murata and his subordinates to talk about a company @-@ wide engine more extensively , the lack of manpower again prevented any significant achievements . 
 = = = Version 1 @.@ 0 = = = 
 Following the public 's positive reaction to the graphics of the Final Fantasy VII Technical Demo for PS3 presented at the Electronic Entertainment Expo in 2005 , it was decided to release the RPG Final Fantasy XIII on the PlayStation 3 rather than the PlayStation 2 as originally planned . In August 2005 , the Technology Division began working on the White Engine , a PlayStation 3 engine that was supposed to be exclusively used for Final Fantasy XIII . Eight months later , however , it was decided to repurpose the engine to further make it compatible with other projects such as the action RPG Final Fantasy Versus XIII ( later rebranded and repurposed into Final Fantasy XV ) and the massively multiplayer online RPG ( MMORPG ) Final Fantasy XIV . In order for the company to stay competitive in a multi @-@ platform environment , support of the engine was extended from the PlayStation 3 to the Xbox 360 and Microsoft Windows , both of which were successful in Western markets . This marked the official development start of a company @-@ wide engine for whose purpose the Technology Division was expanded into the Research and Development Division in September 2006 . Murata remained the division 's general manager with a full @-@ time staff at his disposal . 
 During development of Crystal Tools , the Research and Development Division continually surveyed what types of tools were needed to create Square Enix 's flagship titles . Among the most frequently requested features was an extensive use of character close @-@ ups . This made the staff realize that the Final Fantasy series put great emphasis on the " anime @-@ like coolness " of its characters . Consequently , the engine 's developers focused on attractive visuals rather than on accurate physics . To achieve a stylized look , a post @-@ processing filter for additional lighting , blur , and visual effects was implemented . Square Enix 's large teams were typically composed of a mix of industry veterans and rookie game developers . To accommodate this , the graphical user interface of the engine became another main feature and was designed to be as intuitive as possible . The large investments into technology and human resources quickly made the White Engine the company 's biggest project to date . After one year of work , version 1 @.@ 0 of the engine was completed in September 2007 . 
 = = = Version 1 @.@ 1 and later = = = 
 After version 1 @.@ 0 had been finished , the engine 's code name White Engine was changed to the official title Crystal Tools . This was not only done to represent the company and its works better , but also due to the refractive effects of real @-@ life crystals that were meant to symbolize the flexibility of the engine . Over the next few months , the programmers advanced the engine to version 1 @.@ 1 and added preliminary support for the Wii . In September 2011 , Final Fantasy Versus XIII director Tetsuya Nomura announced that his team had replaced Crystal Tools with a proprietary action game engine that was supplemented by the lighting technology of the company 's new Luminous Studio engine . Other teams , such as the staff behind Final Fantasy XIII @-@ 2 , kept using and refining Crystal Tools . For Lightning Returns : Final Fantasy XIII , the engine was adjusted to make it more suitable to games with an open world design . 
 = = = Problems = = = 
 While Final Fantasy XIII was in production , the development of Crystal Tools caused significant problems and delays . The programmers spent much time on taking all demands from staff into account . Based on this feedback , Murata 's team tried to adapt the engine to the needs of several game projects , which proved to be virtually impossible and prevented the engine 's specifications from being finalized . Furthermore , as separate groups were working on the individual tools of the engine , there was no comprehensive software documentation to ensure usability and compliance . Unable to wait any longer , the Final Fantasy XIII team had no choice but to begin creating assets to keep to the game 's production schedule . However , the lack of specifications resulted in these assets being incompatible with the engine . In the end , it was decided that Final Fantasy XIII was to be the principal focus of Crystal Tools and the game 's team began cooperating with the Research and Development Division more closely to receive the required tools and specifications . While preliminary support of Crystal Tools was developed for the Wii , the console did not fully support all components . In 2008 , Murata said that Square Enix might license the engine out to other companies at some point in the future , although the limited documentation and the impracticality of supporting licensees posed great problems in doing so . Two years later , Final Fantasy XIII producer Yoshinori Kitase stated that developing an engine from scratch to go with a new game may have been a mistake and a likely cause for the long period between the title 's announcement and release . 
 = = Reception = = 
 At the time of Final Fantasy XIII 's release , Crystal Tools was met with praise from critics . Eurogamer 's Richard Leadbetter described it as an " excellent 3D engine " . Nate <unk> of Wired UK felt that it produced " some of the most breath taking cutscenes and 3D graphics " seen on the Xbox 360 and that it made " lengthy cutscenes more movie @-@ like than ever " . Writing for RPGFan , Stephen Harris called Crystal Tools an " impressive software " that " powered the jaw dropping visuals in Final Fantasy XIII " . As time passed on , however , various media outlets criticized Square Enix for building their own engine . GameZone 's James Wynne saw Crystal Tools as a means of " combusting money " during its development , and said it was " fairly out of date " by the time it had matured enough to be used for the company 's projects . GamesRadar 's Ashley Reed faulted Crystal Tools for leading to extended delays in the company 's release schedule and even lowering the quality of some games . She blamed the engine for having caused a " catastrophic meltdown " for Final Fantasy XIV . Harris said that people had come to expect " pretty " graphics from Crystal Tools and that Final Fantasy XIV simultaneously " met and completely shattered " those expectations . He felt that the game was " the most visually astounding MMORPG ever created on the PC platform " . However , he called certain graphical features " resource hogs " and was disappointed with the " steep " hardware requirements recommended by Square Enix to run the game . RPGFan 's staff writer Derek Heemsbergen said that Lightning Returns : Final Fantasy XIII could be seen as " a desperate attempt to squeeze one last game out of the aging graphical engine " . Wynne equally panned Square Enix 's alleged decision to drop Crystal Tools in favor of the newly @-@ developed Luminous Studio engine . 
 = = Games using Crystal Tools = = 
 = LSWR N15 class = 
 The LSWR N15 class was a British 2 – cylinder 4 @-@ 6 @-@ 0 express passenger steam locomotive designed by Robert W. Urie . The class has a complex build history spanning three sub @-@ classes and eight years of construction from 1919 to 1926 . The first batch of the class was constructed for the London and South Western Railway ( LSWR ) , where they hauled heavy express trains to the south coast ports and further west to Exeter . After the Lord Nelsons they were the second biggest express passenger locomotives in the Southern Railway . 
 Following the grouping of railway companies in 1923 , the LSWR became part of the Southern Railway ( SR ) and its publicity department gave the N15 locomotives names associated with Arthurian legend ; the class hence becoming known as King Arthurs . The Chief Mechanical Engineer ( CME ) of the newly formed company , Richard Maunsell , modified the Urie locomotives in the light of operational experience and increased the class strength to 74 locomotives . Maunsell and his Chief Draughtsman James Clayton incorporated several improvements , notably to the steam circuit and valve gear . 
 The new locomotives were built over several batches at Eastleigh and Glasgow , leading to the nicknames of " Eastleigh Arthurs " and " Scotch Arthurs " in service . The class was subjected to smoke deflection experiments in 1926 , becoming the first British class of steam locomotive to be fitted with smoke deflectors . Maunsell 's successor , Oliver Bulleid , attempted to improve performance by altering exhaust arrangements . The locomotives continued operating with British Railways ( BR ) until the end of 1962 . One example , 30777 Sir Lamiel , is preserved as part of the National Collection and can be seen on mainline railtours . 
 = = Background = = 
 Robert Urie completed his H15 class mixed @-@ traffic 4 @-@ 6 @-@ 0 design in 1913 and the prototype was built in August 1914 . It showed a marked improvement in performance over Dugald Drummond ’ s LSWR <unk> class 4 @-@ 6 @-@ 0 when tested on local and express passenger trains . The introduction of ten H15 engines into service coincided with the outbreak of the First World War , which prevented construction of further class members . Despite the interruption caused by the conflict , Urie anticipated that peacetime increases in passenger traffic would necessitate longer trains from London to the south @-@ west of England . Passenger loadings on the heavy boat trains to the London and South Western Railway ’ s ( LSWR ) ports of Portsmouth , Weymouth and Southampton had been increasing prior to the war , and was beginning to overcome the capabilities of the LSWR ’ s passenger locomotive fleet . His response was to produce a modern , standard express passenger design similar to the H15 . 
 = = Design and construction = = 
 For detailed information on numbering variations , see : Livery and numbering 
 Trials undertaken in 1914 with the H15 class prototype had demonstrated to Urie that the basic design showed considerable speed potential on the Western section of the LSWR from Basingstoke westwards , and could form the basis of a powerful new class of 4 @-@ 6 @-@ 0 express passenger locomotive with larger 6 ft 7 in ( 2 @.@ 01 m ) driving wheels . The LSWR required such a locomotive , which would need to cope with increasing train loads on this long and arduous route to the West Country . The result was the N15 class design , completed by Urie in 1917 . It incorporated features from the H15 class , including eight @-@ wheel double bogie tenders with outside plate frames over the wheels and exposed Walschaerts valve gear . High running plates along the boiler were retained for ease of oiling and maintenance . 
 Despite the similarities , the N15 class represented a refinement of the H15 template . The cylinders were increased in size to 22 in × 28 in ( 560 mm × 710 mm ) in diameter , the largest used on a British steam locomotive at that time . The substantial boiler design was also different from the parallel version used on the H15 , and became the first tapered types to be constructed at Eastleigh Works . Contrary to boiler construction practices elsewhere where tapering began near the firebox , it was restricted to the front end of the N15 ’ s barrel to reduce the diameter of the smokebox , and consequently the weight carried by the front bogie . The design also featured Urie ’ s design of narrow @-@ diameter " stovepipe " chimney , a large dome cover on top of the boiler , and his " Eastleigh " superheater . 
 = = = " Urie N15s " = = = 
 The N15 design was approved by the LSWR management committee , though the order for construction was postponed until wartime control of raw materials was relaxed . Government approval was obtained in mid – 1918 , and Eastleigh Works began to produce the LSWR ’ s first new locomotive class since 1914 . The first locomotives , later known by crewmen as the " Urie N15s " , were built in two ten @-@ engine batches by the LSWR 's Eastleigh Works between 1918 – 19 and 1922 – 23 . Of the first batch , the prototype , No. 736 entered service on 31 August 1918 , with four more appearing between September 1918 and April 1919 . They shared a similar profile to Urie 's H15 class with the use of flat @-@ sided Drummond @-@ style cabs with gently curving roofs . The double bogie tenders were outwardly similar in appearance to those used on the H15s , although strengthened during construction with extra internal bracing to hold 5 @,@ 000 imperial gallons ( 22 @,@ 700 l ) of water . A shortage of copper delayed completion of Nos. 741 – 745 , and the last of the batch emerged from Eastleigh in November 1919 . After the running @-@ in of Nos. 736 – 745 and an intensification of the LSWR timetable to the West Country , a second batch of ten was ordered in October 1921 . They entered service over the period June 1922 – March 1923 , and were numbered in the series 746 – 755 . 
 At " Grouping " in January 1923 , the LSWR became part of the new Southern Railway , whose Chief Mechanical Engineer was Richard Maunsell . Maunsell planned to introduce his own designs of express passenger locomotive , one of which was to become the future Lord Nelson class . Despite this , there was a short @-@ term need to maintain existing services that required modification and expansion of Urie 's N15 design . 
 = = = Maunsell ’ s " Eastleigh Arthurs " : Drummond rebuilds = = = 
 Maunsell 's projected design of express passenger locomotive was not ready for introduction during the summer timetable of 1925 , so a third batch of ten N15s was ordered for construction at Eastleigh . This batch was part of an outstanding LSWR order to rebuild 15 of Drummond ’ s unsuccessful 4 @-@ cylinder F13 , G14 and P14 classes 4 @-@ 6 @-@ 0s into 2 – cylinder H15 class locomotives . Only the five <unk> were converted to H15s ; the remaining ten G14 and <unk> ( Nos. 448 – 457 , renumbered E448 – E457 ) were rebuilt as N15s , implementing modifications to Urie ’ s original design . 
 The modifications are attributed to Maunsell ’ s Chief Draughtsman James Clayton , who had transferred to Ashford railway works in 1914 from Derby works . They were the result of cooperation between the South Eastern and Chatham Railway ( SECR ) and the Great Western Railway ( GWR ) when Maunsell was seconded to the Railway Executive Committee during the First World War . The aim was to create a series of standard freight and passenger locomotives for use throughout Britain , and meant that Clayton was privy to the latest GWR developments in steam design . These included streamlined steam passages , long @-@ travel valves , the maximisation of power through reduced cylinder sizes and higher boiler pressure . 
 Maunsell initiated trials with Urie N15 No. 442 in 1924 , and proved that better performance could be obtained by altering the steam circuit , valve travel and draughting arrangements . As a result , Clayton reduced the N15 cylinder diameter to 20 @.@ 5 inches ( 520 mm ) and replaced the safety valves with Ross pop valves set to 200 psi ( 1 @.@ 38 MPa ) boiler pressure . The Urie boiler was retained , though the Eastleigh superheater was replaced by a Maunsell type with 10 per cent greater superheating surface area . This was supplemented by a larger steam chest and an increased @-@ diameter chimney casting specially designed for the rebuilds . It incorporated a rim and <unk> to control exhaust flow into the atmosphere . Valve events ( the timing of valve movements with the piston ) were also revised to promote efficient steam usage and the wheels were re @-@ balanced to reduce hammerblow . 
 When rebuilding was complete , only the numbers , smokebox doors with centre tightening handles and the flat @-@ sided cabs remained of the G14 and P14 classes . The rebuilds retained their distinctive Drummond " watercart " tenders , which were modified with the removal of the complex injector feedwater heating equipment . The " watercart " tenders were of 4 @,@ 300 imp gal ( 19 @,@ 500 l ) water and 5 @.@ 00 long tons ( 5 @.@ 1 t ) coal capacity . The ten rebuilds became the first members of the King Arthur class upon entering service . 
 = = = " Scotch Arthurs " = = = 
 As the Drummond G14 and P14 4 @-@ 6 @-@ 0s were rebuilt to the N15 specification at Eastleigh , a lack of production capacity due to repair and overhaul meant that Maunsell ordered a further batch of 20 locomotives from the North British Locomotive Company in 1924 . The company had under @-@ quoted to gain the contract , which meant that production of the batch was rushed . The necessity to maintain an intensive timetable on the Southern Railway ’ s Western section prompted an increase of the order to 30 locomotives ( Nos. E763 – <unk> ) . Their construction in Glasgow would gain them the " Scotch Arthurs " nickname in service . They were all delivered to the Southern Railway by October 1925 , and featured the front @-@ end refinements used on the Drummond rebuilds . 
 The North British batch was built to the Southern 's new composite loading gauge and differed from previous batches in having an Ashford @-@ style cab based upon that used on the N class . Unlike the Drummond cab retained by Nos. 448 – 457 and <unk> – <unk> , the Ashford cab was of an all @-@ steel construction and had a roof that was flush with the cab sides , allowing it to be used on gauge @-@ restricted routes in the east of the network . It was inspired by the standard cab developed in 1904 by R. M. Deeley for the Midland Railway , and was one of a number of Midland features introduced by Clayton to the SECR and subsequently the Southern Railway . The smokebox door was revised to the Ashford pattern , which omitted the use of central tightening handles in favour of clamps around the circumference . The batch was fitted with the Urie @-@ designed , North British @-@ built 5 @,@ 000 imp gal ( 22 @,@ 700 l ) capacity double @-@ bogie tenders . 
 = = = Maunsell 's " Eastleigh Arthurs " : second batch = = = 
 With the " Scotch Arthurs " in service , the Southern Railway had an ample fleet of express passenger locomotives for its Western section routes . As part of a process of fleet standardisation , the Operating Department expressed a desire replace obsolescent locomotives on the Eastern and Central sections with the King Arthur class . In May 1925 , a batch of 25 locomotives ( Nos. E793 – <unk> ) based upon the Scotch Arthurs was ordered for construction at Eastleigh with smaller firebox grates and improved water heating surfaces . After the first 14 ( Nos. E793 – <unk> ) were built , it was decided to discontinue construction in favour of Maunsell ’ s new 4 @-@ cylinder Lord Nelson class design in June 1926 . 
 The Operating Department intended to equip Nos. E793 – <unk> with six @-@ wheel , 4 @,@ 000 imp gal ( 18 @,@ 200 l ) capacity tenders for use on the former SECR lines of the Eastern section . These were to replace Scotch Arthurs Nos. E763 – E772 on boat train duties . This was because the 5 @,@ 000 imp gal ( 22 @,@ 700 l ) tenders attached to Nos. E763 – E772 were better suited to the longer routes of the Western section . The final ten engines ( Nos. <unk> – <unk> ) were for the former LBSCR routes of the Central section , where short turntables restricted tender size to the 3 @,@ 500 imp gal ( 15 @,@ 900 l ) Ashford variety used on the N class . After the order was changed to the Lord Nelson class design , 14 N class tenders were fitted to Nos. E793 – <unk> for use the Central section . The high draw @-@ gear ( the link between locomotive and tender ) of the N class tenders necessitated modification to the frames beneath the cab . 
 = = = Naming the locomotives = = = 
 For class details , see : List of King Arthur class locomotives 
 When the former Drummond G14 and P14 4 @-@ 6 @-@ 0s were rebuilt to Maunsell ’ s N15 specification in February 1925 , the Southern Railway decided to give names to all express passenger locomotives . Because of the railway 's association with the West of England , the Public Relations Officer , John Elliot suggested that members of the N15 class should be named after characters and places associated with the legend of King Arthur . When Maunsell was told of the decision to name the locomotives , he replied : " Tell Sir Herbert [ Walker ] I have no objection , but I warn you , it won 't make any difference to the working of the engines " . Walker was the General Manager of the Southern Railway , who had told Elliot that Maunsell 's permission was required . The first G14 to be rebuilt , No . <unk> , was given the first name and christened King Arthur . The Urie locomotives ( hitherto referred as N15s rather than King Arthurs ) were also given names connected with Arthurian legend and were referred to as " Urie Arthurs " ; the Maunsell batches of N15s were nicknamed the " Eastleigh " and " Scotch Arthurs " . 
 = = Operational details = = 
 The N15 class was intended to haul heavy expresses over the long LSWR mainlines between Waterloo , Weymouth , Exeter and Plymouth . Locomotives were changed at Salisbury before the upgrading of the South Western Mainline in 1922 , when fast running through to Exeter was possible . The Southern Railway 's motive power re @-@ organisation following the Grouping of 1923 saw the class allocated to sheds across the network and used on Bournemouth to Oxford cross @-@ country trains . Operations were expanded to more restricted Central and Eastern section mainlines in 1925 , and suitably modified class members hauled commuter and heavy boat trains from London Victoria to Dover Marine and expresses to Brighton . In 1931 , No . <unk> Sir <unk> hauled the inaugural Bournemouth Belle Pullman train from Waterloo to Bournemouth West . 
 In peacetime , the class was occasionally used on fast freights from Southampton Docks , although it was common to see them at the head of freight and troop trains during the Second World War . Ten " Urie Arthurs " were transferred to the London and North Eastern Railway ( LNER ) in October 1942 , and were based at Heaton shed for use on freight and occasional passenger trains in the north east and southern Scotland . They returned to the Southern Railway in July 1943 after the introduction of United States Army Transportation Corps <unk> class 2 @-@ 8 @-@ 0s into service . From 1945 the King Arthur class regularly deputised for Bulleid ’ s new Pacifics , which were experiencing poor serviceability due to mechanical failures . The entire class came into British Railways ownership in 1948 : they could be found in most areas of the Southern Region on medium @-@ length expresses and stopping trains on the ex @-@ LSWR mainline . 
 = = = Smoke deflector experiments = = = 
 In 1926 the N15 class became the first in Britain equipped with smoke deflectors , with several designs tested . Experiments were undertaken throughout 1926 and included the fitting of a curved plate above the smokebox of No . <unk> Melisande to channel air from below the chimney to lift the exhaust above the locomotive when on the move . Nos. <unk> Sir Kay and <unk> Sir Gillemere had air scoops attached to the chimney , whilst E772 Sir Percivale was fitted with large , square German @-@ type smoke deflectors . Finally , No . <unk> King Arthur was fitted with small , rectangular smoke deflectors fitted to the handrails on the smokebox sides . The experiments produced mixed results , and Maunsell requested the assistance of the University of London in staging wind tunnel tests . These resulted in a standard plate design ( illustrated in the infobox ) , which was gradually fitted to the class from late 1927 onwards . 
 = = = Performance of the Urie batch and modifications = = = 
 Under LSWR ownership , the N15s were initially well received by crews , though the batch soon gained a reputation for poor steaming on long runs . Through running of the class into Exeter was stopped in favour of engine changes at Salisbury , and Urie attributed the problem to poor driving technique . A series of trial runs changed this assumption , and demonstrated that steam pressure gradually decreased on the flat . The trials also revealed that the robust construction of the motion produced the heaviest hammerblow of any British locomotive class , and had caused cracked frames on the test locomotive . 
 Another criticism from locomotive crews concerned the exposed cab in bad weather , which necessitated the installation of a tarpaulin sheet over the rear of the cab and the front of the tender , restricting rearward vision . The 1921 Coal Miners ’ strike meant that two class members ( Nos. 737 and 739 ) were converted to oil @-@ burning . One of the modified locomotives subsequently caught fire at Salisbury shed , and both were reverted to coal firing by the end of the year . When the LSWR was amalgamated into the Southern Railway in 1923 , Urie had done little to remedy the shortcomings of the N15s , and it fell to his successor to improve the class . 
 When Maunsell inherited the design as CME of the Southern Railway , he began trials using the weakest N15 ( No. 442 ) in 1924 . The results indicated that better performance could be obtained by altering the steam circuit , valve travel and draughting arrangements , although the first two recommendations were deemed too costly for immediate implementation by the Locomotive Committee . Eight extra King Arthur @-@ type boilers were ordered from North British and fitted to N15s Nos. 737 – 742 by December 1925 in an effort to improve steaming . The remaining Urie boilers were fitted with standard Ross pop safety valves to ease maintenance . Maunsell also addressed draughting problems caused by the narrow Urie " stovepipe " chimney . The exhaust arrangements were modified on No. 737 using the King Arthur chimney design and reduced @-@ diameter blastpipes . This proved successful , and all " Urie N15s " were modified over the period 1925 – 1929 . The oil @-@ burning equipment was refitted to Nos. 737 and 739 during the 1926 General Strike and removed in December of that year . 
 Beginning in 1928 , all but No. 755 had their cylinder diameter reduced from 22 inches ( 560 mm ) to 21 inches ( 530 mm ) when renewals were due , improving speed on flat sections of railway , but affecting their performance on the gradients west of Salisbury . No. 755 The Red Knight was modified in 1940 by Maunsell ’ s successor , Oliver Bulleid with his own design of 21 inches ( 530 mm ) cylinders and streamlined steam passages . This was married to a Lemaître multiple @-@ jet blastpipe and wide @-@ diameter chimney , allowing the locomotive to produce performances akin to the more powerful Lord Nelson class . Four other N15s were so modified with four more on order , though the latter was cancelled due to wartime shortages of metal . The soft exhaust of the Lemaître multiple @-@ jet blastpipe precipitated an adjustment to the smoke deflectors on three converted locomotives , with the tops angled to the vertical in an attempt to improve air @-@ flow along the boiler cladding . This failed to achieve the desired effect , and the final two modified locomotives retained the Maunsell @-@ style deflectors . 
 The final modifications to the " Urie N15s " involved the conversion of five locomotives ( Nos. 740 , 745 , 748 , 749 and 752 ) to oil @-@ firing in 1946 – 1947 . This was in response to a government scheme to address a post @-@ war coal shortage . The oil tanks were fabricated from welded steel and fitted within the tender coal space . After initial problems with No. 740 Merlin were rectified , the oil @-@ fired locomotives proved good performers on Bournemouth services . A further addition to the oil @-@ fired locomotives was electric <unk> and cab lighting , which was retained when reverted to coal @-@ firing in 1948 . 
 = = = Performance of the Maunsell batches and modifications = = = 
 The improved front @-@ end layout applied to the first batch of " Eastleigh Arthurs " ( Nos. E448 – E457 ) ensured continuous fast running on flat sections of track around London , although their propensity for speed was sometimes compromised over the hilly terrain west of Salisbury . The inside bearings of the Drummond " watercart " tenders proved problematic , as they were too small for the load carried and suffered from water ingress . The retention of the tall Drummond cab prevented use away from the Western section of the Southern Railway . Despite these problems , their operational reliability prompted the management to arrange the visit of No . <unk> Sir Torre to the Darlington Railway Centenary celebrations in July 1925 . No . <unk> also recorded speeds of up to 90 mph ( 140 km / h ) on the South West Mainline near Axminster in 1929 . This proved that with the right components , Urie ’ s original design could perform well . 
 Despite the successful use of modified N15 components to rebuild Nos. E448 – E457 , the mechanically similar " Scotch Arthurs " proved disappointing when put into service from May 1925 . The performance of those allocated to the Eastern section was indifferent , and failed to improve upon the double @-@ headed ex @-@ SECR 4 @-@ 4 @-@ 0s they were to replace . Reports of poor steaming and hot driving and tender wheel axleboxes were common from crewmen and shed fitters . After investigation , the problems were attributed to poor workmanship during construction as the North British Locomotive Company <unk> production costs to gain the contract . Defects were found in boiler construction across the batch , and necessitated six replacement boilers , re @-@ riveting , re @-@ fitting of tubes and replacement of firebox stays . The hot driving wheel axleboxes were caused by the main frames being out of alignment . A 1926 report suggested that all affected locomotives should be taken to Eastleigh for repair . Once repaired , the " Scotch Arthurs " proved as capable as the rest of the class in service . 
 " Scotch Arthurs " Nos. E763 – E772 received new tenders between 1928 and 1930 in a series of tender exchanges with the Lord Nelson and LSWR S15 classes . This ensured that they could exchange their Urie 5 @,@ 000 imp gal ( 22 @,@ 700 l ) bogie tenders with the 4 @,@ 000 imp gal ( 18 @,@ 200 l ) Ashford design for use on the shorter Eastern section routes . Whilst useful for the roster clerks at Battersea shed , any transfer to the Western section was hampered because of their shorter range . By 1937 , all had reverted to the Urie 5 @,@ 000 imp gal ( 22 @,@ 700 l ) bogie tenders , though Nos. <unk> – E772 were attached to new Maunsell flush @-@ sided tenders with brake vacuum reservoirs fitted behind the coal space . These were again swapped with Maunsell LSWR @-@ style bogie tenders fitted to the Lord Nelson class . 
 The second batch of " Eastleigh Arthurs " displaced the ex @-@ K class tanks and ex @-@ LBSCR H2 " Atlantic " 4 @-@ 4 @-@ 2 locomotives on the Eastbourne and Bognor Regis routes respectively . They were well liked by crews and used on this part of the network until the arrival of electrification . No . <unk> Sir Brian was used on the former Great Northern main line for performance trials against the SECR K and K1 class tanks following a railway accident at Sevenoaks , Kent in 1927 . The tests were supervised by the London and North Eastern Railway 's CME , Sir Nigel Gresley , who commented that the class was unstable at high speeds . The instability was caused by motion hammerblow and exacerbated by irregularities in track @-@ work . This caused excessive stress to the axleboxes and poor riding characteristics on the footplate . Despite this , the class benefited from an excellent maintenance regime . 
 Maunsell ’ s replacement Oliver Bulleid believed that there was little need to improve draughting on this series . However , reports of poor steaming with No. 792 Sir <unk> de Revel gave him an opportunity to trial a Lemaître multiple @-@ jet blastpipe and wide @-@ diameter chimney on a Maunsell Arthur in 1940 . This did not enhance performance to the extent of No. 755 The Red Knight . Under British Railways ownership , the locomotive was re @-@ fitted with the Maunsell chimney in March 1952 with no further problems reported . In another wartime experiment , Bulleid fitted No. 783 Sir Gillemere with three thin " stovepipe " chimneys in November 1940 . These were set in a triangular formation to reduce visibility of exhaust from the air in response to attacks made by low @-@ flying aircraft on Southern Railway trains . The " stovepipes " were reduced to two , producing a fierce exhaust blast that dislodged soot inside tunnels and under bridges . The experiment was discontinued in February 1941 and the locomotive re @-@ fitted with a Maunsell King Arthur chimney . The last experiment was with spark @-@ arresting equipment in response to lineside fires caused by poor quality coal . Nos. 784 Sir <unk> and 788 Sir <unk> of the Mount were fitted with new wide @-@ diameter chimneys in late 1947 . Test @-@ trains showed mixed results and the trials were stopped in 1951 after improvements in coal quality and the fitting of internal smokebox spark @-@ <unk> . 
 = = = Withdrawal = = = 
 The detail variations across the class meant the " Urie N15s " were placed into store over the winters of 1949 and 1952 . The Maunsell King Arthur examples were easier to maintain , and the large number of modern Bulleid Pacific and British Railways Standard classes were able to undertake similar duties . The " Urie N15s " were brought into service during the summer months , although their deteriorating condition was demonstrated when No. <unk> The Green Knight was withdrawn with cracked frames in 1953 . The slow running @-@ down of the " Urie N15s " continued between 1955 – 1957 , and several were stored prior to withdrawal . The last three were withdrawn from Basingstoke shed , with No. <unk> " King <unk> " the final example to cease operation in March 1958 . All were broken up for scrap , though their names were given to 20 BR Standard class 5 locomotives allocated to the Southern Region between 1959 – 1962 . 
 The Maunsell King Arthur class also faced a decrease in suitable work on the Central and Eastern sections following the introduction of BR Standard class 5 and BR Standard class 4 4 @-@ 6 @-@ 0s in 1955 . The gradual withdrawal of the " Urie N15s " , H15s and SR <unk> classes presented an opportunity to replace the ageing Drummond " watercart " tenders fitted to Nos. 448 – 457 with Urie 5 @,@ 000 imp gal ( 22 @,@ 700 l ) bogie tenders . This coincided with a 1958 programme to similarly change the 3 @,@ 500 imp gal ( 15 @,@ 900 l ) Ashford tenders fitted to eight of the second batch " Eastleigh Arthurs " . The class remained intact until the completion of the Eastern section electrification when 17 were made redundant in 1959 . More withdrawals took place in 1960 when an increase in Bulleid Pacifics allocated to the Western section reduced available work . The ranks thinned to 12 in 1961 , and further withdrawals reduced the class to one , No. <unk> Sir <unk> . The class outlasted the newer – but less numerous – Lord Nelson class by one month when No. <unk> was withdrawn from Basingstoke Shed in November 1962 . 
 = = Accidents and incidents = = 
 On 26 November 1947 , locomotive No. 753 King Arthur was hauling a passenger train that was in a rear @-@ end collision with another at Farnborough , Hampshire due to a signalman 's error . Two people were killed . 
 On 22 January 1955 , locomotive No. <unk> Sir Gillemere was in collision with H15 No. <unk> at Eastleigh , Hampshire after its driver misread signals . The locomotive was subsequently repaired ; The H15 was condemned . 
 = = Livery and numbering = = 
 = = = LSWR and Southern Railway = = = 
 Under LSWR ownership , the " Urie N15s " were painted in Urie ’ s LSWR sage green livery for passenger locomotives . This was distinct from Drummond ’ s sage green because it was more olive in colour , and yellowed with cleaning and weathering . Black and white lining decorated the boiler bands and borders of the sage green panels . The lettering was in gilt : the initials " LSWR " located on the side of the tender , the locomotive number on the cabside . 
 The first Southern livery continued that of the LSWR , though with primrose yellow transfers showing " Southern " and the locomotive number , placed on the tender . The lining separating the black border on tender and cab side panels was changed to yellow . Primrose yellow transfers , showing " Southern " and the locomotive number , were placed on the tender . An " E " prefix was located above the tender number ( e.g. <unk> ) , denoting that the class was registered for maintenance at Eastleigh works . The gilt numerals on the cabside and tender rear were replaced by a cast oval plate with " Southern Railway " around the edge and the number located in the centre . Yellow numerals were painted onto the front buffer beam to ease identification . In February 1925 Maunsell developed a deeper green with black and white lining . This was applied to his new King Arthur class locomotives and the " Urie N15s " were similarly painted when overhauls were due . Wheels were olive @-@ green with black tyres . From 1929 the " E " prefix was removed and the cast numerals on the tender rear were removed and replaced with yellow transfers ( e.g. 749 ) . 
 In May 1938 , after Bulleid 's appointment as CME , No. 749 Iseult was trialled in bright unlined light green with yellow @-@ painted block numerals replacing the cast numberplates . The tender was given two designs of lettering , with " Southern " on one side and the initials " SR " on the other . The Board of Directors disapproved and Bulleid repainted the locomotive in darker malachite green with black and white lining ( this would later be applied to his Pacifics ) . The legend " Southern " in block @-@ lettering remained on the tender , though the number was relocated to the cabside on one side and the smoke deflector on the other . Both were painted in a light " sunshine yellow " . No. 749 was returned to Maunsell ’ s green livery . 
 Several variations of the Maunsell green , Urie sage green and Bulleid malachite green liveries were tried with black , white / black , and yellow lining , some sporting a green panel on the smoke deflectors . However , from 1942 to 1946 , during the Second World War , members of the class under overhaul were turned out in unlined @-@ black livery as a wartime economy measure , with green @-@ shaded sunshine yellow lettering . The final Southern livery used from 1946 reverted to malachite green , with yellow / black lining , and sunshine yellow lettering . Some of the class ( Nos. 782 and 800 , Sir Brian and Sir <unk> ) did not receive this livery . 
 = = = British Railways = = = 
 British Railways gave the class the power classification of 5P after nationalisation in 1948 . For the first 18 months the locomotives sported a transitional livery : Southern Railway malachite green with " British Railways " on the tender in sunshine yellow lettering . As each member of the class became due for a heavy general overhaul , they were repainted in the new standard British Railways express passenger livery of Brunswick green with orange and black lining from April 1949 . Initially , the British Railways " Cycling Lion " crest was located on the tender , replaced from the 1957 by the later " Ferret and <unk> " crest . 
 Numbering was initially a continuation of the Southern Railway system , though an ' S ' prefix was added to denote a pre @-@ nationalisation locomotive , so that No. 448 would become No. <unk> . As each locomotive became due for overhaul and received its new livery , the numbering was changed to the British Railways standard numbering system , in the series <unk> – <unk> for the first ten and <unk> – <unk> for the rest . 
 = = Operational assessment and preservation = = 
 For class details and current status of the preserved locomotive , see : List of King Arthur class locomotives 
 After the poor steaming of the Urie batch was addressed , the class proved popular amongst crews , mechanically reliable and capable of high speeds . However , their heavy hammerblow at speed meant that they were prone to rough riding and instability . The two Maunsell batches with their streamlined steam passages and better draughting arrangements were superior in performance , and were a popular choice when Bulleid ’ s locomotives were unavailable . Their use of standard parts considerably eased maintenance , and the fitting of different tender and cab sizes meant few operational restrictions for the class on mainline routes . The class gave many years of service , and were noted for their ability to " do the job " . The electrification of the Eastern and Central sections and the increasing number of Bulleid Pacifics in service meant the lack of a suitable role for the class under British Railways ownership . In spite of the reduction in work , high mileages were obtained with No. <unk> Tintagel achieving 1 @,@ 464 @,@ 032 miles ( 2 @,@ 356 @,@ 131 km ) in service . 
 The decision to preserve a member of the class was made in November 1960 . It was first intended to preserve the King Arthur class doyen No. 453 King Arthur , and it was stored for a time after withdrawal in 1961 pending restoration to museum condition . However , it was decided to restore the preserved locomotive to as @-@ built condition , and the lack of a suitable Drummond " watercart " tender precluded this consideration . No. 453 was subsequently scrapped and it was decided to preserve one of the North British @-@ built batch , No. 30777 Sir Lamiel , withdrawn in October 1961 , instead . Sir Lamiel was named after a character in Thomas Malory 's Le Morte d 'Arthur , Sir Lamiel of Cardiff . This locomotive was restored to Maunsell livery as No . <unk> , and became part of the National Collection . It was restored to the later British Railways livery in 2003 , and No. 30777 can be seen at the Great Central Railway and on the railway network hauling mainline railtours as of 2010 . 
 = = Models = = 
 Hornby Railways manufacture a model of the N15 in OO gauge . 
 = Wells Fargo Building ( Philadelphia ) = 
 The Wells Fargo Building , originally the Fidelity @-@ Philadelphia Trust Company Building , is a skyscraper in Center City , Philadelphia , Pennsylvania , United States . Designed in the Beaux @-@ Arts style by the architectural firm Simon & Simon , the building was erected for the Fidelity @-@ Philadelphia Trust Co. in 1928 . The 29 @-@ story high @-@ rise is listed on the National Register of Historic Places . 
 The building was long regarded as premier office space , but by the 1980s , tenants were leaving for newer buildings in the West Market Street neighborhood . Extensive rehab work has since drawn new tenants . Its largest tenant has always been the Fidelity @-@ Philadelphia Trust Company or its successor companies — today , Wells Fargo . 
 The 405 @-@ foot ( 123 m ) limestone and granite skyscraper features recesses that give the building an H @-@ shape above the fifth floor . Decorations include sculpture by Piccirilli Brothers and 150 @,@ 000 square feet ( 14 @,@ 000 m2 ) of marble . Seven medallions , mainly depicting early American coins , decorate the street @-@ level facade . Bas @-@ relief figures decorate the spandrels above the building 's bronze doors , which are themselves decorated by high @-@ relief panels depicting the history of commerce and civilization . 
 = = History = = 
 In the late 1920s , numerous high @-@ rises were constructed in Center City Philadelphia . Among the businesses commissioning new high @-@ rises was the Fidelity @-@ Philadelphia Trust Company , the result of the 1926 merger between Fidelity Trust Company and the Philadelphia Trust Company . Before the merger , in 1925 , architects Edward P. Simon and Grant M. Simon of the firm Simon and Simon were approached to design a new building . The designs were complete by the end of 1926 and in January 1927 general contractor Irwin & Leighton was engaged to build the Fidelity @-@ Philadelphia Trust Company Building . The site of the building along Broad Street was previously the location of the Forrest Theater and the " Yellow Mansion " ( also known as the Dundas Lippincott House ) . 
 Construction began in 1927 and the building was opened on June 1 , 1928 . The building became premier office space in the center of the city , serving as the home of major law firms among other tenants . In 1953 , steel and concrete pen houses were built at the back of the building to house air conditioning equipment . 
 In July 1982 , the parent company of Fidelity Bank , <unk> , put up for sale Fidelity Building Corp. , a subsidiary which owns The Fidelity Building and the neighboring Witherspoon Building . In December of that year , <unk> announced that the Al @-@ Tajir Foundation , a real estate investment company owned by Mahdi Al Tajir , had agreed to buy Fidelity Building Corp. for US $ 63 @.@ 5 million . 
 During the late @-@ 1980s office building boom in the West Market Street area of Center City , businesses left the Fidelity Building for newer office space . As a result , the building 's owners filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection in 1992 . That same year , the Fidelity Building Corporation was purchased by First Fidelity <unk> , a company formed in the 1988 merger of the building 's original owners and First Fidelity Corporation of Newark , New Jersey . 
 First Union Corporation took control of the building in 1995 when it bought Fidelity <unk> . Shortly after taking over , First Union spent millions of dollars renovating the facade and interiors and modernizing the mechanical systems . In 2000 , First Fidelity Building Corporation , a company controlled by First Union , put the Fidelity Building up for sale . Later that year , Nicholas <unk> , of the American Financial Resource Group , and a group of investors bought the building for about US $ 110 million . In 2006 , a 256 @,@ 000 @-@ square @-@ foot ( 23 @,@ 800 m2 ) portion of the lower floors of the building was sold to Resnick Development Corporation , a subsidiary of Jack Resnick & Sons Incorporated . In April 2008 , American Financial Realty Trust sold the remainder of the building to SSH Real Estate and Young Capital for US $ 57 @.@ 7 million . 
 During the early 2000s , the building became known as the Wachovia Building . Wachovia became the building 's largest tenant after merging with First Union Corporation early in the decade . In 2006 , Wachovia re @-@ negotiated its lease , which was set to expire in 2010 . After exploring other potential new office space in Center City , Wachovia made a deal to stay in the Wachovia Building along with the neighboring Witherspoon Building , the nearby One South Broad , and the Widener Building until the 2020s . The building became known as the Wells Fargo Building after Wells Fargo , which bought Wachovia in 2008 , re @-@ branded Wachovia area banks in April 2011 . Wells Fargo marketed the change by having a stagecoach carrying Philadelphia mayor Michael Nutter and others ride from Philadelphia City Hall to the Wells Fargo Building . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 The 29 @-@ story , 405 @-@ foot @-@ tall ( 123 m ) Wells Fargo Building is located on the Avenue of the Arts in Center City , Philadelphia . The building faces Broad Street on the west , Walnut Street on the south , and Sansom Street on the north . To the east of the building is the 11 @-@ story Witherspoon Building , built in 1896 . Owned by the same owners , the two buildings are linked together . Containing 892 @,@ 000 square feet ( 83 @,@ 000 m2 ) , the Wells Fargo Building 's footprint measures 220 feet 6 @.@ 5 inches ( 67 @.@ 22 m ) by 175 feet 5 @.@ 5 inches ( 53 @.@ 48 m ) . Built in the Beaux @-@ Arts style the building 's brick curtain wall is made of limestone ashlar on the upper and lower floors and rusticated granite on the 2nd and 3rd floors . 
 <unk> the building is divided into three parts . The first two stories and a mezzanine level make up the building 's base . The next eighteen floors make up the building 's shaft and center . The distinctive features of the center are two 55 feet ( 17 m ) recesses on the east and west sides of the building . Starting above the fourth floor , the recesses give the building an H @-@ shape . The skyscraper 's top section is distinguished from the lower floors by three small setbacks . 
 At street level , three arched entranceways line Broad Street . The central arch is slightly larger than the others to indicate the entrance to the main banking hall . Carved into the facade above the center arch is the building 's name . Inside the arches and above the doorways are windows designed by d 'Ascenzo Studios . Leaded panes of glass of various shades of amber are surrounded by a Renaissance @-@ style border . Below the windows are bronze doors , each with 24 high @-@ relief panels depicting the history of commerce and civilization . Bas @-@ relief figures decorate each of the arches ' spandrels . A male figure with a hammer representing industry and a female figure with a beehive representing thrift decorate the center arch . The arch closest to Sansom Street is decorated by two figures with <unk> to represent abundance . The arch nearer to Walnut Street is decorated by a painter and a sculptor to represent art . 
 Next to the two smaller archways are carved medallions , one flanking each spandrel . The medallions closest to Sansom Street represent early American coins , a Pine Tree coin from Massachusetts and Grandi Copper coin from Connecticut . The medallions closest to the Walnut Street side represent the first American coin issued by Congress and the Eye Coin from Vermont . Two medallions on the Walnut Street side depict both sides of the Lafayette Medal . Only one medallion decorates the Samson Street side , depicting another early coin from Vermont . 
 The Wells Fargo Building 's interiors include a 2 ½ <unk> banking hall featuring six 58 @-@ ton steel girders that support the skyscraper 's structure . The girders were the largest in the Eastern United States at the time of construction . Among the 150 @,@ 000 square feet ( 14 @,@ 000 m2 ) of marble inside the Wells Fargo Building is the cream @-@ colored terrazzo marble used throughout the banking hall . At the rear of the hall is a marble sculpture by the Piccirilli Brothers . The statue depicts semi @-@ nude male and female representations of day and night clasping hands under a clock to symbolize eternity . 
 Above the statue and framed by marble pilasters is a window that depicts scenes from Philadelphia history . In the window 's tympanum is a depiction of Independence Hall . Below that are pictures showing William Penn 's treaty with the Indians , George Washington 's Farewell Address to Congress , the proclamation of the Declaration of Independence , the Philadelphia Convention , the drafting of the Declaration of Independence , Benjamin Franklin 's printing office , Betsy Ross exhibiting the United States flag , and Caesar Rodney 's ride from Delaware . The border of the window contains portrait busts of notable American Revolution @-@ era Philadelphians : John Bartram , George Clymer , Robert Morris , David Rittenhouse , Benjamin Rush , and James Wilson . 
 The Wells Fargo Building was added to the National Register of Historic Places on November 27 , 1978 . The skyscraper was listed because it was an excellent example of commercial Beaux @-@ Arts architecture and because it stands " as a glossary of modern skyscraper design , synthesizing the primary features of three phases of skyscraper development reaching back to the 1880s " . The building 's characteristics are its tripartite system of a base , shaft , and capital , the treatment of the skyscraper as a tower , and the use of setbacks . 
 = = Tenants = = 
 Leasing 30 percent of the building , Wells Fargo is the skyscraper 's largest tenant . The second largest tenant is law firm Montgomery , McCracken , Walker & Rhoads , which occupies about 108 @,@ 000 square feet ( 10 @,@ 000 m2 ) on the top five and a half floors ; the firm signed a 15 @-@ year lease in 1995 . Other tenants include Domus Inc . , which occupies 12 @,@ 000 square feet ( 1 @,@ 100 m2 ) . Domus Inc. moved into the Wells Fargo Building in 2000 after outgrowing its space in the Bellevue @-@ Stratford Hotel . 
 Past tenants include the law firms Morgan Lewis & <unk> and Pepper Hamilton & Sheetz and offices for the Westmoreland Coal Company . A private eating club used to operate at the top of the building . Called the Midday Club , it was intended " to provide in the heart of the financial district , removed from the noise and activity of the street , a place where businessmen can dine in a restful atmosphere with their business associates " . The Midday Club opened in 1929 and closed in 1978 . 
 = = Museum = = 
 The lobby holds a branch of the Wells Fargo History Museum ; its exhibits include a stagecoach , telegraph equipment , historic clothing and currency . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 In 1983 , the Wells Fargo Building was featured in the film Trading Places , which starred Dan Aykroyd and Eddie Murphy . 
 = Poco Pine = 
 Poco Pine ( 1954 – 1974 ) was an American Quarter Horse stallion and breeding stallion . He earned 50 Grand Championships in his showing career and after his death was inducted into the American Quarter Horse Association 's ( or AQHA ) AQHA Hall of Fame in 2010 . Two of his descendants have also been inducted into the AQHA Hall of Fame . 37 of his offspring earned an AQHA Championship during their own showing careers . 
 = = Life = = 
 Poco Pine was a 1954 bay stallion , sired by Poco Bueno , and out of Pretty Rosalie , a daughter of Pretty Boy . As a foal , he was bought at E. Paul Waggoner 's 1954 Waggoner Ranch sale by Paul Curtner . Curtner had originally intended to purchase a daughter of Blackburn and a filly by Poco Bueno , but instead ended up purchasing two different horses – a mare by Pretty Boy ( Pretty Rosalie ) and a colt by Poco Bueno ( Poco Pine ) . While still at the sale , Curtner was approached by two employees of Waggoner 's , both informing Curtner that in their opinion , he 'd bought the best mare in the sale . One of the employees , Pine Johnson , Waggoner 's trainer , also felt that the colt was the best Poco Bueno colt he 'd ever seen . Because of Johnson 's praise for the colt , Curtner decided to register the foal as Poco Pine . 
 Poco Pine was shown about five times as a weanling , winning all the halter classes he was shown in . Curtner , however , felt that he was slow to develop and therefore didn 't show him as a yearling or as a two @-@ year @-@ old . By 1957 Curtner felt that Poco Pine was once again ready to perform , and took him to a show in Fort Worth , Texas . Although Poco Pine won his class , Curtner was sure the horse wouldn 't win either Grand Champion or Reserve Grand Champion , and ended up betting B. F. Phillips and Billy Bush that Poco Pine would not win the championship or reserve . Poco Pine won the Championship , which meant that Curtner lost money on his horse winning . 
 Curtner 's goal with Poco Pine 's halter career was to have the stallion win 50 Grand Championships , a goal the stallion accomplished on October 27 , 1960 , when he was six years old . Curtner then retired the horse from halter showing . While Poco Pine was showing at halter , he was also showing in cutting competitions and standing at stud to a large book of mares . In 1958 , for example , he bred 80 mares at a stud fee of $ 800 ( approximately $ 6 @,@ 600 in 2016 ) as well as showing both halter and cutting . In August 1960 , Poco Pine earned enough performance points to qualify for an AQHA Championship and was retired from performance showing . In total , Poco Pine earned 135 AQHA Halter points and 17 AQHA Performance points . 
 Curtner had two opportunities to sell Poco Pine during his showing career — the first time for $ 40 @,@ 000 ( approximately $ 328 @,@ 100 in 2016 ) , the second for $ 100 @,@ 000 ( approximately $ 820 @,@ 200 in 2016 ) — but both times he turned the offers down . 
 = = Breeding career = = 
 Poco Pine 's foals earned $ 14 @,@ 794 in National Cutting Horse Association competition . He sired 37 AQHA Champions , 19 Superior Wester Pleasure Horses , 2 Superior Trail Horses , 15 Superior Halter Horses , 84 Performance Registers of Merit and 4 year end high point horses with the AQHA . He sired 19 foals crops , with a total of 464 foals . His son Poco <unk> was the sire of <unk> Dexter , who was inducted into the AQHA Hall of Fame . Another descendant inducted into the Hall of Fame was Zippo Pine Bar , who was out of a Poco Pine daughter . 
 Poco Pine died in his sleep on November 1 , 1974 . He was inducted into the AQHA Hall of Fame in 2010 . 
 = = Pedigree = = 
 = The Long and Winding Road = 
 " The Long and Winding Road " is a ballad written by Paul McCartney ( credited to Lennon – McCartney ) from the Beatles ' album Let It Be . It became the group 's 20th and last number @-@ one song in the United States in June 1970 , and was the last single released by the quartet . 
 While the released version of the song was very successful , the post @-@ production modifications by producer Phil Spector angered McCartney to the point that when he made his case in court for breaking up the Beatles as a legal entity , he cited the treatment of " The Long and Winding Road " as one of six reasons for doing so . New versions of the song with simpler instrumentation were subsequently released by both the Beatles and McCartney . 
 In 2011 , Rolling Stone ranked " The Long and Winding Road " number 90 on their list of 100 greatest Beatles songs of all time . 
 = = Inspiration = = 
 McCartney originally wrote the song at his farm in Scotland , and was inspired by the growing tension among the Beatles . McCartney said later " I just sat down at my piano in Scotland , started playing and came up with that song , imagining it was going to be done by someone like Ray Charles . I have always found inspiration in the calm beauty of Scotland and again it proved the place where I found inspiration . " 
 McCartney recorded a demo version of the song , with Beatles ' engineer Alan Brown assisting , in September 1968 , during the recording sessions for The Beatles . 
 The song takes the form of a piano @-@ based ballad , with conventional chord changes . The song 's home key is E @-@ flat major but it also uses the relative C minor . Lyrically , it is a sad and melancholic song , with an evocation of an as @-@ yet unrequited , though apparently inevitable , love . 
 In an interview in 1994 , McCartney described the lyric more obliquely : " It 's rather a sad song . I like writing sad songs , it 's a good bag to get into because you can actually acknowledge some deeper feelings of your own and put them in it . It 's a good vehicle , it saves having to go to a psychiatrist . " 
 The opening theme is repeated throughout . The song lacks a traditional chorus , and the melody and lyrics are ambiguous about the opening stanza 's position in the song ; it is unclear whether the song has just begun , is in the verse , or is in the bridge . 
 = = Recording session = = 
 The Beatles recorded several takes of " The Long and Winding Road " on 26 January 1969 and again on 31 January with McCartney on lead vocals and piano , John Lennon on bass guitar , George Harrison on guitar , Ringo Starr on drums , and Billy Preston on Rhodes piano . This was during a series of sessions for an album project then known as Get Back . Lennon , usually the band 's rhythm guitarist , played bass only occasionally and made several mistakes on the recording , prompting some writers , such as Ian MacDonald , to postulate that the disenchanted Lennon 's ragged bass playing was purposeful . 
 In May 1969 , Glyn Johns , who had been asked to compile and mix the Get Back album by the Beatles , selected the 26 January recording as the best version of the song . The Beatles also recorded a master version as part of the " Apple Studio Performance " on 31 January , which contained a different lyrical and musical structure , but this version was not chosen for release . Bootlegs of the recording sessions of that day , and the film , show the band recording numerous takes of the song in a concerted effort to create a master . For both the 1969 and 1970 versions of the Get Back album , Glyn Johns used the 26 January mix as released on the Anthology 3 album in 1996 . When the project was handed over to Phil Spector he also chose the 26 January recording . In the spring of 1970 , Lennon and the Beatles ' manager , Allen Klein , turned over the recordings to Phil Spector with the hope of salvaging an album , which was then titled Let It Be . 
 Spector made various changes to the songs , but his most dramatic embellishments occurred on 1 April 1970 , the last ever Beatles recording session , when he added orchestral overdubs to " The Long and Winding Road , " " Across the Universe " and " I Me Mine " at Abbey Road Studios . The only member of the Beatles present was Starr , who played drums with the session musicians to create Spector 's characteristic " Wall of Sound . " Already known for his eccentric behaviour in the studio , Spector was in a peculiar mood that day , as balance engineer Peter Bown recalled : " He wanted tape echo on everything , he had to take a different pill every half hour and had his bodyguard with him constantly . He was on the point of throwing a wobbly , saying ' I want to hear this , I want to hear that . I must have this , I must have that . ' " Bown and the orchestra eventually became so annoyed by Spector 's behaviour that the orchestra refused to play any further , and at one point , Bown left for home , forcing Spector to telephone him and persuade him into coming back after Starr had told Spector to calm down . 
 Finally , Spector succeeded in overdubbing " The Long and Winding Road " , using 8 violins , four violas , four cellos , three trumpets , three trombones , two guitars , and a choir of 14 women . The orchestra was scored and conducted by Richard Hewson , who would later work with McCartney on his album , <unk> . This lush orchestral treatment was in direct contrast to the Beatles ' stated intentions for a " real " recording when they began work on Get Back . 
 = = Controversy around Spector 's overdubs = = 
 When McCartney first heard the Spector version of the song , he was outraged and nine days after Spector had overdubbed " The Long and Winding Road " , McCartney formally announced the Beatles ' breakup . On 14 April , he sent a sharply worded letter to Apple Records business manager Allen Klein , demanding that the inclusion of the harp be eliminated and that the other added instrumentation and voices be reduced . McCartney concluded the letter with the words : " Don 't ever do it again . " These requests went unheeded , and the Spector version was included on the album with his overdubbed orchestration still in place . 
 In an interview published by the Evening Standard in two parts on 22 and 23 April 1970 , McCartney said : " The album was finished a year ago , but a few months ago American record producer Phil Spector was called in by Lennon to tidy up some of the tracks . But a few weeks ago , I was sent a re @-@ mixed version of my song ' The Long and Winding Road ' with harps , horns , an orchestra , and a women 's choir added . No one had asked me what I thought . I couldn 't believe it . " The Beatles ' usual producer , George Martin , agreed , calling the remixes " so uncharacteristic " of the Beatles . " It was an insult to Paul , " engineer Geoff Emerick recalled . " It was his record . And someone takes it out of the can and starts to overdub things without his permission . " McCartney asked Klein to dissolve the Beatles ' partnership , but was refused . Exasperated , he took the case to court , naming Klein and the other Beatles as defendants . Among the six reasons McCartney gave for dissolving the Beatles was that Klein 's company , ABKCO , had caused " intolerable interference " by overdubbing " The Long and Winding Road " without consulting McCartney . 
 Spector claimed the overdubs were necessary due to the poor quality of the recording , particularly Lennon 's bass playing , but whilst the poor quality of the bass playing has been noted by other sources ( in his book Revolution in the Head , a track @-@ by @-@ track analysis of the Beatles ' records , Ian MacDonald described it as " atrocious " to the point of sabotage ) , its basis as the full @-@ scale re @-@ working of the track by Spector has been questioned : McCartney has argued that Spector could have merely edited out the relevant mistakes and rerecorded them , a technique used elsewhere on the album , and specifically , it would have been a simple matter of having McCartney overdub a more appropriate bass part to replace the Lennon bassline that was judged to be inadequate , or even using the more polished version initially rejected by Glyn Johns . 
 The controversy surrounding the song did not prevent a chart @-@ topping single from being released in the United States on 11 May 1970 , joined by " For You Blue " on the B @-@ side . 1 @.@ 2 million copies were sold in the first two days , and the song began its ten @-@ week @-@ long chart run on 23 May . On 13 June , it became the Beatles ' twentieth and final number one single in America , according to Billboard magazine . This is the all @-@ time record for number of number one singles on the Billboard Hot 100 chart . They achieved these twenty number one singles in a mere space of 74 months ; an average of one number one single per 3 @.@ 7 months , another all @-@ time record . " The Long and Winding Road " brought the curtain down on the Beatles ' seven consecutive years of domination in America that began with " I Want to Hold Your Hand " in 1964 . 
 Ringo Starr was impressed with the Naked version of the song : " There 's nothing wrong with Phil 's strings , this is just a different attitude to listening . But it 's been 30 @-@ odd years since I 've heard it without all that and it just blew me away . " Spector himself argued that McCartney was being hypocritical in his criticism : " Paul had no problem picking up the Academy Award for the Let It Be movie soundtrack , nor did he have any problem in using my arrangement of the string and horn and choir parts when he performed it during 25 years of touring on his own . If Paul wants to get into a pissing contest about it , he 's got me mixed up with someone who gives a shit . " 
 = = Other recordings = = 
 Since release in 1970 , there have been six additional recordings released by McCartney . The original 26 January take , without the orchestration and Spector overdubs , was included on Anthology 3 released in 1996 . This version included a bridge section spoken , rather than sung , by McCartney . In 2003 , the remaining Beatles and Yoko Ono released Let It Be ... Naked , touted as the band 's version of Let It Be remixed by independent producers . McCartney claimed that his long @-@ standing dissatisfaction with the released version of " The Long and Winding Road " ( and the entire Let It Be album ) was in part the impetus for the new version . The new album included a later take of " The Long and Winding Road " , recorded on 31 January . With no strings or other added instrumentation beyond that which was played in the studio at the time , it was closer to the Beatles 's original intention than the 1970 version . This take is also the one seen in the film Let It Be . McCartney and producer George Martin re @-@ recorded " The Long and Winding Road " with instrumentation incorporating a lead saxophone , for the soundtrack to McCartney ’ s 1984 film , Give My Regards to Broad Street A second new studio recording of the song was made by McCartney during the 1989 Flowers in the Dirt album sessions and released that year as a B @-@ side to the single " This One " . 
 " The Long and Winding Road " became a staple of McCartney 's post @-@ Beatles concert repertoire . On the 1976 Wings Over the World Tour , where it was one of the few Beatles songs played , it was performed on piano in a sparse arrangement using a horn section . On McCartney 's 1989 solo tour and since , it has generally been performed on piano with an arrangement using a synthesiser mimicking strings , but this string sound is more restrained than on the Spector recorded version . The live performance recording of the Rio de Janeiro concert in April 1990 is on the album Tripping the Live Fantastic . McCartney also played the song to close the Live 8 concert in London . 
 Several other artists have performed or recorded the song , including a 1999 Royal Albert Hall performance by George Michael , a 1978 recording by Peter Frampton , and a 2010 performance at the White House by Faith Hill when Barack Obama gave McCartney the Gershwin Prize . 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = Southampton = 
 Southampton ( / <unk> , <unk> / ) is the largest city in the ceremonial county of Hampshire on the south coast of England , and is situated 75 miles ( 121 km ) south @-@ west of London and 19 miles ( 31 km ) north @-@ west of Portsmouth . Southampton is a major port and the closest city to the New Forest . It lies at the northernmost point of Southampton Water at the confluence of the River Test and River Itchen , with the River Hamble joining to the south of the urban area . The city , which is a unitary authority , has an estimated population of 253 @,@ 651 . The city 's name is sometimes abbreviated in writing to " So <unk> " or " <unk> " , and a resident of Southampton is called a <unk> . 
 Significant employers in the city of Southampton include The University of Southampton , Southampton Solent University , Southampton Airport , Ordnance Survey , BBC South , the NHS , ABP and Carnival UK . Southampton is noted for its association with the RMS Titanic , the Spitfire and more generally in the World War II narrative as one of the departure points for D @-@ Day , and more recently as the home port of a number of the largest cruise ships in the world . Southampton has a large shopping centre and retail park called WestQuay . In October 2014 , the City Council approved a follow @-@ up from the WestQuay park , called WestQuay Watermark . Construction by Sir Robert McAlpine commenced in January 2015 . <unk> , the owners of the retail park , aim to have at least 1 @,@ 550 people employed on its premises at year @-@ end 2016 . 
 In the 2011 census Southampton and Portsmouth were recorded as being parts of separate urban areas , however by the time of the 2011 census they had merged to become the sixth largest built @-@ up area in England with a population of 855 @,@ 569 . This built @-@ up area is part of the metropolitan area known as South Hampshire , which is also known as Solent City , particularly in the media when discussing local governance organisational changes . With a population of over 1 @.@ 5 million this makes the region one of the United Kingdom 's most populous metropolitan areas . 
 = = History = = 
 Archaeological finds suggest that the area has been inhabited since the stone age . Following the Roman invasion of Britain in AD 43 and the conquering of the local Britons in 70 AD the fortress settlement of Clausentum was established . It was an important trading port and defensive outpost of Winchester , at the site of modern Bitterne Manor . Clausentum was defended by a wall and two ditches and is thought to have contained a bath house . Clausentum was not abandoned until around 410 . 
 The Anglo @-@ Saxons formed a new , larger , settlement across the Itchen centred on what is now the St Mary 's area of the city . The settlement was known as Hamwic , which evolved into <unk> and then Hampton . Archaeological excavations of this site have uncovered one of the best collections of Saxon artefacts in Europe . It is from this town that the county of Hampshire gets its name . 
 Viking raids from 840 onwards contributed to the decline of Hamwic in the 9th century , and by the 10th century a fortified settlement , which became medieval Southampton , had been established . 
 Following the Norman Conquest in 1066 , Southampton became the major port of transit between the then capital of England , Winchester , and Normandy . Southampton Castle was built in the 12th century and by the 13th century Southampton had become a leading port , particularly involved in the import of French wine in exchange for English cloth and wool . 
 Surviving remains of 12th century merchants ' houses such as King John 's House and Canute 's Palace are evidence of the wealth that existed in the town at this time . In 1348 , the Black Death reached England via merchant vessels calling at Southampton . 
 The town was sacked in 1338 by French , Genoese and Monegasque ships ( under Charles Grimaldi , who used the plunder to help found the principality of Monaco ) . On visiting Southampton in 1339 , Edward III ordered that walls be built to ' close the town ' . The extensive rebuilding — part of the walls dates from 1175 — culminated in the completion of the western walls in 1380 . Roughly half of the walls , 13 of the original towers , and six gates survive . 
 The city walls include God 's House Tower , built in 1417 , the first purpose @-@ built artillery fortification in England . Over the years it has been used as home to the city 's gunner , the Town Gaol and even as storage for the Southampton Harbour Board . Until September 2011 , it housed the Museum of Archaeology . The walls were completed in the 15th century , but later development of several new fortifications along Southampton Water and the Solent by Henry VIII meant that Southampton was no longer dependent upon its fortifications . 
 On the other hand , many of the medieval buildings once situated within the town walls are now in ruins or have disappeared altogether . From successive incarnations of the motte and bailey castle , only a section of the bailey wall remains today , lying just off Castle Way . The last remains of the Franciscan friary in Southampton , founded circa 1233 and dissolved in 1538 , were swept away in the 1940s . The site is now occupied by Friary House . 
 Elsewhere , remnants of the medieval water supply system devised by the friars can still be seen today . Constructed in 1290 , the system carried water from Conduit Head ( remnants of which survive near Hill Lane , Shirley ) some 1 @.@ 7 kilometres to the site of the friary inside the town walls . The friars granted use of the water to the town in 1310 and passed on ownership of the water supply system itself in 1420 . Further remains can be observed at Conduit House on Commercial Road . 
 In 1642 , during the English Civil War , a Parliamentary garrison moved into Southampton . The Royalists advanced as far as Redbridge , Southampton , in March 1644 but were prevented from taking the town . 
 During the Middle Ages , shipbuilding became an important industry for the town . Henry V 's famous warship HMS Grace Dieu was built in Southampton . Walter Taylor 's 18th century mechanisation of the block @-@ making process was a significant step in the Industrial Revolution . From 1904 to 2004 , the Thornycroft shipbuilding yard was a major employer in Southampton , building and repairing ships used in the two World Wars . 
 Prior to King Henry 's departure for the Battle of Agincourt in 1415 , the ringleaders of the " Southampton Plot " — Richard , Earl of Cambridge , Henry Scrope , 3rd Baron Scrope of Masham , and Sir Thomas Grey of <unk> — were accused of high treason and tried at what is now the Red Lion public house in the High Street . They were found guilty and summarily executed outside the Bargate . 
 Southampton has been used for military embarkation , including during 18th @-@ century wars with the French , the Crimean war , and the Boer War . Southampton was designated No. 1 Military Embarkation port during the Great War and became a major centre for treating the returning wounded and POWs . It was also central to the preparations for the Invasion of Europe in 1944 . 
 Southampton became a spa town in 1740 . It had also become a popular site for sea bathing by the 1760s , despite the lack of a good quality beach . Innovative buildings specifically for this purpose were built at West Quay , with baths that were filled and emptied by the flow of the tide . 
 The town experienced major expansion during the Victorian era . The Southampton Docks company had been formed in 1835 . In October 1838 the foundation stone of the docks was laid and the first dock opened in 1842 . The structural and economic development of docks continued for the next few decades . The railway link to London was fully opened in May 1840 . Southampton subsequently became known as The Gateway to the Empire . 
 In his 1854 book " The Cruise of the Steam Yacht North Star " John Choules described Southampton thus : " I hardly know a town that can show a more beautiful Main Street than Southampton , except it be Oxford . The High Street opens from the quay , and under various names it winds in a gently sweeping line for one mile and a half , and is of very handsome width . The variety of style and color of material in the buildings affords an exhibition of outline , light and color , that I think is seldom equalled . The shops are very elegant , and the streets are kept exceedingly clean . " 
 The port was the point of departure for the Pilgrim Fathers aboard Mayflower in 1620 . In 1912 , the RMS Titanic sailed from Southampton . Four in five of the crew on board the vessel were <unk> , with about a third of those who perished in the tragedy hailing from the city . Southampton was subsequently the home port for the transatlantic passenger services operated by Cunard with their Blue Riband liner RMS Queen Mary and her running mate RMS Queen Elizabeth . In 1938 , Southampton docks also became home to the flying boats of Imperial Airways . Southampton Container Terminals first opened in 1968 and has continued to expand . 
 The Supermarine Spitfire was designed and developed in Southampton , evolving from the Schneider trophy @-@ winning seaplanes of the 1920s and 1930s . Its designer , R J Mitchell , lived in the Portswood area of Southampton , and his house is today marked with a blue plaque . Heavy bombing of the factory in September 1940 destroyed it as well as homes in the vicinity , killing civilians and workers . World War II hit Southampton particularly hard because of its strategic importance as a major commercial port and industrial area . Prior to the Invasion of Europe , components for a Mulberry harbour were built here . After D @-@ Day , Southampton docks handled military cargo to help keep the Allied forces supplied , making it a key target of Luftwaffe bombing raids until late 1944 . Southampton docks was featured in the television show 24 : Live Another Day in Day 9 : 9 : 00 p.m. – 10 : 00 p.m. 
 630 people lost their lives as a result of the air raids on Southampton and nearly 2 @,@ 000 more were injured , not to mention the thousands of buildings damaged or destroyed . 
 Pockets of Georgian architecture survived the war , but much of the city was levelled . There has been extensive redevelopment since World War II . Increasing traffic congestion in the 1920s led to partial demolition of medieval walls around the Bargate in 1932 and 1938 . However a large portion of those walls remain . 
 A Royal Charter in 1952 upgraded University College at Highfield to the University of Southampton . Southampton acquired city status , becoming the City of Southampton in 1964 . 
 = = Governance = = 
 After the establishment of Hampshire County Council , following the act in 1888 , Southampton became a county borough within the county of Hampshire , which meant that it had many features of a county , but governance was now shared between the Corporation in Southampton and the new county council . There is a great source of confusion in the fact that the ancient shire county , along with its associated assizes , was known as the County of Southampton or <unk> . This was officially changed to Hampshire in 1959 although the county had been commonly known as Hampshire or <unk> for centuries . Southampton became a non @-@ metropolitan district in 1974 . 
 Southampton as a Port and city has had a long history of administrative independence of the surrounding County ; as far back as the reign of King John the town and its port were removed from the writ of the King 's Sheriff in Hampshire and the rights of custom and toll were granted by the King to the burgesses of Southampton over the port of Southampton and the Port of Portsmouth ; this tax farm was granted for an annual fee of £ 200 in the charter dated at <unk> on 29 June 1199 . The definition of the port of Southampton was apparently broader than today and embraced all of the area between Lymington and <unk> . The corporation had resident representatives in Newport , Lymington and Portsmouth . By a charter of Henry VI , granted on 9 March 1446 / 7 ( 25 + 26 Hen . VI , m . 32 ) , the mayor , bailiffs and burgesses of the towns and ports of Southampton and Portsmouth became a County incorporate and separate from Hampshire . 
 The status of the town was changed by a later charter of Charles I by at once the formal separation from Portsmouth and the recognition of Southampton as a county , In the charter dated 27 June 1640 the formal title of the town became ' The Town and County of the Town of Southampton ' . These charters and Royal Grants , of which there were many , also set out the governance and regulation of the town and port which remained the ' constitution ' of the town until the local government organisation of the later Victorian period which from about 1888 saw the setting up of County Councils across England and Wales and including Hampshire County Council who now took on some of the function of Government in Southampton Town . In this regime , The Town and County of the Town of Southampton became once more a county borough with responsibility for all aspects of local government . On 24 February 1964 the status changed again by a Charter of Elizabeth II , creating the City and County of the City of Southampton . 
 The city has undergone many changes to its governance over the centuries and once again became administratively independent from Hampshire County as it was made into a unitary authority in a local government reorganisation on 1 April 1997 , a result of the 1992 Local Government Act . The district remains part of the Hampshire ceremonial county . 
 Southampton City Council consists of 48 councillors , 3 for each of the 16 wards . Council elections are held in early May for one third of the seats ( one councillor for each ward ) , elected for a four @-@ year term , so there are elections three years out of four . Since the 2016 council elections , the composition of the council is : 
 There are three members of parliament for the city : Royston Smith ( Conservative ) for Southampton Itchen , the constituency covering the east of the city ; Dr. Alan Whitehead ( Labour ) for Southampton Test , which covers the west of the city ; and Caroline Nokes ( Conservative ) for Romsey and Southampton North , which includes a northern portion of the city . 
 The city has a Mayor and is one of the 16 cities and towns in England and Wales to have a ceremonial sheriff who acts as a deputy for the Mayor . The current and 793rd Mayor of Southampton is Linda Norris . Catherine <unk> is the current and <unk> sherriff . The town crier from 2004 until his death in 2014 was John Melody , who acted as master of ceremonies in the city and who possessed a cry of 104 decibels . 
 Southampton City Council has developed twinning links with Le Havre in France ( since 1973 ) , <unk> @-@ <unk> @-@ Kreis in Germany ( since 1991 ) , Trieste in Italy ( since 2002 ) ; Hampton , Virginia in USA , Qingdao in China ( since 1998 ) , and Busan in South Korea ( since 1978 ) . 
 = = Geography = = 
 The geography of Southampton is influenced by the sea and rivers . The city lies at the northern tip of the Southampton Water , a deep water estuary , which is a ria formed at the end of the last Ice Age . Here , the rivers Test and Itchen converge . The Test — which has salt marsh that makes it ideal for salmon fishing — runs along the western edge of the city , while the Itchen splits Southampton in two — east and west . The city centre is located between the two rivers . 
 Town Quay is the original public quay , and dates from the 13th century . Today 's Eastern Docks were created in the 1830s by land reclamation of the mud flats between the Itchen & Test estuaries . The Western Docks date from the 1930s when the Southern Railway Company commissioned a major land reclamation and dredging programme . Most of the material used for reclamation came from dredging of Southampton Water , to ensure that the port can continue to handle large ships . 
 Southampton Water has the benefit of a double high tide , with two high tide peaks , making the movement of large ships easier . This is not caused as popularly supposed by the presence of the Isle of Wight , but is a function of the shape and depth of the English Channel . In this area the general water flow is distorted by more local conditions reaching across to France . 
 The city lies in the Hampshire Basin , which sits atop chalk beds . 
 The River Test runs along the western border of the city , separating it from the New Forest . There are bridges over the Test from Southampton , including the road and rail bridges at Redbridge in the south and the M27 motorway to the north . The River Itchen runs through the middle of the city and is bridged in several places . The northernmost bridge , and the first to be built , is at Mansbridge , where the A27 road crosses the Itchen . The original bridge is closed to road traffic , but is still standing and open to pedestrians and cyclists . The river is bridged again at Swaythling , where Woodmill Bridge separates the tidal and non tidal sections of the river . Further south is Cobden Bridge which is notable as it was opened as a free bridge ( it was originally named the Cobden Free Bridge ) , and was never a toll bridge . Downstream of the Cobden Bridge is the Northam Railway Bridge , then the Northam Road Bridge , which was the first major pre @-@ stressed concrete bridge to be constructed in the United Kingdom . The southernmost , and newest , bridge on the Itchen is the Itchen Bridge , which is a toll bridge . 
 = = = Areas and suburbs = = = 
 Southampton is divided into council wards , suburbs , constituencies , ecclesiastical parishes , and other less formal areas . It has a number of parks and green spaces , the largest being the 148 hectare Southampton Common , parts of which are used to host the annual summer festivals , circuses and fun fairs . The Common includes Hawthorns Urban Wildlife Centre on the former site of Southampton Zoo , a paddling pool and several lakes and ponds . 
