 Council estates are in the Weston , Thornhill and Townhill Park districts . The city is ranked 96th most deprived out of all 354 Local Authorities in England . 
 In the 2006 / 07 , 1 @,@ 267 residential dwellings were built in the city — the highest number for 15 years . Over 94 per cent of these properties were flats . 
 There are 16 Electoral Wards in Southampton , each consisting of longer @-@ established neighbourhoods ( see below ) . 
 Settlements outside the city are sometimes considered suburbs of Southampton , including Chartwell Green , Chilworth , Nursling , <unk> , Totton , Eastleigh and West End . The villages of <unk> , Ashurst and Hedge End may be considered <unk> of Southampton . 
 = = = Climate = = = 
 As with the rest of the UK , Southampton experiences an oceanic climate ( Köppen Cfb ) . Its southerly , low lying and sheltered location ensures it is among the warmer , sunnier cities in the UK . It has held the record for the highest temperature in the UK for June at 35 @.@ 6 ° C ( 96 @.@ 1 ° F ) since 1976 . 
 = = = Energy = = = 
 The centre of Southampton is located above a large hot water aquifer that provides geothermal power to some of the city 's buildings . This energy is processed at a plant in the West Quay region in Southampton city centre , the only geothermal power station in the UK . The plant provides private electricity for the Port of Southampton and hot water to the Southampton District Energy Scheme used by many buildings including the WestQuay shopping centre . In a 2006 survey of carbon emissions in major UK cities conducted by British Gas , Southampton was ranked as being one of the lowest carbon emitting cities in the United Kingdom . 
 = = Demography = = 
 At the 2001 Census , 92 @.@ 4 per cent of the city 's populace was White — including one per cent White Irish — 3 @.@ 8 per cent were South Asian , 1 @.@ 0 per cent Black , 1 @.@ 3 per cent Chinese or other ethnic groups , and 1 @.@ 5 per cent were of Mixed Race . 
 Southampton had an estimated 236 @,@ 900 people living within the city boundary in 2011 . There is a sizeable Polish population in the city , with estimates as high as 20 @,@ 000 . 
 There are 119 @,@ 500 males within the city and 117 @,@ 400 females . The 20 – 24 age range is the most populous , with an estimated 32 @,@ 300 people falling in this age range . Next largest is the 25 – 29 range with 24 @,@ 700 people and then 30 – 34 years with 17 @,@ 800 . By population , Southampton is the largest <unk> city in the South East England region and the second largest on the South Coast after Plymouth . 
 Between 1996 and 2004 , the population of the city increased by 4 @.@ 9 per cent — the tenth biggest increase in England . In 2005 the Government Statistics stated that Southampton was the third most densely populated city in the country after London and Portsmouth respectively . Hampshire County Council expects the city 's population to grow by around a further two per cent between 2006 and 2013 , adding around another 4 @,@ 200 to the total number of residents . The highest increases are expected among the elderly . 
 = = Economy = = 
 In March 2007 there were 120 @,@ 305 jobs in Southampton , and 3 @,@ 570 people claiming job seeker 's allowance , approximately 2 @.@ 4 per cent of the city 's population . This compares with an average of 2 @.@ 5 per cent for England as a whole . 
 In June 2006 , 74 @.@ 7 per cent of the city 's population were classed as economically active . 
 Just over a quarter of the jobs available in the city are in the health and education sector . A further 19 per cent are property and other business and the third largest sector is wholesale and retail , which accounts for 16 @.@ 2 percent . Between 1995 and 2004 , the number of jobs in Southampton has increased by 18 @.@ 5 per cent . 
 In January 2007 , the average annual salary in the city was £ 22 @,@ 267 . This was £ 1 @,@ 700 lower than the national average and £ 3 @,@ 800 less than the average for the South East . 
 Southampton has always been a port , and the docks have long been a major employer in the city . In particular , it is a port for cruise ships ; its heyday was the first half of the 20th century , and in particular the inter @-@ war years , when it handled almost half the passenger traffic of the UK . Today it remains home to luxury cruise ships , as well as being the largest freight port on the Channel coast and fourth largest UK port by tonnage , with several container terminals . Unlike some other ports , such as Liverpool , London , and Bristol , where industry and docks have largely moved out of the city centres leaving room for redevelopment , Southampton retains much of its inner @-@ city industry . Despite the still active and expanding docklands to the west of the city centre , further enhanced with the opening of a fourth cruise terminal in 2009 , parts of the eastern docks have been redeveloped ; the Ocean Village development , which included a local marina and small entertainment complex , is a good example . Southampton is home to the headquarters of both the Maritime and Coastguard Agency and the Marine Accident Investigation Branch of the Department for Transport in addition to cruise operator Carnival UK . 
 During the latter half of the 20th century , a more diverse range of industry also came to the city , including aircraft and car manufacture , cables , electrical engineering products , and petrochemicals . These now exist alongside the city 's older industries of the docks , grain milling , and tobacco processing . 
 University Hospital Southampton NHS Foundation Trust is one of the city 's largest employers . It provides local hospital services to 500 @,@ 000 people in the Southampton area and specialist regional services to more than 3 million people across the South of England . The Trust owns and manages Southampton General Hospital , the Princess Anne Hospital and a palliative care service at Countess Mountbatten House , part of the <unk> Hospital site in the village of West End , just outside the city . 
 Other major employers in the city include Ordnance Survey , the UK 's national mapping agency , whose headquarters is located in a new building on the outskirts of the city , opened in February 2011 . The Lloyd 's Register Group has announced plans to move its London marine operations to a specially developed site at the University of Southampton . The area of Swaythling is home to Ford 's Southampton Assembly Plant , where the majority of their Transit models are manufactured . Closure of the plant in 2013 was announced in 2012 , with the loss of hundreds of jobs . 
 Southampton 's largest retail centre , and 35th largest in the UK , is the WestQuay Shopping Centre , which opened in September 2000 and hosts major high street stores including John Lewis and Marks and Spencer . The centre was Phase Two of the West Quay development of the former Pirelli undersea cables factory ; the first phase of this was the West Quay Retail Park , while the third phase ( Watermark <unk> ) was put on hold due to the recession . Work is has resumed in 2015 , with plans for this third stage including shops , housing , an hotel and a public piazza alongside the Town Walls on Western Esplanade . Southampton has also been granted a licence for a large casino . A further part of the redevelopment of the West Quay site resulted in a new store , opened on 12 February 2009 , for Swedish home products retailer IKEA . <unk> is a smaller shopping centre , built in the 1990s and located close to the northern side of WestQuay . Southampton currently has two disused shopping centres : the 1970s <unk> mall , and the 1980s Bargate centre . Neither of these were ever commercially successful ; the former has been earmarked for redevelopment as a Morrison 's supermarket , while the future of the latter is uncertain . There is also the East Street area which has been designated for speciality shopping , with the aim of promoting smaller retailers , alongside the chain store Debenhams . In 2007 , Southampton was ranked 13th for shopping in the UK . 
 Southampton 's strong economy is promoting redevelopment , and major projects are proposed , including the city 's first skyscrapers on the waterfront . The three towers proposed will stand 23 storeys high and will be surrounded by smaller apartment blocks , office blocks and shops . There are also plans for a 15 @-@ storey hotel at the Ocean Village marina , and a 21 @-@ storey hotel on the north eastern corner of the city centre , as part of a £ 100m development . 
 According to 2004 figures , Southampton contributes around £ 4 @.@ 2 bn to the regional economy annually . The vast majority of this is from the service sector , with the remainder coming from industry in the city . This figure has almost doubled since 1995 . 
 = = Culture , media and sport = = 
 = = = Culture = = = 
 The city is home to the longest surviving stretch of medieval walls in England , as well as a number of museums such as Tudor House Museum , reopened on 30 July 2011 after undergoing extensive restoration and improvement ; Southampton Maritime Museum ; God 's House Tower , an archaeology museum about the city 's heritage and located in one of the tower walls ; the Medieval Merchant 's House ; and Solent Sky , which focuses on aviation . The SeaCity Museum is located in the west wing of the civic centre , formerly occupied by Hampshire Constabulary and the Magistrates ' Court , and focuses on Southampton 's trading history and on the RMS Titanic . The museum received half a million pounds from the National Lottery in addition to interest from numerous private investors and is budgeted at £ 28 million . 
 The annual Southampton Boat Show is held in September each year , with over 600 exhibitors present . It runs for just over a week at Mayflower Park on the city 's waterfront , where it has been held since 1968 . The Boat Show itself is the climax of Sea City , which runs from April to September each year to celebrate Southampton 's links with the sea . 
 The largest theatre in the city is the 2 @,@ 300 capacity Mayflower Theatre ( formerly known as the Gaumont ) , which , as the largest theatre in Southern England outside London , has hosted West End shows such as Les Misérables , The Rocky Horror Show and Chitty Chitty Bang Bang , as well as regular visits from Welsh National Opera and English National Ballet . There is also the Nuffield Theatre based at the University of Southampton 's Highfield campus , which is the city 's primary producing theatre . It was awarded The Stage Award for Best Regional Theatre in 2015 . It also hosts touring companies and local performing societies ( such as Southampton Operatic Society , the <unk> and the University Players ) . 
 There are many innovative art galleries in the city . The Southampton City Art Gallery at the Civic Centre is one of the best known and as well as a nationally important Designated Collection , houses several permanent and travelling exhibitions . The Millais Gallery at Southampton Solent University , the John Hansard Gallery at Southampton University as well as smaller galleries including the Art House in Above Bar Street provide a different view . The city 's Bargate is also an art gallery run by the arts organisation " a space " . A space also run the Art Vaults project , which creatively uses several of Southampton 's medieval vaults , halls and cellars as venues for contemporary art installations . 
 In August 2009 , work began on a significant project to create a Cultural Quarter in the city centre , on land adjacent to the Guildhall . 
 = = = = Music = = = = 
 Southampton has two large live music venues , the Mayflower Theatre ( formerly the Gaumont Theatre ) and the Guildhall . The Guildhall has seen concerts from a wide range of popular artists including Pink Floyd , David Bowie , Delirious ? , Manic Street Preachers , The Killers , The Kaiser Chiefs , Amy Winehouse , Lostprophets , The Midnight Beast , <unk> , and All Time Low . It also hosts classical concerts presented by the Bournemouth Symphony Orchestra , City of Southampton Orchestra , Southampton Concert Orchestra , Southampton Philharmonic Choir and Southampton Choral Society . 
 The city also has several smaller music venues , including the Brook , The Talking Heads , The Soul Cellar , The Joiners and Turner Sims , as well as smaller " club circuit " venues like Hampton 's and Lennon 's , and a number of public houses including the Platform tavern , the Dolphin , the Blue Keys and many others . The Joiners has played host to such acts as Oasis , Radiohead , Green Day , Suede , PJ Harvey , the Manic Street Preachers , Coldplay , the Verve , the Libertines and Franz Ferdinand , while Hampton 's and Lennon 's have hosted early appearances by Kate Nash , Scouting for Girls and Band of Skulls . The nightclub , Junk , has been nominated for the UK 's best small nightclub , and plays host to a range of dance music 's top acts . 
 The city is home or birthplace to a number of contemporary musicians such as R 'n'B singer Craig David , Coldplay drummer Will Champion , former <unk> singer Rob Skipper as well as 1980s popstar Howard Jones . Several rock bands were formed in Southampton , including Band of Skulls , The Delays , Bury Tomorrow , Heart in Hand , Thomas Tantrum ( disbanded in 2011 ) and Kids Can 't Fly ( disbanded in 2014 ) . James <unk> , a highly regarded and recognised name in dance music , is also from Southampton . 
 = = = Media = = = 
 Local media include the Southern Daily Echo newspaper based in Redbridge and BBC South , which has its regional headquarters in the city centre opposite the civic centre . From there the BBC broadcasts South Today , the local television news bulletin and BBC Radio Solent . The local ITV franchise is Meridian , which has its headquarters in Whiteley , around nine miles ( 14 km ) from the city . Until December 2004 , the station 's studios were located in the Northam area of the city on land reclaimed from the River Itchen . That 's Solent is an local television channel that began broadcasting in November 2014 , which will be based in and serve Southampton and Portsmouth . 
 Southampton also has 2 community FM radio stations , the Queens Award winning Unity 101 Community Radio ( <unk> ) broadcasting full @-@ time on 101 @.@ 1 FM since 2006 to the Asian and Ethnic communities , and Voice FM ( http : / / <unk> ) located in St Mary 's , which has been broadcasting full @-@ time on 103 @.@ 9 FM since September 2011 , playing a wide range of music from Rock to Dance music and Top 40 . A third station , Awaaz FM ( <unk> ) , is an internet only radio stations also catering for Asian and Ethnic community . 
 Commercial radio stations broadcasting to the city include The Breeze , previously The Saint and currently broadcasting Hot adult contemporary music , Capital , previously Power FM and Galaxy and broadcasting popular music , Wave 105 and Heart Hampshire , the latter previously Ocean FM and both broadcasting adult contemporary music , and 106 Jack FM ( <unk> ) , previously The Coast 106 . In addition , Southampton University has a radio station called <unk> , broadcasting on AM band as well as through the web . 
 = = = Sport = = = 
 Southampton is home to Southampton Football Club — nicknamed " The Saints " — who play in the Premier League at St Mary 's Stadium , having relocated in 2001 from their 103 @-@ year @-@ old former stadium , " The Dell " . They reached the top flight of English football ( First Division ) for the first time in 1966 , staying there for eight years . They lifted the FA Cup with a shock victory over Manchester United in 1976 , returned to the top flight two years later , and stayed there for 27 years ( becoming founder members of the Premier League in 1992 ) before they were relegated in 2005 . The club was promoted back to the Premier League in 2012 following a brief spell in the third @-@ tier and severe financial difficulties . In 2015 , " The Saints " finished 7th in the Premier League , their highest league finish in 30 years , after a remarkable season under new manager Ronald Koeman . Their highest league position came in 1984 when they were runners @-@ up in the old First Division . They were also runners @-@ up in the 1979 Football League Cup final and 2003 FA Cup final . Notable former managers include Ted Bates , Lawrie McMenemy , Chris Nicholl , Ian Branfoot and Gordon Strachan . There is a strong rivalry between Portsmouth F.C. ( " South Coast derby " ) which is located only about 30 km ( 19 mi ) away . 
 The two local Sunday Leagues in the Southampton area are the City of Southampton Sunday Football League and the Southampton and District Sunday Football League . 
 Hampshire County Cricket Club play close to the city , at the Rose Bowl in West End , after previously playing at the County Cricket Ground and the Antelope Ground , both near the city centre . There is also the Southampton Evening Cricket League . 
 The city hockey club , Southampton Hockey Club , founded in 1938 , is now one of the largest and highly regarded clubs in Hampshire , fielding 7 senior men 's and 5 senior ladies teams on a weekly basis along with boys ’ and girls ’ teams from 6 upwards . 
 The city is also well provided for in amateur men 's and women 's rugby with a number of teams in and around the city , the oldest of which is Trojans RFC who were promoted to London South West 2 division in 2008 / 9 . A notable former player is Anthony Allen , who played with Leicester Tigers as a centre . <unk> are also in London South West division 2 and Southampton RFC are in Hampshire division 1 in 2009 / 10 , alongside Millbrook RFC and Eastleigh RFC . Many of the sides run mini and midi teams from under sevens up to under <unk> for both boys and girls . 
 The city provides for yachting and water sports , with a number of marinas . From 1977 to 2001 the Whitbread Around the World Yacht Race , which is now known as the Volvo Ocean Race was based in Southampton 's Ocean Village marina . 
 The city also has the Southampton Sports Centre which is the focal point for the public 's sporting and outdoor activities and includes an Alpine Centre , theme park and athletics centre which is used by professional athletes . With the addition of 11 other additional leisure <unk> which are currently operate by the Council leisure executives . However these have been sold the operating rights to " Park Wood Leisure . " 
 Southampton was named " fittest city in the UK " in 2006 by Men 's Fitness magazine . The results were based on the incidence of heart disease , the amount of junk food and alcohol consumed , and the level of gym membership . In 2007 , it had slipped one place behind London , but was still ranked first when it came to the parks and green spaces available for exercise and the amount of television watched by <unk> was the lowest in the country . Speedway racing took place at Banister Court Stadium in the pre @-@ war era . It returned in the 1940s after WW2 and the Saints operated until the stadium closed down at the end of 1963 . A training track operated in the 1950s in the Hamble area . 
 Southampton is also home to one of the most successful College American Football teams in the UK , the Southampton Stags , who play at the Wide Lane Sports Facility in Eastleigh . 
 The world 's oldest surviving bowling green is the Southampton Old Bowling Green , which was first used in 1299 . 
 = = Emergency services = = 
 Southampton 's police service is provided by Hampshire Constabulary . The main base of the Southampton operation is a new , eight storey purpose @-@ built building which cost £ 30 million to construct . The building , located on Southern Road , opened in 2011 and is near to Southampton Central railway station . Previously , the central Southampton operation was located within the west wing of the Civic Centre , however the ageing facilities and the plans of constructing a new museum in the old police station and magistrates court necessitated the move . There are additional police stations at Portswood , Banister Park , Bitterne , and Shirley as well as a British Transport Police station at Southampton Central railway station . 
 Southampton 's fire cover is provided by Hampshire Fire and Rescue Service . There are three fire stations within the city boundaries at St Mary 's , Hightown and Redbridge . 
 The ambulance service is provided by South Central Ambulance Service . 
 The national headquarters of the Maritime and Coastguard Agency is located in Commercial Road . 
 = = Crime = = 
 According to Hampshire Constabulary figures , Southampton is currently safer than it has ever been before , with dramatic reductions in violent crime year on year for the last three years . Data from the Southampton Safer City Partnership shows there has been a reduction in all crimes in recent years and an increase in crime detection rates . According to government figures Southampton has a higher crime rate than the national average . There is some controversy regarding comparative crime <unk> due to inconsistencies between different police forces recording methodologies . For example , in Hampshire all reported incidents are recorded and all records then retained . However , in neighbouring Dorset crimes reports withdrawn or shown to be false are not recorded , reducing apparent crime figures . In the violence against the person category , the national average is 16 @.@ 7 per 1000 population while Southampton is 42 @.@ 4 per 1000 population . In the theft from a vehicle category , the national average is 7 @.@ 6 per 1000 compared to Southampton 's 28 @.@ 4 per 1000 . Overall , for every 1 @,@ 000 people in the city , 202 crimes are recorded . Hampshire Constabulary 's figures for 2009 / 10 show fewer incidents of recorded crime in Southampton than the previous year . 
 = = Education = = 
 The city has a strong higher education sector . The University of Southampton and Southampton Solent University together have a student population of over 40 @,@ 000 . 
 The University of Southampton , which was founded in 1862 and received its Royal Charter as a university in 1952 , has over 22 @,@ 000 students . The university is ranked in the top 100 research universities in the world in the Academic Ranking of World Universities 2010 . In 2010 , the <unk> - QS World University Rankings positioned the University of Southampton in the top 80 universities in the world . The university considers itself one of the top 5 research universities in the UK . The university has a global reputation for research into engineering sciences , oceanography , chemistry , cancer sciences , sound and vibration research , computer science and electronics , optoelectronics and textile conservation at the Textile Conservation Centre ( which is due to close in October 2009 . ) It is also home to the National Oceanography Centre , Southampton ( <unk> ) , the focus of Natural Environment Research Council @-@ funded marine research . 
 Southampton Solent University has 17 @,@ 000 students and its strengths are in the training , design , consultancy , research and other services undertaken for business and industry . It is also host to the Warsash Maritime Academy , which provides training and certification for the international shipping and off @-@ shore oil industries . 
 In addition to school sixth forms at St Anne 's and King Edward 's there are two sixth form colleges : Itchen College and Richard Taunton Sixth Form College . A number of Southampton pupils will travel outside the city , for example to Barton Peveril College . Southampton City College is a further education college serving the city . The college offers a range of vocational courses for school leavers , as well as ESOL programmes and Access courses for adult learners . 
 There are 79 state run schools in Southampton , comprising : 
 1 nursery school ( The <unk> Early Years Centre in Bassett Green ) 
 21 infant schools ( ages 4 – 7 ) 
 16 junior schools ( ages 7 – 11 ) 
 24 primary schools ( ages 4 – 11 ) 
 8 secondary schools ( ages 11 – 16 ) 
 2 secondary schools with sixth forms ( ages 11 – 18 ) 
 2 academies ( Oasis Academy Mayfield and Oasis Academy Lord 's Hill ) 
 5 special schools 
 There are also independent schools , including The Gregg School , King Edward VI School and St Mary 's College . 
 Over 40 per cent of school pupils in the city that responded to a survey claimed to have been the victim of bullying . More than 2 @,@ 000 took part and said that verbal bullying was the most common form , although physical bullying was a close second for boys . 
 It has been revealed that Southampton has the worst behaved secondary schools within the UK . With suspension rates three times the national average , the suspension rate is approximately 1 in every 14 children , the highest in the country for physical or verbal assaults against staff . 
 = = Transport = = 
 = = = Road = = = 
 Southampton is a major UK port which has good transport links with the rest of the country . The M27 motorway , linking places along the south coast of England , runs just to the north of the city . The M3 motorway links the city to London and also , via a link to the A34 ( part of the European route <unk> ) at Winchester , with the Midlands and North . The <unk> motorway is a spur of the M27 , linking it with the Western Docks and city centre . 
 = = = Rail = = = 
 Southampton is also served by the rail network , which is used both by freight services to and from the docks and passenger services as part of the national rail system . The main station in the city is Southampton Central . Rail routes run east towards Portsmouth , north to Winchester , the Midlands and London , and westwards to Bournemouth , Poole , Dorchester , Weymouth , Salisbury , Bristol and Cardiff . The route to London was opened in 1840 by what was to become the London and South Western Railway Company . Both this and its successor the Southern Railway ( UK ) played a significant role in the creation of the modern port following their purchase and development of the town 's docks . 
 Local train services operate in the central , southern and eastern sections of the city and are operated by South West Trains , with stations at Swaythling , St Denys , Millbrook , Redbridge , Bitterne , Sholing and Woolston . Plans were announced by Hampshire County Council in July 2009 for the introduction of tram @-@ train running from Hythe ( on what is now a freight @-@ only line to Fawley ) via Totton to Southampton Central Station and on to Fareham via St. Denys , and Swanwick . The proposal follows a failed plan to bring light rail to the Portsmouth and Gosport areas in 2005 . 
 The town was the subject of an attempt by a separate company , the Didcot , Newbury and Southampton Railway , to open another rail route to the North in the 1880s and some building work , including a surviving embankment , was undertaken in the Hill Lane area . 
 = = = Air = = = 
 Southampton Airport is a regional airport located in the town of Eastleigh , just north of the city . It offers flights to UK and near European destinations , and is connected to the city by a frequent rail service from Southampton Airport ( Parkway ) railway station , and by bus services . 
 = = = Cruise shipping = = = 
 Southampton 's tradition of luxury cruising began in 1840 . 
 Many of the world 's largest cruise ships can regularly be seen in Southampton water , including record @-@ breaking vessels from Royal Caribbean and Carnival Corporation & plc . The latter has headquarters in Southampton , with its brands including Princess Cruises , P & O Cruises and Cunard Line . 
 The city has a particular connection to Cunard Line and their fleet of ships . This was particularly evident on 11 November 2008 when the Cunard liner RMS Queen Elizabeth 2 departed the city for the final time amid a spectacular fireworks display after a full day of celebrations . Cunard ships are regularly launched in the city , for example Queen Victoria was named by HRH The Duchess of Cornwall in December 2007 , and the Queen named Queen Elizabeth in the city during October 2011 . The Duchess of Cambridge performed the naming ceremony of Royal Princess on 13 June 2013 . 
 At certain times of the year , The Queen Mary 2 , Queen Elizabeth and Queen Victoria may all visit Southampton at the same time , in an event commonly called ' Arrival of the Three Queens ' . 
 The importance of Southampton to the cruise industry was indicated by P & O Cruises 's 175th anniversary celebrations , which included all seven of the company 's liners visiting Southampton in a single day . <unk> , Arcadia , Aurora , Azura , Oceana , Oriana and Ventura all left the city in a procession on 3 July 2012 . 
 = = = Ferry = = = 
 While Southampton is no longer the base for any cross @-@ channel ferries , it is the terminus for three internal ferry services , all of which operate from terminals at Town Quay . Two of these , a car ferry service and a fast catamaran passenger ferry service , provide links to East Cowes and Cowes respectively on the Isle of Wight and are operated by Red Funnel . The third ferry is the Hythe Ferry , providing a passenger service to Hythe on the other side of Southampton Water . 
 Southampton used to be home to a number of ferry services to the continent , with destinations such as San Sebastian , Lisbon , Tangier and Casablanca . A ferry port was built during the 1960s . However , a number of these relocated to Portsmouth and by 1996 , there were no longer any car ferries operating from Southampton with the exception of services to the Isle of Wight . The land used for Southampton Ferry Port was sold off and a retail and housing development was built on the site . The Princess Alexandra Dock was converted into a marina . Reception areas for new cars now fill the Eastern Docks where passengers , dry docks and trains used to be . 
 = = = Bus = = = 
 Buses now provide the majority of local public transport . The main bus operators are First Southampton and Bluestar . Other operators include <unk> Tours , Stagecoach and <unk> . The other large service provider is the Uni @-@ link bus service ( running from early in the morning to midnight ) , which was commissioned by the University of Southampton to provide transport from the university to the town . Previously run by Enterprise , it is now run by Bluestar . Free buses are provided by City @-@ link ' . The City @-@ link runs from the Red Funnel ferry terminal at Town Quay to Central station via WestQuay and is operated by Bluestar . There is also a door @-@ to @-@ door minibus service called Southampton Dial a Ride , for residents who cannot access public transport . This is funded by the council and operated by SCA Support Services . 
 There are two main termini for bus services . As the biggest operator , First uses stops around Pound Tree Road . This leaves the other terminal of West Quay available for other operators . Uni @-@ link passes West Quay in both directions , and Wilts & Dorset drop passengers off and pick them up there , terminating at a series of bus stands along the road . Certain Bluestar services also do this , while others stop at Bargate and some loop round West Quay , stopping at Hanover Buildings . There was a tram system from 1879 to 1949 . 
 = = Notable people = = 
 Notable people who either hail from Southampton or who have lived in the city include : 
 R & B singer Craig David was brought up on the Holyrood estate in the city centre 
 SKY & International Radio Presenter Andy Collins is a native 
 naturalist TV presenter Chris Packham is a native 
 Oscar @-@ winning director of animated films Suzie Templeton grew up in Highfield . 
 Coldplay drummer Will Champion hails from Southampton . His father and late mother taught at the university . 
 Musician Aqualung was born in the city . 
 Author Jane Austen lived at her brother Frank 's home in Southampton from autumn 1806 to spring 1809 . 
 England rugby union player Mike Brown was born in Southampton in 1985 . 
 Matt Cardle , winner of the 2010 series of X Factor , was born in Southampton . 
 Emily Davies famous Suffragette was born in Carlton Crescent , Southampton , although she spent most of her youth in Gateshead . 
 Millvina Dean Last remaining survivor of the sinking of the RMS Titanic until her death in 2009 . 
 Charles Dibdin musician , songwriter , dramatist , novelist and actor . 
 Drone Doom band , Moss , alternative pop group Delays , Rock Band Band of Skulls , folk punk group The Men They Couldn 't Hang and Metalcore band Bury Tomorrow originated in the city . 
 Gareth Emery DJ and Music Producer , Mike Foyle DJ and Music Producer and James <unk> DJ and Music Producer are all from the city . 
 Foxes Grammy award winning singer . 
 Thomas Fleming Judge in the trial of Guy Fawkes following the Gunpowder Plot . 
 Brian Freemantle thriller writer was born in Southampton in 1936 . 
 Charles Fryatt Merchant Mariner , born here in 1872 . 
 Joseph <unk> author and academic in studies of religion , spirituality and masculinity . 
 John Jellicoe , Admiral , commander of the British fleet at the Battle of Jutland was a <unk> and Argentine governor Juan Manuel de Rosas spent his last years in exile in the city . 
 Frank Jenner , evangelist . 
 Justin Hayward @-@ Young lead singer and songwriter of Indie band The Vaccines . 
 Benny Hill Comedian was born in Southampton and grew up in the city . He had a milk round in the city , the inspiration for his song Ernie ( The Fastest Milkman In The West ) . 
 Jona <unk> singer and multi instrumentalist was born in the city . 
 Wally Masur tennis player lives in the city . 
 Ian McKay ( writer ) ( born <unk> <unk> , 1962 ) , English art critic , environmental writer , and academic . 
 Scott Mills radio DJ . 
 Alt @-@ J Frontman and songwriter Joe Newman is from Southampton and referenced Southampton Common in the song <unk> . 
 Ken Russell filmmaker was born and raised in Southampton . 
 Iwan Thomas Olympic athlete lives in the city and is an ambassador for The Saints Foundation , a charity set up by Southampton FC . 
 Matthew Le Tissier former England and Southampton footballer has lived in Southampton since the mid @-@ 1980s . 
 Isaac Watts Hymn writer , composed O God , Our Help in Ages Past , hymn of the King Edward VI school and peal of the Civic Centre clock tower . 
 Artful Dodger ( originally Mark Hill ( musician ) and Pete Devereux ) one of the most famous 2 @-@ step Garage and UK Garage artists are from the city . 
 John Everett Millais , one of the best known Pre @-@ Raphaelite artists , was born in Southampton . 
 Edward John Gregory , a celebrated artist was from Southampton and his friend and fellow Southampton School of Art Student , the German born Hubert von <unk> moved to Southampton at the age of 8 . 
 <unk> <unk> , a famous British @-@ Italian TV animator , mostly famous for his biggest worldwide project ' <unk> Club ' . 
 = Irene Morales = 
 Irene Morales Infante ( 1 April 1865 – 25 August 1890 ) was a Chilean soldier who served in the War of the Pacific . She was born in a barrio of Santiago , and lived in poverty throughout her life , working as a seamstress from an early age . At the time the War of the Pacific began she was only 13 years old , and had been orphaned and twice widowed . Her second husband was executed by the Bolivian military for killing a soldier . She tried to pass herself as a man and enlist as a soldier in the Chilean Army . This failed , but she was given a position as an unofficial cantinière and military nurse , marching alongside the infantrymen to sell food and drink , and caring for the wounded after battles . 
 Despite being given a noncombatant role , she fought alongside the men of her unit in the battles of the Tarapacá Campaign in late 1879 , at Pisagua and San Francisco . Her valor in these battles and her care for wounded men drew the attention of Chilean commander @-@ in @-@ chief Manuel Baquedano , who provided her with official recognition and the rank of a sergeant . She continued to serve in the army for the duration of the war and was famously courageous at the Battle of Tacna in 1880 . After the war , she returned to civilian life and died in obscurity , aged only 25 . Now considered one of Chile 's greatest heroes of the war , her service only became widely known after her death . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Morales was born on 1 April 1865 in La <unk> , a barrio on the <unk> River in Santiago de Chile , the daughter of carpenter Ventura Morales and Marta Infante . Her father died when she was young , and she moved with her mother to Valparaiso . There she started to learn her mother 's trade as a seamstress until her mother married her to an older man in 1877 , at age 11 . Her husband died during the first year of their marriage , and her mother died about the same time . 
 Left without any family , Morales headed for Antofagasta , then a port town in Bolivia that was booming due to the nitrate mines in the area . She travelled there as a steerage passenger , with a ticket she bought by selling nearly all of her possessions . While working there , she met Santiago Pizarro , a Chilean in his 30s who made his living in a Bolivian military band , and married him in mid @-@ 1878 , aged 13 . He was tried and executed on 21 September of that year for killing a Bolivian soldier in a drunken brawl . She found his body dumped by the side of the railway tracks and took a gold ring from his finger , which she wore for the rest of her life . Pizarro 's execution was widely protested by the mostly Chilean population of Antofagasta , which resented what was seen as an unjust Bolivian government . 
 = = Military service = = 
 On 14 February 1879 , Chilean forces entered Antofagasta to the welcome of most of the local population , beginning the War of the Pacific against Bolivia and Peru . Many locals enlisted in the Chilean Army , and Morales enlisted as a soldier to avenge her husband by disguising herself as a man and slipping in unnoticed amid the frenzy of patriotism . 
 Her deception did not last long , for Capt. <unk> <unk> saw through her disguise immediately — because of her curved figure and " feminine beauty , " he said . Nonetheless , he allowed her to be an unauthorised army cantinière and nurse . These were the only positions available to women in the army at the time , and many women effectively served as both , which Morales did . As a cantinière , she sold food and drink to supplement soldiers ' monotonous basic rations , staying with them at their camp and marching with them on operations , and since she was a nurse , she had to be present immediately after battles to care for the wounded . 
 Morales was first sent to <unk> 's unit , the 3rd Regiment of the Line , which was at the front of Chile 's campaigns during much of the war . Although she officially was not a soldier and was not supposed to participate in combat , this did not deter her from fighting alongside the men of her regiment . Indeed , she was noted for her great skill with a rifle . She fought at the amphibious landing and fierce ensuing assault on a Peruvian position of the Battle of Pisagua on 2 November 1879 and at the Battle of San Francisco on 19 November . She was looked up to by the men of her unit for her selfless nursing of the wounded after battles . She also put herself at risk several times to save captured Peruvian soldiers from being abused by her compatriots . 
 Hearing of her deeds , the commander @-@ in @-@ chief of Chile 's military , General Manuel Baquedano , summoned Morales to meet him and officially authorised her to wear the uniform of a cantinière ( as she had done so without authorisation before ) and gave her the rank and pay of a sergeant ( <unk> segundo , lit . " second sergeant " ) . She later moved to the 4th Division , in which she served during the Tacna and Arica Campaign . At the Battle of Tacna on 26 May 1880 , she continued to provide water to the exhausted men at the front lines after she received a slight wound herself . She was one of the first soldiers to enter the city of Tacna that evening , and soldiers of the Carabineros de <unk> cavalry regiment recalled her riding into the town on a horse , raising her rifle as they passed by and crying " Viva Chile ! " . After the battle , she was stricken for some time with an illness she picked up from prisoners of war she had cared for , and she wrote a letter to a friend of hers in Antofagasta , assuming she was on her deathbed . Nonetheless , later writers said she was present at the Battle of Arica two weeks later and ordered the mass killing of captured Peruvians , an account also inscribed on a Peruvian memorial to the dead . During January 1881 , she fought at the Battle of <unk> and Battle of Miraflores and was among the Chileans who entered Lima after the city was captured . 
 While all her contemporaries in Chile recognised her heroism , and the common soldiers she served with looked up to her as the " nun of charity , " some men said Morales had gone too far for a woman by taking up a rifle . Benjamín Vicuña Mackenna praised her for her dedication and bravery and for her hatred for those who killed her husband , but in 1881 gave her the free advice that she should not put herself at such risk and should " return quietly to her poor home and restart the life of a real woman in manual labor , in caring for her relatives , in work with the needle and thimble , and exchange , after several years of adventures and passions , the revolver for her honored and beloved sewing machine . " She did not follow this advice and remained in the army until the end of the war , fighting in the Battle of <unk> on 10 July 1883 , the last battle of the war . Men like Mackenna were right to say she put herself at unusual risk for a woman at the time , for several other Chilean <unk> were killed after being captured by Peruvians during the war . 
 = = Later life and legacy = = 
 After the end of the war , Morales returned to her birthplace of Santiago . While few knew of her actions during the war , the men she served alongside remembered her well . When she appeared at the unveiling of the monument to the common Chilean roto at the Plaza <unk> , she received some of the most enthusiastic applause . After years of illness , she died in anonymity in the common room of a Santiago hospital on 25 August 1890 , aged only 25 . For her , widespread recognition came only after her death . 
 On 25 August 1930 , 40 years after her death , Col. Enrique Phillips wrote an article dedicated to her in El Mercurio that brought her into attention , in which he praised her in the highest terms , saying : " The <unk> of Chile were many in that glorious time , but none exceeded in valour Irene Morales , the paragon of Chilean women . " In the years after her death , a number of poems were written on her , including one by Rómulo <unk> , and she was featured in many works of patriotic literature . A street near the Plaza Baquedano in Santiago is named in her honour , the Calle Irene Morales . During the turbulent years of the 1970s , she was among the historical Chilean women embraced as symbols by both conservative and left @-@ wing women 's political organisations . In modern times , she has been described as one of Chile 's " greatest heroes " of the War of the Pacific . Her remains are kept in the Military Mausoleum at the Cementerio General de Santiago , which is maintained by the Chilean Army . 
 Morales is often compared to Candelaria Pérez , a Chilean cantinière of the earlier War of the Confederation who was also praised for her courage and who also came from La <unk> . 
 = Caludon Castle = 
 Caludon Castle is a Scheduled Ancient Monument and Grade I listed building in Coventry , in the West Midlands of England . A second moated site 190 metres ( 620 ft ) to the south is a Scheduled Ancient Monument in its own right . The castle is now a ruin , and all that remains is a large fragment of sandstone wall . What remains of the estate is now an urban park , owned and run by Coventry City Council , but much of it was sold and developed into housing estates in the early 20th century . 
 The site has been occupied since at least the 11th century CE . The original building , pre @-@ dating the Norman conquest of England , was a large house , which became the property of the Earl of Chester after the conquest . The house was given to the Segrave family in the 13th century , and was first described as a manor in 1239 . A licence for crenellation was granted in 1305 , at which point the house is thought to have been re @-@ styled as a castle . Another licence was received in 1354 , and the property was again rebuilt . In the 14th century , it came into the possession of Thomas de Mowbray , 1st Duke of Norfolk , who was banished in 1398 , after which the castle fell into disrepair . Mowbray 's son , John , inherited the building , and it remained in the Mowbray family until 1481 , when it passed to William de Berkeley , 1st Marquess of Berkeley . It was rebuilt again circa 1580 , this time as a mansion , having lain derelict since Mowbray 's banishment . The castle was all but destroyed in 1662 , and remained in ruins until 1800 , when the remains were used in the construction of a farmhouse on the site . 
 The estate was divided up and much of it sold in 1815 , and remained in the hands of multiple private owners until most of the land was purchased by the Coventry Corporation after the First World War and used for housing developments . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 The remains of the Caludon estate are today located in Wyken , a suburban area to the east of Coventry city centre . However , until portions of it were sold off in the 19th century , the estate was much more expansive . The estate was historically a detached part of St. Michael 's parish , but was transferred to Wyken in 1884 , which in turn was absorbed into the City of Coventry in 1928 . The original boundary of the estate ran from <unk> Bridge ( now known as Clifford Bridge , 52 @.@ <unk> ° N 1 @.@ <unk> ° W ﻿ / 52 @.@ <unk> ; <unk> ) over the River <unk> in the south @-@ east to high ground near Stoke Heath in the north @-@ west . 
 The original castle was in an oval shape , surrounded by a defensive wall , including towers , and a moat . Entrance was via a gatehouse and bridge on the east side . Most living quarters were to the north and west sides of the enclosure , while kitchens and offices were to the south and east . Several farm buildings , associated with the castle , lay just outside the moat , along with a bowling green , gardens , and a three @-@ acre field known as " the pool " . When the property was converted to a mansion , circa 1580 , many outbuildings were recorded as still standing , including a porter 's lodge and brewing house . 
 A survey conducted in 2008 found the foundations of a rectangular building , oriented north @-@ north @-@ west , thought to be the remains of a large hall , 33 x 13 metres ( 108 x 43 feet ) . To the north of the hall the survey found magnetic anomalies representing a complex of living buildings styled as a manor house . The same survey also found large magnetic anomalies in the eastern part of the site , which could be buried rubble from the demolition of a farmhouse , or the remains of in @-@ filled cellars which are believed to have been built on the site . Evidence of a footpath around the interior of the site was also discovered . Given the evidence found , it is likely that the anomalies represent more than one phase of construction , though this could not be conclusively proven with the methods used . 
 A moat , approximately 190 metres ( 620 feet ) to the south of the castle , was constructed in mediaeval times , likely around the time of the rebuilding in 1305 . A Scheduled Ancient Monument in its own right , the moat encloses approximately an acre of land around the property . The moat may have been an enclosure surrounding farm buildings connected to the castle . 
 = = History = = 
 The site was originally occupied by a house , which pre @-@ dated the Norman conquest of England . After the conquest , it came into the possession of the Earls of Chester . Circa 1232 , Ranulf de Blondeville , 6th Earl of Chester gave the house to Stephen de Segrave , who served as Chief Justiciar of England . His son , Gilbert de Segrave , inherited the property , and passed it on to his son , Nicholas de Segrave , 1st Baron Segrave , who was created Baron Segrave . The house was first described as a manor in 1239 , and , at that time , was the only permanent nobleman 's residence in Coventry . The Caludon estate expanded slightly into Wyken , to the north , in 1279 when Nicholas de Segrave purchased a carucate and mill . 
 The house was likely rebuilt as a castle in 1305 , when John de Segrave , 2nd Baron Segrave , Nicholas ' son , was granted a licence by King Edward I of England to crenellate the property ( decorating a parapet with rectangular gaps in the wall through which archers could fire ; largely a status symbol by that time ) and to build a moat and wall . The property was also extended with a chapel and several outbuildings at around the same time . Further rebuilding was undertaken in 1354 , when another licence to crenellate was received . In the second half of the 14th century , the castle was inherited by Thomas de Mowbray , 1st Duke of Norfolk , who , in 1398 , accused Henry of Bolingbroke ( later King Henry IV ) of treason against King Richard II . The two noblemen were to take part in a duel at Gosford Green , between Caludon Castle and Coventry , but Richard II banished both before the duel could take place . After Henry took the throne , he stripped Mowbray of the dukedom , and Mowbray died in exile shortly afterwards . Mowbray was succeeded by John de Mowbray , 2nd Duke of Norfolk , who was restored to the dukedom . 
 The property remained in the Mowbray family until the death of Anne de Mowbray , 8th Countess of Norfolk ( the child bride of Richard of Shrewsbury , 1st Duke of York ) in 1481 . Anne 's estate was divided between John Howard , 1st Duke of Norfolk and William de Berkeley , 1st Marquess of Berkeley , of whom the latter took possession of Caludon Castle . It lay derelict from shortly after Mowbray 's banishment until the late 16th century ( circa 1580 ) , when it was rebuilt by Henry Berkeley , 7th Baron Berkeley in the style of a mansion . A large banqueting hall was added later by Elizabeth ( née Stanhope ) , wife of George Berkeley , 8th Baron Berkeley . The latter kept the house until 1632 , when he sold it to Sir Thomas Morgan , 1st Baronet . It passed from Morgan to Sir John Preston through the latter 's marriage to Morgan 's daughter and co @-@ heir , Jane . The house was badly damaged in 1662 when King Charles II took revenge on Coventry for its heavily parliamentarian sympathies in the English Civil War . Their son , Sir Thomas Preston , inherited the estate , and upon his death in 1709 it passed to his daughter , Anne and her husband , Hugh Clifford , 2nd Baron Clifford of Chudleigh . The Cliffords retained the property , using the ruins of the castle to build a large farmhouse in 1800 , until 1815 , when the estate was divided up and much of it sold . The estate was then held by various private owners until after the First World War , when the Coventry Corporation purchased much of it and developed the area into suburban housing estates . 
 = = Modern day = = 
 The castle is now a ruin , and all that remains above ground is a large grey sandstone wall , which has been the only remnant of any building on the site since at least the early 18th century . It includes two large tracery windows , decorated by red sandstone , which stand out against the grey . Red sandstone also appears at both ends of the walls , suggesting at least two more windows , and meaning that the wall would have been at least twice the length of the surviving fragment when built . Beneath the large windows are two smaller ones , suggestive of an undercroft , and a flue runs between the sets of windows . The wall fragment is thought to be 14th century , likely dating from the reconstruction in 1354 . 
 The castle is now situated in a small urban park called Caludon Castle Park , owned and managed by Coventry City Council . The moat is now dry , and at least part of it is filled in , but parts are still visible , along with other earthworks . The remaining wall is a Scheduled Ancient Monument , as is the moated site to the south . Since 1955 , the wall has also had Grade I listed building status . 
 = Treblinka extermination camp = 
 Treblinka ( pronounced [ <unk> ] ) was an extermination camp , built by Nazi Germany in occupied Poland during World War II . It was located in a forest north @-@ east of Warsaw , 4 kilometres ( 2 @.@ 5 mi ) south of the Treblinka train station in what is now the Masovian Voivodeship . The camp operated between 23 July 1942 and 19 October 1943 as part of Operation Reinhard , the deadliest phase of the Final Solution . During this time , it is estimated that between 700 @,@ 000 and 900 @,@ 000 Jews were killed in its gas chambers , along with 2 @,@ 000 Romani people . More Jews were killed at Treblinka than at any other Nazi extermination camp apart from Auschwitz . 
 Managed by the German SS and the Eastern European Trawnikis ( also known as Hiwi guards ) , the camp consisted of two separate units . Treblinka I was a forced @-@ labour camp ( Arbeitslager ) whose prisoners worked in the gravel pit or irrigation area and in the forest , where they cut wood to fuel the crematoria . Between 1941 and 1944 , more than half of its 20 @,@ 000 inmates died from summary executions , hunger , disease and mistreatment . 
 The second camp , Treblinka II , was an extermination camp ( <unk> ) . A small number of men who were not killed immediately upon arrival became its Jewish slave @-@ labour units called Sonderkommandos , forced to bury the victims ' bodies in mass graves . These bodies were exhumed in 1943 and cremated on large open @-@ air pyres along with the bodies of new victims . <unk> operations at Treblinka II ended in October 1943 following a revolt by the Sonderkommandos in early August . Several SS Hiwi guards were killed and 200 prisoners escaped from the camp ; almost a hundred survived the subsequent chase . The camp was dismantled ahead of the Soviet advance . A farmhouse for a watchman was built on the site and the ground ploughed over in an attempt to hide the evidence of genocide . 
 In postwar Poland , the government bought most of the land where the camp had stood , and built a large stone memorial there between 1959 and 1962 . In 1964 Treblinka was declared a national monument of Jewish martyrology in a ceremony at the site of the former gas chambers . In the same year the first German trials were held regarding war crimes committed at Treblinka by former SS members . After the end of communism in Poland in 1989 , the number of visitors coming to Treblinka from abroad increased . An exhibition centre at the camp opened in 2006 . It was later expanded and made into a branch of the Siedlce Regional Museum . 
 = = Background = = 
 Following the invasion of Poland in 1939 most of the 3 @.@ 5 million Polish Jews were rounded up and put into newly established ghettos by Nazi Germany . The system was intended to isolate the Jews from the outside world in order to facilitate their exploitation and abuse . The supply of food was inadequate , living conditions were cramped and unsanitary , and the Jews had no way to earn money . Malnutrition and lack of medicine led to soaring mortality rates . The initial victories of the Wehrmacht over the Soviet Union inspired plans for the German colonisation of occupied Poland , including all territory within the General Government . At the Wannsee Conference held near Berlin on 20 January 1942 , new plans were outlined for the genocide of the Jews , known as the " Final Solution " to the Jewish Question . The extermination programme was codenamed Aktion Reinhard in German , to differentiate it from the Einsatzgruppen operations in territories conquered by Nazi Germany , in which half a million Jews had already been killed . 
 Treblinka was one of three secret extermination camps set up for Operation Reinhard ; the other two were Bełżec and Sobibór . All three were equipped with gas chambers disguised as shower rooms , for the " processing " of entire transports of people . The lethal agent was established following a pilot project of mobile killing conducted at <unk> and Chełmno extermination camps that began operating in 1941 and used gas vans . Chełmno ( German : <unk> ) was a testing ground for the establishment of faster methods of killing and incinerating people . It was not a part of Reinhard , which was marked by the construction of stationary facilities for mass murder . Treblinka was the third extermination camp of Operation Reinhard to be built , following Bełżec and Sobibór , and incorporated lessons learned from their construction . Alongside the Reinhard camps , mass killing facilities using Zyklon B were developed at the Majdanek concentration camp in March 1942 and at Auschwitz II @-@ Birkenau in September . 
 The Nazi plan to kill Polish Jews from across the General Government during Aktion Reinhard was overseen in occupied Poland by SS @-@ Obergruppenführer Odilo Globocnik , the deputy of Reichsführer @-@ SS Heinrich Himmler in Berlin . The Operation Reinhard camps reported directly to the Reich Main Security Office ( German : Reichssicherheitshauptamt or RSHA for short ) , which was also headed by Himmler . The staff of Operation Reinhard , most of whom had been involved in the Action T4 euthanasia programme , used T4 as a framework for the construction of facilities . All of the Jews who were killed in the Reinhard camps came from ghettos . 
 = = = Location = = = 
 The two parallel camps of Treblinka were built 80 kilometres ( 50 mi ) northeast of the Polish capital Warsaw . Before World War II , it was the site of a gravel mining enterprise for the production of concrete , connected to most of the major cities in central Poland by the Małkinia – Sokołów Podlaski railway junction and the Treblinka village station . The mine was owned and operated by the Polish industrialist Marian <unk> , who added the new 6 @-@ kilometre ( 3 @.@ 7 mi ) railway track to the existing line . When the German SS took over Treblinka I , the quarry was already equipped with heavy machinery that was ready to use . Treblinka was well @-@ connected but isolated enough , halfway between some of the largest Jewish ghettos in Nazi @-@ occupied Europe , including the ghetto in Warsaw and the ghetto in Białystok , the capital of the newly formed Bezirk Bialystok . The Warsaw Ghetto had 500 @,@ 000 Jewish inmates , and the Białystok Ghetto had about 60 @,@ 000 . 
 Treblinka was divided into two separate camps that were 2 kilometres apart . Two engineering firms , the <unk> Company of Leipzig and the Warsaw branch of Schmidt – <unk> , oversaw the construction of both camps . Between 1942 and 1943 the extermination centre was further redeveloped with a crawler excavator . New gas chambers made of brick and cement mortar were freshly erected , and mass cremation pyres were also introduced . The perimeter was enlarged to provide a buffer zone , making it impossible to approach the camp from the outside . The number of trains caused panic among the residents of nearby settlements . They would likely have been killed if caught near the railway tracks . 
 = = = Treblinka I = = = 
 Founded officially on 15 November 1941 , Treblinka I was a forced @-@ labour camp ( Arbeitslager ) , initially for Poles and Jews captured nearby . It replaced an ad hoc company set up in June 1941 by Sturmbannführer Ernst <unk> . A new barracks and barbed wire fencing 2 metres ( 6 ft 7 in ) tall were erected in late 1941 . To obtain the workforce for Treblinka I , civilians were sent to the camp en masse for real or imagined offences , and sentenced to hard labour by the Gestapo office in Sokołów , which was headed by <unk> . The average length of a sentence was six months , but many prisoners had their sentences extended indefinitely . Twenty thousand people passed through Treblinka I during its three @-@ year existence . About half of them died there from exhaustion , hunger and disease . Those who survived were released after serving their sentences ; these were generally Poles from nearby villages . 
 At any given time , Treblinka I had a workforce of 1 @,@ 000 – 2 @,@ 000 prisoners , most of whom worked 12- to 14 @-@ hour shifts in the large quarry and later also harvested wood from the nearby forest as fuel for the open @-@ air crematoria in Treblinka II . There were German , Czech and French Jews among them , as well as Poles captured in <unk> , farmers unable to deliver food requisitions , hostages trapped by chance , and people who attempted to harbour Jews outside the Jewish ghettos or who performed restricted actions without permits . Beginning in July 1942 , Jews and non @-@ Jews were separated . Women mainly worked in the sorting barracks , where they repaired and cleaned military clothing delivered by freight trains , while most of the men worked at the gravel mine . There were no work uniforms , and inmates who lost their own shoes were forced to go barefoot or scavenge them from dead prisoners . Water was rationed , and punishments were regularly delivered at roll @-@ calls . From December 1943 the inmates were no longer carrying any specific sentences . The camp operated officially until 23 July 1944 , when the imminent arrival of Soviet forces led to its abandonment . 
 During its entire operation , Treblinka I 's commandant was Sturmbannführer Theodor van Eupen . He ran the camp with several SS men and almost 100 Hiwi guards . The quarry , spread over an area of 17 hectares ( 42 acres ) , supplied road construction material for German military use and was part of the strategic road @-@ building programme in the war with the Soviet Union . It was equipped with a mechanical digger for shared use by both Treblinka I and II . Eupen worked closely with the SS and German police commanders in Warsaw during the deportation of Jews in early 1943 and had prisoners brought to him from the Warsaw Ghetto for the necessary replacements . According to Franciszek Ząbecki , the local station master , Eupen often killed prisoners by " taking shots at them , as if they were partridges " . A widely feared overseer was Untersturmführer Franz Schwarz , who executed prisoners with a pickaxe or hammer . 
 = = = Treblinka II = = = 
 Treblinka II ( officially the SS @-@ Sonderkommando Treblinka ) was divided into three parts : Camp 1 was the administrative compound where the guards lived , Camp 2 was the receiving area where incoming transports of prisoners were offloaded , and Camp 3 was the location of the gas chambers . All three parts were built by two groups of German Jews expelled from Berlin and imprisoned at the Warsaw Ghetto ( a total of 238 men from 17 to 35 years of age ) . Hauptsturmführer Richard <unk> , the head of construction , brought in German Jews because they could speak German . Construction began on 10 April 1942 , when Bełżec and Sobibór were already in operation . The entire death camp , which was either 17 hectares ( 42 acres ) or 13 @.@ 5 hectares ( 33 acres ) in size ( sources vary ) , was surrounded by two rows of barbed @-@ wire fencing 2 @.@ 5 metres ( 8 ft 2 in ) tall . This fence was later woven with pine tree branches to obstruct the view of the camp . More Jews were brought in from the surrounding settlements to work on the new railway ramp within the Camp 2 receiving area , which was ready by June 1942 . 
 The first section of Treblinka II ( Camp 1 ) was the Wohnlager administrative and residential compound ; it had a telephone line . The main road within the camp was paved and named Seidel Straße after Unterscharführer Kurt Seidel , the SS corporal who supervised its construction . A few side roads were lined with gravel . The main gate for road traffic was erected on the north side . Barracks were built with supplies delivered from Warsaw , Sokołów Podlaski , and <unk> <unk> . There was a kitchen , a bakery , and dining rooms ; all were equipped with high @-@ quality items taken from Jewish ghettos . The Germans and Ukrainians each had their own sleeping quarters , positioned at an angle for better control of all entrances . There were also two barracks behind an inner fence for the Jewish work commandos . SS @-@ Untersturmführer Kurt Franz set up a small zoo in the centre next to his horse stables , with two foxes , two peacocks and a roe deer ( brought in 1943 ) . Smaller rooms were built as laundry , tailors , and cobblers , and for woodworking and medical aid . Closest to the SS quarters were separate barracks for the Polish and Ukrainian serving , cleaning and kitchen women . 
 The next section of Treblinka II ( Camp 2 , also called the lower camp or <unk> ) , was the receiving area where the railway unloading ramp extended from the Treblinka line into the camp . There was a long and narrow platform surrounded by barbed @-@ wire fencing . A new building , erected on the platform , was disguised as a railway station complete with a wooden clock and fake rail terminal signs . SS @-@ Scharführer Josef <unk> who worked on the unloading ramp was known for being especially cruel ; he grabbed crying toddlers by their feet and smashed their heads against wagons . Behind a second fence , about 100 metres ( 330 ft ) from the track , there were two large barracks used for undressing , with a cashier 's booth which collected money and jewellery , ostensibly for safekeeping . Jews who resisted were taken away or beaten to death by the guards . The area where the women and children were shorn of their hair was on the other side of the path from the men . All buildings in the lower camp , including the barber barracks , contained the piled up clothing and belongings of the prisoners . Next to the station building , further to the right , there was a Sorting Square where all baggage was first collected by the <unk> . It was flanked by fake infirmary called " Lazaret " , with the Red Cross sign on it . It was a small barracks surrounded by barbed wire where the sick , old , wounded and " difficult " prisoners were taken . Directly behind the " Lazaret " shack there was an open excavation pit seven metres ( 23 ft ) deep . These prisoners were led to the edge of the pit and shot one at a time by <unk> Willi Mentz , nicknamed " Frankenstein " by the inmates . Mentz single @-@ handedly executed thousands of Jews , aided by his supervisor , August <unk> , who was called the " Angel of Death " by the prisoners . The pit was also used to burn old worn @-@ out clothes and identity papers deposited by new arrivals at the undressing area . 
 The third section of Treblinka II ( Camp 3 , also called the upper camp ) was the main killing zone with gas chambers at its centre . It was completely screened from the railway tracks by an earth bank built with the help of a mechanical digger . This mound was elongated in shape , similar to a retaining wall , and can be seen in a sketch produced during the 1967 trial of Treblinka II commandant Franz Stangl . On the other sides , the zone was camouflaged from new arrivals like the rest of the camp , using tree branches woven into barbed wire fences by the <unk> ( the work detail led out to collect them ) . From the undressing barracks there was a fenced @-@ off path leading through the forested area into the gas chambers . It was cynically called die <unk> ( " the road to heaven " ) or der <unk> ( " the tube " ) by the SS . For the first eight months of the camp 's operation , the excavator was used to dig burial ditches on both sides of the gas chambers ; these ditches were 50 metres ( 160 ft ) long , 25 metres ( 82 ft ) wide , and 10 metres ( 33 ft ) deep . In early 1943 , they were replaced with cremation pyres up to 30 metres ( 98 ft ) long , with rails laid across the pits on concrete blocks . The 300 prisoners who operated the upper camp lived in separate barracks behind the gas chambers . 
 = = Killing process = = 
 Unlike other Nazi concentration camps across German @-@ occupied Europe , in which prisoners were used as forced labour for the German war effort , death camps ( <unk> ) like Treblinka , Bełżec , and Sobibór had only one function : to kill those sent there . To prevent incoming victims from realising its nature , Treblinka II was disguised as a transit camp for deportations further east , complete with made @-@ up train schedules , a fake train @-@ station clock with hands painted on it , names of destinations , a fake ticket window , and the sign " Ober <unk> " , a code word for Treblinka commonly used to deceive passengers departing from Western Europe . <unk> was a prewar landed estate 5 kilometres ( 3 @.@ 1 mi ) away from the camp . 
 = = = Polish Jews = = = 
 The mass deportation of Jews from the Warsaw Ghetto began on 22 July 1942 with the first shipment of 6 @,@ 000 people . The gas chambers started operation the following morning . For the next two months , deportations from Warsaw continued on a daily basis via two shuttle trains ( the second one , from 6 August 1942 ) , each carrying about 4 @,@ 000 to 7 @,@ 000 people crying for water . No other trains were allowed to stop at the Treblinka station . The first daily trains came in the early morning , often after an overnight wait , and the second , in mid @-@ afternoon . All new arrivals were sent immediately to the undressing area by the Sonderkommando squad that managed the arrival platform , and from there to the gas chambers . According to German records , including the official report by SS Brigadeführer Jürgen Stroop , 265 @,@ 000 Jews were transported in freight trains from the Warsaw Ghetto to Treblinka during the period from 22 July to 12 September 1942 . 
 The rail traffic on Polish railway lines was extremely dense . An average of 420 German military trains were passing through every 24 hours on top of internal traffic already in 1941 . The Holocaust trains were routinely delayed en route ; some transports took many days to arrive . Hundreds of prisoners died from exhaustion , suffocation and thirst while in transit to the camp in the overcrowded wagons . In extreme cases such as the Biała Podlaska transport of 6 @,@ 000 Jews travelling only a 125 @-@ kilometre ( 78 mi ) distance , up to 90 per cent of people were already dead when the sealed doors flew open . From September 1942 on , both Polish and foreign Jews were greeted with a brief verbal announcement . An earlier signboard with directions was removed because it was clearly insufficient . The deportees were told that they had arrived at a transit point on the way to Ukraine and needed to shower and have their clothes disinfected before receiving work uniforms and new orders . 
 = = = Foreign Jews and Romani people = = = 
 Treblinka received transports of almost 20 @,@ 000 foreign Jews between October 1942 and March 1943 , including 8 @,@ 000 from the German Protectorate of Bohemia and Moravia via Theresienstadt , and over 11 @,@ 000 from Bulgarian @-@ occupied Thrace , Macedonia , and Pirot following an agreement with the Nazi @-@ allied Bulgarian government . They had train tickets and arrived predominantly in passenger carriages with considerable luggage , travel foods and drinks , all of which were taken by the SS to the food storage barracks . The provisions included such items as smoked mutton , speciality breads , wine , cheese , fruit , tea , coffee , and sweets . Unlike Polish Jews arriving in Holocaust trains from nearby ghettos in cities like Warsaw , Radom , and those of Bezirk Bialystok , the foreign Jews received a warm welcome upon arrival from an SS man ( either Otto <unk> or Willy <unk> ) , after which they were killed like the others . Treblinka dealt mainly with Polish Jews , Bełżec handled the Jews from Austria and the Sudetenland , and Sobibór was the final destination for Jews from France and the Netherlands . Auschwitz @-@ Birkenau " processed " Jews from almost every other country in Europe . The frequency of arriving transports slowed down in winter . 
 The decoupled locomotive went back to the Treblinka station or to the layover yard in Małkinia for the next load , while the victims were pulled from the carriages onto the platform by Kommando Blau , one of the Jewish work details forced to assist the Germans at the camp . They were led through the gate amidst chaos and screaming . They were separated by gender behind the gate ; women were pushed into the undressing barracks and barber on the left , and men were sent to the right . All were ordered to tie their shoes together and strip . Some kept their own towels . The Jews who resisted were taken to the " Lazaret " , also called the " Red Cross infirmary " , and shot behind it . Women had their hair cut off ; therefore , it took longer to prepare them for the gas chambers than men . The hair was used in the manufacture of socks for U @-@ boat crews and hair @-@ felt footwear for the Deutsche Reichsbahn . 
 Most of those killed at Treblinka were Jews , but about 2 @,@ 000 Romani people also died there . Like the Jews , the Romani were first rounded up and sent to the ghettos ; at a conference on 30 January 1940 it was decided that all 30 @,@ 000 Romani living in Germany proper were to be deported to former Polish territory . Most of these were sent to Jewish ghettos in the General Government , such as those in Warsaw and Łódź . As with the Jews , most Romani who went to Treblinka died in the gas chambers , although some were shot . The majority of the Jews living in ghettos were sent to Bełżec , Sobibór , or Treblinka to be executed ; most of the Romani living in the ghettos were shot on the spot . There were no known Romani escapees or survivors from Treblinka . 
 = = = Gas chambers = = = 
 After undressing , the newly arrived Jews were beaten with whips to drive them towards the gas chambers ; hesitant men were treated particularly brutally . Rudolf Höss , the commandant at Auschwitz , contrasted the practice at Treblinka of deceiving the victims about the showers with his own camp 's practice of telling them they had to go through a " delousing " process . According to the postwar testimony of some SS officers , men were always gassed first , while women and children waited outside the gas chambers for their turn . During this time , the women and children could hear the sounds of suffering from inside the chambers , and they became aware of what awaited them , which caused panic , distress , and even involuntary defecation . According to Stangl , a train transport of about 3 @,@ 000 people could be " processed " in three hours . In a 14 @-@ hour workday , 12 @,@ 000 to 15 @,@ 000 people were killed . After the new gas chambers were built , the duration of the killing process was reduced to an hour and a half . 
 The gassing area was entirely closed off with tall wooden fencing made of vertical boards . Originally , it consisted of three interconnected barracks 8 metres ( 26 ft ) long and 4 metres ( 13 ft ) wide , disguised as showers . They had double walls insulated by earth packed down in between . The interior walls and ceilings were lined with roofing paper . The floors were covered with tin @-@ plated sheet metal , the same material used for the roof . Solid wooden doors were insulated with rubber and bolted from the outside by heavy cross @-@ bars . The victims were gassed with the exhaust fumes from the engine of a Red Army tank captured during Operation Barbarossa ; SS @-@ Scharführer Erich Fuchs was responsible for installing it . The engine was brought in by the SS at the time of the camp 's construction and housed in a room with a generator that supplied the camp with electricity . The tank engine exhaust pipe ran just below the ground and opened into all three gas chambers . The fumes could be seen seeping out . After about 20 minutes the bodies were removed by dozens of Sonderkommandos , placed onto carts and wheeled away . The system was imperfect and required a lot of effort ; trains that arrived later in the day had to wait on layover tracks overnight at Treblinka , Małkinia , or Wólka <unk> . 
 Between August and September 1942 , a large new building with a concrete foundation was built from bricks and mortar under the guidance of Action T4 euthanasia expert Erwin Lambert . It contained 8 – 10 gas chambers , each of which was 8 metres by 4 metres ( 26 ft by 13 ft ) , and it had a corridor in the centre . Stangl supervised its construction and brought in building materials from the nearby village of Małkinia by dismantling factory stock . During this time victims continued to arrive daily and were led naked past the building site to the original gas chambers . The new gas chambers became operational after five weeks of construction , equipped with two fume @-@ producing engines instead of one . The metal doors , which had been taken from Soviet military bunkers around Białystok , had portholes through which it was possible to observe the dead before removing them . Stangl said that the old death chambers were capable of killing 3 @,@ 000 people in three hours . The new ones had the highest possible " output " of any gas chambers in the three Reinhard death camps and could kill up to 22 @,@ 000 or 25 @,@ 000 people every day , a fact which Globocnik once boasted about to Kurt Gerstein , a fellow SS officer from <unk> Services . The new gas chambers were seldom used to their full capacity ; 12 @,@ 000 – 15 @,@ 000 victims remained the daily average . 
 The killing process at Treblinka differed significantly from the method used at Auschwitz and Majdanek , where the poison gas Zyklon B ( hydrogen cyanide ) was used . At Treblinka , Sobibór , and Bełżec , the victims died from suffocation and carbon monoxide poisoning . After visiting Treblinka on a guided tour , Auschwitz commandant Rudolf Höss concluded that using exhaust gas was inferior to the cyanide used at his extermination camp . The chambers became silent after 12 minutes and were closed for 20 minutes or less . According to Jankiel Wiernik , who survived the 1943 prisoner uprising and escaped , when the doors of the gas chambers had been opened , the bodies of the dead were standing and kneeling rather than lying down , due to the severe overcrowding . Dead mothers embraced the bodies of their children . Prisoners who worked in the Sonderkommandos later testified that the dead frequently let out a last gasp of air when they were extracted from the chambers . Some victims showed signs of life during the disposal of the corpses , but the guards routinely refused to react . 
 = = = Cremation pits = = = 
 The Germans became aware of the political danger associated with the mass burial of corpses in early 1943 , when they discovered the Polish victims of the Soviet Katyn massacre of 1940 near occupied Smolensk . Those 22 @,@ 000 officers ' bodies were well preserved underground , attesting to the Soviet mass murder . By April 1943 , Nazi propaganda began to draw the attention of the international community to this war crime using <unk> . The Germans brought in a group of twelve forensic experts from various European countries to prove their claim . The Katyn Commission examined the bodies in detail , and the summary report on the findings of the commission concluded that the Soviets were solely responsible . The Germans attempted to use the commission 's results to drive a wedge between the Allies . Subsequently , the secret orders to exhume the corpses buried at Treblinka and burn them came directly from the Nazi leadership , possibly from Himmler , who was very concerned about covering up Nazi crimes . The cremations began shortly after his visit to the camp in late February or early March 1943 . 
 To incinerate bodies , there were large cremation pits constructed at Camp 3 within Treblinka II . The burning pyres were used to cremate the new corpses along with the old ones , which had to be dug up as they had been buried during the first six months of the camp 's operation . Built under the instructions of Herbert <unk> , the camp 's cremation expert , the pits consisted of railroad rails laid as grates on blocks of concrete . The bodies were placed on rails over wood , splashed with petrol , and burned . It was a harrowing sight , according to Jankiel Wiernik , with the bellies of pregnant women exploding from boiling amniotic fluid . He wrote that " the heat radiating from the pits was maddening . " The bodies burned for five hours , without the <unk> of bones . The pyres operated 24 hours a day . Once the system had been perfected , 10 @,@ 000 – 12 @,@ 000 bodies at a time could be incinerated . 
 The open air burn pits were located east of the new gas chambers and refuelled from 4 a.m. ( or after 5 a.m. depending on work @-@ load ) to 6 p.m. in roughly 5 @-@ hour intervals . The current camp memorial includes a flat grave marker resembling one of them . It is constructed from melted basalt and has a concrete foundation . It is a symbolic grave , as the Nazis spread the actual human ashes , mixed with sand , over 22 @,@ 000 square metres ( 237 @,@ 000 square feet ) . 
 = = Organization of the camp = = 
 The camp was operated by 20 – 25 German and Austrian members of the SS @-@ Totenkopfverbände and 80 – 120 <unk> ( " watchmen " ) guards who had been trained at a special SS facility in the Trawniki concentration camp near Lublin , Poland ; all <unk> guards were trained at Trawniki . The guards were mainly ethnic German Volksdeutsche from the east and Ukrainians , with some Russians , Tatars , Moldovans , Latvians , and Central Asians , all of whom had served in the Red Army . They were enlisted by Karl Streibel , the commander of the Trawniki camp , from the prisoner of war ( POW ) camps for Soviet soldiers . The degree to which their recruitment was voluntary remains disputed ; while conditions in the Soviet POW camps were dreadful , some Soviet POWs collaborated with the Germans even before cold , hunger , and disease began devastating the POW camps in mid @-@ September 1941 . 
 The work at Treblinka was carried out under threat of death by Jewish prisoners organised into specialised Sonderkommando squads or work details . At the Camp 2 <unk> receiving area each squad had a different coloured triangle . The triangles made it impossible for new arrivals to try to blend in with members of the work details . The blue unit ( Kommando Blau ) managed the rail ramp and unlocked the freight wagons . They met the new arrivals , carried out people who had died en route , removed bundles , and cleaned the wagon floors . The red unit ( Kommando Rot ) , which was the largest squad , unpacked and sorted the belongings of victims after they had been " processed " . The red unit delivered these belongings to the storage barracks , which were managed by the yellow unit ( Kommando Gelb ) , who separated the items by quality , removed the Star of David from all outer garments , and extracted any money sewn into the linings . The yellow unit was followed by the <unk> , who disinfected the belongings , including sacks of hair from " processed " women . The <unk> unit ( " gold Jews " ) collected and counted banknotes and evaluated the gold and jewellery . 
 A different group of about 300 men , called the Totenjuden ( " Jews of death " ) , lived and worked in Camp 3 across from the gas chambers . For the first six months they took the corpses away for burial after gold teeth had been extracted . Once cremation began in early 1943 they took the corpses to the pits , refuelled the pyres , crushed the remaining bones with mallets , and collected the ashes for disposal . Each trainload of " deportees " brought to Treblinka consisted of an average of sixty heavily guarded wagons . They were divided into three sets of twenty at the layover yard . Each set was processed within the first two hours of backing onto the ramp , and was then made ready by the Sonderkommandos to be exchanged for the next set of twenty wagons . 
 Members of all work units were continuously beaten by the guards and often shot or hanged at the gallows . Only the strongest men were selected from new arrivals daily to obtain the necessary replacements . There were other work details which had no contact with the transports : the <unk> ( " woodcutter unit " ) cut and chopped firewood , and the <unk> ( " disguise unit " ) camouflaged the structures of the camp . Another work detail was responsible for cleaning the common areas . The Camp 1 Wohnlager residential compound contained barracks for about 700 Sonderkommandos which , when combined with the 300 Totenjuden living across from the gas chambers , brought their grand total to roughly one thousand at a time . 
 Going to work bloodied and bruised would lead to execution . If a prisoner was beaten and sustained black eyes , open wounds and severe swelling , he was called a clepsydra ( Greek for " water clock " , the Polish word <unk> is a synonym for " obituary " ) by the other prisoners and most likely shot that evening at roll call or the next day if the bruised cheeks began to swell up . Many Sonderkommando prisoners hanged themselves at night . Suicides in the Totenjuden barracks occurred at the rate of 15 to 20 per day . The work crews – usually unable to eat or sleep from fear and anxiety – were almost entirely replaced every few days ; members of the old work detail were sent to their deaths except for the most resilient . 
 = = Treblinka prisoner uprising = = 
 In early 1943 , an underground Jewish resistance organisation was formed at Treblinka with the goal of seizing control of the camp and escaping to freedom . The planned revolt was preceded by a long period of secret preparations . The clandestine unit was first organised by a former Jewish captain of the Polish Army , Dr. Julian <unk> , who was described by fellow plotter Samuel <unk> as noble and essential to the action . His organising committee included <unk> Bloch ( leadership ) , Rudolf Masaryk , Marceli <unk> , Samuel <unk> , Dr. Irena <unk> ( " Irka " , from the sick bay for the <unk> ) , Leon <unk> , Hershl ( Henry ) Sperling from Częstochowa , and several others . <unk> ( who treated the German patients ) killed himself with poison on 19 April 1943 when faced with imminent capture , so that the Germans could not discover the plot by torturing him . The next leader was another former Polish Army officer , Dr. <unk> <unk> , who arrived on 1 May . Born in Częstochowa , he had practised medicine in Wyszków and was expelled by the Nazis to <unk> in 1939 . 
 The initial date of the revolt was set for 15 June 1943 , but it had to be postponed . A fighter smuggled a grenade in one of the early May trains carrying captured rebels from the Warsaw Ghetto Uprising , which had begun on 19 April 1943 . When he detonated it in the undressing area , the SS and guards were thrown into a panic . After the explosion , Treblinka received only about 7 @,@ 000 Jews from the capital for fear of similar incidents ; the remaining 42 @,@ 000 Warsaw Jews were deported to Majdanek , instead . The burning of unearthed corpses continued at full speed until the end of July . The Treblinka II conspirators became increasingly concerned about their future as the amount of work for them began to decline . With fewer transports arriving , they realised " they were next in line for the gas chambers . " 
 = = = Day of the revolt and survivors = = = 
 The uprising was launched on the hot summer day of 2 August 1943 ( Monday , a regular day of rest from gassing ) , when a group of Germans and 40 Ukrainians drove off to the River Bug to swim . The conspirators silently unlocked the door to the arsenal near the train tracks , with a key that had been duplicated earlier . They had stolen 20 – 25 rifles , 20 hand grenades , and several pistols , and delivered them in a cart to the gravel work detail . At 3 : 45 p.m. , 700 Jews launched an insurgency that lasted for 30 minutes . They set buildings ablaze , exploded a tank of petrol , and set fire to the surrounding structures . A group of armed Jews attacked the main gate , and others attempted to climb the fence . Machine @-@ gun fire from about 25 Germans and 60 Ukrainian Trawnikis resulted in near @-@ total slaughter . <unk> was killed along with most of the insurgents . About 200 Jews escaped from the camp . Half of them were killed after a chase in cars and on horses . The Jews did not cut the phone wires , and Stangl called in hundreds of German reinforcements , who arrived from four different towns and set up roadblocks along the way . Partisans of the Armia Krajowa ( Polish : Home Army ) transported some of the surviving escapees across the river and others like Sperling ran 30 kilometres ( 19 miles ) and were then helped and fed by Polish villagers . Of those who broke through , around 70 are known to have survived until the end of the war , including the future authors of published Treblinka memoirs : Richard <unk> , Chil <unk> , Jankiel Wiernik , and Samuel Willenberg . 
 Among the Jewish prisoners who escaped after setting fire to the camp , there were two 19 @-@ year @-@ olds , Samuel Willenberg and Kalman Taigman , who had both arrived in 1942 and had been forced to work there under pain of death . Taigman died in 2012 and Willenberg in 2016 . Taigman stated of his experience , " It was hell , absolutely hell . A normal man cannot imagine how a living person could have lived through it – killers , natural @-@ born killers , who without a trace of remorse just murdered every little thing . " Willenberg and Taigman emigrated to Israel after the war and devoted their last years to retelling the story of Treblinka . Escapees Hershl Sperling and Richard <unk> both suffered from survivor guilt syndrome and eventually killed themselves . 
 = = = After the uprising = = = 
 In spite of the revolt , Treblinka II continued to function and remained a top priority for the SS for another year . Stangl met the head of Operation Reinhard , Odilo Globocnik , and inspector Christian Wirth in Lublin , and decided not to draft a report , as no native Germans had died putting down the revolt . Stangl wanted to rebuild the camp , but Globocnik told him it would be closed down shortly and Stangl would be transferred to Trieste to help fight the partisans there . The Nazi high command may have felt that Stangl , Globocnik , Wirth , and other Reinhard personnel knew too much and wanted to dispose of them by sending them to the front . With almost all the Jews from the German ghettos ( established in Poland ) killed , there would have been little point in rebuilding the facility . Auschwitz had enough capacity to fulfil the Nazis ' remaining extermination needs , rendering Treblinka redundant . 
 The camp 's new commandant Kurt Franz , formerly its deputy commandant , took over in August . After the war he testified that gassings had stopped by then . In reality , despite the extensive damage to the camp , the gas chambers were intact , and the killing of Polish Jews continued . Speed was reduced , with only ten wagons rolled onto the ramp at a time , while the others had to wait . The last two rail transports of Jews were brought to the camp for gassing from the Białystok Ghetto on 18 and 19 August 1943 . They consisted of 78 wagons ( 37 the first day and 39 the second ) , according to a communiqué published by the Office of Information of the Armia Krajowa , based on observation of Holocaust trains passing through the village of Treblinka . The 39 wagons that came to Treblinka on 19 August 1943 were carrying at least 7 @,@ 600 survivors of the Białystok Ghetto Uprising . 
 On 19 October 1943 , Operation Reinhard was terminated by a letter from Odilo Globocnik . The following day , a large group of Jewish <unk> who had worked on dismantling the camp structures over the previous few weeks were loaded onto the train and transported , via Siedlce and Chełm , to Sobibór to be gassed on 20 October 1943 . Franz followed Globocnik and Stangl to Trieste in November . Clean @-@ up operations continued over the winter . As part of these operations , Jews from the surviving work detail dismantled the gas chambers brick @-@ by @-@ brick and used them to erect a farmhouse on the site of the camp 's former bakery . Globocnik confirmed its purpose as a secret guard post for a Nazi @-@ Ukrainian agent to remain behind the scenes , in a letter he sent to Himmler from Trieste on 5 January 1944 . A Hiwi guard called Oswald Strebel , a Ukrainian Volksdeutscher ( ethnic German ) , was given permission to bring his family from Ukraine for " reasons of surveillance " , wrote Globocnik ; Strebel had worked as a guard at Treblinka II . He was instructed to tell visitors that he had been farming there for decades , but the local Poles were well aware of the existence of the camp . 
 = = Operational command of Treblinka II = = 
 = = = <unk> Eberl = = = 
 SS @-@ Obersturmführer <unk> Eberl was appointed the camp 's first commandant on 11 July 1942 . He was a psychiatrist from <unk> Euthanasia Centre and the only physician @-@ in @-@ chief to command an extermination camp during World War II . According to some , his poor organisational skills caused the operation of Treblinka to turn disastrous ; others point out that the number of transports that were coming in reflected the Nazi high command 's wildly unrealistic expectations of Treblinka 's ability to " process " these prisoners . The early gassing machinery frequently broke down due to overuse , forcing the SS to shoot Jews assembled for suffocation . The workers did not have enough time to bury them , and the mass graves were overflowing . According to the testimony of his colleague Unterscharführer Hans <unk> , Eberl 's ego and thirst for power exceeded his ability : " So many transports arrived that the disembarkation and gassing of the people could no longer be handled . " On incoming Holocaust trains to Treblinka , many of the Jews locked inside correctly guessed what was going to happen to them . The odour of decaying corpses could be smelled up to 10 kilometres ( 6 @.@ 2 miles ) away . 
 Oskar Berger , a Jewish eyewitness who escaped during the 1943 uprising , told of the camp 's state when he arrived there in August 1942 : 
 When we were unloaded , we noticed a paralysing view – all over the place there were hundreds of human bodies . Piles of packages , clothes , suitcases , everything in a mess . German and Ukrainian SS @-@ men stood at the corners of the barracks and were shooting blindly into the crowd . 
 When Odilo Globocnik made a surprise visit to Treblinka on 26 August 1942 with Christian Wirth and Wirth 's adjutant from Bełżec , Josef Oberhauser , Eberl was dismissed on the spot . Among the reasons for dismissal were : incompetently disposing of the tens of thousands of dead bodies , using inefficient methods of killing , and not properly concealing the mass killing . Eberl was transferred to Berlin , closer to operational headquarters in Hitler 's Chancellery , where the main architect of the Holocaust , Heinrich Himmler , had just stepped up the pace of the programme . Globocnik assigned Wirth to remain in Treblinka temporarily to help clean up the camp . On 28 August 1942 , Globocnik suspended deportations . He chose Franz Stangl , who had previously been the commandant of the Sobibór extermination camp , to assume command of the camp as Eberl 's successor . Stangl had a reputation as a competent administrator with a good understanding of the project 's objectives , and Globocnik trusted that he would be capable of resuming control . 
 = = = Franz Stangl = = = 
 Stangl arrived at Treblinka in late August 1942 . He replaced Eberl on 1 September . Years later , he described what he first saw when he came on the scene , in a 1971 interview with Gitta Sereny : 
 The road ran alongside the railway . When we were about fifteen , twenty minutes ' drive from Treblinka , we began to see corpses by the line , first just two or three , then more , and as we drove into Treblinka station , there were what looked like hundreds of them – just lying there – they 'd obviously been there for days , in the heat . In the station was a train full of Jews , some dead , some still alive ... that too , looked as if it had been there for days . 
 Stangl reorganised the camp , and the transports of Warsaw and Radom Jews began to arrive again on 3 September 1942 . According to Israeli historian Yitzhak Arad , Stangl wanted the camp to look attractive , so he ordered the paths paved in the Wohnlager administrative compound . Flowers were planted along Seidel Straße as well as near the SS living quarters . He ordered that all arriving prisoners should be greeted by the SS with a verbal announcement translated by the working Jews . The deportees were told that they were at a transit point on the way to Ukraine . Some of their questions were answered by Germans wearing lab coats as tools for deception . At times Stangl carried a whip and wore a white uniform , so he was nicknamed the " White Death " by prisoners . Although he was directly responsible for the camp 's operations , according to his own testimony Stangl limited his contact with Jewish prisoners as much as possible . He claimed that he rarely interfered with the cruel acts perpetrated by his subordinate officers at the camp . He became desensitised to the killings , and came to perceive prisoners not as humans but merely as " cargo " that had to be destroyed , he said . 
 = = = = Treblinka song = = = = 
 According to postwar testimonies , when transports were temporarily halted , then @-@ deputy commandant Kurt Franz wrote lyrics to a song meant to celebrate the Treblinka extermination camp . In reality , prisoner Walter Hirsch wrote them for him . The melody came from something Franz remembered from Buchenwald . The music was upbeat , in the key of D major . The song was taught to the newly arriving Jews assigned to work in the Sonderkommando . They were forced to memorise it by nightfall of their first day at the camp . Survivor Samuel Willenberg remembered the song beginning : " With firm steps we march ... " Years later , Unterscharführer Franz Suchomel recalled the lyrics as follows : " We know only the word of the Commander . / We know only obedience and duty . / We want to keep working , working , / until a bit of luck beckons us some time . Hurray ! " 
 A musical ensemble was formed , under duress , by Artur Gold , a popular Jewish prewar composer from Warsaw . He arranged the theme to the Treblinka song for the 10 @-@ piece prisoner orchestra which he conducted . Gold arrived in Treblinka in 1942 and played music in the SS mess hall at the Wohnlager on German orders . He died during the uprising . 
 = = = Kurt Franz = = = 
 After the Treblinka revolt in August 1943 and termination of Operation Reinhard in October 1943 , Stangl went with Globocnik to Trieste in northern Italy where SS reinforcements were needed . The third and last Treblinka II commandant was Kurt Franz , nicknamed " Lalka " ( Polish : the doll ) by the prisoners because he had " an innocent face " . According to survivor Hershl Sperling , as deputy commandant Franz beat prisoners to death for minor infractions or had his dog Barry tear them to pieces . He managed Treblinka II until November 1943 . The subsequent clean @-@ up of the Treblinka II perimeter was completed by prisoners of nearby Treblinka I Arbeitslager in the following months . Franz 's deputy was <unk> Fritz <unk> , who maintained a network of Sonderkommando informers and did the hands @-@ on killings . 
 Kurt Franz maintained a photo album against orders never to take photographs inside Treblinka . He named it Schöne Zeiten ( " Good Times " ) . His album is a rare source of images illustrating the mechanised grave digging , brickworks in Małkinia and the Treblinka zoo , among others . Franz was careful not to photograph the gas chambers . 
 The Treblinka I gravel mine functioned at full capacity under the command of Theodor van Eupen until July 1944 , with new forced labourers sent to him by <unk> Ernst <unk> from Sokołów . The mass shootings continued into 1944 . With Soviet troops closing in , the last 300 to 700 Sonderkommandos disposing of the incriminating evidence were executed by Trawnikis in late July 1944 , long after the camp 's official closure . Strebel , the ethnic German who had been installed in the farmhouse built in place of the camp 's original bakery using bricks from the gas chambers , set fire to the building and fled to avoid capture . 
 = = Arrival of the Soviets = = 
 In late July 1944 , Soviet forces began to approach from the east . The departing Germans who already destroyed most direct evidence of genocidal intent burned surrounding villages to the ground , including 761 buildings in <unk> , Prostyń , and <unk> . Many families were killed . The fields of grain that once fed the SS were burned . On 19 August 1944 , German forces blew up the church in Prostyń and its bell tower , the last defensive strongpoint against the Red Army in the area . When the Soviets entered Treblinka on 16 August , the extermination zone had been levelled , ploughed over , and planted with <unk> . What remained , wrote visiting Soviet war correspondent Vasily Grossman , were small pieces of bone in the soil , human teeth , scraps of paper and fabric , broken dishes , jars , shaving brushes , rusted pots and pans , cups of all sizes , mangled shoes , and lumps of human hair . The road leading to the camp was pitch black . Until mid @-@ 1944 human ashes ( up to 20 carts every day ) had been regularly strewn by the remaining prisoners along the road for 2 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 2 miles ) in the direction of Treblinka I. When the war ended , destitute and starving locals started walking up the Black Road ( as they began to call it ) in search of man @-@ made nuggets shaped from melted gold in order to buy bread . 
 = = = Early attempts at preservation = = = 
 The new Soviet @-@ installed government did not preserve evidence of the camp . The scene was not legally protected at the conclusion of World War II . In September 1947 , 30 students from the local school , led by their teacher Feliks <unk> and priest Józef <unk> , collected larger bones and skull fragments into farmers ' wicker baskets and buried them in a single mound . The same year the first remembrance committee Komitet <unk> <unk> <unk> ( <unk> ; Committee for the Remembrance of the Victims of Treblinka ) formed in Warsaw , and launched a design competition for the memorial . 
 Stalinist officials allocated no funding for the design competition nor for the memorial , and the committee disbanded in 1948 ; by then many survivors had left the country . In 1949 , the town of Sokołów Podlaski protected the camp with a new fence and gate . A work crew with no archaeological experience was sent in to landscape the grounds . In 1958 , after the end of Stalinism in Poland , the Warsaw provincial council declared Treblinka to be a place of martyrology . Over the next four years , 127 hectares ( 318 acres ) of land that had formed part of the camp was purchased from 192 farmers in the villages of Prostyń , <unk> , Wólka <unk> and Nowa <unk> . 
 = = = Construction of the memorial = = = 
 The construction of a monument 8 metres ( 26 ft ) tall designed by sculptor Franciszek <unk> was inaugurated on 21 April 1958 with the laying of the cornerstone at the site of the former gas chambers . The sculpture represents the trend toward large avant @-@ garde forms introduced in the 1960s throughout Europe , with a granite tower cracked down the middle and capped by a mushroom @-@ like block carved with abstract reliefs and Jewish symbols . Treblinka was declared a national monument of martyrology on 10 May 1964 during an official ceremony attended by 30 @,@ 000 people . The monument was unveiled by Zenon Kliszko , the Marshal of the Sejm of the Republic of Poland , in the presence of survivors of the Treblinka uprising from Israel , France , Czechoslovakia and Poland . The camp custodian 's house ( built nearby in 1960 ) was turned into an exhibition space following the collapse of communism in Poland in 1989 and the retirement of the custodian ; it opened in 2006 . It was later expanded and made into a branch of the Siedlce Regional Museum . 
 = = Death count = = 
 There are many estimates of the total number of people killed at Treblinka ; most scholarly estimates range from 700 @,@ 000 to 900 @,@ 000 , meaning that more Jews died at Treblinka than at any other Nazi extermination camp apart from Auschwitz . The Treblinka museum in Poland states that at least 800 @,@ 000 people died at Treblinka ; Yad Vashem , which is Israel 's Holocaust museum , puts the number killed at 870 @,@ 000 ; and the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum gives a range of 870 @,@ 000 to 925 @,@ 000 . 
 = = = First estimates = = = 
 The first estimate of the number of people killed at Treblinka came from Vasily Grossman , a Soviet war reporter who visited Treblinka in July 1944 as the Soviet forces marched westward across Poland . He published an article called " The Hell Called Treblinka " , which appeared in the November 1944 issue of <unk> , a monthly Russian literary magazine . In the article he claimed that 3 million people had been killed at Treblinka . He may not have been aware that the short station platform at Treblinka II greatly reduced the number of wagons that could be unloaded at one time , and may have been adhering to the Soviet trend of exaggerating Nazi crimes for propaganda purposes . In 1947 the Polish historian Zdzisław <unk> estimated the death count as 780 @,@ 000 , based on the accepted record of 156 transports with an average of 5 @,@ 000 prisoners each . 
 = = = Court exhibits and affidavits = = = 
 The Treblinka trials of the 1960s took place in Düsseldorf and produced the two official West German estimates . During the 1965 trial of Kurt Franz , the Court of Assize in Düsseldorf concluded that at least 700 @,@ 000 people were killed at Treblinka , following a report by Dr. Helmut <unk> , director of the Institute for Contemporary History in Munich . During Franz Stangl 's trial in 1969 the same court reassessed the number to be at least 900 @,@ 000 after new evidence from Dr. Wolfgang Scheffler . 
 A chief witness for the prosecution at Düsseldorf in the 1965 , 1966 , 1968 and 1970 trials was Franciszek Ząbecki , who was employed by the Deutsche Reichsbahn as a rail traffic controller at Treblinka village from 22 May 1941 . In 1977 he published his book Old and New Memories , in which he used his own records to estimate that at least 1 @,@ 200 @,@ 000 people died at Treblinka . His estimate was based on the maximum capacity of a trainset during the <unk> Warsaw of 1942 rather than its yearly average . The original German <unk> in his possession did not have the number of prisoners listed . Ząbecki , a Polish member of railway staff before the war , was one of the few non @-@ German witnesses to see most transports that came into the camp ; he was present at the Treblinka station when the first Holocaust train arrived from Warsaw . Ząbecki was a member of the Armia Krajowa ( Polish : Home Army ) , which formed most of the Polish resistance movement in World War II , and kept a daily record of the extermination transports . He also clandestinely photographed the burning Treblinka II perimeter during the uprising in August 1943 . Ząbecki witnessed the last set of five enclosed freight wagons carrying Sonderkommandos to the Sobibór gas chambers on 20 October 1943 . In 2013 , his son Piotr Ząbecki wrote an article about him for <unk> <unk> that revised the number to 1 @,@ 297 @,@ 000 . Ząbecki 's daily records of transports to the camp , and demographic information regarding the number of people deported from each ghetto to Treblinka , were the two main sources for estimates of the death toll . 
 In his 1987 book Belzec , Sobibor , Treblinka : The Operation Reinhard Death Camps , Israeli historian Yitzhak Arad stated that at least 763 @,@ 000 people were killed at Treblinka between July 1942 and April 1943 . A considerable number of other estimates followed : see table ( below ) . 
 = = = Höfle Telegram = = = 
 A further source of information became available in 2001 . The Höfle Telegram was an encrypted message sent to Berlin on 31 December 1942 by Operation Reinhard deputy commander Hermann Höfle , detailing the number of Jews deported by <unk> to each Reinhard death camp up to that point . Discovered among declassified documents in Britain , it shows that by the official count of the German Transport Authority 713 @,@ 555 Jews were sent to Treblinka in 1942 . The number of deaths was probably higher , according to the Armia Krajowa communiqués . On the basis of the telegram and additional undated German evidence for 1943 listing 67 @,@ 308 people deported , historian Jacek Andrzej Młynarczyk calculated that by the official <unk> count , 780 @,@ 863 people were brought by Deutsche Reichsbahn to Treblinka . 
 = = = Table of estimates = = = 
 The information in the rows with an empty last column comes from Dam im <unk> na <unk> , page 114 . 
 = = Treblinka trials = = 
 The first official trial for war crimes committed at Treblinka was held in Düsseldorf between 12 October 1964 and 24 August 1965 , preceded by the 1951 trial of SS @-@ Scharführer Josef <unk> , which was triggered by charges of war crimes unrelated to his service at the camp . The trial was delayed because the United States and the Soviet Union had lost interest in prosecuting German war crimes with the onset of the Cold War . Many of the more than 90 @,@ 000 Nazi war criminals recorded in German files were serving in positions of prominence under West German chancellor Konrad Adenauer . In 1964 and 1965 eleven former SS camp personnel were brought to trial by West Germany , including commandant Kurt Franz . He was sentenced to life imprisonment , along with Artur Matthes ( <unk> ) and Willi Mentz and August <unk> ( both from Lazaret ) . Gustav <unk> ( gas chambers ) received 12 years , Franz Suchomel ( gold and money ) 7 years , Otto <unk> ( operation ) 6 years , Erwin Lambert ( gas chambers ) 4 years , and Albert Rum ( <unk> ) 3 years . Otto Horn ( corpse detail ) was acquitted . 
 The second commandant of Treblinka II , Franz Stangl , escaped with his wife and children from Austria to Brazil in 1951 . Stangl found work at a Volkswagen factory in São Paulo . His role in the mass murder of Jews was known to the Austrian authorities , but Austria did not issue a warrant for his arrest until 1961 . Stangl was registered under his real name at the Austrian consulate in Brazil . It took another six years before the famous Nazi hunter Simon Wiesenthal tracked him down and triggered his arrest . After his extradition from Brazil to West Germany Stangl was tried for the deaths of around 900 @,@ 000 people . He admitted to the killings but argued : " My conscience is clear . I was simply doing my duty . " Stangl was found guilty on 22 October 1970 , and sentenced to life imprisonment . He died of heart failure in prison in Düsseldorf on 28 June 1971 . 
 = = = Material gain = = = 
 The theft of cash and valuables , collected from the victims of gassing , was conducted by the higher @-@ ranking SS men on an enormous scale . It was a common practice among the concentration camps ' top echelon everywhere ; two Majdanek concentration camp commandants , Koch and <unk> , were tried and executed by the SS for the same offence in April 1945 . When the top @-@ ranking officers went home , they would sometimes request a private locomotive from <unk> and Emmerich at the Treblinka station to transport their personal " gifts " to Małkinia for a connecting train . Then , they would drive out of the camp in cars without any incriminating evidence on their person , and later arrive at Małkinia to transfer the goods . 
 The overall amount of material gain by Nazi Germany is unknown except for the period between 22 August and 21 September 1942 , when there were 243 wagons of goods sent and recorded . Globocnik delivered a written tally to Reinhard headquarters on 15 December 1943 with the SS profit of RM 178 @,@ 745 @,@ 960 @.@ 59 , including 2 @,@ 909 @.@ 68 kilograms of gold ( 6 @,@ 415 lb ) , 18 @,@ 733 @.@ 69 kg of silver ( 41 @,@ 300 lb ) , 1 @,@ 514 kg of platinum ( 3 @,@ 338 lb ) , and 249 @,@ 771 @.@ 50 American dollars , as well as 130 diamond solitaires , 2 @,@ 511 @.@ 87 carats of brilliants , 13 @,@ 458 @.@ 62 carats of diamonds , and 114 kg of pearls ( 251 lb ) . The amount of loot Globocnik stole is unknown ; Suchomel claimed in court to have filled a box with one million Reichsmarks for him . 
 = = Archaeological studies = = 
 Neither the Jewish religious leaders in Poland nor the authorities allowed archaeological excavations at the camp out of respect for the dead . Approval for a limited archaeological study was issued for the first time in 2010 to a British team from Staffordshire University using non @-@ invasive technology and <unk> remote sensing . The soil resistance was analysed at the site with ground @-@ penetrating radar . Features that appeared to be structural were found , two of which were thought to be the remains of the gas chambers , and the study was allowed to continue . 
 The archaeological team performing the search discovered three new mass graves . The remains were reinterred out of respect for the victims . At the second dig the findings included yellow tiles stamped with a pierced mullet star resembling a Star of David , and building foundations with a wall . The star was soon identified as the logo of Polish ceramics factory manufacturing floor tiles , founded by Jan <unk> and brothers Józef and Władysław Lange ( <unk> i Lange – D <unk> L since 1886 ) , nationalised and renamed under communism after the war . As explained by forensic archaeologist Caroline Sturdy Colls , the new evidence was important because the second gas chambers built at Treblinka were housed in the only brick building in the camp ; Colls claimed that this provides the first physical evidence for their existence . In his memoir describing his stay in the camp , survivor Jankiel Wiernik says that the floor in the gas chambers ( which he helped build ) was made of similar tiles . The discoveries became a subject of the 2014 documentary by the Smithsonian Channel . Colls ' claims regarding the floor tiles are controversial . It has been noted that the imprint of the Star of David is on the back of the tiles , and would have not been visible . More forensic work has been planned . 
 = = March of the Living = = 
 Treblinka museum receives most visitors per day during the annual March of the Living educational programme which brings young people from around the world to Poland , to explore the remnants of the Holocaust . The visitors whose primary destination is the march at Auschwitz II @-@ Birkenau , visit Treblinka in the preceding days . In 2009 , 300 Israeli students attended the ceremony led by Eli <unk> from the Ministry of Education . In total 4 @,@ 000 international students visited . In 2013 the number of students who came , ahead of the Auschwitz commemorations , was 3 @,@ 571 . In 2014 , 1 @,@ 500 foreign students visited . 
 = = Operation Reinhard leadership and Treblinka commandants = = 
 For a more comprehensive list , see List of individuals responsible for Treblinka extermination camp . 
 = Dmitri Shostakovich = 
 Dmitri Dmitriyevich Shostakovich ( Russian : Дми ́ <unk> Дми ́ <unk> <unk> ́ <unk> , tr . Dmitriy Dmitrievich Shostakovich , pronounced [ <unk> <unk> <unk> ] ; 25 September 1906 – 9 August 1975 ) was a Soviet composer and pianist , and a prominent figure of 20th @-@ century music . 
 Shostakovich achieved fame in the Soviet Union under the patronage of Soviet chief of staff Mikhail Tukhachevsky , but later had a complex and difficult relationship with the government . Nevertheless , he received accolades and state awards and served in the Supreme Soviet of the RSFSR ( 1947 – 1962 ) and the Supreme Soviet of the Soviet Union ( from 1962 until his death ) . 
 A poly @-@ stylist , Shostakovich developed a hybrid voice , combining a variety of different musical techniques into his music . Shostakovich 's music is characterized by sharp contrasts , elements of the grotesque , and ambivalent tonality ; the composer was also heavily influenced by the neo @-@ classical style pioneered by Igor Stravinsky , and ( especially in his symphonies ) by the post @-@ Romanticism associated with Gustav Mahler . 
 Shostakovich 's orchestral works include 15 symphonies and six concerti . His chamber output includes 15 string quartets , a piano quintet , two piano trios , and two pieces for string octet . His piano works include two solo sonatas , an early set of preludes , and a later set of 24 preludes and fugues . Other works include three operas , several song cycles , ballets , and a substantial quantity of film music ; especially well known is The Second Waltz , Op. 99 , music to the film The First Echelon ( 1955 – 1956 ) , as well as the Suites composed for The Gadfly . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early life = = = 
 Born at <unk> street in Saint Petersburg , Russia , Shostakovich was the second of three children of Dmitri <unk> Shostakovich and Sofiya <unk> <unk> . Shostakovich 's paternal grandfather , originally surnamed Szostakowicz , was of Polish Roman Catholic descent ( his family roots trace to the region of the town of <unk> in today 's Belarus ) , but his immediate forebears came from Siberia . A Polish revolutionary in the January Uprising of 1863 – 4 , Bolesław Szostakowicz would be exiled to <unk> ( near Tomsk ) in 1866 in the crackdown that followed Dmitri <unk> 's assassination attempt on Tsar Alexander II . When his term of exile ended , Szostakowicz decided to remain in Siberia . He eventually became a successful banker in Irkutsk and raised a large family . His son , Dmitri <unk> Shostakovich , the composer 's father , was born in exile in <unk> in 1875 and studied physics and mathematics in Saint Petersburg University , graduating in 1899 . He then went to work as an engineer under Dmitri Mendeleev at the Bureau of Weights and Measures in Saint Petersburg . In 1903 , he married another Siberian transplant to the capital , Sofiya <unk> <unk> , one of six children born to a Russian Siberian native . 
 Their son , Dmitri Dmitriyevich Shostakovich , displayed significant musical talent after he began piano lessons with his mother at the age of nine . On several occasions , he displayed a remarkable ability to remember what his mother had played at the previous lesson , and would get " caught in the act " of playing the previous lesson 's music while pretending to read different music placed in front of him . In 1918 , he wrote a funeral march in memory of two leaders of the <unk> party , murdered by Bolshevik sailors . 
 In 1919 , at the age of thirteen , he was allowed to enter the Petrograd Conservatory , then headed by Alexander Glazunov , who monitored Shostakovich 's progress closely and promoted him . Shostakovich studied piano with Leonid Nikolayev after a year in the class of Elena <unk> , composition with Maximilian Steinberg , and counterpoint and fugue with Nikolay Sokolov , with whom he became friends . Shostakovich also attended Alexander Ossovsky 's history of music classes . Steinberg tried to guide Shostakovich in the path of the great Russian composers , but was disappointed to see him ' wasting ' his talent and imitating Igor Stravinsky and Sergei Prokofiev . He also suffered for his perceived lack of political zeal , and initially failed his exam in Marxist methodology in 1926 . His first major musical achievement was the First Symphony ( premiered 1926 ) , written as his graduation piece at the age of nineteen . 
 = = = Early career = = = 
 After graduation , Shostakovich initially embarked on a dual career as concert pianist and composer , but his dry style of playing was often unappreciated ( his American biographer , Laurel Fay , comments on his " emotional restraint " and " riveting rhythmic drive " ) . He nevertheless won an " honorable mention " at the First International Chopin Piano Competition in Warsaw in 1927 . He explained the disappointment at the competition to suffering from appendicitis and the jury being all @-@ Polish . He later had his appendix removed in April 1927 . After the competition Shostakovich met the conductor Bruno Walter , who was so impressed by the composer 's First Symphony that he conducted it at its Berlin premiere later that year . Leopold Stokowski was equally impressed and gave the work its U.S. premiere the following year in Philadelphia and also made the work 's first recording . 
 Thereafter , Shostakovich concentrated on composition and soon limited his performances primarily to those of his own works . In 1927 he wrote his Second Symphony ( subtitled To October ) , a patriotic piece with a great pro @-@ Soviet choral finale . Due to its experimental nature , as with the subsequent Third Symphony , the pieces were not critically acclaimed with the enthusiasm granted to the First . 
 The year 1927 also marked the beginning of Shostakovich 's relationship with Ivan Sollertinsky , who remained his closest friend until the latter 's death in 1944 . Sollertinsky introduced the composer to the music of Gustav Mahler , which had a strong influence on his music from the Fourth Symphony onwards . 
 While writing the Second Symphony , Shostakovich also began work on his satirical opera The Nose , based on the story by Gogol . In June 1929 , the opera was given a concert performance , against Shostakovich 's own wishes , and was ferociously attacked by the Russian Association of Proletarian Musicians ( RAPM ) . Its stage premiere on 18 January 1930 opened to generally poor reviews and widespread incomprehension amongst musicians . 
 In the late 1920s and early 1930s , Shostakovich worked at <unk> , a proletarian youth theatre . Although he did little work in this post , it shielded him from ideological attack . Much of this period was spent writing his opera , Lady Macbeth of the Mtsensk District , which was first performed in 1934 . It was immediately successful , on both popular and official levels . It was described as " the result of the general success of Socialist construction , of the correct policy of the Party " , and as an opera that " could have been written only by a Soviet composer brought up in the best tradition of Soviet culture " . 
 Shostakovich married his first wife , Nina Varzar , in 1932 . Initial difficulties led to a divorce in 1935 , but the couple soon remarried when Nina became pregnant with their first child . 
 = = = First denunciation = = = 
 In 1936 , Shostakovich fell from official favour . The year began with a series of attacks on him in Pravda , in particular an article entitled , " Muddle Instead of Music " . Shostakovich was away on a concert tour in Arkhangelsk when he heard news of the first Pravda article . Two days before the article was published on the evening of 28 January , a friend had advised Shostakovich to attend the Bolshoi Theatre production of Lady Macbeth . When he arrived , he saw that Joseph Stalin and the Politburo were there . In letters written to his friend Ivan Sollertinsky , Shostakovich recounted the horror with which he watched as Stalin shuddered every time the brass and percussion played too loudly . Equally horrifying was the way Stalin and his companions laughed at the love @-@ making scene between Sergei and Katerina . Eyewitness accounts testify that Shostakovich was " white as a sheet " when he went to take his bow after the third act . 
 The article condemned Lady Macbeth as formalist , " coarse , primitive and vulgar " . Consequently , commissions began to fall off , and his income fell by about three quarters . Even Soviet music critics who had praised the opera were forced to recant in print , saying they " failed to detect the shortcomings of Lady Macbeth as pointed out by Pravda " . Shortly after the " Muddle Instead of Music " article , Pravda published another , " Ballet Falsehood , " that criticized Shostakovich ’ s ballet The <unk> Stream . Shostakovich did not expect this second article because the general public and press already accepted this music as " democratic " – that is , tuneful and accessible . However , Pravda criticized The <unk> Stream for incorrectly displaying peasant life on the collective farm . 
 More widely , 1936 marked the beginning of the Great Terror , in which many of the composer 's friends and relatives were imprisoned or killed . These included his patron Marshal Tukhachevsky ( shot months after his arrest ) ; his brother @-@ in @-@ law Vsevolod Frederiks ( a distinguished physicist , who was eventually released but died before he got home ) ; his close friend Nikolai <unk> ( a musicologist who had taught Tukhachevsky ; shot shortly after his arrest ) ; his mother @-@ in @-@ law , the astronomer Sofiya <unk> Varzar ( sent to a camp in <unk> ) ; his friend the Marxist writer Galina <unk> ( 20 years in camps ) ; his uncle Maxim <unk> ( died ) ; and his colleagues Boris Kornilov and Adrian Piotrovsky ( executed ) . His only consolation in this period was the birth of his daughter Galina in 1936 ; his son Maxim was born two years later . 
 = = = = Withdrawal of the Fourth Symphony = = = = 
 The publication of the Pravda editorials coincided with the composition of Shostakovich 's Fourth Symphony . The work marked a great shift in style for the composer due to the substantial influence of Gustav Mahler and a number of Western @-@ style elements . The symphony gave Shostakovich compositional trouble , as he attempted to reform his style into a new idiom . The composer was well into the work when the fatal articles appeared . Despite this , Shostakovich continued to compose the symphony and planned a premiere at the end of 1936 . Rehearsals began that December , but after a number of rehearsals Shostakovich , for reasons still debated today , decided to withdraw the symphony from the public . A number of his friends and colleagues , such as Isaak Glikman , have suggested that it was in fact an official ban which Shostakovich was persuaded to present as a voluntary withdrawal . Whatever the case , it seems possible that this action saved the composer 's life : during this time Shostakovich feared for himself and his family . Yet Shostakovich did not repudiate the work ; it retained its designation as his Fourth Symphony . A piano reduction was published in 1946 , and the work was finally premiered in 1961 , well after Stalin 's death . 
 During 1936 and 1937 , in order to maintain as low a profile as possible between the Fourth and Fifth symphonies , Shostakovich mainly composed film music , a genre favored by Stalin and lacking in dangerous personal expression . 
 = = = = " A Soviet artist 's creative response to just criticism " = = = = 
 The composer 's response to his denunciation was the Fifth Symphony of 1937 , which was musically more conservative than his earlier works . Premiered on 21 November 1937 in Leningrad , it was a phenomenal success . The Fifth drove many to tears and welling emotions . Later , Shostakovich 's purported memoir , Testimony , stated : " I 'll never believe that a man who understood nothing could feel the Fifth Symphony . Of course they understood , they understood what was happening around them and they understood what the Fifth was about . " 
 The success put Shostakovich in good standing once again . Music critics and the authorities alike , including those who had earlier accused Shostakovich of formalism , claimed that he had learned from his mistakes and had become a true Soviet artist . The composer Dmitry <unk> , who had been among those who disassociated himself from Shostakovich when the Pravda article was published , praised the Fifth Symphony and congratulated Shostakovich for " not having given in to the seductive temptations of his previous ' erroneous ' ways . " 
 It was also at this time that Shostakovich composed the first of his string quartets . His chamber works allowed him to experiment and express ideas which would have been unacceptable in his more public symphonic pieces . In September 1937 , he began to teach composition at the Leningrad Conservatory , which provided some financial security but interfered with his own creative work . 
 = = = Second World War = = = 
 In 1939 , before the Soviet forces attempted to invade Finland , the Party Secretary of Leningrad Andrei Zhdanov commissioned a celebratory piece from Shostakovich , entitled Suite on Finnish Themes to be performed as the marching bands of the Red Army would be parading through the Finnish capital Helsinki . The Winter War was a bitter experience for the Red Army , the parade never happened , and Shostakovich would never lay claim to the authorship of this work . It was not performed until 2001 . 
 After the outbreak of war between the Soviet Union and Germany in 1941 , Shostakovich initially remained in Leningrad . He tried to enlist for the military but was turned away because of his poor eyesight . To compensate , Shostakovich became a volunteer for the Leningrad Conservatory ’ s firefighter brigade and delivered a radio broadcast to the Soviet people listen . The photograph for which he posed was published in newspapers throughout the country . 
 However , his greatest and most famous wartime contribution was the Seventh Symphony . The composer wrote the first three movements in Leningrad and completed the work in Kuibyshev ( now Samara ) where he and his family had been evacuated . Whether or not Shostakovich really conceived the idea of the symphony with the siege of Leningrad in mind , it was officially claimed as a representation of the people of Leningrad ’ s brave resistance to the German invaders and an authentic piece of patriotic art at a time when morale needed boosting . The symphony was first premiered by the Bolshoi Theatre orchestra in Kuibyshev and was soon performed abroad in London and the United States . However , the most compelling performance was the Leningrad premiere by the Radio Orchestra in the besieged city . The orchestra had only fourteen musicians left , so the conductor Karl Eliasberg had to recruit anyone who could play a musical instrument to perform the symphony . 
 In spring 1943 , the family moved to Moscow . At the time of the Eighth Symphony 's premiere , the tide had turned for the Red Army . Therefore , the public , and most importantly the authorities , wanted another triumphant piece from the composer . Instead , they got the Eighth Symphony , perhaps the ultimate in sombre and violent expression within Shostakovich 's output . In order to preserve the image of Shostakovich ( a vital bridge to the people of the Union and to the West ) , the government assigned the name " Stalingrad " to the symphony , giving it the appearance of a mourning of the dead in the bloody Battle of Stalingrad . However , the symphony did not escape criticism . Shostakovich is reported to have said : " When the Eighth was performed , it was openly declared counter @-@ revolutionary and anti @-@ Soviet . They said , ' Why did Shostakovich write an optimistic symphony at the beginning of the war and a tragic one now ? At the beginning we were retreating and now we 're attacking , destroying the Fascists . And Shostakovich is acting tragic , that means he 's on the side of the fascists . ' " The work was unofficially but effectively banned until 1956 . 
 The Ninth Symphony ( 1945 ) , in contrast , was much lighter in tone . Gavriil Popov wrote that it was " splendid in its joie de vivre , gaiety , brilliance , and pungency ! ! By 1946 , however , it was the subject of criticism . Israel <unk> asked whether it was the right time for " a light and amusing interlude between Shostakovich 's significant creations , a temporary rejection of great , serious problems for the sake of playful , filigree @-@ trimmed trifles . " The New York World @-@ Telegram of 27 July 1946 was similarly dismissive : " The Russian composer should not have expressed his feelings about the defeat of Nazism in such a childish manner " . Shostakovich continued to compose chamber music , notably his Second Piano Trio ( Op. 67 ) , dedicated to the memory of Sollertinsky , with a bittersweet , Jewish @-@ themed <unk> finale . 
 = = = Second denunciation = = = 
 In 1948 , Shostakovich , along with many other composers , was again denounced for formalism in the Zhdanov decree . Andrei Zhdanov , Chairman of the RSFSR Supreme Soviet , accused Shostakovich and other composers ( such as Sergei Prokofiev and Aram Khachaturian ) for writing inappropriate and formalist music . This was part of an ongoing anti @-@ formalism campaign intended to root out all Western compositional influence as well as any perceived " non @-@ Russian " output . The conference resulted in the publication of the Central Committee ’ s Decree " On V. <unk> ’ s opera The Great Friendship , " which was targeted towards all Soviet composers and demanded that they only write " proletarian " music , or music for the masses . The accused composers , including Shostakovich , were summoned to make public apologies in front of the committee . Most of Shostakovich 's works were banned , and his family had privileges withdrawn . Yuri Lyubimov says that at this time " he waited for his arrest at night out on the landing by the lift , so that at least his family wouldn 't be disturbed . " 
 The consequences of the decree for composers were harsh . Shostakovich was among those who were dismissed from the Conservatoire altogether . For Shostakovich , the loss of money was perhaps the largest blow . Others still in the Conservatory experienced an atmosphere that was thick with suspicion . No one wanted their work to be understood as formalist , so many resorted to accusing their colleagues of writing or performing anti @-@ proletarian music . 
 In the next few years , he composed three categories of work : film music to pay the rent , official works aimed at securing official rehabilitation , and serious works " for the desk drawer " . The latter included the Violin Concerto No. 1 and the song cycle From Jewish Folk Poetry . The cycle was written at a time when the post @-@ war anti @-@ Semitic campaign was already under way , with widespread arrests including of I. <unk> and <unk> , the compilers of the book from which Shostakovich took his texts . 
 The restrictions on Shostakovich 's music and living arrangements were eased in 1949 , when Stalin decided that the Soviets needed to send artistic representatives to the Cultural and Scientific Congress for World Peace in New York City , and that Shostakovich should be amongst them . For Shostakovich , it was a humiliating experience culminating in a New York press conference where he was expected to read a prepared speech . Nicolas Nabokov , who was present in the audience , witnessed Shostakovich starting to read " in a nervous and shaky voice " before he had to break off " and the speech was continued in English by a suave radio baritone " . Fully aware that Shostakovich was not free to speak his mind , Nabokov publicly asked the composer whether he supported the then recent denunciation of Stravinsky 's music in the Soviet Union . Shostakovich , who was a great admirer of Stravinsky and had been influenced by his music , had no alternative but to answer in the affirmative . Nabokov did not hesitate to publish that this demonstrated that Shostakovich was " not a free man , but an obedient tool of his government . " Shostakovich never forgave Nabokov for this public humiliation . That same year Shostakovich was obliged to compose the cantata Song of the Forests , which praised Stalin as the " great gardener . " In 1951 the composer was made a deputy to the Supreme Soviet of RSFSR . 
 Stalin 's death in 1953 was the biggest step towards Shostakovich 's rehabilitation as a creative artist , which was marked by his Tenth Symphony . It features a number of musical quotations and codes ( notably the <unk> and Elmira motifs , Elmira Nazirova being a pianist and composer who had studied under Shostakovich in the year prior to his dismissal from the Moscow Conservatoire ) , the meaning of which is still debated , whilst the savage second movement , according to Testimony , is intended as a musical portrait of Stalin himself . The Symphony ranks alongside the Fifth and Seventh as one of his most popular works . 1953 also saw a stream of premieres of the " desk drawer " works . 
 During the forties and fifties , Shostakovich had close relationships with two of his pupils : Galina Ustvolskaya and Elmira Nazirova . In the background to all this remained Shostakovich 's first , open marriage to Nina Varzar until her death in 1954 . He taught Ustvolskaya from 1937 to 1947 . The nature of their relationship is far from clear : Mstislav Rostropovich described it as " tender " . Ustvolskaya rejected a proposal of marriage from him after Nina 's death . Shostakovich 's daughter , Galina , recalled her father consulting her and Maxim about the possibility of Ustvolskaya becoming their stepmother . Ustvolskaya 's friend , Viktor <unk> , said that she had been " deeply disappointed " in Shostakovich by the time of her graduation in 1947 . The relationship with Nazirova seems to have been one @-@ sided , expressed largely through his letters to her , and can be dated to around 1953 to 1956 . He married his second wife , Komsomol activist Margarita <unk> , in 1956 ; the couple proved ill @-@ matched , and divorced three years later . 
 In 1954 , Shostakovich wrote the Festive Overture , opus 96 , that was used as the theme music for the 1980 Summer Olympics . In addition his ' " Theme from the film <unk> , Opus <unk> : Finale " was played as the cauldron was lit at the 2004 Summer Olympics in Athens , Greece . 
 In 1959 , Shostakovich appeared on stage in Moscow at the end of a concert performance of his Fifth Symphony , congratulating Leonard Bernstein and the New York Philharmonic Orchestra for their performance ( part of a concert tour of the Soviet Union ) . Later that year , Bernstein and the New York Philharmonic recorded the symphony in Boston for Columbia Records . 
 = = = Joining the Party = = = 
 The year 1960 marked another turning point in Shostakovich 's life : he joined the Communist Party . The government wanted to appoint him General Secretary of the Composers ' Union , but in order to hold that position he was required to attain Party membership . It was understood that Nikita Khrushchev , the First Secretary of the Communist Party from 1958 to 1964 , was looking for support from the leading ranks of the intelligentsia in an effort to create a better relationship with the Soviet Union ’ s artists . This event has been interpreted variously as a show of commitment , a mark of cowardice , the result of political pressure , or as his free decision . On the one hand , the <unk> was undoubtedly less repressive than it had been before Stalin 's death . On the other , his son recalled that the event reduced Shostakovich to tears , and he later told his wife Irina that he had been blackmailed . Lev <unk> has said that the composer was suicidal . Once he joined the Party , several articles denouncing individualism in music were published in Pravda under his name , though he did not actually write them . In addition , in joining the party , Shostakovich was also committing himself to finally writing the homage to Lenin that he had promised before . His Twelfth Symphony , which portrays the Bolshevik Revolution and was completed in 1961 , was dedicated to Vladimir Lenin and called " The Year 1917 . " Around this time , his health also began to deteriorate . 
 Shostakovich 's musical response to these personal crises was the Eighth String Quartet , composed in only three days . He subtitled the piece , " To the victims of fascism and war " , ostensibly in memory of the Dresden fire bombing that took place in 1945 . Yet , like the Tenth Symphony , this quartet incorporates quotations from several of his past works and his musical monogram : Shostakovich confessed to his friend Isaak Glikman " I started thinking that if some day I die , nobody is likely to write a work in memory of me , so I had better write one myself . " Several of Shostakovich 's colleagues , including Natalya <unk> @-@ <unk> and the cellist Valentin <unk> , were also aware of the Eighth Quartet 's biographical intent . 
 In 1962 he married for the third time , to Irina <unk> . In a letter to Glikman , he wrote " her only defect is that she is 27 years old . In all other respects she is splendid : clever , cheerful , straightforward and very likeable . " According to Galina Vishnevskaya , who knew the <unk> well , this marriage was a very happy one : " It was with her that Dmitri Dmitriyevich finally came to know domestic peace ... Surely , she prolonged his life by several years . " In November he made his only venture into conducting , conducting a couple of his own works in Gorky ; otherwise he declined to conduct , citing nerves and ill health as his reasons . 
 That year saw Shostakovich again turn to the subject of anti @-@ Semitism in his Thirteenth Symphony ( subtitled Babi Yar ) . The symphony sets a number of poems by Yevgeny Yevtushenko , the first of which commemorates a massacre of Ukrainian Jews during the Second World War . Opinions are divided how great a risk this was : the poem had been published in Soviet media , and was not banned , but it remained controversial . After the symphony 's premiere , Yevtushenko was forced to add a stanza to his poem which said that Russians and Ukrainians had died alongside the Jews at Babi Yar . 
 In 1965 Shostakovich raised his voice in defense of poet Joseph Brodsky , who was sentenced to five years of exile and hard labor . Shostakovich co @-@ signed protests together with Yevtushenko and fellow Soviet artists <unk> <unk> , Anna Akhmatova , Samuil Marshak , and the French philosopher Jean @-@ Paul Sartre . After the protests the sentence was commuted , and Brodsky returned to Leningrad . 
 = = = Later life = = = 
 In 1964 Shostakovich composed the music for the Russian film Hamlet , which was favourably reviewed by the New York Times : " But the lack of this aural stimulation – of Shakespeare 's eloquent words – is recompensed in some measure by a splendid and stirring musical score by Dmitri Shostakovich . This has great dignity and depth , and at times an appropriate wildness or becoming levity " . 
 In later life , Shostakovich suffered from chronic ill health , but he resisted giving up cigarettes and vodka . Beginning in 1958 he suffered from a debilitating condition that particularly affected his right hand , eventually forcing him to give up piano playing ; in 1965 it was diagnosed as poliomyelitis . He also suffered heart attacks the following year and again in 1971 , and several falls in which he broke both his legs ; in 1967 he wrote in a letter : 
 " Target achieved so far : 75 % ( right leg broken , left leg broken , right hand defective ) . All I need to do now is wreck the left hand and then 100 % of my extremities will be out of order . " 
 A preoccupation with his own mortality permeates Shostakovich 's later works , among them the later quartets and the Fourteenth Symphony of 1969 ( a song cycle based on a number of poems on the theme of death ) . This piece also finds Shostakovich at his most extreme with musical language , with twelve @-@ tone themes and dense polyphony used throughout . Shostakovich dedicated this score to his close friend Benjamin Britten , who conducted its Western premiere at the 1970 Aldeburgh Festival . The Fifteenth Symphony of 1971 is , by contrast , melodic and retrospective in nature , quoting Wagner , Rossini and the composer 's own Fourth Symphony . 
 Shostakovich died of lung cancer on 9 August 1975 and after a civic funeral was interred in the Novodevichy Cemetery , Moscow . Even before his death he had been commemorated with the naming of the Shostakovich Peninsula on Alexander Island , Antarctica . 
 He was survived by his third wife , Irina ; his daughter , Galina ; and his son , Maxim , a pianist and conductor who was the dedicatee and first performer of some of his father 's works . Shostakovich himself left behind several recordings of his own piano works , while other noted interpreters of his music include his friends Emil Gilels , Mstislav Rostropovich , Tatiana <unk> , Maria <unk> , David Oistrakh , and members of the Beethoven Quartet . 
 His last work was his Viola Sonata , which was first performed on 28 December 1975 , four months after his death . 
 Shostakovich 's musical influence on later composers outside the former Soviet Union has been relatively slight , although Alfred Schnittke took up his eclecticism , and his contrasts between the dynamic and the static , and some of André Previn 's music shows clear links to Shostakovich 's style of orchestration . His influence can also be seen in some Nordic composers , such as Lars @-@ Erik Larsson . Many of his Russian contemporaries , and his pupils at the Leningrad Conservatory , however , were strongly influenced by his style ( including German <unk> , Boris Tishchenko , whose 5th Symphony of 1978 is dedicated to Shostakovich 's memory , Sergei Slonimsky , and others ) . Shostakovich 's conservative idiom has grown increasingly popular with audiences both within and beyond Russia , as the avant @-@ garde has declined in influence and debate about his political views has developed . 
 = = Music = = 
 = = = Overview = = = 
 Shostakovich 's works are broadly tonal and in the Romantic tradition , but with elements of atonality and chromaticism . In some of his later works ( e.g. , the Twelfth Quartet ) , he made use of tone rows . His output is dominated by his cycles of symphonies and string quartets , each totaling fifteen works . The symphonies are distributed fairly evenly throughout his career , while the quartets are concentrated towards the latter part . Among the most popular are the Fifth and Seventh Symphonies and the Eighth and Fifteenth Quartets . Other works include the operas Lady Macbeth of Mtsensk , The Nose and the unfinished The Gamblers based on the comedy of Nikolai Gogol ; six concertos ( two each for piano , violin and cello ) ; two piano trios ; and a large quantity of film music . 
 Shostakovich 's music shows the influence of many of the composers he most admired : Bach in his fugues and <unk> ; Beethoven in the late quartets ; Mahler in the symphonies and Berg in his use of musical codes and quotations . Among Russian composers , he particularly admired Modest Mussorgsky , whose operas Boris Godunov and Khovanshchina he re @-@ orchestrated ; Mussorgsky 's influence is most prominent in the wintry scenes of Lady Macbeth and the Eleventh Symphony , as well as in his satirical works such as " <unk> " . Prokofiev 's influence is most apparent in the earlier piano works , such as the first sonata and first concerto . The influence of Russian church and folk music is very evident in his works for unaccompanied choir of the 1950s . 
 Shostakovich 's relationship with Stravinsky was profoundly ambivalent ; as he wrote to Glikman , " Stravinsky the composer I worship . Stravinsky the thinker I despise . " He was particularly enamoured of the Symphony of Psalms , presenting a copy of his own piano version of it to Stravinsky when the latter visited the USSR in 1962 . ( The meeting of the two composers was not very successful , however ; observers commented on Shostakovich 's extreme nervousness and Stravinsky 's " cruelty " to him . ) 
 Many commentators have noted the disjunction between the experimental works before the 1936 denunciation and the more conservative ones that followed ; the composer told Flora <unk> , " without ' Party guidance ' ... I would have displayed more brilliance , used more sarcasm , I could have revealed my ideas openly instead of having to resort to camouflage . " Articles published by Shostakovich in 1934 and 1935 cited Berg , Schoenberg , Krenek , Hindemith , " and especially Stravinsky " among his influences . Key works of the earlier period are the First Symphony , which combined the academicism of the conservatory with his progressive inclinations ; The Nose ( " The most uncompromisingly modernist of all his stage @-@ works " ) ; Lady <unk> which precipitated the denunciation ; and the Fourth Symphony , described in Grove 's Dictionary as " a colossal synthesis of Shostakovich 's musical development to date " . The Fourth Symphony was also the first in which the influence of Mahler came to the fore , prefiguring the route Shostakovich was to take to secure his rehabilitation , while he himself admitted that the preceding two were his least successful . 
 In the years after 1936 , Shostakovich 's symphonic works were outwardly musically conservative , regardless of any subversive political content . During this time he turned increasingly to chamber works , a field that permitted the composer to explore different and often darker ideas without inviting external scrutiny . While his chamber works were largely tonal , they gave Shostakovich an outlet for sombre reflection not welcomed in his more public works . This is most apparent in the late chamber works , which portray what is described in Grove 's Dictionary as a " world of <unk> numbness " ; in some of these he included the use of tone rows , although he treated these as melodic themes rather than serially . Vocal works are also a prominent feature of his late output , setting texts often concerned with love , death and art . 
 = = = Jewish themes = = = 
 Even before the Stalinist anti @-@ Semitic campaigns in the late 1940s and early 1950s , Shostakovich showed an interest in Jewish themes . He was intrigued by Jewish music ’ s " ability to build a jolly melody on sad intonations " . Examples of works that included Jewish themes are the Fourth String Quartet ( 1949 ) , the First Violin Concerto ( 1948 ) , and the Four Monologues on Pushkin Poems ( 1952 ) , as well as the Piano Trio in E minor ( 1944 ) . He was further inspired to write with Jewish themes when he examined Moisei <unk> ’ s thesis on the theme of Jewish folk music in 1946 . 
 In 1948 , Shostakovich acquired a book of Jewish folk songs , and from this he composed the song cycle From Jewish Poetry . He initially wrote eight songs that were meant to represent the hardships of being Jewish in the Soviet Union . However in order to disguise this , Shostakovich ended up adding three more songs meant to demonstrate the great life Jews had under the Soviet regime . Despite his efforts to hide the real meaning in the work , the Union of Composers refused to approve his music in 1949 under the pressure of the anti @-@ Semitism that gripped the country . From Jewish Poetry could not be performed until after Stalin ’ s death in March 1953 , along with all the other works that were forbidden . 
 = = = Posthumous publications = = = 
 In 2004 , the musicologist Olga <unk> discovered a trove of Shostakovich manuscripts at the Glinka State Central Museum of Musical Culture , Moscow . In a cardboard file were some " 300 pages of musical sketches , pieces and scores " in the hand of Shostakovich . " A composer friend bribed Shostakovich 's housemaid to regularly deliver the contents of Shostakovich 's office waste bin to him , instead of taking it to the garbage . Some of those cast @-@ offs eventually found their way into the Glinka . ... The Glinka archive ' contained a huge number of pieces and compositions which were completely unknown or could be traced quite indirectly , ' <unk> said . " 
 Among these were Shostakovich 's piano and vocal sketches for a prologue to an opera , <unk> ( 1932 ) . They have been orchestrated by the British composer Gerard McBurney and this work was premiered in December 2011 by the Los Angeles Philharmonic . 
 = = = Criticism = = = 
 According to Shostakovich scholar Gerard McBurney , opinion is divided on whether his music is " of visionary power and originality , as some maintain , or , as others think , derivative , trashy , empty and second @-@ hand " . William Walton , his British contemporary , described him as " the greatest composer of the 20th century " . Musicologist David Fanning concludes in Grove 's Dictionary that , " Amid the conflicting pressures of official requirements , the mass suffering of his fellow countrymen , and his personal ideals of humanitarian and public service , he succeeded in forging a musical language of colossal emotional power . " 
 Some modern composers have been critical . Pierre Boulez dismissed Shostakovich 's music as " the second , or even third pressing of Mahler " . The Romanian composer and Webern disciple Philip <unk> called Shostakovich " a hack in a trance " . A related complaint is that Shostakovich 's style is vulgar and strident : Stravinsky wrote of Lady Macbeth : " brutally hammering ... and monotonous " . English composer and musicologist Robin Holloway described his music as " battleship @-@ grey in melody and harmony , factory @-@ functional in structure ; in content all rhetoric and coercion . " 
 In the 1980s , the Finnish conductor and composer Esa @-@ Pekka Salonen was critical of Shostakovich and refused to conduct his music . For instance , he said in 1987 : 
 Shostakovich is in many ways a polar counter @-@ force for Stravinsky . [ ... ] When I have said that the 7th symphony of Shostakovich is a dull and unpleasant composition , people have responded : " Yes , yes , but think of the background of that symphony . " Such an attitude does no good to anyone . 
 However , Salonen has since performed and recorded several of Shostakovich 's works , including the Piano Concertos Nos. 1 and 2 ( 1999 ) , the Violin Concerto No. 1 ( 2010 ) , the Prologue to " <unk> " and the Symphony No. 4 ( 2012 ) . 
 It is certainly true that Shostakovich borrows extensively from the material and styles both of earlier composers and of popular music ; the vulgarity of " low " music is a notable influence on this " greatest of <unk> " . McBurney traces this to the avant @-@ garde artistic circles of the early Soviet period in which Shostakovich moved early in his career , and argues that these borrowings were a deliberate technique to allow him to create " patterns of contrast , repetition , exaggeration " that gave his music the large @-@ scale structure it required . 
 = = Personality = = 
 Shostakovich was in many ways an obsessive man : according to his daughter he was " obsessed with cleanliness " ; he synchronised the clocks in his apartment ; he regularly sent cards to himself to test how well the postal service was working . Elizabeth Wilson 's Shostakovich : A Life Remembered ( 1994 edition ) indexes 26 references to his nervousness . Mikhail Druskin remembers that even as a young man the composer was " fragile and nervously agile " . Yuri Lyubimov comments , " The fact that he was more vulnerable and receptive than other people was no doubt an important feature of his genius " . In later life , Krzysztof Meyer recalled , " his face was a bag of tics and grimaces " . 
 In his lighter moods , sport was one of his main recreations , although he preferred spectating or umpiring to participating ( he was a qualified football referee ) . His favourite football club was Zenit Leningrad , which he would watch regularly . He also enjoyed playing card games , particularly patience . He was fond of satirical writers such as Gogol , Chekhov and Mikhail <unk> . The influence of the latter in particular is evident in his letters , which include wry parodies of Soviet <unk> . <unk> himself noted the contradictions in the composer 's character : " he is ... frail , fragile , withdrawn , an infinitely direct , pure child ... [ but he is also ] hard , acid , extremely intelligent , strong perhaps , despotic and not altogether good @-@ natured ( although <unk> good @-@ natured ) " . 
 He was diffident by nature : Flora <unk> has said he was " completely incapable of saying ' No ' to anybody . " This meant he was easily persuaded to sign official statements , including a denunciation of Andrei Sakharov in 1973 ; on the other hand he was willing to try to help constituents in his capacities as chairman of the Composers ' Union and Deputy to the Supreme Soviet . Oleg Prokofiev commented that " he tried to help so many people that ... less and less attention was paid to his pleas . " When asked if he believed in God , Shostakovich said " No , and I am very sorry about it . " 
 = = Orthodoxy and revisionism = = 
 Shostakovich 's response to official criticism and , what is more important , the question of whether he used music as a kind of covert dissidence is a matter of dispute . He outwardly conformed to government policies and positions , reading speeches and putting his name to articles expressing the government line . But it is evident he disliked many aspects of the regime , as confirmed by his family , his letters to Isaak Glikman , and the satirical cantata " <unk> " , which ridiculed the " anti @-@ formalist " campaign and was kept hidden until after his death . He was a close friend of Marshal of the Soviet Union Mikhail Tukhachevsky , who was executed in 1937 during the Great Purge . 
 It is also uncertain to what extent Shostakovich expressed his opposition to the state in his music . The revisionist view was put forth by Solomon Volkov in the 1979 book Testimony , which was claimed to be Shostakovich 's memoirs dictated to Volkov . The book alleged that many of the composer 's works contained coded anti @-@ government messages , that would place Shostakovich in a tradition of Russian artists outwitting censorship that goes back at least to the early 19th century poet Alexander Pushkin . It is known that he incorporated many quotations and motifs in his work , most notably his signature <unk> theme . His longtime collaborator Yevgeny Mravinsky said that " Shostakovich very often explained his intentions with very specific images and connotations . " 
 The revisionist perspective has subsequently been supported by his children , Maxim and Galina , and many Russian musicians . Volkov has further argued , both in Testimony and in Shostakovich and Stalin , that Shostakovich adopted the role of the <unk> or holy fool in his relations with the government . Other prominent revisionists are Ian MacDonald , whose book The New Shostakovich put forward further revisionist interpretations of his music , and Elizabeth Wilson , whose Shostakovich : A Life Remembered provides testimony from many of the composer 's acquaintances . 
 Musicians and scholars including Laurel Fay and Richard Taruskin contest the authenticity and debate the significance of Testimony , alleging that Volkov compiled it from a combination of recycled articles , gossip , and possibly some information direct from the composer . Fay documents these allegations in her 2002 article ' Volkov 's Testimony reconsidered ' , showing that the only pages of the original Testimony manuscript that Shostakovich had signed and verified are word @-@ for @-@ word reproductions of earlier interviews given by the composer , none of which are controversial . ( Against this , it has been pointed out by Allan B. Ho and Dmitry <unk> that at least two of the signed pages contain controversial material : for instance , " on the first page of chapter 3 , where [ Shostakovich ] notes that the plaque that reads ' In this house lived [ Vsevolod ] Meyerhold ' should also say ' And in this house his wife was brutally murdered ' . " ) 
 = = Recorded legacy = = 
 In May 1958 , during a visit to Paris , Shostakovich recorded his two piano concertos with André Cluytens , as well as some short piano works . These were issued by EMI on an LP , reissued by Seraphim Records on LP , and eventually digitally remastered and released on CD . Shostakovich recorded the two concertos in stereo in Moscow for <unk> . Shostakovich also played the piano solos in recordings of the Cello Sonata , Op. 40 with cellist Daniil Shafran and also with Mstislav Rostropovich ; the Violin Sonata , Op. 134 , with violinist David Oistrakh ; and the Piano Trio , Op. 67 with violinist David Oistrakh and cellist Miloš <unk> . There is also a short sound film of Shostakovich as soloist in a 1930s concert performance of the closing moments of his first piano concerto . A colour film of Shostakovich supervising one of his operas , from his last year , was also made . A major achievement was the recording of the original , unexpurgated score for Lady Macbeth of Mtsensk by EMI . There was at least one recording of the cleaned up version , Katerina <unk> that Shostakovich had made to satisfy Soviet censorship . But when conductor Mstislav Rostropovich and his wife , soprano Galina Vishnevskaya were finally allowed to emigrate to the West , the composer begged them to record the full original score , which they did in 1979 . It features Vishnevskaya as Katerina , Nicolai Gedda as Sergei , <unk> <unk> as Boris Ismailov and a brilliant supporting cast under Rostropovich 's direction . 
 = = Awards = = 
 Soviet Union 
 Hero of Socialist Labor ( 1966 ) 
 Order of Lenin ( 1946 , 1956 , 1966 ) 
 Order of the October Revolution ( 1971 ) 
 Order of the Red Banner of Labour ( 1940 ) 
 Order of Friendship of Peoples ( 1972 ) 
 People 's Artist of the USSR ( 1954 ) 
 People 's Artist of the RSFSR ( 1948 ) 
 International Peace Prize ( 1954 ) 
 Lenin Prize ( 1958 – for the 11th symphony " 1905 " ) 
 Stalin Prize in arts ( 1941 – 1st class , for Piano Quintet ; 1942 – 1st class , for the 7th ( " Leningrad " ) Symphony ; 1946 – 2nd class , for Trio ; 1950 – 1st class , for the music for the film Encounter at the Elbe ; 1952 – 2nd class , for 10 poems for chorus ) 
 USSR State Prize ( 1968 – for the poem " The Execution of Stepan <unk> " for bass , chorus and orchestra ) 
 Glinka State Prize of the RSFSR ( 1974 – for the 14th string quartet and choral cycle " Fidelity " ) 
 National Prize of Ukraine Taras Shevchenko ( posthumously , 1976 – USSR State Prize named after Taras Shevchenko – for the opera " Katerina Ismailov , " staged in <unk> Shevchenko ) 
 United Kingdom 
 Gold Medal of the Royal Philharmonic Society ( 1966 ) 
 Finland 
 Sibelius Award ( 1958 ) 
 United States 
 Oscar nomination for Khovanshchina , Best Score ( Musical ) in 1961 
 Austria 
 Decoration for Services to the Republic of Austria in Silver ( 1967 ) 
 Denmark 
 <unk> Sonning Music Prize ( 1974 ) 
 = = In Fiction = = 
 In th 2015 movie Bridge of Spies , inspired by two real life events : the Abel v. United States process and the 1960 U @-@ 2 incident , the Soviet alleged spy Rudolf Abel appreciates Shostakovich 's music . 
 The Noise of Time by Julian Barnes ( 2016 ) is a fictionalised rendering of Shostakovich 's life , particularly centred on his survival of his first ( 1936 – 37 ) denunciation . 
 = USS Ohio ( BB @-@ 12 ) = 
 USS Ohio ( BB @-@ 12 ) , a Maine @-@ class battleship pre @-@ dreadnought battleship , was the third ship both of her class and of the United States Navy to be named for the 17th state . She was laid down at the Union Iron Works shipyard in San Francisco in April 1899 , was launched in May 1901 , and was commissioned into the fleet in October 1904 . She was armed with a main battery of four 12 @-@ inch ( 300 mm ) guns and could steam at a top speed of 18 knots ( 33 km / h ; 21 mph ) . 
 Ohio initially served in the Asiatic Fleet , from 1905 to 1907 , when she returned to the United States . In December that year , she joined the Great White Fleet for its world cruise , which lasted until early 1909 . She served with the Atlantic Fleet for the next four years conducting a peacetime training routine . In 1914 , she was sent to Mexico to protect American interests in the country during the Mexican Revolution . She served as a training ship during America 's involvement in World War I from 1917 to 1918 . Thoroughly obsolete by that time , Ohio was decommissioned in July 1919 , and was ultimately sold for scrap in March 1923 under the terms of the Washington Naval Treaty . 
 = = Description = = 
 Ohio was 393 feet 11 inches ( 120 @.@ 07 m ) long overall and had a beam of 72 ft 3 in ( 22 @.@ 02 m ) and a draft of 24 ft 4 in ( 7 @.@ 42 m ) . She displaced 12 @,@ 723 long tons ( 12 @,@ 927 t ) as designed and up to 13 @,@ 700 long tons ( 13 @,@ 900 t ) at full load . The ship was powered by two @-@ shaft triple @-@ expansion steam engines rated at 16 @,@ 000 indicated horsepower ( 12 @,@ 000 kW ) and twelve coal @-@ fired Thornycroft boilers , generating a top speed of 18 knots ( 33 km / h ; 21 mph ) . As built , she was fitted with heavy military masts , but these were quickly replaced by cage masts in 1909 . She had a crew of 561 officers and enlisted men , which increased to 779 – 813 . 
 The ship was armed with a main battery of four 12 @-@ inch ( 305 mm ) / 40 caliber guns in two twin gun turrets on the centerline , one forward and aft . The secondary battery consisted of sixteen 6 @-@ inch ( 152 mm ) / 45 Mark 6 guns , which were placed in casemates in the hull . For close @-@ range defense against torpedo boats , she carried six 3 @-@ inch / 50 guns mounted in casemates along the side of the hull , eight 3 @-@ pounder guns , and six 1 @-@ pounder guns . As was standard for capital ships of the period , Ohio carried two 18 in ( 460 mm ) torpedo tubes , submerged in her hull on the broadside . 
 Ohio 's main armored belt was 11 in ( 279 mm ) thick over the magazines and the machinery spaces and 8 in ( 203 mm ) elsewhere . The main battery gun turrets had 12 @-@ inch ( 300 mm ) thick faces , and the supporting barbettes had the same thickness of armor plating on their exposed sides . Armor that was 6 in thick protected the secondary battery . The conning tower had 10 in ( 250 mm ) thick sides . 
 = = Service history = = 
 Ohio , the final member of the Maine class of pre @-@ dreadnought battleships , was the second ship of the three to be laid down . She was built at the Union Iron Works in San Francisco , with her keel being laid down on 22 April 1899 . She was launched on 18 May 1901 and was commissioned on 4 October 1904 . After she entered service , Ohio was assigned as the flagship of the Asiatic Fleet . She left San Francisco on 1 April , bound for Manila in the Philippines . After the new battleship arrived , the party of then @-@ Secretary of War William Howard Taft came aboard for a tour of East Asia , including stops in Japan and China . Ohio returned to the United States in 1907 and was transferred to the Atlantic Fleet . She and the rest of the Atlantic Fleet battleships held a naval review for President Theodore Roosevelt in Hampton Roads , Virginia to mark the start of the cruise of the Great White Fleet on 16 December 1907 . The following day , the fleet steamed out of Hampton Roads and cruised south to the Caribbean and then to South America , making stops in Port of Spain , Rio de Janeiro , Punta Arenas , and Valparaíso , among other cities . After arriving in Mexico in March 1908 , the fleet spent three weeks conducting gunnery practice . 
 The fleet then resumed its voyage up the Pacific coast of the Americas , stopping in San Francisco and Seattle before crossing the Pacific to Australia , stopping in Hawaii on the way . Stops in the South Pacific included Melbourne , Sydney , and Auckland . After leaving Australia , the fleet turned north for the Philippines , stopping in Manila , before continuing on to Japan where a welcoming ceremony was held in Yokohama . Three weeks of exercises followed in Subic Bay in the Philippines in November . The ships passed Singapore on 6 December and entered the Indian Ocean ; they coaled in Colombo before proceeding to the Suez Canal and coaling again at Port Said , Egypt . The fleet called in several Mediterranean ports before stopping in Gibraltar , where an international fleet of British , Russian , French , and Dutch warships greeted the Americans . The ships then crossed the Atlantic to return to Hampton Roads on 22 February 1909 , having traveled 46 @,@ 729 nautical miles ( 86 @,@ 542 km ; 53 @,@ 775 mi ) . There , they conducted a naval review for Roosevelt . 
 Following the conclusion of the ceremonies , Ohio proceeded to New York , where she was based for the following four years . This time was spent conducting normal peacetime training with the fleet and assisting in the training of the New York Naval Militia . By 1914 , the worsening conditions during the Mexican Civil War prompted the United States to begin intervening in the conflict . Ohio was sent to Mexican waters early that year to protect American interests in the country . In mid @-@ 1914 , she returned to the east coast of the United States to conduct a training cruise for midshipmen from the US Naval Academy . After completing the cruise , Ohio was transferred to the Reserve Fleet based at Philadelphia . She returned to service only to conduct additional midshipmen cruises in the summers of 1915 and 1916 . 
 The United States had initially remained neutral during World War I , but by early 1917 , tensions between it and Germany rose as the latter 's unrestricted submarine warfare campaign began to sink American merchants ships . On 6 April 1917 , the United States declared war on Germany , and on the 24th , Ohio was recommissioned . She was based in Norfolk and tasked with training crews for the rapidly expanding wartime fleet . This service included gunnery training ; on 1 June 1918 , she was involved in a significant accident during gunnery practice with two other battleships , New Hampshire and Louisiana . Gunners aboard New Hampshire accidentally began firing at a pair of submarine chasers . Ohio issued a " cease fire " warning , though it was not immediately received aboard New Hampshire before one shell struck Louisiana . While the ships stopped to assess the damage , lookouts aboard Ohio reported an enemy submarine , prompting several salvos from the secondary batteries of Ohio and New Hampshire , though the submarine chasers found no evidence of a submarine upon investigating the scene . 
 Following the German surrender in November 1918 , most of the battleships of the Atlantic Fleet were used as transports to ferry American soldiers back from France . Ohio and her sisters were not so employed , however , owing to their short range and small size , which would not permit sufficient additional accommodations . Instead , she was sent to Philadelphia on 28 November and remained inactive there until 7 January 1919 , when she was placed back in reserve . On 17 July , the ship was reclassified as BB @-@ 12 . Following the 1922 Washington Naval Treaty , which mandated significant reductions in naval armaments , Ohio was stricken from the naval register on 31 May 1922 and sold for scrap on 24 March 1923 . 
 = The Ways of Fate = 
 The Ways of Fate is a 1913 American silent short romance film produced by the American Film Manufacturing Company . The film 's directorial and producer roles have been both attributed to Allan Dwan , but other sources point to Wallace Reid as director . The film 's fictional plot is centered on Jim Conway , who grew up wanting to avenge his father 's death and headed West to seek his father 's killer . Lost in the mountains , he is saved by a young woman and the two fall in love . After a few weeks with her , Conway reveals the reason he came west and the young woman 's father overhears it . The old man confesses to killing Conway 's father , over a game of cards , and bares his chest . Conway refuses to take revenge , because love had diminished such feelings . The film was released on April 19 , 1913 and it had a widespread national release . The survival status of the film is unknown , but it is presumed lost . 
 = = Plot = = 
 A surviving description of this lost film was published in the The Moving Picture World . It states : " Two men playing cards , the argument , flash of a revolver , and one lay dead . The murderer homeward fled , hurried his little girl baby into a west @-@ bound train and was heard of no more . The years passed and boyish Jim Conway grew to manhood with the sole purpose of seeking out his father 's murderer to deal justice to him . He went West and was one day lost in the mountains . He called for help and help came in the form of a sweet @-@ faced woman who led him to her home . He spent the flying weeks with her and the aged father , learned to love the mountain nymph for her beauty of soul and fair face . One day she asked him his reasons for being in the hill country , and he , lover @-@ like , confided his secret . Behind the door , sat the white @-@ haired father . He rose , shook himself like a leaf as be invited the young man into the house . And there he confessed the deed , baring his chest for the expected blow . But none fell for love had sweetened the poison of his thought . " This summary of the film was provided by the American Film Manufacturing Company . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Wallace Reid as Jim Conway 
 Vivian Rich 
 Murdock MacQuarrie 
 A single line in The Motion Picture Story Magazine notes that " Vivian Rich played opposite Wallace Reid in " The Ways of Fate . " According to E. J. Fleming , author of Wallace Reid : The Life and Death of a Hollywood Idol , the cast marks the debut of Lon Chaney , but this is unsupported and disputed . Fleming also credits Pauline Bush in a role , but this is also disputed . 
 = = Production and release = = 
 The Illustrated Guide to Film Directors credits Allan Dwan for directing the film and Sweethearts of the Sage attribute Wallace Reid . Wallace Reid : The Life and Death of a Hollywood Idol credits Dwan as the producer and Reid as the director , but gives an incorrect release date . Fleming states that the film was made on December 26 – 27 , 1912 , that Reid was injured the next day when his horse fell and that he could not work until mid @-@ January . 
 On April 13 , 1913 , an announcement was made that Allan Dwan has been fired from the American Film Manufacturing Company . The dismissal came as a shock to Dwan and stemmed from a personal dispute with J. Warren Kerrigan . Frederic Lombardi , author of Allan Dwan and the Rise and Decline of the Hollywood Studios , suggests that Dwan learned of his firing on April 12 , 1913 , based on a telegram Dwan sent to the Selig Polyscope Company on April 12 inquiring about employment opportunities . A newspaper article tried to dispel rumors about Dwan 's dismissal , termed " retirement , " having resulted in much dissatisfaction within the company . On April 20 , there was an announcement that Pauline Bush and Jessalyn Van Trump were also leaving the company . Lombardi says the two actresses may have had a personal reason to follow Dwan 's departure . In May , there was an announcement that Dwan , Bush and Van Trump had joined Universal Film Manufacturing Company . 
 The film was released on April 19 , 1913 , by the American Film Manufacturing Company , also known as " The Flying A " or " American . " The company described the film as a " half @-@ social , half @-@ western " film . 
 = = Release and legacy = = 
 The film saw widespread release in the United States . Advertising theaters were included in Washington D.C. , Utah , Pennsylvania , Texas , Kansas , North Carolina , and Missouri . The film was also released internationally with advertisements in Manitoba , Canada and in London , United Kingdom . 
 Fleming 's book credits The Ways of Fate as the debut of Lon Chaney , but this has been disputed . The documentary Lon Chaney : A Thousand Faces states that his film debut occurred after his wife 's suicide attempt in April 1913 and " his earliest films were made at the first studio to open in Hollywood , Nestor . " Jon C. Mirsalis notes in his website that the film " almost certainly [ did not feature ] Chaney , although it was directed by Allan Dwan . Wouldn 't it be interesting if Chaney worked at a studio other than Universal in 1913 ! " \ Michael Blake , a Lon Chaney historian and author of several books on Lon Chaney 's life and work , notes that the possibility exists that Chaney performed in a role during a period of unemployment in 1912 . Blake notes that this would have occurred before Lon Chaney rejoined Clarence Kolb and Max Dill 's company in San Francisco , California in September 1912 . Furthermore , the Encyclopedia of Early Cinema states that the American Film Manufacturing Company had moved to its Santa Barbara , California location in the summer of 1912 and that Dwan , who would later work with Chaney , left the company after a dispute with J. Warren Kerrigan in 1913 . Chaney 's appearance in the film is not cited by any Chaney historians . The film 's survival status is unknown , but presumed lost . 
 = Buenos Aires Underground = 
 The Buenos Aires Underground ( Spanish : <unk> de Buenos Aires ) , locally known as Subte ( Spanish pronunciation : [ <unk> ] , from <unk> – ' underground ' or ' subterranean ' ) , is a mass transit metro system that serves the metropolitan area of Buenos Aires , Argentina . The first section of this network ( Plaza de Mayo @-@ Plaza Miserere ) opened in 1913 , making it the 13th subway in the world , and first underground railway in Latin America , the Southern Hemisphere and the Spanish @-@ speaking world , with the Madrid Metro opening five years later , in 1919 . As of 2015 , Buenos Aires is the only Argentine city with a metro system , but there is a proposal to build a metro in the city of Córdoba ( the Córdoba Metro ) , while a proposal to build a metro in Rosario was shelved in favour of a tramway network . 
 Currently , the underground network 's six lines : A , B , C , D , E , and H , comprise 53 @.@ 9 kilometers ( 33 @.@ 5 mi ) of route , serving 86 stations . The network is complemented by the 7 @.@ 4 km long Premetro line , and the 26 km long Urquiza suburban line , with 17 more stations in total . As of 2015 , the underground counts with 4 ghost stations , and lines E and H are undergoing expansions . Over a million passengers use the network , which also provides connections with the city 's extensive commuter rail and bus rapid transport networks . 
 The network expanded rapidly during the early decades of the 20th century ; by 1944 its main routes were completed , with the addition of its newest line occurring as late as 2007 . The pace of expansion fell sharply after the Second World War . In the late 1990s expansion resumed at a quicker pace , and four new lines were planned for the network . Despite this , the network 's expansion has been largely exceeded by the transportation needs of the city and is said to be overcrowded . As of 2015 , two modernisation plans have been presented : City of Buenos Aires law 670 , proposing the creation of 3 new lines , F , G and I ; and the PETERS plan , wherein 2 lines are created and the I line is postponed for future expansion , plus several other route amendments . 
 The entire network was nationalised in 1939 , remaining in state hands and operation until the mid @-@ 1990s when it entered into a concession model . The previously state @-@ operated lines were offered as 20 @-@ year concessions to interested private parties ; the two complementary lines were also included in this privatisation and all have been operated by Metrovías since 1995 , though the network and rolling stock remain the property of the City of Buenos Aires . 
 = = History = = 
 The Subte opened in 1913 , becoming the 13th underground system in the world , as well as the first in Latin America , the Southern Hemisphere and the Hispanophone , followed by the Madrid Metro in 1919 . The network was originally built and operated by three separate private companies and later nationalised in 1939 . In 1952 it was absorbed by a unified state administration , in 1963 it became the property of a newly founded company , which changed hands in 1979 . The Subte then entered into a concession model in the mid 1990s through which private sector parties were to submit bids to execute investment plans " <unk> and funded " by the state , while implemented by the concessionaire . All the Underground lines , along with the Urquiza Line and Premetro were offered as 20 @-@ year concessions to interested private parties . By 1995 , Metrovías took over the Subte under a $ 395 million plan . 
 = = = Early days = = = 
 Discussions on the need to build an underground transportation system in Buenos Aires began in the late nineteenth century , alongside the tramway system , which was one of the most extensive in the world at the time . The first trams appeared in 1870 , and by about 1900 the system was in a crisis exacerbated by the monopolisation of the lines , which had concentrated under the ownership of fewer companies during the electrification of the system . 
 In this context , the first proposals for the building of an underground system were made , along with requests for government grants : first , in 1886 , and several more in 1889 . However , the Ministry of Interior ( Ministerio del Interior , in Spanish ) denied the city administration the power to license building in the city 's subsoil and for this reason , subsequent drafts were submitted directly to this ministry . In 1894 , when it was decided to construct the Congress building in its present location , the underground idea was revived , since it would shorten the travel time between the Casa Rosada and the Congress . In 1896 Miguel <unk> , former Mayor of Buenos Aires ( 1892 – 1893 ) , expressed the need to build an underground railway similar to the one in London 
 There were numerous proposals at the time to build an electric aerial tramway , with one such line to go down the Avenida de Mayo . One proposal was the 1889 Le Tellier proposal , which envisioned multiple lines running along the city 's wider avenues with the trams moved using cables and would hang from steel rails fixed to 6 metre high steel and iron posts positioned in 10 – 15 metre intervals . The lines would take 24 months to build and construction would commence 3 months after their approval by the Argentine National Congress , a decision which was ultimately not taken in favour of an underground tramway . 
 The first Underground line was opened on 1 December 1913 and was built by the Anglo @-@ Argentine Tramways Company ( AATC ) , which had been given permission to build in 1909 . That line was made up of one of the existing sections of Line A , linking the stations of Plaza de Mayo and Plaza Miserere . 170 @,@ 000 passengers took part in the line 's first trip . On 1 April 1914 the line was to expand to Río de Janeiro station and on 1 July was extended to Primera Junta Station . 
 In 1912 the Lacroze Hermanos company won a concession to build another Underground line . The company was a competitor to the Anglo @-@ Argentine company , operating tramways in Buenos Aires as well as the Buenos Aires Central Railway , which later became part of the Urquiza Line . Construction began in 1927 and this line became Line B when it was inaugurated on 17 October 1930 . During 17 – 18 December 380 @,@ 000 passengers travelled on the line 's then 32 cars . The line was originally intended to continue above ground , with the current Federico Lacroze station to be the central terminal of the Buenos Aires Central Railway ( today the General Urquiza Railway ) , however nowadays the overground service forms part of the Urquiza Line instead . 
 By the 1920s , the Argentine government was dissatisfied with the lack of progress the AATC ( which enjoyed a near @-@ monopoly on the city 's tramways by this point ) had made in expanding the rest of the network and thus revoked its right to build any more lines in 1930 , seeking instead another company to do so . By this point , the AATC had only built 48 metres of what is today Line C , a line which would link two of the city 's most important rail terminals ( Constitución and Retiro ) together . In 1933 a third company , the Hispano @-@ Argentina Company of Public Works and Finances ( Compañía Hispano – Argentina de Obras Públicas y <unk> ( <unk> ) , in Spanish ) began construction of the other Underground lines . Line C 's first section , Constitución railway station @-@ Diagonal Norte , was inaugurated on 9 November 1934 by Agustín P. Justo , then President of Argentina . 
 CHADOPyF opened Line D in 1937 , from Catedral through <unk> ; with Line E following later in 1944 , from Constitución to San Juan y Urquiza , later joining with <unk> station . By this point the advent of the Second World War had slowed expansion significantly , but the network was 29 km ( 18 mi ) in length with each of the three companies – unusually for an underground network – continuing to run their respective lines , which were financed entirely with private capital , unlike the country 's railways which had been largely dependent on subsidies . 
 = = = Nationalisation = = = 
 The entire network was centralised and nationalised in 1939 under the management of the Transport Corporation of Buenos Aires ( <unk> ) and the lines were given their current lettered naming scheme , from A to D in the order in which the lines were opened . In 1952 the <unk> was absorbed by the Buenos Aires Transport General Administration ( <unk> ) and in 1963 , the administration was dissolved and the Underground network became the property of the Subterráneos de Buenos Aires company ( SBA ) . 
 In the early years of nationalisation , interchanges were provided between the lines previously belonging to the three different companies that built them ( AATC , CHADOPyF and Lacroze ) since previously only the CHADOPyF lines ( C , D and E ) had formal connections between them . However , the rate of expansion of the network during this period had slowed considerably and only one station was opened during the 1970s . 
 Four different long @-@ term expansion proposals were put forward between 1964 and 1991 which all proposed adding numerous lines to the network as well as extending the existing ones . Given the political instability characteristic of Argentina during this time , none of these proposals came to fruition , though aspects of them have been incorporated into contemporary expansion plans . One additional proposal put forward in 1973 saw the unification of the city 's commuter rail lines through underground tunnels and incorporated into the Buenos Aires Underground , and while this was also shelved , it has been adapted into the current Red de <unk> Regionales proposal . 
 During the 1960s and 70s , efforts were primarily concentrated on Line E , which was re @-@ routed from its terminus at Constitución to the centre of the city at the Plaza de Mayo in an attempt to boost passenger figures , something which proved to be successful . The segment was opened by president Arturo Illia in 1966 and Spain offered CAF @-@ General <unk> Española trains in order to cancel part of the debt it had accrued with Argentina ; trains which continue to serve on the line today . The line was extended westward to José María Moreno in 1973 , in what would be the only expansion of the decade . 
 In 1979 , SBA became Subterráneos de Buenos Aires Sociedad del Estado ( SBASE ) under Buenos Aires mayor Osvaldo <unk> of the National Reorganisation Process military junta . After a long period of stagnation , the Underground began to be expanded again with Lines B and E within the scope of these plans , though only the extension of Line E was commenced and completed before the transition to democracy where expansion was once again stalled . During this time , four Premetro feeder lines were planned leading out from the western termini of Lines D and E as well as one in Puerto Madero , however only Line E2 was completed in 1987 and these plans were scrapped in 1994 when operation of the Underground changed hands . 
 = = = Privatisation = = = 
 In 1994 the operation of the network was privatised , along with the country 's railways , and is now managed by Metrovías . SBASE ( as part of the Government of the City of Buenos Aires ) maintained ownership the network , its rolling stock and infrastructure , and administers its expansion and budget . One cosmetic change carried out in the 1990s under private operation was the re @-@ assignation of the colours of the lines , with Lines B and D switching colours , Line C changing from purple to blue and Line E changing from yellow to purple . The change of colours was also accompanied by a standardisation of the network 's signage to match the new schemes . 
 In 2012 , the role of Metrovías was lessened to simply operating the lines , while maintenance of infrastructure became the responsibility of SBASE . The relationship between Mauricio Macri 's mayoral administration and Metrovías became increasingly strained , with the Government of Buenos Aires issuing multiple fines to the operator . The relationship was further strained in 2013 when Metrovías ' 20 @-@ year concession ended and has since been renewed on a year @-@ by @-@ year basis , leaving the door open for a state @-@ run or mixed operation . Among the public , privatisation has proved unpopular , with a survey carried out in 2015 indicating that 82 % of passengers would like the Underground to be operated by the state instead of a private company . 
 In more recent years , Line A and Line B have been extended westwards , adding a total of 4 stations to each line between 2003 and 2013 . During the same period , Line H was opened 2007 , making it the first completely new line on the underground since Line E , excluding the Premetro . There have also been significant modernisations of infrastructure , signalling systems , stations and the network 's rolling stock . 
 = = Network and services = = 
 The network comprises six underground lines , labelled " A " to " E " and " H " and which are further identified by different colours , covering a total route length of 53 @.@ 9 kilometers ( 33 @.@ 5 mi ) and serving 86 stations . There is also one surface 7 @.@ 4 @-@ kilometer ( 4 @.@ 6 mi ) Premetro line with an additional 17 stations . Daily ridership was approximately 1 @.@ 11 million in 2015 . With the current usage patterns , the entire system is overstretched , and during weekdays overcrowded and with insufficient services . An expansion programme is underway , and it is expected to enlarge the network to 97 kilometers ( 60 mi ) in the future . Similarly , new rolling stock has been incorporated across lines since 2013 to improve capacity and the last of the current orders are set to arrive in 2016 and followed by further orders of new rolling stock , which is expected to increase ridership figures to 1 @.@ 8 million by 2019 . 
 = = = Fares and operating times = = = 
 Fares are AR $ 4 @.@ 50 per trip on the Subte , though these can be as low as AR $ 2 @.@ 70 per trip depending on how many trips are made per month , while the Premetro has a flat rate of AR $ 1 @.@ 50 . While tokens have been used in the past , at present , riders use contactless cards called <unk> , which are rechargeable with multiple forms of payment . Previously , single or multi @-@ use paper cards with a magnetic strip ( called <unk> ) were used , however , these were phased out of the system in May 2016 , opting instead only to use the digital cards , with the exception of some retired , disabled and student cards . Trains run from 05 : 00 until 23 : 00 , every 3 – 4 minutes , for all lines except Line H which has a frequency of around 6 minutes . Under modernisation plans commenced in 2013 , service frequencies are set to increase to an average of one train every 2 : 20 by 2019 . 
 Trains originally ran until 01 : 00 , but following the privatisation of the service through concession to Metrovías , the company temporarily moved the closing time back two hours in 1994 to carry out works on the lines , a change which was never reverted even after the works were completed . There have been numerous petitions as well as a campaign by the City Ombudsman to extend services to 1 : 30 on weekdays and 3 : 00 on Fridays and Saturdays . These proposals have been rejected by Subterráneos de Buenos Aires , which stated in 2015 that the reduced schedule is needed in order to carry out infrastructure modernisation works across all the lines while they are closed . 
 The <unk> operations are radio @-@ controlled and monitored remotely from the Metrovías Central Operations Post ( <unk> in Spanish ) . In it , 24 operators have been monitoring four of the six subway lines ( lines C and H have separate monitoring ) since 2001 . As of 2015 , last formations arrive at their respective terminals at approximately 11 : 30pm , where maintenance and cleaning operations take place until about 04 : 00am . 
 = = = Premetro = = = 
 The <unk> line E2 is a 7 @.@ 4 @-@ kilometer ( 4 @.@ 6 mi ) tramway feeding Line E. The Premetro line opened in 1987 . It carries approximately 2 @,@ 300 passengers daily and is also run by Metrovías . In 2015 , SBASE began making plans to refurbish and rebuild many of the stations , including a brand new central terminal , as part of a plan to modernise the network , which also intends to increase the amount of rolling stock in circulation . By the end of 2015 , the <unk> <unk> terminal had been refurbished , though other works on the line were delayed . 
 The Premetro was originally intended to include a number of feeder lines to the Underground network , including a second one to Line E and ones on lines C and D. The Premetro project was largely abandoned since it occurred in Argentina 's transition to democracy from the military junta and then the privatisation of the railways , which was a difficult time economically for the country , and only Line E2 was built . New Premetro feeder lines have been proposed in recent years , however , the role of the network has given way to the new Metrobus network which covers many of the same routes originally intended for the Premetro . 
 = = = Urquiza Line = = = 
 Línea Urquiza ( in English : Urquiza Line ) is a 26 @-@ kilometer ( 16 mi ) suburban electric commuter rail line originally designed to be part of the Underground system as part of Line B , and operated by the Underground operator Metrovías . As a result , it has similar characteristics to Line B , using third rail electrification and standard gauge as opposed to the broad gauge used in the Buenos Aires commuter rail network . It runs from the Federico Lacroze terminus in the barrio of <unk> , to General Lemos terminus , Campo de Mayo in Greater Buenos Aires . The line is completely at grade ( ground @-@ level ) and uses third rail current collection . It operates 20 hours a day , 7 days a week at 8 @-@ to @-@ 30 @-@ minute intervals . The Urquiza Line transported 15 million passengers in 2013 . 
 Originally the line was planned to run into the centre of Buenos Aires through a long tunnel . But when the tunnel was finally built in 1930 , it ended up as the Line B. The access ramp still exists and is in use today , but for maintenance and storage purposes rather than for passenger services . The Urquiza Line itself opened in 1948 , so suburban passengers travelling on the Underground 's Line B have to transfer to the Urquiza Line at Federico Lacroze station , named after its builder , about 6 km ( 3 @.@ 7 mi ) from the city centre . 
 = = Stations and connections = = 
 Stations are listed from East to West or North to South . Stations in gray have yet to open . Stations in bold are the current termini . Small interchange icons indicate interchanges under construction 
 = = = Ghost stations = = = 
 There are four ghost stations on the Buenos Aires Underground , two on Line A and two on Line E. The Line A stations – Pasco Sur and Alberti Norte – were closed in 1953 since stations in that part of the line were grouped very closely together and having fewer stops would improve the line 's frequency . Pasco Sur remains in very good condition , while Alberti Norte was converted into an electrical substation . 
 The Line E stations were closed in 1966 , after the line 's trajectory was re @-@ routed from Constitución railway station ( where it connected with Line C ) closer to the center of the city , leaving the San José <unk> and Constitución stations out of the network , a move which tripled traffic on the line . The two stations have been used as workshops and storage areas in the past . 
 At one point it was considered that the two former Line E stations and tunnels should be used for Line F since the line 's southern terminus would be there and that part of the trajectory would be roughly similar to the old Line E route . However , it was eventually decided that the line should use new tunnels in that section due to its sharp curves . 
 = = Expansion plans = = 
 Throughout the past , there have been several plans to expand the Underground system as a whole . The underground 's routes are said to spread out like " branches of a tree " from the Plaza de Mayo , something Miguel Delibes described as " restrictive " . Current expansion efforts attempt to address those restrictions by creating more north @-@ south lines and moving termini away from the city centre . The current expansion plan was approved in the year 2000 under Law 670 and has seen the creation of Line H , as well as the extensions of Line A and Line B westwards and Line E northwards . However , in 2015 an alternative plan has been proposed which would make numerous amendments to the Law 670 plan . 
 = = = Works in progress = = = 
 Line E 's extension from Bolívar to Retiro ( with two intermediate stations : Correo Central and Catalinas ) started mid @-@ 2007 . In 2014 , the tunnels and stations were complete and the four @-@ station segment needed only the placement of rails and electrical equipment to be ready for service , however , the transfer of these works from the National Government to the Government of Buenos Aires has slowed down its opening . 
 Line H 's extensions to the north from Corrientes to Plaza Francia , serving intermediate stations at Córdoba , Santa Fe and Las Heras , and south from <unk> with stations at Nueva <unk> and Sáenz , were initiated with ground @-@ breaking ceremonies on 17 January 2012 . Since then , following concerns that the construction of Plaza Francia station would damage the natural beauty of the area surrounding the Recoleta Cemetery , the station was relocated to <unk> de Derecho next to the University of Buenos Aires 's faculty of law , with the change delaying the opening of the station until 2017 . Cordoba and Las Heras were opened in December 2015 , while Santa Fe is set to open in mid @-@ 2016 , providing the line with a connection to Line D. The 20 new Alstom trains to serve the expected increase in passenger numbers as a result of the connection with Line D began arriving in the country in 2015 . 
 = = = Planned Lines = = = 
 The future expansion outlined in Law 670 sees the addition of three new lines . These lines ' routes have already been approved by the Legislature of the City in Law 670 . 39 @.@ 3 km will be added to the network , expanding it to about 97 km in total length and providing several stations with various interchanges . This will also create new north @-@ south routes , resulting in an appropriate network to avoid the city centre . The new lines will mean that more than two million inhabitants of Buenos Aires ( accounting for about 70 % of the city centre 's population ) will live within 400 metres of a metro station . The new lines will run between 56 new stations . 
 Line F will run from <unk> to Plaza Italia in Palermo and will include 16 new stations . The planned route length of this line is 10 @.@ 8 km . Construction is due to begin in 2016 , once the northern extension of Line H is complete , and as originally planned , the line will have automatic trains and platform screen doors . 
 Line G will connect Retiro and <unk> / Villa Crespo ; 12 @.@ 5 km long with 15 new stations . Originally , construction was due to start in 2012 – 2013 , however city legislators opposed the turnkey construction proposed by Chinese firms since the total cost would have been 30 % higher than if it was done with local companies . After this , it was decided to prioritise the other construction projects in the network . 
 Line I will run Parque Chacabuco to Ciudad Universitaria with 18 new stations . The route length is 12 @.@ 6 km . The future of this line ( which had the lowest priority in the expansion plans ) is currently uncertain since it has been proposed that a Metrobus line be built instead , which would follow the same trajectory as the line . 
 = = = PETERS plan = = = 
 In October 2015 , the city of Buenos Aires together with the Inter @-@ American Development Bank presented a 150 @-@ page plan for the Underground called the Strategic y Technical Plan for the Expansion of the Subterranean Network ( Plan <unk> y <unk> para la <unk> de la Red de <unk> , or PETERS ) , highlighting past expansion efforts and the need to adapt plans to the current needs of the city . In this version of the Underground , Line I is cancelled while Line G takes a different route through the centre of the city terminating at Constitucion railway station after going through the neighbourhood of San Telmo , rather than at Retiro railway station . Other changes include a Retiro Norte node where lines F and H terminate , rather than at Plaza Italia and Retiro respectively , while Line E is extended to Plaza Italia from Retiro – a segment which in the original plan was part of Line F. In these plans , Line C is extended both northwards in a loop to Retiro bus station and southwards to the Buenos Aires Belgrano Sur Line railway station minor terminal . 
 Such plans are subject to approval by the Buenos Aires City Legislature and would mean the annulment of many of the current expansion plans outlined in Law 670 . Some criticisms include the failure of the Peters plan to account for the extension of the Belgrano Sur Line to Constitucion railway station , meaning that Line C 's extension to the minor Buenos Aires terminal would be redundant , and that the Retiro Norte node would also be made redundant by the planned Red de <unk> Regionales commuter rail tunnels which are to link the three major railway terminals of the city . 
 = = Modernisation of existing lines = = 
 Much of the modernisation in recent years has centred around the Underground 's rolling stock , with large scale renewals and refurbishments of existing fleets , in particular on Lines A and H. Along with this came the construction of new underground workshops and storage areas on lines A , H and E , as well as the expansion of the existing facilities on Lines B and D. 
 In September 2015 , the president of SBASE highlighted plans for 2015 – 2019 on the Underground at a conference with other South American mass transit operators in Brazil . One of the largest changes to be made during this period is the upgrading of signalling systems on all lines , with the exception of Line E. Lines A and B are to receive Automatic Train Operation systems , replacing their ATS and ATP systems respectively , whilst lines C , D and H are to receive Communications Based Train Control systems . The implementation of these systems was already under way on Lines C and H as of September 2015 , and is due to be completed on other lines before 2019 . Line D is also te receive platform screen doors along with the CBTC system . 
 Other works being carried out during this period include the improvement of disabled access in older stations , new ventilation systems on lines B , C and D , improvements in electrification ( such as replacing overhead lines and substations ) on lines A , B , C and D and the replacement of 14 km of track on Lines C and E. The total investment in this period for these new projects has been set at US $ 1 @.@ 34 billion . 
 = = = Stations = = = 
 Starting in 2007 , the network 's stations began to receive technological updates ranging from Wi @-@ Fi to interactive terminals . Through BA @-@ <unk> ( the city @-@ wide free internet service ) , passengers can use internet free of charge across all stations and aboard trains , though this has been delayed on Line A due to complications surrounding the line 's age . There are also several " digital spaces " across the network and in its commercial galleries where seating areas are provided , along with recharging stations for mobile devices . 
 In this period , there has also been widespread cosmetic changes to stations , including the restoration of historical murals , the incorporation of new artwork and improving the lighting . The renovations on Line B have been met with criticism for destroying parts of the line 's historical patrimony , which dates back to the 1930s . The appearance of the network 's signage has also been changed and the new signs have been gradually replacing the old ones since November 2014 . 
 = = Rolling stock = = 
 The Buenos Aires Underground has had among the longest serving and most varied rolling stock in the world , in part due to the network having been originally built and operated by three different companies in its early years , causing incompatibilities between the lines . The network began with uniform rolling stock , with the Anglo @-@ Argentine Tramways Company Anglo @-@ Argentine Line A using La Brugeoise cars ( with the exception of a few UEC Preston cars ) , the three CHADOPyF lines ( C , D and E ) using Siemens @-@ Schuckert Orenstein & Koppel stock and Lacroze 's Line B using Metro Cammell cars . However , as the lines were expanded and passenger numbers increased , more rolling stock was needed , which made the network less uniform , particularly with regards to the problematic Line B , which used a different electrification system and measurements to the other lines . Line B also became the first line of the network to receive second @-@ hand rolling stock in 1995 . 
 = = = Current fleets = = = 
 In more recent years , there have been moves towards greater modernisation and standardisation , with large purchases of new rolling stock from companies like Alstom and China CNR Corporation , as well as smaller orders of second hand rolling stock , which the government of the City of Buenos Aires claims are temporary measures while those lines are modernised to be able to incorporate more modern rolling stock . Such stock has been acquired from Tokyo , Nagoya , and Madrid . From 2013 to 2019 , 468 new cars are set to arrive while 232 are receiving refurbishment , bringing the average age of the fleet to 22 years in 2016 , down from 34 in 2014 . 
 The network 's oldest cars – the La Brugeoise cars – were retired in 2013 , while its historically most widely used cars – the Siemens @-@ Schuckert Orenstein & Koppel cars – were to be retired in 2015 , though this was pushed back to June 2016 following delays on the opening of Santa Fe station on Line H. While there has been much movement of rolling stock , often in a " hand @-@ me @-@ down " manner from higher frequency lines to less used lines ( the primary recipient being Line E ) , the transition to newer models has gone fairly smoothly , despite shortfalls in some lines following extensions . The Fiat @-@ <unk> cars have been the primary stand @-@ ins while the new trains arrive , though this role has also been filled by the Siemens O & K cars , delaying their retirement . 
 Though Line A ran on a different voltage to the rest of the network , it was converted to the 1500v used on the rest of the network when the 200 Series trains began to arrive . On the other hand , Line B has traditionally been the most troublesome of the network given its different voltage and the fact that that it uses third rail electrification as opposed to the overhead lines used on the rest of the network , making it in effect a separate entity not capable of sharing its stock with other lines . Presently this line uses 1960 's rolling stock acquired from Tokyo 's <unk> Marunouchi Line , along with CAF 5000 and CAF 6000 stock acquired from Madrid which are to replace the aging <unk> stock . The line , along with its remaining third rail stock , is being converted to overhead lines at 1500v , after which the entire network will be standardised . 
 = = Culture and heritage = = 
 The Buenos Aires Underground has historically been characterised by murals and other artistic works in its stations , making it a kind of museum throughout the system . These works , and a number of complete stations , are considered part of the cultural heritage of the city and several of them were declared National Historic Landmarks in 1997 . 
 = = = National patrimony = = = 
 Line A is renowned for having kept its original 1913 rolling stock running on the line up until 2013 , making them the oldest underground carriages in commercial service in the world at the time . They were built by La Brugeoise , et Nicaise et <unk> , a Belgian rolling stock manufacturer established in the city of Bruges , between 1913 and 1919 . Entirely made of wood , they were originally designed to run as underground as well as tramway cars , but they were adapted in 1927 to their current style for underground service only . 
 In March 2013 , La Brugeoise subway carriages were replaced by new Chinese 200 Series rolling stock , just 11 months prior to their 100 @-@ year anniversary on the line . The original rolling stock has since been maintained , some in exhibition and some being converted to 1500v to run tourist services on the line . During the festivities of the 100 @-@ year anniversary of the underground on 1 December 2013 , many restored La Brugeoise trains circulated Line A and there was a symphonic orchestra at Plaza de Mayo station as well as free rides for the entire city in order to mark the event . Throughout the week that followed , there were also numerous displays and events across the different lines of the Underground . 
 Currently , the <unk> Workshop – originally inaugurated along with Line A – is being transformed into a museum to display artefacts and the former rolling stock of the Underground . The workshop also serves as the headquarters for the Association of Friends of the Tramway and many of the Underground 's historical artefacts are stored there , such as the wooden UEC Preston " palace cars " , which also make appearances on Line A during special occasions such as anniversaries and even the inauguration of president Raúl Alfonsín in 1983 , where he and other officials were transported from the National Congress to the Casa Rosada using these cars . 
 = = = Artwork and exhibits = = = 
 The network has over 390 artworks by over 170 artists across its stations , ranging from historic murals to modern art . Styles also vary , from mosaic to <unk> , sculpture and installation pieces . Many stations are decorated with intricate ceramic tile work , some of which date back to 1913 when the Underground first opened its doors . Featured artists include painters and reproductions by <unk> , Molina Campos , Raúl <unk> , Rodolfo Medina and Jorge Schwarz . In addition , they provide spaces for music and theatre events , including an underground iteration of the Pepsi Music Festival on Line H. 
 = = = = Line A = = = = 
 The oldest line on the network has maintained its original appearance from 1913 and 1914 on the Plaza de Mayo – Primera Junta segment following restoration works in 1988 for the 75th anniversary of the line and again in 2007 . These older stations feature no advertisements , but instead have recreations of original advertisements from the early 20th century . The Line 's newest segment , which runs from <unk> to San <unk> , displays more modern artworks , such as those by Uruguayan artist Guillermo Roux at San José de Flores station . 
 = = = = Line B = = = = 
 In <unk> – Villa Ortúzar station there are 18 stained glasses that refer to the history of the Villa Ortúzar neighbourhood , where the station is located . In Los Incas – Parque Chas station there are murals related with different Pre @-@ Columbian era civilisations are exhibited . In 2015 , SBASE faced criticism for its incorporation of new artworks in multiple stations on the line . Many of these artworks were painted directly over tiles dating back to the 1930s when the line was opened by the Lacroze company , while others were completely removed and destroyed . 
 = = = = Line C = = = = 
 From Constitución to Diagonal Norte , the line features murals of Iberian landscapes created by Spanish artists such as Ignacio Zuloaga and Fernando Álvarez de Sotomayor y Zaragoza , which date back to the time of the line 's opening by CHADOPyF . General San Martín station includes photographic reproductions of the Museo de la Ciudad ( City Museum ) activities , photographic reproductions and images of the Plaza San Martín and photographic reproductions of streets and building of the South zone of the City . 
 = = = = Line D = = = = 
 The line 's murals on its original Catedral – Palermo route date back to 1937 and 1940 , and began to be restored in 2013 . These include murals by Argentine artists Benito <unk> Martín in Plaza Italia station . There are also numerous showcase exhibits in its newer stations , with a series of ceramic reproductions by Raúl and Daniel De Francisco in Juramento station , ceramic reproductions of 4 murals made by Raúl <unk> in José Hernández station and showcases exposing works made in the Ceramic School No.1 in <unk> station Congreso de Tucumán station was the network 's first " museum station " and holds numerous exhibits , among them busts of key political and cultural figures in Argentine culture and history such as Jorge Luis Borges and Manuel Belgrano displayed in glass enclosures in its platform walls . 
 = = = = Line E = = = = 
 Some modern murals on the line include an homage to the 1996 Argentine film Moebius at San José station . The film used the line as its primary filming locations and the murals depict scenes from it . The soon to be opened Correo Central station has received an award from the Association of Structural Engineers in Argentina for the quality and creativity of the work . 
 = = = = Line H = = = = 
 The newest line on the Underground has many Hermenegildo <unk> mural reproductions related to tango in all stations . Its numerous stations depict different tango singers and poets relating to the neighbourhoods in which they are situated . 
 = = = Graffiti = = = 
 Graffiti on the Buenos Aires Underground became particularly prevalent in the late 2000s and early 2010s , with 80 % of cars on the network having some degree of " vandalism " in 2013 . By January 2015 , all the painted cars had been cleaned by night @-@ team cleaning teams using a product specially developed for SBASE which allowed the removal of graffiti without damaging the livery of the cars . Cleaning the 410 vandalised cars had cost the City of Buenos Aires AR $ 10 @.@ 25 million , while a coat of anti @-@ graffiti paint has been applied to the cars to make future cleaning easier using alcohol . 
 SBASE , along with the Buenos Aires Metropolitan Police have adopted a zero tolerance policy on graffiti in the Buenos Aires Underground , imposing fines ranging from AR $ 400 – 6000 and up to 30 days community service , the culprits often being made to clean the cars they vandalised . Increased vigilance from over 500 police officers , as well as close to 300 CCTV cameras have aided in decreasing new acts of vandalism by 85 % in 2014 and a further 50 % in 2015 after security was further intensified . 
 Painted cars were often worked on by organised groups in a " whole car " ( graffiti jargon for covering the entire visible surface of the vehicle ) manner , severely reducing visibility from inside the cars . Numerous arrests have been made on these groups which often consist of foreign nationals from countries such as Chile , Germany and France ; two German nationals and a Chilean national were arrested in January 2016 . One high profile arrest of such a group saw four Argentines detained in 2015 after vandalising a 200 Series train on Line A. Their houses were subsequently raided , uncovering a vast collection of stolen Subte paraphernalia as well as documented evidence of their activities in the form of videos and photographs . 
 According to Clarín , people from across the world have visited Buenos Aires with the sole purpose of " bombing " ( painting cars in a clandestine manner ) , while competition among different groups exists in the form of greater points being earned for painting newer cars or the level of danger experienced . In most cases , the people involved are university educated and with stable employment . In January 2016 , a group called <unk> <unk> was discovered to be offering tourists graffiti tours of the Underground , giving them a chance to paint cars for a fee . The group documented their activities and uploaded them to YouTube in order to promote the business , which has been subsequently shut down with its members arrested . 
 = = = In popular culture = = = 
 The Buenos Aires Underground is featured in the 1996 science fiction film Moebius directed by Gustavo Mosquera . In the film , the circumstances surrounding the disappearance of an underground train are investigated by a topologist . The film is based upon the short story , " A Subway Named Möbius " that takes place in the Boston Subway . Other films with scenes shot in the Underground include Highlander II , Focus and The Official Story . 
 In Ricardo <unk> 's 1997 novel Plata <unk> , the bank robber protagonists enjoy riding the underground regularly . In Ernesto Sabato 's novel On Heroes and Tombs , Fernando , one of its main characters , develops a paranoia with blind people in the <unk> . 
 One of Jorge Luis Borges ' earlier editorial jobs was for <unk> , a promotional magazine for the underground system which was privately owned at that time . In the magazine , he wrote several articles on sci @-@ fi topics under various pseudonyms . 
 Line B and some of its stations feature heavily in the 2013 Argentine point @-@ and @-@ click adventure game Reversion : The Meeting . 
 El <unk> is a science fiction comic book created by Héctor Germán <unk> and Francisco Solano López in 1957 . The story is about an alien invasion in Buenos Aires . Part of the action takes place at the Plaza Italia station , as the heroes try to use the underground tunnel to escape from the aliens , and successfully exploit the weakness of the alien leader to kill him . The comic book , published in the 1950s , made reference to the " Canning " station , a former name of the <unk> Ortiz station . 
 = Sibyl Hathaway = 
 Dame Sibyl Mary Hathaway , DBE ( née Collings ; 13 January 1884 – 14 July 1974 ) was Dame of Sark from 1927 until her death . Her 47 @-@ year tenure spanned the reigns of four overlords : George V , Edward VIII , George VI and Elizabeth II . 
 Hathaway was a financially troubled widow with six children when she succeeded her eccentric father , William Frederick Collings , as feudal lord of Sark , one of the small Channel Islands . She immediately set about reinforcing her feudal rights and promoting tourism on the island , which she affectionately called " the last bastion of feudalism " . When she remarried in 1929 , her second husband , Robert Hathaway , legally became her senior co @-@ ruler , but she kept control of the government . 
 Hathaway 's tenure as dame saw the German occupation of the Channel Islands in the Second World War , during which she refused to evacuate and convinced the islanders to stay as well . Her eldest son and heir apparent , Francis William Beaumont , was killed in 1941 , while her husband was deported to a Nazi concentration camp in 1943 . Hathaway remains best known for her indomitable conduct during the occupation . After the war , she continued her publicity campaign , strengthening the island 's tourism industry . 
 Having been widowed again in 1954 , she went on to rule alone , and was made Dame Commander of the Order of the British Empire in 1965 . She was described by a British government official as a " lady of unusual personality " , and is often referred to as a benevolent dictator . Dame Sibyl died at the age of 90 , and was succeeded by her grandson , Michael Beaumont . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Sibyl Mary <unk> was born in Guernsey in a house that once belonged to John Allaire , her privateering great @-@ great @-@ grandfather , whose business dealings brought the fief of Sark to his daughter , Marie Collings . Her parents were William Frederick Collings and his Montreal @-@ born wife Sophie ( née Moffatt ) . Sibyl was born two years after her notoriously <unk> father inherited the fief from his father , William Thomas Collings . Sibyl had one sibling , a sister named Doris . 
 Collings treated Hathaway , his heir presumptive , as if she were a boy . She was lame due to unequal leg length , but that did not prevent her father from insisting on teaching her to shoot , sail , and climb cliffs . Collings never allowed his daughters to complain of pain or sadness ; Hathaway was later grateful for " being able to live a life free of the inconvenience of self @-@ pity " . As the future ruler of an island situated between France and the United Kingdom , she learned standard French and the local <unk> dialect of the Norman language . 
 = = First marriage = = 
 At the age of 15 , Hathaway fell in love with Dudley Beaumont , a British painter who could neither shoot nor climb cliffs and whom her father thus considered a " weakling " . In 1901 , Collings made it clear to Hathaway that he was adamantly opposed to the relationship . When she continued seeing Beaumont , her enraged father dragged her out of her bedroom at midnight and threw her out of the seigneurial residence barefoot and in a nightgown . Hathaway remained in a hedge until Beaumont , alerted by her mother , found her predawn . She boarded a boat for the neighbouring island of Guernsey . When the Seigneur stormed aboard looking for Hathaway , she was hidden by the captain . She then travelled to the house of a relative in London . Beaumont soon married her at St James 's Church , Piccadilly . 
 Hathaway had no contact with her father until the birth of her first child , Bridget ( 1902 – 1948 ) , when he sent her a telegram of condolence because the child was female , saying : " Sorry it was a vixen " . Hathaway , who found children boring , went on to have two more daughters – Douce Alianore Daphne and Jehanne Rosemary Ernestine ( born after her father 's death ) – and four sons – Francis William Lionel , Cyril John Astley , Basil Ian ( died in infancy ) and Richard Vyvyan Dudley . The family moved to Sark in 1912 , a few years after her mother 's death . 
 Hathaway wrote extensively about her relationship with Beaumont in her 1961 autobiography . Beaumont , who served in the British army as an officer during the First World War , died on 24 November 1918 during the Spanish flu pandemic . Beaumont 's death left her a pregnant widow deprived of most of her income . Neither her father nor her father @-@ in @-@ law , the army officer William Spencer Beaumont , were willing to give financial support to Hathaway and her six surviving children . She learned German and started working for the YMCA in Cologne . She also worked for the British Army of the Rhine and raised prize cattle . 
 = = Accession and remarriage = = 
 Collings died on 20 June 1927 , and was succeeded by his widowed daughter . Towards the end of his life , he stopped requesting from the inhabitants the payment of tithes , wheat and <unk> ( a feudal tax of two chickens ) . Upon her accession , Hathaway immediately reasserted her feudal rights , and even noted : " They always give me the <unk> and oldest [ chickens ] " . 
 Some islanders complained about Sark being the last remnant of feudalism in Europe , but Hathaway maintained that agriculture had to be encouraged to make the island more self @-@ sufficient . She used the island 's unique feudal system to draw tourists , and refused to allow anything to deter them by ruining its peacefulness . She thus banned motor vehicles and holiday camps , but the Chief Pleas refused to pass an ordinance that would forbid selling alcohol to anyone known to get drunk . Like her eldest son Francis , heir apparent to the <unk> , Hathaway was fascinated by film production . While Appointment with Venus was being shot on Sark in 1951 , the Dame even deigned to allow a car ashore , ostensibly believing that " a Land Rover was some sort of senior Boy Scout " . 
 In autumn 1929 , the Dame was on her way to a holiday in the United States when she met Robert Hathaway , an American @-@ born former army aviator . On 5 November , following her return from the United States and a twelve @-@ day @-@ long courtship , they married at St Marylebone Parish Church . Robert was not aware that the marriage made him jure uxoris seigneur of Sark , his wife 's co @-@ ruler , until they set foot on the island . Hathaway 's strong personality , however , ensured that she had the final say in the matters of government ; while her husband attended government meetings as seigneur , she accompanied him to " give advice " . Lecture tours in the United States , aided by her second husband 's connections , were part of her efforts to promote tourism and bring more revenue to the island . 
 = = Second World War = = 
 Hathaway 's tenure as seigneur was interrupted by the German occupation of the Channel Islands in the Second World War from 3 July 1940 until 8 May 1945 . While some inhabitants of other Channel Islands were evacuated , Hathaway declared that she would not leave her island , and prevailed upon all native @-@ born islanders to remain as well . Hathaway appears to have believed that Germans would either never come to the island or that their stay would be brief . 
 Most of her tenants bitterly resented her for the decision to remain on Sark during the ensuing five years of occupation , but thanked her after the war when they saw how total evacuation destroyed the neighbouring island of Alderney . The Dame had her senior official meet German officers at the harbour and escort them to her residence , where her maid announced them as if they were guests . 
 Hathaway was much respected by the islanders as well as the Germans , whose language she spoke perfectly , for the leadership she gave during this period , and the British Home Secretary Herbert Morrison observed that she remained " almost wholly mistress of the situation " throughout the occupation . Hathaway was on friendly terms with Eugen Fürst zu Oettingen @-@ Wallerstein , the German commander stationed in Guernsey , as indicated by their warm correspondence . She wrote of him as a " charming man " and noted " that they had many friends in common " . 
 Many other German officers in charge of the Channel Islands were also of noble extraction , and Hathaway exploited their " stiff German formality " by making it clear that she " expected to be treated ... with the rigid etiquette to which they were accustomed in their own country . " She insisted that officers come to her rather than the other way around , and expected them to bow , kiss her hand , and bow again before she allowed them to take a seat . Using her influence with the Prince of Oettingen @-@ Wallerstein , she was able to get the German army physician stationed in Sark to treat her sick tenants . When Germans ordered that all the <unk> be instructed in German , the Dame offered a room in her residence as a classroom for the children of the island . 
 Hathaway 's eldest son Francis and his wife Mary were killed during the Liverpool Blitz ; his son Michael became first in line to inherit the island . Her husband was deported to <unk> VII in <unk> in Bavaria in February 1943 , where he remained for the rest of the war . He did not sign any document delegating his seigneurial authority , which meant that legality of ordinances issued by Hathaway during this period was , at best , questionable . She refused to sign orders issued by Germans , arguing that they were simply not hers to sign . She was insulted by an order that prohibited sexual relations between her tenants and German troops on the grounds of venereal disease outbreak , since the order implied that <unk> women consorted with Germans . 
 On the other hand , it appears that she did not voice objection to a series of antisemitic orders that had been previously issued , and which concerned her Czech Jewish friend Annie <unk> . 
 Islanders struggled with food shortage in the last months of the occupation . Hathaway organised a raid on German grain stocks and saved many families from starvation with her secret potato hoard . Sark was liberated on 10 May 1945 . Three British officers arrived and , explaining that no British troops were available , asked the Dame to take command of 275 men belonging to the defeated German garrison . She made sure the garrison cleared up the island of land mines . She was , however , so concerned about the legal status of the decisions she had issued during the war that she sailed to Guernsey to validate them as soon as the island was liberated . Her experience of the German occupation inspired William Douglas @-@ Home 's play The Dame of Sark . Hathaway 's manner of receiving Germans has been described as both impressive and overly cordial . 
 = = Postwar years = = 
 Following the war , Hathaway continued to promote Sark 's tourist trade and advocated building a new harbour . In 1949 , she and her husband welcomed Princess Elizabeth , Duchess of Edinburgh ( later Queen Elizabeth II ) and the Duke of Edinburgh , who opened the new harbour . The same year , Hathaway became Officer of the Order of the British Empire . 
 Sibyl and Robert Hathaway 's happy marriage ended with his death in 1954 , six years after the death of her eldest child , Bridget . Hathaway , a widow once again , regained her complete authority over the island . In 1957 , Queen Elizabeth II and the Duke of Edinburgh returned to Sark ; this was the first time a reigning monarch had ever come to the island . 
 Hathaway rendered homage to the Queen on that occasion – the first time that ceremony was performed on Sark itself . Her autobiography , Dame of Sark , was published in 1961 . 
 On the 400th anniversary of Queen Elizabeth I 's grant of charter signed in 1565 to Sark 's first seigneur , <unk> de Carteret , Hathaway was made Dame Commander of the Order of the British Empire at Buckingham Palace . She then jokingly referred to herself as a " double dame " . However , soon after her quatercentenary , her daughter , Douce Briscoe , died in 1967 , having struggled with alcoholism for a long time . 
 In 1969 , Hathaway became increasingly worried by the Royal Commission on the Constitution 's intrusion into her affairs . At the same time , she had a sharp dispute with the Chief Pleas , claiming that its members violated the laws they themselves had passed and that their misconduct threatened to make her tourism campaign futile . She shocked the islanders by announcing her intention to resign the charter of the island back to the Crown " in somewhat the same way as the Hereditary le Mesurier Family did in Alderney " and to recommend that the government be taken over by Guernsey . The threat was effective ; regulations were suddenly enforced much more strictly . By the beginning of the next year , Hathaway retracted her announcement , having been persuaded " by an enormous number of letters and requests " . 
 = = Death = = 
 Cyril Beaumont died in 1973 , becoming the fifth child Dame Sibyl outlived . Early next year , the 90 @-@ year @-@ old gave her approval for the stage presentation of William Douglas @-@ Home 's play The Dame of Sark , inspired by her experiences in the Second World War . She looked forward to meeting Celia Johnson , who was to play the title role , but died suddenly at the <unk> of a heart attack on 14 July 1974 . 
 The <unk> passed from the benevolent dictator , referred to as a " lady of unusual personality " by a British government official , to her grandson Michael Beaumont . Sark remained " the last bastion of feudalism " , as she proudly put it , until 2008 , when universal suffrage and a democratic leadership were established . 
 = David Pearson ( racing driver ) = 
 David Gene Pearson ( born December 22 , 1934 ) is a former American stock car racer from Spartanburg , South Carolina . Pearson began his NASCAR career in 1960 and ended his first season by winning the 1960 NASCAR Rookie of the Year award . He won three championships ( 1966 , 1968 , and 1969 ) every year he ran the full schedule in NASCAR 's Grand National Series ( now Sprint Cup Series ) . NASCAR described his 1974 season as an indication of his " consistent greatness " ; that season he finished third in the season points having competed in only 19 of 30 races . 
 At his finalist nomination for NASCAR Hall of Fame 's inaugural 2010 class , NASCAR described Pearson as " ... the model of NASCAR efficiency during his career . With little exaggeration , when Pearson showed up at a race track , he won . " Pearson ended his career in 1986 , and currently holds the second position on NASCAR 's all @-@ time win list with 105 victories ; as well as achieving 113 pole positions . Pearson was successful in different venues of racing ; he won three times on road courses , 48 times on superspeedways , 54 times on Short tracks , and had 23 dirt track wins . Pearson finished with at least one Top 10 finish in each of his 27 seasons . Pearson was nicknamed the " Fox " ( and later the " Silver Fox " ) for his calculated approach to racing . ESPN described him as being a " plain @-@ spoken , humble man , and that added up to very little charisma . " 
 Pearson 's career paralleled Richard Petty 's , the driver who won the most races in NASCAR history . They accounted for 63 first / second @-@ place finishes ( with the edge going to Pearson ) . Petty said , " Pearson could beat you on a short track , he could beat you on a superspeedway , he could beat you on a road course , he could beat you on a dirt track . It didn 't hurt as bad to lose to Pearson as it did to some of the others , because I knew how good he was . " 
 = = Background = = 
 Pearson was born near Spartanburg , South Carolina . When Pearson was young , he climbed a tree at the local stock car racing track ( Spartanburg Fairgrounds ) to see the races . Pearson said , " I 'd always been interested in cars , and I decided right then that was what I wanted to do with my life . " He worked with his brother in a car body repair shop , and used the money to purchase a Ford coach . Pearson removed the fenders to convert the vehicle into a street rod . He jumped the car over ditches until he rolled it over . His mother paid him to junk the car and he used the money to purchase another car to build . In 1952 , he raced a 1940 Ford at dirt tracks and won $ 30 in an outlaw class race . He kept winning and attracted the attention of Spartanburg 's racing community , including Joe Littlejohn . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = 1960s = = = 
 Pearson began racing in NASCAR 's Grand National series during the 1960 season shortly after winning the 1959 track champion at Greenville @-@ Pickens Speedway . His first NASCAR start was the first 1960 Daytona 500 qualifying race and he finished 17th in a self @-@ owned car that he had purchased from Jack White . He started 22 events that season , finishing 23rd in season points and was voted the 1960 NASCAR Rookie of the Year . His season was highlighted by a second @-@ place finish at Gamecock Speedway ( Sumter , South Carolina ) , and a fourth @-@ place finish at Hickory Motor Speedway and fifth after starting on the pole position at his hometown track in Piedmont Interstate Fairgrounds in Spartanburg . 
 When Pearson bent the frame of his own race car early in the 1961 season , he began working as a house roofer in Spartanburg to support his family , which included two sons . Darel <unk> had a contract dispute with a tire company and was not able to compete in the inaugural World 600 at Charlotte . Littlejohn was at the track , and he recommended that car builder Ray Fox hire Pearson . Pearson was unsure if he should join the team , and Fox was not convinced that he should trust his car to the relatively untested 26 @-@ year @-@ old driver . 
 After Pearson had a successful test run , he qualified the car with the third fastest time behind Richard Petty and Joe Weatherly . Pearson raced his way into the lead early in the event and was the leader after the first round of pit stops . Pearson and Petty were the only two cars on the lead lap by a restart on the 311th lap ( of 400 ) . Petty made up six seconds on Pearson in 20 laps before Petty had to retire with a blown engine . Pearson held a three lap lead over Fireball Roberts and was leading late in the race until he ran over some debris on the backstretch and blew a tire with only two laps remaining . Pearson drove the car around the track slowly for the final lap at approximately 20 miles per hour ( 32 km / h ) to take the victory . 
 He started in 19 races during the 1961 season and he had three wins to finish thirteenth in season points , winning his first NASCAR race in a Fox @-@ prepared car at Concord Speedway . Later in the season , he won the Firecracker 250 at Daytona and the Dixie 400 at Atlanta . 
 Pearson started in only 12 of 53 events in 1962 yet managed to finish tenth in season points . Pearson began the season racing for Fox until Fox retired ; he started for Petty Enterprises , Cotton Owens , and Bud Moore that season . He had seven top ten finishes and no wins . During 41 starts in 55 races , Pearson finished the 1963 season sixth in points for Cotton Owens . He held two pole positions and had no wins . 
 In 1964 , he had eight wins at Richmond , Greenville @-@ Pickens Speedway , <unk> Speedway , Boyd Speedway , Lincoln Speedway , Rambi Raceway , Columbia Speedway and Hickory Motor Speedway . Pearson finished third in the championship , which was won by Petty for the first time . He qualified on the pole position for 12 events . 
 NASCAR banned the Mopar Hemi engine in 1965 , so Petty and Pearson boycotted many races rather than compete with a non @-@ competitive engine against Ford and Mercury drivers . Both competed in drag racing . Pearson drove a Dodge Dart station wagon nicknamed the " Cotton Picker " for Owens . NASCAR owner Bill France , Sr. adjusted the engine rules later in the season to bring back Mopar drivers ; Petty and Pearson ended up competing in 14 of 55 events . Pearson won two of the final 21 races ( Columbia and Richmond ) to finish 40th in the season points . 
 In his first full @-@ time season , Pearson won his first of three NASCAR championships in 1966 . He won 15 of 49 events , which was the second most in NASCAR history at that time . Early in the season , Pearson won at Hickory , Columbia , Greenville @-@ Pickens , and Winston @-@ Salem Speedway to complete four straight victories . Throughout the season , Pearson won at Richmond , Dog Track Speedway , New Asheville Speedway , Smokey Mountain Raceway , the second Greenville @-@ Pickens race , Bridgehampton Race Circuit , Fonda Speedway , Bowman Gray Stadium , and the second Richmond race . 
 Pearson ran a partial season in 1967 , competing in 22 of 48 races . He began the season racing for Cotton Owens before switching after the thirteenth race to Holman Moody . Pearson quit after there was a misunderstanding about who would drive the teams tow truck . Dodge decided to stop racing in NASCAR , so Pearson switched way from Owen 's <unk> in favor of Holman Moody 's Fords . He had two wins ( Bristol , Greenville @-@ Pickens ) , both for Owens , in a season that was dominated by Petty 's all @-@ time record 27 victories ( including all @-@ time record 10 straight ) . Pearson finished seventh in season points . 
 In the second season of running the full schedule , Petty and Pearson each won 16 races during 1968 ; Pearson won the championship and Petty finished third . Pearson competed primarily for Holman @-@ Moody , winning at Bristol , Richmond , North Wilkesboro , Asheville @-@ Weaverville Speedway , Darlington , Beltsville Speedway , Langley Field Speedway , Charlotte , Middle Georgia Raceway , Bristol , Nashville Speedway , Columbia , Bowman @-@ Gray , Asheville @-@ Weaverville , Hickory , and Augusta Speedway . He added twelve pole positions . 
 Pearson won his third and final championship in his final season running the full schedule in 1969 . The championship tied Pearson with Lee Petty for the most championships in NASCAR history ( Richard Petty and Dale Earnhardt hold the current record with seven titles each ) . He started out the season at the 1969 Daytona 500 by being the first driver to qualify faster than 190 miles per hour with a speed of 190 @.@ 029 miles per hour ( 305 @.@ 822 km / h ) . 
 In 51 starts , he had 11 wins , 42 top @-@ fives , and 44 top @-@ tens . He earned a record $ 229 @,@ 760 for his effort . Pearson completed 14 @,@ 270 laps in 1969 , which is the most laps ever in a NASCAR Cup season . He was one of eleven drivers to boycott the first race at Talladega after concerns with the tires ; he rejoined the tour at the following event . 
 = = = 1970s = = = 
 The 1970 season started with Pearson competing part @-@ time , as he would for the rest of his career . Pearson led the Daytona 500 under caution with 13 laps remaining and changed only his right side tires in a two @-@ tire pit stop . Pete Hamilton did a four @-@ tire stop and passed Pearson after the restart for the victory . In 19 starts , he won a single race ( Darlington ) and earned two pole positions ( Bristol , Darlington ) to finish 23rd in points . 
 R. J. Reynolds began sponsoring NASCAR in 1971 and the Grand National series was retitled the Winston Cup Series . Holman Moody and Pearson split near the middle of the season after Pearson refused to take a 10 % pay cut . He won two races before the split ( Daytona Twin 125 and Bristol ) and four @-@ second @-@ place finishes . Pearson finished the season by competing in seven races for Ray <unk> . He recorded one top @-@ ten finish ( eighth at the July Daytona race ) , but suffered mechanical problems in all of the other races . For the season he finished 51st in points after competing in 17 races with nine top @-@ tens and eight top @-@ fives . 
 At R. J. Reynolds ' request , NASCAR began cutting down on the number of races in 1972 season by eliminating midweek races . It also dropped 13 short tracks and had a 31 @-@ race schedule . Pearson began racing for the Wood Brothers that season . He raced in 17 of the events and had six wins , which earned him a 20th @-@ place finish in the season points . Pearson was racing against Bobby Isaac and Buddy Baker at the end of the Winston 500 at Talladega Superspeedway when Jimmy Crawford spun into Isaac ; Pearson won the race . He won later that season at the Firecracker 400 , a race that he would win three straight times . 
 While Pearson only started in 18 ( of 28 ) races during 1973 , he was named the NASCAR driver of the Year after finishing eighth in points . He won 11 of those 18 races in the Wood Brothers Mercury . His 61 % win percentage is the highest in NASCAR history . He had wins at North Carolina Motor Speedway ( Rockingham ) , Atlanta , Darlington , Martinsville , Talladega , Dover , Michigan , second Daytona race , second Atlanta race , second Dover race , and the second Rockingham race . The remaining seven races contained four Did Not Finishes ( DNFs ) , two @-@ second @-@ place finishes and one third place . At the first Rockingham event , Pearson led 499 of 500 miles , giving up the lead only for a pit stop . He won eight pole positions with a 3 @.@ 4 average starting position . 
 Pearson finished third in the 1974 points after competing in 19 of 30 events . It was the only season where drivers were awarded points based on their money earnings , which ended up rewarding drivers who finished high in the big @-@ money races . He won seven races , including the Winston 500 by 0 @.@ 17 seconds over Benny Parsons . Pearson began to earn the nickname of " silver fox " after the 1974 Firecracker 400 . Entering the final lap , he was leading followed closely by Petty . Fearing that Petty would do a slingshot pass , he slowed a little , pulled his car off to the side to simulate a blown motor , and threw his hand up in the air as a motion of defeat . Petty quickly passed , only to find Pearson following him closely . Coming out of the final corner , Pearson did a slingshot pass back to win the race . The International Race of Champions ( IROC ) invited him to participate in their first annual all @-@ star stock car racing series for the 1973 – 74 season and he finished fourth of the twelve drivers . 
 In 1975 , NASCAR changed to the points system that it would use for over a decade until the current Chase for the Cup format was implemented . ABC televised the second half of the 1975 Daytona 500 and drew a 10 @.@ 5 rating opposite an 8 @.@ 6 rating for an NBA game and a 4 @.@ 1 for a NHL game . Pearson led the race with three laps remaining . Benny Parsons was racing in a distant second . Petty , who was several laps down after experiencing tires difficulties , began drafting with Parsons and the duo started closing on Pearson . Pearson collided with another car and Parsons won the race . After the race , Pearson complained that Petty showed favoritism by helping Parsons . His attempt to win his third consecutive Winston 500 fell short when he was unable to catch Baker . Despite these near @-@ wins , he won three times in 21 attempts . He finished 14th in points in the 30 – event season . He competed in the second annual IROC season during 1974 / 75 and he finished sixth in points . 
 The 1976 Daytona 500 is known for the final lap battle between Pearson and Petty . In 2007 , ESPN rated the race as the fourth most interesting Daytona 500 . Petty was leading Pearson going into the last lap by a couple of car lengths . Pearson used the draft to attempt a slingshot pass against Petty at the end of the back stretch on the last lap , but his car pushed high into the final turn while going around another car . Petty edged under Pearson , and their cars crashed into each other on the frontstretch in the final turns . They both spun out into the infield grass approximately 100 feet ( 30 meters ) short of the finish line . The third place car was over a lap behind the disabled cars . With Petty unable to restart his car , Pearson slowly drove his Wood Brothers Mercury over the grassy infield past the finish line for his only Daytona 500 victory . He won a series @-@ best ten races in 1976 , but finished ninth in season points after competing in only 22 of 30 events . He won his only IROC race at the first race of IROC III in 1975 / 1976 at Michigan International Speedway and finished fifth in points . 
 Pearson finished 13th in the 1977 NASCAR points , with two wins in 22 ( of 30 ) races . IROC invited him to participate in IROC IV in 1976 / 77 and he finished ninth in the four race series . 
 He competed in 22 races ( of 30 ) again in 1978 , winning four times for a 16th @-@ place finish in the season points . In March , Pearson won his 100th Winston Cup race at Rockingham . Late in the World 600 , Pearson was battling for the win against Parsons until Parsons ' spin collected both drivers . Darrell Waltrip edged Donnie Allison for the victory . Pearson competed in his final IROC race in June 1978 during IROC V. 
 Pearson began 1979 by winning the pole position at year 's first race at Riverside ; he finished in second place . 1979 was Pearson 's final season racing for the Wood Brothers , with his last race happening at Darlington . After a miscommunication , he left the pits without waiting for the pit crew to place lug nuts on the car and the tires fell off the car when he reached the end of pit lane . Pearson quit the team after the race . Pearson had won 43 races between 1972 and 79 while driving for the Wood Brothers . Later during the season , Rod <unk> 's rookie driver , Dale Earnhardt , suffered a shoulder injury . <unk> hired Pearson to replace Earnhardt during four races ; he collected the pole position at Michigan and won the 1979 Southern 500 . For the season , Pearson had competed in nine races and finished 32nd in points . Fans voted him as NASCAR 's Most Popular Driver . 
 = = = 1980s = = = 
 Pearson raced for Hoss Ellington during the 1980 season . He won the 1980 CRC Chemicals Rebel 500 at Darlington for his final Cup win . He started nine times to finish 37th in season points . Pearson qualified on the pole position at Charlotte for his eleventh straight time and he had started on the front row in fifteen straight races between 1972 – 80 . In 1981 , he raced in six races for four owners . His season was highlighted by winning the pole position for <unk> Childers at Dover and two Top 10 finishes at Darlington . 
 Bobby Hawkins hired Pearson to race in six events during 1982 . He started on the pole position at Charlotte and Darlington and had top five finishes at the July Daytona race and Charlotte . He ended the 30 @-@ race season in 37th place in the point standings . Pearson entered his first NASCAR Busch Grand National ( now Xfinity Series ) race that season . He won the pole position for that race at Bristol and he finished second . Pearson raced in two more Busch races that season ( Dover , North Carolina ) , starting second and first ; he finished fifth and first . The North Carolina win was his only Busch victory . 
 Pearson raced in ten events for Hawkins in 1983 . He had four top ten finishes , including eighth and third @-@ place finishes at Daytona , and finished 33rd in points . He started from the pole position for his final Busch Grand National race at Dover ; it resulted in a twelfth @-@ place finish . In 1984 , Pearson raced in eleven events for Hawkins and finished 41st in the season points . He had three top ten finishes , all ninth @-@ place finishes , at the Daytona 500 , World 600 , and the Miller 400 . 
 Pearson raced in twelve races during 1985 , the first eight for Hoss Ellington and the final four for himself . He had an average start of 9 @.@ 2 , but ten DNFs resulted in an average finish over 30th place . He had one top ten finish at the July Daytona race and finished 36th in points . 1986 was Pearson 's final season in NASCAR . Pearson drove his own car in two events . After a DNF at Charlotte , he finished tenth in his final race at the August Michigan event . 
 After a three @-@ year hiatus , Pearson planned to come out of retirement in 1989 , replacing the injured Neil Bonnett in the Wood Brothers ' No. 21 at Charlotte Motor Speedway . Following testing for the event , however , he suffered severe neck and back pain , and chose instead to announce his retirement ; Tommy Ellis replaced Pearson for the race . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The National Motor Sports Press Association 's Hall of Fame inducted Pearson in 1991 . He was inducted in the International Motorsports Hall of Fame in 1993 and the Charlotte Motor Speedway Court of Legends in 1998 . He was one of ten finalists for the Driver of the Quarter Century ( 1967 – 91 ) sponsored by a United States businessman ; Mario Andretti won the award . 
 In mid @-@ 1999 , Sports Illustrated used votes from 40 NASCAR insiders to name Pearson the Top Stock Car Driver of the Twentieth Century . 
 In 2009 , Pearson was one of the 25 nominees for the first class to be inducted in the NASCAR Hall of Fame . NASCAR named the five people to be inducted in its 2010 class and it stated that he finished between sixth and eighth place . Pearson left the premises ten minutes after the inductees were announced . The snub drew public criticism and some writers predicted that he will be the headliner for the 2011 class . 
 At the induction ceremony , Pearson said that he felt the inaugural class should include more pioneers such as Raymond Parks , Tim Flock , and Lee Petty . Pearson said " I feel like if I was going in next year and I knew Raymond Parks wasn 't , I 'd withdraw my name to get him in . " In 2010 , Pearson was named to the 2011 class in the NASCAR Hall of Fame . He received the most votes , from 50 of 53 voters . " I am just proud that that many people thought enough to vote for me " , Pearson said . He added that he had not felt slighted by Bill France , Jr. beating him into the 2010 class by one vote . He was inducted into the NASCAR Hall of Fame on May 23 , 2011 . 
 = = Daytona 500 results = = 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Pearson 's wife Helen Ruth Pearson predeceased him in 1991 . He has three sons ( Larry Pearson , Ricky Pearson , and Eddie Pearson ) . Larry raced in NASCAR and he was the 1986 and 1987 Busch Series champion . Ricky Pearson was general manager and a crew chief for Buckshot Jones / Buckshot Racing when they won two Busch Series races . 
 In December 2014 Pearson suffered a mild stroke which partially paralyzed the left half of his body , but from which he recovered . 
 = Sandgate Castle = 
 Sandgate Castle is an artillery fort originally constructed by Henry VIII in Sandgate in Kent , between 1539 and 1540 . It formed part of the King 's Device programme to protect against invasion from France and the Holy Roman Empire , and defended vulnerable point along the coast . It comprised a central stone keep , with three towers and a gatehouse . It could hold four tiers of artillery , and was fitted with a total of 142 firing points for cannon and handguns . 
 Sandgate was taken by Parliament in 1642 at the start of the first English Civil War , and was seized by Royalist rebels in the second civil war of 1648 . The castle was extensively redesigned between 1805 and 1808 during the Napoleonic Wars . The height of the castle was significantly reduced and the keep was turned into a Martello tower ; when the work was completed , it was armed with ten 24 @-@ pounder ( 11 kg ) guns and could hold a garrison of 40 men . 
 The castle had begun to suffer damage from the sea by the early 17th century , and by the middle of the 19th century , the receding coastline had reached the edge of the castle walls . The high costs of repair contributed to the government 's decision to sell the site off in 1888 . It was initially bought by a railway company and then passed into private ownership . Coastal erosion continued and by the 1950s , the southern part of the castle had been destroyed by the sea . The remaining castle was restored between 1975 and 1979 by Peter and Barbara McGregor , who turned the keep into a private residence . In the 21st century , Sandgate remains in private ownership , and is protected under UK law as a grade I listed building . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = 16th century = = = 
 Sandgate Castle was built as a consequence of international tensions between England , France and the Holy Roman Empire in the final years of the reign of King Henry VIII . Traditionally the Crown had left coastal defences to the local lords and communities , only taking a modest role in building and maintaining fortifications , and while France and the Empire remained in conflict with one another , maritime raids were common but an actual invasion of England seemed unlikely . Modest defences , based around simple blockhouses and towers , existed in the south @-@ west and along the Sussex coast , with a few more impressive works in the north of England , but in general the fortifications were very limited in scale . 
 In 1533 , Henry broke with Pope Paul III in order to annul the long @-@ standing marriage to his wife , Catherine of Aragon and remarry . Catherine was the aunt of Charles V , the Holy Roman Emperor , and he took the annulment as a personal insult . This resulted in France and the Empire declaring an alliance against Henry in 1538 , and the Pope encouraging the two countries to attack England . An invasion of England appeared certain . In response , Henry issued an order , called a " device " , in 1539 , giving instructions for the " defence of the realm in time of invasion " and the construction of forts along the English coastline . 
 Sandgate was intended to defend a vulnerable point along the Kent cliffs , just west of Folkestone , where an enemy force could potentially land and make their way easily further inland . Sandgate 's construction was supervised by the Moravian engineer Stefan von Haschenperg , and Thomas <unk> and Richard Keys acted as commissioners for the project . In the initial stages of the work in 1539 , a team of 237 men were employed , with masons , quarrymen , <unk> and wood fellers preparing the site ; the masons were drawn from as far away as Somerset and Gloucestershire . By the summer , over 500 were at work , including labourers , bricklayers , carpenters and sawyers . After a pause during the winter months , work picked up again in the summer of the next year , with 630 working on the castle that July . 
 The castle 's foundations rested on the underlying shingle of the beach . The walls were made from Kentish ragstone , mostly roughly laid , with some work using finer ashlar , with Caen stone used in the detailing . Most of the ragstone was collected from the local beaches , where there were suitable outcrops to the west and east of the site . 459 tons of Caen stone was recycled from the priories of Christ Church and Horton , which had recently been dissolved by Henry . In total , 147 @,@ 000 bricks were used , produced at 13 different brickyards , and 44 @,@ 000 tiles , mostly manufactured in Wye , along with 1 @,@ 829 loads of lime , 110 tons of coal and 979 tons of timber . The total cost of the project came to £ 5 @,@ 584 . 
 At the centre of the new castle was a circular keep , with three ovoid towers and bastions around it on the north @-@ west , north @-@ east and south sides , and a gatehouse to the north . These were surrounded by two curtain walls , forming a triangular inner and outer ward . Covered stone passageways , three storeys high , linked the towers , the keep and the gatehouse . The outer ward was grassed over , with a stone cesspool by the side of the north @-@ east tower , linked by sewers to the inside of the castle . The castle was entered through a doorway in the rear of the gatehouse , originally called the " Half Moon " , linked by a stairway in the covered passageway to the keep . There were four tiers of guns in the finished castle , from the ground level up to the roof of the keep , and a total of 142 firing points for cannon and handguns ; their design closely resembling those at nearby Walmer and Deal castles . 
 Sandgate was completed by the autumn of 1540 ; Henry may have come to the castle when he was visiting Folkestone in May 1542 . Elizabeth I visited the fortification in 1573 , and also used it to imprison the courtier Thomas Keyes for a period , after he married Lady Mary Grey against the Queen 's wishes . In 1593 , the castle was reported to be equipped with seven artillery pieces - one culverin , two demi @-@ culverins , three sakers and one minion - along with muskets , bows and arrows . 
 = = = 17th – 18th centuries = = = 
 In 1609 , the garrison comprised a captain and his lieutenant , five soldiers , two porters and ten gunners . The mortar used in the castle was particularly poor , and had begun to seriously decay by 1616 . A survey that year showed the castle to be substantially dilapidated , with the cost of the proposed repairs estimated at £ 260 , and noted that a 100 feet ( 30 m ) gun platform for ten weapons had been built along the southern walls to replace the original southern battery . A 1623 report echoed the same problems , noting that the sea had caused a third of the southern wall to collapse ; the necessary repairs , including strengthening the walls , were projected at £ 560 . 
 Four years later , amid fears of war with France and Spain , the castle 's captain , Richard <unk> , reported that the fortification was in such a poor condition that " neither habitable or defensible against any assault , nor any way fit to command the roads " . An inspection team observed that it was straightforward to climb over the castle 's ruined walls and rotten timbers , and that as a result its artillery had been dismounted and placed along the beach instead . The castle was probably not repaired , however , until after 1638 . 
 Sandgate Castle was seized in 1642 by Parliamentary forces at the start of the first English Civil War between the supporters of King Charles I and Parliament , although its captain , Richard Hippesley , remained in post . The war ended in 1646 but , after the few years of unsteady peace , the Second Civil War broke out in 1648 . The Parliamentary navy was based in Kent , protected by the other Henrician castles of Walmer , Deal and Sandown , but by May a Royalist insurrection was under way across the county , and the fleet joined the rebellion . Sandgate and its sister castles were occupied by the Royalists . Parliament defeated the wider insurgency at the Battle of Maidstone at the start of June , however , and then sent a force under the command of Colonel Rich to deal with the Kentish castles . Sandgate was still occupied by the Royalists that August , when Rich sent forces to prevent its garrison intervening to disrupt his assault on Deal and Sandown , but was recaptured soon after . 
 During the interregnum , Hippesley initially continued as captain of Sandgate , until he was replaced in 1653 , resulting in complaints from him that he had been unfairly treated and that he was owed money by Parliament . During this period the garrison was increased to include a governor , two corporals , twenty soldiers and three gunners . When Charles II was restored to the throne in 1660 , Sandgate and the other Device Forts initially remained at the heart of the south coast defences , but by now their design was antiquated . The garrison was cut back to its pre @-@ war levels , and then reduced further in 1682 to only ten men . Sandgate had fallen into a poor condition , and £ 200 was assigned in 1663 for the repair of the castle , to be met partially from the proceeds of lands around Sandgate confiscated from former supporters of Parliament . 
 = = = 19th century = = = 
 Sandgate Castle was still in use during the Napoleonic Wars at the start of the 19th century , but was heavily rebuilt . Brigadier @-@ General William Twiss surveyed the south coast in 1804 , and proposed building a series of 58 new defensive towers along it , as part of which he proposed converted Sandgate into a " secure sea battery " . After some opposition , and many delays within the War Office , the work on the castle finally began in 1805 . 
 The project lowered the height of the castle considerably , destroying much of the fortification in the process . The upper storeys of the keep , the towers , the covered passageways and the gatehouse were all demolished , along with some of the buildings in the inner ward . The resulting rubble was used to backfill the outer ward , raising its height and effectively turning the inner ward into a dry moat . The inner curtain wall was reduced to one storey in height , and the outer curtain wall was refaced . An esplanade and wall @-@ walk were built around the remaining outer walls , which supported at least eight gun emplacements . 
 The circular keep was turned into a Martello tower , a type of Napoleonic artillery fortification . It was now only two storeys tall , although remaining original interior walls and doorways largely survived untouched . It was accessed on the first floor via an unusual sliding drawbridge , which was supported on rails and could retract into the floor , and the different storeys were linked by a spiral staircase . The ground floor of the keep included a brick @-@ built magazine , and the roof , supported by a central pillar running up through the building , held a single , large gun emplacement . 
 The north @-@ east and north @-@ west towers , now only one @-@ storey tall , were covered with turf , turning the rear of the outer ward into a flat , grassed esplanade . The southern tower was reduced in height to two storeys , but remained in use as a gun platform . The covered corridors between the keep and the towers were now one @-@ storey high as well , linking to the buried towers in the north @-@ east and north @-@ west bastions . The upper storeys of the gatehouse were rebuilt , although the ground floor remained in its 16th @-@ century condition . 
 The modified castle was completed by 1808 , and held eight 24 @-@ pounder ( 11 kg ) guns along the outer wall , a gun on the roof of the southern bastion , and another on top of the keep itself . The new castle could hold a garrison of 40 men . 
 In 1859 , the castle was re @-@ equipped with heavier artillery , a combination of 32 @-@ pounder ( 15 kg ) and 68 @-@ pounder ( 31 kg ) guns . A new magazine was constructed , comprising a large , brick @-@ built building divided into three rooms for storing gunpowder , specially designed to keep the powder dry . The exterior gun emplacements were also redesigned , reusing the 1806 foundations ; the two surviving emplacements , in the north @-@ east and north @-@ west bastions , date from 1859 . 
 Coastal erosion remained a problem . By the middle of the century , the tides had reached the southern edge of the castle , and a 1866 report stated that the walls had been undermined by the sea . Despite protective piles being driven around the castle , it was badly affected by flooding in 1875 and 1878 , creating serious fissures in the stonework . The high costs of maintaining the property , combined with its dwindling utility , encouraged the government to sell the castle to the South Eastern Railway company in 1888 , who intended to turn it into a railway station . It was then sold to private owners and a small museum was created in the castle , which was sometimes opened to the public for an entry price of one penny . 
 = = = 20th – 21st centuries = = = 
 The receding coast line continued to threaten Sandgate Castle , and severe storms in 1927 and 1950 undermined large parts of the castle . By the time that a new seawall was built in the early 1950s , the southern third of the castle had been entirely destroyed . 
 In 1975 , Peter and Barbara McGregor began to restore the ruins of the castle , with the support of the Department of the Environment , Kent County Council and the British Army . As part of the project , archaeological investigations were carried out between 1975 and 1979 by Edward Harris . The part of the 1806 esplanade around the north @-@ east bastion was excavated , revealing the lower 16th @-@ century stonework of the tower and the east side of the 1859 magazine , and a retaining wall was built to support the newly exposed walls . This created two levels in the outer bailey : a higher level on the western side , which still covered the north @-@ west tower , and a lower one on the eastern . The keep was turned into a private residence , with a new sun room built on top of the gun platform . In 2000 , Geoffrey Boot and his wife acquired the castle , which is now used by Boot 's company , AMT South Eastern Ltd . 
 The castle is protected under UK law as a grade I listed building . The two 16th @-@ century ledger books from the original construction , written by the project clerk Thomas <unk> , survive in the British Library . They are 350 pages long , and form what the historian Peter Harrington has described as the " most complete building account of any Tudor fortification " . 
 = Peacock ( song ) = 
 " Peacock " is a song by American singer Katy Perry , taken from her third studio album , Teenage Dream ( 2010 ) . Because the song was filled with suggestive lyrics pertaining to male genitalia , Capitol Records initially opposed the idea of including it on her record . Similar to what happened with another song of hers – " I Kissed a Girl " ( 2008 ) – she refused . " Peacock " was panned by music critics and , musically , was compared to the 1980s hit " Mickey " by Toni Basil , and Gwen Stefani 's " Hollaback Girl " ( 2005 ) . 
 Despite not being released as a single , the song entered several music charts worldwide . Its least successful charting territory was the United Kingdom , while it performed best in the US , topping the Billboard Hot Dance Club Songs chart for a week , and has been certified Platinum by the RIAA . Perry has performed " Peacock " on several occasions , including during her 2011 world tour California Dreams Tour . When performing the track , the singer usually wears colorful or glittery clothing . 
 = = Production = = 
 Mikkel S. Eriksen , Tor Erik Hermansen , and Ester Dean assisted Perry in writing " Peacock " for her third studio album , Teenage Dream , released in 2010 . According to Perry , the whole point of writing " Peacock " was to play with words . Midway through recording the album , Perry recalled saying to the people she was working with : " Look I 've got a lot of jewels , but I really don 't have the crown . I really don 't have that full @-@ blown presentation " . So she then decided to get back into the studio and work with Stargate , a production team co @-@ producing Teenage Dream , during a late @-@ night session and made several more songs , including " Firework " and " Peacock " . 
 Originally , the singer 's recording label , Capitol Records , was against the inclusion of the song as a track on Teenage Dream as they deemed " Peacock " too controversial . " They were all a bit worried about the word ' cock ' and it gave me déjà vu because they did the exact same thing with ' I Kissed a Girl , ' " Perry stated . Unhappy with the idea of making her music more family friendly , she refused . " They said , ' We don 't see it as a single , we don 't want it on the album . ' And I was like , ' You guys are idiots ' . " When asked about " Peacock " , Perry stated : " I 'm hoping it will be a gay @-@ pride anthem , peacocks represent a lot of individuality ..... It 's not just like , ' I wanna see your bulge . ' " And then she went on to clarify : " It does have the word cock in it , but art is also in fart ! It 's all in how you look at it . " Prior to the release of Teenage Dream , the singer debuted " Peacock " in early August 2010 when she performed it at the MTV World Stage in Malaysia . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Peacock " is a dance @-@ pop song , with an up @-@ tempo house music beat , that lasts for three minutes and 51 seconds . The song is composed in the key of D minor and is set in time signature of common time , with a tempo of 138 beats per minute . Perry 's vocal range spans over an octave , from B ♭ 3 to D5 . Lyrically , the track contains a double entendre with suggestive wording . New York magazine writer Willa Paskin observed that Perry did the obvious with the song 's hook ( " she used a common word for penis and made it mean penis ! " ) . Paskin also wrote that " Peacock " could perhaps be the most outrageous example of an entirely obvious double entendre . Perry herself has considered it to be the biggest innuendo in the world . During an interview with MTV News , the singer said that she is a fan of using puns and double entendres and often looks for ways to incorporate it into her material . In the song , Perry repeatedly asks to see their peacock , if they are " brave enough " to do so . Its composition was compared to Toni Basil 's cheerleader anthem " Mickey " by many reviews as both songs are stomping jams , bursting with double meanings . Leah Greenblatt of Entertainment Weekly dubbed it a shamelessly silly revival of Basil 's 1980s hit . Rob Sheffield from Rolling Stone noticed the two songs shared a drum hook , and thought of " Peacock " as a sequel to Gwen Stefani 's 2005 single , " Hollaback Girl " . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 The track <unk> generally negative reviews from critics , who mostly criticized the song 's " cock , cock , cock " line . Greg Knot from Chicago Tribune said that " Peacock " adapting the beat from Basil 's " Mickey " into a suggestive metaphor " barely qualifies as an off @-@ color joke let alone a song . " Stephen Thomas Erlewine from AllMusic found the singer to have distinguished herself through " desperate vulgarity " . Erlewine concluded : " All this stylized provocation is exhausting , and not just because there 's so much of it ( none of it actually arousing ) . It 's tiring because , at her heart , Perry is old @-@ fashioned and is invested in none of her aggressive teasing . " 
 Elysa Gardner from USA Today advised people who buy the album to skip the song . In his negative review for the album , Matthew Cole of Slant Magazine found it difficult to think of a song more unrefined or more irritating than " Peacock " . He believed all reviews of Teenage Dream will discuss the track , which will be because it is " potentially historic in its badness , to the point that , once you 've heard it , you too will have to describe it to other people just to convince yourself that it really exists . " Spin magazine writer Mikael Wood remarked that the song contains a double entendre that even a performer such as Kesha could find crude . 
 Writing in music website Sputnikmusic , Rudy Klapper said she would bet that " Peacock " would " never [ be ] seeing the light of day , primarily because it 's a terrible song with a double entendre so blunt it would make Ke $ ha blush " . Klapper also said the lyrics do not compliment Perry 's writing skills . The Washington Post staff writer Chris Richards ' review of the track was also negative . Talking about how hooks on Teenage Dream are catchy , but quickly start to erode if listeners pay more attention to the words , he cited " Peacock " as an example of this . Describing its chorus as " an earworm of the highest order , " he said some of the lyrics are enough to make people clench their teeth . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 Despite not being released as a single , " Peacock " managed to chart in some territories . The song peaked at number fifty @-@ six on the Canadian Hot 100 and performed similarly in the Czech Republic , where it charted at number fifty @-@ two . The UK Singles Chart was where " Peacock " had its lowest charting entry . In the week ending on September 11 , 2010 , the track found its peak at number one @-@ hundred @-@ twenty @-@ five . On Billboard 's US Hot Dance Club Songs , the song had its highest peak position . After eight weeks of appearing on the chart , " Peacock " reached the top spot , replacing La Roux 's " In for the Kill " , on December 4 , 2010 . However , by next week , it was superseded by the Richard Vission song " I Like That " . The song also reached number five on the Billboard Bubbling Under Hot 100 Singles chart . In June 2014 , the song was certified Platinum by the RIAA for selling one million copies . 
 = = Live performances and cover versions = = 
 For most performances of " Peacock " , the singer usually dons a glittery aquamarine bustier or a colorful piece of clothing attached to her back that is to resemble peacock feathers . Perry 's first performance of the song took place during August 2010 at the MTV World Stage . The stage she performed on included props such as lifesize candy canes , background dancers dressed up like candy canes and a video of a blue eye surrounded by peacock feathers playing in the backdrop . While dancing across the stage , Perry wore a white glitter <unk> and tutu . 
 In November , Perry also performed " Peacock " at New York 's Roseland Ballroom , where she introduced herself by popping out of a giant cake , dressed in a purple skin @-@ tight cupcake print dress . Additionally , Perry included " Peacock " in her setlist for her worldwide concert tour , California Dreams Tour ( February 2011 – January 2012 ) . When singing the song , the performance would include an elaborated feathered fan dance number . She wore a turquoise / green one @-@ piece swimsuit with a peacock tail attached accompanied by female dancers dressed in a similar way , two male dancers and mimes . Concert reviewer Jim Abbott for the Orlando Sentinel felt that detailed performances such as the ones done for " Peacock " were a highlight for the singer 's tour . 
 Monthly LGBT @-@ interest magazine The Advocate called " Peacock " " very gay " . Ryan James <unk> , who had already parodied another of Perry 's songs , " California Gurls " , did the same for " Peacock " . While fewer than James <unk> 's parody of the former , his " Peacock " video received more than 130 @,@ 000 reviews on the internet just two days after its release . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Digital download – remix 
 " Peacock " ( Cory Enemy & Mia Moretti Remix ) – 5 : 32 
 Digital download – remix 
 " Peacock " ( <unk> Remix ) – 4 : 19 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from the Teenage Dream liner notes . 
 Assistant : Tim Robbins 
 Mixers : Serban Ghenea 
 Mix engineer : John Hanes 
 Producers : Stargate , Ester Dean 
 Recorders : Mikkel S. Eriksen , Miles Walker 
 Backing vocals , Lead vocals : Katy Perry 
 Writers : Katy Perry , Mikkel S. Eriksen , Tor Erik Hermansen , Ester Dean 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = George Fox = 
 George Fox ( July 1624 – 13 January 1691 ) was an English Dissenter and a founder of the Religious Society of Friends , commonly known as the Quakers or Friends . 
 The son of a Leicestershire weaver , Fox lived in a time of great social upheaval and war . He rebelled against the religious and political authorities by proposing an unusual and uncompromising approach to the Christian faith . He travelled throughout Britain as a dissenting preacher , for which he was often persecuted by the authorities who disapproved of his beliefs . 
 Fox married Margaret Fell , the widow of one of his wealthier supporters ; she was a leading Friend . His ministry expanded and he undertook tours of North America and the Low Countries . Between these tours , he was imprisoned for more than a year . He spent the final decade of his life working in London to organize the expanding Quaker movement . 
 While his movement attracted disdain from some , others such as William Penn and Oliver Cromwell viewed Fox with respect . 
 = = Early life = = 
 George Fox was born in the strongly Puritan village of Drayton @-@ in @-@ the @-@ Clay , Leicestershire , England ( now known as Fenny Drayton ) , 15 miles ( 24 km ) west @-@ south @-@ west of Leicester . He was the eldest of four children of Christopher Fox , a successful weaver , called " Righteous Christer " by his neighbours , and his wife , Mary née Lago . Christopher Fox was a churchwarden and was relatively wealthy ; when he died in the late 1650s he left his son a substantial legacy . From childhood Fox was of a serious , religious disposition . There is no record of any formal schooling but he learned to read and write . " When I came to eleven years of age " , he said , " I knew pureness and righteousness ; for , while I was a child , I was taught how to walk to be kept pure . The Lord taught me to be faithful , in all things , and to act faithfully two ways ; viz . , inwardly to God , and outwardly to man . " Known as an honest person , he also proclaimed , " The Lord taught me to be faithful in all things ... and to keep to Yea and Nay in all things . " 
 As he grew up , his relatives " thought to have made me a priest " but he was instead apprenticed to a local shoemaker and grazier , George Gee of <unk> . This suited his contemplative temperament and he became well known for his diligence among the wool traders who had dealings with his master . A constant obsession for Fox was the pursuit of " simplicity " in life , meaning humility and the abandonment of luxury , and the short time he spent as a shepherd was important to the formation of this view . Toward the end of his life he wrote a letter for general circulation pointing out that Abel , Noah , Abraham , Jacob , Moses and David were all keepers of sheep or cattle and therefore that a learned education should not be seen as a necessary qualification for ministry . 
 George Fox knew people who were " professors " ( followers of the standard religion ) , but by the age of 19 he had begun to look down on their behaviour , in particular drinking alcohol . He records that , in prayer one night after leaving two acquaintances at a drinking session , he heard an inner voice saying , " Thou <unk> how young people go together into vanity , and old people into the earth ; thou must forsake all , young and old , keep out of all , and be as a stranger unto all . " 
 = = First travels = = 
 Driven by his " inner voice " , Fox left Drayton @-@ in @-@ the @-@ Clay in September 1643 , moving toward London in a state of mental torment and confusion . The English Civil War had begun and troops were stationed in many towns through which he passed . In Barnet , he was torn by depression ( perhaps from the temptations of the resort town near London ) . He alternately shut himself in his room for days at a time or went out alone into the countryside . After almost a year he returned to Drayton , where he engaged Nathaniel Stephens , the clergyman of his hometown , in long discussions on religious matters . Stephens considered Fox a gifted young man but the two disagreed on so many issues that he later called Fox mad and spoke against him . 
 Over the next few years Fox continued to travel around the country as his particular religious beliefs took shape . At times he actively sought the company of clergy but found no comfort from them as they seemed unable to help with the matters troubling him . One , in Warwickshire , advised him to take tobacco ( which Fox disliked ) and sing psalms ; another , in Coventry , lost his temper when Fox accidentally stood on a flower in his garden ; a third suggested bloodletting . He became fascinated by the Bible , which he studied assiduously . He hoped to find among the " English Dissenters " a spiritual understanding absent from the established church but fell out with one group , for example , because he maintained that women had souls : 
 as I had forsaken the priests , so I left the separate preachers also , and those esteemed the most experienced people ; for I saw there was none among them all that could speak to my condition . And when all my hopes in them and in all men were gone , so that I had nothing outwardly to help me , nor could tell what to do , then , oh , then , I heard a voice which said , " There is one , even Christ Jesus , that can speak to thy condition " ; and when I heard it my heart did leap for joy . Then the Lord let me see why there was none upon the earth that could speak to my condition , namely , that I might give Him all the glory ; for all are concluded under sin , and shut up in <unk> as I had been , that Jesus Christ might have the pre @-@ eminence who enlightens , and gives grace , and faith , and power . Thus when God doth work , who shall let ( i.e. prevent ) it ? And this I knew experimentally . 
 He thought intensely about the Temptation of Christ , which he compared to his own spiritual condition , but drew strength from his conviction that God would support and preserve him . In prayer and meditation he came to a greater understanding of the nature of his faith and what it required from him ; this process he called " opening " . He also came to what he deemed a deep inner understanding of standard Christian beliefs . Among his ideas were : 
 Rituals can be safely ignored , as long as one experiences a true spiritual conversion . 
 The qualification for ministry is given by the Holy Spirit , not by ecclesiastical study . This implies that anyone has the right to minister , assuming the Spirit guides them , including women and children . 
 God " dwelleth in the hearts of his obedient people " : religious experience is not confined to a church building . Indeed , Fox refused to apply the word " church " to a building , using instead the name " steeple @-@ house " , a usage maintained by many Quakers today . Fox would just as soon worship in fields and orchards , believing that God 's presence could be felt anywhere . 
 Though Fox used the Bible to support his views , Fox reasoned that , because God was within the faithful , believers could follow their own inner guide rather than rely on a strict reading of Scripture or the word of clerics . 
 Fox also made no clear distinction between Father , Son and Holy Spirit . 
 = = Religious Society of Friends = = 
