 In 1647 Fox began to preach publicly : in market @-@ places , fields , appointed meetings of various kinds or even sometimes " steeple @-@ houses " after the service . His powerful preaching began to attract a small following . It is not clear at what point the Society of Friends was formed but there was certainly a group of people who often travelled together . At first , they called themselves " Children of the Light " or " Friends of the Truth " , and later simply " Friends " . Fox seems to have had no desire to found a sect but only to proclaim what he saw as the pure and genuine principles of Christianity in their original simplicity , though he afterward showed great prowess as a religious legislator in the organization he gave to the new society . 
 There were a great many rival Christian denominations holding very diverse opinions ; the atmosphere of dispute and confusion gave Fox an opportunity to put forward his own beliefs through his personal sermons . Fox 's preaching was grounded in scripture but was mainly effective because of the intense personal experience he was able to project . He was scathing about immorality , deceit and the exacting of tithes and urged his listeners to lead lives without sin , avoiding the <unk> 's antinomian view that a believer becomes automatically sinless . By 1651 he had gathered other talented preachers around him and continued to roam the country despite a harsh reception from some listeners , who would whip and beat them to drive them away . As his reputation spread , his words were not welcomed by all . As an uncompromising preacher , he hurled disputation and contradiction to the faces of his opponents . The worship of Friends in the form of silent waiting seems to have been well @-@ established by this time , though it is not recorded how this came to be . 
 = = = Imprisonment = = = 
 Fox complained to judges about decisions he considered morally wrong , as in his letter on the case of a woman due to be executed for theft . He campaigned against the paying of tithes , which funded the established church and often went into the pockets of absentee landlords or religious colleges far away from the paying parishioners . In his view , as God was everywhere and anyone could preach , the established church was unnecessary and a university qualification irrelevant for a preacher . Conflict with civil authority was inevitable . Fox was imprisoned several times , the first at Nottingham in 1649 . At Derby in 1650 he was imprisoned for blasphemy ; a judge mocked Fox 's exhortation to " tremble at the word of the Lord " , calling him and his followers " Quakers " . Following his refusal to fight against the return of the monarchy ( or to take up arms for any reason ) , his sentence was doubled . The refusal to swear oaths or take up arms came to be a much more important part of his public statements . Refusal to take oaths meant that Quakers could be prosecuted under laws compelling subjects to pledge allegiance , as well as making testifying in court problematic . In a letter of 1652 ( That which is set up by the sword ) , he urged Friends not to use " carnal weapons " but " spiritual weapons " , saying " let the waves [ the power of nations ] break over your heads " . 
 In 1652 , Fox preached for several hours under a walnut tree at <unk> , where his disciple Thomas Aldham was instrumental in setting up the first meeting in the Doncaster area . In June that year Fox felt that God led him to ascend Pendle Hill where he had a vision of many souls coming to Christ . From there he travelled to Sedbergh in Westmorland , where he had heard a group of Seekers were meeting , and preached to over a thousand people on Firbank Fell , convincing many , including Francis Howgill , to accept that Christ might speak to people directly . At the end of the month he stayed at Swarthmoor Hall , near Ulverston , the home of Thomas Fell , vice @-@ chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster , and his wife , Margaret . At around this time the ad hoc meetings of Friends began to be formalized and a monthly meeting was set up in County Durham . Margaret became a Quaker and , although Thomas did not convert , his familiarity with the Friends proved influential when Fox was arrested for blasphemy in October . Fell was one of three presiding judges , and had the charges dismissed on a technicality . 
 Fox remained at Swarthmoor until summer 1653 then left for Carlisle where he was arrested again for blasphemy . It was even proposed to put him to death but Parliament requested his release rather than have " a young man ... die for religion " . Further imprisonments came at London in 1654 , Launceston in 1656 , Lancaster in 1660 , Leicester in 1662 , Lancaster again and Scarborough in 1664 – 66 and Worcester in 1673 – 75 . Charges usually included causing a disturbance and travelling without a pass . Quakers fell foul of irregularly enforced laws forbidding unauthorized worship while actions motivated by belief in social equality — refusing to use or acknowledge titles , take hats off in court or bow to those who considered themselves socially superior — were seen as disrespectful . While imprisoned at Launceston Fox wrote , " Christ our Lord and master saith ' Swear not at all , but let your communications be yea , yea , and nay , nay , for whatsoever is more than these cometh of evil . ' ... the Apostle James saith , ' My brethren , above all things swear not , neither by heaven , nor by earth , nor by any other oath . Lest ye fall into condemnation . ' " 
 In prison George Fox continued writing and preaching , feeling that imprisonment brought him into contact with people who needed his help — the jailers as well as his fellow prisoners . In his journal , he told his magistrate , " God dwells not in temples made with hands . " He also sought to set an example by his actions there , turning the other cheek when being beaten and refusing to show his captors any dejected feelings . 
 = = = Encounters with Oliver Cromwell = = = 
 Parliamentarians grew suspicious of monarchist plots and fearful that the group travelling with Fox aimed to overthrow the government : by this time his meetings were regularly attracting crowds of over a thousand . In early 1655 he was arrested at Whetstone , Leicestershire and taken to London under armed guard . In March he was brought before the Lord Protector , Oliver Cromwell . After affirming that he had no intention of taking up arms Fox was able to speak with Cromwell for most of the morning about the Friends and advised him to listen to God 's voice and obey it so that , as Fox left , Cromwell " with tears in his eyes said , ' Come again to my house ; for if thou and I were but an hour of a day together , we should be nearer one to the other ' ; adding that he wished [ Fox ] no more ill than he did to his own soul . " 
 This episode was later recalled as an example of " speaking truth to power " , a preaching technique by which subsequent Quakers hoped to influence the powerful . Although not used until the 20th century , the phrase is related to the ideas of plain speech and simplicity which Fox practiced , but motivated by the more worldly goal of eradicating war , injustice and oppression . 
 Fox petitioned Cromwell over the course of 1656 , asking him to alleviate the persecution of Quakers . Later that year , they met for a second time at Whitehall . On a personal level , the meeting went well ; despite disagreements between the two men , they had a certain rapport . Fox invited Cromwell to " lay down his crown at the feet of Jesus " — which Cromwell declined to do . Fox met Cromwell again twice in March 1657 . Their last meeting was in 1658 at Hampton Court , though they could not speak for long or meet again because of the Protector 's worsening illness — Fox even wrote that " he looked like a dead man " . Cromwell died in September of that year . 
 = = = James Nayler = = = 
 One early Quaker convert , the Yorkshireman James Nayler , arose as a prominent preacher in London around 1655 . A breach began to form between Fox 's and Nayler 's followers . As Fox was held prisoner at Launceston , Nayler moved south @-@ westwards towards Launceston intending to meet Fox and heal any rift . On the way he was arrested himself and held at Exeter . After Fox was released from Launceston gaol in 1656 , he preached throughout the West Country . Arriving at Exeter late in September , Fox was reunited with Nayler . Nayler and his followers refused to remove their hats while Fox prayed , which Fox took as both a personal slight and a bad example . When Nayler refused to kiss Fox 's hand , Fox told Nayler to kiss his foot instead . Nayler was offended and the two parted acrimoniously . Fox wrote , " there was now a wicked spirit risen amongst Friends " . 
 After Nayler 's own release later the same year he rode into Bristol triumphantly playing the part of Jesus Christ in a re @-@ enactment of Palm Sunday . He was arrested and taken to London , where Parliament defeated a motion to execute him by 96 – 82 . Instead , they ordered that he be pilloried and whipped through both London and Bristol , branded on his forehead with the letter B ( for <unk> ) , bored through the tongue with a red @-@ hot iron and imprisoned in solitary confinement with hard labour . Nayler was released in 1659 , but he was a broken man . On meeting Fox in London , he fell to his knees and begged Fox 's forgiveness . Shortly afterward , Nayler was attacked by thieves while travelling home to his family , and died . 
 = = Suffering and growth = = 
 The persecutions of these years — with about a thousand Friends in prison by 1657 — hardened George Fox 's opinions of traditional religious and social practices . In his preaching , he often emphasized the Quaker rejection of baptism by water ; this was a useful way of highlighting how the focus of Friends on inward transformation differed from what he saw as the superstition of outward ritual . It was also deliberately provocative to adherents of those practices , providing opportunities for Fox to argue with them on matters of scripture . This pattern was also found in his court appearances : when a judge challenged him to remove his hat , Fox <unk> by asking where in the Bible such an injunction could be found . 
 The Society of Friends became increasingly organized towards the end of the decade . Large meetings were held , including a three @-@ day event in Bedfordshire , the precursor of the present Britain Yearly Meeting system . Fox commissioned two Friends to travel around the country collecting the testimonies of imprisoned Quakers , as evidence of their persecution ; this led to the establishment in 1675 of Meeting for Sufferings , which has continued to the present day . 
 The 1650s , when the Friends were most confrontational , was one of the most creative periods of their history . During the Commonwealth , Fox had hoped that the movement would become the major church in England . Disagreements , persecution and increasing social turmoil , however , led Fox to suffer from a severe depression , which left him deeply troubled at Reading , Berkshire , for ten weeks in 1658 or 1659 . In 1659 , he sent parliament his most politically radical pamphlet , Fifty nine Particulars laid down for the Regulating things , but the year was so chaotic that it never considered them ; the document was not reprinted until the 21st century . 
 = = = The Restoration = = = 
 With the restoration of the monarchy , Fox 's dreams of establishing the Friends as the dominant religion seemed at an end . He was again accused of conspiracy , this time against Charles II , and fanaticism — a charge he resented . He was imprisoned in Lancaster for five months , during which he wrote to the king offering advice on governance : Charles should refrain from war and domestic religious persecution , and discourage oath @-@ taking , plays , and maypole games . These last suggestions reveal Fox 's Puritan leanings , which continued to influence Quakers for centuries after his death . Once again , Fox was released after demonstrating that he had no military ambitions . 
 At least on one point , Charles listened to Fox . The seven hundred Quakers who had been imprisoned under Richard Cromwell were released , though the government remained uncertain about the group 's links with other , more violent , movements . A revolt by the Fifth Monarchists in January 1661 led to the suppression of that sect and the repression of other Nonconformists , including Quakers . In the aftermath of this attempted coup , Fox and eleven other Quakers issued a broadside proclaiming what became known among Friends in the 20th century as the " peace testimony " : they committed themselves to oppose all outward wars and strife as contrary to the will of God . Not all his followers accepted this statement ; Isaac Penington , for example , dissented for a time arguing that the state had a duty to protect the innocent from evil , if necessary by using military force . Despite the testimony , persecution against Quakers and other dissenters continued . 
 Penington and others , such as John Perrot and John Pennyman , were uneasy at Fox 's increasing power within the movement . Like Nayler before them , they saw no reason why men should remove their hats for prayer , arguing that men and women should be treated as equals and if , as according to the apostle Paul , women should cover their heads , then so could men . Perrot and Penington lost the argument . Perrot emigrated to the New World , and Fox retained leadership of the movement . 
 Parliament enacted laws which forbade non @-@ Anglican religious meetings of more than five people , essentially making Quaker meetings illegal . Fox counseled his followers to openly violate laws that attempted to suppress the movement , and many Friends , including women and children , were jailed over the next two and a half decades . Meanwhile , Quakers in New England had been banished ( and some executed ) , and Charles was advised by his councillors to issue a mandamus condemning this practice and allowing them to return . Fox was able to meet some of the New England Friends when they came to London , stimulating his interest in the colonies . Fox was unable to travel there immediately : he was imprisoned again in 1664 for his refusal to swear the oath of allegiance , and on his release in 1666 was preoccupied with organizational matters — he normalized the system of monthly and quarterly meetings throughout the country , and extended it to Ireland . 
 Visiting Ireland also gave him the opportunity to preach against what he saw as the excesses of the Roman Catholic Church , in particular the use of ritual . More recent Quaker commentators have noted points of contact between the denominations : both claim the actual presence of God in their meetings , and both allow the collective opinion of the church to augment Biblical teaching . Fox , however , did not perceive this , brought up as he was in a wholly Protestant environment hostile to " Popery " . 
 Fox married Margaret Fell of Swarthmoor Hall , a lady of high social position and one of his early converts , on 27 October 1669 at a meeting in Bristol . She was ten years his senior and had eight children ( all but one of them Quakers ) by her first husband , Thomas Fell , who had died in 1658 . She was herself very active in the movement , and had campaigned for equality and the acceptance of women as preachers . As there were no priests at Quaker weddings to perform the ceremony , the union took the form of a civil marriage approved by the principals and the witnesses at a meeting . Ten days after the marriage , Margaret returned to Swarthmoor to continue her work there while George went back to London . Their shared religious work was at the heart of their life together , and they later collaborated on a great deal of the administration the Society required . Shortly after the marriage , Margaret was imprisoned at Lancaster ; George remained in the south @-@ east of England , becoming so ill and depressed that for a time he lost his sight . 
 = = = Travels in America and Europe = = = 
 By 1671 Fox had recovered and Margaret had been released by order of the King . Fox resolved to visit the English settlements in America and the West Indies , remaining there for two years , possibly to counter any remnants of Perrot 's teaching there . After a voyage of seven weeks , during which dolphins were caught and eaten , the party arrived in Barbados on 3 October 1671 . From there , Fox sent an epistle to Friends spelling out the role of women 's meetings in the Quaker marriage ceremony , a point of controversy when he returned home . One of his proposals suggested that the prospective couple should be interviewed by an all @-@ female meeting prior to the marriage to determine whether there were any financial or other impediments . Though women 's meetings had been held in London for the last ten years , this was an innovation in Bristol and the north @-@ west of England , which many there felt went too far . 
 Fox wrote a letter to the governor and assembly of the island in which he refuted charges that Quakers were stirring up the slaves to revolt and tried to affirm the orthodoxy of Quaker beliefs . After a stay in Jamaica , Fox 's first landfall on the North American continent was at Maryland , where he participated in a four @-@ day meeting of local Quakers . He remained there while various of his English companions travelled to the other colonies , because he wished to meet some Native Americans who were interested in Quaker ways — though he relates that they had " a great dispute " among themselves about whether to participate in the meeting . Fox was impressed by their general demeanour , which he said was " courteous and loving " . He resented the suggestion ( from a man in North Carolina ) that " the Light and Spirit of God ... was not in the Indians " , a proposition which Fox refuted . Fox left no record of encountering slaves on the mainland . 
 Elsewhere in the colonies , Fox helped to establish organizational systems for the Friends , along the same lines as he had done in Britain . He also preached to many non @-@ Quakers , some but not all of whom were converted . 
 Following extensive travels around the various American colonies , George Fox returned to England in June 1673 confident that his movement was firmly established there . Back in England , however , he found his movement sharply divided among provincial Friends ( such as William Rogers , John Wilkinson and John Story ) who resisted establishment of women 's meetings and the power of those who resided in or near London . With William Penn and Robert Barclay as allies of Fox , the challenge to Fox 's leadership was eventually put down . But in the midst of the dispute , Fox was imprisoned again for refusing to swear oaths after being captured at <unk> , Worcestershire . His mother died shortly after hearing of his arrest and Fox 's health began to suffer . Margaret Fell petitioned the king for his release , which was granted , but Fox felt too weak to take up his travels immediately . Recuperating at Swarthmoor , he began dictating what would be published after his death as his journal and devoted his time to his written output : letters , both public and private , as well as books and essays . Much of his energy was devoted to the topic of oaths , having become convinced of its importance to Quaker ideas . By refusing to swear , he felt that he could bear witness to the value of truth in everyday life , as well as to God , who he associated with truth and the inner light . 
 For three months in 1677 and a month in 1684 , Fox visited the Friends in the Netherlands , and organized their meetings for discipline . The first trip was the more extensive , taking him into what is now Germany , proceeding along the coast to <unk> and back again over several days . Meanwhile , Fox was participating in a dispute among Friends in Britain over the role of women in meetings , a struggle which took much of his energy and left him exhausted . Returning to England , he stayed in the south in order to try to end the dispute . He followed the foundation of the colony of Pennsylvania , where Penn had given him over 1 @,@ 000 acres ( 4 @.@ 0 km2 ) of land , with interest . Persecution continued , with Fox arrested briefly in October 1683 . Fox 's health was becoming worse , but he continued his activities — writing to leaders in Poland , Denmark , Germany , and elsewhere about his beliefs , and their treatment of Quakers . 
 = = Last years = = 
 In the last years of his life , Fox continued to participate in the London Meetings , and still made representations to Parliament about the sufferings of Friends . The new King , James II , pardoned religious dissenters jailed for failure to attend the established church , leading to the release of about 1500 Friends . Though the Quakers lost influence after the Glorious Revolution , which deposed James II , the Act of Toleration 1689 put an end to the uniformity laws under which Quakers had been persecuted , permitting them to assemble freely . 
 Two days after preaching , as usual , at the <unk> Street Meeting House in London , George Fox died between 9 and 10 p.m. on 13 January 1691 . He was interred in the Quaker Burying Ground , <unk> Fields , three days later in the presence of thousands of mourners . 
 = = Journal and letters = = 
 Fox 's journal was first published in 1694 , after editing by Thomas Ellwood — a friend and associate of John Milton — with a preface by William Penn . Like most similar works of its time the journal was not written contemporaneously to the events it describes , but rather compiled many years later , much of it dictated . Parts of the journal were not in fact by Fox at all but are constructed by its editors from diverse sources and written as if by him . The dissent within the movement and the contributions of others to the development of Quakerism are largely excluded from the narrative . Fox portrays himself as always in the right and always vindicated by God 's interventions on his behalf . As a religious autobiography , Rufus Jones compared it to such works as Augustine 's Confessions and John Bunyan 's Grace <unk> to the Chief of Sinners . It is , though , an intensely personal work with little dramatic power that only succeeds in appealing to readers after substantial editing . Historians have used it as a primary source because of its wealth of detail on ordinary life in the 17th century , and the many towns and villages which Fox visited . 
 Hundreds of Fox 's letters — mostly intended for wide circulation , along with a few private communications — were also published . Written from the 1650s onwards , with such titles as Friends , seek the peace of all men or To Friends , to know one another in the light , they give enormous insight into the detail of Fox 's beliefs , and show his determination to spread them . These writings , in the words of Henry Cadbury , Professor of Divinity at Harvard University and a leading Quaker , " contain a few fresh phrases of his own , [ but ] are generally characterized by an excess of scriptural language and today they seem dull and repetitious " . Others point out that " Fox 's sermons , rich in biblical metaphor and common speech , brought hope in a dark time . " Fox 's aphorisms have found an audience beyond Quakers , with many other church groups using them to illustrate principles of Christianity . 
 Fox is described by Ellwood as " graceful in countenance , manly in personage , grave in gesture , courteous in conversation " . Penn says he was " civil beyond all forms of breeding " . We are told that he was " plain and powerful in preaching , fervent in prayer " , " a <unk> of other men 's spirits , and very much master of his own " , skilful to " speak a word in due season to the conditions and capacities of most , especially to them that were weary , and wanted soul 's rest " ; " valiant in asserting the truth , bold in defending it , patient in suffering for it , immovable as a rock " . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Fox 's influence on the Society of Friends was tremendous , and his beliefs have largely been carried forward by that group . Perhaps his most significant achievement , other than his predominant influence in the early movement , was his leadership in overcoming the twin challenges of government prosecution after the Restoration and internal disputes that threatened its stability during the same period . Not all of his beliefs were welcome to all Quakers : his Puritan @-@ like opposition to the arts and rejection of theological study , forestalled development of these practices among Quakers for some time . 
 The name of George Fox is often invoked by traditionalist Friends who dislike modern liberal attitudes to the Society 's Christian origins . At the same time , Quakers and others can relate to Fox 's religious experience , and even those who disagree with many of his ideas regard him as a pioneer . 
 Walt Whitman , who was raised by parents inspired by Quaker thought , later wrote : " George Fox stands for something too — a thought — the thought that wakes in silent hours — perhaps the deepest , most eternal thought latent in the human soul . This is the thought of God , merged in the thoughts of moral right and the immortality of identity . Great , great is this thought — aye , greater than all else . " 
 George Fox University in Oregon , founded as Pacific College in 1891 , was renamed for him in 1949 . He also has a building named after him at Lancaster University . James Harcourt played Fox in the 1941 film Penn of Pennsylvania . Fox 's relationship with Margaret Fell is novelized in Jan de Hartog 's The Peaceable Kingdom : An American Saga . 
 = Hurricane Pauline ( 1968 ) = 
 Hurricane Pauline was the deadliest hurricane of the 1968 Pacific hurricane season . Forming from a disturbance in the Intertropical Convergence Zone on September 26 and becoming a tropical storm on September 29 , the hurricane strengthened to a peak of 85 mph ( 137 km / h ) as a Category 1 hurricane on the Saffir @-@ Simpson Hurricane Scale on September 30 before making landfall just east of La Paz , Baja California Sur , near Ciudad Constitución in Mexico , exiting over the Gulf of California . Before making a second landfall on the state of Sonora on October 3 , Pauline lost tropical characteristics . The storm continued inland , passing directly over Ciudad Obregón before dissipating south @-@ southeast of Sierra Vista , Arizona . 
 There is very little information as to the effects of Pauline on Mexico , but during the passage of the hurricane over Magdalena Bay , a boat disappeared with its five occupants . Despite a large @-@ scale search for the boat or any possible remnants , no trace was ever found . The remnants of Pauline triggered showers over the southwest United States and may have been responsible for a damaging tornado which occurred near Glendale , Arizona . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 The Intertropical Convergence Zone disturbance that developed into Hurricane Pauline was first noticed by meteorologists 200 mi ( 320 km ) southeast of Acapulco and 1 @,@ 500 mi ( 2 @,@ 400 km ) <unk> mi ( 3 @,@ 200 km ) west of dissipating Tropical Storm Orla . The disturbance was in a large area of convection west of Guatemala in the Gulf of Tehuantepec that began to spread 500 mi ( 800 km ) to the west @-@ northwest on September 26 . Satellite imagery at this time showed an area of reflective clouds roughly 500 mi ( 800 km ) long and 200 mi ( 320 km ) wide . Shortly thereafter , the disturbance was upgraded into a tropical depression . After being upgraded , a vortex began to organize at its center and the depression began to intensify . On September 29 , a ship 200 mi ( 320 km ) south of the center reported winds of 17 mph ( 27 km / h ) to 23 mph ( 37 km / h ) and a minimum pressure of 1008 mbar , the only pressure reading left on best track data for the entire season . Other than this ship , all other active boats steered away from the center of the developing system . Later that day , it was determined that the depression had reached tropical storm strength . 
 After being named , Pauline displayed signs of a tight circulation , but satellite pictures were unable to pick up any distinct features due to nearby cirrus outflow . Later that day , however , satellites picked up a feature in the hurricane that resembled an eye , but closer inspection showed that the eye was either a shadow or a gap between bands and that the real center was 50 mi ( 80 km ) west of the eye . On September 30 , the storm turned to the northwest and its forward speed accelerated to 9 mph ( 14 km / h ) . Around this time , a satellite picture showed a genuine eye beginning to form and banding features became apparent . Even though the picture was distorted due to by electronic problems , the tropical storm was subsequently upgraded to hurricane intensity . On October 1 , the ship Overseas Joyce recorded 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) to 85 mph ( 137 km / h ) north @-@ northeast winds , a heavy swell from the east @-@ southeast and a pressure of 1002 mbar . An estimate based on satellite pictures placed the Overseas Joyce at 15 mi ( 24 km ) to 20 mi ( 32 km ) away from the center . Another nearby ship , the Golden Eagle , reported south @-@ southeast winds of 50 mph ( 80 km / h ) and high seas 75 mi ( 121 km ) east of the center . 
 Further investigation into the hurricane was limited to ship reports , and a satellite image on October 1 was mostly not helpful due to another electronic problem ; however , it showed that the hurricane had shrunk . A United States Air Force reconnaissance plane flew into the hurricane that day and reported that the eyewall was open on the southwest quadrant . After the breakup of the first eyewall , a break in the clouds lead to the possibility that another eye was forming 30 mi ( 48 km ) to the north @-@ northwest of the previous eye . 
 No information on the hurricane was available for October 2 , when it made landfall near Ciudad <unk> in Baja California Sur . After landfall , La Paz reported winds of 60 mph ( 97 km / h ) from the northwest , which began weakening in the next hour . Satellite imagery showed that Pauline had moved over the Gulf of California , the interaction with land having weakened it to a tropical storm . The storm moved north , making a second landfall near Navojoa . The storm continued inland , passing directly over Ciudad Obregón . The storm dissipated south @-@ southeast of Sierra Vista in Arizona . 
 = = Impact , records , and naming = = 
 Damage totals from Baja California Sur in relation to the hurricane were never received , but light damage was reported in Navojoa . The Pasadena @-@ based newspaper reported that a tourist in Mazatlán at the time had sent a card saying that the hurricane was responsible for cutting off @-@ shore capers . Mexican Navy members in Magdalena Bay reported that while passing over , Pauline had clocked winds of 115 mph ( 185 km / h ) , the equivalent of a Category 3 hurricane on the Saffir @-@ Simpson Hurricane Scale . The Navy report of 115 mph ( 185 km / h ) winds came after another report that the 40 @-@ foot ( 12 m ) auxiliary @-@ powered yawl called the <unk> was missing in the same bay . The ship had left Newport Harbor on September 25 with the destination being Puerto Vallarta and was occupied by a family of five people . The last reported sighting of the yawl was off Cedros Island . After the report of the missing yawl was received , the United States Coast Guard engineered a search for the vessel . The search was called off after covering an area of 50 @,@ 000 sq mi ( 130 @,@ 000 km2 ) with no results . The ship was reported as lost and the five occupants were listed as dead . Despite not finding any sign of the ship , the Coast Guard was praised for the extensive search . 
 The remnants of Pauline were responsible for scattered showers in an area ranging from southern California to Utah and New Mexico . In Arizona , Tucson , Phoenix , and Gila Bend all reported rain on October 3 even though Pauline was centered 200 mi ( 320 km ) southeast of Douglas . The remnants also caused an F2 tornado on the Fujita Scale . The tornado touched down near Glendale and followed an erratic path to the west , injuring three people due to flying glass , one of which was hospitalized due to their injuries , and causing severe damage to two apartment buildings . Automobiles were damaged by falling concrete blocks and various buildings and trailers were also damaged . In total , the tornado was responsible for $ 50 @,@ 000 to $ 500 @,@ 000 in damages . 
 = Ed Stelmach = 
 Edward Michael " Ed " Stelmach ( / <unk> / ; born May 11 , 1951 ) is a Canadian politician and served as the 13th Premier of Alberta , Canada , from 2006 to 2011 . The grandson of Ukrainian immigrants , Stelmach was born and raised on a farm near Lamont and speaks fluent Ukrainian . He spent his entire pre @-@ political adult life as a farmer , except for some time spent studying at the University of Alberta . His first foray into politics was a 1986 municipal election , when he was elected to Lamont County council . A year into his term , he was appointed reeve . He continued in this position until his entry into provincial politics . 
 In the 1993 provincial election , Stelmach was elected as the Member of the Legislative Assembly ( MLA ) for Vegreville @-@ Viking ( later Fort Saskatchewan @-@ Vegreville ) . A Progressive Conservative , he served in the cabinets of Ralph Klein — at various times holding the portfolios of Intergovernmental Relations , Transportation , Infrastructure , and Agriculture , Food , and Rural Development — where he developed a reputation as a low @-@ key politician who avoided the limelight . When Klein resigned the party 's leadership in 2006 , Stelmach was among the first to present his candidature to replace him . After a third @-@ place finish on the first ballot of the leadership race , he won an upset second ballot victory over former provincial treasurer Jim Dinning . 
 Stelmach 's premiership was heavily focused on management of the province 's oil reserves , especially those of the Athabasca Oil Sands . He rejected calls from environmentalists to slow the pace of development in the Fort McMurray area , and similarly opposed calls for carbon taxes . Other policy initiatives included commencing an overhaul of the province 's health governance system , amendments to the Alberta human rights code , a re @-@ introduction of all @-@ party committees to the Legislature , and the conclusion of a major labour agreement with Alberta 's teachers . His government also attracted controversy for awarding itself a 30 % pay increase shortly after its re @-@ election , and featured strained relations with Calgary , one of Klein 's former strongholds . Despite this , Stelmach increased the Progressive Conservatives ' already substantial majority in the 2008 election . With the advent of the late @-@ 2000s recession , Stelmach had to cope with a deteriorating economic situation and the Alberta government 's first budget deficit in 16 years . 
 Stelmach was succeeded as Premier by Alison Redford on October 7 , 2011 . 
 = = Background = = 
 Edward Michael Stelmach was born on a farm near Lamont , Alberta , the grandson of immigrants from <unk> , Ukraine . His grandparents settled near Andrew , Alberta in 1898 , after bypassing Saskatchewan because they did not care for the terrain . His parents , Nancy ( née <unk> ) and Michael N. Stelmach , had five children , of whom Edward was the youngest , ten years younger than his closest sibling . He was raised a Ukrainian Catholic , and continues to attend church regularly , sing in the church choir , and act as volunteer caretaker for the cemetery . Through high school , he worked as a well @-@ digger and a Fuller Brush salesman , where he said his grasp of Ukrainian helped him make sales . After graduating high school — his grade 12 yearbook called him a future Prime Minister of Canada — he attended the University of Alberta , intending to become a lawyer . He continued there , working as an assistant manager at Woodward 's , until 1973 , when his oldest brother , Victor , died . While his family had intended for Victor to take over the farm that his grandparents had settled 75 years before , Stelmach dropped out of university , returned home , and bought the land from his parents . He continues to farm the land today . 
 As a teenager , he met Marie <unk> at the wedding of a mutual friend . They married in 1973 , and have three sons and a daughter . 
 Stelmach entered politics in 1986 with his election to the council of Lamont County ; one year later , he was appointed county reeve , a position he held until his entry into provincial politics in 1993 . 
 = = MLA and minister = = 
 Stelmach ran for the Legislative Assembly of Alberta as a Progressive Conservative in the 1993 provincial election , defeating incumbent New Democrat Derek Fox in the riding of Vegreville @-@ Viking . Stelmach became a member of the Deep Six , a group of enthusiastically fiscally conservative rookie MLAs ; in addition to supporting Premier Ralph Klein 's aggressive deficit @-@ cutting , Stelmach practiced fiscal restraint himself , incurring low office expenses and declining a government vehicle . During his first term , Stelmach served as Deputy Whip and , later , Chief Government Whip for the P.C. caucus . As a backbencher , he sponsored the Lloydminster Hospital Act Repeal Act . This was a government bill that dissolved the then @-@ existing Lloydminster hospital board in preparation for an arrangement compliant with both the Alberta government 's new system of regional health authorities and the Saskatchewan government 's system . Lloydminster sits on the border of Alberta and Saskatchewan , and the hospital , although built and operated by the Alberta government , sits on the Saskatchewan side . It passed the legislature with little debate . In 1996 , shortly before an April by @-@ election in <unk> , Stelmach was accused of " pork barrel politics " for presenting , along with colleague Peter <unk> and P.C. candidate Ross Quinn , a large cheque to a local seniors centre . Stelmach said that he had only stepped in to help the riding after its MLA , Nicholas Taylor , had been appointed to the Senate . 
 After the 1997 provincial election , Klein appointed Stelmach Minister of Agriculture , Food , and Rural development . While he held this office , his department encouraged the establishment of feedlots . The opposition parties charged that the government was not regulating these sufficiently , but Stelmach responded that municipalities had the authority necessary to effectively regulate them . On the Canadian Wheat Board controversy , Stelmach sided with farmers who wanted an end to the federal body 's monopoly on grain sales in the western provinces . <unk> , Stelmach sponsored five bills while in the Agriculture , Food , and Rural Development portfolio , all of which passed through the legislature . 1997 's Meat Inspection Amendment Act required meat inspectors to acquire a search warrant before entering a private dwelling , but also allowed for fines to be voluntarily paid without requiring a court case . It was called by Liberal agriculture critic Ken Nicol " a really good bill " . The Livestock and Livestock Products Amendment Act of the same year eliminated government guarantee of the Livestock Patrons ' Assurance Fund , designed to protect cattle producers from payment defaults by livestock dealers , in favour of leaving the Fund entirely in the hands of the industry . It too was supported by the Liberals , with Nicol calling it " very easy for us to accept " . In 1998 , Stelmach sponsored the Agriculture Statutes ( Penalties ) Amendment Act , which overhauled the penalty system for violation of various agricultural statutes , setting maximum fines and leaving the precise amount up to judges on a case by case basis . It also passed with Liberal support , as MLA Ed Gibbons said that it " really makes a lot of sense " . Another 1998 bill was the Marketing of Agricultural Products Amendment Act , which allowed provincial agricultural marketing boards to revise their marketing plans , and was supported by the opposition . Finally , Stelmach initiated the Agriculture Statutes ( Livestock Identification ) Amendment Act , which allowed the government to delegate the inspection of branding to the cattle industry . The bill was the subject of considerable debate on second reading , but was ultimately supported by the Liberals on the third and final reading . 
 In 1999 , Klein shifted Stelmach to the new Infrastructure portfolio , where he made traffic safety a priority , increasing fines for traffic offenses , sometimes by as much as 700 % . He also briefly aroused controversy by proposing reversing the slow and fast lanes on provincial highways , on the grounds that this would equalize the rate at which the lanes broke down and therefore save on maintenance costs ; nothing came of the proposal . He established a fund for capital projects , but was criticized for not doing enough to address the deterioration of the province 's infrastructure . In 2001 , Klein separated Transportation out of the Infrastructure portfolio and appointed Stelmach to it , where the new minister advocated the use of public @-@ private partnerships to build ring roads around Edmonton and Calgary . He also introduced a program of graduated driver licensing and initiated a review of traffic safety programs . Stelmach was re @-@ elected by his largest majority yet during the 2001 election , and retained the Transportation portfolio until 2004 , when he was reassigned to the position of Minister of Intergovernmental Relations . He resigned this position in 2006 in order to contest the P.C. leadership election ( Klein had required that ministers intending to campaign to succeed him resign from cabinet ) . 
 As minister , Stelmach kept a low profile . Mark Lisac , who was the Edmonton Journal 's provincial affairs columnist during much of Stelmach 's time in cabinet , later recalled that Stelmach " never did anything that was flashy or controversial in any way " and that " not a thing " stood out about Stelmach 's ministerial service . This low @-@ key style earned Stelmach the moniker " Steady Eddie " , which would follow him to the Premier 's office . 
 = = 2006 leadership election = = 
 Stelmach was the first candidate to declare his intention to run for the P.C. leadership , and picked up endorsements from nineteen members of his caucus ( including cabinet ministers Pearl <unk> and Iris Evans ) . However , former provincial Treasurer Jim Dinning had twice as many caucus endorsements ( despite not having held elected office since 1997 ) and was generally considered the race 's front @-@ runner . Stelmach ran a low @-@ profile campaign , touring the province in a custom @-@ painted campaign bus , while most media attention was focussed on the rivalry between Dinning and the socially conservative Ted Morton . 
 According to the race 's rules , the three candidates receiving the most votes on the first ballot would move on to a second ballot , which would use a preferential voting system to select a winner . Stelmach finished third on the first ballot with 15 @.@ 3 % of the vote , 3 @,@ 329 votes ahead of fourth place Lyle Oberg and 10 @,@ 647 votes behind second place Morton . However , the fourth , fifth , and sixth place candidates ( Oberg , Dave Hancock , and Mark Norris ) all endorsed Stelmach for the second ballot . On this ballot , he finished in first place on the first count , fewer than five hundred votes ahead of Dinning . A majority of Morton 's votes went to Stelmach on the second count , and he was elected leader . 
 = = = Financing = = = 
 Stelmach raised more than $ 1 @.@ 1 million for his leadership campaign . After his victory , he revealed the names of the donors of 85 % of this money , but declined to release the names of eighty supporters , citing their requests for privacy . These supporters had donated a total of more than $ 160 @,@ 000 . Party rules did not require any disclosure , and the disclosures by candidates varied — Norris named all of his donors , while Morton did not reveal any . Stelmach 's partial disclosure was deemed insufficient by opposition leaders and Democracy Watch , whose head suggested that Albertans should assume that Stelmach 's anonymous donors placed him in a conflict of interest until he proved otherwise . Stelmach also acknowledged receiving a $ 10 @,@ 000 donation from the Beaver Regional Waste Management Service 's Commission , a landfill operator owned by five municipalities in Stelmach 's riding . While asserting that the donation was legal , Stelmach admitted that it was " clearly unethical " , blamed overzealous campaign volunteers for soliciting it , and returned it after the end of the campaign . 
 In the wake of the leadership campaign , Stelmach , along with Oberg , Hancock , and Norris , organized two $ 5 @,@ 000 per plate dinners in January 2007 to pay campaign debts . After critics argued that the dinners were essentially selling access to the premier and two senior ministers , Stelmach cancelled them . 
 = = Premier = = 
 = = = 2008 election = = = 
 Stelmach was sworn in as Premier December 14 , 2006 . On February 4 , 2008 , immediately after Lieutenant Governor Norman Kwong read the throne speech to open the legislative session , Stelmach requested a dissolution of the legislature with an election to follow March 3 . Shortly before the writ was dropped , a group calling itself Albertans for Change began to buy print and television ads that attacked Stelmach for lacking a plan and portrayed him as unfit to lead the province . The group was funded by the Alberta Building Trades Council and the Alberta Federation of Labour , which led to a series of ads purchased by the National Citizens Coalition and Merit Contractors , in which it was accused of " putting your [ union members ' ] money where [ union leadership 's ] mouths are . " 
 Despite a campaign that was called disorganized and uninspired , Stelmach 's Progressive Conservatives won 72 seats in the 83 @-@ seat Legislative Assembly , an increase from the 62 that the party had won in the previous election and only two seats short of Ralph Klein 's 2001 landslide . Political analysts attributed the party 's win to its ability to present Stelmach as " a cautious , straightforward and hard @-@ working man with a plan for Alberta 's future " . 
 The voter turnout in the election was 41 % , the lowest in Alberta 's history , and roughly a quarter of these had to swear an oath on election day after discovering they weren 't on the voter 's list . Opposition politicians and media blamed Stelmach 's government for these problems , arguing that riding @-@ level returning officers , who were nominated by Progressive Conservative constituency associations and who were responsible for voter enumeration , were not appointed early enough . According to the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation , " about half " of the 83 returning officers in the 2008 election had ties to the P.C. Party ; the returning officer in Stelmach 's Fort Saskatchewan – Vegreville riding had donated between $ 500 and $ 1 @,@ 000 to Stelmach 's leadership campaign . 
 Alberta Chief Returning Officer Lorne Gibson , as one of his 182 post @-@ election recommendations to the government , suggested that the appointment of returning officers be handled by his own , non @-@ partisan , office . He had previously made this suggestion in 2006 , but the government had not acted on it . He also recommended following the election that his office , rather than the government 's Justice department , be responsible for prosecuting election @-@ related offenses ; the latter did not lay charges in any of 19 alleged campaign finance violations Gibson brought to its attention . In February 2009 , Gibson appeared before the legislature 's all @-@ party committee on legislative offices to answer questions about the conduct of the election ; there , he echoed opposition claims that the government , and not his office , was to blame for most problems . Shortly after , the committee voted 8 – 3 against re @-@ appointing him , with all Progressive Conservatives on the committee opposing his re @-@ appointment and all opposition MLAs supporting it . Opposition leaders David Swann and Brian Mason suggested that Gibson was being punished for criticizing the government . 
 = = = Energy and environmental policy = = = 
 Much of Stelmach 's term as Premier was dominated by questions related to the Athabasca Oil Sands . The rapid development of these reserves was fuelling the Alberta economy 's strong growth , but also raised environmental questions . After winning the Premiership , Stelmach emphasized that he had no intention of taking measures that would slow down oilsands development and suggested that the economy would find its own appropriate growth rate . He aggressively defended Alberta 's oil at home and abroad , and called the idea that it was extracted at an unacceptably high environmental cost " a myth " . When Liberal Party of Canada leader Stéphane Dion proposed a federal carbon tax to reduce emissions of greenhouse gases , Stelmach rejected the policy on the basis that it would hurt the economy and would unfairly penalize the western provinces . Instead , he championed the development of carbon capture technology . In July 2008 , Stelmach announced $ 2 billion worth of funding for carbon capture initiatives , for which he was applauded by industry groups . However , the Canadian Federation of Independent Business called it " a huge amount of money to spend on something that isn 't proven " , and Mike Hudema of Greenpeace suggesting that there were better environmental uses of the money available . 
 Though Stelmach pledged not to do anything to curb the development of the oilsands , he did promise to review royalty rates — the rates paid by oil companies for the privilege of extracting Alberta 's oil . He also committed to reducing the proportion of bitumen that left Alberta to be upgraded out of province , likening the export of bitumen to " scraping off the top soil " from farmland . Soon after becoming Premier , he commissioned the Alberta Royalty Review panel to make recommendations on the province 's royalty regime ; opposition politicians had accused the government of <unk> substantially . Stelmach rejected many of the panel 's recommendations , and claimed to increase royalty rates by approximately 20 % ( 25 % less than recommended by the panel ) , however instead of an increase in royalties on oil and gas , Alberta collected $ 13 @.@ 5 billion less from 2009 to 2014 . Just after the 2008 election , Stelmach 's government announced a five @-@ year royalty break worth $ 237 million per year to encourage development that it feared would have become uneconomical under the new plan . He was less decisive in increasing in @-@ province bitumen upgrading ; in 2008 he conceded that Alberta would continue upgrading between sixty and sixty @-@ five percent of the bitumen it produced for the foreseeable future , rather than the seventy @-@ two percent target he had previously announced for 2016 . This admission came in the wake of his government 's approval of three new pipelines designed to export bitumen . 
 In January 2008 , Stelmach unveiled the province 's " made in Alberta " — as distinct from imposed by the federal government or by international treaty — plan to cut carbon emissions in order to fight global warming . The plan called for reducing greenhouse gas emissions by 14 % ( from 2007 levels ) by 2050 . Environmental groups and opposition parties suggested that this was insufficient in light of British Columbia 's plan to cut emissions by 80 % ( from 2007 levels ) during the same period , but Stelmach argued that Alberta 's position as a supplier of oil to the rest of the country justified higher emissions . This was followed in June by the unveiling of the government 's campaign to ask Albertans to make " one simple act " — such as composting , using reusable shopping bags , and replacing incandescent light bulbs with the more efficient fluorescent bulbs . Opponents argued that the emphasis on personal responsibility by individuals did nothing to address the greater environmental damage caused by the development of the Athabasca Oil Sands . 
 In late April 2008 hundreds of ducks landed in a northern Alberta tailings pond belonging to Syncrude , where most died . The incident was a blow to Stelmach 's efforts to convince the world that Alberta 's oil sands were environmentally friendly . The number of ducks that died was originally reported at around 500 , but in March 2009 Syncrude revealed that the number was in fact more than 1 @,@ 600 . In response to accusations from opposition and environmental groups that his government , which had known the actual number since the summer of 2008 , had participated in covering it up to save face , Stelmach asserted that it had refrained from making the higher number public for fear of jeopardizing its investigation of whether Syncrude had violated any provincial regulations in the incident . Investigations were centred around the questions of whether Syncrude had immediately reported the incident as required ( the government had first heard of it from an anonymous tip , though Syncrude reported it several hours later ) and whether the company had the required measures in place to prevent ducks from landing on its tailings ponds ( it had <unk> designed to deter waterfowl , but these had not been set up at the time of the incident due to winter weather conditions ) . Syncrude was eventually charged with " failing to have systems in place to divert waterfowl " , which carries a maximum fine of $ 800 @,@ 000 . 
 Partially in an effort to counter @-@ act negative publicity from oil sands @-@ related issues — for example , the March 2009 edition of National Geographic Magazine contained a 20 @-@ page article portraying Alberta 's oil sands operations as being highly environmentally damaging — in 2009 Stelmach 's government spent $ 25 million on a rebranding campaign for the province . Among other things , it replaced the " Alberta Advantage " slogan that had long been in use with " Alberta : Freedom to create . Spirit to achieve . " The campaign became the subject of some ridicule when the Edmonton Journal revealed that one of the photos used in it was not taken in Alberta , but at a North Sea beach in Northumberland . While the government initially claimed that it had intentionally used a foreign image to represent Alberta 's engagement with the world , it later admitted that this was not the case , and that the photo had been used in error . Stelmach responded to the image , which showed two children running along a beach , by saying that " children , no matter where they are around the world , they are the next generation . And air quality , water quality , no matter where we live on this big globe , we 're all responsible , and that 's the message we 're trying to portray . " 
 = = = Energy and Utilities Board affair and land use policy = = = 
 In June 2007 , the government @-@ mandated Alberta Energy and Utilities Board admitted that it had hired private investigators to spy on landowners who opposed the construction of a major power line in the Rimbey area . Stelmach initially downplayed the incident , but ordered a judicial investigation once the province 's Information and Privacy Commissioner initiated an investigation of his own . This investigation found that the EUB had violated provincial law and infringed on the landowners ' privacy , while the judicial investigation criticized the EUB 's tactics as " repulsive " . The opposition parties called for the dismissal of the entire EUB and Energy Minister Mel Knight ; Stelmach instead opted to appoint a new EUB chair . 
 Stelmach 's government also responded with legislation entitled the Alberta Utilities Commission Act ( Bill 46 ) , which would split the EUB into two parts : the Alberta Utilities Commission ( responsible for regulating utilities ) and the Energy Resources Conservation Board ( responsible for regulating oil and gas ) . The legislation was controversial , as elements of the EUB 's governing legislation that provided for public notice and consultation in the event of energy construction projects were left out . Opposition parties and advocacy groups charged that this was an assault on both landowners ' rights and the environment . The legislation ultimately passed , and took effect at the beginning of 2008 . 
 Stelmach clashed with rural landowners again in 2009 when his government introduced the Land Assembly Project Area Act , designed to make it easier for the government to acquire large blocks of land for public purposes such as ring roads or reservoirs . The Act allowed the government to identify land that it may be interested in expropriating at some point in the future and to indefinitely prohibit any development on that land that could conflict with the government 's purposes . Despite vigorous opposition from landowners and the opposition parties , the bill passed the legislature in late April . 
 = = = Fiscal policy = = = 
 Ralph Klein 's major focus for much of his premiership had been the elimination of the provincial deficit , and the government ran a record $ 8 @.@ 9 billion surplus during Stelmach 's first year in office . Alberta was in the midst of a major economic expansion driven by high energy prices and major oilsands development . This growth continued into 2007 – 2008 , when the government 's surplus was $ 4 @.@ 6 billion . Both of these surpluses were higher than expected , and Stelmach 's government followed a policy of placing one third of unanticipated surpluses into savings and two @-@ thirds into construction projects . Critics , including Liberal MLA Laurie Blakeman and the Canadian Taxpayers Federation , charged that the government was not saving enough money in anticipation of a fall in energy prices . 
 In her April 2008 budget , Stelmach 's Finance Minister Iris Evans forecast a $ 1 @.@ 6 billion surplus for 2008 – 2009 . By August , she had revised this prediction to $ 8 @.@ 5 billion . The major reason for this change is an increase in oil prices : while she had estimated in April that they would average $ 78 per barrel over the fiscal year , by August increases — including a high of $ 147 per barrel in July — have led her to make a new estimate of a $ 119 @.@ 25 per barrel average . By November , prices had fallen to $ 55 per barrel , and Evans estimated a $ 2 billion surplus . By February 2009 , the government of Alberta appeared poised to run a $ 1 billion deficit . In April 2009 , Evans released her budget for 2009 – 2010 , in which she anticipated a $ 4 @.@ 6 billion deficit . This is the largest deficit in Alberta 's history , and its first in sixteen years . The government 's fiscal plan includes deficits until 2012 – 2013 , when it again anticipates a surplus . 
 Stelmach 's approach to this deteriorating fiscal situation , part of a global recession , was to invest heavily in infrastructure in an effort to stimulate the economy and take advantage of low construction costs . He went as far as to advocate borrowing for capital construction , a departure from the Klein government 's notoriously anti @-@ debt approach . However , his government was also one of only two in Canada ( the other being Saskatchewan 's ) to cut overall spending in the 2009 – 2010 budget . This approach drew the ire of Liberal leader David Swann , who supported increased government spending for economic stimulus purposes , but drew support from some economists and was defended by Evans on the basis that capital spending was at twice the per capital level of the Canadian average . 
 = = = Teachers pension liability = = = 
 During his first year in office , Stelmach and his education minister Ron Liepert concluded a deal with the Alberta Teachers Association ( ATA ) in which the province agreed to contribute $ 2 @.@ 1 billion towards the $ 6 @.@ 6 billion unfunded pension liability . This liability resulted from insufficient contributions to the teachers ' pension plan during the period leading up to 1992 . In exchange , the ATA agreed to a five @-@ year contract extension . The deal was applauded by the opposition Liberals and New Democrats , but was criticized by the Canadian Taxpayers Federation , which called for a plebiscite on the issue . 
 = = = Pay increases = = = 
 Shortly after winning an increased majority in the 2008 election , Stelmach 's cabinet approved substantial raises for themselves , increasing the salary paid to cabinet ministers from $ 142 @,@ 000 to $ 184 @,@ 000 and that paid to the Premier from $ 159 @,@ 450 to $ 213 @,@ 450 . The increases also affect the severance paid to ministers who resign or are defeated in elections — under the program implemented by Ralph Klein 's government to replace the previously existing pension program , departing MLAs receive three months ' pay for every year they served , with the level of the pay based on their three highest @-@ earning years . The increases were attacked by the Canadian Taxpayers Federation and the opposition parties , but Stelmach defended the raises as the first received by cabinet ministers in fifteen years and as being necessary to attract qualified people to politics . 
 In early 2009 , in response to the Late @-@ 2000s recession , Stelmach announced that his caucus would decline an automatic 4 @.@ 9 % cost of living pay increase . The following week , the legislature 's all @-@ party Standing Committee on Member Services extended this to all MLAs by voting unanimously to freeze MLA salaries for the fiscal year . 
 = = = Health policy = = = 
 Stelmach 's policy on health care was highlighted by his removal of the province 's health care premiums effective the end of 2008 . Critics had denounced the premiums as being regressive , both because they were the same amount regardless of the payer 's income and because people with better @-@ paying jobs often had their premiums covered by their employer . The opposition Liberal and New Democratic parties had long called for their removal . This elimination was announced in a throne speech immediately before the dissolution of the legislature for the 2008 election , although it was initially promised to take effect by 2012 . During this campaign , Stelmach promised to increase the capacity of Alberta universities to train doctors and nurses over four years , eventually resulting in the graduation of 225 more doctors , 350 more registered nurses , and 220 licensed practical nurses . After the registrar of the Alberta College of Physicians and Surgeons called the plan unfeasible , Health Minister Dave Hancock clarified that most of the increase would in fact come from the immigration of foreign doctors to Alberta , rather than from in @-@ province training . 
 Following the election , Stelmach 's new Minister of Health , Ron Liepert , released the government 's new health plan . In it , Liepert refused to characterize the problems in the health care system as being the result of doctor shortages , and instead promised structural reforms . He indicated that these may include consolidating health authorities , closing rural hospitals , and de @-@ listing some health services from coverage under the province 's public health insurance scheme . In May , the government took the first step in implementing these structural reforms by combining the province 's nine health authorities into one health " <unk> " . 
 In June 2008 , three senior health officials announced that they would be leaving the province 's employment at the expiration of their contracts in August . Liepert blamed their departures on better offers from other employers , although New Democrat leader Brian Mason speculated that the government 's health restructuring may have been to blame . Detractors pointed out that the optics of allowing the employees to depart for more money elsewhere soon after the government had approved a substantial pay hike for cabinet ministers were not good . 
 As the province 's fiscal situation worsened in late 2008 , the government adapted its health policy . In December , Liepert announced a new seniors drug plan that made drugs free for seniors making less than $ 21 @,@ 325 but required those making more to pay as much as $ 7 @,@ 500 for their drugs . In response to protests from seniors , he amended the plan in April 2009 to reduce both the income level at which seniors would have to start paying and the amount which those seniors would have to pay . Liepert said that the plan , $ 10 million more expensive than the one he had announced in December , would see 60 % of seniors pay less than they did under the status quo . The same month , Stelmach 's government 's budget revealed changes to which medical services it would cover : those de @-@ listed included chiropractic services , at an annual savings of $ 53 million , and sex change operations , at an annual savings of $ 700 @,@ 000 . While the Canada Health Act requires the federal government to financially penalize provinces that do not support all " medically necessary " procedures , Liepert maintained that the de @-@ listed services were not " medically necessary " from the perspective of the Act , and said that he anticipated no trouble from the federal government . 
 During the 2009 H1N1 pandemic , Stelmach initially announced that the government would make the vaccine available to all Albertans , though vaccine shortages resulted in a limited number of clinics , which experienced long lineups . In response , Liberal leader David Swann accused the government of managing limited vaccine supplies poorly by not giving priority to the most vulnerable groups . Liepert defended the government 's record by saying that high risk populations had been given priority , but that the government 's policy was to turn nobody away ; he blamed many of the problems on the federal government 's delivery to the province of fewer doses of the vaccine than promised . Further controversy erupted when it was revealed that hockey players on the Calgary Flames were vaccinated with vaccine received directly from Alberta Health Services , which prompted Stelmach to announce an investigation . Two Alberta Health Services employees were fired as a result of the investigation . 
 = = = Human Rights , Citizenship , and Multiculturalism Act = = = 
 In spring 2009 , Stelmach 's government announced its intention to overhaul the Alberta Human Rights , Citizenship , and Multiculturalism Act . In 1998 's <unk> v. Alberta , the Supreme Court of Canada had found that the legislation 's failure to include sexual orientation among the grounds on which discrimination was prohibited violated the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms and had " read in " this protection . However , the text of the act continued not to mention sexual orientation . Gay rights activists and opposition politicians hoped that the government 's proposed changes to the Act would change this . Conservatives and libertarians , including National Post columnist Colby Cosh , hoped that the changes would also include removal of a section of the act empowering the Alberta Human Rights Commission to investigate and prosecute complaints of publications " exposing a person or a class of persons to contempt , " believing that the powers granted to the commission amounted to censorship . 
 This section had been used to try to prosecute Ezra Levant for publishing the cartoons at the centre of the Jyllands @-@ Posten Muhammad cartoons controversy in his Western Standard magazine , and to successfully prosecute the Red Deer Advocate for publishing a letter to the editor entitled " Homosexual agenda wicked " . 
 The changes that were eventually tabled included the enshrining of sexual orientation as protected grounds but not the removal of the section dealing with " exposing to contempt . " This omission was criticized , Levant said that it made him " deeply embarrassed as a conservative , " but Stelmach said that his caucus was comfortable that another provision , requiring that the impugned section should not " be deemed to interfere with the free expression of opinion on any subject " , protected Albertans against its abusive use . The proposal also included a section entitling parents to advance notice from schools if their children were going to be taught " subject @-@ matter that deals explicitly with religion , sexuality or sexual orientation " and the right to remove their children from such classes . Stelmach called this a " very , very fundamental right " and suggested that it would allow parents to opt out of having their children learn about evolution , though his Education Minister Dave Hancock argued that the new wording didn 't extend beyond current practice . Alberta Teachers ' Association President Frank <unk> expressed concern that this would make the teaching of science and geography in public schools very difficult , and suggested that parents who did not wish to have their children exposed to evolution should home school them or send them to private school . New Democratic Party leader Brian Mason suggested that the changes would make Alberta " sound like Arkansas " . 
 = = = Democratic reform = = = 
 Klein 's government had received criticism for reducing the importance of the legislature by sitting it fewer days than any other province 's legislature and for directing business through standing policy committees of the Progressive Conservative caucus . These committees met in private , unlike the legislature 's all @-@ party committees , which fell almost entirely out of use during the Klein years . In April 2007 , Stelmach initiated the creation of four new legislative " policy field committees " which would include opposition representation . The same month , his government introduced new legislation on conflicts of interest , such that former cabinet ministers would have to wait one year before doing business with the government or lobbying it on behalf of third parties ( up from six months ) . It also created a similar cooling @-@ off period for senior bureaucrats , which lasted six months . However , an Order in Council passed by Stelmach 's cabinet shortly before the 2008 election delayed the implementation of these rules until one month after the election , meaning that cabinet ministers who retired or lost their bids for re @-@ election would be exempt from the new rules . 
 = = = Relationship with Calgary = = = 
 Critics of Stelmach suggest that , as a farmer from the central part of the province , he is biased against Calgary and urban Alberta in general . They pointed to the fact that the city , which was considered the heartland of Jim Dinning 's support during the leadership race , had only three members ( Ron Liepert , Ron Stevens , and Greg <unk> ) in his first eighteen @-@ member cabinet ( Stelmach supporters pointed out that Edmonton had only one minister , Dave Hancock ) . Stelmach also found himself in a feud with Calgary mayor Dave Bronconnier during his first year as premier as Bronconnier accused Stelmach of failing to keep a promise to the city regarding infrastructure spending during his first budget . Several Stelmach supporters suggested that the mayor , a Liberal , might be angling to take over as leader of the official opposition if Kevin Taft fumbled . During the by @-@ election to fill Ralph Klein 's Calgary Elbow seat , P.C. candidate Brian Heninger went so far as to tell a voter he 'd like to choke his party 's leader ( Stelmach told media that this was the sort of enthusiasm he wanted from his MLAs ) . Heninger was defeated by Liberal Craig <unk> and , in the 2008 election , Calgary was the only area of the province in which Stelmach lost seats on his way to an increased majority . 
 After Deputy Premier Ron Stevens resigned his Calgary @-@ Glenmore seat to accept a judgeship , a 2009 by @-@ election elected outgoing Wildrose Alliance Party ( WRA ) leader Paul Hinman to replace him . Hinman had been the WRA 's only MLA until he lost his Cardston @-@ Taber @-@ Warner to Progressive Conservative <unk> Jacobs in the 2008 election . Shortly after Hinman 's election , polls showed that the Wildrose Alliance , under new leader Danielle Smith , was the second most popular party province @-@ wide , and led the Conservatives 34 percent to 30 percent in Calgary . 
 = = = Politics and public opinion = = = 
 Critics at first compared Stelmach to Harry Strom , the last Social Credit premier of the province . Strom was regarded as honest but ineffective and lacking charisma ; he survived only long enough as Premier to lose the 1971 election soundly . Thus ended the last long one @-@ party rule , and observers asked if history would repeat with Stelmach . After Stelmach 's landslide win in the 2008 election , however , the comparisons largely ceased . 
 In late 2009 , the Conservatives ' plunging popularity at the polls and the surge in support for the right @-@ wing Wildrose Alliance led to speculation that Stelmach would receive lukewarm support at his mandatory leadership review , to be held at the November 2009 Progressive Conservative convention . Klein 's resignation came in the wake of his receiving only 55 % support at such a review , and Klein suggested that Stelmach should resign if he received less than 70 % . The question was whether party leaders would blame Stelmach for the party 's decline and look for new leadership in the face of Stelmach 's own weakening poll numbers . Instead , Stelmach met the criterion set up by his critics and won 77 @.@ 4 % support , a strong endorsement . 
 = = = Resignation = = = 
 On January 25 , 2011 , Stelmach announced that he would not seek re @-@ election ; he also promised a leadership race before the next election . He did not specify his date of resignation at that time , however he submitted his letter of resignation in June , writing that he would leave office on October 1 . In the early hours of October 2 , 2011 , Alison Redford was declared the new leader of the party , and Stelmach resigned as premier on October 7 . 
 = = Electoral record = = 
 = = = As party leader = = = 
 Notes : 
 1 Liberal Chris <unk> originally had a five @-@ vote margin over Progressive Conservative Thomas <unk> . A judicial recount on January 24 , 2005 , determined Thomas <unk> the winner . 
 2 Results change is compared to the Alberta Alliance in 2004 . 
 = = = As MLA = = = 
 = = = Party leadership contests = = = 
 = Summer Catalog = 
 " Summer Catalog " is the 20th episode of the second season of the American comedy television series Parks and Recreation , and the 26th overall episode of the series . It originally aired on NBC in the United States on March 25 , 2010 . In the episode , Leslie organizes a reunion with the last four Pawnee park directors , but is disappointed when it turns out they despise each other . Meanwhile , Tom tries to take a photo of Ann and Mark for the city 's summer catalog , while the budding relationship of Andy and April continues to develop . 
 The episode was written by Katie Dippold and directed by Ken Whittingham . It featured a guest appearance by Michael Gross , best known for his role as Steven Keaton from Family Ties , as one of the former park directors . According to Nielsen Media Research , " Summer Catalog " was seen by 4 @.@ 47 million household viewers . It suffered competition from CBS footage of the first round of the 2010 NCAA Men 's Division I Basketball Tournament , which drew 9 @.@ 68 million household viewers . " Summer Catalog " received generally positive reviews . 
 = = Plot = = 
 While working on the Pawnee summer catalog , Leslie ( Amy Poehler ) excitedly organizes a reunion between Ron ( Nick Offerman ) and his three predecessors . She anticipates a joyous occasion and plans to write a letter about it for the catalog . However , none of the four men get along with each other , and all of them are difficult to get along with . One of them ( Dakin Matthews ) litters repeatedly , treats everybody disrespectfully , and cheerfully says he never gave a damn about the Parks department and only took the job because it had an easy path to job security and a lucrative pension . Another one ( Jack Wallace ) exhibits a sexist attitude , and tells Leslie she should not be working there due to menstruation issues . The third ( Michael Gross ) constantly talks about his affinity for marijuana , going so far as to say " I 've planted marijuana in community gardens across this city , " and particularly clashes with Ron ( who forced him out of the position years ago ) who cheerfully confirms he screwed his predecessor over and otherwise is his usual detached self . Later , a frustrated Leslie decides she cannot write the catalog letter ; she stops treating the former directors with any respect by telling the sexist to shut up and calling them " turds " when she briefly takes a throwaway picture and then walks away from without another word . Ron takes her out to dinner to apologize , and the two process their mutual respect for each other , and vow they will never grow to hate each other the way the four former directors do . Ron even tells Leslie that he wants her to take over his Parks Director position if he becomes Pawnee 's City Manager . However , Ron cheerfully says in an interview that one of his first acts as City Manager would be to eliminate the Parks department , while Leslie gives an equally upbeat interview where she says one of her first acts as City Manager , were she to leapfrog Ron for the job , would be to double the department 's size . 
 Tom ( Aziz Ansari ) is tasked with taking the cover photo of the summer catalog , and convinces Ann ( Rashida Jones ) and Mark ( Paul Schneider ) to pose for photos at a community park . Tom is repeatedly frustrated with Ann , who has a difficult time appearing happy . When the photos are finished , Ann agrees that she looks miserable and asks that the pictures not be used . Mark appears concerned that Ann 's unhappiness is a reflection of their relationship . She insists everything is fine , but he is unconvinced . Meanwhile , April ( Aubrey Plaza ) and Andy ( Chris Pratt ) appear to be growing closer . After helping Leslie set up her picnic , Andy asks whether April wants to get drinks after work , and she agrees . However , when they arrive at a bar , the bouncer ( Mike <unk> ) easily notices April is underage , and her identification confirms she is 20 . April tells Andy they can go to another bar , but Andy decides to go home instead , seemingly uncomfortable about their age difference . April is visibly disappointed , but does not convey it to Andy . Later , the summer catalogs arrive , with a photo on the cover of April and Andy appearing happy together at the picnic . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Summer Catalog " was written by Katie Dippold and directed by Ken Whittingham . The character Michael Tansley , one of the former parks directors , was played by guest actor by Michael Gross , best known for his role as Steven Keaton from Family Ties . At the end of the episode , Leslie and Ron have dinner at J.J. ' s Diner , an eatery previously featured in the first season episode " The Reporter " . Although the exterior shots of the restaurant are the same , the interior set of the diner is a completely different one from the other episode . 
 Shortly after the episode aired , a copy of the Pawnee Summer Catalog 2010 that was featured in the episode was made available for download on the official Parks and Recreation website . The map of Pawnee contained within the catalog is based off the map of central Christchurch , New Zealand . Within a week of the episode 's original broadcast , two deleted scenes from " Summer Catalog " were made available on the official Parks and Recreation website . In the first , a two @-@ minute clip , April and Andy flirt while walking along a trail to set up Leslie 's picnic . When April complains about her feet hurting , Andy volunteers to give her a piggyback ride . Later , Leslie tries to write her summer catalog letter based on the picnic , but struggles due to how rude the four men acted . The second clip , which lasted two minutes and 15 seconds , includes further scenes of Tom leading Ann and Mark through a photo shoot at the park . Tom forces them to enter into unusual , avant @-@ garde poses , and yells at young children who get in the way of the shot while playing . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 Leslie compares the summer catalog to the Pawnee version of Vogue , a fashion and lifestyle magazine . During one scene , Tom makes a joke , then says , " Am I right , Justin ? " The line is a reference to Leslie 's stylish ex @-@ boyfriend Justin , played by actor Justin Theroux earlier in the season , who Tom desperately admired . When Jerry takes a bad picture for the catalog , he indicates he will use the graphics software Adobe Photoshop to change the image , prompting April to ask , " Can you Photoshop your life with better decisions , Jerry ? " During the picnic , when Andy and April are talking . Andy talks about writing a song called " Life is a Picnic , " Andy makes a reference to NFL quarterback Peyton Manning . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original American broadcast on March 25 , 2010 , " Summer Catalog " was seen by 4 @.@ 47 million household viewers , according to Nielsen Media Research . For the second week in a row , the show suffered in comparison to CBS footage of the 2010 NCAA Men 's Division I Basketball Tournament , which drew an average of 9 @.@ 68 million household viewers during Parks and Recreation 's 8 : 30 p.m. time @-@ slot . Also for the second consecutive week , Parks and Recreation was outperformed by the ABC drama series FlashForward , which drew 6 @.@ 2 million household viewers . " Summer Catalog " had an overall 2 @.@ 9 rating / 6 share , and a 3 / 1 rating / 11 share among adult viewers between ages 18 and 49 . 
 " Summer Catalog " received generally positive reviews . Alan Sepinwall , television columnist with The Star @-@ Ledger , called the episode a " nice character piece for most of the ensemble " , and said it demonstrated how much Leslie has developed as a character since the first season . He praised the jokes about Ron 's hunger and the scenes with Tom 's demanding photography sessions . Entertainment Weekly television writer Ken Tucker said the storylines moved along briskly , provided a " constant stream of laughs " and displayed the " rich texture " of the characters . Tucker also said the romances in Parks and Recreation were more believable than contemporary ones in shows like The Office and 30 Rock . 
 Matt Fowler of IGN called it a " particularly strong " episode that used all of the characters well . Fowler especially liked that although Ron and Leslie bickered throughout the episode , they still displayed a mutual respect for each other . He also said Tom 's photography sessions were a good way to display Ann and Mark 's deteriorating relationship . The A.V. Club writer Steve Heisler said " Summer Catalog " laid the foundation for several future developments , like changes to the Andy / April and Mark / Ann relationships , but also kept the episode funny and enjoyable . Heisler said Tom had the best lines of the episode . Kona Gallagher of TV Squad said she was saddened by the decline in Mark and Ann 's relationship and the setback for the April and Andy courtship , and feared the subplot might not reach a satisfactory conclusion by the end of the season . Gallagher also said the <unk> with Leslie and the former park heads was predictable , and that guest star Michael Gross was underused . 
 = = DVD release = = 
 " Summer Catalog " , along with the other 23 second season episodes of Parks and Recreation , was released on a four @-@ disc DVD set in the United States on November 30 , 2010 . The DVD included deleted scenes for each episode . 
 = Cullacabardee , Western Australia = 
 Cullacabardee is a northeastern rural suburb of Perth , the capital city of Western Australia , located 21 km ( 13 mi ) from Perth 's central business district via Alexander Drive or Beechboro Road . It is in the City of Swan local government area . Most of the suburb is covered in native sheoak and banksia forest . A small Noongar Aboriginal community is based on Baal Street , a drug rehabilitation retreat is located off Gnangara Road in the suburb 's northeast , and the Perth International Telecommunications Centre facility is based in the suburb 's northwest . 
 = = Geography = = 
 Cullacabardee is 21 kilometres ( 13 mi ) north of Perth 's central business district , beyond the residential suburb of Ballajura . It covers approximately 13 square kilometres ( 5 sq mi ) ) and its borders are Gnangara Road to the north , Alexander Drive to the west , Beechboro Road to the east and Hepburn Avenue to the south . Only one public road , Baal Street , enters the locality . 
 Much of the suburb 's area , formerly owned by the Western Australian Planning Commission and known as " <unk> West " , became part of Whiteman Park on 31 March 2000 and contains about 5 square kilometres ( 2 sq mi ) of regionally significant bushland . The remaining sections are zoned General Rural under the City of Swan 's 1993 Cullacabardee Rural Plan . 
 Cullacabardee is located over an unconfined aquifer known as the Gnangara Mound , a major supplier of scheme groundwater to the Perth Metropolitan Area . The area is classified as an underground Water Pollution Control Area under the Water Authority Act 1984 and a Priority 1 drinking water source by the Department of Water . A survey of soils in the area in April 1999 indicated that Cullacabardee 's soil is located in the Bassendean Sand soil association , and is a leached white siliceous sand of mineral quartz , with negligible phosphorus retention capability . Vegetation is mainly low woodland forests of sheoak and banksia , with scattered jarrah . 
 = = Cullacabardee Aboriginal Community = = 
 The community at Cullacabardee consisting of 30 units set in 40 hectares of bushland has existed since about 1980 , and was designed for four different groups who the Western Australian Government perceived to be " having difficulty surviving in suburbia " and who would otherwise be homeless . Families were first moved into the homes on 8 October 1980 and the Cullacabardee Aboriginal Corporation was registered and incorporated on 21 March 1984 under paragraph 45 ( 1 ) of the Aboriginal Councils and Associations Act 1976 , and is vested in the Aboriginal Lands Trust . The community 's housing is managed by the state 's Department of Housing , but local programs and maintenance are managed by the Aboriginal Corporation and funded by federal and state governments . 
 = = = Alleged problems = = = 
 Some discussion in local media has focussed on alleged problems within the community . In 1999 , The Australian reported that many of Cullacabardee 's residents were unemployed , had no public transport despite 20 years of State Government management and no access to jobs , shops , education or health services . The article noted that " residents have to walk up to 6 km ( 4 mi ) along a dangerously busy road or through a bush track to reach a shop or bus stop " , and that the nearest primary school is 8 km ( 5 mi ) away . Nine derelict homes in the community were being refurbished under a training scheme to assist young community members to gain skills , although the community claimed that funding was only available for 12 @-@ month periods , making apprenticeships ( which run for several years ) impossible to offer . A review report into the community in 2000 identified these and other issues such as the land being zoned General Rural , effectively prohibiting residential development , and the illegal dumping of concrete demolition rubble and other refuse near the community . 
 In 2003 , a series of articles in The West Australian newspaper claimed that gun violence , threats to women and children and other social problems were widespread at Cullacabardee and at similar camps at Gnangara and at Saunders Street , Henley Brook , and reported some residents ' criticism of the community 's long @-@ time manager , Ivy Quartermaine . Reporting to a government select committee into the operation of the reserves later the same year , <unk> director Greg Joyce defended Quartermaine : " She has done her best over a long time to run the place . One of the dilemmas we always get involved with is that when families are dysfunctional in the normal community , the tendency is for the system to ask Mrs Quartermaine to take them . " He said the department were " legitimately ambivalent " towards the future of the camp . 
 A press report in The Australian newspaper in August 2006 , which also noted the passing of Mrs Quartermaine , suggested that following the withdrawal of funding by the Federal Government , which had provided most of the Corporation 's income since 1997 , the state 's Department of Housing and Works intended to close the camp down and relocate the 15 families still resident in the village to " better housing in suburban Perth " . However , there has been no mention of the community in Hansard since 2004 , and the Department of Housing and Works 's website does not mention any impending action . 
 = = Perth International Telecommunications Centre = = 
 The 133 @.@ 5 @-@ hectare ( 330 @-@ acre ) site was originally home to a radio station which was used until 1986 by the Overseas Telecommunications Commission ( OTC ) , one of two entities which later merged and formed the Telstra telecommunications company . Most government agencies refer to the site 's location as Landsdale or Landsdale @-@ Gnangara . In July 1984 , an international meeting agreed to construct an undersea cable between Jakarta , Singapore and Perth , spanning 4 @,@ 473 kilometres ( 2 @,@ 415 nmi ) and connecting with cable systems in Malaysia , the Philippines , the Middle East and Eastern Europe . The Perth International <unk> Centre ( PITC ) commenced operations in November 1986 . To this day , it handles a large percentage of Telstra 's satellite communications . 
 Recent debate in the community and in State and Federal parliaments has focussed on residential development near the previously isolated site . The PITC had maintained for many years that there should be a 1 km ( 0 @.@ 6 mi ) buffer surrounding its land in which no residential development should occur , and from the mid @-@ 1990s onwards , several members of parliament for the area tried to resolve this issue on behalf of neighbouring landowners . Some Landsdale residents in the already @-@ developed section had also complained that the PITC facility interfered with their domestic appliances . 
 In October 2005 , the WA Planning Commission presented Metropolitan Region Scheme Amendment 1089 / 33 to the Western Australian parliament , which was approved and took effect from 2 April 2006 . The amendment rezoned an area known as East Landsdale Precinct 64 , west of Alexander Drive , from rural to urban . In August 2006 , Wanneroo City Council , the local government area responsible for Landsdale , submitted corresponding changes to the District Plan for approval . It is unknown at this time whether PITC will eventually have to relocate as a medium @-@ to @-@ long @-@ term result of the rezoning . 
 = = Other facilities = = 
 = = = <unk> House Residential Program = = = 
 <unk> House , the trading arm of WA Council on <unk> Inc , is a non @-@ government , not @-@ for @-@ profit organisation specialising in treatment of drug and alcohol addictions and is based in North Perth . They operate two facilities off Gnangara Road in Cullacabardee , both of which were established in 1991 - the Rick Hammersley Centre , a therapeutic community where residents spend 10 weeks , followed by a two @-@ week community re @-@ entry skills development program , and the <unk> Women 's Program , a residential village for women affected by addictive or compulsive behaviour and their children , where residents spend a minimum of three months and also receive assistance for re @-@ entry into the general community . 
 = = = Transport = = = 
 Cullacabardee is not served by public transport . The nearest stop is at Kingfisher Avenue , Ballajura , about a 6 km ( 4 mi ) walk from the Cullacabardee Aboriginal community through regional bushland . 
 = Norman Birkett , 1st Baron Birkett = 
 William Norman Birkett , 1st Baron Birkett , PC , QC ( 6 September 1883 – 10 February 1962 ) was a British barrister , judge , politician and preacher who served as the alternate British judge during the Nuremberg Trials . 
 Birkett received his education at Barrow @-@ in @-@ Furness Grammar School . He was a Methodist preacher and a draper before attending Emmanuel College , Cambridge in 1907 , to study theology , history and law . Upon graduating in 1910 he worked as a secretary and was called to the Bar in 1913 . 
 Declared medically unfit for military service during World War I , Birkett used the time to make up for his late entry into the legal profession and was appointed a King 's Counsel in 1924 . He became a criminal defence lawyer and acted as counsel in a number of famous cases including the second of the Brighton trunk murders . A member of the Liberal Party , he sat in Parliament for Nottingham East twice , first in 1923 and again in 1929 . 
 Despite refusing appointment to the High Court of Justice in 1928 , he was offered the position again in 1941 and accepted , joining the King 's Bench Division . In 1945 he served as the alternate British judge at the Nuremberg trials , and he was made a Privy Counsellor in 1947 . He joined the Court of Appeal of England and Wales in 1950 but retired in 1956 when he had served for long enough to draw a pension . From 1958 he served in the House of Lords , and his speech against a private bill in 1962 saw it defeated by 70 votes to 36 , two days before he died on 10 February 1962 . 
 Described as " one of the most prominent Liberal barristers in the first half of the 20th century " and " the Lord Chancellor that never was " , Birkett was noted for his skill as a speaker , which helped him defend clients with almost watertight cases against them . As an alternate judge , Birkett was not allowed a vote at the Nuremberg Trials , but his opinion helped shape the final judgment . During his tenure in the Court of Appeal he oversaw some of the most significant cases of the era , particularly in contract law , despite his avowed dislike of judicial work . 
 Five of Birkett 's cases were dramatised for radio by Caroline and David Stafford and broadcast on BBC Radio 4 's Afternoon Play series , one on 1 June 2010 starring David Haig as Birkett and four in January 2012 starring Neil Dudgeon as Birkett . 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 Norman was born in Ulverston , Lancashire ( now part of the administrative county of Cumbria ) , on 6 September 1883 to Thomas Birkett , a draper , and his wife Agnes , who died in 1884 of tuberculosis . He attended the Wesleyan primary school in Ulverston until 1894 , when he moved to Barrow @-@ in @-@ Furness Grammar School . Although intelligent , Birkett was not noted as a particularly academic student and spent as much time on practical jokes as he did on his studies . He left school in 1898 , starting work as an apprentice in one of the draper 's shops owned by his father and beginning to preach . He was a popular local preacher on the local Methodist circuit , and , on deciding that he was unlikely to be a good draper , his father allowed him to leave the business in 1904 to become a minister under Charles Bedale . In 1905 , Bedale suggested Birkett should go to Cambridge University to study history and theology . Birkett liked the idea , having previously conversed with A. C. Benson , the Master of Magdalene College , and applied to Emmanuel College , Cambridge . The college offered him a place , with the condition that he would have to pass an entrance examination and complete the <unk> to be accepted into the university as a whole . He spent three months learning Latin and Greek and was accepted into the university in October 1907 . 
 At Cambridge , Birkett preached on the local Methodist circuit and at The Leys School . He was also active in sport , playing rugby , football and golf . He first spoke at the Cambridge Union Society in his second term at Cambridge on the motion of " this House would welcome the Disestablishment of the Church of England " , and the Cambridge Review reported that it was " a most interesting speech " . In his second year , he was elected to the Emmanuel Debating Society Committee and spoke many times at the Union on subjects including Home Rule for Ireland , cruelty to animals and secular education . He befriended Arnold McNair , the Secretary of the Union , and McNair agreed to put Birkett 's name on the electoral papers for election to the Union Committee . Birkett failed to get in , but on running again in 1910 was elected Secretary of the Union by a margin of only six votes . He became Vice @-@ President the following term , and President the term after that . While Birkett was President , the Cambridge Review reported that there was " no speaker more sure of pleasing the house " , and the speech he gave when Theodore Roosevelt visited Cambridge was well received by both Roosevelt and the university as a whole . 
 He gained a Second Class in the first History Tripos in 1909 , and won the English Essay Prize with an essay on political satire in English poetry . He won the same prize again in 1910 , and that year gained first @-@ class honours in his Theological Special Examination . By this point , he was having doubts about his future as a minister and consulted with the university Law Reader as to the possibility of a career as a barrister . On the Reader 's advice , Birkett took the second Law Tripos in 1911 , passing with second @-@ class honours . Birkett interviewed with the editors of The Guardian and The Observer in his search for a job to sustain him while he took the bar exam . He took a job as personal secretary to George Cadbury Junior , with a wage of £ 200 a year , which he planned to hold until he qualified as a barrister . After only a month of working for Cadbury , his salary was raised to £ 500 , and he was offered a permanent position . While there , he continued his political work and spoke on behalf of the Liberal Party , cementing his reputation as an effective speaker by , on one occasion , holding the attention of more than a thousand people for an hour . He took the first part of the Bar Examination in 1912 , but failed the paper on real property ; he passed it on his second attempt , and was called to the Bar at the Inner Temple on 4 June 1913 . 
 While working for Cadbury , Birkett befriended Ruth " Billy " Nilsson , and after he had proposed to her several times , she agreed to marry him . Nilsson gave up her position at <unk> to move to London and they were married on 25 August 1920 . They had two children , a daughter Linnea Birkett on 27 June 1923 , and a son Michael Birkett on 22 October 1929 . A keen golfer , he was a member of the Harewood Downs Golf Club , near Amersham , Buckinghamshire . 
 = = Practice at the Bar and time as a member of parliament = = 
 After qualifying as a barrister , he moved to Birmingham in 1914 , choosing the city because he had some connections there thanks to his association with Cadbury , and began work at the chambers of John Hurst . His career was aided by the outbreak of World War I ; many of the younger and fitter barristers were called up for war service , whilst Birkett himself , who was thirty when he joined the bar , avoided conscription as he was declared medically unfit . He was suffering from tuberculosis , and he returned to Ulverston for six months to recover . During his time in Birmingham , he continued his work as a minister , regularly preaching at the Baptist People 's Chapel . 
 Birkett became a popular defence counsel , something that on occasion caused him trouble ; he was once forced to refuse a defendant 's request to act as his representative because Birkett was expected in a different court . He impressed the Bench in Birmingham so much that , in 1919 , he was advised by a local Circuit Judge to move to London to advance his career . Although he was initially hesitant , saying that " competition in London is on quite a different scale , and if I failed there , I would have lost everything I have built up here " , a case he took in 1920 changed the situation . He acted as a junior for the prosecution in the so @-@ called Green Bicycle Case against Edward Marshall @-@ Hall . Although he lost , he sufficiently impressed Marshall @-@ Hall for the latter to offer him a place in his chambers in London . He had no connections with the solicitors in London , and the clerk at his new chambers got around this lack of contacts by using him as counsel in cases involving Marshall @-@ Hall , who as a King 's Counsel could appear in court only when accompanied by a junior barrister such as Birkett . 
 = = = Member of Parliament = = = 
 His father had been a supporter of the Liberal Party , and Birkett had helped campaign for them during the 1906 general election . He had been invited to become the Liberal candidate for Cambridge in 1911 , but he refused because he had no income ; he did , however , help his employer George Cadbury , Jr. get elected as a Liberal Councillor in Birmingham and helped start a branch of the National League of Young Liberals in the city . Birkett was the Liberal candidate for Birmingham King 's Norton in the 1918 general election , but lost to Herbert Austin . Birkett 's political career took off in 1923 . He ran for Nottingham East in the 1923 general election , and was elected with a majority of 1 @,@ 436 votes , a feat that was described as an " overwhelming victory " since the Conservative Party had held the seat since 1910 and had a majority of 4 @,@ 000 at the previous election . 
 Birkett 's maiden speech in Parliament responded to a proposal by Charles Dukes , a Labour Party Member of Parliament , in favour of state pensions for widows with children , and wives whose husbands were unable to work because of injury . Birkett went further than the proposed change and suggested that pensions should be provided to unmarried mothers , deserted wives and divorced wives . His speech was well @-@ received ; the Nottingham Journal described it as making " a most excellent impression " on the House of Commons , and Charles Masterman called him " a possible future Lord Chancellor " . Because of his focus on his career as a barrister rather than as a politician , Birkett rarely appeared in the House of Commons , but he worked hard when he did attend . On one occasion , he spent all night in a Parliamentary session that ended at 6 a.m. and then attended a court session the next day . 
 He applied to become a King 's Counsel in 1924 , since barristers who were also parliamentarians stood a higher chance of getting accepted than others . He was accepted on 15 April 1924 and sworn in on the same day . His promotion was met with approval from several noted judges , including Frederick Greer , later a Lord Justice of Appeal , who wrote that " unless my judgement is very much astray , you will quickly acquire a leading place in the front row " , a feeling which was echoed by other justices including William Finlay , who wrote that " I am confident that you will rise to the top of the profession , and I shall very greatly rejoice when my confidence is justified . " In his first year as a King 's Counsel Birkett earned £ 8 @,@ 600 , double what he had taken the previous year as a junior brief . 
 In 1924 , the Campbell Case brought down the Labour minority government and forced a general election . Birkett returned to Nottingham East to campaign for his re @-@ election , though he faced a much more difficult job than he had in 1923 . The Conservative candidate , Edmund Brocklebank , was much stronger than in the previous election , and the left @-@ wing vote was split because he was also campaigning against Tom Mann , a noted Communist . A few days before the election , a letter allegedly addressed to the Communist Party was published that mentioned organising uprisings in British colonies ; fear of the " socialist menace " drove many voters to the right , and in the election on 29 October 1924 , many Liberal members of parliament , including Birkett , lost their seats to Conservatives . 
 = = = Practice at the Bar in London = = = 
 While working with Marshall @-@ Hall , Birkett was involved in several notable criminal cases that helped cement his reputation as an outstanding speaker at the Bar . 
 In 1925 , a case known as the " Bachelor 's Case " came up at the High Court of Justice between Lieutenant @-@ Colonel Ian Dennistoun and his ex @-@ wife Dorothy Dennistoun . When the <unk> divorced , Mr. Dennistoun could not pay ancillary relief . He instead promised that he would provide for his ex @-@ wife in the future when he had the money . Some time after the divorce , Mr. Dennistoun married Almina , Countess of Carnarvon , the widow of Lord Carnarvon , a rich woman thanks to the terms of her husband 's will , who provided for her new husband . After hearing about this , Dorothy Dennistoun demanded the alimony money she had been promised . Lady Carnarvon saw this as blackmail and persuaded her new husband to take his wife to court for what Sir Henry McCardie , who tried the case , called " the most bitterly conducted litigation I have ever known " . Marshall @-@ Hall and Birkett both worked on the case representing Lady Carnarvon and Mr. Dennistoun , while Ellis Hume @-@ Williams , one of the most respected divorce barristers of the day , represented Mrs. Dennistoun . 
 The case initially appeared to be going badly for Marshall @-@ Hall . An inept cross @-@ examination on his part weakened his argument , and an illness made him irritable and short @-@ tempered . On the advice of his clerk , he asked Birkett to make the closing address before the court , which turned the mood of the courtroom completely and an initially hostile jury decided to disregard the agreement of Mr. Dennistoun to pay ancillary relief to his former wife . Birkett 's performance made the front pages of many evening newspapers , including The Daily Mail which described Birkett as " the greatest legal discovery of the year " and called his speech " a brilliant piece of advocacy " . His work for this case and the newspaper coverage of it brought him to the attention of many London solicitors , and led to him earning £ 8 @,@ 000 in the first seven months of 1925 . In that year he made £ 12 @,@ 000 overall , an amount which rose to £ 16 @,@ 500 in 1926 and peaked in 1929 when he earned £ 33 @,@ 500 . On meeting Miles Malleson , an old friend from his time at Cambridge , he said in surprise " did you know , Miles , that I am making more money than I thought existed in the world ! " 
 = = = Return to politics = = = 
 Birkett was returned as MP for Nottingham East at the general election on 31 May 1929 in which he won 14 @,@ 049 votes , taking the seat with a majority of 2 @,@ 939 . 
 As the largest single party , the Labour Party formed a minority government and set about filling the ministerial posts . The Labour Party had few experienced lawyers in the House of Commons , so Labour Prime Minister Ramsay MacDonald attempted to lure prominent Liberal lawyers to fill the positions of Attorney General and Solicitor General for England and Wales . William Jowitt defected to the Labour Party in exchange for the position of Attorney General , and the position of Solicitor General was offered to Birkett . Birkett replied that " he could not change his politics in twenty @-@ five minutes , and even if the Liberal Party should disintegrate completely , he would not be seen taking refuge in the Labour ark " . 
 Despite having to juggle his career at the Bar and as a member of parliament , Birkett kept up a good attendance in the House of Commons , and along with Sir John Simon he became the leading Liberal spokesperson on the legal side of legislation . His attack on a clause of the Finance Act 1930 drew much praise from both Liberal and Conservative politicians , including Winston Churchill , who said that " I have rarely heard a speech more precisely directed at the object under debate , more harmoniously attuned to the character of Committee discussion , than the excellent statement the Honourable and learned Gentleman has just made " . Birkett led the Liberal response to the Labour proposal of the Trade Disputes Bill 1931 and " reduced it to tatters " , although the Bill passed because of some Liberal abstentions . The speech was a particularly well @-@ received one and led MacDonald to again offer the position of Solicitor General to Birkett , as the incumbent <unk> James Melville was about to resign . Again Birkett refused , and Stafford Cripps was appointed . When the Liberal Party returned to power in 1931 in coalition with the Conservatives and National Labour as part of MacDonald 's National Government , it was expected that Birkett would be offered the position being a Liberal Member of Parliament , but by the time they proposed candidates for Solicitor General , the Liberals had exceeded their ministerial quota agreed to in the coalition . Birkett was offered a non @-@ legal office but said that he " could not contemplate a post that meant giving up my practice " . 
 After an economic crisis in 1931 , the King dissolved parliament and Birkett returned to Nottingham East to defend his seat ; his main opponent was the Conservative , Louis Gluckstein , who had challenged him in the 1929 election . The Conservative Party 's support of protectionism met with approval from the electorate , as most were employed in industries which had suffered after the institution of free trade . Gluckstein won the general election on 27 October 1931 with a majority of 5 @,@ 583 votes . 
 On 3 November , Birkett was informed that if he had been returned , the Prime Minister intended to make him Solicitor @-@ General . Disillusioned with the circumstances of the election , Birkett " [ bade ] farewell to East Nottingham " and retired from politics . He was invited to become a Liberal candidate two more times ; once in 1931 for Torquay and once in 1932 for North Cornwall . The second was a tempting offer ; the seat had become vacant on the death of its previous holder , a National Liberal with a comfortable majority , and it was felt that Birkett was almost certain to be returned to Parliament . Despite this , he refused , disliking the National Liberal policies and the extent to which they had aligned themselves with the Conservative Party . 
 = = = Return to the Bar = = = 
 In 1930 , Birkett was involved in the so @-@ called Blazing Car murder case . On 6 November 1930 , two men returning home in Northampton noticed a bright light in the distance and saw a man come out of a ditch at the side of the road , glance back toward the light and say " looks like somebody has had a bonfire " . The two young men ran toward the light , saw it was a burning car and fetched a policeman . When the fires died away , a body was found inside the boot of a car with a face so charred it was impossible to determine the identity of the man ; the <unk> of the car was intact , however , and traced to an Alfred Arthur Rouse . Rouse was arrested and appeared at Northampton Crown Court on 26 January 1931 , charged with the murder of an unknown man . He was defended by Donald <unk> , and the Crown was represented by Birkett and Richard Elwes . Rouse was damned by a series of events . When arrested , he made statements such as " I 'm very glad it 's over " and " I 'm responsible " and that the car engine had been off at the time of the fire , ruling out the possibility of accidental ignition . When he appeared as a witness , the defendant claimed that after giving an unknown man a lift , he had found that he was running out of petrol and had asked the passenger to take the spare can in the car and fill up the fuel tank . While he was doing this , Rouse testified that he went to the side of the road to urinate , and while there heard a large explosion . He said he saw a large flame and became convinced the petrol tank would explode . As such he ran away as fast as possible , at which point he ran into the two young men on the road . 
 The cross @-@ examination of him and other witnesses by Birkett swayed the jury , and they took only fifteen minutes to find Rouse guilty of murder . After his appeal had been rejected by both the Court of Appeal and the Home Secretary , Rouse admitted that he had in fact committed the murder – although he never gave a reason – it was theorised that he had done so in an attempt to fake his own death . Despite his admission of guilt the identity of the victim has never been discovered . 
 In 1934 , Birkett acted as counsel for the second of the two Brighton trunk murders , a case which was described as " his greatest triumph in a capital case " . In June 1934 , a woman 's torso was found in a suitcase in Brighton railway station . The legs were discovered at King 's Cross Station the next day , but her head and arms were never found , and the case is still unsolved . A woman by the name of Violette Kaye had disappeared , and the appearance of the first woman 's body prompted greater scrutiny on Kaye 's case . On 14 July , they interviewed Toni Mancini , Kaye 's boyfriend , who convinced them that the dead woman could not possibly be Kaye ; the dead woman had been identified as around thirty five years old and five months pregnant , while Kaye was ten years older . Kaye was last seen alive on 10 May looking distressed in the doorway to her house and had been scheduled to visit her sister in London who received a telegram on 11 May reading " Going abroad . Good job . Sail Sunday . Will write . Vi . " in block capitals . The post office clerks could not remember who sent it , but experts testified that the handwriting on the telegram had similarities to that on a menu written by Mancini . On 14 May , with the help of another man , Mancini moved his belongings from the house he shared with Kaye , which included a large trunk which was too heavy to move by hand . Mancini had told people that he had broken up with Kaye and she had moved to Paris , and that before she left he had beaten her . He later said to a friend , " What is the good of knocking a woman about with your fists ? You only hurt yourself . You should hit her with a hammer same as I did and [ chop ] her up . " A hammerhead was later found in the rubbish at his old house . 
 After the police had left on 14 July , Mancini got on a train to London . When the police arrived the next morning , they were unable to find Mancini but found Kaye 's body decomposing in the trunk in his new home . They immediately sent out a country @-@ wide call for Mancini to be arrested , and he was picked up near London . He claimed he was not guilty , and stated during interviews with police that he had returned home to find Kaye dead . Fearing that with his criminal record , the police would not believe him , he had hidden the body in a trunk . While Mancini was in prison , his solicitor phoned Birkett and asked him to work as counsel for the defence , which Birkett agreed to do . In his defence , Birkett highlighted flaws in the prosecution 's case to introduce an element of doubt in the minds of the jury . His cross @-@ examination of Sir Bernard Spilsbury , famous Home Office pathologist and potentially the most dangerous witness for the Crown , was seen as " masterly " . Birkett also emphasised the affectionate nature of the relationship between Kaye and Mancini before Kaye 's death . Despite strong evidence that he had committed the crime , including marks on the victim 's skull believed to be from a hammer and marks of blood on Mancini 's clothing , the jury found Mancini innocent after two and a half hours of deliberations . Mancini later confessed to the murder before dying . 
 In May 1937 Birkett was appointed Chairman of the Inter @-@ Departmental Committee for Abortion set up by the Minister of Health and Home Secretary , preparing a report " to inquire into the prevalence of abortion , and the law relating thereto , and to consider what steps can be taken by more effective enforcement of the law " , something which occupied him for two years . During the summer of 1937 , Birkett was asked to represent the English Bar at the annual meeting of the Canadian Bar Association in Toronto , where he was a popular speaker . In January 1938 , he was asked to act as a Commissioner of Assize to open the Assize Court in Aylesbury , dealing with an average of ten cases a day . After the outbreak of World War II in 1939 , he became a member of a committee advising the Home Secretary on the detention of suspected enemy agents . The committee dealt with more than 1 @,@ 500 cases in two years . Although the work was unpaid , he was knighted on 6 June 1941 as a reward for his work . He also delivered weekly radio broadcasts after the Friday night news to counter the broadcasts of William Joyce , known as Lord Haw Haw . The first broadcast took place on 9 February 1940 , and they were considered to be a morale boost during the so @-@ called Phony War . 
 = = Judicial work = = 
 Birkett had been offered appointment to the High Court as early as 1928 , but turned it down , saying that " I wasn 't really drawn to the judicial office ... I loved the Bar too much " . After the death of the High Court judge Sir Anthony Hawke in October 1941 , the Lord Chancellor Lord Simon offered Birkett the seat . Birkett considered it his " public duty " to join the bench and wrote back on 4 November accepting the offer . He was sworn in on 11 November 1941 and first sat on 24 November . He did not enjoy his time in the high courts , admitting that he " missed the limelight " of being an advocate , and , combined with ill @-@ health , he suffered from depression in 1942 . He was , however , a popular judge , although he felt he was too weak in his judgments because he " did not desire to hurt people 's feelings " . At one point , the Daily Herald reported he was to be made Viceroy of India . For several weeks in 1943 , he sat in the Court of Appeal before departing on an Assize visit . He fell ill after a few weeks with a combination of heart disease and pneumonia , and he returned home to recover . He suffered from more illness over the next year and considered resigning as a judge , as he felt that he could no longer trust his abilities as one . During his time in the High Court , he dealt with several notable cases including Constantine v Imperial Hotels Ltd , which reaffirmed the common law principle that innkeepers must not refuse accommodation to guests without just cause . 
 = = = Nuremberg trials = = = 
 On 30 August 1945 , Birkett received a letter from the Lord Chancellor asking him to serve as the British judge at the Nuremberg Trials of German War Criminals . He accepted , saying that it was " a great honour to be selected " . But when he went to London to discuss it , he was informed that the Foreign Office wanted a more senior judge to be in attendance , ideally a Law Lord , but since no Law Lord was available , they had requested that a judge from the Court of Appeal should be appointed . Geoffrey Lawrence was made the main British judge , and Birkett was offered the position of alternate judge for the trials , which he accepted , although with less enthusiasm than he had shown when accepting the original offer . He became friends with the American judge Francis Biddle , although when they first met he accidentally confused him with Anthony Drexel Biddle and remarked how useful his diplomatic training would be in the trials . 
 The trial lasted from 18 October 1945 to 30 September 1946 , and although Birkett did not have a vote in the proceedings as an alternate judge , his opinion was given weight , and it helped sway the decisions made by the main judges . After returning home from the trials , he received praise from both the Lord Chancellor , who said that " The country owes much to him for vindicating our conceptions of an impartial trial under the rule of law " , and from John Parker , the American alternate judge , who wrote that : 
 Although only an alternate member of the tribunal without a vote , his voice was heard in all of its deliberations , his hand drafted a large and most important part of its judgment , and no one connected with the tribunal , member or otherwise , had a greater part than he in shaping the final result . If , as I confidently believe , the work of the tribunal will constitute a landmark in the development of world order based on law , to Norman Birkett must go a large share of the credit for the success of the undertaking . To few men does the opportunity come to labour so mightily for the welfare of their kind . 
 After the judges returned home , Lawrence was made a Baron for his work at Nuremberg , but Birkett received nothing . The lack of reward for his work pushed him into depression , which he took many months to recover from . He was eventually made a Privy Counsellor in the 1947 Birthday Honours list , but he saw this as poor reward for the work he had put in at Nuremberg . 
 = = = Further judicial work = = = 
 The rest of his time in the High Court passed uneventfully , but he continued to be unhappy with his work as a judge , noting that " I am nervous of myself , without much confidence in my judgment and hesitant about my sentences and damages and things of that kind . I have felt no glow of achievement in any summing up , though none of them have been bad . " 
 He was again struck by depression in 1948 when Sir Alfred Thompson Denning and Sir John Singleton were both appointed to the Court of Appeal ahead of him , despite having been appointed to the High Court after him . On 30 July 1949 , Birkett went to the Lord Chancellor and discussed the possibility of his appointment to the Court of Appeal , but left dissatisfied . On 14 November , a duodenal ulcer perforated , from which he spent six months recovering . In an attempt to appease him , the Lord Chancellor offered Birkett a peerage without salary on 8 May 1950 , but he refused as he lacked the means to survive without paid employment . While speaking at a conference in Washington , D.C. on 31 August 1950 , he received a telegram from the Lord Chancellor offering him appointment to the Court of Appeal ; he immediately wired back his acceptance . He was sworn in on 2 October , and heard his first case the following day . 
 He found the work in the Court of Appeal dull , and his disappointment increased the longer he worked . As in the High Court , he felt uncertain about his judgements and unsure as to whether he was having an impact on the law . Despite his personal opinion of himself , the judiciary as a whole felt that his mix of humanity and common sense was beneficial to the court . During the 1951 Long Vacation he broadcast three talks for the BBC on the subject of international law and its growth and gave a speech for the Law Society titled " The Lawyer 's Contribution to Society " . Despite his unhappiness with his work in the Court of Appeal , he worked until 1956 , when his long service as a judge allowed him to draw a pension . In his remaining time in the Court of Appeal , Birkett judged several notable cases , in particular Pharmaceutical Society of Great Britain v Boots Cash Chemists ( Southern ) Ltd [ 1953 ] 1 QB 401 , and <unk> Ltd v Miles Far East Corporation [ 1955 ] 2 QB 327 , where the court made a landmark decision on acceptance of a contract in relation to Telex . From April 1958 to October 1961 he sat as a Law Lord , where his cases included De <unk> v Home Secretary [ 1959 ] AC 654 and <unk> v <unk> Motor Bodies Ltd [ 1960 ] AC 459 . 
 = = Retirement = = 
 On 13 June 1957 he became chairman of a committee of Privy Counsellors holding an inquiry into the Home Secretary 's use of telephone tapping . After twenty @-@ nine meetings , Birkett drafted a report which he passed on to Parliament supporting the use of telephone taps and noting their effectiveness . On 9 December , a letter arrived from the Prime Minister offering him a peerage . He accepted , and his name appeared in the New Year Honours list , and was created Baron Birkett , of Ulverston in the County of Lancaster , and took his seat in the House of Lords on 20 February 1958 . In the same year , he was awarded a LLD by the University of Cambridge , where the speaker said that Birkett was " endowed with such a voice as Cicero declared to be first requisite of an orator " and that " in our own time there had been no one more skilled in swaying the mind of a jury . " In February 1959 , he appeared on the first episode of the BBC television program Face to Face , where he was described as " one of the three or four greatest criminal lawyers of this century , and perhaps one of the three or four greatest criminal lawyers of all time " . Outside politics and the law , he also served as Master of the Worshipful Company of <unk> four times . 
 Birkett tried to sit as regularly in the House of Lords as possible , and made his maiden speech on 8 April 1959 on the subject of crime in the United Kingdom . In May , he moved the first reading of the Obscene Publications Bill , which passed with support from both sides of the house . Privately , Birkett believed that " there will never be a satisfactory law in England about obscenity . Our 1959 Act is the best we have yet done . " In 1961 , he was again invited by the BBC to give a series of talks on the BBC Home Service , this time titled " Six Great Advocates " . He picked Edward Marshall @-@ Hall , Patrick Hastings , Edward Clarke , Rufus Isaacs , Charles Russell and Thomas Erskine . He sat for the last time in the House of Lords on 8 February 1962 , where he made a speech criticising an element of the Manchester Corporation Bill which would have water drained from Ullswater to meet the needs of the growing population in Manchester . His speech was " deeply felt and eloquent " , and when the votes were announced , Birkett and his supporters had won by 70 votes to 36 . The Ullswater Yacht Club now holds an annual Lord Birkett Memorial Trophy Race on the lake . 
 The next morning he complained of heart trouble , collapsed shortly after lunch and was taken to the hospital . The doctors discovered that he had ruptured an important blood vessel and immediate surgery was needed to fix it . The operation failed to fix the problem , and he died early in the morning on 10 February 1962 . His son , Michael , succeeded him as Baron Birkett . 
 = = = Arms = = = 
 = Pah Wongso Pendekar Boediman = 
 Pah Wongso Pendekar Boediman ( Malay for Pah Wongso the Righteous Warrior ) is a 1941 detective film from the Dutch East Indies ( now Indonesia ) . The first production by Star Film , it was produced by Jo Eng Sek and featured camerawork by Cho ' Chin Hsin . Starring L. V. Wijnhamer , Jr . , Elly Joenara , and Mohamad Arief , it followed the social worker Pah Wongso as he investigated a murder to clear his protégé 's name . 
 The first film of its genre to be produced in the Indies , Pah Wongso Pendekar Boediman was made to capitalize on the popularity of Wijnhamer and Hollywood characters such as Charlie Chan and Mr. Moto . Released in April 1941 to popular acclaim , it had a mixed critical reception ; the reviewer Saeroen suggested that its success was entirely because of its star 's renown . A sequel to this film , which is possibly lost , Pah Wongso Tersangka , was released later that year . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Pah Wongso is a nut seller , social worker , and schoolmaster who lives in Batavia and takes care of the local poor . One day , his young protégé Wisnoe saves the life of a young woman named Siti when she is almost hit by a carriage . In thanks , her father Haji Abdullah gives Wisnoe a job at his rice mill . Wisnoe 's zeal and diligence quickly make him stand out from his fellow employees , and he begins to woo Siti , who returns his affections . 
 However , Wisnoe 's cousin Bardja is envious of his newfound success . A gambler who frequents prostitutes , Bardja is smitten with Siti , who does not love him . Hoping to eliminate his competition , Bardja hires some thugs to kill Wisnoe ; this attempt fails , and Bardja 's financial situation becomes increasingly desperate . He decides to steal from his rich uncle , but is caught in the act . In the ensuing struggle , he kills the older man , then frames Wisnoe for the murder . 
 Wisnoe is arrested , and soon Pah Wongso – warned by Siti of Bardja 's previous treachery – begins to investigate the case . Ultimately he discovers that Bardja is the true murderer and confronts him , resulting in a battle to the death . Wongso emerges victorious , and Wisnoe 's name is cleared . 
 = = Production = = 
 Pah Wongso Pendekar Boediman was produced by Jo Eng Sek , a businessman who had produced the film Si Tjonat in 1929 . Cinematography on this black @-@ and @-@ white film was handled by Cho ' Chin Hsin , who had recently immigrated from Shanghai . The film was the first production of Star Film , a studio which Jo and Cho ' had established in <unk> , Batavia ( now Mangga Besar , Jakarta ) . 
 At the time , the Hollywood characters Charlie Chan and Mr. Moto were popular in the Indies , as were imported detective films in general ; however , no films in that genre had yet been produced domestically . This led Jo to make a detective film which he thought would be successful with ethnic Chinese audiences . For this , he approached L. V. Wijnhamer , Jr . , an Indo man who was popular within the ethnic Chinese community for his social work ; Wijnhamer , better known as Pah Wongso , helped educate abandoned children , ran an employment office , and raised funds for Red Cross aid in war @-@ torn China . Wijnhamer accepted the role . 
 To support Wongso , stage actress Elly Joenara was cast as Siti , making her film debut , while Mohamad Arief appeared as <unk> . Other cast members included Djoenaedi , R. Sukran , and Miss <unk> . To ensure that fight scenes went smoothly , Jo hired members of Primo Oesman 's silat and boxing group to perform as criminals ; Oesman , a professional boxer , also appeared in the film . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 Pah Wongso Pendekar Boediman was rated for audiences over the age of 17 . It premiered at the Rex Theatre in Batavia on 1 April 1941 , following a short speech by Wijnhamer . It had reached Surabaya by June , where it was advertised as a film of intrigue , life , and death . Although intended predominantly for domestic consumption , it was also screened in China , Singapore and British Malaya . When the film reached Singapore in July 1941 , it was touted as a " thrilling Malay detective story ... full of thrills and excitement from beginning to end " . 
 The Indonesian film historian Misbach Yusa Biran records Pah Wongso Pendekar Boediman as a commercial success . Critical reviews , however , were mixed . An anonymous reviewer in the Bataviaasch Nieuwsblad praised the quality of the film , particularly its cinematography , acting , and story . In the Malayan magazine Film Melayu , a reviewer considered the film of similar quality to Hollywood productions and praised its casting of a South East Asian as the titular detective . The critic and <unk> Saeroen expressed concern that the film 's success was not because of its quality , and opined that it was only popular because of Wijnhamer 's fame . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 By September 1941 , Jo had begun production of a second – and final – film starring Wongso , titled Pah Wongso Tersangka ( Pah Wongso Becomes a Suspect ) . Directed by Wu Tsun , this late 1941 release featured Pah Wongso in four roles and showed him attempting to clear his name after being framed for a crime . Arief , Primo , and Sukran were also recast in this film , which was billed as the colony 's first comedy film . Although Joenara did not return for Pah Wongso Tersangka , she acted in three further films for Star ; her acting career continued into the 1950s , and she became a producer in the early 1970s . 
 Pah Wongso Pendekar Boediman may be lost . Movies in the Indies were recorded on highly flammable nitrate film , and after a fire destroyed much of Produksi Film Negara 's warehouse in 1952 , old films shot on nitrate were deliberately destroyed . Thus , the American visual anthropologist Karl G. Heider wrote that all Indonesian films from before 1950 are lost . However , JB Kristanto 's Katalog Film Indonesia ( Indonesian Film Catalogue ) records several as having survived at Sinematek Indonesia 's archives , and Biran writes that several Japanese propaganda films have survived at the Netherlands Government Information Service . 
 = = Explanatory notes = = 
 = Viva el Príncipe = 
 Viva el Príncipe ( English : Long Live the Prince ) is the thirteenth studio album by Mexican recording artist Cristian Castro , released on November 30 , 2010 by Universal Music Latino . It is a tribute album to Mexican singer José José , Castro 's musical idol . The album was produced by Rafael Pérez @-@ Botija who also produced for José José . Viva el Príncipe covers twelve songs by José José and includes a poem recited by Castro 's idol . Recording took place on August 2010 at The Hit Factory Criteria in Miami , Florida . 
 To promote the recording , Castro released " La Nave del Olvido " , which peaked at No. 48 on the Billboard Hot Latin Songs chart . Castro toured for the release in United States , Latin America and Spain . The album became successful in Mexico and the United States where it topped both the Mexican and Billboard Latin album charts . It was certified diamond by the Asociación Mexicana de Productores de Fonogramas y Videogramas ( AMPROFON ) in Mexico and double platinum ( Latin field ) by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) in the United States . In South America , it peaked at No. 5 on the Argentine Chamber of Phonograms and Videograms Producers ( CAPIF ) album chart and received gold certifications in Colombia and Venezuela . It had sold over 800 @,@ 000 copies worldwide as of November 2011 . 
 Viva el Príncipe received a positive review from David Jeffries of Allmusic praising Botija 's production and Castro 's vocal delivery . It earned a negative review from an editor of Terra Networks who felt that the album did not add anything to the originals . The album received a nomination for a Latin Grammy , two Billboard Latin Music Awards nominations , and an Oye ! award . The success led to a 2011 release of more José José songs titled Mi Amigo El Príncipe . 
 = = Background = = 
 The project for Viva el Príncipe began in 2008 after Castro , who was one of the selected artists , interpreted one of José 's songs during a tribute concert . José believed that it was the right time for Castro to record a cover album with his songs and recommended that he seek the help of Rafael Pérez @-@ Botija and Chucho Ferrer , who were responsible for producing José 's albums . Castro recalled growing up in the same neighborhood with José , who often invited him over for parties and studied with his children in the same college . When he heard José 's song " La Navel del <unk> " for first time , Castro said : " I promised to be a singer someday and to sing ballads . José José is my musical father and biggest inspiration " . Castro expressed hope that the album would allow José 's songs to be heard by a newer generation . The album was officially revealed by Castro alongside José after his concert in Argentina . The title of the recording is a reference to José 's honorary title " The Prince of Song " ( " El Príncipe de la Canción " ) . 
 = = Recording and production = = 
 The album was recorded on August 2010 at The Hit Factory Criteria in Miami , Florida , produced by Botija . Along with Botija , the album includes arrangers Angel " Cucco " Peña and Jorge Calandrelli . The album covers ten of José 's most recognized works such as " La Navel del Olvido " , " El Triste " , and " <unk> o Paloma " . " Lo <unk> , <unk> " features a duet with José José using the original recording . The album contains " Poema al Cantante " recited by José . In the poem , José conveys that the singer cannot live if he cannot sing ( " Ya no <unk> vivir , si ya no <unk> " ) ; an allusion to losing his singing voice from the effects of alcoholism . 
 Castro was initially disappointed with the project as he did not want to solely imitate José 's vocals , Ferrer 's absence and his desire to record Jose 's lesser known songs . According to Castro , it was the decisions of the executive producers of his record label , Universal Music Latino , to only have Botija produce the album and to record José José 's more recognized songs . He later retracted his statement , commending Botija and referred to the disc as his best , only lamenting he could not record José 's lesser known songs . José expressed satisfaction with the result . 
 = = Promotion = = 
 To promote the album , " La Nave del Olvido " was selected as the lead single from the album and was released on September 28 , 2010 . It peaked at No. 48 on the Billboard Hot Latin Songs chart and No. 22 on the Billboard Latin Pop Songs chart . The music video was directed by Ricardo Moreno and filmed in Los Angeles . Three promotional singles were released on iTunes : Amor , Amor , Volcán , and Mi Niña . The standard track listing contains contain ten tracks and the poem . The deluxe edition contains two additional songs , a cover of " Gracias " and " Mi Niña " and a DVD which includes Castro performing each song at The Hit Factory Criteria and the music video for " La Nave del Olvido " . 
 = = = Tour = = = 
 On June 2 , 2011 , Castro announced the " Viva el Príncipe Tour " consisting of 121 shows including the United States and twelve countries in Latin America . The tour began in Mexico where he performed in Guadalajara on June 24 , 2011 , and sang in Tabasco , Jalisco , and Puebla . During the concert in the National Auditorium he was accompanied by José José and his parents Manuel Valdés and Verónica Castro . On July 28 , 2011 , Castro began the tour 's US leg in Chicago , Illinois , performing in Texas , California , Florida and Puerto Rico . The tour continued on to South America where Castro performed in Chile , Argentina , Bolivia , Peru , Ecuador and Colombia . Castro also performed in Spain and mentioned the difficulty of promoting in the country , as ballads are generally not well @-@ received on radio stations . 
 In the first part of the show , Castro performed songs from the disc sporting a white tuxedo . In the second he performed hits from his earlier career . 
 = = Commercial reception = = 
 The album was released on November 30 , 2010 worldwide . In Mexico , the album spent fifteen weeks on top of the Top 100 Mexico chart . It was ranked as 2011 's third best @-@ selling album in Mexico and was certified diamond by AMPROFON for shipping 300 @,@ 000 copies . 
 In the United States , it debuted at No. 157 on the Billboard 200 and No. 2 on both the Billboard Top Latin Albums and Billboard Latin Pop Albums charts selling over 7 @,@ 000 copies its first week . The album reached No. 1 on the Top Latin Albums and Latin Pop Albums charts in the week of January 29 , 2011 succeeding Shakira 's album Sale el Sol where it spent seven weeks on top of Latin Albums and ten weeks on top of Latin Pop Albums . It peaked at No. 49 on the Billboard 200 on the week of March 21 , 2011 . 
 On the Billboard year @-@ end charts of 2011 , the album ranked as the second @-@ best selling Latin album of the year after Prince Royce 's eponymous album and the best @-@ selling Latin pop album of the year . It was certified double platinum ( Latin field ) by the RIAA for shipments of 200 @,@ 000 copies in United States . In Spain , it peaked at No. 44 on the Productores de Música de España album chart . In South America , Viva el Príncipe peaked at No. 5 on the Argentine Chamber of Phonograms and Videograms Producers pop charts and received gold certifications in Colombia by the Asociación Colombiana de Productores de Fonogramas and in Venezuela by the Association of Venezuelan Phonograph Producers . As of November 2011 , the album had sold over 800 @,@ 000 copies worldwide . 
 = = Critical reception and accolades = = 
 David Jeffries of Allmusic gave the album a positive review believing that José José 's " spirit fills the album " and commended Botija for his role in the production and Castro for bringing " the sense of tradition as he delivers this material with respect " . He observed that it doesn 't stop Castro from " pouring his heart into the songs " and perceived mimicry as a non @-@ issue . Jeffries closed the review affirming that the album " winds up a tribute that will please fans of either artist " . An editor of Terra Networks gave the album a negative review . Although the editor complimented Castro 's ability to imitate José José 's music , he felt that the audience were better off listening to the original recordings as Castro did not take the risk of adapting the tunes to his own style . 
 At the 12th Latin Grammy Awards , Castro received a nomination for Best Male Pop Vocal Album , which went to Franco De Vita for En Primera Fila . At the 2012 Latin Billboard Music Awards , the album received two nominations for Latin Album of the Year and Latin Pop Album of the Year losing the first award to Prince Royce 's eponymous album and the second award to Drama y Luz by Maná . At the 2012 Billboard Music Awards , it was nominated Latin Album of the Year but lost to Formula , Vol . 1 by Romeo Santos . At the 2012 Mexican Oye ! Awards , it received an award for Male Pop Album of the Year and a nomination for Album of the Year . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 A follow @-@ up to Viva el Príncipe was announced by Castro on September 13 , 2011 titled Mi Amigo El Príncipe . As with its predecessor , Mi Amigo El Príncipe was produced by Botija . The disc was released on November 1 , 2011 . A two @-@ disc compilation titled Viva El Príncipe : Edición Especial , Vol . 1 & 2 was released on February 7 , 2012 with the tracks from both albums . Another compilation album featuring covers of José 's songs was released in 2012 titled <unk> Al Príncipe which contains thirteen previously recorded songs and two covers of " Mi Vida " and " Pero Me Hiciste <unk> " . Sony Music Latin released a greatest hits albums featuring José 's and Castro 's songs titled El <unk> & El Príncipe in 2012 . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 The following credits are adapted from Allmusic and the album liner notes . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 = = = Weekly charts = = = 
 = = = Album certifications = = = 
 = Armenian parliament shooting = 
 The Armenian parliament shooting , commonly known in Armenia as October 27 ( <unk> 27 , <unk> k ’ <unk> ’ ) , was a terrorist attack on the Armenian National Assembly in the capital Yerevan on October 27 , 1999 , by a group of five armed men led by Nairi Hunanyan that , among others , killed the two de facto decision @-@ makers in the country 's political leadership — Prime Minister Vazgen Sargsyan and Parliament Speaker Karen Demirchyan . 
 The shooting is one of the most controversial events of post @-@ Soviet Armenian history , which led to significant changes in the country 's political landscape . It remains a subject of numerous conspiracy theories , mostly involving President Robert Kocharyan , whose tenure thereafter was frequently criticized as authoritarian . Sargsyan and Demirchyan were posthumously honored with National Hero of Armenia titles . 
 = = Shooting = = 
 On 27 October 1999 , at around 5 : 15 p.m. , five men led by journalist and former ARF member Nairi Hunanyan , armed with Kalashnikov rifles hidden under long coats , broke into the National Assembly building on Baghramyan Avenue in Yerevan , while the government was holding a question @-@ and @-@ answer session . They shot dead eight people : 
 Vazgen Sargsyan , Prime Minister 
 Karen Demirchyan , National Assembly Speaker 
 Yuri Bakhshyan , Deputy National Assembly Speaker 
 Ruben <unk> , Deputy National Assembly Speaker 
 Leonard Petrosyan , Minister of Urgent Affairs 
 Henrik Abrahamyan , Member of Parliament 
 Armenak <unk> , Member of Parliament 
 <unk> <unk> , Member of Parliament 
 The gunmen injured at least 30 people in the parliament . 
 Hunanyan was accompanied by his brother Karen , uncle Vram , and two others . The group claimed they were carrying out a coup d 'état . They described their act as " patriotic " and " needed for the nation to regain its senses . " They said they wanted to " punish the authorities for what they do to the nation " and described the government as profiteers " drinking the blood of the people . " They claimed Armenia was in a " catastrophic situation " and that " corrupt officials " were not doing anything to provide the way out . Vazgen Sargsyan was the main target of the group and the other deaths were said to be unintended . According to reporters who witnessed the shooting , the men went up to Sargsyan and said , " Enough of drinking our blood , " to which Sargsyan calmly responded , " Everything is being done for you and the future of your children . " Vazgen Sargsyan was hit several times . Hunanyan claimed that the eight deaths and dozens of injuries in the attack were all " innocent victims " except for the case of Sargsyan , who he said had " failed the nation " . Anna <unk> , an eyewitness journalist , stated that " the first shots were fired directly at Vazgen Sargsyan at a distance of one to two meters " and , in her words , " it was impossible that he would have survived . " Gagik <unk> , a cameraman , was the first person from outside to be allowed to go into the building while the men were in control of it . <unk> recorded the dead bodies of Vazgen Sargsyan and Karen Demirchyan . Sargsyan 's body was taken out of the parliament building on the evening of October 27 . 
 = = = Government response = = = 
 Soon after the attack , hundreds of policemen and army forces personnel and two armored personnel carriers were brought into Yerevan , positioned on Baghramyan Avenue surrounding the National Assembly building . An anti @-@ terrorist squad from Russia also participated in the operation . Meanwhile , ambulance vehicles rushed to the site of the shooting . President Robert Kocharyan was directing the operation of the security forces around the parliament building . While holding around 50 hostages inside the building , the men demanded a helicopter and airtime on national television for a political statement . 
 President Robert Kocharyan gave a speech on TV , announcing that the situation was under control . His spokesman <unk> <unk> was quick to characterize the men as " individual terrorists " and assured that " it 's only the parliament building and a very small group . " After overnight negotiations with President Kocharyan , the gunmen released the hostages and gave themselves up on the morning of October 28 , after a standoff that lasted 17 – 18 hours . Kocharyan had guaranteed the personal security of the gunmen and the right to a free trial . In the meantime , the Armenian armed forces blocked the roads leading to Yerevan for security reasons . 
 On 28 October 1999 , President Kocharyan declared a three @-@ day mourning period . The state funeral ceremony for the victims of the parliament shooting took place from 30 October to 31 October 1999 . The bodies of the victims , including Vazgen Sargsyan , were placed inside the Yerevan Opera Theater . A number of high @-@ ranking officials from some 30 countries , including Russian Prime Minister Vladimir Putin and the Georgian President Eduard Shevardnadze , attended the funeral . Karekin II , the Catholicos of All Armenians and Aram I , the Catholicos of the Holy See of Cilicia gave prayers . 
 = = Reaction = = 
 = = = Public = = = 
 A poll carried out immediately after the shooting ( in October 30 – 31 ) by the Center for Sociological Studies of the National Academy of Sciences of Armenia found that 56 @.@ 9 % of respondents said that the October 27 events were a crime against statehood and the country 's authorities . 63 @.@ 4 % of those questioned believed that the terrorist group consisted of assassins – traitors and enemies . 
 = = = International = = = 
 Australia — Foreign Affairs Minister Alexander Downer condemned the assassination of the high officials . 
 France — The Armenian embassy in Paris received telegrams from President Jacques Chirac , Prime Minister Lionel Jospin and many others . 
 Iran — Vice President Hassan Habibi visited the Armenian embassy in Tehran , where he left a condolence note in the book on the sad occasion . 
 Kazakhstan — President Nursultan Nazarbayev of Kazakhstan sent a telegram of condolences to President Kocharyan , saying it was a " barbaric " incident that had been received " with shock and indignation " . Nazarbayev emphasized that this " monstrous crime once again demands that we join efforts to step up the uncompromising fight against terrorism which threatens people 's stability , creative work and peaceful life . " 
 Russia — President Boris Yeltsin expressed his " deep anger " and " sharp condemnation of the actions of the terrorists " . He instructed the Russian ambassador in Yerevan to convey his " deepest sympathies " and condolences to all those who had suffered " as a result of this barbarous act " . President Yeltsin was also quoted as saying there was a need " to curb decisively all manifestations of terrorism , wherever they happened , " stressing Russia 's readiness for " close co @-@ operation on this issue with all concerned parties . " 
 Syria — Parliament Speaker Abd al @-@ Qadir <unk> offered condolences . 
 Turkey — Prime Minister <unk> Ecevit expressed his concern and stated that " This is an extremely sad and worrying event . " He added that " Many possibilities come to mind . A process of dialogue has started that gives signs of hope between Azerbaijan and Armenia . Is it a reaction to that or not ? I don 't know . " 
 United Kingdom — The Foreign Office spokesman said : " This is clearly a terrible blow for Armenia after gaining independence in 1991 and after efforts to build up a democracy . We do not condone terrorism . " 
 United States — President Bill Clinton condemned the shootings , calling it a " senseless act " , and stated renewed US support for Armenia . He added , " At this time of tragedy we renew our support for the people of Armenia and their leaders as they continue to build on the principles today 's victims have so courageously embodied . " On November 17 , 1999 the House of Representatives passed a resolution deploring the assassinations . 
 = = Investigation and trial = = 
 The five men were charged with terrorism aimed at undermining authority on 29 October . The investigation was led by Gagik Jhangiryan , the Chief Military Prosecutor of Armenia , who claimed his team was looking for the masterminds of the shooting even after the trial had begun . According to Jhangiryan , the investigating team considered more than a dozen theories . By January 2000 , Jhangiryan 's investigators considered the connection of Kocharyan and his circle to the parliament shooting . Several figures close to Kocharyan were arrested , including <unk> Harutiunyan , the Deputy Presidential Adviser , and Harutiun Harutiunyan , the Deputy Director of the Public Television of Armenia but , by the summer of that year , they were released . Eventually , Jhangiryan failed to find evidence linking Kocharyan to the shooting . 
 The investigation ended and the case was sent to court on 12 July 2000 . The trial began on February 15 , 2001 , in Yerevan 's <unk> and Nork @-@ Marash District Court . The judicial case was transferred to the jurisdiction of Aghvan Hovsepyan , the Prosecutor General , and his office , which finally closed the case for lack of evidence . The five main perpetrators of the shooting ( Nairi Hunanyan , his younger brother Karen Hunanyan , their uncle Vram <unk> , <unk> <unk> and Eduard Grigoryan ) were sentenced to life in prison on December 2 , 2003 . 
 = = Conspiracy theories = = 
 It has never been fully explained what motivated the attack : the gunmen claimed to have been acting on their own initiative , and despite abundant conspiracy theories , no convincing evidence surfaced to suggest that any political leader or party was behind the attack . Nevertheless , the killings left a leadership void in the political establishment . Conspiracy theories immediately flourished that the gunmen had been acting on orders to sabotage a Karabakh peace deal , but a decade on , the available evidence still pointed to the leading gunman being a loner with a grudge against the Armenian political elite . 
 In an interview in April 2013 , Rita Demirchyan , the widow of Karen Demirchyan , suggested that the shooting was commanded from outside of Armenia and that it was not an attempt of a coup , but rather an assassination . 
 = = = Alleged involvement of Robert Kocharyan and Serzh Sargsyan = = = 
 Although the investigation did not find any considerable evidence linking Kocharyan to the Hunanyan group , many Armenian politicians and analysts believe that President Robert Kocharyan and National Security Minister Serzh Sargsyan were behind the assassination of Vazgen Sargsyan and other leading politicians . In January 2000 , investigators alleged that several members of the President Robert Kocharian 's inner circle may have been behind the October 27 shooting , promoting some opposition figures to call for Kocharian 's resignation . However , Kocharyan gradually consolidated his power throughout the year to emerge as the most powerful figure in the country 's leadership . 
 Armenia 's first president Levon Ter @-@ Petrosyan has repeatedly " accused Kocharyan and Serzh Sargsyan and their ' criminal @-@ oligarchic ' system of being the real perpetrators of the parliament shooting . " In the run up to the 2008 presidential election he explicitly stated that " If you vote for Serzh Sargsyan on February 19 , you will vote for Nairi Hunanyan . He who elects Serzh Sarkisian would desecrate the holy graves of Karen <unk> and Vazgen Sarkisian . " In 2009 the Armenian National Congress , an opposition alliance led by Ter @-@ Petrosyan , released a statement on the 10th anniversary of the shooting blaming " Kocharyan and Serzh <unk> for the killings , claiming that most Armenians consider them the masterminds of the crime . " The statement continued , " October 27 was a violent seizure of power perpetrated by means of terrorism . Terrorism thus became the regime 's main tool for clinging to power and reproducing itself . " 
 In March 2013 , Vazgen Sargsyan 's younger brother Aram Sargsyan stated that he has many questions to both governments of Robert Kocharyan and Serzh Sargsyan . He claimed the judicial process of October 27 " deepened the public distrust in the authorities " as " many questions remain unanswered today " According to Aram Sargsyan , the disclosure of the shooting is " vital " for Armenia . Sargsyan at conclusion insisted that he " have never accused this or the former authorities in being responsible for October 27 . I have accused them in not fully disclosing October 27 . " 
 Albert Bazeyan stated in 2002 that " We have come to the conclusion that the crime was aimed at making Robert Kocharian 's power unlimited and uncontrolled . By physically eliminating Karen Demirchyan and Vazgen Sargsyan , its organizers wanted to create prerequisites for Kocharyan 's victory in the future presidential elections . " 
 = = = Alleged foreign involvement = = = 
 = = = = Russia = = = = 
 In late April 2005 , in an interview to an Azerbaijani newspaper <unk> Azerbaijan , the former Russian secret service agent Alexander Litvinenko accused the Main Intelligence Directorate ( GRU ) of the General Staff of the Armed Forces of the Russian Federation of having organised the Armenian parliament shooting , ostensibly to derail the peace process which would have resolved the Nagorno @-@ Karabakh conflict , but he offered no evidence to support the accusation . In May 2005 , the Russian embassy in Armenia denied any such involvement , and described Litvinenko 's accusation as an attempt to harm relations between Armenia and Russia by people against the democratic reforms in Russia . The Armenian National Security Service also denied the Russian involvement in the shootings . The NSS spokesman <unk> Baghramyan stated " not a single fact or even a hint relating to Litvinenko 's theory emerged during the trial . " President Robert Kocharyan 's national security adviser , <unk> <unk> , called Litvinenko a " sick man . " 
 On October 27 , 2012 , the French @-@ based Armenian " political refugee " and former Apostolic priest Artsruni Avetisysan ( also known by his religious name Ter <unk> ) gave an interview to <unk> , in which he claimed the Russian secret services have been behind the shooting . On May 7 , 2013 , in an interview to the same agency , Artsruni Avetisysan claimed the shooting was perpetrated by Lieutenant General Vahan <unk> , the Deputy Minister of Defense from 1992 to 1999 and the National Security Minister Serzh Sargsyan . He insisted the shooting was assisted by the Russian secret services in order to bring the " Neo @-@ Bolshevik criminal clan " of Serzh Sargsyan and Robert Kocharyan into power . 
 = = = = United States and France = = = = 
 Ashot Manucharyan , one of the leading members of the Karabakh Committee , the former Minister of Internal Affairs and Levon Ter @-@ Petrosyan 's National Security Adviser and his close ally until 1993 , stated in October 2000 that Armenian officials were warned by a foreign country about the shootings . He also declared that " Western special services " were involved in the October 27 events . In Manucharyan 's words , " the special services of the US and France are acting to destroy Armenia , and in this context , they are much likely to be involved in the realization of the terrorist acts in Armenia . " 
 = = = Alleged role of the Armenian Revolutionary Federation = = = 
 Nairi Hunanyan , the leader of the armed group , was an ex @-@ member of the Armenian Revolutionary Federation ( Dashnaktsutyun ) . According to the ARF representatives , Hunanyan was expelled from the party in 1992 for misconduct and had not been in any association with the ARF since then . Some speculations have been made about the involvement of the ARF in the shootings . Ashot Manucharyan stated in 2000 that he is much worried about the circumstance that " a number of Dashnaktsutyun party leaders are acting in the interest of the American foreign policy . " 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Armenian @-@ American journalist Garin Hovannisian described the aftermath of the attack as follows : 
 From early June to late October 1999 , the political system in Armenia was based on the Demirchyan @-@ Sargsyan tandem , which controlled the military , the legislative and the executive branches . Their assassination disrupted the political balance in the country and the political arena of Armenia was left in disarray for months . The assassination hit Armenia 's international reputation resulting in a decline in the foreign investment . The " de facto dual command " of Sargsyan and Demirchyan transferred to President Robert Kocharyan . 
 Aram Khachatryan from the People 's Party of Armenia was elected speaker of the parliament , while Vazgen Sargsyan 's brother Aram Sargsyan was appointed Prime Minister . However , Aram Sargsyan was dismissed by President Kocharyan in May 2000 due to " inability to work " with Sargsyan 's cabinet . Republican Party leader Andranik Margaryan came to replace him as Prime Minister on May 12 , 2000 . 
 Kocharyan successfully prevented the Unity bloc @-@ controlled parliament from impeaching him , and gradually consolidated the power around him . Kocharyan remained highly unpopular in Armenia as a poll in August 2002 showed at least three other politicians ( Stepan Demirchyan , Artashes <unk> , Levon Ter @-@ Petrosyan ) having more support than him . In 2009 , <unk> Bakhshyan , an MP from Heritage and the widow of Yuri Bakhshyan , the killed Deputy National Assembly Speaker , stated that " Robert Kocharyan turned October 27 , 1999 terrorism act to good use , making a shift towards more totalitarian regime . " Human Development Report wrote in 2000 that the " October 27 events adversely impacted the situation in the country in all aspects and spheres and its consequences will be felt for long , in economic , political and social expressions " and predicted a further decline in human development . 
 = = Later developments = = 
 On October 27 , 2009 , a memorial was installed in the National Assembly park . During the opening ceremony , Stepan Demirchyan , the son of one of the two main victims , Karen Demirchyan , stated that " It is impossible to get an entire revelation while the current authorities are in power . However , sooner or later the reality will be disclosed . This is a matter of our statehood 's dignity . Only in case of having an entire revelation we will be able to overcome the negative consequences of the October 27 events . " 
 = Mario Ramírez Treviño = 
 Mario Armando Ramírez Treviño ( born 5 March 1962 ) , commonly referred to by his aliases El Pelón and / or X @-@ 20 , is an alleged Mexican drug lord and former leader of the Gulf Cartel , a drug trafficking organization . 
 In the early 2000s , Ramírez Treviño was a close associate of Jaime González Durán ( El Hummer ) , a founder and top leader of Los Zetas drug cartel . In 2008 , González Durán was arrested and sentenced to 35 years in prison ; by 2010 , Los Zetas , who were working as the armed wing of the Gulf Cartel , separated from the organization to operate independently . Both criminal organizations went to war with each other , but Ramírez Treviño remained in the Gulf Cartel . Under the tutelage of Samuel Flores Borrego ( El Metro 3 ) , he worked as the second @-@ in @-@ command for the criminal organization in Reynosa , Tamaulipas . In an apparent power struggle within the Gulf Cartel , however , El Metro 3 was killed , and he became the regional kingpin in September 2011 . 
 With the death of El Metro 3 , several groups within the Gulf Cartel went to war with each other , but Ramírez Treviño remained loyal to his faction , Los Metros . In late 2012 , the Gulf Cartel leaders Mario Cárdenas Guillén and Jorge Eduardo Costilla Sánchez were arrested by the Mexican Armed Forces , forcing him to take the lead of the criminal organization . To keep the Gulf Cartel under his control and in a single command structure , Ramírez Treviño resorted to kill El Metro 4 , Miguel " El Gringo " Villarreal , and other cartel leaders who stood in his way . He was arrested by the Mexican Army and Navy on 17 August 2013 in Reynosa . 
 = = Early life and career = = 
 Mario Armando Ramírez Treviño was born in Mexico on 5 March 1962 . For many years , he worked under the radar as he ascended in the ranks of the Gulf Cartel . In the early 2000s , he worked with Jaime González Durán ( El Hummer ) , one of the leaders and founders of Los Zetas , an organization that served as the armed wing of the Gulf Cartel . El Hummer was eventually arrested in November 2008 and sentenced to 35 years in prison ; Los Zetas later separated from the Gulf Cartel in early 2010 and went to war with them . But when the two organizations separated , Ramírez Treviño remained loyal to the Gulf Cartel and became the second @-@ in @-@ command in Reynosa , Tamaulipas , an area formerly controlled by the deceased Samuel Flores Borrego ( El Metro 3 ) . He was Flores Borrego 's right @-@ hand man in Reynosa . On 2 September 2011 , however , the Mexican authorities discovered the bullet @-@ ridden corpse of Flores Borrego inside a Ford Lobo truck on a highway that connects Reynosa with Monterrey . Although the information has not been confirmed , the Mexican Army alleges that Ramírez Treviño 's boss was killed by " members of his own cartel , " presumably on orders from the Gulf Cartel leaders Juan Mejía González ( El R @-@ 1 ) and Rafael Cárdenas Vela ( El Junior ) . Within a few hours after his death , Ramírez Treviño , who had been working as the regional boss of Ciudad Victoria , Tamaulipas , succeeded him as the kingpin of Reynosa . The top echelons of the Gulf Cartel gave him " explicit orders to make the [ drug market ] profitable again . " 
 The death of Ramírez Treviño 's boss triggered a war within the Gulf Cartel , resulting in the deaths and arrests of several high @-@ ranking drug traffickers from 2011 to 2013 . When the Gulf Cartel 's top leaders Mario Cárdenas Guillén and Jorge Eduardo Costilla Sánchez were arrested in early September 2012 , Ramírez Treviño decided to step up for the job and become the undisputed leader of the cartel . In efforts to keep the Gulf Cartel under a single command structure , he ordered the assassination of high @-@ ranking drug trafficker El Metro 4 on 15 January 2013 in Reynosa . His death , however , sparked a turf war . 
 = = Reynosa turf wars = = 
 = = = Battle with Miguel " El Gringo " Villarreal = = = 
 On the night of 10 March 2013 , rival factions within the Gulf Cartel clashed when gunmen loyal to Ramírez Treviño and henchmen of Miguel " El Gringo " Villarreal , another high @-@ ranking drug trafficker , battled in a three @-@ hour gunfight in Reynosa , paralyzing the avenues and streets of the city while the Mexican Armed Forces missed most of the fighting . When the melee ended , the Mexican government initially confirmed two civilian deaths , but unofficial reports suggested that around 40 Gulf Cartel gunmen were reportedly killed ; the number may possibly be higher , considering that the cartel members were reported to have carried away the corpse of their fallen comrades in their vehicles . In the shootout , unofficial reports claimed that El Gringo 's ally , Jesús García Román ( El Puma ) , was killed . And that high @-@ ranking Gulf Cartel leader Sergio <unk> Silva ( Comandante Cortez ) , who heads the faction known as Los <unk> ( The Zeros ) , confronted El Gringo and his forces . 
 Ramírez Treviño and El Gringo vied for the control of the drug trade operations in Reynosa , but the former had taken the overall command of the Gulf Cartel and had committed himself to kill anyone that he considered his enemy , which included El Gringo . In order to put him down , Ramírez Treviño ordered his men to " erase everything and [ kill ] everyone that had ties El Gringo " , thereby creating a single structure among the cartel 's commanders . With the help of the Sinaloa Cartel , Ramírez Treviño was planning to oust El Gringo for reportedly failing to stay low @-@ profile in Reynosa , and for considering him a " bloodthirsty " leader . In addition , he distrusted El Gringo because he had ties with his rival Juan Mejía González ( El R1 ) . Stratfor indicates that the infighting between both men might have triggered after El Gringo allegedly betrayed the Gulf Cartel and started working with Heriberto Lazcano Lazcano ( El <unk> ) , the deceased leader of the rival Los Zetas cartel . Intelligence reports indicate that the infighting between Ramírez Treviño and El Gringo left at least 60 dead throughout the state of Tamaulipas in March 2013 , particularly in Miguel Alemán and Camargo , Tamaulipas . 
 After several prolonged battles for the control of Reynosa , Ramírez Treviño became the top leader of the Gulf Cartel in 2013 , a position he had been vying since the drug lords Costilla Sánchez and Cárdenas Guillén were arrested in late 2012 . Although the information has not been officially confirmed , Stratfor intelligence agency suggests that El Gringo and several of his top associates were killed in the infighting on 10 March 2013 . 
 = = Bounty and status = = 
 According to the United States Department of State , Ramírez Treviño is 1 @.@ 73 m ( 5 ft 8 in ) tall , and weighs approximately 90 @.@ 1 kilograms ( 200 lbs ) . He has black @-@ colored hair and brown eyes , and his aliases are X @-@ 20 , Comandante X @-@ 20 ( " Commander X @-@ 20 " ) , Pelón ( " Baldy " ) , and / or Mario Pelón . 
 Ramírez Treviño was an active participant and coordinator of cocaine and marijuana shipments heading to the United States from Mexico . He is also involved in moving large sums of money from drug sales heading back to Mexico from the U.S. through the Reynosa corridor . He was also the leader of Los Metros , a Gulf Cartel subgroup . In 2008 , he was charged with a federal indictment in the District of Columbia for violations of Title 21 USC Sections 959 , 960 , 963 , and Title 18 USC Section 2 . The United States Department of State was offering up to US $ 5 million for information leading to his arrest and / or conviction . Mexico , however , did not have him on its most @-@ wanted list and was not offering any financial reward for information leading to his arrest . 
 His criminal profile portrays Ramírez Treviño as a violent , cold @-@ blooded , and intelligent criminal . Assassins who have worked for him say that the drug lord enjoyed spending time alone , gambling , and drinking ; they also say that he was an introvert and was easily frustrated . To instill fear among his enemies and respect among his men , Ramírez Treviño reportedly tortured his victims . He was considered " at least as violent " as former Zetas leader Miguel Treviño Morales . 
 = = = Kingpin Act sanction = = = 
 On 24 March 2010 , the United States Department of the Treasury sanctioned Ramírez Treviño under the Foreign Narcotics Kingpin Designation Act ( sometimes referred to simply as the " Kingpin Act " ) , for his involvement in drug trafficking along with fifty @-@ three other international criminals and ten foreign entities . The act prohibited U.S. citizens and companies from doing any kind of business activity with him , and virtually froze all his assets in the U.S. 
 = = Months prior to arrest = = 
 After Los Zetas leader Miguel Treviño Morales ( alias <unk> ) was arrested in July 2013 , the authorities speculated that Ramírez Treviño was planning to lead the Gulf Cartel into new grounds by retaking the turfs controlled by Los Zetas , their former allies , in northeastern Mexico . With a new armed squad known as Los Deltas ( a parallel version of what Los Zetas was for the Gulf Cartel prior to their separation ) , the drug lord was planning to fight off Los Zetas at a border area known as " La Frontera Chica , " which encompasses Miguel Alemán , Camargo and Ciudad Mier – directly across the U.S @-@ Mexico border from Starr County , Texas . Other crime specialists believed that Ramírez Treviño stood a chance of reunifying the Gulf Cartel and Los Zetas as they were in early 2010 . 
 = = = Capture = = = 
 Ramírez Treviño was arrested during a joint operation between the Mexican Army and Navy in Reynosa , Tamaulipas on the morning of 17 August 2013 . In the operative the federal agents confiscated three assault rifles , nine communication equipment , and more than US $ 38 @,@ 000 and $ 25 @,@ 000 pesos ( about US $ 2 @,@ 000 ) . They also arrested the drug lord with two of his bodyguards . The Mexican federal government first confirmed the arrest of the drug lord via Twitter and then issued a short statement of the operative , but did not offer major details until the following day during a formal press conference . That same day , he was flown from the General Lucio Blanco International Airport in Reynosa to Mexico City under tight security and kept at the <unk> installations , Mexico 's organized crime investigatory agency . The government responded to the arrest by strengthening security and increasing the presence of federal troops in northeastern Mexico in order to neutralize any incursion from rival criminal organizations like Los Zetas in the region . On 21 August 2013 , he was transferred to the Federal Social Readaptation Center No. 1 maximum security prison in Almoloya de Juárez , State of Mexico by the Mexican Army . 
 The Mexican government has not officially confirmed the existence of a successor to Ramírez Treviño 's reign . However , the most rumored name is Homero Cárdenas Guillén ( El <unk> ) , the brother of the former leaders Osiel and Antonio . According to U.S. sources , there are three other possible leaders for the Gulf Cartel : Luis Alberto Trinidad Cerón ( El <unk> ) ; Juan Francisco <unk> ( El 98 ) ; and Alberto de la Cruz Álvarez ( El <unk> ) . 
 = Super Mario 64 = 
 Super Mario 64 ( Japanese : <unk> , Hepburn : Sūpā Mario Rokujūyon ) is a 1996 platform video game developed and published by Nintendo for the Nintendo 64 . Along with Pilotwings 64 , it was one of the launch titles for the console . It was released in Japan on June 23 , 1996 , and later in North America , Europe , and Australia . It is the best @-@ selling game on the Nintendo 64 , with more than eleven million copies sold . An enhanced remake called Super Mario 64 DS was released for the Nintendo DS in 2004 . 
 In the game , Mario explores Princess Peach 's castle and must rescue her from Bowser . As one of the earlier three @-@ dimensional ( 3D ) platform games , Super Mario 64 is based on open world playability , degrees of freedom through all three axes in space , and relatively large areas which are composed primarily of true 3D polygons as opposed to only two @-@ dimensional ( 2D ) sprites . The game established a new archetype for the 3D genre , much as Super Mario Bros. did for 2D sidescrolling platformers . In the evolution from two dimensions to three , Super Mario 64 places an emphasis on exploration within vast worlds that require the player to complete multiple diverse missions , in addition to the occasional linear obstacle courses as in traditional platform games . While doing so , it still preserves many gameplay elements and characters of earlier Mario games . 
 The game has left a lasting impression on 3D game design , particularly notable for its use of a dynamic camera system and the implementation of its 360 @-@ degree analog control . The title is acclaimed by many critics and fans as one of the greatest and most revolutionary video games of all time . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Super Mario 64 is a 3D platformer where the player controls Mario through several courses . Each course is an enclosed world in which the player is free to wander in all directions and discover the environment without time limits . The worlds are filled with enemies that attack Mario , as well as friendly creatures that provide assistance , offer information , or ask a favor ( such as pink " peace @-@ loving " Bob @-@ omb Buddies ) . The player gathers stars in each course ; some stars only appear after completing certain tasks , often hinted at by the name of the course . These challenges include defeating a boss , solving puzzles , racing an opponent , and gathering coins . As more stars are collected , more areas of the castle hub world become accessible . The player unlocks doors in the castle with keys obtained by defeating Bowser in special courses . There are many hidden mini @-@ courses and other secrets to the game , most containing extra stars required for the full completion of the game . 
 There are three special cap power @-@ ups appear in certain areas on many stages . The Wing Cap allows Mario to fly ; the Metal Cap makes him immune to most damage , allows him to withstand wind , walk underwater , and be unaffected by noxious gases ; and the Vanish Cap renders him partially immaterial and allows him to walk through some obstacles such as wire mesh , as well as granting invulnerability to some forms of damage . Some courses contain cannons that Mario can access by speaking to a pink Bob @-@ omb Buddy . After entering a cannon , Mario can be shot out to reach distant places . When the player has the Wing Cap equipped , cannons can be used to reach high altitudes or fly across most levels quickly . 
 Mario 's abilities in Super Mario 64 are far more diverse than those of previous Mario games . The player can make Mario walk , run , jump , crouch , crawl , swim , climb , kick , or punch using the game controller 's analog stick and buttons . Special jumps can be executed by combining a regular jump with other actions , including the double and triple jumps ( jumping two and three times in a row , respectively ) , long jump and backflip . There are also special maneuvers , such as wall jumping — jumping from one wall to another in rapid succession to reach areas that would otherwise be too high . The player can pick up and carry certain items , an ability which is used to solve various puzzles , and swim underwater at various speeds . Mario 's life energy slowly diminishes while underwater , representing how long he can hold his breath . 
 = = Plot and setting = = 
 Super Mario 64 is set in Princess Peach 's Castle , which consists of three floors , a basement , a moat , and a courtyard . The area outside the castle is an introductory area in which the player can experiment , testing his or her player skills . Scattered throughout the castle are entrances to courses via secret walls and paintings . Super Mario 64 begins with a letter from Princess Peach inviting Mario to come to her castle for a cake she has baked for him . However , when he arrives , Mario discovers that Bowser has invaded the castle and imprisoned the princess and her servants within it using the power of the castle 's 120 Power Stars . Many of the castle 's paintings are portals to other worlds , in which Bowser 's minions keep watch over the stars . Mario explores the castle for these portals to enter the worlds and recover the stars . He gains access to more rooms as he recovers more Power Stars , and eventually traverses three different obstacle courses , each leading to its own battle with Bowser . Defeating Bowser the first two times earns Mario a key for opening another level of the castle . After Mario defeats Bowser in the final battle , Peach is released from the stained @-@ glass window above the castle 's entrance . Peach rewards Mario by kissing him on the nose and baking the cake that she had promised him . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Concept = = = 
 The development of Super Mario 64 took less than two years during the development of the Nintendo 64 gaming system and the Super Nintendo Entertainment System era , but producer and director Shigeru Miyamoto stated that he had conceived of a 3D Mario game concept more than five years prior , while working on Star Fox . He considered utilizing the Super FX chip in order to develop a proposed Super Nintendo Entertainment System game to be called Super Mario FX , but instead retargeted the idea to the Nintendo 64 . This was not due to the former system 's technical limitations , but because the N64 controller has more buttons for gameplay . According to former Argonaut engineer Dylan Cuthbert , a game titled Super Mario FX had never reached development status , and that " Super Mario FX " had been used as the internal code name of the Super FX chip itself . 
 According to Jez San , the ultimate design of Super Mario 64 was influenced by a prototype of Argonaut Software 's cancelled 3D platform game starring Yoshi that later became Croc : Legend of the <unk> . 
 = = = Design = = = 
 The game 's development began with the creation of the characters and camera system . Miyamoto and the other designers were initially unsure of which direction the game should take ; months were spent selecting a camera view and layout that would be appropriate . The original concept involved the game having fixed path much like an isometric type game ( similar to Super Mario RPG ) , before the choice was made to settle on a free @-@ roaming 3D design . Although the majority of Super Mario 64 would end up featuring the free @-@ roaming design , elements of the original fixed path concept would remain in certain parts of the game , particularly in the three Bowser encounters . One of the programmers of Super Mario 64 , Giles Goddard , explained that these few linear elements survived as a means to force players into Bowser 's lair rather than to encourage exploration . 
 The development team placed high priority on getting Mario 's movements right , and before levels were created , the team was testing and refining Mario 's animations on a simple grid . The first test scenario for controls and physics involved Mario interacting with a golden rabbit named " MIPS " for the Nintendo 64 's MIPS architecture CPU , who was included in the final release of the game . The developers initially tried to make the game split screen co @-@ op using both Mario and Luigi . Initially , the two characters would start at separate points in the castle and work their way through the game together . However , developers were unable to make the gameplay work . 
 One unique challenge that the team encountered early on was related to depth perception , which the team remedied by provisioning a shadow directly beneath each object regardless of the area 's lighting . Developer Yoshiaki Koizumi would go on to call this feature an " iron @-@ clad necessity " which " might not be realistic , but it ’ s much easier to play . " 
 Miyamoto 's guiding design philosophy behind Super Mario 64 was to " include more details " than found in games prior to the Nintendo 64 , featuring " an entire world in miniature , like miniature trains " with " all the emotions of the characters " . Some details were inspired by the developers ' personal lives . For example , the Boos are based on assistant director Takashi Tezuka 's wife , who , as Miyamoto explained , " is very quiet normally , but one day she exploded , maddened by all the time Tezuka spent at work . In the game , there is now a character which shrinks when Mario looks at it , but when Mario turns away , it will grow large and menacing . " 
 Super Mario 64 features more puzzles than earlier Mario games . It was developed simultaneously with The Legend of Zelda : Ocarina of Time , but as Ocarina of Time was released more than two years later , some puzzles were taken from that game for Super Mario 64 . Information about Super Mario 64 first leaked out in November 1995 , and a playable version of the game was presented days later as part of the world premiere for the Nintendo 64 ( then known as the " Ultra 64 " ) at Nintendo Space World . At this point , the basic controls had been implemented and the game was reportedly 50 % finished , featuring 32 courses , although about 2 % of mapping was complete . Miyamoto thought he could create more courses , up to 40 plus bonus levels . However , the actual number turned out much lower in the final game , as only 15 courses could fit . According to Nintendo of America chairman Howard Lincoln , Miyamoto 's desire to put more into Super Mario 64 was a major factor in the decision to push the Nintendo 64 's release date back from Christmas 1995 to April 1996 . 
 = = = Audio = = = 
 The music was composed by veteran composer Koji Kondo , who created new interpretations of the familiar melodies from earlier games as well as entirely new material . Super Mario 64 is one of the first games in the series to feature Charles Martinet as the voice of Mario . It also features the voices of Leslie Swan ( then Senior Editor of Nintendo Power ) as Princess Peach , who also wrote the English text for the game . 
 = = = = Track list = = = = 
 = = Reception = = 
 Super Mario 64 received widespread critical acclaim and is the best @-@ selling Nintendo 64 game . By May 2003 , eleven million copies had been sold . Super Mario 64 had become the second most popular title on Wii 's Virtual Console by June 2007 , behind Super Mario Bros. 
 The game has been praised in the gaming press , and is still highly acclaimed . It has collected numerous awards , including various " Game of the Year " honors by members of the gaming media , as well as Nintendo 's own best @-@ selling Player 's Choice selection . In addition , Super Mario 64 has been placed high on " the greatest games of all time " lists by many reviewers , including IGN , Game Informer , Edge , Yahoo ! Games , GameFAQs users , and Nintendo Power . Electronic Gaming Monthly awarded the game a Gold award in its initial review , and in Edge magazine , Super Mario 64 was the first game to receive a perfect score . British magazine Maximum gave it their " Maximum Game of the Month Award " , making it the only import game ( since Super Mario 64 had not yet been released outside Japan ) to win that honor , and attested it to be the greatest game the magazine had ever reviewed . Game Informer initially rated the game a 9 @.@ 75 , but re @-@ rated it a 9 @.@ 0 a decade later in a " Retro Review " . The Japanese gaming magazine Famitsu rated Super Mario 64 a 39 / 40 . Common praise focused on the presentation , while criticism was directed at the camera system . Nintendo Power lauded the graphics , sound , and gameplay , but commented the shifting camera angle took getting used to . Next Generation Magazine praised many aspects of the game : musical score , graphics , lack of loading times , and the scale of the game , though they commented that the game is less accessible than previous Mario titles , citing the camera 's occasional , erratic movements and lack of optimal angle as frustrating . Maximum found the game 's strongest points to be its sense of freedom and the fact that revisiting levels unearths new areas and challenges . 
 Video game publications and developers praised Super Mario 64 for its design and use of the 3D gameplay . The game is counted by 1UP.com as one of the first games to have brought a series of 2D games into full 3D . Maximum commented that " The old 2D platform genre is essentially dead with the arrival of this game . The limitations inherent with the genre have been swept away in the wake of Mario 64 . " In the transition to 3D , many of the series conventions were rethought drastically , placing an emphasis on exploration over traditional platform jumping , or " hop and bop " action . While its quality was disputed by some , it has been argued that it established an entirely new genre , different from that of previous games in the series . Time Magazine focused on the realistic kinetic animation and the controls provided by the integration of the new pressure @-@ sensitive controller into the game , calling it the " fastest , smoothest game action yet attainable via joystick at the service of equally virtuoso motion " , where " [ f ] or once , the movement on the screen feels real " . 
 GameSpot called it one of the 15 most influential games of all time , and rated the Nintendo 64 version a score of 9 @.@ 4 and the Wii Virtual Console version an 8 . Game Informer commented that even a decade later the game still offers hours of entertainment . They also commented on the camera system , stating that by present @-@ day standards the camera system " would almost be considered broken " . Game Revolution 's retrospective review referred to the graphics as " beautiful " , but criticized the camera angles , saying " it doesn 't work as well as it should " . The game placed 6th in Official Nintendo Magazine 's " 100 greatest Nintendo games of all time " . In 2009 , Game Informer put Super Mario 64 13th on their list of " The Top 200 Games of All Time " . Official Nintendo Magazine referred to the game as a " masterpiece of game design " , stating that Nintendo was able to take its " number @-@ one 2D franchise and convert it flawlessly into 3D " . Michael <unk> of Liquid Entertainment stated he was initially " very turned off " by the openness of the game the first time he played it . Upon playing it later , he was " highly pleased " and stated " each level brought some new unique cool gameplay element and I was never bored " . Warren Spector , former lead designer at Ion Storm , stated it was " not possible to squeeze this much gameplay into a single game " and " no game has done a better job of showing goals before they can be attained , allowing players to make a plan and execute on it " . He also praised the exploration aspect of the game , commenting that " [ allowing players to ] explore the same spaces several times while revealing something new each time is a revelation " . 
 = = Impact and legacy = = 
 Critics acknowledge Super Mario 64 as a key contributor to the anticipation , and initial success , of the Nintendo 64 console . Though the system was initially very successful , it eventually lost much of its market share to Sony 's PlayStation . 1UP.com attributed this decline to Nintendo 's use of cartridges and the design of the Nintendo 64 controller , which were reportedly implemented by Miyamoto for Super Mario 64 . 
 The game also set many precedents for 3D platformers to follow . GameDaily listed the game as one of the " Most Influential Video Games " and stated it " defined the 3 @-@ D platform experience , influencing numerous designers to create their own , original offerings " . GamesTM noted many game companies , including Nintendo , have tried to develop a platform game to match up to Super Mario 64 . Nintendo 's first party developer , Rare , reflected in 2013 that during the development of 2001 's Conker 's Bad Fur Day , they had originally drawn inspiration from their deep analysis of the gameplay and camera mechanics of Super Mario 64 : " We were just copying Mario , weren 't we ? Which , to this day , is still the best 3D camera . " Super Mario 64 is notable for its sense of freedom and non @-@ linearity . A central hub , where controls can be learned before entering levels themselves , has been used in many 3D platformers since . In addition , the game 's mission @-@ based level design is an inspiration for other game designers . Martin Hollis , who produced and directed GoldenEye 007 , says " the idea for the huge variety of missions within a level came from Super Mario 64 " . In 2012 , Dan Houser , a prominent figure in the development of the Grand Theft Auto series , stated , " Anyone who makes 3D games who says they 've not borrowed something from Mario or Zelda [ on the Nintendo 64 ] is lying . " Tetsuya Nomura , a leading designer at Square Enix , stated in 2016 that Super Mario 64 was the impetus for the creation of the Kingdom Hearts series . 
 Super Mario 64 is the first game to have a " free " camera that can be controlled independently of the character . Most 3D games from the time use a first @-@ person perspective , or a camera that is fixed in position relative to the player 's character , or to the level . To create freedom of exploration , and more fluid control in a 3D world , the designers created a dynamic system in which the video camera is operated by the in @-@ game character Lakitu . The camera system would become the standard for 3D platform games in the future . Nintendo Power stated the camera @-@ control scheme is what transitioned platform games into three dimensions , and that the game , along with The Legend of Zelda : Ocarina of Time , " blazed trails " into the 3D era . Along with camera control , the game also innovated in its implementation of movement . Edge stated the game changed " gamers ' expectations of 3D movement forever " . The Nintendo 64 's analog stick allows for more precise and wide @-@ ranging character movements than the digital D @-@ pads of other consoles , and Super Mario 64 uses this in a way that was unique for its time . At the time , 3D games generally allowed for controls in which the player could either control the character in relation to a fixed camera angle or in relation to the character 's perspective . Super Mario 64 's controls are fully analog , and interpret a 360 @-@ degree range of motion into navigation through a 3D space relative to the camera . The analog stick also allows for precise control over subtleties such as the speed at which Mario runs . Super Mario 64 was one of the first games to implement the system . 
 Because of the game 's popularity , rumors about glitches and secrets spread rapidly after its release . A common rumor was that Luigi was a secret character in the game , fueled by illegible symbols in the castle courtyard that were said to resemble the text " L is real <unk> " . This same texture would reappear in The Legend of Zelda : Ocarina of Time on a plaque in <unk> 's Cavern . IGN received so many questions and supposed methods to unlock Luigi that the staff offered a US $ 100 reward to anyone who could prove that Luigi was in the game . The number of false codes submitted to IGN dropped dramatically , as Luigi 's inclusion was proved to be a myth . The April Fools ' Day 1998 issue of Nintendo Power claims that the cryptic phrase would be discussed on the non @-@ existent page 128 , and also features a facetious article titled " Luigi 64 " , commenting humorously on the rumor . 
 On May 5 , 2011 , Super Mario 64 was selected as one of the 80 games to be displayed at the Smithsonian American Art Museum as part of " The Art of Video Games " exhibit that opened on March 16 , 2012 . 
 = = Re @-@ releases and remakes = = 
 A 64DD version of the original game was created only for demonstration of the prototype drive 's operation and performance at the 1996 Nintendo Space World trade show . Nintendo of America 's Chairman Howard Lincoln explained , " Super Mario 64 is running on the 64DD right now . First they weren 't going to show anything on 64DD , but they decided at the last minute to have a game people recognize . " 
 Like Wave Race 64 , Super Mario 64 was re @-@ released in Japan on July 18 , 1997 , as Super Mario 64 Shindō Pak <unk> Version ( <unk> <unk> ) . This version adds support for Nintendo 's Rumble Pak peripheral and includes the voice acting from the English version . In 1998 , Super Mario 64 was re @-@ released in Europe and North America as part of the Player 's Choice line , a selection of games with high sales sold for a reduced price . The game was later released on the Wii 's Virtual Console service in the United States on November 19 , 2006 , and in other territories the following weeks . This release adds compatibility with the GameCube and Classic controllers , and enhances the resolution to 480p . 
 An enhanced remake for the Nintendo DS called Super Mario 64 DS was available for the launch of the handheld system in 2004 . Yoshi , Luigi , and Wario are additional playable characters , and the game features slightly altered graphics , courses , touchscreen mini @-@ games , and a multiplayer mode . In addition , the number of Power Stars has been raised from 120 to 150 . Reviews were mostly positive , and by March 2008 , 6 @.@ 12 million copies of Super Mario 64 DS had been sold worldwide . 
 In 2015 , a fan remake of Super Mario 64 was created called Super Mario 64 HD . The project was later taken down due to a copyright claim by Nintendo . 
 = = Sequels = = 
 A direct sequel titled Super Mario 64 2 was planned for the Nintendo 64DD . Miyamoto mentioned at E3 's 1997 convention that he was " just getting started " on the project . In May 1999 , Super Mario 64 2 was reported to be released in late 1999 ; however , the game was canceled due to the failure of the 64DD , as well as lack of progress in the game 's development . 
 Instead , Super Mario 64 was followed by other sequels on subsequent Nintendo systems , such as Super Mario Sunshine for the GameCube and Super Mario Galaxy for the Wii . The sequels built on Super Mario 64 's core design of enhancement items and open ended gameplay . One sequel , Super Mario Galaxy 2 , features a remake of the Whomp 's Fortress level . 
 = Purple heron = 
 The purple heron ( Ardea purpurea ) is a wide ranging species of wading bird in the heron family , Ardeidae . The scientific name comes from Latin <unk> " heron " , and purpureus , " coloured purple " . It breeds in Africa , central and southern Europe , and southern and eastern Asia . The Western Palearctic populations migrate between breeding and wintering habitats whereas the African and tropical @-@ Asian populations are primarily sedentary , except for occasional dispersive movements . 
 It is similar in appearance to the more common grey heron but is slightly smaller , more slender and has darker plumage . It is also a more evasive bird , favouring densely vegetated habitats near water , particularly reed beds . It hunts for a range of prey including fish , rodents , frogs and insects , either stalking them or standing waiting in ambush . 
 Purple herons are colonial breeders and build a bulky nest out of dead reeds or sticks close to the water ' edge among reeds or in dense vegetation . About five bluish @-@ green eggs are laid and are incubated by both birds . The young hatch about four weeks later and fledge six weeks after that . The International Union for Conservation of Nature notes that the global population trend is downwards , largely because of the drainage of wetlands , but assesses the purple heron 's conservation status as being of " least concern " . 
 = = Description = = 
 The purple heron is a large bird , 78 – 97 cm ( 31 – 38 in ) in length with a standing height from 70 to 94 cm ( 28 to 37 in ) and a 120 – 152 cm ( 47 – 60 in ) wingspan . However , it is slender for its size , weighing only 0 @.@ 5 to 1 @.@ 35 kg ( 1 @.@ 1 to 3 @.@ 0 lb ) . It is somewhat smaller than the grey heron , from which it can be distinguished by its darker reddish @-@ brown plumage , and , in adults , its darker grey back . Adults have the forehead and the crown of the head black , with a dark stripe down the back of the neck that terminates in a slender , dangling crest . This is shorter than the crest of the grey heron and does not exceed 140 mm ( 5 @.@ 5 in ) . The sides of the head and the neck are buffish @-@ chestnut , with dark streaks and lines down either side of the whole the neck . The mantle is oily brown and the upper scapular feathers are elongated but not the lower ones . The rest of the upper parts and the tail are brownish @-@ grey . The front of the neck is paler than the sides and there are some elongated feathers at the base of the neck which are streaked with white , chestnut and black . The breast is chestnut brown , with some blackening at the side , and the belly and under @-@ tail coverts are black . The brownish @-@ yellow beak is long , straight and powerful , and is brighter in colour in breeding adults . The iris is yellow and the legs are brown at the front and yellowish behind . 
 The call is a harsh " <unk> " , but is quieter and more high @-@ pitched than that of the grey heron . It is generally a less noisy bird , though similar guttural sounds are heard emanating from the heronry . It is also less robust , and appears somewhat hollow @-@ chested . Its head and neck are more slender and snake @-@ like than the grey heron and its toes much longer . Unlike that bird , it often adopts a posture with its neck extending obliquely , and even nestlings tend to use this stance . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 There are three or four subspecies : 
 A. p. purpurea – Linnaeus , 1766 : nominate , found in Africa , Europe north to the Netherlands , and southwestern Asia east to Kazakhstan . 
 A. p. <unk> – de <unk> , 1966 : Bourne 's heron . Found in the Cape Verde Islands ( included in purpurea by some authors , but treated as a distinct species Ardea <unk> by some others ) . 
 A. p. madagascariensis – van Oort , 1910 : found in Madagascar . 
 A. p. <unk> – Meyen , 1834 : found in Asia from Pakistan east to the Philippines and Indonesia , and north to Primorsky Krai , Russia . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The purple heron has a mostly <unk> distribution and breeds in Europe , Asia and Africa . The range of the western race extends from southern Spain and North Africa eastwards across southern and eastern Europe as far as Lake Balkhash in Kazakhstan , with a separate population in Pakistan . In Africa , the bird breeds in Senegal , down the east coast of Africa and in Madagascar . The eastern race extends from the Indian Subcontinent , eastwards to eastern China and the Philippines , and northwards to the basins of the Amur River and the Ussuri River at about 49 ° N. The southern race is restricted to Madagascar , and a small population of purple herons on the Cape Verde Islands is regarded as a separate race by some authorities . 
 Between August and October , birds of the western population migrate southwards to tropical Africa , returning northwards in March . A few birds are reported to overwinter in Baluchistan . Purple herons often overshoot their normal range on their return , and are vagrants to northern Europe including Britain . The eastern population is largely resident , though some birds from the northern part of the range fly southwards to Korea , Thailand and Malaysia . The African birds are resident . 
 The purple heron inhabits marshes , lagoons and lakes surrounded by dense vegetation . It may frequent mangrove swamps on the coast but it usually chooses freshwater habitats , particularly locations with reed beds ( Phragmites ) . It also visits mudflats , river banks , ditches and canals . In the Cape Verde Islands , it is more likely to be seen in the open , on arid slopes . 
 = = Behaviour = = 
 Flight is slow , with the neck retracted and the legs extending a long way behind the tail . This is characteristic of herons and bitterns , and distinguishes them from storks , cranes and spoonbills , which extend their necks in flight . It is a secretive bird , spending less time out in the open than the grey heron and tending to skulk in reed beds . Its long toes mean it can walk on floating vegetation , and it sometimes walks over bushes in the same way , not making any attempt to grip the branches . It seldom perches in trees , preferring more terrestrial sites to rest . 
 It is most active at dawn and dusk , roosting with other birds in the middle of the day and at night , but increasing its diurnal activity while rearing young . It feeds in shallow water , grabbing its prey with its powerful beak . It will often wait motionless for prey , or slowly stalk its victim . The diet consists mainly of fish , small mammals and amphibians , but nestling birds , snakes , lizards , crustaceans , water snails , insects and spiders are also eaten . Terrestrial beetles are the commonest insect prey , followed by water beetles and aquatic larvae , with grasshoppers , dragonflies , bees and flies also being consumed . 
 The purple heron usually breeds in colonies but sometimes the nests are solitary . It sometimes associates with other species such as the goliath heron ( Ardea goliath ) or grey heron at multi @-@ species nesting colonies . The site chosen is generally in reed beds , <unk> or low bushes close to large lakes or other extensive wetlands . It builds a bulky nest of dead reeds , sticks or whatever is available , carelessly pulling the material together . The eggs are bluish @-@ green , averaging 56 by 45 mm ( 2 @.@ 20 by 1 @.@ 77 in ) . The clutch is usually four or five eggs , with occasionally seven or eight eggs being laid , though these large clutches may have resulted from two females laying in the same nest . The eggs are laid at intervals of three days , and incubation may begin with the first egg , or start when the clutch is complete . Both parents share the incubation , which lasts between 24 and 28 days , and the care of the young . When an adult brings food , its beak is dragged down by the chicks and it regurgitates food from the crop onto the nest , or the young may take food directly from the beak . The young fledge at about six weeks and become independent at two months . They then disperse widely . 
 = = Status = = 
 There are estimated to be a total of between 270 @,@ 000 and 570 @,@ 000 purple herons in the world and the population is probably decreasing slowly . The International Union for Conservation of Nature has assessed its conservation status as being of " least concern because the rate of decline is insufficient to justify rating it in a more threatened category . The chief threat the bird faces is drainage and disturbance of its wetland habitats , particularly destruction of the reed beds . The purple heron is one of the species to which the Agreement on the Conservation of African @-@ Eurasian Migratory Waterbirds ( AEWA ) applies . 
 = Barry Goldwater presidential campaign , 1964 = 
 The Barry Goldwater presidential campaign of 1964 began when United States Senator Barry Goldwater of Arizona elected to seek the Republican Party nomination for President of the United States to challenge incumbent Democratic President Lyndon B. Johnson . Early on , before officially announcing his candidacy for the presidency , Goldwater was accused by Governor of New York Nelson Rockefeller of attempting to galvanize southern and western Republican support while neglecting the industrial northern states , eventually becoming one of Goldwater 's primary opponents in the race for the Republican Party 's nomination in 1964 . 
 Amid growing popularity in the southern states in the early 1960s , Goldwater had been anticipating and looking forward to an " issue @-@ oriented " campaign against Democrat John F. Kennedy , a personal friend of his . Goldwater , who was an aviator by hobby , wished to fly about the country in an attempt to revive whistle stop train tour @-@ style debates . Kennedy 's assassination in November 1963 dashed Goldwater 's hopes of an election contest between himself and his friend and political rival . Nevertheless , Goldwater officially announced his candidacy for the presidency in January 1964 from the patio of his Arizona home . Following a battle with moderate and liberal Republicans in the Republican primary , such as Nelson Rockefeller and with moderate conservatives such as William Scranton among others , Goldwater won the party 's nomination for president . 
 From the beginning of his campaign , Goldwater fought an uphill battle to unseat an incumbent president under favorable economic circumstances . Goldwater consistently refused to moderate his views , which alienated a significant portion of the more moderate wing of the Republican party from his campaign . With the assistance of the media , who in large part also had an unfavorable opinion of Goldwater , President Johnson used this fissure in the party to portray him as an extremist . In the general election , Goldwater lost in a landslide to Lyndon Johnson , carrying only six states to Johnson 's 44 and 38 % of the popular vote to Johnson 's 61 % . 
 = = Background = = 
 Barry Goldwater 's executive experience stretched back to 1929 , when he took over his family 's department store chain " Goldwater 's " after finishing one year at the University of Arizona . By 1937 , he became president of the chain and was chairman of the board by 1953 . Goldwater began active duty in the United States Army Air Forces just prior to the American entrance into World War II , and was deployed to India . In 1945 , he was discharged from active duty as a Lieutenant Colonel in piloting and went on to organize the Arizona National Guard . By 1959 , he had attained the rank of Brigadier General in the Air Force Reserve Command , and was a Major General by 1962 . 
 Goldwater began his political career in 1949 when he was elected to the city council of Phoenix with a focus on eliminating rampant gambling and prostitution . Three years later , he ran for the U.S. Senate as a member of the Republican Party and unseated incumbent Democrat Ernest McFarland , who had served in the body since 1941 . After winning re @-@ election in 1958 against McFarland , who was heavily funded by labor unions , critics hailed Goldwater as the conservative successor of Robert A. Taft . His political stock rose significantly two years later when he ran his first campaign for president and published the widely circulated book The Conscience of a Conservative . In the book , Goldwater criticized the effectiveness of the " radical , or Liberal , approach " to politics and discussed many contemporary issues that divided the nation at the time including civil rights and the welfare state . After publication , it rose to the top of many national bestseller lists . 
 On the right wing of the Republican party , some of Goldwater 's political positions included anti @-@ communism , an emphasis on total victory in war and opposition to high taxes and government spending . He often criticized the politics of some of his more moderate contemporaries , including President Dwight D. Eisenhower . He criticized some aspects of Eisenhower 's economic policy , citing his failure to balance the federal budget . After being written off as too right @-@ wing to successfully wage a successful presidential campaign , Goldwater actively supported Richard Nixon 's campaign against John F. Kennedy in the 1960 presidential election . 
 = = Early stages = = 
 = = = Suite 3505 Committee = = = 
 In 1961 , a group of twenty @-@ two conservatives including Congressman John M. Ashbrook of Ohio , lawyer William A. Rusher and scholar F. Clifton White met privately in Chicago to discuss the formation of a grassroots organization to secure the nomination of a conservative at the 1964 Republican National Convention . They budgeted $ 65 @,@ 000 for the first year of activities and split the U.S. into nine geographic regions , appointing a director for each to build an organization and influence the local Republican Party . The main headquarters for the organization were established at Suite 3505 of the <unk> Building in New York City , leading members to refer to themselves as the " Suite 3505 Committee " . They decided to wait until after the 1962 mid @-@ term elections to choose a favored candidate . Following the election , they formally backed Goldwater , who upon hearing the news after a leak in January 1963 , notified the group that he did not wish to begin a campaign . As a result , three months later , they established the " Draft Goldwater Committee " headed by Texas Republican Party Chairman Peter O 'Donnell of Dallas . The committee helped to win over state delegations by filling caucuses with supporters in the American West and negotiating with party leaders in the Midwest . The group also laid the foundation for the Southern strategy by essentially creating the Republican parties of the Deep South and overthrowing the Democratic patronage system . John Grenier , the former Alabama Republican Party chairman and the committee 's southern regional coordinator , was responsible for the Republican organization in the South . 
 = = = Groundwork = = = 
 Throughout 1963 , the media speculated about a potential presidential run by Goldwater . Grassroots efforts heightened as well , climaxing with a July 4 rally in Washington D.C. attended by 8 @,@ 000 supporters . Shortly thereafter , Goldwater hinted at a possible presidential candidacy and explained to the " Draft Goldwater Committee " that he planned to use his own staff if he decided to run . In late October , he speculated that he could open his candidacy in January 1964 and campaign extensively in New Hampshire ahead of the state 's first @-@ in @-@ the @-@ nation primary . To lay the groundwork , he named former Eisenhower aide Edward A. McCabe as Research Director to lead a team of economists and political scientists to formulate policy positions and speeches . McCabe worked under longtime Goldwater adviser Denison <unk> , who officially worked as the campaign manager of Goldwater 's Senate re @-@ election , and would eventually be named as the campaign manager of the presidential run . Around this time , an AP poll showed that 85 @.@ 1 percent of Republicans believed Goldwater was the " strongest candidate " for the party , cementing his place as front @-@ runner . Meanwhile , a Gallup poll showed that former Vice President Richard Nixon , who had not shown an interest in the Republican nomination after losing the 1960 presidential election and the 1962 gubernatorial race in California , led Goldwater , 52 percent to 48 percent among Republicans in a two @-@ way race . With all potential candidates included , Goldwater led with 37 percent support . 
 While he enjoyed enthusiastic support from the conservative movement , Goldwater was opposed by liberals and moderates in the party , particularly New York Governor Nelson Rockefeller , who was also speculated to run for president . He cast Goldwater as an opponent of civil rights and an isolationist that wanted to withdraw from the United Nations . He vowed to stop Goldwater from running , " at all costs " . There were concerns that Goldwater and the more moderate Rockefeller could divide the Republican party , harming the its chances of winning the general election . Goldwater was the perceived leader of a grassroots movement in the American southern , southwestern , and western states staged by the more conservative wing of the party . Rockefeller , on the other hand , disagreed with most of the fiscal and social positions held by Goldwater , advocating a more progressive , mainstream approach to government for the Republican platform . News of Rockefeller 's marriage in May 1963 , eighteen months after he divorced his first wife , to a woman with whom he 'd had a relationship for over five years spread quickly throughout the nation . Initially , Rockefeller 's divorce received little media fanfare ; however , news of his remarriage prompted a considerably negative reaction among many . Rockefeller , who had been leading in the polls over other Republican candidates by a comfortable margin just weeks previously , saw a significant decrease in support for his candidacy . In July 1963 , he made an attempt to regain lost support by taking aim at what he viewed as " extremist groups , " targeting Goldwater specifically . Goldwater responded by accusing Rockefeller of blurring the line separating the Republican and Democratic parties . In attacking Goldwater 's politics and advocating his own , more progressive agenda , Rockefeller said to voters " Americans will not and should not respond to a political creed that cherishes the past solely because it offers an excuse for shutting out the hard facts and difficult tasks of the present . " 
 = = = Changing dynamics = = = 
 The dynamic of the race changed in November 1963 when President Kennedy was assassinated and succeeded by Vice President Lyndon Johnson . Goldwater began to receive hate mail for creating a " climate of hate " , and reconsidered his run for the presidency . He privately remarked that he was relieved he had not committed to forming a campaign since a major loss to Johnson could have damaged the Conservative movement . As a southerner , Johnson would appeal to the rural Protestant bloc that Goldwater hoped to gain against the northern Roman Catholic Kennedy . Word that Goldwater could possibly decide against running caused grassroots supporters to fill his mailboxes with supportive letters . A reluctance on Goldwater 's part could have greatly demoralized the movement and caused proponents to grow bitter . After the conclusion of the official mourning period for President Kennedy , Goldwater went on the attack against the new President , accusing Johnson of playing " politics with Christmas " by twisting the arms of Congressmen to pass a foreign aid bill on Christmas Eve . Goldwater still led among the other potential Republican candidates , but his support had dropped to 25 percent . The goal for Goldwater and the implication of who would receive the nomination for the Republican party , which faced a slim chance of victory in 1964 following Kennedy 's assassination , was a possible shift in the control of the party itself from the " liberal Eastern wing . " Of this , Goldwater told his aides " First let 's take over the party . Then we 'll go from there . " 
 Shortly after the assassination of President John Kennedy , Lyndon Johnson defined the goal of his administration as continuing those of the Kennedy administration in front of Congress . This , among the passages of other controversial bills , included the proposal of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 . Goldwater supported civil rights to varying degrees , but opposed this bill , reasoning that it undermined the sovereignty of the states to govern themselves . His opposition to federal civil rights legislation and advocacy for state sovereignty led to a rise in popularity in the southern states , support that would prove to be indispensable in both Goldwater 's pursuit of the Republican nomination and general election campaign . Goldwater had been leading in polls for the 1964 Republican nomination and had been the target of speculation about whether he would enter the presidential race or seek reelection to the U.S. Senate . Amid this speculation , Goldwater disclosed via a two @-@ paragraph telegram that he would hold a press conference at his Phoenix , Arizona home to announce his " decision , regarding 1964 . " 
 = = Primary campaign = = 
 = = = ' A choice , not an echo ' = = = 
 On Friday , January 20 , 1964 , at the planned press conference from the patio of his home in Phoenix , Goldwater , while on crutches as a consequence of a recent medical procedure , officially announced his intention to seek the Republican nomination for the office of President of the United States . In his campaign announcement speech , Goldwater justified his candidacy by stating that he had " not heard from any announced Republican candidate a declaration of conscience or of political position that could possibly offer to the American people a clear choice in the next presidential election . " He emphasized the need for a federal government that is " limited and balanced and against the ever increasing concentrations of authority in Washington " that encourages personal responsibility among American citizens while pledging his candidacy to " victory for principle and to presenting an opportunity for the American people to choose . " He promised " a choice , not an echo " in the election , and positioned himself to the right of Nelson Rockefeller , who had announced his candidacy two months prior . 
 Supporters were excited by the entrance of Goldwater , and predicted that he would take the south from the Democratic column . Two days after the announcement , he appeared on Meet the Press , but was uncomfortable from previous foot surgery . Critics Rowland Evans and Robert Novak noted that even Goldwater supporters deemed the interview a " flop " . Hoping to make up for the setback , he left for New Hampshire , beginning a 19 @-@ day campaign swing , ahead of the state 's March 10 primary . At every stop , including his first major campaign speech at St. Anselm College , Goldwater criticized President Johnson for his liberal policies and expansion of the federal government . He asserted that Johnson was trying to appeal to Washington insiders as a New Deal liberal , while hoping to present himself to the public as a conservative . He argued that Johnson was compelled to continue the programs of the Kennedy administration against his own desires . Goldwater would later , directly discuss the assassination of Kennedy , and remarked that communism was to blame . In a head to head match @-@ up with Johnson , Goldwater trailed 20 percent to 75 percent , and his lead over Rockefeller tightened . 
 Later in January , Goldwater came under fire for a few of his comments . First , while criticizing President Johnson 's plans to cut funding to manned @-@ bombers , he claimed that long @-@ range missiles were " not dependable " . Defense Secretary Robert McNamara blasted the remark and accused Goldwater of " damaging the national security " . General Curtis LeMay backed Goldwater 's claims , and Congressional hearings would later be conducted on missile reliability . Next , Rockefeller took exception to Goldwater 's suggestion that it was not beneficial for the United States to remain in the United Nations in the wake of its admittance of communist China . Rockefeller challenged Goldwater to a debate , though Goldwater felt that debating Rockefeller " would be more like debating a member of the New Frontier than ... another Republican . " Despite the criticism , Goldwater refused to alter his political beliefs , opting to remain consistent with his conservative ideology . Nevertheless , polls at the end of January marked an eight @-@ point decrease in Goldwater 's New Hampshire lead from two months previous . He led Rockefeller , 54 percent to 46 percent in the state . 
 In early February , Goldwater embarked on a campaign tour of Minnesota . During a stop in Minneapolis , he leveled what the Associated Press labeled his " toughest campaign attack on Johnson 's foreign policy . " He accused the administration of failing in Vietnam and Panama and argued that Johnson was " off making promises to buy votes at home while the world smolders and burns . " Afterwards , he arrived in Chicago for a fundraiser and announced his support for a tougher blockade against Cuba . He continued his dialogue on the Cold War during a stop in San Francisco , arguing that the U.S. had no policy on the issue . He proposed an outline to maintain peace that included the encouragement of Communist " eviction from positions of control " in the world , and maintenance of American strength to keep the Soviet Union in check . 
 Later , Goldwater embarked on a four @-@ day tour of New Hampshire , his last appearance in the state , before his final campaign run ahead of the primary . During the trip , he publicly wondered why " the Rockefeller family wants to do business with ... Communist countries " , and remarked that he would fire defense secretary McNamara for his insistence that long range missiles were more accurate than manned bombings . He referred to this as the " stupidest statement " he ever heard from a defense secretary . 
 = = = Early primaries and state conventions = = = 
 At the end of February , Goldwater began to downplay the importance of the New Hampshire Primary , commenting that any result above 35 percent would be a " strong showing " due to the overabundance of candidates such as Senator Margaret Chase Smith . He projected that the June 2 California Primary would be a better test of the strength of the primary field ahead of the national convention in July . He attended the Oklahoma and North Carolina state conventions to campaign for delegates , in the first of several crucial state conventions . While in North Carolina , Goldwater claimed that in order to win the election , the GOP nominee must carry the south . He argued that none of his opponents understood the problems of the south and were therefore un @-@ viable general election candidates . Goldwater won 22 delegates from Oklahoma , but gained none from North Carolina despite winning the convention 's endorsement . However , the state 's 26 delegates were likely to back Goldwater . 
 As the New Hampshire primary neared , Rockefeller began to attack Goldwater , claiming he supported a voluntary social security plan that would bankrupt the nation . Goldwater denied the charge . He campaigned in New Hampshire until the primary vote , spending approximately $ 150 @,@ 000 as opposed to $ 250 @,@ 000 by Rockefeller . Voters grew wary of Goldwater 's stances on social security , Cuba , the military and the role of the Federal government , and were likewise turned off by Rockefeller 's very public divorce . As a result , the electorate sought out other candidates . Surprisingly , Ambassador to South Vietnam Henry Cabot Lodge , Jr. won the primary with 35 @.@ 5 percent as a write @-@ in candidate while still serving in Vietnam and without making any public appearances in New Hampshire . Goldwater finished in second with 22 @.@ 3 percent , followed by Rockefeller with 21 @.@ 0 percent . Neither won any delegates from the primary . The chairman of the Florida GOP attributed the defeat to a divided campaign , which he also witnessed in his state , where party leaders such as Congressman William C. Cramer disagreed over a delegate slate . 
 After the loss in New Hampshire , Goldwater focused his efforts on California , remarking that it was " the only primary [ he was ] interested in . " He traveled to the state to vie for the endorsement of the 14 @,@ 000 member California GOP at the party 's annual convention . Goldwater won the backing of the party at the convention , increasing the number of volunteers to his California campaign . Rockefeller was angered by the result and declared that the convention had been overrun by radicals . At the end of March , Goldwater traveled to Detroit and continued to criticize defense secretary McNamara , calling him an " all @-@ time loser . " Meanwhile , his son , Barry Goldwater , Jr. campaigned for his father in Oregon in preparation for the state 's May 15 primary . 
 = = = Front @-@ runner status = = = 
 In early April , Goldwater himself traveled to Oregon and made several campaign stops , noting the " psychological importance " of the state 's primary due to its proximity to California . During a press conference , he announced plans to utilize television to spread his message , and attacked his opponent , Rockefeller , for labeling the campaign as extremist . But , he refused to use his opponent 's recent divorce for political purposes , and Rockefeller eased his direct criticism , praising Goldwater for his willingness to discuss his views with the American people . Both men spoke before the Republican Women 's Conference in Washington in early April . Rockefeller set his sights on Goldwater and warned of " extremism " in the Republican Party , but Goldwater instead criticized the Johnson administration for its policies on Communism , and called for Republicans to " just fight Democrats rather than other Republicans " . 
 Ahead of the Illinois Primary , Goldwater traveled to Chicago and announced that he would change the campaign 's media policy to avoid overexposure to the press , which he believed was reporting negatively on his campaign . He won the Illinois primary with 64 percent of the vote and gained most of the state 's 48 delegates , but the victory was overshadowed by the 25 percent performance by long @-@ shot candidate Margaret Smith . Goldwater 's total was lower than the 80 percent that was expected . However , the result showed that Goldwater could win in a populous northern state , though a survey of newspaper publishers predicted that most of the Goldwater delegates would end up switching to the still @-@ undecided Nixon . Goldwater remained confident that he would win the nomination , but continued to feel that overcoming Nixon would be his " last hurdle " . 
 Later in April , President Johnson offered foreign policy briefings to each major presidential candidate , which Goldwater flatly rejected , calling it " an offhand political gesture " . Goldwater also continued his criticism of the Johnson administration over missile accuracy as a Senate committee declared that missiles were reliable though advocated increased spending for a manned bombing project . Goldwater also affirmed his support for increased military action in North Vietnam to cut off supply lines from China . 
 Goldwater gained a total of three delegates after finishing in second and fourth place respectively , in the Massachusetts and Pennsylvania primaries , which were won by favorite son candidates Henry Cabot Lodge , Jr. and Governor William Scranton . He won an additional 16 delegates from his home state of Arizona following a convention without any debate . After the gains , Goldwater was viewed as the favorite to win the nomination . As the May 15 Oregon Primary drew near , Rockefeller 's campaign depended on a victory . Rumors spread that former President Eisenhower wanted a more moderate choice than Goldwater , but he did not insert himself in the campaign . Likewise , the attempts to draft Nixon or Lodge appeared fruitless . Senator Jacob Javits attempted to rally a movement to prevent Goldwater 's nomination , but as the convention neared , the likelihood of Goldwater 's nomination grew further . He purchased time on network television and spoke directly to the American people during a half @-@ hour segment , highlighting his political positions . The appearance was unprecedented ; no previous presidential candidate had addressed a national audience before winning his party 's nomination . Goldwater hoped for further episodes , but was stalled by limited campaign funds . At the time , Goldwater had secured 274 delegates of the 655 needed to win the nomination , well ahead of the 61 won ( all in Pennsylvania ) by the second place William Scranton . Rockefeller stood at fourth , with only eight delegates . Goldwater won primaries in Texas , Nebraska and Indiana , but lost Oregon and its 18 delegates to Rockefeller . He labeled the defeat as " a victory for the radical left . " After the primary , Goldwater predicted that Rockefeller would join with the Lodge campaign in a last @-@ ditch effort to prevent his nomination ; with focus on the June 2 California Primary . Goldwater refused to engage in what he called " personal vindictiveness and smear " and commented that Republicans should instead focus on defeating President Johnson . 
 At the end of May , Goldwater appeared to be faltering a bit . A rally planned at the Phoenix Municipal Stadium drew only 2 @,@ 000 supporters , although 8 @,@ 000 were expected , and the candidate came under fire for mentioning that low grade Atomic bombs could be used to expose the supply of Communists in Vietnam . Meanwhile , his Florida slate was rejected by the party , and Rockefeller led him 57 % to 43 % in California polls . Goldwater rejected the legitimacy of the polls , and appeared to find a glimmer of hope as Nixon and Scranton each declared neutrality for the California Primary , acknowledging the importance of party unity , and thus preventing any further proliferation of the " Stop Goldwater " movement . The birth of Rockefeller 's child likely reminded voters of his adultery . 
 = = = Securing the nomination = = = 
 Goldwater won the California primary on June 2 with 51 % of the vote , gaining the state 's 86 delegates , and all but securing the nomination . Immediately thereafter , he began a search for a running mate , narrowing the field to four easterners : William Scranton , Senator Thurston B. Morton of Kentucky , Congressman William E. Miller of New York , and Ohio Governor James A. Rhodes . United Press International reported that an authoritative source informed them that former President Eisenhower asked Scranton to be " more available " for the presidential nomination . However , he disavowed the " Stop Goldwater movement " and later advised Scranton to not get involved " in a cabal against anyone . " Moderate Republican governors felt the development effectively ended the anti @-@ Goldwater movement , and thus secured his nomination . They then worked to convince Goldwater to soften his political stances . 
 Goldwater mathematically secured the nomination after winning an additional 56 delegates at the Texas Republican Convention in Dallas on June 16 . His address to the convention drew 11 @,@ 000 people to the Dallas Memorial Auditorium , where he proclaimed that it was essential for Republicans to win in the south , after years of " writing off " the region . Although Goldwater had surpassed the number of delegates needed for the Republican nomination , only 361 were bound by state law , slightly leaving the door open for a battle at the convention if his remaining 316 delegates chose to waver . Scranton hoped to change their minds and took control of a semi @-@ revived Stop Goldwater movement , campaigning nationwide and labeling Goldwater as unqualified . While Scranton gained the support of Henry Cabot Lodge , who resigned his post in Vietnam to assist the campaign , Goldwater requested that Lodge give an update on the progress in Vietnam , but the former ambassador refused , saying that the war should not be a political issue . Goldwater took a further hit after voting against the Civil Rights Act of 1964 , questioning its constitutionality . His vote was denounced by the NAACP , who publicly voiced their opposition to Goldwater , breaking their tradition of neutrality during presidential elections . But the vote helped Goldwater among southern Democrats . After returning from Washington , Goldwater briefly returned to Phoenix to attend his daughter 's wedding , which received a great deal of media coverage . He then traveled to the midwest and the eastern seaboard to continue to build support for his candidacy . Polls from late June , showed that in a head to head match up , Republicans favored Scranton over Goldwater as Scranton escalated his attacks , labeling Goldwater 's policy positions as " ignorant " with the convention just twelve days away . 
 On June 30 , Goldwater received the endorsement of moderate Senator Everett Dirksen of Illinois after traveling to the Midwest to gain delegates . Dirksen 's support further deflated the Stop Goldwater movement , as the Senator had criticized Goldwater 's earlier vote against the Civil Rights Act , but concluded upon further review that he was only being consistent with his views . Richard Nixon followed suit and endorsed Goldwater two days later . 
 Goldwater feared that race would become a major issue during the general election and incite violence . He refused to criticize Democrats for using his vote against the Civil Rights Act to attack him , saying that he would do the same in their position . But the attacks on the vote continued . Scranton launched his toughest assault , six days ahead of the convention , calling the vote an attempt to " gain by [ causing ] racial unrest " . Likewise , Michigan Governor George W. Romney mustered a veiled attack on Goldwater , proposing to add an amendment to the Republican platform , excluding " extremists of the right " from the party . The Goldwater campaign did not respond to the comments , but the candidate affirmed that he would honor the law as president , as it reflected " the voice of the majority " . However , as the convention neared and with his nomination seemingly imminent , Goldwater told Der Spiegel that at this point in the campaign , he could not defeat President Johnson . 
 = = Republican National Convention = = 
 The 1964 Republican National Convention was held from July 13 to 16 at the Cow Palace indoor arena in San Francisco , California . At the convention , the moderate wing of the party staged a last @-@ ditch effort to nominate a more moderate candidate , this time Pennsylvania Governor William Scranton . In televising what the moderate wing portrayed as extremism on the part of Goldwater supporters , they hoped to entice voters to contact their delegates to convince them to endorse Scranton . After accusations that Goldwater attempted to connect with the German politically right @-@ wing community in another attempt to convince Goldwater 's delegates to abandon the conservative candidate , the delegates exuberantly supported Goldwater , giving him the Republican nomination on the first ballot with 883 delegates ; Scranton had 214 . Nelson Rockefeller , while speaking out against extremism at the convention , was loudly booed by adamant Goldwater supporters . In his acceptance speech , Goldwater proclaimed to a vivacious audience " Extremism in the defense of liberty is no vice . And ... moderation in the pursuit of justice is no virtue ! " 
 Goldwater selected William E. Miller , U.S. Representative and chairman of the Republican National Committee , as his running mate for the general election . Although virtually unknown to many voters , Miller was viewed by those familiar with him as a wise choice for the vice @-@ presidential nomination , with his supporters arguing that he would play a key role in waging an aggressive campaign against Lyndon Johnson and the Democrats . 
 = = General election = = 
 In the wake of John F. Kennedy 's death and favorable economic circumstances , Lyndon Johnson was the favorite candidate early on in the general election campaign . In light of Nelson Rockefeller 's rebuke of Goldwater 's political ideology at the Republican Convention , which was televised nationally , the media speculated as to whether or not Rockefeller would endorse Goldwater in the general election , barring the Goldwater campaign with more negative publicity . In addition to this , Johnson was known for his ability to manipulate the press in order to provide favorable coverage of his own campaign . Johnson , along with the media , who also had a generally unfavorable opinion of Goldwater , portrayed his opponent as a political extremist . Johnson also used Goldwater 's speeches to imply that he would willingly wage a nuclear war , quoting Goldwater : " by one impulse act you could press a button and wipe out 300 million people before sun down . " In turn , Goldwater defended himself by accusing Johnson of making the accusation indirectly , and contending that the media blew the issue out of proportion . 
 While Johnson campaigned on a platform of limited involvement in Vietnam and continuation of funding for social programs , Goldwater called for substantial cuts in social programs , suggesting that Social Security become optional , and suggested the use of nuclear weapons in Vietnam if necessary . Goldwater believed that the Tennessee Valley Authority should be sold into the private sector . On foreign policy , Goldwater 's beliefs differed sharply from those of his opponent , who advocated limited involvement in Vietnam , maintaining that he would not send " American boys nine or ten thousand miles from home to do what Asian boys ought to be doing for themselves . " Goldwater , however , accused Johnson and the Democratic party of having given in on the issue of Communist aggression . 
 In reference to Goldwater 's policies regarding the use of nuclear weaponry , the Johnson campaign launched a television ad that would come to be known as the " daisy ad " in which a young girl pulls the petals off a flower until the screen is overtaken by an exploding mushroom cloud . Despite Johnson 's accusing Goldwater of being willing to use nuclear weapons in Vietnam after stating the United States should do whatever was necessary for victory , Goldwater clarified that he was not an outright advocate of using nuclear weapons there . Despite this , the Johnson campaign continued to portray Goldwater as a warmonger . The negative media attention to the Goldwater campaign continued with the publication of an article by Fact Magazine in which the publication claimed to have sent questionnaires to 12 @,@ 000 psychologists asking them to assess whether or not Goldwater " was psychologically fit to serve as president of the United States . " Among the 1 @,@ 800 replies , there were claimed to be assessments by some psychologists classifying Goldwater as unfit for office . Goldwater was eventually compensated $ 75 @,@ 000 in a libel suit after the election . 
 Throughout much of the campaign , Goldwater was on the defensive , using television commercials to respond to accusations from Johnson and clarify statements that he had made previously . In turn , Goldwater attempted to launch a counterattack via television , featuring a commercial showing Secretary of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union Nikita Khrushchev shouting " We will bury you ! " over children reciting the Pledge of Allegiance . The commercial 's effectiveness was diminished by Khrushchev 's removal from office in October . In response to Goldwater 's attacks , Johnson began reversing Goldwater 's campaign slogan " In Your Heart You Know He 's Right " to slogans such as " In Your Head You Know He 's Wrong " and " In Your Guts You Know He 's Nuts . " Johnson 's campaign also broadcast an advertisement , Confessions of a Republican , in which the actor William <unk> , a genuine Republican , expressed his concerns over Goldwater . 
 In September , a poll conducted by the Goldwater campaign revealed that Johnson had a comfortable lead over him . Indeed , Goldwater 's campaign was an uphill battle against an incumbent administration during a prosperous economy . In the wake of the death of John Kennedy , who had been leading in polls for reelection in 1964 , there lingered the possibility that Johnson had the sympathy of the media and voters . 
 On October 27 , actor Ronald Reagan , who had not yet entered politics , gave his official endorsement to Goldwater in what would come to be known as the " A Time for Choosing " speech . In his speech , Reagan emphasized issues such as the spread of Communism , taxes and the national debt and advocated limited government , aggressive tactics against the Soviet Union and laissez @-@ faire capitalism . The speech was Reagan 's " unofficial entrance to politics " and played a crucial role in his election as Governor of California in 1966 . 
 Throughout October , the media emphasized the lead Johnson had over Goldwater , stating that Goldwater had little chance of winning the election . This negative coverage of the campaign caused many independent voters , who were not strong supporters of either candidate , not to vote , for they believed the result of the election had been already determined . 
 = = Results = = 
 On Election Day , Goldwater lost the election to Johnson by what was then the largest margin in history . Goldwater accumulated 52 electoral votes to Johnson 's 486 and 38 @.@ 5 % of the popular vote ( 27 @,@ 178 @,@ 188 ) to Johnson 's 61 @.@ 1 % ( 43 @,@ 129 @,@ 566 ) . Goldwater carried six states : Louisiana , Alabama , Mississippi , Georgia , South Carolina and his home state of Arizona . Goldwater 's strong showing in the south is largely due to his support of the white southern view on civil rights : that states should be able to control their own laws without federal intervention . 
 Goldwater lost the popular vote in both the male and female electorate with 40 % and 38 % , respectively . Goldwater 's most narrow regional loss was in the South , with 48 % of the popular vote , but he lost by greater margins in the East , Midwest and West with 32 % , 39 % and 40 % of the popular vote , respectively . Johnson was heavily favored over Goldwater among Catholics ( 76 % to 24 % ) , and by a smaller margin among Protestants ( 55 % to 45 % ) . Goldwater lost the Independent vote to Johnson ( 56 % to 44 % ) . Johnson won the white vote over Goldwater ( 59 % to 41 % ) and was heavily favored by the nonwhite electorate ( 94 % to 6 % ) . Goldwater lost the college @-@ educated , high school @-@ educated and grade school @-@ educated population to Johnson ( 52 % to 48 % , 62 % to 38 % and 66 % to 34 % , respectively ) . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Four years after the election , Goldwater returned to the Senate and was re @-@ elected twice . He became an influential member of the party 's conservative wing , serving as chairman of the Select Committee on Intelligence and the Committee on Armed Services . He supported the presidential candidacy and eventual presidency of Richard Nixon ; however , he was critical of Nixon 's attempt to control prices and wages . Initially , Goldwater defended Nixon in light of the Watergate scandal until August 5 , 1974 , when he withdrew his support . Nixon resigned from office four days later . 
 Goldwater grew libertarian as he reached the end of his career , and chose to retire from the Senate in 1987 . He was succeeded by John McCain , who praised his predecessor as the man who " transformed the Republican Party from an Eastern elitist organization to the breeding ground for the election of Ronald Reagan . " Goldwater strongly supported the 1980 presidential campaign of Reagan , who had become the face of the conservative movement after his Time for Choosing speech . Reagan reflected many of the principles of Goldwater 's earlier run in his campaign . Washington Post columnist George Will took note of this , writing , " We ... who voted for him in 1964 believe he won , it just took 16 years to count the votes . " 
 After leaving the Senate , Goldwater 's views cemented as libertarian . He began to criticize the " moneymaking ventures by fellows like Pat Robertson and others [ in the Republican Party ] who are trying to ... make a religious organization out of it . " He lobbied for gays to serve openly in the military , opposed the Clinton administration 's plan for health care reform , and supported abortion rights and the legalization of medicinal marijuana . 
 In 1997 , Goldwater was revealed to be in the early stages of Alzheimer 's disease . He died in 1998 at the age of 89 . 
 = Michelle McCool = 
 Michelle Leigh McCool @-@ Calaway ( née McCool , born January 25 , 1980 ) is an American retired professional wrestler who is best known for her time with WWE . She is also a former two @-@ time WWE Divas Champion and a two @-@ time WWE Women 's Champion and a one @-@ time Diva of the Year . 
 McCool originally worked as a middle school teacher in Palatka , Florida . She joined WWE in 2004 after participating in the 2004 WWE Diva Search . In her initial on @-@ screen role , she acted primarily as a personal trainer and occasional wrestler . She also acted as the manager to the team of K. C. James and Idol Stevens , collectively known as the Teacher 's Pets , in 2006 after changing her on @-@ screen character to that of a teacher . At The Great American Bash in 2008 , McCool became the inaugural WWE Divas Champion , holding the title for approximately five months . She then won the WWE Women 's Championship at The Bash in 2009 , becoming the first female wrestler to have held both titles . At Night of Champions in 2010 , she unified both titles becoming the first and only WWE Unified Divas Champion . McCool has held both titles on two occasions , which makes her a four @-@ time champion overall . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Both of McCool 's parents also work in education ; her mother , Mary , is a teacher and her father , Terry , is a superintendent . She has an older brother who played football at the University of Cincinnati . Growing up , McCool was an avid wrestling fan , going as far as knowing how to do Ric Flair 's signature maneuver , the figure @-@ four leglock , by age seven . Before and during high school , McCool played softball , basketball and volleyball . She also played first base at Pasco @-@ Hernando State College . McCool later received her Master 's degree in Educational leadership from Florida State University . Before becoming involved in professional wrestling , she taught seventh grade science for four years in her hometown of Palatka , Florida . She also competed in National Physique Committee fitness contests , taught gymnastics and kickboxing , and worked as a personal trainer . 
 = = Professional wrestling career = = 
 = = = World Wrestling Entertainment / WWE = = = 
 = = = = Early appearances and developmental territories ( 2004 – 2006 ) = = = = 
 In Summer 2004 , the 24 @-@ year @-@ old McCool , participated in the Raw Diva Search contest , becoming one of the finalists , but placed 7th when she was eliminated on August 16 ; the winner of the contest was Christy Hemme . However , McCool and other Diva Search contestants were later signed by WWE . 
 On November 18 , 2004 , McCool debuted on SmackDown ! as a fan favorite , portraying a fitness trainer , teaching Rob Van Dam and Rey Mysterio some stretches . On November 25 , McCool helped Miss Jackie stretch and discussed the rumors of Charlie Haas cheating on her . On December 2 , McCool helped Booker T and Eddie Guerrero stretch and sort out their " negative vibes " . On January 6 , McCool participated in her first in @-@ ring segment during the John Cena vs. Kenzo Suzuki <unk> . McCool caught the eye of Suzuki , resulting in Hiroko attacking McCool . On January 10 , McCool , Miss Jackie , Torrie Wilson and Dawn Marie participated in a " Miss SmackDown ! Contest " , which Wilson won . 
 McCool , Miss Jackie , Torrie Wilson , Dawn Marie , Joy Giovanni , Rochelle Loewen and Lauren Jones participated in a " Best Body Contest " on February 21 , 2005 , which was again won by Wilson . McCool made her in @-@ ring debut on March 3 , where The Big Show and McCool defeated René Duprée and Dawn Marie in a mixed tag team match , with Big Show pinning Duprée . Dawn Marie then attacked McCool as they were posing for St. Patrick 's Day photos with fans on March 17 . After that , McCool made her singles debut match on March 24 , losing to Marie . McCool , Miss Jackie , Torrie Wilson , Dawn Marie , Joy Giovanni and Lauren Jones participated in a " Viva Las Vegas Bikini Contest " on April 7 , which Wilson won . McCool then competed in a losing effort against Torrie Wilson on May 28 , where McCool attempted to feign an injury . On June 16 , McCool became involved in a feud between MNM ( Joey Mercury and Johnny Nitro ) and Heidenreich , when she defended Heidenreich against MNM 's manager Melina 's verbal attacks , and attacked Melina . McCool attacked Melina again during a match between Joey Mercury and Heidenreich on June 23 . The feud between McCool and Melina concluded in a match on June 30 , where Melina defeated McCool . After the match , Mercury and Nitro performed their finisher , the Snapshot , before they were chased away by Heidenreich . 
 McCool was then assigned to WWE 's then @-@ developmental territory , Deep South Wrestling ( DSW ) . McCool made her in @-@ ring debut for DSW on September 8 , losing to Angel Williams . In October , McCool was legitimately hospitalized for over eight days after suffering a bad reaction to Ibuprofen after a CT scan . On January 19 , 2006 , Trenesha Biggers and Angel Williams attacked Kristal Marshall during the intermission , but Tracy Tailor and McCool made the save , and brawled with Biggers and Williams . On February 9 , McCool , Williams , Tailor , Biggers and Marshall participated in a " Bikini Contest " , but no winner was declared when Palmer Canon interrupted and said that he did not want bikini contests on his network . McCool , Tailor and Marshall later accompanied Tommy Dreamer to a match against Palmer Canon , who had Trenesha Biggers and Angel Williams as his managers , but Dreamer lost the match . On March 9 , McCool defeated Tracy Tailor , winning her first match in DSW . 
 In March 2006 , McCool was sent to another developmental territory , Ohio Valley Wrestling ( OVW ) , for a gimmick tryout with Amish Roadkill and Kasey James , also continued her training . While in OVW , she began managing the duo of Amish Roadkill and Kasey James . On May 3 , Roadkill and Kasey James , accompanied by McCool , defeated The Untouchables ( Deuce and Domino ) , who were accompanied by Cherry Pie . On May 5 , Roadkill and James , with McCool at ringside , lost a dark match on SmackDown against William Regal and Sylvan . 
 = = = = Sexy Teacher and All @-@ American Diva ( 2006 – 2008 ) = = = = 
 McCool returned to SmackDown ! on June 2 , 2006 , this time as a villainous character with a " sexy teacher " gimmick , pulling on her real life experiences as a teacher , and warning the Divas that she was " gonna take them to school " . On June 9 , McCool , Jillian Hall , Kristal and Ashley participated in a " Bikini Contest " , which Massaro won . Hall , Kristal and Ashley stripped down , but McCool rejected , saying she had too much class , and walked out of the ring . McCool appeared in a backstage segment with Ashley on June 16 , where Ashley wanted to have a 1 @-@ on @-@ 1 " Bikini Contest " with her , but McCool declined . McCool and Kristal had a catfight backstage with Jillian Hall and Ashley on July 14 , which prompted a feud between the four Divas . On July 15 , McCool and Victoria reached the finals of a Divas Mechanical Bull Riding Contest , which McCool won . On July 21 , McCool and Kristal lost a tag team match against Hall and Ashley , after Ashley pinned Kristal . This led to a Fatal Four @-@ Way Bra and Panties match at The Great American Bash on July 23 , which Ashley won after eliminating Marshall . McCool won her first singles match in WWE on July 28 , defeating Jillian Hall . 
 Soon after , she began acting as the valet for K. C. James and Idol Stevens , who , because of her association with them , were nicknamed as " The Teacher 's Pets " . On August 4 , 2006 , The Teacher 's Pets , with McCool at ringside , defeated Scotty 2 Hotty and Sho Funaki . In August , the trio began feuding with Paul London and Brian Kendrick , and their valet Ashley , for the WWE Tag Team Championship . The Teachers Pets lost a match against Paul London , Brian Kendrick and Ashley on September 8 , and Ashley attacked McCool after the match . On September 29 , The Teacher 's Pets defeated The Pitbulls ( Kid Kash and Jamie Noble ) . On October 6 , McCool took her revenge on Ashley in a singles match , which McCool won . The Teacher 's Pets lost a WWE Tag Team Championship match against London and Kendrick at No Mercy on October 8 , and Ashley attacked McCool again . 
 On October 20 , The Miz hosted a Diva 's " Dance Off Contest " with the SmackDown ! Divas , McCool , Jillian Hall , Kristal , Ashley and Layla , who were judged by Nick and Aaron Carter , with the chosen winner being Layla . On October 27 , McCool , Hall , Kristal , Ashley and Layla participated in a Diva 's " Trick @-@ Or @-@ Treat Battle Royal " with The Miz as the special guest referee . McCool eliminated Hall , and also took her revenge on Ashley by eliminating her , but Kristal was declared the winner after Miz helped her win . On November 3 , The Teacher 's Pets lost a championship match against London and Kendrick , and after the match , their feud with London and Kendrick and also The Teacher 's Pets tag team alliance ended . On November 10 , K.C. James , with McCool , lost a match against then @-@ WWE United States Champion Chris Benoit . On November 28 , McCool was hospitalized with an enlarged kidney , a broken sternum , and an electrolyte <unk> She was released from the hospital on December 2 , 2006 . 
 McCool returned on the March 30 , 2007 episode of SmackDown ! , where she participated in a 10 @-@ Diva tag team match with Victoria , Melina , Kristal , and Jillian Hall in a losing effort . On the April 13 episode of SmackDown ! , McCool became a fan favorite again , when she came to the aid of Ashley after she was attacked by Jillian Hall backstage . Subsequently , a series of matches took place between Victoria and McCool , including a mixed tag team match where Victoria and Kenny Dykstra defeated McCool and Chuck Palumbo . On the November 13 episode of ECW , McCool formed an alliance with Kelly Kelly , and the duo were defeated Melina and Layla . On the December 12 episode of ECW , McCool saved Kelly from an attack by Victoria and Layla . 
 McCool was then repackaged as " The All @-@ American Diva " , where she began accompanying her on @-@ screen friend Chuck Palumbo during matches against Jamie Noble . After a series of matches between the men , Noble won a date with McCool by defeating Palumbo . In the storyline , Palumbo accidentally elbowed McCool during a match , causing her to suffer a concussion . The partnership was dissolved when McCool refused to accept his apology . She then went on to compete in a series of matches with Victoria , Eve Torres , Maryse and Cherry to determine SmackDown ! ' s top Diva , with McCool winning title . On the March 28 episode of SmackDown ! , McCool teamed up with Cherry to defeat Victoria and Maryse in a " Wet and Wild " match . On the January 28 episode of SmackDown ! , McCool defeated ECW 's Layla in a singles match . On the April 11 episode of SmackDown ! , McCool was defeated Victoria after interference from Natalya . On the May 2 episode of SmackDown ! , McCool teamed up with Cherry in losing effort to Victoria and Natalya . 
 = = = = Inaugural Divas Champion ( 2008 – 2009 ) = = = = 
 On the July 4 , 2008 episode of SmackDown ! , McCool won a Golden Dreams match to face Natalya for the WWE Divas Championship at the The Great American Bash . At the event on July 20 , McCool defeated Natalya to become the inaugural Divas Champion . With this win , Michelle <unk> created history . On the July 25 episode of SmackDown ! , McCool defeated Maryse in a non @-@ title match . She successfully defended her championship against Maryse at Unforgiven , and in a rematch on the September 19 episode of SmackDown . 
 On the September 23 episode of ECW , McCool was defeated by Maryse in non @-@ title match . On the November 14 episode of SmackDown ! , McCool successfully retained her Divas Championship against Maria , but lost to her in a non @-@ title match on the December 5 episode of SmackDown ! . After the match , McCool began showing signs of a heel turn , and attacked Maria backstage . On the December 19 episode of SmackDown ! , Maryse became the number one contender for Divas Championship after Maryse defeated Maria , with McCool at ringside . On the December 26 episode of SmackDown , McCool lost the Divas Championship to Maryse , ending her reign at 155 days . After the match , McCool blamed Maria , the special guest referee of the match , for her loss , and attacked her , establishing herself as a villain . 
 On the January 2 , 2009 episode of SmackDown ! , McCool attacked Eve Torres in an in @-@ ring segment . The following week on an episode of SmackDown ! , McCool teamed up with Victoria in a losing effort to The Bella Twins ( Brie and Nikki Bella ) , and after the match , McCool attacked Victoria . On the January 16 episode of SmackDown ! , McCool defeated Victoria in the latter 's retirement match . On the January 23 episode of SmackDown ! , McCool teamed up with Natalya in a no @-@ contest to The Bella Twins , after Maria attacked McCool during the match . On the February 6 episode of SmackDown ! , McCool defeated Eve Torres in the latter 's debut match . On the February 13 episode of SmackDown ! , McCool was defeated by Maria after an interference from Torres . 
 McCool then defeated Gail Kim on the May 22 episode of SmackDown ! to become the number @-@ one contender for the WWE Women 's Championship , which she would win a month later , on June 28 , at The Bash by defeating Melina . With the win , McCool became the first woman in WWE history to hold both the Diva 's and Women 's titles and hence created history again . She retained the championship against Melina in a rematch on July 26 at Night of Champions , and also in a Lumberjill match on the October 2 episode of SmackDown ! . 
 = = = = LayCool and retirement ( 2009 – 2011 ) = = = = 
 McCool then allied with Layla to form LayCool , and the duo entered a controversial feud with Mickie James , in which LayCool bullied James and made fun of her weight . The feud resulted in a five @-@ on @-@ five elimination tag team match at Survivor Series , which James ' team won , when Melina pinned McCool . James then became the number @-@ one contender for McCool 's WWE Women 's Championship at TLC : Tables , Ladders & Chairs , where McCool successfully retained the championship after interference from Layla . McCool , however , lost the Women 's Championship to James at the Royal Rumble , although she regained it on the February 26 , 2010 episode of SmackDown ! when special guest referee Vickie Guerrero interfered , to become a two @-@ time Women 's Champion . On the April 23 episode of SmackDown ! , McCool and Layla defeated Beth Phoenix and Mickie James , and attacked Phoenix with hairspray and a table . The attack led to McCool losing the championship to Phoenix in an " Extreme Makeover " match at Extreme Rules . On the May 14 episode of SmackDown ! , McCool and Layla faced Phoenix in a Women 's Championship two – on – one handicap match , in which Layla pinned Phoenix to win the championship . Despite Layla 's win , McCool and Layla cut the Women 's Championship in half , and the duo were unofficially referred to as the " co @-@ champions " . 
 On the July 30 episode of SmackDown ! , McCool took Layla 's place in her Women 's Championship match against Tiffany , defeating her and retaining the title . At Night of Champions , McCool defeated Melina to unify the WWE Women 's Championship with the WWE Divas Championship , thus becoming the first ever WWE Unified Divas Champion , and both McCool and Layla carried their own separate championship belts . At Survivor Series on November 21 , she lost the Divas Championship when Natalya defeated McCool and Layla in a two @-@ on @-@ one handicap match . At TLC : Tables , Ladders and Chairs , McCool and Layla were defeated in the first @-@ ever Divas tag team tables match by Natalya and Beth Phoenix . LayCool invoked their rematch clause in January 2011 , prompting the scheduling of a two @-@ on @-@ one handicap match at the Royal Rumble . At the event , however , the match was altered to a Fatal Four @-@ Way by the Anonymous Raw General Manager , and Eve Torres was added to the match . Torres went on to pin Layla to capture the Divas Championship , despite the fact McCool had Natalya pinned at the same time . 
 On the March 14 , 2011 episode of Raw , LayCool helped Vickie Guerrero defeat Trish Stratus in a no disqualification match , to get a job on Raw . After the match , LayCool were attacked by Stratus and special guest star Snooki . On the following episode of Raw , LayCool teamed up with Dolph Ziggler and Vickie Guerrero , defeating Stratus and John Morrison in a 3 @-@ on @-@ 2 handicap mixed tag team match . At WrestleMania XXVII on April 3 , LayCool and Ziggler lost to Snooki , Stratus , and Morrison in a six @-@ person mixed tag team match after Snooki pinned McCool . 
 On the April 8 episode of SmackDown ! , dissension began to show between McCool and Layla after they were defeated by Beth Phoenix and Kelly Kelly , due to McCool avoiding being tagged in by Layla , citing a back injury . After more arguing and unsuccessful couples therapy sessions in the following weeks , LayCool officially disbanded . On the April 29 episode of SmackDown , McCool faced Layla in a singles match , which ended in a double count @-@ out after the two began brawling . After the match , Layla challenged McCool to a no disqualification and no count @-@ out match at Extreme Rules . McCool accepted under one condition , which was that the loser leaves WWE . At Extreme Rules , McCool was pinned by Layla , forcing her to leave WWE . Afterwards , she was attacked by the debuting Kharma to write her out . In reality , McCool had decided to retire from professional wrestling . 
 = = Other media = = 
 During the week of November 5 , 2007 , she appeared on six episodes of Family Feud with several other WWE wrestlers and Divas . She also appeared on the February 6 , 2008 episode of Project Runway with Maria Kanellis , Candice Michelle , Torrie Wilson , Kristal Marshall , and Layla El . On June 3 , 2008 , she appeared on The Best Damn Sports Show Period with John Cena . In addition , McCool appeared in the January 2009 edition of Muscle & Fitness , along with Eve Torres and Maryse . She also appeared on a special WWE edition of Are You Smarter Than a Fifth Grader . In 2012 , McCool appeared on Extreme Makeover : Weight Loss Edition along with Kelly Kelly and Eve Torres . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 McCool was married to Jeremy Louis Alexander , whom she began dating in high school . The couple divorced in 2006 . She married fellow wrestler Mark Calaway , known professionally as The Undertaker , on June 26 , 2010 , in Houston , Texas . On August 1 , 2012 , it was announced that they were expecting their first child . Kaia Faith Calaway was born on August 29 , 2012 , and is Calaway 's fourth child and McCool 's first . 
 McCool is a devout Christian , and she incorporated Christian crosses on her wrestling attire . She has had several wrestling @-@ related injuries ; in November 2007 , she fractured her nose during an overseas WWE tour after Victoria 's clothesline hit her in the face . She has been hospitalized twice , had two broken ribs , a broken sternum , and a broken <unk> process . When she chose to leave the WWE , she mentioned that her foot had been injured for two months with a broken toe , torn joint capsules and a torn MCL . 
 McCool is a <unk> of Krav Maga . 
 = = In wrestling = = 
 Finishing moves 
 Faith Breaker ( Belly to back inverted mat slam ) – 2008 – 2011 
 Final Exam ( Hair @-@ pull backbreaker ) – 2005 – 2007 
 <unk> – Make a Diva Tap ( Heel hook , sometimes transitioned into an ankle lock ) – 2008 
 Simply Flawless ( Big boot ) – 2007 – 2011 
 Wings of Love ( Lifting double underhook facebuster ) – 2008 
 Signature moves 
 Baseball slide , as a sunset flip counter 
 Belly to belly suplex 
 European uppercut 
 Figure @-@ four necklock 
 Roundhouse kick , sometimes to a kneeling opponent – 2007 – 2011 
 Running corkscrew neckbreaker – 2008 – 2009 
 Running hurricanrana 
 Russian legsweep floated over into a pin 
 With Layla 
 Double team finishing moves 
 Double running big boot 
 Leg trap ( Layla ) and big boot ( McCool ) combination 
 Double team signature moves 
 Double forward Russian legsweep 
 Managers 
 K.C. James 
 Idol Stevens 
 Chuck Palumbo 
 Kristal Marshall 
 Vickie Guerrero 
 Alicia Fox 
 Layla 
 Wrestlers managed 
 Amish Roadkill 
 Jon Heidenreich 
 K.C. James 
 Idol Stevens 
 Tommy Dreamer 
 Chuck Palumbo 
 Jamie Noble 
 Kaval 
 Dolph Ziggler 
 Layla El 
 Entrance themes 
 " Move It Up " by Billy Lincoln ( March 3 , 2005 – June 2 , 2006 ) 
 " Not Man Enough for Me " by Jim Johnston ( June 2 , 2006 – May 1 , 2011 ) 
 = = Championships and accomplishments = = 
 Pro Wrestling Illustrated 
 PWI ranked her # 1 of the best 50 female singles wrestlers in the PWI Female 50 in 2010 
 Woman of the Year ( 2010 ) 
 World Wrestling Entertainment 
 WWE Divas Championship ( 2 times ) 
 WWE Women 's Championship ( 2 times ) 
 Slammy Awards ( 2 times ) 
 Diva of the Year ( 2010 ) 
 Knucklehead Moment of the Year ( 2010 ) Losing to Mae Young at Old School Raw – with Layla 
 = = = Luchas de Apuestas record = = = 
 = University of Dayton Ghetto = 
 The University of Dayton Ghetto is a neighborhood in Dayton , Ohio , that is home to upperclassmen at the University of Dayton ( UD ) . It is an example of a form of housing called a student ghetto . Houses in the neighborhood are leased to students , an arrangement that resembles both traditional university housing and a landlord / tenant relationship . The neighborhood is also known as the South Student Neighborhood , a term commonly used by the university . 
 Tracing its history back to the 1870s , the Ghetto now includes more than 200 university @-@ owned houses as well as landlord @-@ owned houses , high @-@ density housing and gathering spaces . With the inclusion of Holy Angels and The Darkside , two smaller neighborhoods the university owns property in , there are more than 400 houses currently used as student residential space . Because of the area 's age , the university has been engaged in a program to renovate and update the Ghetto , and several additional changes to the neighborhood are expected in the coming years as part of the university 's Master Plan . 
 = = History and geography = = 
 The Ghetto is south of downtown Dayton but north of the city of Oakwood . The Great Miami River is just more than half a mile to the west , and Interstate 75 is just more than a mile to the west . In its current form , it is bounded by Brown Street to the west , Irving Avenue to the south , Trinity Avenue and Evanston Avenue to the east , and Caldwell Street and Stonemill Road to the north . This gives the area a roughly triangular shape . 
 The land on which the Ghetto now sits was owned by John Henry Patterson until the mid @-@ 1870s . The land was then divided between suburban housing lots to the east and the NCR factory to the west . The original proprietors of the neighborhood were Thomas S. Babbitt , Dr. Joseph E. Lowes , R. D. Hughes and Harry Kiefaber . The area was known as the town of Babbitt , and in its original form included only four streets : Lowes Street , Kiefaber Street , Hughes ( now Stonemill Road ) and Wead ( now <unk> Avenue ) . This core area was measured at 47 acres ( 190 @,@ 000 m2 ) . 
 The NCR Corporation used Babbitt as housing for its workers . In 1906 , the area was annexed by the city of Dayton and continued on as a middle @-@ class neighborhood . The University of Dayton , Babbitt 's neighbor to the northeast , began to buy available houses in the neighborhood in the 1950s as an experiment in off @-@ campus housing . By the 1970s , the student population of the area was growing rapidly . 
 While it is unknown when the area began its life as the Ghetto , there have been several efforts to rename it . In the 1960s , Rev. Norbert Burns , who taught at the university for 62 years before retiring in 2007 at the age of 82 , was part of one such effort . His committee attempted to change the name to the " Village , " an effort which ultimately failed . University administrators now refer to the area as the " South Student Neighborhood , " though the phrase sees little use by the student population . 
 = = Recent changes = = 
 As the houses in the Ghetto age , and as the number of students wishing to live in the Ghetto expands , the university has begun a renovation and replacement program with the goal of keeping the current feel of the area intact . In 2000 , construction began on several new duplexes to fill land that was unused , resulting in housing for several dozen additional students . The duplexes housed six students per side , for a total of 12 students each . In 2003 , the university continued the project by tearing down several houses on Stonemill Road and replacing them with a new five @-@ person design . Several more of these houses have now been built throughout the Ghetto . 
 In 2006 , the university began a new phase of replacement and renovation in the neighborhood , in which $ 2 @.@ 5 million was spent to renovate four existing structures , including a duplex , as well as to build a five @-@ unit set of attached townhouses . The houses , located on Frericks Way and Stonemill Road , house 55 students and include the famous " Castle " which has been given a new faux @-@ stone facade in homage to its traditional name . The houses became available to students for the 2007 – 2008 academic year . 
 The new wave of construction brings the university 's stock of houses to 328 , including several duplexes . Not including these new additions , as of 2005 , the university owned 225 houses in the Ghetto , with the rest on the Darkside , the other half of the University of Dayton campus . Additionally , 73 houses in the neighborhood were owned by private landlords and rented to UD students . 
 = = Holy Angels and the Darkside = = 
 In addition to the properties the university owns in the Ghetto , there are also student houses located in two other neighborhoods : the Darkside — or North Student Neighborhood , as it is referred to by the university — and Holy Angels . Once considered a single neighborhood and connected by the north @-@ south Alberta Street , the areas were separated when the Thomas J. Frericks Center and a new formal entrance were added . Alberta Street now acts as the main thoroughfare for the Darkside , while the street has been rerouted and renamed College Park Avenue in the Holy Angels neighborhood . It is cut off from the portion in the Ghetto , renamed Frericks Way . 
 The Darkside , which derives its name from a lack of street lights when students first began to move to the area , is bounded by Stewart Street to the south , Brown Street to the west , Woodland Cemetery to the east and Wyoming Street to the north . Traditionally , the Darkside has served as housing for juniors . This is not due to any university policy , but rather the preference of seniors , who select houses first in the student housing lottery due to their larger number of credit hours . 
 The third and smallest neighborhood , Holy Angels , derives its name from the Holy Angels Church and School that occupies the center of the area . It lies between the Darkside and the Ghetto , but is physically separated from them by Stewart Street and the Frericks Center parking lot . 
 = = Features = = 
 Not all of the houses in the student neighborhoods are occupied by students . Four houses in both the Ghetto and the Darkside — on Trinity Avenue , Kiefaber Street , Stonemill Road and Chambers Street — are home to groups of <unk> , the Catholic religious institute behind UD . Between six and 10 <unk> live in each house . They serve the university as ministers , groundskeepers , administrators and professors , among other professions . 
 The Ghetto also contains several high @-@ density living areas , including the Garden Apartments , the <unk> Apartments and the Campus South , a high @-@ rise living complex for sophomores . In 2004 , the <unk> complex opened , intended as a combined living @-@ learning space . It includes housing for 56 students , as well as a cafe , an amphitheater , rehearsal rooms , several activity rooms and gallery spaces , and a new studio for the campus radio station , <unk> . The Ghetto is also home to the McGinnis school house , which was acquired in 1982 and renamed the McGinnis Center ; it is used as a central point of contact for Ghetto residents . The McGinnis Center houses several meeting rooms , administrative offices and laundry facilities for houses that are not equipped with washers and dryers . 
 Some houses in the neighborhood have been given informal nicknames by which they are commonly known , such as " The Deli House " at 237 Lowes St. , the " The F Shaq " at 418 Lowes St. and " The Crack House " at 1488 Frericks Way . For the majority of houses , nicknames are arbitrary and vary year to year . In addition , many houses in the Ghetto are those occupied by various fraternities , sororities and other special interest groups . 
 = = Future = = 
 In 2002 , the University of Dayton released a Master Plan which called for the renovation and construction of several houses , an extension to Stonemill Road to connect directly to Evanston Avenue , and the enlargement and clean @-@ up of the parking areas in the alleys behind the houses . Despite ongoing rumors , there were no plans to raze the Ghetto and replace it with more high @-@ density housing and other university buildings , despite the landlocked nature of the campus . 
 In June 2005 , before the plan could be realized , the university made a $ 25 million purchase of an additional 49 acres ( 200 @,@ 000 m2 ) — much of the land which was once home to the NCR Corporation — as well as a new 100 @,@ 000 @-@ square @-@ foot ( 9 @,@ 300 m2 ) building on Brown Street . The area , renamed Mid Campus , prompted the development of a new Campus Master Plan . 
 While several new buildings have been planned , many of the changes that had been proposed to the Ghetto in the previous master plan are no longer included in the new plan . The largest feature affecting the student neighborhoods is a new building to the east of Alberta Street , between Chambers Street and <unk> Court , on the Darkside . According to the draft of the master plan , the building is intended to be a sustainable residence hall , a <unk> to 90 @-@ bed facility that would also include an educational wing . The proposed building would use technologies such as solar energy , geothermal heating and cooling , compost piles and low @-@ flow showers . The plan also calls for a walk / bike greenway to link the neighborhood to the core of campus and the athletic complex . 
 = Alsos Mission = 
 The Alsos Mission was an organized effort by a team of United States military , scientific , and intelligence personnel to discover enemy scientific developments during World War II . Its chief focus was on the German nuclear energy project , but it also investigated both chemical and biological weapons and the means to deliver them . 
 The Alsos Mission was created following the September 1943 Allied invasion of Italy with a twofold assignment : search for personnel , records , material , and sites to evaluate the above programs and prevent their capture by the Soviet Union . It was established as part of the Manhattan Project 's mission to coordinate foreign intelligence related to enemy nuclear activity . Alsos personnel followed close behind the front lines in Italy , France , and Germany , occasionally crossing into enemy @-@ held territory to secure valuable resources before they could be destroyed or scientists escape or fall into rival hands . 
 The Alsos Mission was commanded by Colonel Boris Pash , a former Manhattan Project security officer , with Samuel Goudsmit as chief scientific advisor . It was jointly staffed by the Office of Naval Intelligence ( ONI ) , the Office of Scientific Research and Development ( OSRD ) , the Manhattan Project , and Army Intelligence ( G @-@ 2 ) , with field assistance from combat engineers assigned to specific task forces . 
 Alsos teams were successful in locating and removing a substantial portion of the German research effort 's surviving records and equipment . They also took most of the senior German research personnel into custody , including Otto Hahn , Max von Laue , Werner Heisenberg and Carl Friedrich von Weizsäcker . 
 = = Origin = = 
 The Manhattan Project was a research @-@ and @-@ development program , operated during and immediately after World War II . Led by the United States with contributions principally from the United Kingdom and Canada , it aimed to produce an atomic bomb . Brigadier General Leslie Groves of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers became its director in September 1942 . The project operated under a tight blanket of security lest its discovery induce Axis powers , particularly Germany , to accelerate their own nuclear projects or to undertake covert operations against the project . 
 The Manhattan Project intelligence staff believed that the Japanese atomic program was not far advanced because Japan had little access to uranium ore , the industrial effort required exceeded Japan 's capacity , and , according to American physicists at the University of California , Berkeley , who knew the leading Japanese physicists personally , there were too few Japanese qualified to work in the area . Oppositely , German scientists had reputations as leaders in the field , and the fear of Germany developing nuclear weapons first was one of the reasons for the establishment of the Manhattan Project . The Chancellor of Germany , Adolf Hitler , frequently claimed that Germany was developing secret weapons , and it was feared that these might include nuclear weapons . Reports of German nuclear activity were taken very seriously . At the instigation of the Manhattan Project , Norwegian saboteurs and Allied bombers attacked heavy @-@ water infrastructure in German @-@ occupied Norway in late 1942 and early 1943 . 
 Following the September 1943 Allied invasion of Italy , Brigadier General Wilhelm D. Styer , Chief of Staff of Army Service Forces , was concerned intelligence activities related to foreign nuclear energy programs were not being properly coordinated . He feared that important items might be overlooked unless those responsible were properly briefed , yet at the same time wished to minimize the number of personnel with access to such secret information . Having the Manhattan Project itself take over responsibility for coordinating these efforts would address both these concerns . Accordingly , he approached Groves on behalf of General George Marshall , the Chief of Staff of the Army , with that recommendation . 
 In response , Groves created the Alsos Mission , a small team jointly staffed by the Office of Naval Intelligence ( ONI ) , the Office of Scientific Research and Development ( OSRD ) , the Manhattan Project , and Army Intelligence ( G @-@ 2 ) . Its assignment was to investigate enemy scientific developments , including nuclear weapons research . Groves was not pleased with the codename , the Greek word for " grove " , but decided that changing it would only draw unwanted attention . 
 The Chief of Army Intelligence , Major General George V. Strong , appointed Lieutenant Colonel Boris Pash to command the unit . Pash had served as the head of the Counter Intelligence Branch of the Western Defense Command , where he had investigated suspected Soviet espionage at the Radiation Laboratory at Berkeley . Pash 's command comprised his executive officer Captain Wayne B. <unk> , four Counter Intelligence Corps ( CIC ) agents , four interpreters , and four scientists : Dr. James B. Fisk from the Bell Telephone Company , Dr. John R. Johnson from Cornell University , Commander Bruce Olds from the Office of Naval Intelligence ( ONI ) and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology ( MIT ) , and Major William Allis , originally from MIT although then serving on the War Department scientific staff . 
 = = Italy = = 
 In December 1943 , the Alsos Mission reached Algiers , where Pash reported to the Chief of Staff at Allied Force Headquarters ( AFHQ ) , Major General Walter B. Smith , and his British Chief of Intelligence , Brigadier Kenneth Strong . This was awkward as Pash 's instructions were not to give the British information about the Alsos Mission , but it turned out that Strong was already fully aware of it . It was arranged that Pash would deal with Strong 's American deputy , Colonel Thomas E. Roderick . The Alsos Mission then moved on to Italy , where it was assigned to Major General Kenyon A. Joyce 's Allied Control Commission . Pash met with Marshal of Italy Pietro Badoglio , the man who had negotiated Italy 's surrender to the Allies , and was now head of the Italian Provisional Military Government , who gave him a letter of introduction addressed to Italian civil and military authorities . 
 Alsos interviewed the Italian Minister for Communications , the Chief of Naval Ordnance , the staff of the Italian Naval Academy , and Italian scientists at the University of Naples , and examined what captured technical documents could be found . There was little information about developments in northern Italy and Germany . The Alsos Mission was attached to Colonel George Smith 's S @-@ Force . Built around a Royal Air Force ground reconnaissance squadron equipped with armored cars , this unit contained American , British , French , and Italian technical specialists of various kinds who would enter Rome on the heels of the advancing Allied forces . The expectation that Rome would soon be captured proved premature , and by March 1944 most of the Alsos Mission had returned to the United States . The Alsos Mission had gathered little of value about nuclear matters , but submitted detailed reports about German rockets and guided missiles . 
 Rome fell on 4 June 1944 . When the news came that its fall was imminent , Pash was ordered from London to Italy . He flew back to Italy and entered the city with S @-@ Force on 5 June . Pash took key scientists into custody and arranged for sites targeted by Alsos , including the University of Rome and the Consiglio Nazionale delle <unk> , to be secured . The Alsos Mission to Italy was reconstituted under the command of Pash 's deputy , Major Richard C. Ham , and Johnson and Major Robert R. Furman were sent from the United States to join him . They reached Rome on 19 June , and over the next weeks interviewed scientists including Edoardo Amaldi , Gian @-@ Carlo Wick , and Francesco Giordani . The picture that the Alsos Mission built up indicated that the German effort was not far advanced . 
 = = Western Europe = = 
 = = = Britain = = = 
 In December 1943 , Groves sent Furman to Britain to discuss the establishment of a London Liaison Office for the Manhattan Project with the British government , and to confer over coordinating the intelligence effort . Lieutenant Commander Eric Welsh , the head of the Norwegian Section of MI6 , was unimpressed with Furman 's grasp of the subject matter . Groves selected the head of the Manhattan District 's security activities , Captain Horace K. Calvert , as head of the London Liaison Office , with the title of Assistant Military Attaché . Working in cooperation with Eric Welsh and Michael Perrin from Tube Alloys , the London Liaison Office consisted of Calvert , Captain George C. Davis , two Women 's Army Corps clerks and three CIC agents . 
 The Liaison Office interviewed European refugee scientists and studied German physics journals . It compiled lists of German scientists of interest and possible locations of nuclear research and industrial facilities , and the mining and stockpiling of uranium and thorium ores . Little thorium was available in Germany or German @-@ occupied Europe , and attention soon centered on the mines at Joachimsthal in Czechoslovakia . Aerial reconnaissance was carried out periodically , and production was measured by assessing the size of the piles of tailings . 
 Groves warned General Dwight D. Eisenhower of the possibility that the Germans might disrupt the Normandy landings with radioactive poisons , and sent Major Arthur V. Peterson to brief his chief of staff , Lieutenant General Walter B. Smith . Under the codename Operation Peppermint , special equipment was prepared and Chemical Warfare Service teams were trained in its use . The British forces made similar preparations for their beaches . The precautions were unnecessary . 
 Meanwhile , the new head of G @-@ 2 , Major General Clayton L. Bissell , at the urging of Groves and Furman , decided to create a new , even larger Alsos Mission for western Europe in March 1944 . Pash assumed command of the new unit upon its official creation by the Secretary of War , Henry L. Stimson , on 4 April . The military staff for the new mission were selected by Bissell on Pash 's advice . Lieutenant Colonel George R. Eckman became the deputy commander . Captain Henry A. Schade was appointed as the head of the naval contingent . Groves and Vannevar Bush , the head of OSRD , selected the scientific staff , and appointed Samuel Goudsmit , a University of Michigan physicist with a good command of several western European languages , as its head . Goudsmit had not been working on the Manhattan Project , and therefore could not reveal any of its secrets if captured . The British considered creating their own rival mission , but in the end agreed to participate as a junior partner . Three Dutch and one Norwegian officer also served with the Alsos Mission . By the end of August it had seven officers and 33 scientists . 
 = = = France = = = 
 On 5 August , Pash received a secret message from Washington , D.C. , reporting that the French physicist Frédéric Joliot @-@ Curie had been sighted at his holiday home at L 'Arcouest in Brittany . Joliot @-@ Curie was at the top of Alsos 's wanted list , so Pash and CIC Special Agent Gerry Beatson set out to investigate in the wake of the advancing U.S. Third Army . They searched the University of Rennes and found some documents there on 9 August . On 11 August they reached the homes of Joliot @-@ Curie , Francis Perrin , and Pierre Auger in the L 'Arcouest area . Joliot @-@ Curie was not home , but German snipers fired on them , and they had to wait until 12 August before they could search the house . 
 The rest of the advance party of the Alsos Mission moved to Normandy in August 1944 , where it joined T @-@ Force , a similar formation to S @-@ Force , at Rambouillet , where it was preparing for the liberation of Paris . An Alsos Mission team including Pash and Calvert reached Joliot @-@ Curie 's house in the Paris suburbs on 24 August to find that he was not there , but at his laboratory at the Collège de France . The next day they reached the Porte d 'Orléans where they encountered troops of the French 2e Division Blindée , who were engaged in liberating the city , and came under small arms fire from the German defenders . The Alsos Mission replied with their M1 carbine and Tommy guns as they made their way through the back streets to the college , where they found Joliot @-@ Curie in his office . 
 Goudsmit interviewed Joliot @-@ Curie in Paris on 27 August . Accompanied by Calvert , Joliot @-@ Curie was flown to London where Perrin and Goudsmit interviewed him about the activities of German scientists . Joliot @-@ Curie recalled visits to the College , which had a cyclotron , by German scientists including Erich Schumann , who had initiated the German nuclear project , and controlled it until it had been handed over to the Reichsforschungsrat ( National Research Council ) in 1942 ; by Abraham Esau , who had been in charge of nuclear physics under the Reichsforschungsrat ; and by Walter Gerlach , who had replaced him in January 1944 . Other German physicists who had used the facilities included Kurt Diebner , Walther Bothe , and Erich Bagge , all of whom were known to be associated with the German nuclear project . 
 Meanwhile , T @-@ Force had moved into the Petit Palais . The main body of the Alsos Mission soon followed , and the Mission opened an office at the Place de l 'Opéra . On 5 September , word was received that the British 21st Army Group was about to enter Brussels . There were two important Alsos Mission objectives in Belgium : the corporate headquarters of Union Minière du Haut Katanga , the world 's largest supplier of uranium ore , in Antwerp , and its uranium processing plant in Olen . A six @-@ man Alsos Mission team set out to secure them , led by Pash and the Assistant Chief of Staff , G @-@ 2 , at ETOUSA , Colonel G. Bryan Conrad . 
 On reaching Brussels , they made contact with Lieutenant Colonel David Strangeways , the commander of R Force , who provided them with an escort of Royal Air Force armored vehicles . They entered Antwerp on 7 September and found the office of Union Minière . They discovered that over 1 @,@ 000 tons of refined uranium had been sent to Germany , but about 150 tons still remained at Olen . They set out for Olen , where they located 68 tons , but another 80 tons were missing , having been shipped to France in 1940 ahead of the German invasion of Belgium . The capture of Eindhoven by the U.S. 101st Airborne Division allowed early access to another high priority target , the Philips plant there . Brigadier Edgar Williams , the 21st Army Group 's Chief of Intelligence , facilitated the Alsos Mission 's detour to Eindhoven , where it was able to interview Dutch scientists . Williams also furnished a detachment of Royal Engineers to transport and move the uranium from Olen . Groves had it shipped to England , and , ultimately , to the United States . 
 The Alsos Mission now attempted to recover the shipment that had been sent to France . Documentation was discovered that said that part of it had been sent to Toulouse . An Alsos Mission team under Pash 's command reached Toulouse on 1 October and inspected a French Army arsenal . They used a Geiger counter to find barrels containing 31 tons of the uranium from Belgium . Conrad persuaded Major General Frank S. Ross to release the U.S. 3342nd Quartermaster Truck Company from the Red Ball Express to retrieve the shipment . The barrels were collected and transported to Marseille , where they were loaded on a ship bound for the United States . During the loading process a barrel fell into the water and had to be retrieved by a Navy diver . In Marseilles , the Alsos Mission detachment also met up with the detachment that had been sent to Italy , which now rejoined them . The remaining 49 tons of the original shipment to France were never found . 
 Information gathered in Rennes , Paris , and Eindhoven pointed to Strasbourg as a place of particular interest . Physicists Rudolf Fleischmann and Carl Friedrich von Weizsäcker were known to be working at the University of Strasbourg , as was Eugen von Haagen , an expert on viruses whose work was of great concern to the Alsos Mission 's Biological Warfare section . The Naval section was interested in the torpedo research being carried out there , and jet engine development was being undertaken at Strasbourg 's Junkers plant . 
 On 22 November , the U.S. Sixth Army Group notified the Alsos Mission that the capture of Strasbourg was imminent , and it should join T @-@ Force in Saarburg , where it was preparing to enter the city . The Alsos Mission joined T @-@ Force in Strasbourg on 25 November . The German nuclear laboratory was discovered on the grounds of the Strasbourg Hospital , where the physicists attempted to pass themselves off as medics . Fleischmann was taken into custody , but Weizsäcker and von Haagen had fled the city . 
 Documents discovered in Weizsäcker 's office , Fleischmann 's laboratory and the Strasbourg Hospital pointed to nuclear activities taking place at Stadtilm , Haigerloch , Hechingen , and Tailfingen . After establishing its headquarters in von Haagen 's office Alsos staff uncovered documents concerning secret medical experiments at Natzweiler concentration camp . These indicated the Germans had been unable to develop a practical process for uranium enrichment . For the first time the Alsos Mission was able to categorically report that the Germans did not have nuclear weapons , and would not have them for some time . 
 = = = Germany = = = 
 When the German Operation Nordwind offensive threatened Strasbourg , Pash ordered all captured documents to be removed . Papers indicating the nature of the Alsos Mission were removed or destroyed . Although Strasbourg was not abandoned by the Allies , and ultimately did not fall , the Alsos Mission departed the city on 8 January 1945 . Pash even ordered an evacuation plan to be prepared for the Alsos Mission 's main headquarters in Paris . The embarrassing series of intelligence failures that had led up to the Battle of the Bulge cast doubts on the Alsos Mission 's own findings . A four @-@ man team under Eckman was sent to investigate a suspiciously devastating V @-@ 2 explosion near Antwerp , and Fred <unk> had to confirm that it was not a small nuclear explosion . Rumors that Germany had an atomic bomb persisted as late as March 1945 . 
 A new forward headquarters , Alsos Forward North ( <unk> ) , was opened at Aachen , and on 8 February the Alsos Mission reopened its forward headquarters in Strasbourg as Alsos Forward South ( <unk> ) . In March , the U.S. Twelfth Army Group launched Operation Lumberjack , an offensive to clear the Germans west of the Rhine . Pash , who was promoted to colonel on 6 March , led an Alsos Mission detachment into Cologne on 7 March , but little additional information was found . 
 The interrogation of German prisoners indicated that uranium and thorium were being processed in Germany , mostly at the <unk> plant at Oranienburg , so Groves arranged for the plant to be bombed on 15 March 1945 . Some 612 B @-@ 17 Flying Fortresses of the U.S. Eighth Air Force dropped 1 @,@ 500 tons of high explosive and 178 tons of incendiary bombs on the plant . 
 On 30 March , the Alsos Mission reached Heidelberg , where important scientists were captured including Walther Bothe , Richard Kuhn , Philipp Lenard , and Wolfgang Gertner . Their interrogation revealed that Otto Hahn was at his laboratory in Tailfingen , while Werner Heisenberg and Max von Laue were at Heisenberg 's laboratory in Hechingen , and the experimental natural uranium reactor that Heisenberg 's team had built in Berlin had been moved to Haigerloch . Henceforth , the main focus of the Alsos Mission was on these nuclear facilities in the Württemberg area . 
 As the Allied armies advanced into Germany in April 1945 , Alsos Mission teams searched Stadtilm , where they found documentation concerning the German nuclear program , components of a nuclear reactor , and eight tons of uranium oxide . Scientists captured at Göttingen and <unk> @-@ Lindau included Werner <unk> , the chief of the planning board of the Reichsforschungsrat , and Fritz Houtermans , who provided information about the Soviet atomic bomb project . At Celle , the Alsos Mission uncovered an experimental centrifuge for separating uranium isotopes , the result of work undertaken at the University of Hamburg by a team under Paul Harteck . 
 The problem with the targets in the Württemberg area was that they not only lay in the path of the French First Army 's advance , but were also in the occupation zone allocated to France . Groves attempted to get the occupation boundaries changed , but the State Department wanted to know why first , and Groves refused to provide this information . Groves , Marshall , and Stimson then decided that the area would have to be secured by American troops that would carry off what they could and destroy everything else . Pash was sent to ask General Jacob Devers , the commander of the U.S. Sixth Army Group , if the zones of the French First Army and the U.S. Seventh Army could be swapped around . He was informed that the matter would have to be taken up with Eisenhower . 
 Groves dispatched Lieutenant Colonel John Lansdale , Jr . , to Europe , where he participated in a meeting with Lieutenant General Bedell Smith and Major General Harold Bull of SHAEF ; Major General Eldridge G. Chapman , the commander of the U.S. 13th Airborne Division ; Pash , Furman , and Goudsmit of Alsos ; and Brigadier General Reuben E. Jenkins from the Sixth Army Group . The plan , codenamed Operation Effective , called for the 13th Airborne Division to occupy the area to prevent its capture by the French , and seize an airfield that could be used to fly in an Alsos Mission team , and later to fly it out , along with captured German scientists . Operation Effective was scheduled for 22 April . Meanwhile , Devers took steps to delay the French advance . 
 The Alsos Mission had learned that the uranium ores that had been taken from Belgium in 1944 had been shipped to the <unk> <unk> ( <unk> ) plant in Staßfurt . The 83rd Infantry Division captured this on 15 April . As it was in the occupation zone allocated to the Soviet Union at the Yalta Conference , the Alsos Mission , led by Pash and accompanied by Lansdale , Perrin and Air Commodore Sir Charles Hambro , arrived on 17 April to remove anything of interest . Over the following ten days , 260 truckloads of uranium ore , sodium uranate and <unk> weighing about 1 @,@ 000 tons , were taken away by an African @-@ American truck company . The uranium was taken to Hildesheim and most of it was flown to the United Kingdom by the Royal Air Force ; the rest had to be moved to Antwerp by train and loaded onto a ship to England . 
 On 20 April , the French First Army captured an intact bridge over the Neckar River at Horb and established a bridgehead . It was decided to send in a force on the ground instead of Operation Effective , which was cancelled on 19 April . This time , instead of following or accompanying the front @-@ line troops , the Alsos Mission would operate behind enemy lines . The Alsos Mission had taken delivery of two armored cars , four jeeps with machine gun mounts , and two .50 caliber machine guns . The other two jeeps would carry captured German machine guns . They would be accompanied by three unarmed jeeps . For the operation , codenamed Operation Big , Pash would command a special force called Task Force A , built around his Alsos Mission team and Lieutenant Colonel Wilbur White 's U.S. 1269th Engineer Combat Battalion , less its Company B. Sir Charles Hambro decided to accompany the Alsos Mission with a British group that included Michael Perrin , David <unk> , Eric Welsh , and Rupert Cecil . Lansdale accompanied Task Force A as Groves ' representative , and Brigadier General Eugene L. Harrison , the G @-@ 2 from the Sixth Army Group , as Devers ' representative . 
 The Alsos Mission set out on 20 April and rendezvoused with the 1269th Engineer Combat Battalion at Freudenstadt . The intact bridge over the Neckar River at Horb was crossed and Haigerloch was occupied without opposition on 22 April . The main body of Task Force A arrived on 23 April . In a laboratory in a cellar they found a German experimental nuclear reactor shaped like a cylinder and made of graphite blocks , but the uranium and heavy water were missing . The scientists immediately began dismantling it . Pash left Hambro in charge , while he led troops of Task Force A to Bisingen , and then on to Hechingen , where 25 scientists were captured , including von Weizsäcker , von Laue , Karl Wirtz , Horst <unk> and Erich Bagge . At Tailfingen they took Otto Hahn and nine members of his staff into custody . At Haigerloch , a sealed drum of documents was retrieved from a cesspool , and three drums of heavy water and 1 @.@ 5 tons of uranium ingots were found buried in a field . The uranium and heavy water were loaded onto trucks . The apertures in the cellar were blown up with minor explosions to prevent their capture by the French . 
 Werner Heisenberg remained at large , having left Hechingen on 19 April . On 1 May , Pash set out in pursuit of Heisenberg with ten men in the two armored cars and two jeeps . They teamed up with the 36th Reconnaissance Troop of the U.S. 36th Infantry Division and entered <unk> on 2 May , where Pash found Heisenberg at his home . The Americans became involved in firefights with German troops attempting to enter the town , and the 36th Reconnaissance Troop had to head off on another mission , leaving Pash with just seven men . Fortunately , the German force , which numbered about 700 , offered to surrender . Pash returned on 3 May with the 3rd Battalion , 142nd Infantry , which took them prisoner , while Pash and his Alsos Mission team took Heisenberg into custody . 
 By VE day , the Alsos Mission had a strength of 114 men and women . It was officially disbanded on 15 October 1945 . 
 = = Japan = = 
 Plans for the invasion of Japan incorporated an Alsos Mission . Japanese fire balloon attacks on the United States had aroused fears that the technique might be used in combination with biological agents , which the Japanese Unit 731 was known to be experimenting with . In March 1945 , the physicist and seismologist L. Don Leet was appointed as head of the scientific section of the Alsos Mission to Japan . Leet had previously worked with the Manhattan Project on the Trinity nuclear test . Plans were drawn up to prepare and equip a T @-@ Force along the lines of the one in Europe , but made up of personnel already in the Pacific . The mission differed from its European counterpart in that it was solely American and consisted of only one intelligence agency . Responsibility for nuclear matters was subsequently handled by a separate Manhattan Project Intelligence Group organized by Groves . 
 Leet 's group reached Manila in July 1945 , where they met with the intelligence staff of General of the Army Douglas MacArthur 's Army Forces , Pacific . Following the surrender of Japan the mission traveled to Japan and visited various research establishments including Tokyo Imperial University , Waseda University , Tokyo Institute of Technology , the Institute of Physical and Chemical Research , the Institute for Materials Research , Tokyo Shibaura Denki ( Toshiba ) , the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science , the National Research Council , and the Board of Technology . The mission , which included Karl Compton , interviewed over 300 Japanese scientists and produced reports on Japanese research into radar , rockets , and other developments , including chemical and biological warfare . The Manhattan Project Intelligence Group , under the command of Philip Morrison , arrived in Japan in September 1945 and examined Japan 's wartime nuclear weapons program . The group concluded that lack of uranium ore and low priority had doomed the Japanese effort . They reported that , contrary to American belief , Japan 's nuclear physicists were competent . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 After seeing the German project at Haigerloch , Goudsmit wrote that : 
 It was so obvious the whole German uranium set up was on a ludicrously small scale . Here was the central group of laboratories , and all it amounted to was a little underground cave , a wing of a small textile factory , a few rooms in an old brewery . To be sure , the laboratories were well equipped , but compared to what we were doing in the United States it was still small @-@ time stuff . Sometimes we wondered if our government had not spent more money on our intelligence mission than the Germans had spent on their whole project . 
 In the end , the Alsos Mission contributed little to the Allied defeat of Nazi Germany , because the German nuclear and biological weapons programs that it had been formed to investigate turned out to be smaller and less threatening than had been feared . In the field of nuclear weapons development at least , the underfunded and disorganized German program lagged far behind the Allies ' own efforts . In its appropriation of the accomplishments of European science , the Alsos Mission played a small part in the wartime and subsequent scientific and technological developments that characterized and transformed the postwar world . 
 = William Hely = 
 Air Vice Marshal William Lloyd ( Bill ) Hely , CB , CBE , AFC ( 24 August 1909 – 20 May 1970 ) was a senior commander in the Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) . He graduated from the Royal Military College , Duntroon , in 1930 before transferring to the RAAF as a cadet pilot . Hely came to public attention in 1936 – 37 , first when he crashed on a survey flight in the Northern Territory , and later when he undertook two successful missions to locate missing aircraft in the same vicinity . His rescue efforts earned him the Air Force Cross . After occupying staff positions during the early years of World War II , Hely was appointed Officer Commanding No. 72 Wing in Dutch New Guinea in May 1944 . Later that year he formed No. 84 ( Army Cooperation ) Wing , commanding it during the Bougainville Campaign until the end of the Pacific War . 
 Hely spent the immediate post @-@ war period on the staff of RAAF Headquarters , Melbourne . From 1951 to 1953 he served as Air Officer Commanding ( AOC ) Western Area Command in Perth , after which he was appointed a Commander of the Order of the British Empire . He was Deputy Chief of the Air Staff from 1953 to 1956 , AOC Training Command from 1956 to 1957 , and Head of the Australian Joint Services Staff in Washington , D.C. from 1957 to 1960 . He then served as Air Member for Personnel ( AMP ) for six years , his tenure coinciding with a significant increase in manpower to meet commitments in South East Asia and the demands of a major re @-@ equipment program . Having been promoted acting air vice marshal in 1953 ( substantive in 1956 ) , he was appointed a Companion of the Order of the Bath in 1964 for his service as AMP . He retired from the Air Force in 1966 and made his home in Canberra , where he died in 1970 at the age of sixty . 
 = = Early career = = 
 The third child of Prosper Frederick Hely , a storekeeper , and his wife Alice ( née Lloyd ) , William Lloyd ( Bill ) Hely was born on 24 August 1909 at Wellington , New South Wales . He was educated to Intermediate Certificate level at Mudgee , Wollongong and Rozelle Public Schools , and at Fort Street High School , Petersham . Leaving school in 1926 , he worked as a clerk and studied accountancy in his spare time . On 16 February 1927 , Hely entered the Royal Military College , Duntroon , as one of four cadets sponsored that year by the Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) , which did not yet have its own officer training college . He graduated as a lieutenant on 9 December 1930 , and the following day enlisted in the RAAF . As well as the four graduates the Air Force had enrolled in 1927 , budgetary constraints imposed during the Great Depression necessitated the transfer from Duntroon to Point Cook of eight other RAAF @-@ sponsored cadets midway through their four @-@ year course , including Alister Murdoch , Bill Garing and Douglas Candy . Initially ranked pilot officer , Hely commenced his flying training course at RAAF Point Cook , Victoria , on 15 January 1931 , graduating on 10 December . His early postings as a pilot in 1932 and 1933 were to RAAF Station Richmond , New South Wales , and RAAF Station Laverton , Victoria . Qualifying in aerial photography , he served at Point Cook from 1933 to 1936 . He was then transferred to No. 3 Squadron at Richmond , receiving promotion to flight lieutenant . 
 In April 1936 , Hely took command of No. 3 Squadron 's North Australia Survey Flight , one of two such flights formed by the Air Force that month to carry out photographic surveys . Flying a twin @-@ engined de Havilland Dragon Rapide ( serial number A3 @-@ 2 ) , Hely departed Richmond on 11 April for Port Hedland , which was to be the flight 's base for its initial survey work in Western Australia . Over the Northern Territory , between Newcastle Waters and Wave Hill , he became lost , ran out of fuel , and had to crash land . He and his crew of two were found by RAAF search aircraft ten days later , on 22 April . The Argus had reported that " grave fears " were held for their safety , but they were largely uninjured , Hely having suffered cuts and abrasions to his head and leg . The aircraft was badly damaged and had to be transported back to Richmond in pieces . In February 1937 , Hely took part in the search for a missing Stinson airliner that was eventually found in the McPherson Range , Queensland , five of its seven passengers and crew dead . 
 For its 1937 aerial survey program , the RAAF formed the Communications and Survey Flight under No. 1 Aircraft Depot 's Recruit Training Squadron at Laverton on 3 May . The flight was divided into Western and Eastern Air Detachments , the former under Hely . Flying a Tugan Gannet , Hely 's first task became searching for survey director Sir Herbert Gepp , whose Rapide ( A3 @-@ 2 , the same one Hely crash landed the previous year ) had gone missing on an inspection flight in the Northern Territory between Tennant Creek and <unk> . Hely located the downed Rapide on 23 May , guiding in a ground party that was able to clear a makeshift runway and allow Gepp and his team to take off and resume their journey . On 25 September , Hely was again diverted from survey work to search for a lost plane , this time the de Havilland Gipsy Moth of flying doctor Clyde Fenton , who had gone missing north @-@ east of Newcastle Waters . Hely , once more piloting Rapide A3 @-@ 2 , found the Moth three days later and landed to rescue the lost doctor . Fenton was subsequently quoted as saying " I have only the highest praise for the efficient manner in which Hely conducted a difficult search and the skilful way in which he located me and picked me up " . The rescue efforts made Hely one of the RAAF 's best @-@ known public figures . Completing his posting to the survey flight , he served as adjutant at Laverton in 1938 . He was awarded the Air Force Cross on 9 June for " zeal and initiative in searching for Sir Herbert Gepp 's party and later for Dr. Fenton when lost in Central Australia " . On 29 November 1938 , he married secretary Jean McDonald at St Aidan 's Anglican Church in Launceston , Tasmania ; the couple would have two daughters . Hely spent the following year in Britain , attending the Royal Air Force Staff College , Andover , and was promoted to squadron leader in September . 
 = = World War II = = 
 At the outbreak of World War II , Hely was attached to the operations room at RAF Coastal Command . On his return to Australia in January 1940 , he was appointed Staff Officer Plans at RAAF Headquarters , Melbourne . In October , he joined the Deputy Chief of the Air Staff , Air Vice Marshal Bill Bostock , as a delegate to a defence conference in Singapore . The Australian contingent found the local forces ill @-@ prepared for an attack by the Japanese and recommended significant increases in air capability , both in Australia and the Pacific Islands , to meet the threat . Hely was promoted to temporary wing commander the following January , and was the ranking Air Force delegate at a series of staff talks in Batavia and Singapore regarding the defence of the Dutch East Indies . He became Director of Operations at RAAF Headquarters in August . His promotion to acting group captain was announced on 17 February 1942 . Two days later , the Japanese bombed Darwin , Northern Territory ; Hely circulated a memo early the next month to all commands on the lessons learnt from the raid . He was posted to Darwin in May to join North @-@ Western Area headquarters as senior air staff officer , and was granted the temporary rank of group captain in January 1943 . Hely returned to RAAF Headquarters in March to become Director of Air Staff Plans . 
 In May 1944 , Hely assumed command of No. 72 Wing at Merauke , Dutch New Guinea , succeeding Group Captain Allan Walters . Comprising fighter and dive @-@ bomber squadrons , the wing had been established to undertake air defence and patrol tasks in and around western New Guinea . Hely departed Merauke in September 1944 to establish an army cooperation formation , No. 84 Wing , in Cairns , Queensland . It was one of two such wings formed by the RAAF in the South West Pacific Theatre late in World War II . They were , as described by the official history of the RAAF in the Pacific , " essentially non @-@ offensive in character " , responsible for reconnaissance , artillery spotting , supply drops to ground forces , spraying DDT to combat malaria , and guiding close support aircraft to their objectives . The wing could also carry out its own strikes on " targets of opportunity " . No. 84 Wing comprised No. 5 ( Tactical Reconnaissance ) Squadron , No. 17 Air Observation Post Flight , No. 10 Communication Unit ( subsequently renamed No. 10 Local Air Supply Unit ) , and No. 39 Operational Base Unit . It deployed to Torokina in October to support Australian troops during the Bougainville Campaign . No. 5 Squadron , equipped with CAC Boomerangs and Wirraways , was assigned to mark targets for F4U Corsairs of the Royal New Zealand Air Force . Between December 1944 and January 1945 , the wing lost one Auster , one Wirraway , and one Boomerang on operations . Despite shortages of pilots and equipment , Hely 's formation was generally able to keep pace with the army 's requirements . By the end of June 1945 , it had flown over 4 @,@ 000 sorties . 
 = = Post @-@ war career = = 
 Hely relinquished command of No. 84 Wing on 12 August 1945 and returned to RAAF Headquarters in October . He was by this time among a coterie of officers at group captain level , including Val Hancock , Alister Murdoch and Bill Garing , earmarked by the Australian Air Board for leadership roles in the post @-@ war RAAF , which was to shrink rapidly with demobilisation . At RAAF Headquarters , Hely was appointed Deputy Director of Operations , in which capacity he served on a committee to investigate proposals for an officer training college , later established as RAAF College , Point Cook . Along with Hely , all officers associated with the proposal 's examination were former Duntroon students , including the Deputy Chief of the Air Staff , Air Commodore Frank Bladin , the Director of Postings , Group Captain Murdoch , and the Director of Training , Group Captain Paddy Heffernan . Another Duntroon graduate , Air Commodore Hancock , became the college 's first commandant . Hely was appointed Director of Organisation and Staff Duties in 1946 . That November , he became Director of Postings . The following year , he took up the position of Director of Personal Services , before departing for Britain in December 1948 to study at the Imperial Defence College , London . 
 Returning to Melbourne , Hely served as deputy to the Air Member for Personnel from January 1950 . He became an aide @-@ de @-@ camp to King George VI in June 1951 . In September , he was appointed Officer Commanding Western Area , Perth , taking up his new post in mid @-@ October . He was promoted to acting air commodore in July 1952 , becoming Air Officer Commanding ( AOC ) Western Area . His rank was made permanent in September , and the same month he was appointed aide @-@ de @-@ camp to Queen Elizabeth II . Among Hely 's duties as AOC Western Area was coordinating air support for the British atomic test on Montebello in October 1952 , including supply and observation flights by Dakotas of No. 86 ( Transport ) Wing . He was appointed a Commander of the Order of the British Empire ( CBE ) in the Queen 's Coronation Honours promulgated on 1 June 1953 , for his war service and his work during the Montebello test . In August , he was named Deputy Chief of the Air Staff ( DCAS ) , with the acting rank of air vice marshal , effective from October ; he replaced Air Vice Marshal Hancock . Between October 1953 and February 1954 , the RAAF underwent major organisational change , as it transitioned from a geographically based command @-@ and @-@ control system to one based on function , resulting in the establishment of Home ( operational ) , Training , and Maintenance Commands . At the same time , RAAF Headquarters in Melbourne was absorbed by the Department of Air in Canberra . Hely was acting Air Member for Personnel from 3 January to 7 March 1955 , between the terms of Air Vice Marshals Val Hancock and Fred Scherger . On 24 January 1956 , he became AOC Training Command , taking over from Air Vice Marshal Murdoch . He was succeeded as DCAS by Air Vice Marshal Douglas Candy . Hely 's rank of air vice marshal became substantive on 5 September . In January 1957 , Point Cook retired its last de Havilland Tiger Moth trainers , signalling the end of the biplane era in the RAAF . That May , Hely was seconded to the Department of Defence and posted to Washington , D.C. , to head up the Australian Joint Services Staff . He was succeeded as AOC Training Command by Air Vice Marshal Ian McLachlan . 
 Hely became Air Member for Personnel ( AMP ) on 28 March 1960 , taking over from the acting AMP , Air Commodore Frank Headlam . Responsible for the Personnel Branch of the RAAF , the position of AMP occupied a seat on the Air Board , the service 's controlling body that comprised its senior officers and was chaired by the Chief of the Air Staff ( CAS ) . The Air Force expanded greatly during Hely 's term as AMP , owing to Australia 's increasing commitment to the security of South East Asia , and the most significant rearmament program the RAAF had undertaken outside of World War II . Its permanent establishment increased from a steady 15 @,@ 000 or so in the 1950s to over 18 @,@ 000 by 1966 . Hely himself initiated a scheme to attract staff from the Royal Air Force , which was suffering cutbacks , by opening a recruitment office in London and taking advantage of the Australian government 's assisted passage scheme to import trained personnel and their families . He was appointed a Companion of the Order of the Bath ( CB ) in the 1964 New Year Honours for his " tactful and careful handling of personnel matters " , and for having " done much to improve the manning level of the Air Force " . As AMP , Hely put forward proposals to increase the number of diploma @-@ qualified engineering and equipment officers in the Air Force . He was also closely involved in deliberations concerning the balance of academic and military studies at the RAAF Academy ( previously RAAF College ) , the outcome of which is considered to have left the course biased towards pure science , rather than its applications to air power . 
 = = Retirement = = 
 Hely retired on 24 August 1966 , after almost forty years in the military . He was succeeded the following day as AMP by Air Vice Marshal Candy . In retirement , Hely was active in the Canberra branch of the Air Force Association . He died of cancer in Canberra on 20 May 1970 . Survived by his wife and children , he was accorded an Air Force funeral at St John the Baptist Church and cremated at Norwood Park Crematorium , Gungahlin . The official mourning party included Chairman of the Chiefs of Staff Committee ( CCOSC ) General Sir John Wilton , former CCOSC Air Chief Marshal Sir Frederick Scherger , Secretary of Defence Sir Arthur Tange , CAS Air Marshal Colin Hannah , former CAS Air Marshal Sir Alister Murdoch , Vice Admiral Sir Victor Smith , Air Vice Marshal Brian Eaton , and Group Captain John Waddy . The guns at Duntroon were fired in salute as the cortege left the church . 
