 Leake consequently moved with speed , heading south and west toward the French settlements . On 28 August the fleet made its first captures , taking a French ship recently arrived from the French West Indian isle of Martinique , did battle with those at Trepassey Bay , and two more that Lichfield chased down . The next day Leake captured another French ship in St. Mary 's Bay , and was rejoined by Montagu , which had taken three prizes the day before . Ordering Montagu , Lichfield , and Charles Galley to make for Colinet , Leake took the rest of the fleet to St. Mary 's , where he chased a ship aground , and then sent out boats to refloat her . Landing parties were sent ashore , where they destroyed fishing stages , houses , shipbuilding equipment and unfinished ships , and many small boats . 
 After destroying the facilities at Colinet , the fleet regrouped on the 30th . Leake ordered a few of his ships to escort the captured prizes to St. John 's , and then to cruise off Cape Race for 14 days looking for prizes . Leake detached Montagu and Lichfield to destroy St. Lawrence while he sailed for Saint Pierre . 
 = = = Saint Pierre = = = 
 Leake 's account places his first arrival off Saint Pierre on 1 September . Bad weather prevented him from entering the harbour until the next day . He was therefore only able to capture two of the eight ships that had been in the harbour , because the rest got away through a shallow channel . On the 3rd he again approached the harbour , but did not report landing , and left then Saint Pierre to head for St. John 's . 
 Leake 's fleet reassembled at St. John 's on 7 September . He then detached about half the fleet , led by the Medway and Charles Galley , to return to Saint Pierre to destroy it , while he took the other half north toward Bonavista . There he hoped to acquire experienced pilots with knowledge of other French harbours . Failing in this endeavour ( none of the pilots he found had the needed experience , and also expressed concerns over the advancing winter conditions ) , he returned to St. John 's . He was met there on 2 October by the other half of the fleet , which had completed the destruction of Saint Pierre . 
 Saint Pierre 's Governor <unk> reported in a letter dated 11 October ( presumably New Style , thus 30 September Old Style ) that the English had twice landed men , on 7 and 8 October . He reported the second landing to consist of 400 men , who besieged him in his small fort . He surrendered after they exchanged gunfire for several hours , after which the English destroyed most of the facilities . They then deposited 52 French prisoners captured earlier in the expedition , and left . 
 = = = Cruising for the French convoy = = = 
 Leake then divided the fleet to begin the return to Europe . Montagu and Looe were assigned to convoy merchants and prizes destined for Portugal , while Reserve , Charles Galley , and Firebrand were set to escort those destined for England . Leake took the rest of the fleet and cruised off Cape Race for several weeks , hoping to intercept the French convoy that would have to pass nearby before winter set it . Weather conditions were often quite stormy , but Leake managed to take eight prizes before he finally sailed for England in mid @-@ October . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Leake reported taking 51 ships . Sixteen were sent to England , six to Portugal , and five were sold at St. John 's . He left two ships at St. John 's as part of its defence force . The remaining ships , including their cargoes and trade goods that had not been loaded before they were taken , were destroyed . Six French settlements were destroyed : Trepassey , St. Mary 's , Colinet , Great and Little St. Lawrence , and Saint Pierre . Upon his return to England , Leake was received with favour by Queen Anne . He was promoted to rear admiral for his actions , and went on to have a distinguished career for the rest of the war , serving in European waters . 
 Newfoundland continued to be contested throughout the war , with each side waging economic war against the other 's settlements , destroying fishing stages and other infrastructure . The main English settlement at St. John 's was besieged in 1705 and captured in 1709 by French forces from Plaisance . Sovereignty of the entire island passed to Great Britain with the 1713 Treaty of Utrecht , although the French were granted some rights to dry fish on shore . Saint Pierre also came under British control , but it and neighboring Miquelon were eventually given to France after the War of the Austrian Succession . 
 = Manchester ( The West Wing ) = 
 " Manchester " is the two @-@ part third season premiere of the American political drama television series The West Wing . The episodes deal with President Bartlet 's decision to run for re @-@ election , and the activities of the weeks leading up to his official announcement . Both parts were written by Aaron Sorkin and directed by Thomas Schlamme , and the episodes contain the first appearances by Ron Silver , Evan Handler and Connie Britton . These episodes also mark the first episode where Stockard Channing is added to opening credits , marking that she became a regular character this season . The second episode was an Emmy nominee for Outstanding Art Direction For A Single @-@ Camera Series . It also earned a Golden Reel Award nomination for Best Sound Editing in a Television Series . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The episode picks up at the press conference immediately where last season 's cliff @-@ hanger ( Two Cathedrals ) left off , and what was then only implicit is here made clear : President Bartlet is running for a second term . When asked if he plans to seek re @-@ election , he answers " Yeah , and I 'm gonna win . " From that point on the story develops in dual storylines , one following immediately upon the press conference , the other taking place four weeks later , as the staff is preparing for the official campaign announcement in Manchester , New Hampshire . 
 Leo decides to bring in Bruno Gianelli ( Silver ) , a highly accomplished political consultant , to help with the re @-@ election campaign , but conflict soon arises between Gianelli 's and Bartlet 's respective staffs . The conflict is particularly intense between the idealistic Communications Director Toby and the more pragmatic Doug <unk> ( Handler ) . A problem appears when it becomes clear that RU @-@ 486 – an emergency contraception – will receive government approval on the same day as the announcement ceremony . This will not only take attention away from the event , but also give political ammunition to the Right , and raise questions about the professionalism of the campaign . Josh strongly wants to " wave off the FDA " on the release , and it later appears that his underlying motive for this is to rectify a previous mistake . In the early part of the story , he applied pressure to pass a bill on anti @-@ tobacco measures , but Gianelli points out the error in passing a bill that could have given them political leverage against the Republicans in the upcoming election . 
 In the ongoing conflict in Haiti , a rescue mission is staged to save American citizens . Bartlet decides to send in peacekeeping troops , in spite of political consequences . CJ then , when announcing the decision to the press , makes a grave mistake by saying that she thinks " the president 's relieved to be focusing on something that matters " , implying both that the MS incident was unimportant and that the President was happy to use an incident in which American lives are at risk to deflect attention away from his illness . Leo responds by sitting her out for the next press briefing , and she reacts by offering her resignation . Yet she is eventually persuaded to stay by the president 's heartfelt assurance that he considers her a vital member of the administration . 
 Bartlet 's wife Abbey is not pleased with the president making his bid for re @-@ election without consulting her . Later on she still decides to join him in Manchester . She tells him that he needs to reach out to his staff , some of whom believe that he should make a public apology for concealing his MS. In the end he makes the apology , not publicly , but privately to his nearest advisors . He assures them that , even though Gianelli 's help is much needed , they will still run a campaign that does not shrink from handling controversial issues . In a final speech he tells them that " We 're gonna write a new book . Right here . Right now . " 
 = = Production and cultural references = = 
 The scenes purporting to be in Manchester were not shot in New Hampshire , in spite of lobbying from local residents . John Spencer , who played Leo McGarry on the show , said : " I certainly understand where the people from New Hampshire are coming from . But I think it 's logistics . New Hampshire is not close enough " . For financial reasons the producers decided to film the outside parts of the episodes in <unk> , Virginia instead . The town was said to have the " quiet streets , a mix of mostly older architectural styles , fieldstone fences , and breathtaking views of rolling countryside " that the show was looking for . The house chosen – out of 55 contenders – to pass as the president 's farmhouse , was the home of Purcellville mayor John Marsh . Marsh 's friends and neighbours also appear as extras in the crowd scenes . 
 For the sub @-@ plot about the morning @-@ after pill , former Clinton economic advisor Gene Sperling was brought in for consultation . Such a drug , called <unk> , was in fact approved in the United States in September 2000 ; one of the last months of the Clinton presidency . Also the political issues related to Haiti have close parallels to an episode in the Clinton presidency : the return of President Jean @-@ Bertrand Aristide to power by the United States in 1994 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The second episode was an Emmy nominee for Outstanding Art Direction For A Single @-@ Camera Series . It also earned a Golden Reel Award nomination for Best Sound Editing in Television Series . The two episodes were also nominated for Series Storyline at the 2002 <unk> Awards , a prize awarded for " accurate and honest portrayals of sexuality " . 
 Jenny Halper , writing for UGO , was less than impressed with the pre @-@ season special episode , and wrote that " the season really kicks off " with the " flashback intensive " " Manchester " <unk> . Britt Gillette , of The DVD Report , counted " Manchester Part I " among the more dramatic episodes on the show , with special reference to C.J. ' s blunder , and the debate over the president 's apology . Deborah of Television Without Pity gave both episodes the grade " A " . The A.V. Club 's Steve Heisler gave the two episodes a B + . He believed these two episodes were " meant to center the characters and the audience " after the previous season , ending in the season finale " Two Cathedrals " . " And like most things on The West Wing , " he continued , " it ’ s a long , messy , spectacular road to a perfect ( likely <unk> ) end . " 
 = Telopea oreades = 
 Telopea oreades , commonly known as the <unk> , <unk> or Victorian waratah , is a large shrub or small tree in the family Proteaceae . Native to southeastern Australia , it is found in wet sclerophyll forest and rainforest on rich acidic soils high in organic matter . No subspecies are recognised , though a northern isolated population hybridises extensively with the Braidwood waratah ( T. mongaensis ) . Reaching a height of up to 19 metres ( 62 feet ) , T. oreades grows with a single trunk and erect habit . It has dark green leaves with prominent veins that are 11 – 28 centimetres ( 4 @.@ 3 – 11 in ) long and 1 @.@ 5 – 6 cm ( 0 @.@ 6 – 2 @.@ 4 in ) wide . The red flower heads , known as inflorescences , appear in late spring . Each is composed of up to 60 individual flowers . 
 In the garden , T. oreades grows in soils with good drainage and ample moisture in part @-@ shaded or sunny positions . Several commercially available cultivars that are hybrid forms with T. speciosissima have been developed , such as the ' Shady Lady ' series . The timber is hard and has been used for making furniture and tool handles . 
 = = Description = = 
 Telopea oreades grows as a large shrub or narrow tree 9 – 19 m ( 30 – 62 ft ) high with a trunk reaching 45 to 60 cm ( 18 to 24 in ) in diameter . <unk> brown , the trunk is thin in relation to the tree 's height and not buttressed . Its surface is smooth with horizontal lenticels and warty protuberances . Smaller branches are more brown and smooth . Young plants have a much more erect habit than other members of the genus Telopea and their stems have a distinct reddish tinge . The shiny dark green leaves are arranged alternately along the stems . The leaves are narrow @-@ obovate to spathulate , and measure 11 – 28 centimetres ( 4 @.@ 3 – 11 in ) long and 1 @.@ 5 – 6 cm ( 0 @.@ 59 – 2 @.@ 36 in ) wide . They have a sunken midrib on the upperside ( and corresponding ridge on the underside ) with four to six pairs of lateral veins visible at a 45 degree angle to the midline . They veer and converge to form an easily seen vein that runs around 0 @.@ 5 cm ( 0 @.@ 20 in ) inside the leaf margin . The undersurface is paler and greyer . When dried , the leaves appear to have a granular texture . 
 Flowering occurs between October and December in its native range , with plants at higher elevations flowering later than ones at lower altitude . The crimson flowerheads , known as inflorescences , are about 9 cm ( 3 @.@ 5 in ) in diameter . They are composed of 36 to 60 individual flowers with green to pink bracts , which may be up to 3 cm ( 1 @.@ 2 in ) long . Each flower is encased in a 2 @.@ 5 cm ( 0 @.@ 98 in ) long perianth , which is a much brighter red on the surface facing the centre of the flower than the surface facing outwards . Anthesis , or the opening of the flowers , begins with those at the centre of the flowerhead and moves to the edges or base . The individual flower bears a sessile anther ( that is , it lacks a filament ) , which lies next to the stigma at the end of the style . The ovary lies at the base of the style and atop a stalk known as the gynophore , and it is from here that the seed pods then develop . Meanwhile , a crescent @-@ shaped nectary lies at the base of the gynophore . 
 After flowering , the curved leathery to woody follicles develop ; these are 5 to 7 @.@ 5 cm ( 2 @.@ 0 to 3 @.@ 0 in ) long , which somewhat resemble a boat in shape . These ripen the following May to September , and split open to reveal ( and spill ) 10 – 16 seeds . Arranged in two columns , the winged , flat brown seeds are around 1 cm ( 0 @.@ 39 in ) long with a roughly rectangular wing 3 @.@ 5 – 4 cm ( 1 @.@ 4 – 1 @.@ 6 in ) long . New shoots often grow through flowerheads . 
 It can be difficult to distinguish T. oreades from T. mongaensis though the leaves of the latter species are more prominently veined , and mostly ( but not always ) narrower than 2 cm ( 0 @.@ 79 in ) wide . Telopea oreades flowers around a month earlier than T. mongaensis in areas where both are present . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The Gippsland waratah was first formally described by the Victorian Government Botanist Ferdinand von Mueller in 1861 in Fragmenta <unk> <unk> . The type material was collected in rugged mountainous country around <unk> Creek , a tributary of the Genoa River in south @-@ eastern New South Wales . Mueller had been surveying the mountainous eastern part of the state since the 1850s . The species name is derived from the Ancient Greek <unk> " mountain " and hence means " of or relating to a mountain " . The only alternative scientific name proposed was in 1891 , when Otto Kuntze named it as Hylogyne oreades , but it was rejected as an illegitimate name . Common names applies to the species include <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , and tree waratah . 
 Telopea oreades is one of five species from southeastern Australia that make up the genus Telopea . No subspecies are recognised . It has been difficult to distinguish from the similar T. mongaensis , but microscopic analysis has revealed that T. oreades has features termed <unk> while T. mongaensis does not . The two are sister species , and their next closest relative is the Tasmanian waratah ( T. truncata ) . 
 A disjunct northern population of T. oreades grows together with T. mongaensis in the southern Monga Valley in southern New South Wales , with some hybrids reported . Crisp and Weston concluded that the two species for the most part did not hybridise there . However , a genetic study using microsatellites found there was extensive hybridisation , with much of the presumed pure T. oreades showing a close relation to T. mongaensis . The populations of waratahs are thought to have grown and shrunk with the ebb and flow of ice ages in the Pleistocene , finally stranding a population of T. oreades located alongside T. mongaensis as conditions suitable for waratahs changed in southeastern Australia . 
 The genus lies in the subtribe Embothriinae , along with the tree waratahs ( Alloxylon ) from eastern Australia and New Caledonia , and Oreocallis and Chilean firetree ( Embothrium coccineum ) from South America . Almost all these species have red terminal flowers , and hence the subtribe 's origin and floral appearance must predate the splitting of Gondwana into Australia , Antarctica , and South America over 60 million years ago . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 Telopea oreades occurs in moist forests and temperate rainforests of coastal ranges and tableland escarpments in two disjunct areas of southeastern Australia . The first is centred on East Gippsland in Victoria , from Orbost to the vicinity of Eden across the border in far southeastern New South Wales . There is a more northerly population around the Monga Valley near Braidwood , New South Wales extending to Moss Vale . There are unconfirmed reports of the species in the vicinity of Brown Mountain and <unk> State Forest in southern New South Wales , which lie between the two areas . Plants in Victoria are found at altitudes ranging from 200 metres ( 660 ft ) in Lind National Park to 1 @,@ 300 metres ( 4 @,@ 300 ft ) on Mount Ellery . Wetter eastern and southern slopes are favoured habitats , and the annual rainfall ranges from 1 @,@ 000 to 2 @,@ 000 mm ( 39 to 79 in ) . 
 T. oreades grows in acidic soil that is high in nutrients and organic matter . Associated tree species in Victoria include shining gum ( Eucalyptus nitens ) , messmate ( E. obliqua ) , mountain grey gum ( E. <unk> ) , cut @-@ tail ( E. <unk> ) , silvertop ash ( E. sieberi ) , southern sassafras ( <unk> <unk> ) , black <unk> ( Elaeocarpus <unk> ) , blanket leaf ( <unk> arborescens ) , Australian <unk> ( Acacia <unk> ) , privet mock ‐ olive ( <unk> <unk> ) , <unk> ( Pittosporum bicolor ) , Errinundra plum pine ( Podocarpus sp . <unk> Rocks ) , Errinundra pepper ( <unk> <unk> subsp. robusta ) and soft tree fern ( <unk> antarctica ) . 
 = = = Conservation = = = 
 Telopea oreades is not listed under Commonwealth environmental legislation and is not considered by respective state authorities to be rare or threatened in Victoria or New South Wales . The species does occur in the threatened Cool Temperate Rainforest Community in Victoria that is protected under the Flora and Fauna Guarantee Act , and it is a component of the threatened Southern Escarpment Wet <unk> Forests of far southern New South Wales . Furthermore , planted specimens are frequently stolen from bush regeneration sites as they are desirable garden plants . Conversely in New Zealand , there is a report of T. oreades escaping into <unk> scrub from the trout hatchery gardens on the Tongariro River south of Lake Taupo . 
 = = Ecology = = 
 The prominent position and striking colour of Telopea oreades and many of its relatives within the subtribe Embothriinae — both in Australia and South America — strongly suggest it is adapted to pollination by birds , and has been for over 60 million years . Birds recorded visiting the flowers for their nectar include red wattlebird ( Anthochaera carunculata ) , eastern spinebill ( Acanthorhynchus tenuirostris ) , crescent honeyeater ( Phylidonyris pyrrhopterus ) , yellow @-@ faced honeyeater ( Lichenostomus chrysops ) , brown @-@ headed honeyeater ( Melithreptus brevirostris ) , white @-@ naped honeyeater ( Melithreptus lunatus ) and silvereye ( Zosterops lateralis ) . 
 T. oreades has a central taproot and few lateral roots . Like most Proteaceae , it has fine proteoid roots that arise from larger roots . These are roots with dense clusters of short lateral rootlets that form a mat in the soil just below the leaf litter . They are particularly efficient at absorbing nutrients from nutrient @-@ poor soils , including the phosphorus @-@ deficient native soils of Australia . 
 T. oreades has a swollen woody base largely under the soil known as a lignotuber , which stores energy and nutrients as a resource for rapid growth after a bushfire . The wet forests in which it grows seldom catch fire . When they do , the plant community becomes a more open sclerophyll woodland until slow @-@ growing plants with larger leaves take over . New shoots grow from the lignotuber , which survives bushfire as the rest of the plant above ground is burnt . The seed also germinates and grows in post @-@ bushfire soil , which is higher in nutrients and more open with fewer competing plant species . Waratah seeds are often eaten — and destroyed — by animals and do not travel far ( several metres ) from the parent plants . 
 = = Cultivation and uses = = 
 Telopea oreades needs a well @-@ drained location as well as reliable moisture to thrive . Soil with some clay content is beneficial . It is more shade @-@ tolerant than the more popular New South Wales waratah , preferring part @-@ shade but tolerating sunny aspects . It tolerates moderate frosts . Plants can be hard @-@ pruned — <unk> old stems and branches can rejuvenate mature plants . Plants can benefit from low @-@ phosphorus fertilizer applied in spring and autumn . Propagation is by seed , the germination rates of which fall significantly after several months ' storage unless refrigerated , or by cuttings of new growth that has just hardened . Cultivars must be propagated by cutting to make daughter plants identical to the parent . 
 T. oreades has been grown successfully in England . The plant was first cultivated there by Canon Arthur Townsend Boscawen at <unk> in Cornwall from seed that he obtained in 1910 . He had succeeded in bringing the plant into flower by 1915 , providing material for illustration in Curtis 's Botanical Magazine in 1916 . A plant in Cornwall reached 4 @.@ 6 metres ( 15 ft ) in height , while another at Wakehurst Place reached 2 @.@ 5 metres ( 8 @.@ 2 ft ) in the late 1980s . Although thriving at Wakehurst , the species can be very sensitive to English soils . The Royal Horticultural Society awarded the species an Award of Merit in 1916 . 
 A selected white @-@ flowered form from the Errinundra Plateau , which was originally known as ' Plateau View Alba ' or ' Plateau View White ' , was registered by the Australian Cultivar Registration Authority in 1990 as ' <unk> White ' . Plantsmen have also developed several hybrids with T. speciosissima , looking to combine the hardiness of T. oreades with the showier flowerheads of the latter . <unk> , <unk> and even white @-@ flowered cultivars are available . 
 Telopea ' Champagne ' is a cultivar registered under plant breeders ' rights ( PBR ) in 2006 . Its creamy yellow flowerheads appear from October to December . It is a three @-@ way hybrid between T. speciosissima , T. oreades and the yellow @-@ flowered form of T. truncata . 
 Telopea ' Golden Globe ' is a cultivar registered under PBR in 2005 . Larger than ' Champagne ' , it is also a three @-@ way hybrid between T. speciosissima , T. oreades and the yellow @-@ flowered form of T. truncata . It has been propagated and sold as ' Shady Lady Yellow ' . It was originally bred in the Dandenong Ranges east of Melbourne . 
 Telopea ' Shady Lady Red ' is a larger shrub that may reach 5 m ( 16 ft ) high and 2 or 3 m ( 6 @.@ 6 or 9 @.@ 8 ft ) wide . A hybrid of T. speciosissima and T. oreades , it arose by chance in a Melbourne garden . The first of the ' Shady Lady ' series of cultivars , it became commercially available in the mid @-@ 1980s . The flowerheads are smaller and lack the bracts of the speciosissima parent . As its name suggests , it tolerates more shade . It is vigorous and more reliable in temperate and subtropical areas , and grows in semi @-@ shade or sun . 
 Telopea ' Shady Lady White ' is a white @-@ flowered hybrid between T. speciosissima and T. oreades . 
 Telopea ' Shady Lady Pink ' is the result of a cross between ' Shady Lady Red ' and ' Shady Lady White ' . 
 Telopea ' Shady Lady Crimson ' is a selected colour form developed from ' Shady Lady Red ' . It became commercially available in Australia in 2010 . 
 The timber is fairly hard and resembles silky oak ( Grevillea robusta ) . It is durable and can be readily polished and worked with , making it amenable for use in furniture , picture frames and tool handles . 
 = SMS Kaiser Max ( 1862 ) = 
 SMS Kaiser Max was the lead ship of the Kaiser Max class of armored frigates built for the Austrian Navy in the 1860s . Her keel was laid in October 1861 at the Stabilimento Tecnico Triestino shipyard ; she was launched in March 1862 , and was completed in 1863 . She carried her main battery — composed of sixteen 48 @-@ pounder guns and fifteen 24 @-@ pounders — in a traditional broadside arrangement , protected by an armored belt that was 110 mm ( 4 @.@ 3 in ) thick . 
 Kaiser Max saw action at the Battle of Lissa in July 1866 . She engaged the Italian coastal defense ship Palestro , which later exploded and sank after sustaining heavy Austrian fire . Kaiser Max emerged from the battle largely unscathed , save for minor damage to her funnel and rigging inflicted by the armored frigate Re d 'Italia . After the war , Kaiser Max was modernized slightly in 1867 to correct her poor seakeeping and improve her armament , but she was nevertheless rapidly outpaced by naval developments in the 1860s and 1870s . Obsolescent by 1873 , Kaiser Max was officially " rebuilt " , though in actuality she was broken up for scrap , with only her armor plate , parts of her machinery , and other miscellaneous parts being reused in the new Kaiser Max . 
 = = Design = = 
 Kaiser Max was 70 @.@ 78 meters ( 232 @.@ 2 ft ) long between perpendiculars ; she had a beam of 10 m ( 33 ft ) and an average draft of 6 @.@ 32 m ( 20 @.@ 7 ft ) . She displaced 3 @,@ 588 metric tons ( 3 @,@ 531 long tons ; 3 @,@ 955 short tons ) . She had a crew of 386 . Her propulsion system consisted of one single @-@ expansion steam engine that drove a single screw propeller . The number and type of her coal @-@ fired boilers have not survived . Her engine produced a top speed of 11 @.@ 4 knots ( 21 @.@ 1 km / h ; 13 @.@ 1 mph ) from 1 @,@ 926 indicated horsepower ( 1 @,@ 436 kW ) . She could steam for about 1 @,@ 200 nautical miles ( 2 @,@ 200 km ; 1 @,@ 400 mi ) at a speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . 
 Kaiser Max was a broadside ironclad , and she was armed with a main battery of sixteen 48 @-@ pounder muzzle @-@ loading guns and fifteen 24 @-@ pounder 15 cm ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) rifled muzzle @-@ loading guns . She also carried a single 12 @-@ pounder gun and a six @-@ pounder The ship 's hull was sheathed with wrought iron armor that was 110 mm ( 4 in ) thick . 
 = = Service history = = 
 Kaiser Max was built by the Stabilimento Tecnico Triestino ( STT ) shipyard ; her keel was laid down in October 1861 , and her completed hull was launched on 14 March 1862 . Fitting @-@ out work was completed the following year , when she was commissioned into the Austrian fleet . She proved to be very wet forward owing to her open bow , and as a result , tended to handle poorly . In June 1866 , Italy declared war on Austria , as part of the Third Italian War of Independence , which was fought concurrently with the Austro @-@ Prussian War . Rear Admiral Wilhelm von Tegetthoff , the commander of the Austrian Fleet , immediately began to mobilize his fleet . As the ships became fully manned , they began to conduct training exercises in Fasana . Tegetthoff brought the Austrian fleet to Ancona on 27 June , in an attempt to draw out the Italians , but the Italian commander , Admiral Carlo Pellion di Persano , refused to engage Tegetthoff . Tegetthoff made another sortie on 6 July , but again could not bring the Italian fleet to battle . 
 = = = Battle of Lissa = = = 
 On 16 July , Persano took the Italian fleet , with twelve ironclads , out of Ancona , bound for the island of Lissa , where they arrived on the 18th . With them , they brought troop transports carrying 3 @,@ 000 soldiers . Persano then spent the next two days bombarding the Austrian defenses of the island and unsuccessfully attempting to force a landing . Tegetthoff received a series of telegrams between the 17 and 19 July notifying him of the Italian attack , which he initially believed to be a feint to draw the Austrian fleet away from its main base at Pola and Venice . By the morning of the 19th , however , he was convinced that Lissa was in fact the Italian objective , and so he requested permission to attack . As Tegetthoff 's fleet arrived off Lissa on the morning of 20 July , Persano 's fleet was arrayed for another landing attempt . The latter 's ships were divided into three groups , with only the first two able to concentrate in time to meet the Austrians . Tegetthoff had arranged his ironclad ships into a wedge @-@ shaped formation , with Kaiser Max on his left flank ; the wooden warships of the second and third divisions followed behind in the same formation . 
 While he was forming up his ships , Persano transferred from his flagship , Re d 'Italia to the turret ship Affondatore . This created a gap in the Italian line , and Tegetthoff seized the opportunity to divide the Italian fleet and create a melee . He made a pass through the gap , but failed to ram any of the Italian ships , forcing him to turn around and make another attempt . After the second pass , Kaiser Max engaged Re d 'Italia , with the latter damaging Kaiser Max 's rigging and funnel . After the Italian ship had been rammed and sunk by Erzherzog Ferdinand Max , Kaiser Max attempted to ram another Italian vessel without success . She then engaged the small coastal defense ship Palestro with fifteen broadsides . The Austrian ironclad then Juan de Austria became surrounded by Italian ships , prompting Kaiser Max to come to her rescue . 
 Around this time , Persano broke off the engagement , and though his ships still outnumbered the Austrians , he refused to counter @-@ attack with his badly demoralized forces . In addition , the fleet was low on coal and ammunition . The Italian fleet began to withdraw , followed by the Austrians ; Tegetthoff , having gotten the better of the action , kept his distance so as not to risk his success . As night began to fall , the opposing fleets disengaged completely , heading for Ancona and Pola , respectively . Kaiser Max had emerged from the battle essentially undamaged , the Italian shells having been unable to penetrate her armor . 
 = = = Later career = = = 
 After returning to Pola , Tegetthoff kept his fleet in the northern Adriatic , where it patrolled against a possible Italian attack . The Italian ships never came , and on 12 August , the two countries signed the Armistice of Cormons ; this ended the fighting and led to the Treaty of Vienna . Though Austria had defeated Italy at Lissa and on land at the Battle of Custoza , Italy 's ally Prussia had decisively defeated the Austrian army at the Battle of Königgrätz . As a result , Austria , which became Austria @-@ Hungary in the Ausgleich of 1867 , was forced to cede the city of Venice to Italy . 
 Kaiser Max was rebuilt in 1867 , particularly to correct her poor seakeeping . Her open bow was plated over and she was rearmed with twelve 7 @-@ inch ( 178 mm ) muzzleloaders manufactured by Armstrong and two 3 @-@ inch ( 76 mm ) 4 @-@ pounder guns . By 1873 , the ship was obsolescent and had a thoroughly rotted hull , so the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy decided to replace the ship . Parliamentary objection to granting funds for new ships forced the navy to resort to subterfuge to replace the ship . Reconstruction projects were routinely approved by the parliament , so the navy officially " rebuilt " Kaiser Max and her sister ships . In reality , Kaiser Max was completely broken up at the STT shipyard starting in December 1873 , and only some parts of the engines , her armor plate , and other miscellaneous parts were salvaged for use in the new Kaiser Max , so @-@ named to conceal the fact that she was a new vessel . 
 = The Negro Motorist Green Book = 
 The Negro Motorist Green Book ( at times styled The Negro Motorist Green @-@ Book or titled The Negro Travelers ' Green Book ) was an annual guidebook for African @-@ American <unk> , commonly referred to simply as the Green Book . It was originated and published by New York City mailman Victor H. Green in the United States from 1936 to 1966 , during the Jim Crow era , when open and often legally prescribed discrimination against non @-@ whites was widespread . Although pervasive racial discrimination and black poverty limited ownership of cars among African Americans , the emerging black middle class became car owners . In response , Green expanded the coverage in his book from the New York area to much of North America , also founding a travel agency . 
 Many blacks took to driving , in part to avoid segregation on public transportation . As the writer George Schuyler put it in 1930 , " all Negroes who can do so purchase an automobile as soon as possible in order to be free of discomfort , discrimination , segregation and insult . " Black Americans employed as athletes , entertainers , and salesmen also traveled frequently for work purposes . African @-@ American travelers faced a variety of dangers and inconveniences , such as white @-@ owned businesses refusing to serve them or repair their vehicles , being refused accommodation or food by white @-@ owned hotels , and threats of physical violence and forcible expulsion from whites @-@ only " sundown towns " . Green founded and published The Negro Motorist Green Book to tackle such problems , compiling resources " to give the Negro traveler information that will keep him from running into difficulties , embarrassments and to make his trip more enjoyable . " 
 From a New York @-@ focused first edition published in 1936 , Green expanded the work to cover much of North America , including most of the United States and parts of Canada , Mexico , the Caribbean , and Bermuda . The Green Book became " the bible of black travel during Jim Crow " , enabling black travelers to find lodgings , businesses , and gas stations that would serve them along the road . It was little known outside the African @-@ American community . Shortly after passage of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 , which outlawed the types of racial discrimination that had made the Green Book necessary , publication ceased and it fell into obscurity . There has been a revived interest in it in the early 21st century in connection with studies of black travel during the Jim Crow era . 
 Los Angeles is now considering offering special protection to the sites that kept black travelers safe . Ken Bernstein , principal planner for the city 's Office of Historic Resources notes , " At the very least , these sites can be incorporated into our city 's online inventory system . They are part of the story of African Americans in Los Angeles , and the story of Los Angeles itself writ large . " 
 = = Traveling while black : the African @-@ American travel experience = = 
 Until long after the Civil Rights era ( 1955 – 1968 ) , black travelers in the United States faced major problems to which most whites were oblivious . White supremacists had long sought to restrict black mobility . As a result , simply undertaking an auto journey was fraught with difficulty for black people and was potentially a dangerous undertaking . They were subjected to racial profiling by police departments ( " Driving While Black " ) , faced being punished for being seen as " uppity " or " too prosperous " if they were driving a car ( an act that many whites regarded as a white prerogative ) , and risked harassment or worse on and off the highway . A bitter commentary published in a 1947 issue of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People 's magazine , The Crisis , highlighted the uphill struggle blacks faced in undertaking recreational travel : 
 Would a Negro like to pursue a little happiness at a theater , a beach , pool , hotel , restaurant , on a train , plane , or ship , a golf course , summer or winter resort ? Would he like to stop overnight at a tourist camp while he motors about his native land ' Seeing America First ' ? Well , just let him try ! 
 Such restrictions had their origins dating back to colonial times , and were found throughout the United States . After the end of legal slavery in the North and then later in the South after the Civil War , most freedmen continued to live at little more than a subsistence level , but a minority of African Americans gained a measure of prosperity . They could plan leisure travel for the first time . Affluent blacks arranged large group excursions for as many as 2 @,@ 000 people at a time , for instance , traveling by rail from New Orleans to resorts along the coast of the Gulf of Mexico . In the pre @-@ Jim Crow era this necessarily meant mingling with whites in hotels , transportation and leisure facilities . They were aided in this by the Civil Rights Act of 1875 , which had made it illegal to discriminate against African Americans in public accommodations and public transportation . 
 They encountered a white backlash , particularly in the South , where by 1877 white Democrats controlled every state government . The Act was declared unconstitutional by the United States Supreme Court in 1883 , resulting in states and cities passing numerous segregation laws . White governments in the South required even interstate railroads to enforce their segregation laws , despite national legislation requiring equal treatment of passengers . The US Supreme Court ruled in Plessy v. Ferguson ( 1896 ) that " separate but equal " accommodations were constitutional but in practice , facilities for blacks were far from equal , generally being of lesser quality and underfunded . Blacks faced restrictions and exclusion throughout the United States . Generally if blacks were not barred entirely from facilities , they could use them only at different times from whites or in different places , such as segregated ( and usually inferior ) areas . 
 In 1917 , the black writer W. E. B. Du Bois observed that the impact of " ever @-@ recurring race discrimination " had made it so difficult to travel to any number of destinations , from popular resorts to major cities , that it was now " a puzzling query as to what to do with vacations " . It was a problem that came to affect an increasing number of black people in the first decades of the 20th century . Tens of thousands of southern African Americans migrated from farms in the south to factories and domestic service in the north . No longer confined to living at a subsistence level , many gained enough disposable income and time to engage in leisure travel . The development of affordable mass @-@ produced automobiles liberated black Americans from having to rely on the " Jim Crow cars " – smoky , battered and uncomfortable railroad carriages which were the separate but decidedly unequal alternatives to more salubrious whites @-@ only carriages . As one black magazine writer commented in 1933 , in an automobile " it 's mighty good to be the skipper for a change , and pilot our craft whither and where we will . We feel like Vikings . What if our craft is blunt of nose and limited of power and our sea is <unk> ; it 's good for the spirit to just give the old railroad Jim Crow the laugh . " 
 Middle @-@ class blacks throughout the United States " were not at all sure how to behave or how whites would behave toward them " , as Bart Landry puts it . In Cincinnati , Ohio , the African @-@ American newspaper editor Wendell Dabney wrote of the situation in the 1920s that " hotels , restaurants , eating and drinking places , almost universally are closed to all people in whom the least tincture of colored blood can be detected . " Areas without significant black populations outside the South often refused to accommodate them : not one hotel or other accommodation was open to blacks in Salt Lake City , Utah , in the 1920s . Black travelers were stranded if they had to stop there overnight . Only six percent of the more than 100 motels that lined U.S. Route 66 in Albuquerque , New Mexico , admitted black customers . Across the whole state of New Hampshire , only three motels in 1956 served African Americans . 
 George Schuyler reported in 1943 , " Many colored families have motored all across the United States without being able to secure overnight accommodations at a single tourist camp or hotel . " He suggested that black Americans would find it easier to travel abroad than in their own country . In Chicago in 1945 , St. Clair Drake and Horace A. Cayton reported that " the city 's hotel managers , by general agreement , do not sanction the use of hotel facilities by Negroes , particularly sleeping accommodations . " One incident reported by Drake and Cayton illustrated the discriminatory treatment meted out even to blacks within racially mixed groups : 
 Two colored schoolteachers and several white friends attended a luncheon at an exclusive coffee shop . The Negro women were allowed to sit down , but the waitress ignored them and served the white women . One of the colored women protested and was told that she could eat in the kitchen . 
 = = = Coping with discrimination on the road = = = 
 While automobiles made it much easier for black Americans to be independently mobile , the difficulties they faced in traveling were such that , as Lester B. Granger of the National Urban League puts it , " so far as travel is concerned , Negroes are America 's last pioneers . " Black travelers often had to carry buckets or portable toilets in the trunks of their cars because they were usually barred from bathrooms and rest areas in service stations and roadside stops . Travel essentials such as gasoline were difficult to purchase because of discrimination at gas stations . To avoid such problems on long trips , African Americans often packed meals and carried containers of gasoline in their cars . Writing of the road trips that he made as a boy in the 1950s , Courtland Milloy of the Washington Post recalled that his mother spent the evening before the trip frying chicken and boiling eggs so that his family would have something to eat along the way the next day . 
 One black motorist observed in the early 1940s that while black travelers felt free in the mornings , by the early afternoon a " small cloud " had appeared . By the late afternoon , " it casts a shadow of apprehension on our hearts and sours us a little . ' Where , ' it asks us , ' will you stay tonight ? ' " . They often had to spend hours in the evening trying to find somewhere to stay , sometimes resorting to sleeping in <unk> or in their own cars if they could not find anywhere . One alternative , if it was available , was to arrange in advance to sleep at the homes of black friends in towns or cities along their route . However , this meant detours and an abandonment of the spontaneity that for many was a key attraction of motoring . 
 The civil rights leader John Lewis has recalled how his family prepared for a trip in 1951 : 
 There would be no restaurant for us to stop at until we were well out of the South , so we took our restaurant right in the car with us .... Stopping for gas and to use the bathroom took careful planning . Uncle Otis had made this trip before , and he knew which places along the way offered ' colored ' bathrooms and which were better just to pass on by . Our map was marked and our route was planned that way , by the distances between service stations where it would be safe for us to stop . " 
 Finding accommodation was one of the greatest challenges faced by black travelers . Not only did many hotels , motels , and boarding houses refuse to serve black customers , but thousands of towns across the United States declared themselves " sundown towns , " which all non @-@ whites had to leave by sunset . Huge numbers of towns across the country were effectively off @-@ limits to African Americans . By the end of the 1960s , there were at least 10 @,@ 000 sundown towns across the U.S. – including large suburbs such as Glendale , California ( population 60 @,@ 000 at the time ) ; Levittown , New York ( 80 @,@ 000 ) ; and Warren , Michigan ( 180 @,@ 000 ) . Over half the incorporated communities in Illinois were sundown towns . The unofficial slogan of Anna , Illinois , which had violently expelled its African @-@ American population in 1909 , was " Ain 't No Niggers Allowed " . Even in towns which did not exclude overnight stays by blacks , accommodations were often very limited . African Americans migrating to California to find work in the early 1940s often found themselves camping by the roadside overnight for lack of any hotel accommodation along the way . They were acutely aware of the discriminatory treatment that they received . Courtland Milloy 's mother , who took him and his brother on road trips when they were children , recalled that " after riding all day , I 'd say to myself , ' Wouldn 't it be nice if we could spend the night in one of those hotels ? ' or , ' Wouldn 't it be great if we could stop for a real meal and a cup of coffee ? ' We 'd see the little white children jumping into motel swimming pools , and you all would be in the back seat of a hot car , sweating and fighting . " 
 African @-@ American travelers faced real physical risks because of the widely differing rules of segregation that existed from place to place , and the possibility of extrajudicial violence against them . Activities that were accepted in one place could provoke violence a few miles down the road . <unk> formal or unwritten racial codes , even inadvertently , could put travelers in considerable danger . Even driving etiquette was affected by racism ; in the Mississippi Delta region , local custom prohibited blacks from overtaking whites , to prevent their raising dust from the unpaved roads to cover white @-@ owned cars . A pattern emerged of whites purposefully damaging black @-@ owned cars to put their owners " in their place " . Stopping anywhere that was not known to be safe , even to allow children in a car to relieve themselves , presented a risk ; Milloy noted that his parents would urge him and his brother to control their need to use a bathroom until they could find a safe place to stop , as " those backroads were simply too dangerous for parents to stop to let their little black children pee " . 
 Racist local laws , discriminatory social codes , segregated commercial facilities , racial profiling by police , and sundown towns made road journeys a minefield of constant uncertainty and risk . Road trip narratives by blacks reflected their unease and the dangers they faced , presenting a more complex outlook from those written by whites extolling the joys of the road . Milloy recalls the menacing environment that he encountered during his childhood , in which he learned of " so many black travelers ... just not making it to their destinations . " 
 Even foreign black dignitaries were not immune to the discrimination that African @-@ American travelers routinely encountered . In one high @-@ profile incident , <unk> <unk> Gbedemah , the finance minister of newly independent Ghana , was refused service at a Howard Johnson 's restaurant at Dover , Delaware , while traveling to Washington , D.C. , even after identifying himself by his state position to the restaurant staff . The snub caused an international incident , to which an embarrassed President Dwight D. Eisenhower responded by inviting Gbedemah to breakfast at the White House . Repeated and sometimes violent incidents of discrimination directed against black African diplomats , particularly on U.S. Route 40 between New York and Washington , D.C. , led to the administration of President John F. Kennedy setting up a Special Protocol Service Section within the State Department to assist black diplomats traveling and living within the United States . The State Department considered issuing copies of The Negro Motorist Green Book to black diplomats , but eventually decided against steering them to black @-@ friendly public accommodations as it wanted them " to have all of the privileges of whiteness . " 
 John A. Williams wrote in his 1965 book , This Is My Country Too , that he did not believe " white travelers have any idea of how much nerve and courage it requires for a Negro to drive coast to coast in America . " He achieved it with " nerve , courage , and a great deal of luck , " supplemented by " a rifle and shotgun , a road atlas , and <unk> , a listing of places in America where Negroes can stay without being embarrassed , insulted , or worse . " He noted that black drivers needed to be particularly cautious in the South , where they were advised to wear a chauffeur 's cap or have one visible on the front seat and pretend they were delivering a car for a white person . Along the way , he had to endure a stream of " insults of clerks , <unk> , attendants , cops , and strangers in passing cars . " There was a constant need to keep his mind on the danger he faced ; as he was well aware , " [ black ] people have a way of disappearing on the road . " 
 = = Navigating Jim Crow : the role of the Green Book = = 
 Segregation meant that facilities for African @-@ American motorists were limited , but entrepreneurs of both races realized that lucrative opportunities existed in marketing goods and services exclusively to black patrons . The challenge for travelers was to find such oases in the middle of a desert of discrimination . To address this problem , African @-@ American writers produced a number of guides to provide advice on traveling . These included directories of which hotels , camps , road houses , and restaurants would serve African Americans . Jewish travelers , who had long experienced discrimination at many vacation spots , created guides for their own community though they were at least able to visibly blend in more easily with the general population . African Americans followed suit with publications such as Hackley and Harrison 's Hotel and Apartment Guide for Colored Travelers , published in 1930 to cover " Board , Rooms , Garage Accommodations , etc. in 300 Cities in the United States and Canada " . 
 The Negro Motorist Green Book was one of the best known examples of the African @-@ American travel guide . It was conceived in 1932 and first published in 1936 by Victor H. Green , a World War I veteran from New York City who worked as a postal carrier and later as a travel agent . He said his aim was " to give the Negro traveler information that will keep him from running into difficulties , embarrassments and to make his trip more enjoyable . " According to an editorial written by <unk> C. Dashiell in the Spring 1956 edition of the Green Book , " the idea crystallized when not only [ Green ] but several friends and acquaintances complained of the difficulties encountered ; oftentimes painful embarrassments suffered which ruined a vacation or business trip . " 
 Green asked his readers to provide information " on the Negro motoring conditions , scenic wonders in your travels , places visited of interest and short stories on one 's motoring experience . " He offered a reward of one dollar for each accepted account , which he increased to five dollars by 1941 . He also obtained information from colleagues in the US Postal Service , who would " ask around on their routes " to find suitable public accommodations . At that time , like it is now , the Postal Service was one of the largest employers of African Americans in the US , and its employees were ideally situated to inform Green of which places were safe and hospitable to African @-@ American travelers . 
 The Green Book 's motto , displayed on the front cover , was for black travelers to " carry your Green Book with you – You may need it " . The 1949 edition included a quote from Mark Twain : " Travel is fatal to prejudice " , inverting Twain 's original meaning ; as Cotton Seiler puts it , " here it was the visited , rather than the visitors , who would find themselves enriched by the encounter . " Green commented in 1940 that the Green Book had given black Americans " something authentic to travel by and to make traveling better for the Negro . " Its principal goal was to provide accurate information on black @-@ friendly accommodations to answer the constant question that faced black drivers : " Where will you spend the night ? " As well as essential information on lodgings , service stations and garages , it provided details of leisure facilities open to African Americans , including beauty salons , restaurants , nightclubs and country clubs . The listings focused on four main categories – hotels , motels , tourist homes ( private residences , usually owned by African Americans , which provided accommodation to travelers ) , and restaurants . They were arranged by state and subdivided by city , giving the name and address of each business . For an extra payment , the listed businesses could have their listing displayed in bold type or to have a star next to it to denote that they were " recommended " . 
 Many such establishments were run by and for African Americans and in some cases were named after prominent figures in African @-@ American history . In North Carolina , such black @-@ owned businesses included the Carver , Lincoln , and Booker T. Washington hotels , the Friendly City beauty parlor , the Black Beauty Tea Room , the New Progressive tailor shop , the Big Buster tavern , and the Blue Duck Inn . Each edition also included feature articles on travel and destinations , and included a listing of black resorts such as Idlewild , Michigan ; Oak Bluffs , Massachusetts ; and Belmar , New Jersey . The state of New Mexico was particularly recommended as a place where most motels would welcome " guests on the basis of ‘ cash rather than color " . 
 = = = Influence = = = 
 The Green Book attracted sponsorship from a number of businesses , including the African @-@ American newspapers Call and Post of Cleveland , Ohio , and the Louisville Leader of Louisville , Kentucky . Standard Oil ( later Esso ) was also a sponsor , owing to the efforts of James " Billboard " Jackson , a pioneering African @-@ American Esso sales representative . Esso 's " race group " , part of its marketing division , promoted the Green Book as enabling Esso 's black customers to " go further with less anxiety " . By contrast , Shell gas stations were known to refuse serving black customers . The 1949 edition included an Esso endorsement message that told readers : " As representatives of the Esso Standard Oil Co . , we are pleased to recommend the Green Book for your travel convenience . Keep one on hand each year and when you are planning your trips , let Esso Touring Service supply you with maps and complete routings , and for real ' Happy Motoring ' – use Esso Products and Esso Service wherever you find the Esso sign . " Photographs of some African @-@ American entrepreneurs who owned Esso gas stations appeared in the pages of the Green Book . 
 Although Green usually refrained from editorializing in the Green Book , he let his readers ' letters speak for the influence of his guide . William Smith of Hackensack , New Jersey , described it as a " credit to the Negro Race " in a letter published in the 1938 edition . He commented : 
 It is a book badly needed among our Race since the advent of the motor age . Realizing the only way we knew where and how to reach our pleasure resorts was in a way of speaking , by word of mouth , until the publication of The Negro Motorist Green Book ... We earnestly believe that [ it ] will mean as much if not more to us as the A.A.A. means to the white race . " 
 Earl Hutchinson Sr. , the father of journalist Earl <unk> Hutchinson , wrote of a 1955 move from Chicago to California that " you literally didn 't leave home without [ the Green Book ] . " Ernest Green , one of the Little Rock Nine , used the Green Book to navigate the 1 @,@ 000 miles ( 1 @,@ 600 km ) from Arkansas to Virginia in the 1950s and comments that " it was one of the survival tools of segregated life " . According to the civil rights leader Julian Bond , recalling his parents ' use of the Green Book , " it was a guidebook that told you not where the best places were to eat , but where there was any place . " Bond comments : 
 You think about the things that most travelers take for granted , or most people today take for granted . If I go to New York City and want a hair cut , it 's pretty easy for me to find a place where that can happen , but it wasn 't easy then . White barbers would not cut black peoples ' hair . White beauty parlors would not take black women as customers — hotels and so on , down the line . You needed the Green Book to tell you where you can go without having doors slammed in your face . 
 While the Green Book was intended to make life easier for those living under Jim Crow , its publisher looked forward to a time when such guidebooks would no longer be necessary . As Green wrote , " there will be a day sometime in the near future when this guide will not have to be published . That is when we as a race will have equal opportunities and privileges in the United States . It will be a great day for us to suspend this publication for then we can go as we please , and without embarrassment . " 
 = = = Publishing history = = = 
 The Green Book was published locally in New York , but its popularity was such that from 1937 it was distributed nationally with input from Charles McDowell , a collaborator on Negro Affairs for the United States Travel Bureau , a government agency . With new editions published annually from 1936 to 1940 , the Green Book 's publication was suspended during World War II and resumed in 1946 . Its scope expanded greatly during its years of publication ; from covering only the New York City metropolitan area in the first edition , it eventually covered facilities in most of the United States and parts of Canada ( primarily Montreal ) , Mexico and Bermuda . Coverage was good in the eastern US and weak in Plains states such as North Dakota , where there were few black residents . It eventually sold around 15 @,@ 000 copies per year , distributed by mail order , by black @-@ owned businesses , and through Esso service stations , some of which – unusual for the oil industry at the time – were franchised to African Americans . 
 It originally sold for 25 cents , increasing to $ 1 @.@ 25 by 1957 . With the book 's growing success , Green retired from the post office and hired a small publishing staff that operated from 200 West 135th Street in Harlem . He also established a vacation reservation service in 1947 to take advantage of the post @-@ war boom in automobile travel . From 10 pages in its first edition , by 1949 he had expanded the Green Book to more than 80 pages , including advertisements . 
 The 1951 Green Book recommended that black @-@ owned businesses raise their standards , as travelers were " no longer content to pay top prices for inferior accommodations and services " . The quality of black @-@ owned lodgings was coming under scrutiny , as many prosperous blacks found them to be second @-@ rate compared to the white @-@ owned lodgings from which they were excluded . In 1952 , Green renamed the publication The Negro Travelers ' Green Book , in recognition of its coverage of international destinations requiring travel by plane and ship . Although segregation was still in force , by state laws in the South and often by practice elsewhere , the wide circulation of the Green Book had attracted growing interest from white businesses that wanted to tap into the potential sales of the black market . The 1955 edition noted : 
 " A few years after its publication ... white business has also recognized its [ The Green Book ’ s ] value and it is now in use by the Esso Standard Oil Co . , The American Automobile <unk> and its affiliate automobile clubs throughout the country , other automobile clubs , air lines , travel bureaus , travelers aid , libraries and thousands of subscribers . " 
 By the start of the 1960s , the Green Book ′ s market was beginning to erode ; civil rights activism was having effects , even before the passage of legislation later in the decade to prohibit racial segregation in public facilities . An increasing number of middle @-@ class African Americans were beginning to question whether guides such as the Green Book were accommodating Jim Crow by steering black travelers to segregated businesses , rather than encouraging them to push for equal access . Black @-@ owned motels in remote locations off state highways lost customers to a new generation of integrated interstate motels located near freeway exits . The 1963 Green Book acknowledged that the activism of the civil rights movement had " widened the areas of public accommodations accessible to all , " but it defended the continued listing of black @-@ friendly businesses because " a family planning for a vacation hopes for one that is free of tensions and problems . " 
 The 1966 edition was the last to be published after the Civil Rights Act of 1964 made the guide effectively obsolete , by outlawing racial discrimination in public accommodations . The last edition of the Green Book included significant changes that reflected the post @-@ Civil Rights Act outlook . The title was changed to Traveler 's Green Book : International Edition – no longer just for the Negro , or the motorist – as its publishers sought to widen its appeal . Although the content continued to proclaim its mission of highlighting leisure options for black travelers , the cover featured an affluent white blonde water @-@ skiing – a sign of how , as Michael Ra @-@ Shon Hall puts it , " the Green Book ‘ whitened ’ its surface and internationalized its scope , while still remaining true to its founding mission to ensure the security of African @-@ American travelers both in the US and abroad . " 
 = = Representation in other media = = 
 In the 2000s , academics , artists , curators , and writers exploring the history of African @-@ American travel in the United States during the Jim Crow era revived interest in the Green Book . The result has been a number of projects , books and other works referring to the Green Book . The book itself has acquired a high value as a collectors ' item ; a " partly perished " copy of the 1941 edition sold at auction in March 2015 for $ 22 @,@ 500 . Some examples are listed below . 
 = = = Digital projects = = = 
 The New York Public Library 's Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture has published digitized copies of 21 issues of the Green Book , dating from 1937 to 1964 . To accompany the <unk> , the NYPL Labs have developed an interactive visualization of the books ' data to enable web users to plot their own road trips and see heat maps of listings . 
 = = = Exhibitions = = = 
 In 2003 , the Smithsonian Institution 's National Museum of American History included the Green Book in an exhibition , America on the Move . 
 In 2007 , the book was featured in a traveling exhibition called Places of Refuge : The Dresser Trunk Project , organized by William Daryl Williams , the director of the School of Architecture and Interior Design at the University of Cincinnati . The exhibition drew on the Green Book to highlight artifacts and locations associated with travel by blacks during segregation , using dresser trunks to reflect venues such as hotels , restaurants , nightclubs and a Negro league baseball park . 
 In late 2014 , the Gilmore Car Museum in Hickory Corners , MI installed a permanent exhibit on the Green Book that features a 1956 copy of the book that guests can review as well as video interviews of those that utilized it . 
 In 2016 , a 1941 copy of the book will be displayed at the Smithsonian National Museum of African American History and Culture , when the museum opens . 
 = = = Films = = = 
 Calvin Alexander Ramsey and Becky <unk> Searles interviewed people who traveled with the Green Book as well as Victor Green 's relatives as part of producing a documentary , The Green Book Chronicles ( 2016 ) . 
 100 Miles to Lordsburg ( 2017 ) , is a short film about a black couple crossing New Mexico in 1961 with aid of the Green Book . > 
 = = = Literature = = = 
 African @-@ American playwright Calvin Alexander Ramsey published a children 's book , Ruth and the Green Book ( 2010 ) , about a Chicago family 's journey to Alabama in 1952 , in which they use the Green Book as a guide . 
 Ramsey also wrote a play , called The Green Book : A Play in Two Acts , which debuted in Atlanta in August 2011 after a staged reading at the Lincoln Theatre in Washington , DC in 2010 . It centers on a tourist home in Jefferson City , Missouri . A black military officer , his wife , and a Jewish survivor of the Holocaust spend the night in the home just before the civil rights activist W. E. B. Du Bois is scheduled to deliver a speech in town . The Jewish traveler comes to the home after being shocked to find that the hotel where he planned to stay has a " No Negroes Allowed " notice posted in its lobby – an allusion to the problems of discrimination that Jews and blacks both faced at the time . The play was highly successful , gaining an extension of several weeks beyond its planned closing date . 
 = = = Photography projects = = = 
 Architecture at sites listed in the Green Book is being documented by photographer <unk> Taylor in collaboration with the National Park Service 's Route 66 Corridor Preservation Program . She is also planning to publish other materials and apps featuring such sites . 
 = A Hard Day 's Night ( film ) = 
 A Hard Day 's Night is a 1964 British comedy film directed by Richard Lester and starring the Beatles — John Lennon , Paul McCartney , George Harrison and Ringo Starr — during the height of Beatlemania . It was written by Alun Owen and originally released by United Artists . The film portrays several days in the lives of the group . 
 The film was a financial and critical success . Time magazine rated it as one of the all @-@ time great 100 films . British critic Leslie Halliwell described it as a " comic fantasia with music ; an enormous commercial success with the director trying every cinematic gag in the book " and awarded it a full four stars . The film is credited as being one of the most influential musical films of all time , inspiring numerous spy films , the Monkees ' television show and pop music videos . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Bound for a London show , the Beatles escape a horde of fans . Once they are aboard the train and trying to relax , various interruptions test their patience : after a dalliance with a female passenger , Paul 's grandfather is confined to the guard 's van and the four lads join him there to keep him company . John , Paul , George , and Ringo play a card game , entertaining schoolgirls before arriving at their destination . 
 Upon arrival in London , the Beatles are driven to a hotel , only to feel trapped inside . After a night out during which Paul 's grandfather causes minor trouble at a casino , the group is taken to the theatre where their performance is to be televised . The preparations are lengthy so Ringo decides to spend some time alone reading a book . Paul 's grandfather , a " villain , a real mixer " , convinces him to go outside to experience life rather than reading books . Ringo goes off by himself . He tries to have a quiet drink in a pub , walks alongside a canal and rides a bicycle along a railway station platform . Meanwhile , the rest of the band frantically ( and unsuccessfully ) attempts to find Ringo . Finally , he returns after being arrested by the police along with Paul 's grandfather , and the concert goes ahead as planned . After the concert , the band is taken away from the hordes of fans via helicopter . 
 = = Cast = = 
 = = Screenplay = = 
 The screenplay was written by Alun Owen , who was chosen because the Beatles were familiar with his play No Trams to Lime Street , and he had shown an aptitude for Liverpudlian dialogue . McCartney commented , " Alun hung around with us and was careful to try and put words in our mouths that he might 've heard us speak , so I thought he did a very good script . " Owen spent several days with the group , who told him their lives were like " a train and a room and a car and a room and a room and a room " ; the character of Paul 's grandfather refers to this in the dialogue . Owen wrote the script from the viewpoint that the Beatles had become prisoners of their own fame , their schedule of performances and studio work having become punishing . 
 The script comments cheekily on the Beatles ' fame . For instance , at one point a fan , played by Anna Quayle , apparently recognises John Lennon , though she does not actually mention Lennon 's name , saying only " you are ... " . He demurs , saying his face is not quite right for " him " , initiating a surreal dialogue ending with the fan agreeing that Lennon doesn 't " look like him at all " , and Lennon saying to himself that " she looks more like him than I do " . Other dialogue is derived from actual interviews with the Beatles . When Ringo is asked if he 's a mod or a rocker , he replies : " Uh , no , I 'm a mocker " , a line derived from a joke he made on the TV show Ready Steady Go ! . The frequent reference to McCartney 's grandfather ( Wilfrid Brambell ) as a " clean old man " sets up a contrast with the stock description of Brambell 's character , Albert Steptoe in Steptoe and Son , as a " dirty old man " . 
 Audiences also responded to the Beatles ' brash social impudence . Director Richard Lester said , " The general aim of the film was to present what was apparently becoming a social phenomenon in this country . Anarchy is too strong a word , but the quality of confidence that the boys exuded ! Confidence that they could dress as they liked , speak as they liked , talk to the Queen as they liked , talk to the people on the train who ‘ fought the war for them ’ as they liked ... [ Everything was ] still based on privilege — privilege by schooling , privilege by birth , privilege by accent , privilege by speech . The Beatles were the first people to attack this … they said if you want something , do it . You can do it . Forget all this talk about talent or ability or money or speech . Just do it . " 
 Despite the fact that the original working titles of the film were first The Beatles and then Beatlemania , the group 's name is never spoken in the movie — it is , however , visible on Ringo 's drum kit , on the stage lighting , and on the helicopter in the final scene . The television performance scene also contains a visual pun on the group 's name , with photos of " beetles " visible on the wall behind the dancers . 
 = = Production = = 
 The film was shot for United Artists ( UA ) using a cinéma vérité style in black @-@ and @-@ white and produced over a period of sixteen weeks . It had a low budget for its time of £ 200 @,@ 000 ( $ 500 @,@ 000 ) and filming was finished in under seven weeks . At first , the film itself was something of a secondary consideration to UA , whose primary interest was in being able to release the soundtrack album in the United States before Capitol Records ( the American EMI affiliate who had first shot at releasing Beatles music in the States ) got around to issuing their material ; in the words of Bud Ornstein , the European head of production for United Artists : " Our record division wants to get the soundtrack album to distribute in the States , and what we lose on the film we 'll get back on this disc . " As film historian Stephen Glynn put it , A Hard Day 's Night was intended as , " a low @-@ budget exploitation movie to milk the latest brief musical craze for all it was worth . " 
 Unlike most productions , it was filmed in near sequential order , as stated by Lennon in 1964 . Filming began on 2 March 1964 at Marylebone station in London ( sometimes misidentified as Paddington ) . The Beatles had joined the actors ' union , Equity , only that morning . The first week of filming was on a train travelling between London and Minehead . On 10 March , scenes with Ringo were shot at the Turk 's Head pub in Twickenham , and over the following week various interior scenes were filmed at Twickenham Studios . From 23 to 30 March , filming moved to the Scala Theatre , and on 31 March , concert footage was shot there , although the group mimed to backing tracks . The " Can 't Buy Me Love " segment , which featured creative camera work and the band running and jumping around in a field was shot on 23 April 1964 at Thornbury Playing Fields , Isleworth , Middlesex . The final scene was filmed the following day in West Ealing , London , where Ringo obligingly drops his coat over puddles for a lady to step on , only to discover that the final puddle is actually a large hole in the road . 
 Before A Hard Day 's Night was released in America , a United Artists executive asked Lester to dub the voices of the group with mid @-@ Atlantic accents . McCartney angrily replied , " Look , if we can understand a fucking cowboy talking Texan , they can understand us talking Liverpool . " Lester subsequently directed the Beatles ' 1965 film , Help ! . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Irish actor Wilfrid Brambell , who played Paul McCartney 's fictional grandfather John McCartney , was already well @-@ known to British audiences as co @-@ star of the British sitcom Steptoe and Son . The recurring joke that he was so clean reflects a play on his sitcom role , where he was always referred to as a dirty old man . In other roles , Norman Rossington played the Beatles ' manager Norm , John Junkin played the group 's road manager Shake , and Victor Spinetti played the television director . Brian Epstein , the group 's real manager , had an uncredited bit part . 
 The supporting cast included Richard Vernon as the " city gent " on the train and Lionel Blair as a featured dancer . There were also various cameos . John <unk> played a car thief and an uncredited Derek Nimmo appeared as magician Leslie Jackson . David Janson played the small boy met by Ringo on his " walkabout " . Rooney Massara , who went on to compete in the 1972 Munich Olympics , was the sculler in the river in the " walkabout " scene by the river at Kew ( uncredited ) . Kenneth Haigh appeared as an advertising executive who mistakes George for a " new phenomenon . " David Langton also made a cameo appearance as an actor in the dressing room scene . 
 Mal Evans , one of the Beatles ' road managers , also appears briefly in the film — moving an upright bass through a tight hallway as Lennon talks with the woman who mistakes him for someone else . 
 George Harrison met his wife @-@ to @-@ be , Patricia Boyd , on the set when she made a brief ( uncredited ) appearance as one of the schoolgirls on the train . His initial overtures to her were spurned because she had a boyfriend at the time but he persisted and they were married within 18 months . The girl with Boyd in the dining car scene is Prudence Bury . Phil Collins appeared as an extra , uncredited as a boy in the concert audience , and would go on to become a very successful musician himself . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The film premiered at the Pavilion Theatre in London on 6 July 1964 — the eve of Ringo Starr 's 24th birthday — and the soundtrack was released four days later . A Hard Day 's Night set records at the London Pavilion by grossing over $ 20 @,@ 000 in the first week , ultimately becoming so popular that more than 1 @,@ 600 prints were in circulation simultaneously . 
 Reviews of the film were mostly positive ; one oft @-@ quoted assessment was provided by Andrew Sarris of The Village Voice , labeling A Hard Day 's Night " the Citizen Kane of jukebox musicals . " When The Village Voice published the results of its first annual film poll , A Hard Day 's Night placed second behind Stanley Kubrick 's Dr. Strangelove . Time magazine called the film " One of the smoothest , freshest , funniest films ever made for purposes of exploitation . " Film critic Roger Ebert described the film as " one of the great life @-@ affirming landmarks of the movies " , and added it to his list of The Great Movies . In 2004 , Total Film magazine named A Hard Day 's Night the 42nd greatest British film of all time . In 2005 , Time.com named it one of the 100 best films of the last 80 years . Leslie Halliwell gave the film his highest rating , four stars , the only British film of 1964 to achieve that accolade . It has a 99 % rating on Rotten Tomatoes based on 101 reviews . It is also No.1 on Rotten Tomatoes ' list of the Top Ten Certified Fresh Musicals and No. 8 on the Best Reviewed Movies of All Time . 
 New York Times film critic Bosley Crowther noted the film was a subtle satire on Beatlemania and the Beatles themselves . The Beatles are portrayed as likeable young lads who are constantly amazed at the attention they receive and who want nothing more than a little peace and quiet ; however , they have to deal with screaming crowds , journalists who ask nonsensical questions , and authority figures who constantly look down upon them . In fact their biggest problem is McCartney 's elderly , but " clean " grandfather , played by Wilfrid Brambell . The New Yorker critic Brendan Gill wrote : " Though I don 't pretend to understand what makes these four rather odd @-@ looking boys so fascinating to so many scores of millions of people , I admit that I feel a certain mindless joy stealing over me as they caper about uttering sounds . " 
 A Hard Day 's Night was nominated for two Academy Awards : for Best Screenplay ( Alun Owen ) , and Best Score ( Adaptation ) ( George Martin ) . 
 By 1971 the film was estimated to have earned $ 11 million worldwide . 
 = = Influence = = 
 British critic Leslie Halliwell states the film 's influence as " ... it led directly to all the kaleidoscopic swinging London spy thrillers and comedies of the later sixties ... " In particular , the visuals and storyline are credited with inspiring The Monkees ' television series . The " Can 't Buy Me Love " segment borrowed stylistically from Richard Lester 's earlier The Running Jumping & Standing Still Film , and it is this segment , in particular using the contemporary technique of cutting the images to the beat of the music , which has been cited as a precursor of modern music videos . Roger Ebert goes even further , crediting Lester for a more pervasive influence , even constructing " a new grammar " : " he influenced many other films . Today when we watch TV and see quick cutting , hand @-@ held cameras , interviews conducted on the run with moving targets , quickly intercut snatches of dialogue , music under documentary action and all the other trademarks of the modern style , we are looking at the children of A Hard Day 's Night " . In an interview for the DVD re @-@ release of A Hard Day 's Night , Lester said he had been labeled the father of MTV and had jokingly responded by asking for a paternity test . 
 = = Title = = 
 The movie 's strange title originated from something said by Ringo Starr , who described it this way in an interview with disc jockey Dave Hull in 1964 : " We went to do a job , and we 'd worked all day and we happened to work all night . I came up still thinking it was day I suppose , and I said , ' It 's been a hard day ... ' and I looked around and saw it was dark so I said , ' ... night ! ' So we came to A Hard Day 's Night . " 
 According to Lennon in a 1980 interview with Playboy magazine : " I was going home in the car , and Dick Lester suggested the title , ' Hard Day 's Night ' from something Ringo had said . I had used it in In His Own Write , but it was an off @-@ the @-@ cuff remark by Ringo . You know , one of those malapropisms . A Ringo @-@ ism , where he said it not to be funny ... just said it . So Dick Lester said , ' We are going to use that title . ' " 
 In a 1994 interview for The Beatles Anthology , however , McCartney disagreed with Lennon 's recollections , recalling that it was the Beatles , and not Lester , who had come up with the idea of using Starr 's verbal misstep : " The title was Ringo 's . We 'd almost finished making the film , and this fun bit arrived that we 'd not known about before , which was naming the film . So we were sitting around at Twickenham studios having a little brain @-@ storming session ... and we said , ' Well , there was something Ringo said the other day . ' Ringo would do these little malapropisms , he would say things slightly wrong , like people do , but his were always wonderful , very lyrical ... they were sort of magic even though he was just getting it wrong . And he said after a concert , ' Phew , it 's been a hard day 's night . ' " 
 Yet another version of events appeared in 1996 ; producer Walter Shenson said that Lennon had described to him some of Starr 's funnier gaffes , including " a hard day 's night " , whereupon Shenson immediately decided that that was going to be the title of the film . 
 Regardless of which of these origin stories is the true one , the original tentative title for the film had been " Beatlemania " and when the new title was agreed upon , it became necessary to write and quickly record a new title song , which was completed on 16 April , just eight days before filming was finished . Lennon and McCartney wrote the song in one night , basing the lyrics on a birthday card sent to his young son Julian , and it went on to win a Grammy for Best Performance by a Vocal Group . 
 The film was titled Yeah Yeah Yeah in Germany , Tutti Per Uno ( All for One ) in Italy , Quatre Garçons Dans Le Vent ( Four Boys in the Wind ) in France , Yeah ! Yeah ! <unk> <unk> ! ( Yeah ! Yeah ! Here We Come ! ) in Finland and Os Reis do Iê @-@ Iê @-@ Iê ( The Kings of Yeah @-@ yeah @-@ yeah ) in Brazil . 
 = = Novelization = = 
 In 1964 , Pan Books published a novelisation of the film by author John Burke , described as " based on the original screenplay by Alun Owen " . The book was priced at two shillings and sixpence and contained an 8 @-@ page section of photographs from the movie . It is the first book in the English language to have the word ' grotty ' in it . 
 = = Songs = = 
 The film 's credits state that all songs are composed by John Lennon and Paul McCartney . However , a portion of " Don 't Bother Me " is heard in the film ; this song is , in fact , a George Harrison composition , and is identified as such on all album appearances . 
 " A Hard Day 's Night " 
 " I Should Have Known Better " 
 " I Wanna Be Your Man " ( sample ) 
 " Don 't Bother Me " ( Harrison ) ( sample ) 
 " All My Loving " ( sample ) 
 " If I Fell " 
 " Can 't Buy Me Love " 
 " And I Love Her " 
 " I 'm Happy Just to Dance with You " 
 " Ringo 's Theme ( This Boy ) " 
 " Tell Me Why " 
 " She Loves You " 
 In addition to the soundtrack album , an EP ( in mono ) of songs from the film titled Extracts From The Film A Hard Day 's Night was released by Parlophone on 6 November 1964 , having the following tracks : Side A 
 " I Should Have Known Better " 
 " If I Fell " 
 Side B 
 " Tell Me Why " 
 " And I Love Her " 
 = = = Song notes = = = 
 " I 'll Cry Instead " was among several songs considered for the film but ultimately not included either as an on @-@ camera performance or for usage as an audio @-@ only track . It was to be used during the " escape / fire escape " sequence of the film , but ultimately director Richard Lester vetoed it because of its downbeat lyrics and it was replaced for that scene by " Can 't Buy Me Love " . Its status as an early contender for inclusion led to the song being included on the US soundtrack album . 
 In the 1982 US theatrical reissue of the film by Universal Pictures , the song " I 'll Cry Instead " was used as the audio track for a prologue sequence to the film which consisted of stills from the film and publicity photographs . The prologue was assembled without the involvement or knowledge of the film 's director Richard Lester , who subsequently expressed his disapproval of the addition . The prologue was not included on the 2000 restoration of the film . 
 The song " You Can 't Do That " was filmed as part of the film 's TV concert sequence , but was not included in the final cut of the film . At a point before a decision had been made to excise the song from the film , footage of that performance had been sent by the filmmakers and Brian Epstein to be aired on The Ed Sullivan Show as a tease to promote the forthcoming release of the movie . The clip aired on the Sullivan show on Sunday , 24 May 1964 in conjunction with an interview with The Beatles specially filmed by Sullivan in London . An extract of the footage of the song performance was included in the 1994 documentary The Making of " A Hard Day 's Night " . 
 The song " I Call Your Name " was cut from the film for unknown reasons . 
 = = Release history = = 
 1964 : A Hard Day 's Night was released by United Artists ; 
 1967 : The film premiered on American television on the NBC network ; the Peacock introduction was replaced as the film was not shot in color ; 
 1979 : Rights to the film were transferred to its producer , Walter Shenson ; 
 1984 : , MPI Home Video , under license from Shenson , first released A Hard Day 's Night on home video in the VHS , Betamax , CED Videodisc , and Laserdisc formats , which all included the <unk> movie was also released by Janus Films as part of The Criterion Collection in both a single @-@ disc <unk> and a DualDisc CAV Laserdisc format . The additional features section on the CAV edition include the original theatrical trailer , an interview with Richard Lester , and his The Running Jumping & Standing Still Film . 
 There were notable pitch problems with the songs in this version , precisely one octave lower than the original recordings . This was fixed in subsequent releases . 
 1993 : Voyager Company produced a CD @-@ ROM for Mac and PC platforms with video in QuickTime 1 format , containing most of Criterion 's elements , including the original script . 
 1997 : MPI Home Video released the first DVD edition . It contains the 1982 prologue and trailer , newsreels , an interview with Richard Lester , and The Running Jumping & Standing Still Film . 
 2000 : Miramax Films reissued the film in theatres in the United States and then as a collector 's edition DVD two years later , as well as its final issue in the VHS format . The film had been transferred from the restored 35 mm negative and presented in 1 @.@ 66 : 1 Widescreen . The prologue that Universal added in 1982 is absent on the Miramax <unk> addition to the original film , the DVD edition contained a bonus disc with over 7 hours of additional material including interviews with cast and crew members and Beatles associates . The DVD was produced by Beatles historian and producer Martin Lewis , a longtime friend of Walter Shenson . 
 2009 : The film was released on Blu @-@ ray Disc in Canada ; however , the disc is region free and will play in any Blu @-@ ray machine . It contains most of the 2000 DVD bonus features . 
 2010 : Miramax was sold by Disney to <unk> Holdings , LLC , and the home video sub @-@ licence transferred to Lionsgate , although no U.S. Blu @-@ ray release date had been announced . 
 2011 : A new Blu @-@ ray edition was released in Mexico , this version has Spanish subtitles . 
 2014 : Janus Films acquired the rights to the film from Miramax ( on behalf of the Shenson Estate , managed by Bruce A. Karsh ) and announced a domestic video re @-@ release via The Criterion Collection on 24 June 2014 . This dual @-@ format edition ( which incorporates the first ever U.S. issue on Blu @-@ ray ) contains various supplements from all previous video re @-@ issues . This marks the return of this film to Criterion for the first time in two decades . The film was also released in theaters across the U.S. and in the UK ( by Metrodome in the latter region ) on 4 July 2014 . On 6 July 2014 , the film was shown in re @-@ mastered HD on BBC Four in the UK to mark its 50th anniversary . Criterion 's DVD / Blu @-@ ray release of A Hard Day 's Night was duplicated by Umbrella Entertainment in Australia ( released 2 July ) and Second Sight Films in the UK ( released 21 July ) . 
 = = = 40th anniversary cast and crew reunion screening = = = 
 On 6 July 2004 , the 40th anniversary of the film 's world premiere , a private cast and crew reunion screening was hosted in London by DVD producer Martin Lewis . The screening was attended by McCartney , actors Victor Spinetti , John Junkin , David Janson and many crew members . In media interviews at the event , McCartney disclosed that while he had seen the film many times on video , he had not seen the film on the " big screen " since its 1964 premiere . 
 = Leccinum holopus = 
 Leccinum holopus , commonly known as the white birch bolete , white bog bolete , or ghost bolete , is a species of bolete fungus in the family Boletaceae found in northern Asia , Europe , and northeastern North America . It associates with birch trees and is typically found in boggy or swampy areas , often growing among sphagnum moss . 
 Fruitbodies ( mushrooms ) of L. holopus have convex caps measuring up to 10 cm ( 4 in ) in diameter . Often pure white — especially in young fruitbodies — the caps sometimes become flushed with buff or brownish tints . The whitish surface of the stipe is covered with small , stiff , projecting scales ( scabers ) that become tan or darker in age . Some varieties of Leccinum holopus have been described that vary in cap color or staining reaction , but DNA evidence suggests that most are the same taxon . Although the fruitbodies are edible , opinions vary as to their culinary desirability . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 Initially named as a species of Boletus by German mycologist Friedrich <unk> in 1844 , the fungus was later transferred to Leccinum by Roy Watling in 1960 . Synonyms resulting from transfer to different genera include : Krombholzia <unk> and K. holopus ( both published by Albert Pilát in 1951 ) ; Krombholziella holopus ( Josef Šutara , 1989 ) ; <unk> holopus ( Paul Konrad and André <unk> , 1952 ) , and <unk> scaber f. holopus ( Henri Romagnesi , 1939 ) . Other synonyms , according to Index Fungorum , include Leccinum <unk> , described from France in 1994 , and Leccinum <unk> ( 1991 ) . Leccinum holopus is classified in section <unk> of genus Leccinum , a grouping that includes Northern Hemisphere species associating exclusively with birch . 
 The specific epithet holopus is Greek for " with perfect stalk " . Common names given to the fungus include white birch bolete , white bog bolete , and ghost bolete . 
 Several <unk> of Leccinum holopus have been described . In form <unk> , described by Josef Šutara in 2009 , the flesh discolors green after injury . The variety americanum , described by Alexander H. Smith and Harry Delbert Thiers in 1971 from collections made in Michigan , injured flesh stains reddish . Lannoy & <unk> described Leccinum <unk> in 1993 , a taxon that was later ( 2007 ) published as variety <unk> of L. holopus ; no molecular evidence was found supporting the existence of this as a distinct taxon , and it is therefore placed into synonymy with L. holopus . Leccinum holopus var. majus , described by Rolf Singer in 1966 ( originally published by Singer as Krombholzia scabra f. majus ) , is another historical variety without independent taxonomic significance . 
 = = Description = = 
 Fruitbodies of Leccinum holopus have convex to flattened caps measuring 3 – 10 cm ( 1 @.@ 2 – 3 @.@ 9 in ) in diameter , with a narrow band of sterile tissue surrounding the margin . The caps are initially whitish , but can develop gray , buff , tan , or pinkish tints during maturity ; the color may also darken and become greenish with age . The cap surface is initially covered with very fine hairs , but later becomes more or less smooth , often with a sticky texture in age or in moist conditions . The flesh is white and lacks any distinct odor or taste ; it can have either little or no bruising color reaction with injury , or may become light pink in variety americanum . On the cap underside is a porous surface comprising pores numbering 2 to 3 per millimeter , each of which is the end of a tube that extends to 2 @.@ 5 cm ( 1 @.@ 0 in ) deep . The color of the pore surface ranges from whitish to grayish to dingy brown , and has little color reaction to injury , although it may discolor yellowish or brownish . There is a depression where the pores meet the stipe . The stipe measures 8 – 14 cm ( 3 @.@ 1 – 5 @.@ 5 in ) long by 1 – 2 cm ( 0 @.@ 4 – 0 @.@ 8 in ) wide . Its whitish surface is covered with scabers that darken in age to tan or darker . The stipe base often stains bluish . 
 Leccinum holopus produces a brown spore print . Spores are somewhat fusoid ( spindle @-@ shaped ) and measure 14 – 20 by 5 – 6 @.@ 5 µm . The basidia ( spore @-@ bearing cells ) are four @-@ spored and measure 28 @.@ 5 – 36 @.@ 5 by 11 @.@ 5 – 12 @.@ 5 µm . Cystidia on the pores are flask @-@ shaped ( lageniform ) to fusiform , and 39 @.@ 0 – 45 @.@ 5 by 7 @.@ 5 – 9 @.@ 0 µm , while those of the stipe ( caulocystidia ) are fusiform , club @-@ shaped , or cylindrical , measuring 39 @.@ 0 – 54 @.@ 5 x 9 @.@ 1 – 13 @.@ 5 µm . There are no clamp connections present in the hyphae of L. holopus . The cap cuticle is arranged in the form of a cutis — with hyphae that run parallel to the cap surface . 
 Several chemical tests can be used to help verify an identification of L. holopus . A drop of ammonium hydroxide solution turns the cap cuticle a pinkish color , but has no reaction with the flesh . A drop of dilute potassium hydroxide ( KOH ) has no reaction on the cap surface , and either no reaction or a brownish reaction with the flesh . Application of iron ( II ) sulphate solution does not have a reaction on the cap surface , and either no reaction to slightly olive coloration on the flesh . 
 = = = Similar species = = = 
 <unk> <unk> is similar in appearance to L. holopus , but grows in association with oak and has a more southerly distribution . L. scabrum is a widely distributed lookalike that can be distinguished from L. holopus by its larger size and generally darker colors . 
 = = Edibility = = 
 Although commonly considered edible , opinions vary on the culinary appeal of Leccinum holopus fruitbodies . Michael Kuo , writing in 100 Edible Mushrooms , considers it a good edible ; Peter Roberts and Shelley Evans in The Book of Fungi say " it is edible , but is said to be tasteless and <unk> , so is not recommended . " Fruitbodies are optimally harvested when they are young , before the flesh becomes too spongy , and before insect larvae establish themselves . Minimal cleaning is required in the field . The mushroom has a mild , somewhat sweet flavor that is enhanced after brief <unk> . Drying the mushrooms enhances the flavor , but diminishes the sweetness of fresh mushrooms . 
 = = Habitat and distribution = = 
 Leccinum holopus is a mycorrhizal species . It fruits on the ground ( often among Sphagnum moss ) , singly to scattered in wet areas like cedar swamps , bogs , or soggy forests . Like most Leccinum species , the fungus is highly host @-@ specific and associates with birch ( Betula ) . In North America , the range of Leccinum holopus extends from eastern Canada to New York , extending west to the northern Rocky Mountains , roughly coinciding with the distribution of the paper birch ( Betula papyrifera ) . In this range , it is common and fruits from August to October . L. holopus var. americanum is known only from North America . The fungus is rare in southern Europe , but more common in the Sphagnum swamps in the north . In Asia , it has been recorded from Taiwan and Qinghai ( China ) . 
 Fruitbodies of L. holopus are a source of food for fly species such as Pegomya winthemi ( family <unk> ) and <unk> pygmaeoides ( family Phoridae ) . 
 = Cyclone Alibera = 
 Cyclone Alibera was the second longest @-@ lasting tropical cyclone on record in the south @-@ west Indian Ocean , with a duration of 22 days . It formed on December 16 , 1989 , well to the northeast of Madagascar . For several days , it meandered southwestward while gradually intensifying . On December 20 , Alibera intensified to tropical cyclone status with 10 ‑ minute maximum sustained winds of 120 km / h ( 75 mph ) , or the equivalent of a minimal hurricane . That day , the Météo @-@ France office in Réunion ( MFR ) estimated 10 ‑ minute winds of 140 km / h ( 85 mph ) , while the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) , an unofficial warning agency for the region , estimated peak 1 ‑ minute winds of 250 km / h ( 150 mph ) . After drifting erratically for several days , the storm began a steady southwest motion on December 29 as a greatly weakened system . On January 1 , Alibera struck southeastern Madagascar near Mananjary , having re @-@ intensified to just below tropical cyclone status . It weakened over land but again restrengthened upon reaching open waters on January 3 . The storm turned to the southeast , then to the southwest , and finally back to the southeast , dissipating on January 5 . 
 Early in its duration , Alibera produced gusty winds in the Seychelles . Upon moving ashore in Madagascar , the cyclone lashed coastal cities with heavy rainfall and up to 250 @-@ km / h ( 150 @-@ mph ) wind gusts . In Mananjary , nearly every building was damaged or destroyed , and locals considered it the worst storm since 1925 . Across the region , the cyclone destroyed large areas of crops , thousands of houses , and several roads and bridges . Alibera killed 46 people and left 55 @,@ 346 people homeless . After the storm , the Malagasy government requested for international assistance . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 The first named storm of the season , Tropical Cyclone Alibera , formed on December 16 about halfway between Tromelin Island and Diego Garcia as a tropical disturbance . It originated from the Intertropical Convergence Zone and initially consisted of a spiral area of thunderstorms . The system moved erratically , first to the southwest , then to the southeast , and later curving back to the west , steered by a ridge to the southeast . On December 18 , the Météo @-@ France office in Réunion ( MFR ) estimated that the system attained winds of 65 km / h ( 40 mph ) , making it a moderate tropical storm . The MFR is the official Regional Specialized Meteorological Center for the basin . As a result , the Mauritius Meteorological Service named the storm Alibera . Also on December 18 , the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) , a joint United States Navy and Air Force task force issuing cyclone warnings for the region , assessed that the storm had winds equivalent to a minimal hurricane in a post @-@ storm analysis . While the storm was active , however , the JTWC did not begin advisories until the following day . 
 Alibera quickly intensified , attaining tropical cyclone status on December 20 while southwest of Agaléga . Although the MFR estimated 10 ‑ minute winds of 140 km / h ( 85 mph ) that day , the JTWC assessed that the storm was vastly stronger , estimating peak 1 ‑ minute winds of 250 km / h ( 150 mph ) . This is equivalent to a super typhoon , which made Alibera tied for the strongest cyclone in the southern hemisphere that season , along with Cyclone Alex in the Australian basin . On December 21 , Alibera turned sharply to the south and slowly weakened . On the next day , the storm curved to an eastward drift as a downgraded severe tropical storm , its path influenced by ridges to the east and west . It maintained its intensity for the next several days , turning back to the south on December 24 and slowly recurving to the west . However , the movement was erratic , and the storm executed four small loops . Although the MFR had forecasting difficulties during this time , the storm remained far enough to the north of the Mascarene Islands to limit rainfall warnings . 
 On December 29 , Alibera began a steady track to the southwest after the ridge weakened , and briefly deteriorated to minimal tropical storm status . However , it re @-@ intensified to just shy of tropical cyclone status on January 1 . Shortly thereafter , Alibera made landfall north of Mananjary in southeastern Madagascar , at 3 a.m. local time on New Year 's Day , with 10 ‑ minute winds of 115 km / h ( 70 mph ) . The storm quickly weakened over land , but again restrengthened upon reaching the Mozambique Channel on January 3 . This was short @-@ lived , as Alibera weakened back to tropical depression status by January 5 . The storm moved to the southeast , turned to the southwest , and finally back to the southeast before dissipating on January 7 , having been swept into the westerlies . 
 Alibera was the second longest @-@ lasting tropical cyclone in the basin since the start of satellite imagery , with a duration of 22 days . Only Cyclone Georgette in 1968 lasted longer at 24 days . After Alibera , the only storm to approach Alibera 's duration was Cyclone Leon – Eline in 2000 , which lasted 21 days in the basin ( 29 days overall ) . 
 = = Impact and aftermath = = 
 Before Alibera affected Madagascar , it produced winds of tropical cyclone force in the Seychelles . On Tromelin Island , Alibera produced sustained winds of 83 km / h ( 52 mph ) with gusts to 124 km / h ( 77 mph ) . 
 In Mananjary where the cyclone moved ashore , Alibera produced gusts of 250 km / h ( 150 mph ) . There , nearly every building was damaged or destroyed , including hospitals , government offices , and schools . About 80 % of houses were destroyed . The cyclone shut down the city 's water system , disrupted access to the ocean , cut communications , and blocked or damaged most roads . There were 15 deaths in Mananjary alone . The storm damage in Mananjary prevented ships from delivering supplies . Residents in the region considered the storm to be the worst since 1925 . 
 Elsewhere in southern Madagascar , the cyclone damaged about 70 % of the buildings in Nosy <unk> and 15 % of <unk> . In the former town , many schools and houses were destroyed , leaving thousands homeless , and 4 @,@ 230 houses were destroyed in Vohipeno . Strong winds damaged walls and roofs in several other towns in Fianarantsoa Province . The offshore island of Île Sainte @-@ Marie sustained heavy damage . Across Fianarantsoa Province , Alibera destroyed 33 @,@ 065 ha ( 81 @,@ 710 acres ) of rice , corn , coffee , bananas , and vegetables , although most of the damage was to the rice crop . The cyclone also wrecked about 10 @,@ 000 ha ( 25 @,@ 000 acres ) of cotton and tobacco fields in <unk> , and downed many trees along its path . Areas in southeastern Madagascar experienced heavy rainfall , which flooded rivers and canals in Fianarantsoa Province . Across the region , 23 roads were cut or damaged , totaling 19 @.@ 5 km ( 12 @.@ 1 mi ) of roads in need of repairs . This included a 500 m ( 1 @,@ 600 ft ) portion of a mountain road that was destroyed , as well as a damaged section of Route nationale 7 . In Vohipeno , the floods destroyed 13 bridges , and a bridge was damaged in <unk> . The cyclone also cut a portion of the Fianarantsoa @-@ Côte Est railway , thus disrupting regional economic activity . Across Madagascar , Alibera killed 46 people and left 55 @,@ 346 homeless . 
 On January 18 , the Malagasy government issued an appeal to the international community for assistance . The Office of the United Nations Disaster Relief Coordinator provided $ 15 @,@ 000 ( USD ) in emergency funding to purchase immediate supplies . The United States sent $ 20 @,@ 000 to rebuild schools and hospitals . Other countries donated $ 135 @,@ 000 in supplies or cash , including $ 82 @,@ 000 from Japan and $ 23 @,@ 000 from the United Kingdom . In Mananjary , the local government provided 300 kg ( 660 lb ) of rice to affected families , while the national government provided other relief goods to the city after roads were cleared . After the storm , a school in Farafangana housed 900 locals who were left homeless . Existing food supplies were sufficient to feed affected residents after the storm passed . 
 = Marge vs. the Monorail = 
 " Marge vs. the Monorail " is the twelfth episode of The Simpsons ' fourth season . It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on January 14 , 1993 . The plot revolves around Springfield 's impulse purchase of a faulty monorail from a conman . The episode was written by Conan O 'Brien and directed by Rich Moore . Phil Hartman provided the voice of Lyle Lanley , while the American actor Leonard Nimoy made a guest appearance as himself . 
 The episode has been widely praised by fans and critics and is frequently cited as being among the best and funniest of the series . Writer Conan O 'Brien has claimed that , of the Simpsons episodes that he wrote , this was his favorite . Leonard Nimoy 's unexpected guest appearance was also widely praised . Despite this , the episode attracted some criticism when it was first aired due to the somewhat abstract and less situational nature of the plot , particularly from voice actor Yeardley Smith who in 1995 described the episode as " truly one of our worst " . 
 = = Plot = = 
 After being caught by the Environmental Protection Agency dumping nuclear waste in the city park , Mr. Burns is fined $ 3 million . A town meeting is held so that the citizens can decide how to spend the money . Marge suggests that the city use the money to fix Main Street , which is in poor condition . The town is about to vote in favor when someone new to town , a fast @-@ talking salesman named Lyle Lanley , suggests that Springfield construct a city monorail . After being swayed by a song , the now enthused townspeople decide to build the monorail . 
 Even though Lanley succeeds in winning over almost the entire town , his salesmanship fails to convince Marge , who is frustrated with the town 's purchase because she ( correctly ) believes the monorail is unsafe and that Lanley is a conman . While watching TV , Homer sees an advertisement that suggests he attend Lanley 's institute of monorail conducting , which is a transparent effort to make even more money from the con . Homer immediately decides to enroll . After a three @-@ week course , Lanley selects Homer at random from among his classmates to be the monorail conductor . 
 Still annoyed about the town 's lack of understanding of the monorail , Marge visits Lanley to question his motives , and discovers a notebook containing drawings which reveal Lanley ’ s intention to run off with bags of money skimmed from the monorail project while everyone else falls victim to his faulty train . Marge immediately drives to North Haverbrook , which Lanley mentioned was a previous purchaser of one of his monorails . She discovers that the town is in ruins . While exploring , Marge meets Sebastian Cobb , the engineer who designed Lanley 's North Haverbrook monorail . Cobb explains that Lanley embezzled construction funds through shoddy workmanship and materials , and that the entire project was a scam . Realizing Marge believes him , he offers his assistance in helping to prevent the same fate from happening to Springfield . 
 At the maiden voyage of the Springfield monorail , Lanley arranges for a well @-@ attended opening ceremony , which will divert the town 's attention while he escapes on a plane to Tahiti . The whole town turns out , and Leonard Nimoy is the guest of honor . The monorail departs just before Marge and Cobb arrive . Although it runs normally at the start , the controls soon malfunction and cause it to speed wildly around the track . Homer , Bart , and the passengers are in danger , but the monorail 's electricity cannot be shut off because of its solar power . 
 Meanwhile , Lanley 's flight to Tahiti is interrupted by a brief and unexpected stopover in North Haverbrook . The townsfolk are alerted to his presence and they storm the plane to attack Lanley as revenge for ruining their town . Back in Springfield , Marge and Cobb contact Homer by radio and Cobb tells Homer that he will need to find an anchor in order to stop the train . Improvising quickly , Homer pries loose the giant metal " M " from the logo on the side of the monorail 's engine , ties a rope to it , and throws it from the train . Eventually the " M " catches on the sign of a doughnut shop and the rope holds , stopping the monorail and saving its passengers . 
 = = Production = = 
 Conan O 'Brien conceived the idea when he saw a billboard that just had the word " Monorail " on it , with no other details or explanation . He first pitched this episode at a story retreat to Al Jean and Mike Reiss , who said the episode was a little crazy and thought he should try some other material first . O 'Brien had previously pitched episodes where Lisa had a rival and where Marge gets a job at the power plant and Burns falls in love with her ; both went well . James L. Brooks " absolutely loved " this episode when O 'Brien presented it . 
 Leonard Nimoy was not originally considered for the role as the celebrity at the maiden voyage of the monorail , as the writing staff did not think he would accept , because William Shatner had previously turned the show down . Instead , George Takei was asked to guest star as he had appeared on the show once before . After demanding several script changes , Takei declined , saying he did not want to make fun of public transportation as he was a member of the board of directors of the Southern California Rapid Transit District . As a result , the staff went to Nimoy , who accepted . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 The episode is a partial spoof of the 1962 film The Music Man , with " The Monorail Song " strongly resembling the Music Man 's " Ya Got Trouble " and with Lyle Lanley being a doppelganger for Harold Hill . 
 The episode starts with a tribute song to The Flintstones as Homer heads home from work and crashes his car into a chestnut tree . Later , Leonard Nimoy makes a guest appearance as himself . References are made to his role in Star Trek : The Original Series , and an allusion to his role as the host of In Search of ... from 1976 to 1982 . Kyle Darren , the caricature of Luke Perry star of Beverly Hills , 90210 , appears as well . Mayor Quimby uses the phrase " May the Force be with you " from the Star Wars franchise , confusing it with Nimoy 's work on Star Trek ( and — at the same time — believing Nimoy to have been " one of The Little Rascals " ) . Homer 's Monorail conductor uniform is based on uniforms from Star Wars . When Mr. Burns is brought into the court room , he is restrained in the same way as Hannibal Lecter in the film The Silence of the Lambs . Homer briefly serenades Marge in their bedroom with a line from the folk song " The Riddle Song " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original American broadcast , " Marge vs. the Monorail " finished 30th in the ratings for the week of January 11 to January 17 , 1993 , with a Nielsen rating of 13 @.@ 7 . The episode was the highest @-@ rated show on the Fox network that week . 
 " Marge vs. the Monorail " has frequently been selected in lists of the show 's best episodes . In 2003 , Entertainment Weekly released a list of its Top 25 episodes , ranking this episode in fourth , saying " the episode has arguably the highest throwaway @-@ gag @-@ per @-@ minute ratio of any Simpsons , and all of them are laugh @-@ out @-@ loud funny . " In his book Planet Simpson , Chris Turner named the episode as being one of his five favorites . In 2006 , IGN.com named the episode the best of the fourth season . John Ortved of Vanity Fair called it the third best episode of the show , due to , " An amazing musical number ; Leonard Nimoy in a random guest appearance ... Besides being replete with excellent jokes , this episode reveals the town 's mob mentality and its collective lack of reason . This is the episode that defines Springfield more than any other . " In 2010 , Michael Moran of The Times ranked the episode as the ninth best in the show 's history . 
 The authors of the book I Can 't Believe It 's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide , Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood , called it " an unsurpassed episode . It 's hard to know where to start dishing out the praise — Leonard Nimoy 's guest appearance , the Monorail song , Marge 's narration , the truck full of popcorn ... " Robert Canning of IGN strongly praised the episode , stating " It is by far one of the most loved episodes of The Simpsons and can safely be called a classic by any fan . From beginning to end , there 's joke after joke after hilarious joke . There 's nothing in this half @-@ hour that doesn 't work , and no matter how many times I watch this episode , it never , ever gets old . " Todd VanDerWerff of Slant Magazine named it the show 's best episode , stating " It 's the one you think of when you think of a Simpsons episode " , and is " maybe the show 's funniest , and it most perfectly encapsulates what may be the show 's overriding theme : People are really stupid and self @-@ serving , but if you give them long enough , they 'll eventually bumble toward the right answer . " 
 Leonard Nimoy 's appearance as himself has been praised as being one of the show 's best guest appearances . In a list of the 25 greatest guest voices on the show , released September 5 , 2006 , IGN.com ranked Leonard Nimoy at 11th . Nathan Ditum ranked his performance as the 13th best guest appearance in the show 's history . Nimoy would make a second guest appearance in season eight 's " The Springfield Files " . 
 Conan O 'Brien has said that of all the episodes of The Simpsons he wrote , this is his favorite . Homer 's lines " I call the big one <unk> " and " Doughnuts , is there anything they can 't do ? " are among series creator Matt Groening 's favorite lines . 
 Conversely , the episode was not initially well received by many fans of the show 's earlier seasons , as it was a particularly absurd early example of the show taking a more joke @-@ based cartoon approach to comedy , rather than the more realistic situational style of comedy it had employed in its first few years . In 1995 , during the production of the seventh season , Yeardley Smith said of the episode as " truly one of our worst – we [ the entire cast ] all agree " . 
 In 2012 , " Marge vs. the Monorail " was the second @-@ place finisher in a Splitsider reader poll to decide on the best episode of any television sitcom , losing to the Community episode " Remedial Chaos Theory " . 
 Conan O 'Brien and Hank Azaria performed the monorail song live at the Hollywood Bowl from September 12 – 14 , 2014 as part of the show " The Simpsons Take The Bowl " . 
 = Esther Drummond = 
 Esther Drummond is a fictional character in the science fiction series Torchwood , portrayed by American actress Alexa Havins . Havins is one of several American actors to join Torchwood in its fourth series , Torchwood : Miracle Day , which was co @-@ produced by Torchwood 's original British network BBC1 and the American premium television network Starz . The character appears in every episode of the fourth series in addition to a prequel novel , The Men Who Sold the World . 
 Within the series narrative , Esther is a Central Intelligence Agency ( CIA ) watch analyst who becomes aware of the defunct British Torchwood Institute on " Miracle Day " , when it is discovered that no one can die . Alongside her CIA colleague Rex Matheson she joins forces with the last two remaining Torchwood agents to investigate the phenomenon . Esther 's standing as a desk @-@ bound computer and technology expert puts her in contrast with the tougher and more action @-@ orientated characters in the series . By the Miracle Day finale , Esther has become a more competent field agent , but is murdered by the group 's enemies in an attempt to stop them progressing with their mission . 
 Havins was influenced in her decision to accept the part by her husband 's appreciation of the series . Like Rex , Esther is used by executive producer Russell T Davies as a means of introducing new American audiences to the established mythos of Torchwood . Havins stated the character to have an unrequited love for Rex , but explained that he does not appear to notice . Response to the character varied ; some critics praised her characterisation and portrayal whilst others felt her to display incompetency and to not have been taken to by the audience . The nature of her exit from the show was generally praised , though some reviewers felt it lacked the desired emotional impact . 
 = = Appearances = = 
 = = = Television = = = 
 Esther Drummond , a Central Intelligence Agency ( CIA ) watch analyst , makes her first appearance in Torchwood : Miracle Day 's premiere episode " The New World " in which she informs colleague Rex Matheson ( Mekhi Phifer ) about a mysterious message containing the single word " Torchwood " . A distracted Rex is then fatally injured , leading Esther to blames herself for his accident . After finding out the process of death has been ceased in a global event termed " Miracle Day " , Esther begins tracking down information on Torchwood , supposing a link between the organisation and the start of " Miracle Day " . Amid her research , she encounters former head of Torchwood , Captain Jack Harkness ( John Barrowman ) , who helps her escape the destructive blast of a suicide bomber . Harkness explains the history of the Torchwood Institute , but wipes Esther 's memory so she will not remember their encounter . Esther 's memory is later triggered when a hard copy of the Torchwood file lands on her desk . Esther 's investigation into Torchwood compromises her position within the CIA and she — like Rex — is set up by the agency . Forced into fugitive status , she finds herself working as part of Torchwood alongside Rex and the Torchwood Institute 's last surviving members , Captain Jack and Gwen Cooper ( Eve Myles ) . 
 Esther fulfills Torchwood 's technical need for a competent hacker , researcher and computer expert . However , she initially struggles as a field agent , nearly compromising the team 's mission when she attempts to get help for her mentally ill sister Sarah ( Candace Brown ) . Later whilst trying to escape during an undercover mission in an effective concentration camp , in which the gravely wounded are incinerated , Esther strangles Colin Maloney ( Marc Vann ) in unarmed combat , leaving her aghast and shaken . In the following episode , Esther works out that Gwen is being blackmailed into delivering Jack to an unknown conspirator ; she has Gwen 's parents liberated by Sergeant Andy Davidson ( Tom Price ) , and alongside Rex , successfully snipes Jack 's would @-@ be captors . The Torchwood team subsequently end up in CIA custody . Though Esther is pardoned alongside Rex , Jack is shot as he tries to escape , leaving Esther with the responsibility of keeping him safe on the run . Two months later , in " The Gathering " , Esther has nursed Jack to health in Scotland where she drains his blood , believing it connected to the Miracle . The team learn that the Miracle originated at the near @-@ antipodes of Shanghai and Buenos Aires ; the team splits up , with Esther and Rex in the latter location . The series finale , " The Blood Line " , sees Esther fatally shot by a member of The Three Families — the villains behind Miracle Day — in an attempt to prevent Torchwood ending the Miracle , but Gwen persuades Jack and Rex that Esther has to die so that the Miracle can be ended . In the episode 's epilogue , Esther is among the few post miracle deceased to be allowed a full funeral service . 
 = = = Literature = = = 
 Esther features as a supporting character in the novel The Men Who Sold The World , which is featured as a prequel to Torchwood : Miracle Day . In the novel , Esther aids Rex in his mission to track down a CIA contingent who have gone rogue with dangerous alien weaponry . Reviewing the novel , SFX columnist Alasdair Stuart commented that author Guy Adams provided " interesting , and brave , context to Rex ’ s relationship with Esther . " According to Stuart , The Men Who Sold The World demonstrated that " Rex knows he manipulates her and doesn ’ t particularly care . She ’ s an asset , just one he can use better and faster than most " . 
 = = Characterisation = = 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 In the series ' planning stages , Esther 's surname was originally <unk> , and the casting call specified that this role would be for a non @-@ Caucasian actress . Greek star Amber Stevens was one of the actresses who auditioned for the part of <unk> . However , white actress Alexa Havins was announced by the BBC on 6 January 2011 , the character 's surname having been changed to Drummond . Havins was not initially sure about accepting the role when she was offered it due to having recently become a mother . She revealed that her husband , actor Justin Bruening , being a Torchwood " fan @-@ boy " influenced her decision to accept the role , stating that he told her " you 've got to take this part " and offered to assume child @-@ minding responsibilities . In preparation for the role Havins watched some of the earlier series of Torchwood to acquire a sense of the show 's tone , but did not fully immerse herself in the show 's history because , given her character 's ignorance , " not being so well @-@ versed in it played in my favour " . 
 = = = Concept and development = = = 
 Esther is introduced in press materials as being " an innocent in a world of assassins , liars and zealots " . Havins describes Drummond as " an optimist and the glass is half full person " . A promotional video released by Starz provided background information on Esther including her college education — the character introduces herself by stating that she has a BA in Linguistics and a Masters in Cognitive science . Series four writer Jane Espenson enjoyed writing for Esther as she felt the character to be most similar to herself . She notes that when devising Esther 's backstory the writer 's " ended up just putting my college experience down . " Esther 's introduction invites parallels that of lead female character Gwen Cooper ( Eve Myles ) in the series ' 2006 premiere episode " Everything Changes " ; she represents an audience surrogate for new American viewers . Havins refers to Esther as the " tour guide " for new viewers coming to Torchwood for the first time , one who is " digging deeper and deeper into the rabbit hole " . Despite similarities to their introduction , Havins comments that Esther as a character has a less action @-@ orientated role than Gwen , being more the " <unk> " of the team who uses her intellect and technology as her weapons . The actress feels that Esther 's desk @-@ bound analyst position is " her safe little world " . Head writer and executive producer Russell T Davies described Esther as " a very healing force " in helping the other more outspoken characters gel together as a team because she is " much more able to empathise with people . " The character 's sister , Sarah Drummond ( Candace Brown ) , recurs throughout Miracle Day , Havins feels that her presence helps " humanise the situation " as including family members helps the audience " understand why people react a certain way . " Espenson notes that the first scene between Esther and Sarah was discussed at length at the writer 's room — the writers chose to make Esther 's choice whether or not to refer her ill sister to social services " as difficult as possible " to heighten the pain felt by the character . 
 Esther has a romantic interest in Rex Matheson ( Mekhi Phifer ) , who she <unk> and looks up to . Despite her feelings , Rex does not appear to notice or reciprocate , actress Alexa Havins conjectures that " he 's so blind to her feelings " due to him having " this wall built up around him that it 's hard to break through . " Phifer commented that Rex sees Esther as a sister and conjectures that Esther 's interests in him are partly a result of her sensationalising his work . Despite her highly romanticised idea of field work , Esther is not as skilled in the field as more experienced agents Rex , Jack ( John Barrowman ) and Gwen . However , being part of a new Torchwood team means that Esther is " ripped away from her desk and thrust into the world of Torchwood on the run . " During the later parts of the series the character has to fight physically against the team 's enemies . Havins did not receive any training for these sequences , she felt that having been trained in fight sequences would have made Esther " too slick , too trained , too perfect , too in sync with the rest of the Torchwood crew . " Instead of being able to take out her attackers easily , when Esther has to fight for her life it is " raw and brutal " and " almost like a bar @-@ brawl meets a chick @-@ fight " . Espenson notes that by the final episode Esther has earned a degree of admiration from Rex through her work for the Torchwood team , which she feels to be because " he just can 't fail to see how smart and brave she is . " In regards to being killed off Havins states that she knew it was a possibility from the moment she accepted the role due to the danger present in the series and it 's precedence for killing <unk> io9 's Charlie Jane Anders observed that the character 's death helps serve to illustrate " how hard it is to consign others to death , for the greater good . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 After the fourth series premiere TV.com 's Tim Surette wrote that Esther " is fantastic as the Torchwood newbie , holding hands with viewers who 've never watched the series before . " The HD Room 's James <unk> praised the friendship between Esther and Gwen stating that " It isn 't a trite Cagney & Lacey wannabe pairing of two female characters " and instead offers a chance for the two actresses " to branch out and add complexity to their characters ' personalities " . Den of Geek 's Simon Brew felt the character 's storyline with her sister in " Escape to L.A. " to be " welcome exposition , and Alexa Havins is proving to be an excellent bit of casting " . Digital Spy 's Morgan Jeffrey stated that throughout the fourth series , " Alexa Havins was consistently excellent , bringing a real warmth and likability to her role . " The character attracted comparisons to previous Torchwood characters . Dan Martin wrote after the broadcast of " Rendition " that the character of Esther " is shaping up as a Toshiko @-@ style tragedy queen " . Dave Golder , writing for SFX noted the character 's incompetency in the episode " Escape to L.A. " showed her to be " every bit as incapable of acting professionally for more than 60 seconds as Owen and Tosh were back in the old days . " 
 Golder identified " Esther ’ s scarily casual death " as one of the gripping points of what he felt to be an underwhelming finale . The Daily Telegraph 's Gavin Fuller referred to her exit as " being a genuine , and saddening shock . " Jeffrey praised the character 's death as a " well @-@ handled shocker " , noting that all signs had indicated Rex would die instead . He felt it was " cruel trick on the writers ' part to off lovely Agent Drummond " and " all the crueler to keep viewings hanging until that first glimpse of her funeral . " He concluded by saying that " this kind of emotional sucker @-@ punch " is something Torchwood has always excelled at . Neela Debnath of The Independent commented that her death was sad because the " character went through so much " and that " there would have been room for more growth in subsequent series . " Conversely , Los Angeles Times correspondent Todd VanDerWerff opined that it was hard to invest in Esther , in addition to Rex and Oswald , and though her death was intended as the " one big , emotional moment of the finale " it came across to him as " kind of a dud " . He felt that throughout the fourth series Esther was used as " simply a plot device , someone the writers used when they needed something to go wrong or when they needed the story to move in a certain direction . " Blair Marnell of CraveOnline also notes in his review of the series finale that " Rex and Esther never really caught on as leading characters " and felt that it would have been better had the characters departed in symmetry . 
 = Remember Paul ? = 
 " Remember Paul ? " is the seventh season premiere episode of the American comedy @-@ drama television series Desperate Housewives , and the 135th overall episode of the series . It was originally broadcast in the United States on September 26 , 2010 , on the American Broadcasting Company ( ABC ) . In the episode , Paul ( Mark Moses ) announces his return to Wisteria Lane while Carlos ( Ricardo Antonio Chavira ) learns that his daughter was accidentally switched with another baby at the hospital eight years earlier . 
 The episode was written by series creator Marc Cherry and directed by David Grossman . It included the introduction of Renee Perry ( Vanessa Williams ) , Lynette 's ( Felicity Huffman ) former college roommate . " Remember Paul ? " also dealt with Bree 's ( Marcia Cross ) divorce and continued the storyline of the financial problems of Susan ( Teri Hatcher ) and Mike ( James Denton ) . 
 " Remember Paul ? " garnered generally mixed reviews . Many critics drew both favorable and unfavorable comparisons between Williams ' performance in the episode and her portrayal of Wilhelmina Slater in Ugly Betty . According to Nielsen ratings , the episode drew just over 13 million viewers , making it the least watched season premiere at the time . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Desperate Housewives focuses on the lives of several residents in the suburban neighborhood of Wisteria Lane , as narrated by their deceased neighbor , Mary Alice Young ( Brenda Strong ) . In past episodes , a local hospital discovered that a nurse had accidentally switched two children at birth years earlier and that one of the involved families lives in town on Wisteria Lane . Bree Hodge ( Marcia Cross ) decided to confess to Gabrielle Solis ( Eva Longoria ) that her son , Andrew ( Shawn Pyfrom ) , was driving the car that killed Gabrielle 's mother @-@ in @-@ law eleven years earlier . As a result , her husband Orson ( Kyle MacLachlan ) decided to leave her . Susan ( Teri Hatcher ) and Mike Delfino ( James Denton ) slipped into financial crisis and decided to move into a small apartment across town . Mary Alice 's husband , Paul ( Mark Moses ) , avenged her suicide by killing her blackmailer , Martha Huber ( Christine Estabrook ) . In response , her sister , Felicia Tilman ( Harriet Sansom Harris ) , framed Paul for her own death and fled town . Ten years later , Paul was released from jail and returned to Wisteria Lane . 
 = = = Episode = = = 
 News of Paul 's return jolts the neighborhood , including Susan , who did not know that she had rented her home to him . Paul expresses interest in buying his old home across the street , despite just having signed a lease for Susan 's house . Felicia , whose plan was foiled when she was pulled over by a police officer for speeding , is now incarcerated and swears that Paul will be dead within six months . 
 Jack Pinkham ( Kevin Symons ) , a lawyer for Fairview Memorial Hospital , tells Carlos Solis ( Ricardo Antonio Chavira ) that his daughter , Juanita ( Madison De La Garza ) , is not their biological child and was accidentally switched at birth with their daughter . Carlos decides to keep this information from Gabrielle to spare her the pain . Meanwhile , Bree tells Gabrielle that Andrew ran over Carlos ' mother , but Gabrielle decides not to tell Carlos because she does not want to upset him . 
 Despite downsizing to a small apartment , Susan and Mike are still struggling financially . Susan receives an offer from her landlord , Maxine Rosen ( Lainie Kazan ) , to appear on her home @-@ run erotic website — " Va @-@ Va @-@ Va @-@ Broom ! " — for which she would film herself doing housework in lingerie . She initially refuses the offer , but when Mike considers taking a job on an oil rig in Alaska , Susan agrees to appear on the website ; however , she conceals her new job from her friends and family . 
 Bree struggles with her impending divorce . However , when Orson reveals that he has already begun dating his physical therapist , Bree takes an interest in her contractor , Keith ( Brian Austin Green ) . Meanwhile , Lynette 's old college frenemy Renee Perry ( Vanessa Williams ) , wife of New York Yankees player Doug Perry , comes to visit her , but their friendly bickering quickly escalates into an argument . Lynette threatens to kick her out but changes her mind when Renee reveals that Doug has left her for another woman . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Remember Paul ? " was written by series creator and executive producer Marc Cherry and directed by David Grossman . It marked the debut of Vanessa Williams as Renee Perry , an old college rival of Lynette Scavo . The addition of Williams to the cast was announced after the close of the series ' sixth season , as well as the finale of the ABC series Ugly Betty , in which Williams starred as Wilhelmina Slater . The character , who was originally named Renee Filmore @-@ Jones , was conceived as a trouble @-@ making vixen , similar to the Edie Britt character ( Nicollette Sheridan ) , who appeared on the series until the fifth season . Following the casting announcement , Williams admitted to having been a fan of the series during its first year , but stopped watching because of the racially insensitive second season mystery storyline . It focused on Betty Applewhite ( Alfre Woodard ) , the series ' first black main character . Williams explained to Entertainment Weekly , " [ Betty ] had her son in chains in the basement . It was like , ' Really ? Do we have to go there with our first Black character ? ' I honestly fell off the show after that . I think it was just so implausible and just an image that Black folks don 't want to see their child chained and shackled in the basement . " Cast member Felicity Huffman commented on Williams ' addition to the cast , saying " She 's such a great dash of vinegar to Wisteria Lane ! It 's going brilliantly — she 's a wonderful woman , she 's really smart , she 's really strong , a real team player . She 's a great addition . " 
 The episode also reintroduced the storyline of Paul Young and Felicia Tilman 's rivalry . Mark Moses returned to the series as a series regular after appearing briefly as Paul in the sixth season finale . On his return , Moses commented , " There was some talk about [ me coming back ] a year ago . And there ’ s often talk in Hollywood . Sometimes it pans out , sometimes it doesn ’ t . I don ’ t get super @-@ excited about a ' maybe ' in this town , because there are lots of <unk> that don ’ t happen . But then this last year they called up my agent and said , ' We 're really thinking seriously about [ this ] . ' And eventually , they made an offer , and I was very pleased . " Harriet Samson Harris also returned to reprise her role as Felicia , while Steven Culp and Christine Estabrook returned as Rex Van de Kamp and Martha Huber respectively in flashback sequences . Kyle MacLachlan , who left Desperate Housewives as a series regular at the end of season six , reprised his role as Orson Hodge in this episode . 
 Kevin Rahm and Tuc Watkins , who have been portraying gay couple Bob Hunter and Lee McDermott since the series ' fourth season , were both promoted to series regulars for the seventh season . Darcy Rose Byrnes also joined the main cast as Penny Scavo , a role previously portrayed by Kendall Applegate . Brian Austin Green made his series debut in the episode as Keith Watson , " a new contractor and charming playboy " who catches the attention of both Bree and Renee , while Lainie Kazan began a multi @-@ episode guest appearance as Maxine Rosen , Susan 's landlady . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 According to Nielsen ratings , " Remember Paul ? " was watched by 13 @.@ 056 million viewers and held an 8 @.@ 1 rating / 12 share on its original American broadcast on September 26 , 2010 . Among viewers between 18 and 49 years of age , the episode drew a 4 @.@ 3 rating , making it the twelfth most @-@ watched show for the week in that demographic . The premiere was outperformed by Sunday Night Football on NBC and Family Guy on Fox , which respectively drew a 7 @.@ 3 and 4 @.@ 5 rating in the 18 to 49 demographic in the Desperate Housewives time slot . At the time , the episode was the least @-@ watched season premiere of Desperate Housewives , with an eleven percent decrease in viewership from the sixth season premiere one year earlier . ABC reported that the episode gained an additional 2 @.@ 1 million viewers and 1 @.@ 0 rating in the week following the original broadcast due to DVR recordings . " Remember Paul ? " was outperformed by the following episode , " You Must Meet My Wife " , which drew 13 @.@ 234 million viewers and scored 8 @.@ 2 rating / 12 share in total viewers and a 4 @.@ 4 rating in viewers between 18 and 49 years of age . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 The episode received mixed reviews . Tanner Stransky of Entertainment Weekly gave the premiere a positive review . He praised Williams ' performance , stating that she brought back a " brand of <unk> " that had been missing from the series since Nicollette Sheridan 's departure ; additionally , he favorably compared the performance to Williams ' portrayal of Wilhelmina Slater on Ugly Betty . He also complimented Harriet Sansom Harris ' performance , naming her " the creepiest character ... in the best possible way . " Stransky called the Gabrielle and Carlos storyline " sweet , " but criticized the ridiculousness of Susan 's storyline . Neal Justin of the Star Tribune said , " the premiere is packed with the zippy zingers that made us fall in love with the dramedy in the first place , " accrediting the series ' improved quality over season six to the return of Mark Moses as Paul Young . He also commented that Vanessa Williams gave " a repeat performance " of her character on Ugly Betty . Damian Holbrook of TV Guide also drew a comparison between Williams ' performances in the episode and on Ugly Betty , stating the two characters " have the same stiletto @-@ sharp tongue and prickly chemistry with everyone who enters her orbit . " 
 John Griffiths of Us Weekly gave the premiere a negative review , awarding it only two stars . He stated the show had turned into " a run @-@ of @-@ the @-@ mill sitcom " and criticized the writers for not being able to develop material to match the " venerable cast capable of great things . " He called the Paul storyline " corny " and the switched @-@ baby storyline " as compelling as a manicure , " and commented that both Williams and Brian Austin Greene deliver underwhelming performances . Isabelle Carreau of TV Squad called the episode " a solid season premiere for the series . " She was surprised by both the identity of the switched child and its early revelation . Carreau also praised Williams ' performance , writing : " The banter between Lynette and Renee was priceless ! " 
 = Nur jedem das Seine , BWV 163 = 
 Nur jedem das Seine ( To each his own ! ) , BWV 163 , is a church cantata by Johann Sebastian Bach . He composed it in Weimar for the twenty @-@ third Sunday after Trinity and first performed it on 24 November 1715 . 
 This work was part of Bach 's sequence of composing monthly church cantatas for the Weimar court , which he began in 1714 . It was the first piece performed after a mourning period of several months for Prince Johann Ernst . The text , written by the court poet Salomon Franck , is based on the prescribed gospel reading for the Sunday , " Render unto Caesar ... " , and includes several allusions to money and gold . The cantata has six movements , beginning with an aria for tenor , followed by two pairs of recitatives and arias , one for bass and the other for the duet of soprano and alto , and a concluding chorale . Similar to other cantatas on words by Franck , the work is scored for a small Baroque chamber ensemble of two violins , viola , two cellos and continuo . Bach composed a unique aria with a dark texture of a bass voice and two obbligato cellos . A duet has been described as a love duet and compared to operatic duets . The music of the closing chorale is lost , except for the continuo part . It is not clear if Bach set the stanza printed in the libretto from Heermann 's " Wo soll ich fliehen hin " , or instead his " Meinen Jesum lass ich nicht " , in a tune that appears as a cantus firmus in movement 5 . 
 = = History and text = = 
 On 2 March 1714 Bach was appointed concertmaster of the Weimar court orchestra ( Kapelle ) of the co @-@ reigning dukes Wilhelm Ernst and Ernst August of Saxe @-@ Weimar . As concertmaster , he assumed the principal responsibility for composing new works , specifically cantatas for the Schlosskirche ( palace church ) , on a monthly schedule . Bach composed the cantata in 1715 for the twenty @-@ third Sunday after Trinity . The prescribed readings for the Sunday were from the Epistle to the Philippians , " our conversation is in heaven " ( Philippians 3 : 17 – 21 ) , and from the Gospel of Matthew , the question about paying taxes , answered by " Render unto Caesar ... " ( Matthew 22 : 15 – 22 ) . The librettist was Salomon Franck , the court poet in Weimar . He began with a paraphrase of the famous answer " Render unto Caesar " from the gospel , and included several allusions to money and gold ( he was also the numismatist of the Weimar court ) . Franck included a stanza from a hymn by Johann Heermann as the sixth and last movement of this cantata , according to the printed libretto the final stanza of " Wo soll ich fliehen hin " ( 1630 ) . The music of that chorale is lost ; only the continuo part has survived . Recent scholarship found that Bach possibly chose to set a stanza from Heermann 's " Meinen Jesum lass ich nicht " instead , in a tune he used instrumentally in movement 5 , which would match the continuo part . 
 Bach led the first performance on 24 November 1715 . It was the first cantata performed after a period of mourning for Prince Johann Ernst from August to November . No account is extant of a later performance in Leipzig , but the Bach scholar Christoph Wolff writes : " it seems safe to assume that it was [ revived ] " . 
 = = Scoring and structure = = 
 The cantata in structured in six movements , beginning with an aria for tenor ( T ) , followed by two pairs of recitative and aria , one for bass ( B ) , the other for the duet of soprano ( S ) and alto ( A ) , and a concluding chorale when all four parts are united . As with several other cantatas on words by Franck , it is scored for a small Baroque chamber ensemble of two violins ( Vl ) , viola ( Va ) , two cellos ( Vc ) and basso continuo ( Bc ) . 
 In the following table of the movements , the scoring , keys and time signatures are taken from Alfred Dürr , using the symbol for common time ( 4 / 4 ) . The instruments are shown separately for winds and strings , while the continuo , playing throughout , is not shown . 
 = = Music = = 
 The opening da capo aria for tenor is based on a paraphrase of " Render to Ceasar " : " Nur jedem das Seine " . The aria features an unusual ritornello in which the strings assume a motif introduced by the continuo , which is then repeated several times through all parts . The movement is a da capo aria emphasizing dualism and debt . Craig Smith remarks that it is " almost academic in its metrical insistence " . 
 The second movement is a secco bass recitative , " Du bist , mein Gott , der Geber aller <unk> " ( You are , my God , the Giver of all gifts ) . It has been described as " operatic in its intensity and subtle adjustments of character " . The recitative is remarkable for its " aggressive , even belligerent " conclusion . 
 The following bass aria , " <unk> mein Herz die <unk> sein " ( Let my heart be the coin ) , has an unusual and unique accompaniment of two obbligato cellos with continuo . The cellos present an imitative motif to introduce the bass . John Eliot Gardiner , who conducted the Bach Cantata Pilgrimage in 2000 , comments that Bach " conjures up an irresistible picture of two coin @-@ <unk> at work , a sort of eighteenth @-@ century sorcerer goading his apprentice " , observing that " two cellos polish away in contrary motion with wide <unk> leaps " . Bach was interested in coins and precious metals . The conductor Craig Smith compares the dark texture to the " descent into the earth in Wagner 's Das Rheingold " . The aria is in three thematic sections : " enjoining " , " melodramatically rhetoric " , and " <unk> " . 
 The fourth movement is a soprano and alto duet recitative , " Ich <unk> dir , o Gott , das Herze <unk> geben " ( I would gladly , o God , give you my heart ) It is rhythmically metrical and presents five sections based on mood and text . The recitative is " high and light but very complicated in its myriad of detail " . 
 The duet aria , " Nimm mich mir und gib mich dir ! " ( Take me from myself and give me to You ! ) , again for soprano and alto , is in triple time . The tune of Johann Heermann 's hymn " Meinen Jesum lass ich nicht " ( I will not let go of my Jesus ) is interwoven in the texture as a cantus firmus of the upper strings in unison . The movement is a " love duet " characterized by " antiphonal <unk> of commitment " to God rather than a carnal desire . The musicologist Julian Mincham compares its presentation to Monteverdi 's L 'incoronazione di Poppea . The movement begins with sparse scoring and becomes more richly textured as it progresses , adding the chorale tune . 
 The final movement , possibly " <unk> auch mein Herz und Sinn " ( Also lead my heart and mind ) , is a four @-@ part chorale setting , marked " Chorale in semplice <unk> " ; however , only the continuo line is extant . While the libretto shows that a stanza from Heermann 's " Wo soll ich fliehen hin " was to be used , sung to a melody by Christian Friedrich Witt , the Bach scholar Andreas Glöckner found that the continuo part matches the tune in the previous movement , which appeared in a hymnal published by Witt . 
 = = Selected recordings = = 
 Amsterdam Baroque Orchestra & Choir , Ton Koopman . J.S. Bach : Complete Cantatas Vol . 3 . Erato , 1995 . 
 Bach Collegium Japan , Masaaki Suzuki . J.S. Bach : Cantatas Vol . 4 . BIS , 1996 . 
 Gächinger Kantorei / Bach @-@ Collegium Stuttgart , Helmuth Rilling . Die Bach Kantate . Hänssler , 1977 . 
 Holland Boys Choir / Netherlands Bach Collegium , Pieter Jan Leusink . Bach Edition Vol . 11 . Brilliant Classics , 1999 . 
 Monteverdi Choir / English Baroque Soloists , John Eliot Gardiner . Bach Cantatas Vol . 12 . Soli Deo Gloria , 2000 . 
 = Dysprosium = 
 Dysprosium is a chemical element with the symbol Dy and atomic number 66 . It is a rare earth element with a metallic silver luster . Dysprosium is never found in nature as a free element , though it is found in various minerals , such as xenotime . Naturally occurring dysprosium is composed of seven isotopes , the most abundant of which is 164Dy . 
 Dysprosium was first identified in 1886 by Paul Émile Lecoq de Boisbaudran , but was not isolated in pure form until the development of ion exchange techniques in the 1950s . Dysprosium is used for its high thermal neutron absorption cross @-@ section in making control rods in nuclear reactors , for its high magnetic susceptibility in data storage applications , and as a component of Terfenol @-@ D ( a magnetostrictive material ) . Soluble dysprosium salts are mildly toxic , while the insoluble salts are considered non @-@ toxic . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 = = = Physical properties = = = 
 Dysprosium is a rare earth element that has a metallic , bright silver luster . It is soft enough to be cut with a knife , and can be machined without sparking if overheating is avoided . Dysprosium 's physical characteristics can be greatly affected by even small amounts of impurities . 
 Dysprosium and holmium have the highest magnetic strengths of the elements , especially at low temperatures . Dysprosium has a simple ferromagnetic ordering at temperatures below 85 K ( − 188 @.@ 2 ° C ) . Above 85 K ( − 188 @.@ 2 ° C ) , it turns into an helical antiferromagnetic state in which all of the atomic moments in a particular basal plane layer are parallel , and oriented at a fixed angle to the moments of adjacent layers . This unusual <unk> transforms into a disordered ( paramagnetic ) state at 179 K ( − 94 ° C ) . 
 = = = Chemical properties = = = 
 Dysprosium metal tarnishes slowly in air and burns readily to form dysprosium ( III ) oxide : 
 4 Dy + 3 O2 → 2 <unk> 
 Dysprosium is quite electropositive and reacts slowly with cold water ( and quite quickly with hot water ) to form dysprosium hydroxide : 
 2 Dy ( s ) + 6 H2O ( l ) → 2 Dy ( OH ) 3 ( aq ) + 3 H2 ( g ) 
 Dysprosium metal vigorously reacts with all the halogens at above 200 ° C : 
 2 Dy ( s ) + 3 F2 ( g ) → 2 DyF3 ( s ) [ green ] 
 2 Dy ( s ) + 3 Cl2 ( g ) → 2 DyCl3 ( s ) [ white ] 
 2 Dy ( s ) + 3 Br2 ( g ) → 2 DyBr3 ( s ) [ white ] 
 2 Dy ( s ) + 3 I2 ( g ) → 2 <unk> ( s ) [ green ] 
 Dysprosium dissolves readily in dilute sulfuric acid to form solutions containing the yellow Dy ( III ) ions , which exist as a [ Dy ( OH2 ) 9 ] 3 + complex : 
 2 Dy ( s ) + 3 H2SO4 ( aq ) → 2 <unk> + ( aq ) + 3 SO2 − 
 4 ( aq ) + 3 H2 ( g ) 
 The resulting compound , dysprosium ( III ) sulfate , is noticeably paramagnetic . 
 = = = Compounds = = = 
 Dysprosium halides , such as DyF3 and DyBr3 , tend to take on a yellow color . Dysprosium oxide , also known as <unk> , is a white powder that is highly magnetic , more so than iron oxide . 
 Dysprosium combines with various non @-@ metals at high temperatures to form binary compounds with varying composition and oxidation states + 3 and sometimes + 2 , such as <unk> , <unk> , <unk> and <unk> ; <unk> , <unk> , <unk> and <unk> ; <unk> , <unk> , <unk> and <unk> , as well as <unk> and <unk> . 
 Dysprosium carbonate , Dy2 ( CO3 ) 3 , and dysprosium sulfate , Dy2 ( SO4 ) 3 , result from similar reactions . Most dysprosium compounds are soluble in water , though dysprosium carbonate tetrahydrate ( Dy2 ( CO3 ) 3 · 4H2O ) and dysprosium oxalate <unk> ( Dy2 ( C2O4 ) 3 · <unk> ) are both insoluble in water . Two of the most abundant dysprosium carbonates , <unk> ( Dy ) ( Dy2 ( CO3 ) 3 · 2 – 3H2O ) and <unk> ( Dy ) ( <unk> ( OH ) ) are known to form via a poorly ordered ( amorphous ) precursor phase with a formula of Dy2 ( CO3 ) 3 · 4H2O . This amorphous precursor consists of highly hydrated spherical nanoparticles of 10 – 20 nm diameter that are exceptionally stable under dry treatment at ambient and high temperatures . 
 = = = Isotopes = = = 
 Naturally occurring dysprosium is composed of seven isotopes : 156Dy , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , and 164Dy . These are all considered stable , although 156Dy decays by alpha decay with a half @-@ life of over 1 × 1018 years . Of the naturally occurring isotopes , 164Dy is the most abundant at 28 % , followed by <unk> at 26 % . The least abundant is 156Dy at 0 @.@ 06 % . 
 Twenty @-@ nine radioisotopes have also been synthesized , ranging in atomic mass from 138 to 173 . The most stable of these is <unk> , with a half @-@ life of approximately 3 × 106 years , followed by <unk> with a half @-@ life of 144 @.@ 4 days . The least stable is <unk> , with a half @-@ life of 200 ms . As a general rule , isotopes that are lighter than the stable isotopes tend to decay primarily by β + decay , while those that are heavier tend to decay by β − decay . However , <unk> decays primarily by alpha decay , and <unk> and <unk> decay primarily by electron capture . Dysprosium also has at least 11 metastable isomers , ranging in atomic mass from 140 to 165 . The most stable of these is <unk> , which has a half @-@ life of 1 @.@ 257 minutes . <unk> has two metastable isomers , the second of which , <unk> , has a half @-@ life of 28 ns . 
 = = History = = 
 In 1878 , erbium ores were found to contain the oxides of holmium and thulium . French chemist Paul Émile Lecoq de Boisbaudran , while working with holmium oxide , separated dysprosium oxide from it in Paris in 1886 . His procedure for isolating the dysprosium involved dissolving dysprosium oxide in acid , then adding ammonia to precipitate the hydroxide . He was only able to isolate dysprosium from its oxide after more than 30 attempts at his procedure . On succeeding , he named the element dysprosium from the Greek <unk> ( <unk> ) , meaning " hard to get " . The element was not isolated in relatively pure form until after the development of ion exchange techniques by Frank Spedding at Iowa State University in the early 1950s . 
 In 1950 , Glenn T. Seaborg , Albert Ghiorso , and Stanley G. Thompson bombarded 241Am with helium ions , which produced atoms with an atomic number of 97 and which closely resembled the neighboring lanthanide terbium . Because terbium was named after Ytterby , the city in which it and several other elements were discovered , this new element was named berkelium for the city in which it was synthesized . However , when the research team synthesized element 98 , they could not think of a good analogy for dysprosium , and instead named the element californium in honor of the state in which it was synthesized , California . The research team went on to " point out that , in recognition of the fact that dysprosium is named on the basis of a Greek word meaning ' difficult to get at , ' that the searchers for another element a century ago found it difficult to get to California " . 
 = = Occurrence = = 
 While dysprosium is never encountered as a free element , it is found in many minerals , including xenotime , fergusonite , gadolinite , euxenite , <unk> , <unk> , monazite and bastnäsite ; often with erbium and holmium or other rare earth elements . Currently , most dysprosium is being obtained from the ion @-@ adsorption clay ores of southern China , and future sources will include the Halls Creek region in Western Australia . In the high @-@ yttrium version of these , dysprosium happens to be the most abundant of the heavy lanthanides , comprising up to 7 – 8 % of the concentrate ( as compared to about 65 % for yttrium ) . The concentration of Dy in the Earth 's crust is about 5 @.@ 2 mg / kg and in sea water 0 @.@ 9 ng / L. 
 = = Production = = 
 Dysprosium is obtained primarily from monazite sand , a mixture of various phosphates . The metal is obtained as a by @-@ product in the commercial extraction of yttrium . In isolating dysprosium , most of the unwanted metals can be removed magnetically or by a flotation process . Dysprosium can then be separated from other rare earth metals by an ion exchange displacement process . The resulting dysprosium ions can then react with either fluorine or chlorine to form dysprosium fluoride , DyF3 , or dysprosium chloride , DyCl3 . These compounds can be reduced using either calcium or lithium metals in the following reactions : 
 3 Ca + 2 DyF3 → 2 Dy + 3 CaF2 
 3 Li + DyCl3 → Dy + 3 LiCl 
 The components are placed in a tantalum crucible and fired in a helium atmosphere . As the reaction progresses , the resulting halide compounds and molten dysprosium separate due to differences in density . When the mixture cools , the dysprosium can be cut away from the impurities . 
 About 100 tonnes of dysprosium are produced worldwide each year , with 99 % of that total produced in China . Dysprosium prices have climbed nearly <unk> , from $ 7 per pound in 2003 , to $ 130 a pound in late 2010 . The price increased to $ 1 @,@ 400 / kg in 2011 but fell to $ 240 in 2015 , largely due to illegal production in China which circumvented government restrictions . 
 According to the United States Department of Energy , the wide range of its current and projected uses , together with the lack of any immediately suitable replacement , makes dysprosium the single most critical element for emerging clean energy technologies - even their most conservative projections predict a shortfall of dysprosium before 2015 . As of late 2015 , there is a nascent rare earth ( including dysprosium ) extraction industry in Australia . 
 = = Applications = = 
 There are not many applications unique to dysprosium . Theodore Gray wrote in his book The Elements : A Visual Exploration of Every Known Atom in the Universe " Look up dysprosium , and you have to go to the fourth page of results before finding anything that isn 't a periodic table website 's entry for dysprosium , usually an obligatory ' It 's an element , so we have to have a page about it ' sort of page . " 
 Dysprosium is used , in conjunction with vanadium and other elements , in making laser materials and commercial lighting . Because of dysprosium 's high thermal @-@ neutron absorption cross @-@ section , dysprosium @-@ oxide – nickel <unk> are used in neutron @-@ absorbing control rods in nuclear reactors . Dysprosium – cadmium chalcogenides are sources of infrared radiation , which is useful for studying chemical reactions . Because dysprosium and its compounds are highly susceptible to magnetization , they are employed in various data @-@ storage applications , such as in hard disks . Dysprosium is increasingly in demand for the permanent magnets used in electric car motors and wind turbine generators . 
 <unk> – iron – boron magnets can have up to 6 % of the neodymium substituted by dysprosium to raise the <unk> for demanding applications , such as drive motors for electric vehicles and generators for wind turbines . This substitution would require up to 100 grams of dysprosium per electric car produced . Based on Toyota 's projected 2 million units per year , the use of dysprosium in applications such as this would quickly exhaust its available supply . The dysprosium substitution may also be useful in other applications , because it improves the corrosion resistance of the magnets . 
 Dysprosium is one of the components of Terfenol @-@ D , along with iron and terbium . Terfenol @-@ D has the highest room @-@ temperature magnetostriction of any known material ; which is employed in transducers , wide @-@ band mechanical resonators , and high @-@ precision liquid @-@ fuel injectors . 
 Dysprosium is used in dosimeters for measuring ionizing radiation . Crystals of calcium sulfate or calcium fluoride are doped with dysprosium . When these crystals are exposed to radiation , the dysprosium atoms become excited and luminescent . The luminescence can be measured to determine the degree of exposure to which the dosimeter has been subjected . 
 <unk> of dysprosium compounds have high strength and a large surface area . Therefore , they can be used to reinforce other materials and act as a catalyst . Fibers of dysprosium oxide fluoride can be produced by heating an aqueous solution of DyBr3 and NaF to 450 ° C at 450 bar for 17 hours . This material is remarkably robust , surviving over 100 hours in various aqueous solutions at temperatures exceeding 400 ° C without <unk> or aggregating . 
 Dysprosium iodide and dysprosium bromide are used in high @-@ intensity metal @-@ halide lamps . These compounds dissociate near the hot center of the lamp , releasing isolated dysprosium atoms . The latter re @-@ emit light in the green and red part of the spectrum , thereby effectively producing bright light . 
 Several paramagnetic crystal salts of dysprosium ( Dysprosium Gallium Garnet , <unk> ; Dysprosium Aluminum Garnet , DAG ; Dysprosium Iron Garnet , <unk> ) are used in adiabatic <unk> refrigerators . 
 = = Precautions = = 
 Like many powders , dysprosium powder may present an explosion hazard when mixed with air and when an ignition source is present . Thin foils of the substance can also be ignited by sparks or by static electricity . Dysprosium fires cannot be put out by water . It can react with water to produce flammable hydrogen gas . Dysprosium chloride fires , however , can be extinguished with water , while dysprosium fluoride and dysprosium oxide are non @-@ flammable . Dysprosium nitrate , Dy ( NO3 ) 3 , is a strong oxidizing agent and will readily ignite on contact with organic substances . 
 Soluble dysprosium salts , such as dysprosium chloride and dysprosium nitrate , are mildly toxic when ingested . Based on the toxicity of dysprosium chloride to mice , it is estimated that the ingestion of 500 grams or more could be fatal to a human . The insoluble salts , however , are non @-@ toxic . 
 = Tragedy of Otranto = 
 The Tragedy of Otranto took place on 28 March 1997 when the Albanian ship Kateri i Radës sank in a collision with the Italian naval vessel Sibilia in the Strait of Otranto and at least 57 Albanians , aged 3 months to 69 years , lost their lives . The emigrants had been part of a large migration of Albanians to Italy following a popular uprising that began after the collapse of several large @-@ scale pyramid schemes . In order to prevent the unauthorized entry of <unk> migrants into Italy , the Italian Navy set up a procedure to board Albanian vessels whenever encountered , implementing a de facto blockade . 
 In proceeding to carry out a boarding , the Italian vessel Sibilia collided with Kater i Radës and capsized it , resulting in the Albanian deaths . The captains of both ships were held responsible for " shipwreck and multiple manslaughter " . The event raised questions over the extent of power that a state may exercise to protect itself from unauthorized entry . Arguments were presented that a state must limit coercive actions that are disproportionate to the risk of unauthorized entry . The United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees criticized the Italian blockade as illegal since it had been established solely through an intergovernmental agreement with Albania . 
 = = Background = = 
 After years of enforced isolation and a ban on international travel , with shoot @-@ to @-@ kill orders on the border , thousands of Albanians began fleeing to Italy and Greece in late 1990 , when communism in Albania started to fall . Two large waves of people came to Italy , first in March and then in August 1991 . The first wave was sparked by a rumor that Italy was giving visas , and thousands of people commandeered boats of all sizes at the port of Durrës . The still @-@ communist Albanian government called the outflow a " national dementia . " By then , about 20 @,@ 000 Albanians had reached Italy , most of them in Brindisi . Much of the Italian media portrayed the situation as " barbarians " invading Italian soil . As a consequence of the Gulf War , Italian opinion @-@ makers voiced concerns regarding the alleged " Islamic danger " of the migration . Others saw a connection between the Ottoman invasion of Otranto ( 1480 – 1481 ) across the 40 miles ( 64 km ) wide Strait of Otranto and contemporary migration . 
 In 1997 , a crisis erupted in Albania after the collapse of several massive pyramid schemes , which resulted in social deterioration and violence in the country . An imposition of a curfew and a state of emergency on 2 March provoked a popular rebellion , causing concern in Italy , which feared another large @-@ scale migration flow . Albanian migration to Italy reached its peak in the latter half of March , bringing great pressure to Italian accommodation centers and provoking a strong reaction in Italian public opinion . Italy had been operating under a bilateral agreement with Albania to board Albanian vessels whenever encountered starting on 3 April 1997 and Albanian would @-@ be migrants going to Italy would be sent back to Albania , in exchange for Italian financial , police , and humanitarian assistance to the country . A military Operation White Flags was established in the international waters of the Strait and implemented a de facto naval blockade . 
 = = Sinking = = 
 The incident happened on 28 March 1997 in the Strait of Otranto when the Italian Navy vessel Sibilia collided with the Albanian ship Kateri i Radës which had left from the Albanian port city of Vlorë with 142 people on board . The Sibilla sought to stop and inspect the ship suspected of containing irregular migrants . The vessel instead ended up colliding with the ship and sinking it . According to Italian authorities , there was no intention to cause the collision . The Zefiro first approached and identified the Kateri i Radës as a motorboat with approximately 30 civilians on board . The motorboat continued toward Italy even though a stop order issued by the Zefiro . This happened around 4 : 30 PM , near the Albanian island Sazan . Sibilia then took over the operation and during its maneuvers , the Italian ship caused the Kateri i Radës to turn which resulted in subsequent deaths . After the Albanian ship was capsized , the Sibilia allegedly left and came back approximately 20 minutes later . The bodies of at least 52 who lost their lives were recovered . The total number of dead may be as high as 83 . The survivors were taken to the Apulian port of Brindisi , where they arrived at 2 : 45 AM . They were then put on a bus , and taken to an immigration center to be identified . On 29 and 30 March 1997 , news of the disaster made it to the first page of major Italian newspapers , relating the sense of gravity of the incident , which reported it as either a collision or a ramming . March 31 was a day of mourning in Albania . 
 On March 28 , the United Nations Security Council adopted resolution 1101 , which established a multinational protection force in Albania to facilitate the delivery of humanitarian assistance . The force , known as Operation Alba , was led by the Italians and included the participation of 6 @,@ 500 soldiers from eight other countries . The unspoken reason for the intervention was to stem the flow of refugees . 
 = = Legal proceedings = = 
 The accident raised questions about the extent of power that the state may use to protect itself from unauthorized entry . Although undisputed that the sinking was unintentional , controversy exists over whether it was a result of dangerous maneuvering , which was disproportionate in relation to the stopping of the ship . Authors argue that there is an obligation for the state to limit coercive actions which are disproportionate to the risk of intrusion . The United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees criticized the Italian blockade as " illegal " since Italy established it only through a bilateral , intergovernmental agreement with Albania . 
 The <unk> et. al v. Italy and Albania case was held to be inadmissible because of non @-@ <unk> national remedies . The European Court of Human Rights , which held the case , assumed jurisdiction relying on the bilateral agreement between Albania and Italy . The ship was recovered 35 miles ( 56 km ) from the Italian coast , no more than 10 miles ( 16 km ) to 15 miles ( 24 km ) from the Albanian coast within Albanian territorial waters . The court held Italy responsible for the incident since it was considered to have exercised jurisdiction . Italy was also held responsible for holding an investigation of the deaths , a requirement which was considered to have been fulfilled by the public manslaughter proceedings held against the captain of the Italian vessel . By the end of eight years of proceedings , the Court of Brindisi convicted the Italian and Albanian captains together of " shipwreck and multiple manslaughter " with the first to three years in prison and the second to four . Responsibility for the " accident " was attributed to both and was relegated to the individual level . The larger chain of command , legal framework , discourses , and established practices which resulted in the sinking have not been judicially investigated . 
 = = Remembrance = = 
 The tragedy became part of the Albanian folk song repertoire relating to the migration of Albanians abroad . The leading figures of this practice were local intellectuals called <unk> related the <unk> of <unk> before World War II with the migration . They make use of metaphors and performance devices taken from oral folk poetry and death laments which react on the migrations to fix them in the memory of the community . This became a tool for responding to the loss of life for the tragedy of Otranto and other tragic events . 
 Parts of Kateri i Radës were transported to a concrete platform in the port of Otranto as a monument to the tragedy . The project cost € 150 thousand and was entrusted to the Greek sculptor Costas <unk> . Before the project , what was left of the ship lay in a corner of the port of Brindisi . The project was titled L <unk> . Opera all <unk> <unk> ( The Landing . A work dedicated to Migrating Humanity ) . Photographers Arta <unk> and <unk> <unk> published photographs of the ship on the Albanian @-@ Italian newspaper <unk> i <unk> . The families of the dead requested for the relics of Kateri i Radës to be placed in Albania after Italian media reported that it was to be used as a monument . 
 = 1984 Intercontinental Cup = 
 The 1984 Intercontinental Cup was an association football match between Liverpool F.C. of England and Club Atlético Independiente of Argentina on 9 December 1984 at the National Stadium in Tokyo , Japan , the annual Intercontinental Cup contested between the winners of the Copa Libertadores and European Cup . Independiente were appearing in their sixth Intercontinental Cup , they had won the competition once in 1973 and lost the other four . Liverpool were making their second appearance in the competition , after their loss in 1981 . 
 The teams had qualified for the competition by winning their continent 's primary cup competition . Independiente qualified by winning the primary South American cup competition , the Copa Libertadores . They won the 1984 Copa Libertadores defeating Brazilian team Grêmio 3 – 1 on points in the finals . Liverpool qualified by winning the primary European cup competition , the European Cup . They beat Italian team A.S. Roma 4 – 2 in a penalty shoot @-@ out after the match finished 1 – 1 . 
 Watched by a crowd of 62 @,@ 000 , Independiente took the lead in the sixth minute when José Percudani scored . Liverpool had the better of the possession during the match , but they were unable to convert their chances ad the match finished in a 1 – 0 victory to Independiente . The win was the Argentine club 's second triumph in the competition and the fifth in a row by the South American team . 
 = = Match = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Independiente qualified for the Intercontinental Cup as the reigning Copa Libertadores winners . They had won the 1984 Copa Libertadores beating Grêmio 3 – 1 on points over two legs in the finals . It would be Independiente 's sixth appearance in the competition . Their previous five appearances had resulted in one win in 1973 and four defeats in 1964 , 1965 , 1972 and 1974 . 
 Liverpool had qualified for the Intercontinental Cup as a result of winning the 1983 – 84 European Cup . They had beaten Roma 4 – 2 in a penalty shoot @-@ out after the match finished 1 – 1 to win their fourth European Cup . Liverpool were appearing in their second Intercontinental Cup . Their appearance in 1981 resulted in a 3 – 0 defeat against Flamengo . Liverpool were scheduled to appear in 1977 and 1978 but did not compete . They declined to play in 1977 and were replaced by runners @-@ up Borussia Mönchengladbach , while in 1978 , Liverpool and Boca Juniors declined to play each other . 
 Liverpool 's last match before the Intercontinental cup was against Coventry City in the 1984 – 85 Football League . They won 3 – 1 courtesy of two goals from John Wark and one from Ian Rush . The last match Independiente played before the Intercontinental Cup was against Rosario Central in the 1984 Argentine Primera División , which they lost 1 – 0 . 
 = = = Summary = = = 
 Before the match , Liverpool lost defender Mark Lawrenson who had injured his hamstring in training . Gary Gillespie was his replacement . Liverpool kicked off the match and the first few exchanges saw a number of rash tackles . Independiente defender Carlos Enrique tackled Craig Johnston robustly , but the referee indicated to play on . Moments later Liverpool midfielder Jan Mølby tackled Enrique late , which prompted the referee to award a free kick . Liverpool controlled the opening exchanges of the match , but could not work the ball into the Independiente penalty area . However , it was Independiente who opened the scoring , Claudio Marangoni sent a ball over the Liverpool defence for striker José Percudani , whose low shot beat the advancing Liverpool goalkeeper Bruce Grobbelaar to give Independiente a 1 – 0 lead . 
 Following the goal , Independiente under instruction rom their manager José Pastoriza , began to sit back in their own half inviting Liverpool to attack them . Their plan worked as Liverpool were unable to break down their defence , while their strikers Percudani and Alejandro <unk> counter @-@ attacked when Independiente received the ball . The second half saw Liverpool continue to attack the Independiente goal , but to no avail . Midfielders John Wark and Mølby tried to find a way through the Independiente defence was equal to their efforts . Wark 's efforts trying to engineer an equalising goal resulted in him being substituted for Ronnie Whelan in the 76th minute , due to fatigue . 
 Despite being the better team for the majority of the match , Liverpool were unable to beat the Independiente defence , with their shooting in front of goal being the culprit . Both sides questioned some of the referee 's decisions . Liverpool believed they should have had two penalties , while Independiente felt that the assistant referee 's decisions were questionable . Incidentally , the referee had served half of his two match ban handed out by the Brazilian Football Association . 
 = = = Details = = = 
 = = Post @-@ match = = 
 Despite the defeat , Liverpool manager Joe Fagan could not fault the effort his players had put in : " Independiente are a good defensive tactical team and we could find no way through , the weather was ideal , we were just as fit as they were . The South Americans have better ball control than we do . We were disappointed with the result but I wasn 't disappointed with the display . " 
 Liverpool finished the 1984 – 85 Football League in second place 13 points behind local rivals Everton . They also reached the final of the 1984 – 85 European Cup , which they lost 1 – 0 to Juventus . However the events of the match were overshadowed for the disaster that occurred before kick @-@ off . Liverpool fans breached a fence separating the two groups of supporters and charged the Juventus fans . The resulting weight of people caused a retaining wall to collapse , killing 39 people and injuring hundreds . English clubs were banned indefinitely from European competition , with a condition that when the ban was lifted , Liverpool would serve an extra three @-@ year ban . The ban eventually lasted for five years , clubs returning to European competition in the 1990 – 91 season . 
 Independiente would finish their season in the Primera Division in 14th place . Despite this , they competed in the 1985 Copa Libertadores as the reigning champions . However , they were unable to retain their title as they exited in the semi @-@ finals . 
 = If U Seek Amy = 
 " If U Seek Amy " ( edited for radio as " If U See Amy " ) is a song recorded by American singer Britney Spears for her sixth studio album , Circus ( 2008 ) . It was released on March 10 , 2009 by Jive Records as the third single of the album , and was chosen by a poll on Spears 's official website . " If U Seek Amy " was written and produced by Swedish producer Max Martin , who also wrote previous hits for her first three albums and marked as Spears 's comeback song to Martin since 2001 . In the song , Spears is looking for a woman named Amy in a club , and although it appears to be about sex , it is actually about how society perceives her life . Musically , " If U Seek Amy " makes use of instruments such as keyboards and timpani . 
 " If U Seek Amy " was generally well received by contemporary critics , who praised Spears 's confident vocals and frequently cited it as the highlight of the album . After its release , " If U Seek Amy " caused controversy in English @-@ speaking countries for the euphemism and lyrical content , along with the fact that if pronounced in certain dialect , " If U Seek Amy " could be thought of as a double entendre that is interpreted as " F @-@ U @-@ C @-@ K Me " which caused the Parents Television Council ( PTC ) threatening to file indecency complaints against any radio station that played the song during daytime . An edited version of the song titled " If U See Amy " was released in some regions , including in stations owned by Clear Channel Radio and Austereo Radio Network . " If U Seek Amy " was a moderate success , reaching the top twenty in Australia , the United States , Canada , Ireland , the United Kingdom and many other countries worldwide . It was also her third single from Circus to reach the top twenty in the United States . 
 The music video for " If U Seek Amy " begins with a parody of an America 's Newsroom report by Megyn Kelly and portrays Spears at a sex party that takes place at her house . Towards the end , she changes into conservative housewife clothes and opens the front door with her family while paparazzi take pictures of them . It references some of her previous music videos such as " ... Baby One More Time " and " Piece of Me " . Critics noted the similarities with her past work and also compared it to the film Eyes Wide Shut . " If U Seek Amy " was performed at The Circus Starring Britney Spears ( 2009 ) and the Femme Fatale Tour ( 2011 ) . It is currently performed as part of the revamped set list of Spears ' Las Vegas residency show , Britney : Piece of Me ( 2013 – 17 ) . 
 = = Background = = 
 The song was co @-@ written and produced by Max Martin , who wrote hits for Spears ' first albums , including " ... Baby One More Time " ( 1998 ) and " Oops ! ... I Did It Again " ( 2000 ) . This marked the first time they worked together since her third studio album , Britney ( 2001 ) . Recording sessions took place at Conway Recording Studios and Sunset Studios in Hollywood , California . Background vocals by <unk> and Martin were recorded at Maratone Studios in Stockholm , Sweden . The recordings were mixed by Serban Ghenea at MixStar Studios in Virginia . On December 5 , 2008 , a poll was added to Spears ' official website to choose the third single , involving ten other songs from Circus . On January 7 , 2009 , it was announced that " If U Seek Amy " had won , receiving 26 % of the total votes . 
 = = Music and lyrics = = 
 " If U Seek Amy " runs through a dance @-@ oriented beat and features many instruments , including keyboards , snare , bass drums , electric guitars and timpani . According to the sheet music published at musicnotes.com by Hal Leonard Corporation , the song has a beat of 130 beats per minute and is written in the key of A minor . Spears 's vocal range spans from G3 @-@ C5 . In the song , Spears seems to be looking for a woman named Amy in a club . It has been suggested that Amy is either Amy Winehouse or an alter ego of Spears herself . The verses end with the hookline " <unk> " , which , according to Poppy Cossins of The Sun , is fitting to " the album 's carnivalesque overtone " . The chorus begins with the lines " Love me , hate me / Say what you want about me " , a reference to the public 's perception and fascination with Spears ' life . This presents Spears both as " an object of desire and a punching bag " . According to Neil McCormick of The Daily Telegraph , this line also hints at the public image of British singer Amy Winehouse . 
 The title , " If U Seek Amy " , is a <unk> , meaning to sound like " F @-@ U @-@ C @-@ K me " when heard in the chorus , " All of the boys and all of the girls are begging to , if you seek Amy . " This euphemism was compared to the title of Van Halen 's 1991 album , For Unlawful Carnal Knowledge , as well as a portion of James Joyce 's Ulysses . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 The song received generally positive reviews . Chris Williams of Billboard said the song is " Max Martin and Spears at their best : a stomping dance floor beat with building synths prodding the song along and the singer sounding like she 's having a blast being the bad girl " . Rolling Stone writer Caryn Ganz called the song one of the standout tracks of the album . Alexis <unk> of The Guardian commented that her stronger and confident delivery in the chorus was noticeably lacking in the rest of the album . Joey Guerra of The Houston Chronicle also said that the " more aggressive , pointed persona " Spears adopts in the song is one of the high points of the album . The Emory Wheel 's writer Julia Cox called it " the album 's strongest and most unorthodox song " . Ricardo Baca of The Denver Post named the song the most fascinating track of the album and commented on the euphemism , saying " It 's trashy and clever , and it 's also quite fun . And fun is exactly what Spears should be aiming for " . However , there were also some negative reviews . Stephen Thomas Erlewine of Allmusic said the song is " a Katy Perry @-@ styled exercise in crass commercial carnality that is at once the best and worst song here " . Chris Willman of Entertainment Weekly called it " puerile " and added that " it 'll be a middle @-@ school sensation " . NME named it one of the filthiest songs of all time . 
 = = Public reception = = 
 Controversy was first reported by Australian music site <unk> on December 5 , 2008 , after the release of the album . Leonie <unk> , a housewife from Sydney , said , " I was astonished and totally taken aback when I heard my 5 and 7 year old kids walking around the house singing ' F @-@ U @-@ C @-@ K ' ... When I asked them what it was , they told me it was Britney Spears . I was horrified . I got them the Circus album but there was no warning on it ... It is extremely offensive . I feel deceived . " Rolling Stone writer Daniel Kreps defended Spears , arguing that parents should have been aware of the singer 's musical themes . After the song was announced as the third single from the album , American radio stations were unsure about playing the track due to its double entendre in the chorus . Program directors of Z100 and KIIS @-@ FM compared the issues to be faced by their radio stations to the release of the 2005 The Black Eyed Peas single , " Don 't Phunk with My Heart " , saying that " listeners thought it was the other word , and so we had to change it to ' mess ' " . Program director Patti Marshall of <unk> said " It 's ok to put in on an album , have fun with it , but we 're publicly owned , you know ? [ ... ] It 's not about us . It 's about the mom in the minivan with her 8 @-@ year @-@ old . " <unk> 's Tommy Chuck said his station produced their own edit of the song that replaced " seek " with " see " , with the station 's disc jockeys referring to it as " If U See Amy " . 
 Shortly after , the Parents Television Council ( PTC ) threatened to file indecency complaints with the Federal Communications Commission ( FCC ) against any station that played the song between 6 a.m. and 10 p.m. PTC President Tim Winter said " there is no misinterpreting the lyrics to this song , and it 's certainly not about a girl named Amy . It 's one thing for a song with these lyrics to be included on a CD so that fans who wish to hear it can do so , but it 's an entirely different matter when this song is played over the publicly owned airwaves , especially at a time when children are likely to be in the listening audience . " <unk> reported that " interestingly , Circus was reviewed by Common Sense Media , another organization whose mission is to help parents manage their children 's media consumption . It rated it appropriate for age 13 and up , but made no specific mention of ' If U Seek Amy ' . Even more interestingly , reputed incoming FCC Chair Julius <unk> is a founding board member of Common Sense . " The threats of the PTC were later extended to cable music channels that played the music video ; however , the FCC does not have control over cable . 
 On January 23 , 2009 , Tom <unk> , senior vice president of programming for Clear Channel Radio , announced they planned to play an edited version . Sharon Dastur of Z100 added that Spears had recorded a new version of the song and the new edit would be provided by Jive Records . David Hinckley of the Daily News commented that " Clear Channel , which laid off 9 % of its workforce this week , is hardly in the mood to finance an FCC fight right now " . Finally , a radio edit titled " If U See Amy " was released to American radio stations , which changes the " seek " to " see " . The amended version was released in the UK in May . While the song has not officially been renamed or released in Australia , some radio stations , such as those belonging to the Austereo Radio Network , play the censored version , while others continue to play the uncensored . Both the music video and the international radio single remain " If U Seek Amy " . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 According to Nielsen SoundScan , " If U Seek Amy " sold over 107 @,@ 000 digital copies in the United States within two weeks of the album 's release . On April 11 , 2009 , the song peaked at number seventeen on the Billboard Hot Digital Songs . On May 9 , 2009 , the song peaked at number nineteen on the Billboard Hot 100 , making Circus the first Spears album to have three top twenty hits since her 1999 debut , ... Baby One More Time . As of March 2015 , " If U Seek Amy " has sold 1 @.@ 3 million digital downloads in the United States according to Nielsen SoundScan . It is her tenth best @-@ selling digital single in the country . In Canada the song debuted at eighty @-@ eight on December 20 , 2008 . It returned on February 14 , 2009 at eighty @-@ six before reaching the thirteenth position , where it finally peaked on April 4 , 2009 . 
 " If U Seek Amy " debuted at number forty @-@ nine on the ARIA Singles Chart on February 16 , 2009 , and moved to a peak position of eleven on March 30 , 2009 , also becoming the chart 's " greatest gainer " . It has since been certified gold by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) with sales of over 35 @,@ 000 copies . " If U Seek Amy " entered the UK Singles Chart at number forty @-@ five on April 6 , 2009 due to its rising digital sales . After its physical release , it peaked at number twenty on May 10 , 2009 . According to The Official Charts Company , the song has sold 105 @,@ 000 copies there . " If U Seek Amy " also achieved success worldwide , reaching the top ten in Belgium ( Wallonia ) , France and Turkey , and the top twenty in Belgium ( Flanders ) , Ireland , New Zealand and Sweden . 
 = = Music video = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 The music video for " If U Seek Amy " was filmed on February 7 , 2009 , at Pacific Palisades , California and was directed by Jake Nava , who previously worked with Spears for her " My Prerogative " music video . Spears was styled by David Thomas for the video . During the scenes at the party , she wears American Apparel wet @-@ looking leggings and a black corset from London lingerie designer <unk> with diamond @-@ shaped holes . She also wears a pair of red high @-@ heeled Louboutins with <unk> petals , that were not available for sale until a month after the video was released . When she is dressed as a housewife , Spears has a blonde wig , wears a pale pink sweater , a white skirt from Derek Lam and a Lacoste polo shirt . The music video premiered on March 12 , 2009 , on both Virgin Mobile 's official website and Spears 's official websites . 
 = = = Synopsis = = = 
 The video starts with a news anchor ( played by Kristina Mitchell ) saying the title of the song above a news banner that reads " Britney Spears song lyrics spell out obscenity in disguise " . This is actually a parody of an America 's Newsroom report by Megyn Kelly . It then skips to a house , in which a sex party is coming to an end . Spears starts singing while sitting on the edge of a bed while the people that surround her are getting dressed . She gets up and looks out the window . As the first verse ends , she picks up a pair of panties from the floor , recalling her personal struggles and the " Piece of Me " video . She dances with four male dancers in the first chorus . During the second chorus , she dances with four other female dancers dressed in cheerleading outfits , while many men are watching them dance . The screen fades to white and Spears begins to change into a conservative ' 50s @-@ inspired housewife outfit . As the chorus begins again , she comes out of her bedroom . She walks down the stairs , with dancers surrounding her and a woman gives her a <unk> , which she uses to pick up a pie . After this , she walks out the front door of the house and is joined by her seemingly conservative @-@ looking husband and children , one of them dressed with the schoolgirl outfit Spears wore in the " ... Baby One More Time " video . As they go down the walkway , they are surrounded by paparazzi , who have no idea what goes on behind closed doors . While the kids and husband wave , Spears smiles for the camera and blows a kiss . The video then ends with the news anchor saying , " Doesn 't make any sense , does it ? " . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 James Montgomery of MTV stated that the video manages to combine elements from her previous music videos , such as the style of " Everytime " and the attitude of " Stronger " . He also referred to it as " a pretty amazing amalgamation of all things Brit , and a nice primer of her entire career up to this point " . Rolling Stone writer Daniel Kreps compared the party on the video to the 1999 film Eyes Wide Shut and added that " this may be the first Spears video ever crafted strictly with the morally @-@ lax Internet in mind , a brazen clip that doesn 't have to tone down its explicit nature lyrically and visually in order to get airplay " . Chris Johnson of the Daily Mail compared Spears ' housewife style to one of her looks in a 2001 Pepsi commercial . Leah Greenblatt of Entertainment Weekly said , " it 's kind of difficult to believe the song 's real meaning will get past even the thickest listener , the video itself is pretty tame ... almost disappointingly so " . The reviewer also compared the hairstyle of Spears during the housewife scenes to Marilyn Monroe . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Spears performed the song during 2009 's The Circus Starring Britney Spears . After a performance of " Boys " from Britney , Spears performed a military drill with her male dancers , which ended with her putting on a faux fur vest to perform " If U Seek Amy " . At the end , Spears pulled a giant pink hammer and proceeded to knock her dancers off the stage , in a similar way to Whac @-@ A @-@ Mole . Jerry Shriver of USA Today said in the opening night of the tour , " [ the ] single ' If U Seek Amy ' draws a huge roar and sing @-@ along from the crowd as Spears shakes her long blond mane " . Craig Rosen of The Hollywood Reporter commented , " The artist that raised the ire of parents from the beginning in her scandalous schoolgirl outfit also continues to use shock @-@ and @-@ awe tactics . Her latest , ' If U Seek Amy ' [ ... ] was included in the set , much to the delight of her young fans " . 
 " If U Seek Amy " was also performed by Spears at 2011 's Femme Fatale Tour . Spears reappeared onstage after " Lace and Leather " to perform a jazz @-@ inspired version of the song , wearing a white skirt and standing over a fan , recalling Marilyn Monroe 's iconic scene in The Seven Year Itch ( 1955 ) . The backdrops behind her showed 1940s crime film @-@ inspired black @-@ and @-@ white footage while photographers in colorful outfits took pictures of her . Rick Florino of Artistdirect said , " Marrying old school detective fare and stadium @-@ size anthems is something no other pop star has done , and once again Britney 's the first . " Nicki Escudero of the Phoenix New Times stated that it was " nice " to hear remixed versions of older hits , " such as the jazzy ' If You Seek Amy , ' [ sic ] the sultry and Middle Eastern @-@ inspired ' Boys ' and the sped @-@ up ' Toxic ' . " 
 Spears currently performs the song at her revamped Las Vegas residency show , Britney : Piece of Me , at The AXIS theater at Planet Hollywood Resort & Casino . The performance , which pays homage to Spears ' ' Circus ' era , immediately follows the song " Circus " ( 2008 ) on the set list . 
 = = Track listings = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Vocals : Britney Spears 
 Writers : Max Martin , Shellback , Savan Kotecha and Alexander Kronlund 
 Producer : Max Martin 
 Mixing : Serban Ghenea 
 Protools editing : John Hanes 
 Programming : Shellback and Max Martin 
 Background vocals : Britney Spears , <unk> and Max Martin 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = History of Milton Keynes = 
 This history of Milton Keynes details its development from the earliest human settlements , through the plans for a ' new city ' for 250 @,@ 000 people in south central England , its subsequent urban design and development , to the present day . ( Milton Keynes is a large town in South East England , founded in 1967 ) . 
 = = Overview = = 
 On 23 January 1967 when the formal new town designation order was made , the 21 @,@ 870 acres ( 8 @,@ 850 ha ) , area to be developed was largely farmland and undeveloped villages . Before construction began , every area was subject to detailed archaeological investigation : doing so has exposed a rich history of human settlement since Neolithic times and has provided a unique insight into the history of a large sample of the landscape of north Buckinghamshire . 
 From its establishment in 1967 to its abolition in 1992 , the Milton Keynes Development Corporation created by far the largest and most ambitious of the British new towns : indeed its objective was to build a new city of 250 @,@ 000 people . Many of Britain 's most acclaimed building and landscape architects contributed to what was to be a show @-@ piece of British design . Unlike previous new towns , Milton Keynes has a preponderance of privately funded development but these developments were subject to an exacting design brief in line with the design principles laid out in The Plan for Milton Keynes . 
 = = Pre @-@ history and early human settlement = = 
 Long before England existed , this area was at the bottom of a primeval sea . The most notable of the fossils uncovered is that of an ichthyosaur from Caldecotte , now on display in the central library . 
 Human settlement began in this area around 2000 BCE , mainly in the valleys of the rivers Ouse and <unk> and their tributaries ( Bradwell Brook , Shenley Brook ) . Archaeological excavations revealed several burial sites dating from 2000 BCE to 1500 BCE . Evidence for the earliest habitation was found at Blue Bridge – production of flint tools from the Middle Stone Age . In the same area , an unusually large ( 18 @-@ metre or 59 @-@ foot diameter ) round house was excavated and dated to the Late Bronze Age / Early Iron Age , about 700 BCE . Other excavations in this Blue Bridge / Bancroft hill @-@ side uncovered a further seven substantial settlement sites , dating from then until 100 BCE . 
 = = = Milton Keynes Hoard = = = 
 The area that was to become Milton Keynes was relatively rich : the Milton Keynes Hoard is possibly the largest ( by weight , 2 @.@ 2 kilograms or 4 @.@ 9 pounds ) hoard of Bronze Age jewellery ever found in Britain . It was discovered in September 2000 at <unk> ( near Milton Keynes village ) and consists of two Bronze Age gold torcs and three gold bracelets in a datable clay pot . 
 = = Roman Britain = = 
 Before the Roman conquest of Britain of 43 CE , the Catuvellauni ( a British Iron Age tribe ) controlled this area from their hill fort at <unk> , near Woburn Sands ( map ) . Under Roman occupation , the area thrived . The obvious reason for this is the major Roman road , Iter II ( later known as Watling Street ) , that runs through the area and that gave rise to an associated Roman town at <unk> ( Fenny Stratford ) . Possibly the oldest known gold coin in Britain was found here , a gold stater of the mid @-@ 2nd century BCE . 
 The foundations of a large Romano @-@ British villa were excavated at Bancroft Park , complete with under @-@ floor heating and mosaic floor . Further excavations revealed that this area ( map ) , overlooking the fertile valley of the Bradwell Brook , was in continuous occupation for 2 @,@ 000 years , from the Late Bronze Age to the early Saxon period . Cremation grave goods from the Iron Age found on the site included jewellery and fine pottery . Other Romano @-@ British settlements were found at Stantonbury , Woughton and <unk> . Industrial activity of the period included bronze working and pottery making at Caldecotte , pottery also at Wavendon Gate , and many iron @-@ working sites .. 
 = = Anglo @-@ Saxon period = = 
 It seems that most of the Romano @-@ British sites were abandoned by the 5th century and the arable land reverted to scrub and woodland . Arriving in the 6th century , the Anglo @-@ Saxons began to clear the land again . Bletchley ( " <unk> 's clearing " ) and Shenley ( " Bright clearing " ) date from this period . Large settlements have been excavated at <unk> and near Milton Keynes Village . Their cemeteries have been found at Newport Pagnell , Shenley and Tattenhoe . 
 = = Norman conquest and the medieval period = = 
 Excavations in and around the modern villages have failed to find any evidence of occupation before the 10th or 11th centuries , except in Bradwell where Bradwell Bury is traced to the 9th century . The Domesday Book of 1086 provides the first documentary evidence for many settlements , listing <unk> ( Broughton ) , <unk> ( Calverton ) , <unk> ( Great Linford ) , <unk> ( Loughton , Milton Keynes ) , <unk> ( Newport Pagnell ) , <unk> ( Newton Longville ) , <unk> ( Shenley ) , <unk> ( Simpson ) , <unk> ( Woughton ) , <unk> ( Walton ) , <unk> ( Wolverton ) and <unk> ( Woolstone ) . 
 Administration of the area that was later to become the Borough of Milton Keynes was in ' Hundreds ' – initially ( 11C ) <unk> ( or <unk> ) Hundred , <unk> ( or <unk> ) Hundred and Moulsoe Hundred , amalgamated as the ' three hundreds of Newport ' in the middle of the 13th Century . Bletchley , Bradwell , Calverton , Fenny Stratford , Great Linford , Loughton , Newport Pagnell , Newton Longville , Shenley ( part of ) , Simpson , Stantonbury , Stoke Hammond , Stony Stratford , Water Eaton , Willen , Great and Little Woolstone , Wolverton , and Woughton on the Green were in <unk> Hundred ; Cold <unk> , <unk> , Gayhurst , Hanslope , <unk> , Lathbury , <unk> , Little Linford , Olney , Ravenstone , Stoke <unk> , <unk> with <unk> , and Weston Underwood were in ( <unk> Hundred ; and Bow Brickhill , Great Brickhill , Little Brickhill , Broughton , <unk> , Clifton <unk> , North Crawley , Emberton , <unk> , Lathbury , <unk> , Milton Keynes ( village ) , Moulsoe , Newton <unk> , Olney with Warrington , Ravenstone , <unk> , Stoke <unk> , <unk> with <unk> , Walton , Wavendon , Weston Underwood , and Willen were in Moulsoe Hundred . The modern Borough of Milton Keynes covers almost exactly the same area as Newport Hundred ( plus a little of the former Winslow Hundred which was one of 18 ancient hundreds amalgamated under the administrative control of Cottesloe Hundred ) . 
 The moot mound of <unk> Hundred has been found , excavated and reconstructed – it is on the highest point in the central area and is just behind the Library in modern Central Milton Keynes . Only one medieval manor house survives : the 15th century Manor Farmhouse in Loughton . There are sites of other manor houses in Great Woolstone , Milton Keynes village and Woughton on the Green . The oldest surviving domestic building is Number 22 , Milton Keynes ( village ) , the house of the bailiff of the manor of Bradwell . 
 Newport Pagnell , established early in the 10th century , was the principal market town for the area . Stony Stratford and Fenny Stratford were founded as market towns on Watling Street in the late 12th or early 13th centuries . 
 By the early 13th century , North Buckinghamshire had several religious houses : Bradwell Abbey ( 1154 ) is within modern Milton Keynes and <unk> Priory ( 1218 ) is just outside it . Both were Benedictine priories . Many of the medieval trackways to these sites still survive and have become cycleways and footpaths of the Redway network . 
 Britain 's earliest ( excavated ) windmill is in Great Linford . The large oak beams forming the base supports still survived in the mill mound and were shown by radio carbon dating to originate in the first half of the 13th century . ( The present stone tower mill at Bradwell was built in 1815 , on a site convenient to the new Grand Junction Canal ) . 
 = = Early modern Britain = = 
 Enclosures 
 Most of the eighteen medieval villages in Milton Keynes are still extant and are at the heart of their respective districts . But some , such as Old Wolverton , remain only as field patterns marking a deserted village . The desertion of Old Wolverton was due to enclosure of the large strip cultivation fields into small " closes " by the local landlords , the Longville family , who turned arable land over to pasture . By 1654 , the family had completely enclosed the parish . With the end of the feudal system , the peasants had lost their land and tillage / grazing rights and were forced to find other work or starve . Thus Old Wolverton was reduced from about thirty peasant families in the mid 16th century to almost none , within the space of a century . There are also deserted village sites in Tattenhoe and Westbury ( Shenley Wood ) . 
 Turnpike roads 
 Some important roads cross the site of the new city . Most important of these is Watling Street from London to Chester . Originally , the Northampton to London road joined the Watling Street at Fenny Stratford , via Broughton and Simpson . The Oxford to Cambridge route came through Stony Stratford , Wolverton and Newport Pagnell . Unfortunately , the heavy clay soils , poor drainage and many streams made these routes frequently impassable in winter . The <unk> to Dunchurch stretch of Watling Street became a ( paved ) Turnpike in 1706 ( the first turnpike to be approved by parliament ) . Simpson remained a quagmire and in 1870 the new Northampton / London turnpike diverted away at Broughton to take the higher route through Wavendon and Woburn Sands to join Watling Street near <unk> . On the east / west route , the Stony Stratford to Newport Pagnell turnpike of 1814 extended the Woodstock , Oxfordshire / Bicester / Stony Stratford turnpike of 1768 . Turnpikes provided a major boost to the economy of Fenny Stratford and particularly Stony Stratford . In the stage coach era , Stony Stratford was a major resting place and exchange point with the east / west route . In the early 19th century , over 30 coaches a day stopped here . That traffic came to an abrupt end in 1838 when the London – Birmingham Railway ( now the West Coast Main Line ) opened at nearby Wolverton . 
 Grand Junction Canal 
 The Grand Junction Canal came through the area between 1793 and 1800 , with canal @-@ side wharfs in Fenny Stratford , Great Linford , Bradwell and Wolverton . The route bypassed Newport Pagnell but , in 1817 , an arm was dug to it from Great Linford . Trade along the canal stimulated the local economy . A large brickworks was established near the canal in Great Linford : two bottle kilns and the clay pits can still be seen on the site . Pottery from the Midlands begins to appear in excavations of dwellings from that period . 
 London and Birmingham Railway , Wolverton and New Bradwell new towns 
 The London and Birmingham Railway brought even more profound changes to the area . The coach trade on the turnpike through Stony Stratford collapsed , taking many businesses with it . Fortunately , Wolverton was the half way point on the rail route , where engines were changed and passengers alighted for refreshments . Wolverton railway works was established here , creating work for thousands of people in the surrounding area . In the period 1840 to 1880 , new towns were built in New Bradwell and Wolverton ( about 2 km or 1 @.@ 2 mi east of the original deserted village ) to house them . A narrow gauge railway , the Wolverton to Newport Pagnell Line , was built to Newport Pagnell in 1866 , much of it by closing and reusing the Newport Arm of the canal . The Wolverton and Stony Stratford Tramway ran to Stony Stratford from 1888 ( to 1926 ) and , in 1889 , was extended to <unk> in Northamptonshire . 
 Bletchley , on the 1846 junction of the London and Birmingham railway with the Bedford branch , was to become an important railway town too . In 1850 , another branch from Bletchley to Oxford was built , later to become the ( Cambridge / Oxford ) Varsity Line . Bletchley , originally a small village in the parish of Fenny Stratford , grew to reach and absorb its parent . In Stony Stratford , expertise learned in the works was applied to the construction of traction engines for agricultural use and the site of the present <unk> Close was engaged in their manufacture . 
 = = Bletchley Park = = 
 Bletchley Park is a former private estate located in Old Bletchley and modern Museum of Cryptography . Conveniently located at the junction of the Varsity Line with the West Coast Main Line , Bletchley Park , code @-@ named Station X , was the location of the Allied main code @-@ breaking establishment during World War II . Codes and ciphers of several Axis powers were deciphered there , most famously the German Enigma . Colossus , the world 's first programmable electronic digital computer was put to work here as part of the codebreaking effort . The high @-@ level intelligence produced by Bletchley Park , codenamed Ultra , is frequently credited with aiding the Allied war effort and shortening the war , although Ultra 's effect on the actual outcome of World War II is debated . 
 = = " Bigger , Better , Brighter " – Bletchley in the 20th century = = 
 Almost forty years after the construction of Bletchley railway station , the 1884 / 5 Ordnance Survey shows Bletchley as still just a small village around the C of E church at Bletchley Park , and a hamlet near the Methodist chapel and Shoulder of Mutton public house at the junction of Shenley Road / Newton Road with Buckingham Road . ( These districts are known today as Old Bletchley and Far Bletchley ) . The major settlement of the time is Fenny Stratford . 
 By 1911 , the population of the combined parishes was 5 @,@ 166 but the balance between them had changed : in that year , the name of the local council ( Urban District ) changed from Fenny Stratford UD to Bletchley UD . The 1926 Ordnance Survey shows the settlements beginning to merge , with large private houses along the Bletchley Road between them . In 1933 , the newly founded Bletchley Gazette began a campaign for a " Bigger , Better , Brighter , Bletchley " . As the nation emerged from World War II , Bletchley Council renewed its desire to expand from its 1951 population of 10 @,@ 919 . By mid @-@ 1952 , the Council was able to agree terms with five London Boroughs to accept people and businesses from bombed @-@ out sites in London . This trend continued through the 1950s and 1960s , culminating in the GLC @-@ funded Lakes Estate in Water Eaton parish , even as Milton Keynes was being founded . Industrial development kept pace , with former London businesses relocating to new industrial estates in Mount Farm and Denbigh – Marshall Amplification being the most notable . With compulsory purchase , Bletchley Road ( now renamed Queensway after a royal visit in 1966 ) became the new high street with wide pavements where front gardens once lay . Houses near the railway end were replaced by shops but those nearer Fenny Stratford became banks and professional premises . At the 1971 Census , the population of the Bletchley Urban District was 30 @,@ 642 . 
 Bletchley had fought to be the centre of the proposed new city , but it was not to be . The 1971 Plan for Milton Keynes placed Central Milton Keynes on a completely new hill @-@ top site four miles further north , half way to Wolverton . Bletchley was relegated to the status of suburb . 
 = = 1960s Plans for a new city in North Buckinghamshire , 1967 designation of Milton Keynes = = 
 In the 1960s , the Government decided that a further generation of new towns in South East England was needed to take the projected population increase of London , after the initial 1940s / 1950s wave . Bletchley had already been considered as a new town in this first wave , and had subsequently in the 1950s the London County Council constructed overspill housing for several London boroughs there . 
 Buckinghamshire County Council 's architect , Fred Pooley , had spent considerable time in the early sixties developing ideas for a new town in the Bletchley and Wolverton area . He developed a futuristic proposal based on a monorail linking a series of individual townships to a major town centre . The county council published the proposals in 1966 , but it was too late to influence the government . 
 In 1964 , a Ministry of Housing and Local Government study recommended " a new city " near Bletchley . A further <unk> & LG study in 1965 proposed that the proposed new city would encompass the existing towns of Bletchley , Stony Stratford and Wolverton . It was to be the biggest new town yet , with a target population of 250 @,@ 000 . A Draft Order was made in April 1966 . The Housing Minister , Anthony Greenwood , made his formal announcement on 23 January 1967 . The designated area was 21 @,@ 870 acres ( 8 @,@ 850 ha ) , somewhat smaller than the 27 @,@ 000 acres ( 11 @,@ 000 ha ) in the Draft Order ( due to the exclusion of the Calverton <unk> ) . The name " Milton Keynes " was also unveiled at this time , taken from the existing village of Milton Keynes on the site . The site was deliberately located ( roughly ) equidistant from London , Birmingham , Leicester , Oxford and Cambridge . With its large target population , Milton Keynes was eventually intended to become a city . All subsequent planning documents and popular local usage make use of the term " city " or " new city " , even though formal city status has not been awarded . 
 When the boundary of Milton Keynes was defined , some 40 @,@ 000 people lived in the " designated area " of 88 @.@ 51 km ² ( 21 @,@ 833 acres ) . The area was split between five existing local authorities : Bletchley , Newport Pagnell and Wolverton Urban Districts together with the Newport Pagnell Rural District and the Winslow Rural District . Planning control was taken from elected local authorities and delegated to the Milton Keynes Development Corporation ( <unk> ) . 
 = = = Existing settlements and oral history = = = 
 The designated area outside the four main towns ( Bletchley , Newport Pagnell , Stony Stratford , Wolverton ) was largely rural farmland but included many picturesque North Buckinghamshire villages and hamlets : Bradwell village and Abbey , Broughton , Caldecotte , Fenny Stratford , Great Linford , Loughton , Milton Keynes Village , New Bradwell , Shenley Brook End , Shenley Church End , Simpson , Stantonbury , Tattenhoe , <unk> , Walton , Water Eaton , Wavendon , Willen , Great and Little Woolstone , Woughton on the Green . All of these had a rich oral history , which has been recorded . 
 = = Milton Keynes Development Corporation : designing a city for 250 @,@ 000 people = = 
 Following publication of the Draft Master Plan for Milton Keynes , the government appointed Lord Campbell ( " Jock " Campbell ) to lead the Milton Keynes Development Corporation . He and his chief executive , Walter Ismay , appointed Llewellyn Davies as principal planning consultants – the team included Richard Llewellyn @-@ Davies , Walter Bor and John de <unk> . Execution of the plan was led by Fred Roche . The goals declared in the master plan were these : 
 opportunity and freedom of choice 
 easy movement and access 
 good communications 
 balance and variety 
 an attractive city 
 public awareness and participation 
 efficient and imaginative use of resources 
 The Corporation was determined to learn from the mistakes made in the earlier new towns and revisit the Garden City ideals . They set in place the characteristic grid roads that run between districts , the Redway system of independent cycle / pedestrian paths , and the intensive planting , lakes and parkland that are so appreciated today . Central Milton Keynes was not intended to be a traditional town centre but a business and shopping district that supplemented the Local Centres in most of the Grid Squares . This non @-@ hierarchical devolved city plan was a departure from the English New Towns tradition and envisaged a wide range of industry and diversity of housing styles and tenures across the city . The radical grid plan was inspired by the work of Californian urban theorist Melvin M Webber ( 1921 – 2006 ) , described by the founding architect of Milton Keynes , Derek Walker , as the city 's " father " . Webber thought that telecommunications meant that the old idea of a city as a concentric cluster was out of date and that cities that enabled people to travel around them readily would be the thing of the future , achieving " community without <unk> " for residents . 
 Urban design 
 Since the radical plan form and large scale of the New City attracted international attention , early phases of the city include work by celebrated architects , including Sir Richard <unk> , Lord Norman Foster , Henning Larsen , Ralph Erskine , John Winter , and Martin Richardson . The Corporation itself attracted talented young architects led by the young and charismatic Derek Walker . Its strongly modernist designs featured regularly in the magazines Architectural Design and the Architects ' Journal . Though strongly committed to sleek " Miesian " minimalism inspired by the German / American architect Ludwig Mies van der Rohe , they also developed a strand of contextualism in advance of the wider adoption of commercial Post @-@ Modernism as an architectural style in the 1980s . In the Miesian tradition were the <unk> Sewage Works , which Derek Walker regarded as his finest achievement , and the Shopping Building designed by Stuart Mosscrop and Christopher Woodward . The contextual tradition that ran alongside it is exemplified by the <unk> 's infill scheme at <unk> Close , Stony Stratford , designed by Wayland <unk> , which inserts into a historic stretch of High Street a modern retail facility , offices and car park . 
 " City in the forest " 
 The original Development Corporation design concept aimed for a " forest city " and its foresters planted millions of trees from its own nursery in Newlands in the following years . As of 2006 , the urban area has 20 million trees . Following the winding up of the Development Corporation , the lavish landscapes of the Grid Roads and of the major parks were transferred to the MK Parks Trust , an independent non @-@ profit charity which is quite separate from the municipal authority and which was intended to resist pressures to build on the parks over time . The Parks Trust is endowed with a portfolio of commercial properties , the income from which pays for the upkeep of the green spaces , a city @-@ wide maintenance model which has attracted international attention . 
 Public art 
 The Development Corporation had an ambitious public art programme and over 50 works were commissioned , mostly still extant . This programme also had two strands : a populist one which involved the local community in the works , the most famous of which is Liz <unk> 's Concrete Cows , a group of concrete Friesian cows which have become the unofficial logo of the city ; and a tradition of abstract geometrical art , such as <unk> <unk> 's " Circle of Light " hanging in the Midsummer Arcade of the Central Milton Keynes Shopping Centre . 
 Demographics 
 Unusually for a new town , Milton Keynes has arrived at a bias in favour of private sector investment , with about 80 % of owner @-@ occupied homes . The political climate determined this : previous new towns were mainly controlled by Labour Governments but Milton Keynes was mainly built during the Conservative years . 
 = = Further development plans = = 
 In January 2004 , Deputy Prime Minister John Prescott announced the United Kingdom government 's Expansion plans for Milton Keynes 
 He proposed that the population of Milton Keynes should double in the next 20 years . He appointed English Partnerships to do so , taking planning controls away from Milton Keynes Borough Council and making EP the statutory planning authority . In turn , EP established a subsidiary Milton Keynes Partnership to manage the programme locally . Their proposal for the next phase of expansion moves away from grid squares to large scale , mixed use , higher density developments which are more based on assumptions about public transport than private car usage . 
 = = Milestones since 1967 = = 
 1960s 
 1961 Census : Population of districts to become the Borough of Milton Keynes 
 = 52 @,@ 931 
 1967 Designation 
 1969 The Open University moves to its new headquarters in Walton Hall . 
 1970s 
 1970 First section of new city grid road system ( H2 from V4 Watling Street ) . The Stables presents its first concert . 
 1971 First major housing scheme ( Galley Hill , Stony Stratford ) . 
 1971 Census : Population of future Borough of Milton Keynes = 
 66 @,@ 949 ; 
 population of designated area 
 = 46 @,@ 500 
 1974 Stantonbury Campus opens ; first major grid road ( V8 Marlborough Street connects Bletchley to Stantonbury ( for New Bradwell and Wolverton ) ; work begins on the Shopping Building ( now The Centre : MK ) ; the first balancing lake ( Willen Lake ) is finished . Borough of Milton Keynes created ( as a district of Buckinghamshire until 1997 ) 
 1975 The first office building in Central Milton Keynes ( Lloyds Court ) opens . 
 1979 First concert at Milton Keynes Bowl ( Desmond Dekker / Geno Washington ) ; Margaret Thatcher opens the Shopping Building . 
 1980s 
 1980 <unk> opens , bypassing Watling Street ; Peace Pagoda dedicated at Willen . 
 1981 Homeworld , Central Library , Willen Hospice 
 1981 Census : Population of the Borough of Milton Keynes = 
 123 @,@ 289 ; 
 population of designated area 95 @,@ 800 
 1982 Central Milton Keynes railway station officially open . 
 1983 Caldecotte balancing lake ready . 
 1984 <unk> road connects to M1 motorway at Junction 13 ; Milton Keynes General Hospital opens ( renamed Milton Keynes University Hospital in 2015 ) . 
 1985 Britain 's first multiplex cinema , The Point , opens . 
 1986 Energy World ; new County Court ; Forte Crest Hotel ( now Holiday Inn ) ; <unk> school ( closes 2002 ) . 
 1987 Woughton Marina opens . 
 1989 <unk> balancing lake , Bradwell aqueduct ( first aqueduct on Grand Union in over 100 years ) . 
 1990s 
 1991 Census : Population of the Borough of Milton Keynes 
 = 179 @,@ 252 ; 
 population of designated area = 
 144 @,@ 700 . 
 1991 Church of Christ the Cornerstone was completed ; De Montfort University opens Milton Keynes campus . ( Closes 2003 ) . 
 1992 Milton Keynes Development Corporation wound up , replaced by Commission for New Towns ; Kingston District Centre ; Woodhill ( HM Prison ) . 
 1994 <unk> district centre . 
 1996 National Hockey Stadium opens . 
 1997 Borough of Milton Keynes unitary authority 
 1999 Milton Keynes Theatre , Art Gallery and new Visitor Centre . 
 2000s 
 2000 Xscape opens . 
 2001 Census : Population of Borough of Milton Keynes 
 = 207 @,@ 063 ; 
 population of designated area = 
 177 @,@ 500 . 
 2003 Wimbledon F.C. moves to the former England National Hockey Stadium . 
 2004 ( " <unk> " ) Wimbledon F.C. renamed and relaunched as Milton Keynes Dons F.C .. 
 2007 Stadium : mk opens and Milton Keynes Dons move in . 
 2007 The Hub & Vizion developments are completed at the western end of the town centre 
 2008 University Centre Milton Keynes opens . 
 2010s 
 2010 former England National Hockey Stadium is demolished , construction begins on Network Rail National Centre . Milton Keynes Shopping Centre is grade II listed . IF : Milton Keynes International Festival is launched . 
 2011 Census : Population of Borough of Milton Keynes = 248 @,@ 800 
 2012 Network Rail National Centre ( Quadrant : MK ) officially opens . 
 = Kenya Airways = 
 Kenya Airways Ltd . , more commonly known as Kenya Airways , is the flag carrier of Kenya . The company was founded in 1977 , after the dissolution of East African Airways . The carrier 's head office is located in <unk> , Nairobi , with its hub at Jomo Kenyatta International Airport . 
 The airline was wholly owned by the Government of Kenya until April 1995 ( 1995 @-@ 04 ) , and it was privatised in 1996 , becoming the first African flag carrier to successfully do so . Kenya Airways is currently a public @-@ private partnership . The largest shareholder is the Government of Kenya ( 29 @.@ 8 . % ) , followed by KLM , which has a 26 @.@ 73 % stake in the company . The rest of the shares are held by private owners ; shares are traded on the Nairobi Stock Exchange , the Dar es Salaam Stock Exchange , and the Uganda Securities Exchange . 
 Kenya Airways is widely considered as one of the leading Sub @-@ Saharan operators ; as of January 2013 , the carrier was ranked fourth among the top ten ones that operate in Africa by seat capacity , behind South African Airways , Ethiopian Airlines and EgyptAir . The airline became a full member of SkyTeam in June 2010 ( 2010 @-@ 06 ) , and is also a member of the African Airlines Association since 1977 . As of March 2015 , the company had 3 @,@ 986 employees . 
 = = History = = 
 Kenya Airways was established by the Kenyan government on 22 January 1977 ( 1977 @-@ 01 @-@ 22 ) , following the break @-@ up of the East African Community and the consequent demise of East African Airways ( EAA ) . On 4 February 1977 ( 1977 @-@ 02 @-@ 04 ) , two Boeing 707 – <unk> leased from British Midland Airways inaugurated operations , serving the Nairobi – Frankfurt – London route . On internal and regional flights , the carrier deployed aircraft formerly operated by the EAA consortium , such as one Douglas DC @-@ 9 @-@ 52 and three Fokker F @-@ 27 @-@ 200s . In late 1977 , three Boeing 707s were acquired from Northwest Orient . The following year , the company formed a charter subsidiary named Kenya Flamingo Airlines , which leased aircraft from the parent airline in order to operate international passenger and cargo services . Aer Lingus provided the company with technical and management support in the early years . 
 In July 1980 ( 1980 @-@ 07 ) the airline had 2 @,@ 100 employees and a fleet of three Boeing 707 @-@ <unk> , one Boeing 720B , one DC @-@ 9 @-@ 30 and three Fokker F @-@ 27 @-@ 200s . At this time , Addis Ababa , Athens , Bombay , Cairo , Copenhagen , Frankfurt , Jeddah , Kampala , Karachi , Khartoum , London , Lusaka , Mauritius , Mogadishu , Rome , Salisbury , Seychelles and Zurich were part of the airline 's list of international destinations , whereas domestic services radiating from Nairobi to Kisumu , Malindi , Mombasa and <unk> were also operated . A Nairobi – Bombay nonstop route was launched in 1982 using Boeing 707 @-@ 320B equipment . A year later , the company commenced serving Tanzania . Flights to Burundi , Malawi and Rwanda were launched in 1984 . Capacity on the European routes was boosted in November 1985 ( 1985 @-@ 11 ) with the incorporation of an Airbus A310 @-@ 200 leased from Condor . Kilimanjaro was first served in March 1986 ( 1986 @-@ 03 ) . That year , the airline ordered two Airbus A310 @-@ 300s . Kenya Airways became the first African carrier in acquiring the type , and they were the first wide @-@ bodies ordered by the company . Funded with a US $ 20 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 ( equivalent to $ 43 @,@ 175 @,@ 471 in 2015 ) loan , the delivery of these two aircraft took place in May and September 1986 ( 1986 @-@ 09 ) . They were put on service on the Kenya – Europe corridor , and permitted Kenya Airways to return the A310 @-@ 200 to the lessor . In early 1988 , the carrier ordered two Fokker 50s ; aimed at operating domestic routes , the airline received the first of these aircraft at the end of the year . Also in 1988 , the lease of a third A310 @-@ 300 was arranged with the International Lease Finance for a ten @-@ year period ; the aircraft joined the fleet in November 1989 ( 1989 @-@ 11 ) . Leased from Ansett Worldwide , the first Boeing 757 @-@ 200 was handed over to the company in January 1990 ( 1990 @-@ 01 ) , whereas a third Fokker 50 was incorporated in October the same year . By late 1991 , two Boeing 737 @-@ 200s had been leased from <unk> Peat Aviation . 
 In 1986 , <unk> Paper Number 1 was published by the Government of Kenya , outlining the country 's need for economic development and growth . The document stressed the government opinion that the airline would be better off if owned by private interests , thus resulting in the first attempt to privatise the airline . The government named Philip <unk> as Chairman of the Board in 1991 , with specific orders to make the airline a privately owned company . In 1992 , the Public Enterprise Reform paper was published , giving Kenya Airways priority among national companies in Kenya to be privatised . <unk> was succeeded by Isaac <unk> <unk> . In September 1992 ( 1992 @-@ 09 ) , Brian Davies , was appointed as the new managing director of the company . Davies had been previously hired to carry out a study of viability on privatisation , working for British Airways ' <unk> consulting arm . Swissair was the first company that provided Kenya Airways with privatisation advice . In the fiscal year 1993 to 1994 , the airline produced its first profit since the start of commercialisation . In 1994 , the International Finance Corporation was appointed to provide assistance in the privatisation process , which effectively began in 1995 . A large aviation industry partner was sought to acquire 40 % of the shares , with another 40 % reserved for private investors and the government keeping the remaining stake . The government would absorb almost US $ 90 million in debts and would convert another US $ 31 million it provided in loans into equity ; after reorganisation , the company would have a debt of approximate US $ 78 million . British Airways , KLM , Lufthansa and South African Airways were among the airlines that expressed interest in taking a stake in Kenya Airways . 
 KLM was eventually awarded the privatisation of the company , which restructured its debts and made a master corporation agreement with the Dutch airline that bought 26 % of the shares , becoming the largest single shareholder since then . Shares were floated to the public in March 1996 ( 1996 @-@ 03 ) , and the airline started trading on the Nairobi Stock Exchange . The Government of Kenya kept a 23 % stake in the company , and offered the remaining 51 % to the public ; however , non @-@ Kenyan shareholders could at most had a participation of 49 % in the airline . Despite 40 % of the shares being kept by foreign investors following privatisation ( including KLM 's 26 % stake ) , top management positions were held by Kenyans . Following the takeover , the government of Kenya capitalised US $ 70 million , while the airline was awarded a US $ 15 million loan from the International Finance Corporation to modernise its fleet . In a deal worth US $ 82 million , two Boeing 737 @-@ 300s were ordered in July 1996 ( 1996 @-@ 07 ) . 
 In January 2000 ( 2000 @-@ 01 ) , the airline experienced its first fatal accident when an Airbus A310 that had been bought new in 1986 crashed off Ivory Coast , shortly after taking off from Abidjan . By April the same year , the aircraft park consisted of four Airbus A310 @-@ 300s , two Boeing 737 @-@ 200 Advanced and four Boeing 737 @-@ 300s . At this time the company had a staff of 2 @,@ 780 , including 400 engineers , 146 flight crew and 365 cabin crew . From its main hub at Jomo Kenyatta International Airport , scheduled services were operated to Abidjan , Addis Ababa , Amsterdam , Bujumbura , Cairo , Copenhagen , Dar es Salaam , Douala , Dubai , Eldoret , Entebbe / Kampala , Harare , Johannesburg , Karachi , Khartoum , Kigali , Kinshasa , Lagos , Lilongwe , <unk> , London , Lusaka , Mahe Island , Malindi , Mombasa , Mumbai , and Zanzibar . In 2002 , an order for three Boeing 777 @-@ 200ERs was placed with Boeing ; an additional aircraft of the type was acquired in November 2005 ( 2005 @-@ 11 ) . In March 2006 ( 2006 @-@ 03 ) , six Boeing 787 @-@ 8s were ordered ; the first two examples would be delivered in 2010 and the rest in 2011 . The original Boeing 787 order was amended nine months later to include three more aircraft of the type . 
 In June 2012 ( 2012 @-@ 06 ) the company announced the issuance of rights worth <unk> billion , aimed at increasing capital to support expansion plans . Following the allocation of shares , KLM increased their stake in the company from 26 % to 26 @.@ 73 % , while the Kenyan government boosted their participation into the company from 23 % to 29 @.@ 8 % , becoming the new major shareholder of the carrier . 
 = = Corporate affairs = = 
 = = = Key people = = = 
 As of February 2016 , Kenya Airways ' Managing Director and chief executive officer ( CEO ) positions were held by <unk> <unk> . <unk> , who had been appointed CEO in June 2014 ( 2014 @-@ 06 ) , was the company 's former chief operating officer . Dennis <unk> was the airline 's chairman , as of July 2016 . 
 = = = Subsidiaries and associates = = = 
 The cargo handling company African Cargo Handling Limited is a wholly owned subsidiary of Kenya Airways ; partly owned companies are Kenya <unk> Handling Limited , dedicated to the cargo handling of perishable goods ( 51 % <unk> ) and Tanzanian carrier Precision Air ( 41 @.@ 23 % <unk> ) . A new low @-@ cost subsidiary named <unk> was created in 2013 . 
 = = = Business trends = = = 
 The key trends for the Kenya Airways group over recent years are shown below ( as at year ending 31 March ) : 
 = = Destinations = = 
 = = = Alliances = = = 
 KLM sponsored the process of the company joining SkyTeam in mid @-@ 2005 . In September 2007 ( 2007 @-@ 09 ) , the alliance welcomed Kenya Airways as one of the first official SkyTeam Associate Airlines . SkyTeam upgraded the status of the company to a full membership in June 2010 ( 2010 @-@ 06 ) . The alliance provides Kenya Airways ' passengers with access to the member airlines ' worldwide network and passenger facilities . 
 = = = Codeshare agreements = = = 
 As of January 2015 , the carrier has codeshare agreements with the following companies , which are the actual operators on the routes specified in parenthesis : 
 = = = Future plans = = = 
 In April 2012 ( 2012 @-@ 04 ) , the airline launched a plan named Project <unk> ( the Swahili word meaning Clouds ) to add 24 destinations by 2021 , including the start of services to Australia , and North and South America , and expanding its presence in Asia as well . The carrier intends to add new flights to São Paulo ( <unk> / 15 ) , Toronto ( <unk> / 16 ) , and Perth ( FY 2016 / 17 ) , and to build up a network in Mainland China consisting of eight cities by 2021 , adding seven new destinations ( Beijing , Chengdu , Chongqing , Kunming , Shanghai , Ürümqi , and Xiamen ) to Guangzhou , the only city served in the region , as of April 2012 . In June 2012 ( 2012 @-@ 06 ) , the carrier announced the suspension of services to Rome and Muscat as part of cost @-@ cutting measures , following a 50 % fall in profit for FY2011 / 12 . 
 In October 2013 ( 2013 @-@ 10 ) , the airline reaffirmed its intention of expanding its route network with the addition of six new destinations every year , following the delivery of Boeing 777s and 787s the carrier has on order . Beijing and Shanghai are expected to be included in the airline 's route network by the end 2014 . 
 = = Fleet = = 
 = = = Recent developments and future plans = = = 
 The first of five Embraer 190s ordered in 2010 was incorporated into the fleet in December 2010 ( 2010 @-@ 12 ) . An additional order for ten aircraft of the same type was placed in August 2011 ( 2011 @-@ 08 ) ; the carrier took delivery of the first and second of these fully owned aircraft in September 2012 ( 2012 @-@ 09 ) . In October 2012 ( 2012 @-@ 10 ) , the airline took possession of the 900th E @-@ Jet manufactured by Embraer . 
 The company announced in late February 2011 ( 2011 @-@ 02 ) its intention of acquiring a freighter aircraft to boost cargo capacity on African operations . Until February 2012 ( 2012 @-@ 02 ) , when a joint freighter service with KLM was launched , the carrier 's cargo division has been using belly capacity on its operations ; there are plans to buy and lease more freighter aircraft in order to boost capacity in the growing cargo market between Africa and Asia . Furthermore , the airline announced in October 2012 ( 2012 @-@ 10 ) the conversion of some Boeing 737 @-@ 300s into freighter aircraft to complement the Boeing 747 @-@ 400F service , jointly operated with KLM and <unk> Cargo . The first of four converted Boeing 737 @-@ 300s was delivered to the company in April 2013 ( 2013 @-@ 04 ) ; Kenya Airways will fly this aircraft on routes to eastern , central and southern Africa that are served by the Embraer 190s , in order to boost cargo capacity . The company took delivery of its first Boeing 777 @-@ 300ER , on lease from GECAS , in October 2013 ( 2013 @-@ 10 ) . It had been previously announced that this aircraft would be deployed on a new route to Guangzhou in November . 
 Kenya Airways had nine Boeing 787 Dreamliners on order , as of April 2011 , although the company considered cancelling the order after systematic delays with the delivery dates . The airline received some compensation , in cash and in kind , from Boeing for the delays . <unk> are financing the acquisition of the 20 aircraft the airline has on order . The handover of the first Boeing 787 took place on 4 April 2014 . On 4 June 2014 ( 2014 @-@ 06 @-@ 04 ) , Nairobi – Paris became the first route that was served using the Boeing 787 . In August 2014 ( 2014 @-@ 08 ) , Dreamliners were also deployed on the Nairobi – Johannesburg route . 
 As of April 2015 , the carrier was set to sell some aircraft , including four Boeing 777s , following a decrease in passenger traffic . 
 = = = Current fleet = = = 
 As of May 2016 , the carrier 's fleet consists of the following aircraft : 
 = = = Retired fleet = = = 
 The company has previously operated the following equipment : 
 = = = Livery = = = 
 In 2005 , Kenya Airways changed its livery . The four stripes running all through the length of the fuselage were replaced by the company slogan Pride of Africa , whereas the KA tail logo was replaced by a styled K encircled with a Q to evoke the airline 's IATA airline code . 
 = = Services = = 
 = = = Frequent flyer programmes = = = 
 Former Kenya Airways ' frequent flyer programme <unk> was merged with KLM 's Flying Dutchman in 1997 , which was in turn merged with that of Air France and rebranded as Flying Blue in 2005 , following the fusion of both companies . Gold Elite and Platinum Elite members of the Flying Blue programme are offered the JV Lounge . This service is provided to Kenya Airways passengers , and to passengers flying with its partner airlines as well . Simba Lounge is a service provided to Kenya Airways Business passengers only . Both lounges are located at Jomo Kenyatta International Airport . 
 = = = In @-@ flight entertainment = = = 
 Different in @-@ flight entertainment is available depending upon the aircraft and the class travelled . The airline 's in @-@ flight magazine is called <unk> , and is distributed among the passengers in all aircraft , irrespective of the class . 
 = = Accidents and incidents = = 
 As of October 2014 , Kenya Airways has had two fatal accidents and two hull loss accidents . 
 10 July 1988 : A Fokker F27 @-@ 200 , registration 5Y @-@ BBS , approached the runway too fast and made a belly landing at Kisumu Airport inbound from Nairobi as Flight 650 , skidding down the runway for some 600 m ( 2 @,@ 000 ft ) . 
 11 July 1989 : A Boeing 707 @-@ 320B , registration 5Y @-@ BBK , overran the runway at Bole International Airport following a brake failure . The aircraft had departed from the same airport , and the non @-@ retraction of the landing gear prompted the crew to return . 
 30 January 2000 : Flight 431 was a scheduled Abidjan – Lagos – Nairobi service , operated with an Airbus A310 @-@ 304 , registration 5Y @-@ BEN , that plunged into the Atlantic Ocean and broke up , about a minute after it took off from Abidjan 's Félix Houphouët @-@ Boigny International Airport . There were 179 people aboard , of whom ten were crewmembers ; most of the occupants were Nigerians . 169 people perished in the accident . This was the carrier 's first fatal accident . 
 5 May 2007 : Flight 507 , operated with a Boeing 737 @-@ 800 , tail number 5Y @-@ <unk> , crashed into a mangrove swamp immediately after takeoff for Nairobi , about 5 @.@ 5 kilometres ( 3 @.@ 42 mi ) southeast of Douala International Airport . The flight originated in Abidjan , with a stopover in Douala to pick up passengers . There were 114 people on board , 105 passengers from 23 countries — the majority of them Cameroonians — plus 9 crew members ; all of them perished in the accident . 
 = Black Rock Harbor Light = 
 Black Rock Harbor Light , also known as Fayerweather Island Light , is a lighthouse in Bridgeport , Connecticut , United States which stands on the south end of Fayerweather Island and marks the entrance to Black Rock Harbor . The first lighthouse at the site , built by Abisha Woodward under contract with the United States government , was a wooden tower that was lit and made operational by 1808 . A storm destroyed the tower in 1821 and the current , stone lighthouse was erected in its place in 1823 . The Black Rock Harbor Light was an active navigational aid until 1933 when it was replaced by two automatic lights offshore . The beacon was subsequently given to the City of Bridgeport in 1934 . Two significant efforts during the 1980s and 1990s served to restore the aging tower and the light was relit as a non @-@ navigational aid in 2000 . Black Rock Lighthouse is listed as a contributing property for Bridgeport 's Seaside Park historic district . 
 = = Construction = = 
 In 1807 , the United States government bought the 9 @.@ 5 acres ( 3 @.@ 8 ha ) of land upon which the lighthouse stands from Daniel Fayerweather for $ 200 . The government appropriated $ 5000 for the light station in February 1807 and contracted Abisha Woodward to construct the light . The first Black Rock Harbor Light was a 40 foot ( 12 @.@ 1 meter ) octagonal wooden tower built in 1808 . Abisha Woodward , who previously constructed the 1801 New London Harbor Light and the 1802 Falkner Island Light , constructed a wooden tower that was lit and made operational by October 1808 . The <unk> 's home was a small one and a half story home built on the opposite side of a marsh , several hundred feet away from the tower . Another brick structure was built to house the oil . The total cost of the wooden lighthouse , and likely the accompanying keeper 's house and oil house , was listed at $ <unk> @.@ 69 . 
 On September 3 , 1821 , the wooden tower was destroyed in the Norfolk and Long Island hurricane and was replaced with a 40 foot ( 12 @.@ 1 meter ) octagonal stone tower at a cost of $ 2300 @.@ 53 . Completed in 1823 , the new tower was made of coursed sandstone ashlar and rubble mortar and was claimed by its builder to " withstand the storm of ages . " This boisterous claim was countered by Edmund Blunt , an American Coast Pilot , who stated , " a more contemptible Lighthouse does not disgrace Long Island Sound , most shamefully erected and badly kept . " In 1835 , $ 2052 @.@ 63 was used to preserve the buildings on Fayerweather Island , including the lighthouse . Three years later , in 1838 , on the report of a Captain Gregory , another $ 1529 @.@ 60 was used to build a seawall to protect the buildings . Another $ 15 @,@ 000 would be used from 1847 through 1849 to complete the seawall . The original keeper 's quarters , then referred to as a " dilapidated old edifice " , was replaced in 1879 . 
 = = Service = = 
 The lighthouse originally had a whale oil spider lamp from the Stratford Point Light , but it was upgraded to a system with eight lamps in 1830 . In 1838 , it was reported by Lieutenant George Bache that the reflectors were out of alignment and the light was barely visible in hazy conditions . In 1854 , a fifth @-@ order Fresnel lens was installed . The Black Rock Harbor Light was deactivated in 1932 following the construction of two offshore automatic lights . 
 = = Restoration = = 
 The lighthouse was given to the city of Bridgeport , Connecticut in 1934 and became a part of Seaside Park . In the following years , vandals " gutted the interior " of the lighthouse . In 1977 , the keeper 's quarters building was destroyed in a fire . The first restoration effort came in 1983 when the Friends of Seaside Park restored the tower . Fayerweather Island was cleaned of debris , landscaped and established as a nature preserve . They installed steel " windows " and also secured the entry with a steel panel , but vandals again forced their way into the lighthouse . 
 A second effort was mounted by David Grant Grimshaw and Patricia Roche in 1993 . A sum of $ 25 @,@ 000 cash and in @-@ kind services was raised with fundraising and annual Preservation Balls ; it was later matched by the City of Bridgeport 's Board of Park Commissioners with another grant of $ 25 @,@ 000 . During the night of the 1996 Preservation Ball the lighthouse was mysteriously lit , but Grimshaw did not arrange the illumination . D 'Entremont writes that " maybe the spirit of Kate Moore had grown tired of waiting for the restoration . " The 1998 restoration was conducted under the direction of David Barbour , a local architect . The restoration included masonry repairs , <unk> the lantern room , rust removal from the railings , new doors and windows with vandal @-@ proof steel panes . The lighthouse was repainted with graffiti @-@ resistant paint in the original paint and mortar colors . The light , relit in 2000 , does not serve as an active navigational aid . The light is powered by solar panels on the top of the lighthouse ; it was donated by United Illuminating and Bridgeport Energy . In 2004 , vandals smashed the solar panels and new panels with protective cages were installed in 2007 . 
 = = Access = = 
 The lighthouse is listed as a contributing property for Bridgeport 's Seaside Park historic district , which was listed on July 1 , 1982 . The grounds are accessible by parking at Seaside Park and crossing a breakwater , but the lighthouse is not open to the public . 
 = = List of keepers = = 
 = I Vampiri = 
 I Vampiri ( lit . The Vampires ) is a 1957 Italian horror film . The film was directed by Riccardo Freda and completed by the film 's cinematographer , Mario Bava . It stars Gianna Maria Canale , Carlo D 'Angelo and Dario Michaelis . The film is about a series of murders on young women who are found with all their blood drained . The newspapers describes the killer as the Vampire and young journalist Pierre Lantin researches the crimes . Lantin investigates the mysterious Du Grand family who lives in a castle occupied by Gisele Du Grand who is in love with Lantin . She lives with her aunt who hides her face in a veil as well as the scientist Julian Du Grand who is trying to find the secret to eternal youth . 
 The film was developed during a growth in the Italian film industry which allowed for the market to expand beyond a local Italian audience , and would allow Italian film makers to explore new genres of filmmaking . Freda made a deal with producers at the Italian film studio <unk> to create a low budget horror film by writing a story in one day and filming it in two weeks . The producers agreed and Freda began filming . On the final day of shooting , Freda left the set which led to the cinematographer Mario Bava to direct the rest of the film , which changed various plot points and added the inclusion of stock footage . 
 On the film 's release in 1957 , it became Italy 's first horror film of the sound era . It was not successful in Italy , which Freda interpreted as an audience not interested in horror films made by Italians . The film was released theatrically as The Devil 's Commandment and Lust of the Vampire in the United States and United Kingdom respectively . English critics predominantly discuss the film in terms of its cinematography and place in film history . Despite being the first of the Italian horror films , it was not until the British film Dracula ( 1958 ) and the international hit Black Sunday were released that a greater amount of horror films began being produced in Italy . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In 1957 Paris , a series of mysterious killings are committed against young women of the same blood type who are found dead and drained of their blood . These killings are reported in the press as being performed by a murderer coined The Vampire . The journalist Pierre Lantin ( Dario Michaelis ) begins to investigate , and becomes more involved when his fiancee , the dancer Nora Duval is kidnapped . As Inspector Chantal ( Carlo D 'Angelo ) examines the crime scene , Lantin arrives predicting that the crime was committed by The Vampire . Lantin investigates the school that the latest murder happened at to search for clues and finds that the woman was being followed by a tall man before the murder . Elsewhere , a man named Joseph ( Paul Muller ) begs for " his fix " in a dark room is told to go after a woman named Lorette ( <unk> Guida ) and that he " know what to do " at Rue Saint Etienne . Joseph arrives at the location and is spotted by Lantin but manages to get away from him . Joseph arrives at the clinic of Professor Julian Du Grand ( Antoine <unk> ) and demands money to leave town or he will report what 's happening to the police . He is strangled by Du Grand 's assistant when a shadowed woman named Marguerite arrives and states that if the police track them down , it will be the end of Du Grands career . A newspaper headline later reveals that Professor Julian Du Grand has died unexpectedly . 
 After a funeral procession for Julian , a group of men arrive and reveal that the body buried was that of Joseph . Joseph 's corpse is taken to a castle where he is experimented on by Julian who is attempting discover the secret for eternal life . Later , Lorette meets a blind man in the street who asks her to drop off a letter . On dropping the letter off , she is kidnapped and finds herself locked in a bedroom with the skeletons of the The Vampire 's previous victims . As the police try and track down Lorette 's kidnappers , Lantin is reassigned from following the Vampire story and is set to cover a ball at the castle of Du Grand . At the castle , he meets Gisele ( Gianna Maria Canale ) who expresses admiration for Lantin as he reminds her of his father . Lantin leaves the party and is pursued by the photographer Donald . Lantin states he does not want to lead on Gisele with her emotions which leads to Donald re @-@ entering the castle to profess his love for Gisele . Gisele turns him down as her face begins to grow old before his eyes as she reveals that each person killed restores her youth for a short time . Knowing her secret , she reaches for a pistol and murders Donald . Gisele then calls upon Professor Julian to make her eternally young . Julian states that under her fragile emotional state it may not work , but begins an experimental transfer Lorette 's youth and beauty to Giselle . 
 Gisele meets Pierre the next day when she is picking up a painting where he spots odd behavior in her such as writing with the wrong hand , which leads him to return to her castle to investigate further . Gisele begins growing ill from her previous experiment and calls upon Professor Julian to aid her . As he leaves , Joseph awakens in Julian 's lab . Pierre triggers an alarm which has him race out the castle where he meets the disoriented Joseph . Pierre takes Joseph to the police station where he reveals he was the kidnapper of the young women but the people in the castle are the real murderers . The police arrive looking for Marguerite but only find Gisele who denies any knowledge of Joseph . Pierre and the police explore the castle without finding clues . On leaving , Gisele begins transforming back into Marguerite before their eyes prompting for an emergency search of the castle . A gun battle ensues between Professor Du Grands assistant and the police leaving the assistant and Professor Du Grand shot . This leads the police to open his grave where they find Lorette . Lorette is sent home and Inspector Chantal reveals that Giselle confessed to the crimes and died shortly after . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Background and development = = = 
 Around the time I Vampiri was in development , Italian film productions had grown exponentially . Italian film productions rose from 25 films in 1945 , to 204 in 1954 . This growth allowed film makers in Italy to approach new genres and new styles not attempted before . In 1956 , the chief executive officer of <unk> , Goffredo Lombardo , stated that Italian film productions should be aimed a European market opposed to just an Italian one . During the production of the film Beatrice Cenci ( 1956 ) , director Riccardo Freda and his friend , cinematographer Mario Bava discussed the idea of developing a horror film . Horror films had been previously banned in Italy during the 1930s and 1940s , while a new taste for the macabre was developing . Italian film historian Goffredo <unk> stated in 1963 that " ghosts , monsters and the taste for the horrible appears when a society that became wealthy and evolves by industrializing , and are accompanied by a state of well @-@ being which began to exist and expand in Italy only since a few years " 
 Freda 's ambition to make a horror film derived from his desire to make films in the fantastique style , feeling that only the Americans and German expressionists were able to make such films in the past . Freda approached film producer Luigi <unk> with the idea of the film despite not having a treatment ready . Promising them that he would have something for them by the next day , he returned with a tape of his treatment that was complete with sound effects . <unk> phoned Goffredo Lombardo to convince him further . Freda followed up his tape with the promise that his script could pass the censors and could be filmed in 12 days . This convinced the producer who allowed Freda to create what became I Vampiri . 
 = = = Pre @-@ production = = = 
 The screenplay of I Vampiri is credited to Piero Regnoli and the fictional writer and scenarist Rijk <unk> . The story of the film features contributions from Freda , who has only mentioned Regnoli during the writing process . Both Freda and Regnoli have uncredited roles in the film as the autopsy doctor and <unk> respectively . Freda had the film set in the 1950s opposed the 18th or 19th Century to lower the cost of re @-@ creating a period set as well as making the film 's plot feel like it could actually happen . The film 's story borrows from uncredited stories . This includes the crimes committed by Gianna Maria Canale 's character Giselle Du Grand , which are based upon the legend of Elizabeth Bathory who bathed in the blood of virgins to stay young . Another influence that Freda acknowledged was Edgar Allan Poe 's short story " The Fall of the House of Usher " , with its suggested parallel between decaying , dissipated interiors and the Canale 's vampire @-@ like character . 
 Gianna Maria Canale took the female lead in the film despite not initially wanting the role . The film was the last of her many films she made with Freda . Freda and Canale had first worked together on Il <unk> misterioso ( 1948 ) ; their relationship led to Freda leaving his wife to go with Canale to Brazil where they made two more films . On their return to Italy , Canale would have the female lead role in nearly all his films including The Iron Swordsman , Sins of Rome and Theodora , Slave Empress . 
 = = = Production = = = 
