 = Reckoning ( R.E.M. album ) = 
 Reckoning is the second studio album by the American alternative rock band R.E.M. , released in 1984 by I.R.S. Records . Produced by Mitch Easter and Don Dixon , the album was recorded at Reflection Sound Studio in Charlotte , North Carolina over 16 days in December 1983 and January 1984 . Dixon and Easter intended to capture the sound of R.E.M. ' s live performances , and used binaural recording on several tracks . Singer Michael Stipe dealt with darker subject matter in his lyrics , and water imagery is a recurring theme on the record . Released to critical acclaim , Reckoning reached number 27 in the United States — where it was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America in 1991 — and peaked at number 91 in the United Kingdom . 
 = = Background and production = = 
 After its debut album Murmur ( 1983 ) received critical acclaim , R.E.M. quickly began work on its second album . The group wrote new material prodigiously ; guitarist Peter Buck recalled , " We were going through this streak where we were writing two good songs a week [ ... ] We just wanted to do it ; whenever we had a new batch of songs , it was time to record " . Due to the number of new songs the group had , Buck unsuccessfully tried to convince everyone to make the next album a double record . In November 1983 , the band recorded 22 songs during a session with Neil Young producer Elliot Mazer in San Francisco . While Mazer was briefly considered as a candidate to produce the band 's next album , R.E.M. ultimately decided to team up again with Murmur producers Mitch Easter and Don Dixon . 
 R.E.M. started recording Reckoning at Reflection Sound in Charlotte , North Carolina , on December 8 , 1983 . The group recorded over two eight @-@ day stretches around Christmas 1983 , separated by two weeks of canceled studio time that allowed the band to play a show in Greensboro , North Carolina , go out to see a movie , and shoot a video in the studio . While the studio diary listed 16 days for recording , the album sleeve later claimed the album was recorded in 14 days , while in interviews Buck at times commented that the album was recorded in 11 days . The producers both disputed that the sessions were that short ; Dixon insisted that they were at the studio for at least 25 days ( during which he worked eighteen @-@ hour days ) , while Easter said " When I read ' eleven days ' I thought , what the fuck ! It was twenty days , which was still short , but it 's not eleven . " 
 During recording there was pressure from I.R.S. Records to try to make the album more commercial . The label sent messages to Dixon and Easter , which the producers told the band that they would ignore . While the producers respected I.R.S. president Jay Boberg , they expressed dismay at the comments he made when he visited during the last day of sessions . Dixon called Boberg " record company clueless " , while Easter said " I got along with Jay Boberg OK [ ... ] but now and again he would express an opinion that would make me think , ' holy shit ' , because it would strike me as really teenage . " Buck said he was grateful that Dixon and Easter acted as a buffer between the band and its label . He said that " it got to the point where as much as I respected the guys at I.R.S. , we basically tried to record the records so they wouldn 't know we were recording them ! " , and explained that part of the reason why R.E.M. recorded the album so quickly was that the group wanted to finish before representatives from I.R.S. showed up to listen to it . 
 The recording sessions were difficult for singer Michael Stipe , who , among the band , was particularly worn out by the group 's 1983 tour schedule . Getting usable vocal tracks from Stipe was difficult ; Dixon recalled that he and Stipe would show up around noon each day before the rest of the band , but that " he was kind of shut down , and it was difficult to get him to open up " . While recording the song " 7 Chinese Brothers " , Stipe sang so quietly that Dixon could not hear him on the tape . Frustrated , the producer climbed a ladder to a spot above the recording booth Stipe was in and found a gospel record titled The Joy of Knowing Jesus by the <unk> , which he then handed to the singer in an attempt to inspire him . Stipe began reciting the liner notes from the album audibly , which enabled Dixon to move on to recording the vocal track to " 7 Chinese Brothers " properly ( the initial recitation take was later released in 1987 as " Voice of Harold " on the compilation Dead Letter Office ) . 
 = = Music = = 
 With Reckoning , Dixon , Easter and the band wanted to capture the energy of R.E.M. ' s live sound . Dixon had not seen the band perform live before working on Murmur ; after he had done so , he had a greater sense of the band 's strengths and weaknesses . Dixon wanted the guitars to sound more like they did in concert , but at first met resistance from both the band and the label . However , by the time R.E.M. started to record , Dixon said the group " wanted to rock out a bit more " . 
 Dixon was enamored of the technique of binaural recording , and used it extensively on the album . Easter recalled that Dixon " made this sort of fake binaural head out of a cardboard box and stuck two microphones in it " to record the group . In Easter 's opinion the method made drummer Bill Berry 's parts " fresher sounding " . Binaural recording also allowed bassist Mike Mills ' backing vocals to be loud without covering up Stipe 's lead vocals . Dixon explained , " Mike Mills was often singing 12 to 15 feet away from the microphones that were recording his part , but because it was in a studio binaural field , we would tend to hear him as behind [ Stipe ] . " 
 Biographer David Buckley wrote , " While the music moved away from Murmur 's slightly airless feel , the subject matter was a little darker . " Buck noted in a 1988 interview that water imagery was abundant in the album . Buckley interpreted that imagery as representing the change presented by the band 's increasing success , as well as the changing music scene of the group 's Athens , Georgia hometown . The song " Camera " addressed the death of a friend from Athens who died in a car crash . Easter said , " [ Stipe 's ] vocal was so exposed on that track , and because of that , it could really show any technical imperfections with regard to pitch . " The producer tried to get Stipe to sing a better take , but the singer was more intent on getting the feeling of the song across , and at one point refused to record further . While many of the album 's songs were new compositions , some had been in R.E.M. ' s show setlists for years . In particular , " Pretty Persuasion " and " ( Don 't Go Back to ) Rockville " had been played live as far back as October 1980 . The band was reluctant to record " Pretty Persuasion " as the members considered it too old , but Dixon and Easter convinced the group to do so . R.E.M. originally intended to release " ( Don 't Go Back to ) Rockville " as a non @-@ album single between Reckoning and its next release . When the band recorded it for the album , the group rearranged the song from its live incarnation and gave it a country music feel in tribute to its lawyer Bertis Downs , IV , who was a country fan . 
 = = Packaging = = 
 For the cover of Reckoning , Stipe drew a picture of a two @-@ headed snake , which he then gave to artist Howard Finster to fill in as a painting . Stipe stated that the imagery was an attempt to define the elements , explaining , " Part of it is rocks and part of it is the sun and part of it the sky . " The end result was considered a disappointment , as Stipe had to work with Finster on a long @-@ distance basis , and the reproduction of the artwork for the album sleeve was problematic . The spine of the vinyl version of the album features the phrase " File Under Water " . Stipe told NME in 1984 the phrase is the true title of the record . He added " In America , both titles are on the spine , with nothing on the cover . Here [ in the United Kingdom ] they insisted on Reckoning being on the cover . " Instead of labeling the sides of the record as " side one " and " side two " , the sides were designated as " L " and " R " , respectively . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 Reckoning was released on April 9 , 1984 in the United Kingdom , and on April 17 in the United States . The album quickly reached the top of the college radio airplay charts , whose audience had highly anticipated the album . However , the band hadn 't received much exposure on commercial radio and MTV by that point . Instead of the music industry standard of waiting for mainstream radio stations to pick up the band 's music , I.R.S. hoped to " convince reluctant programmers to add the group by pointing to the press response , word @-@ of @-@ mouth reaction to local live performances and sales figures " , according to a July 1984 Los Angeles Times article . The album 's first single , " So . Central Rain ( I 'm Sorry ) " , was released in May and reached number 85 on the Billboard Hot 100 singles charts . A second single , " ( Don 't Go Back to ) Rockville " , came out in August ; unlike its predecessor , it did not chart . Within a month of its release Reckoning peaked at number 27 on the Billboard 200 album chart , and it remained on the chart for nearly a year . While the album 's domestic chart placing was unusually high for a college rock band at the time , scant airplay and poor distribution overseas resulted in it charting no higher than number 91 in the United Kingdom . In 1991 the record was certified gold ( 500 @,@ 000 copies shipped ) by the Recording Industry Association of America . 
 Rolling Stone gave Reckoning a four out of five star rating . Reviewer Christopher Connelly wrote that in comparison to Murmur the " overall sound is crisper , the lyrics far more comprehensible . And while the album may not mark any major strides forward for the band , R.E.M. ' s considerable strengths – Buck 's ceaselessly inventive strumming , Mike Mills ' exceptional bass playing and Stipe 's evocatively gloomy baritone – remain unchanged " . However , Connelly felt that Stipe 's " erratic meanderings " were an impediment to the band that " will prevent R.E.M. from transcending cult status " . Nonetheless , he concluded , " R.E.M. ' s music is able to involve the listener on both an emotional and intellectual level . " Joe <unk> of The Washington Post felt that the songs on the album " trump even Murmur 's outstanding songwriting " and stated " there isn 't an American band worth following more than R.E.M. " NME reviewer Mat Snow wrote that Reckoning " confirms R.E.M. as one of the most beautifully exciting groups on the planet " and called the album " another classic " . The album placed seventh in that magazine 's Best Album of the Year critics ' poll , and ranked sixth in the Village Voice Pazz & Jop poll . Slant Magazine listed the album at number 81 on its list of " Best Albums of the 1980s " . 
 The 1992 British Compact Disc reissue of the album included five bonus tracks . A 25th anniversary deluxe edition of the album , which was remastered and packaged with a bonus disc featuring a concert recorded at Chicago 's Aragon Ballroom on July 7 , 1984 , was released in 2009 . 
 = = Left of Reckoning = = 
 Eager to explore the music video medium , Stipe secured funding for a short film that would accompany music from the first half of Reckoning . Stipe 's concept was to film the project at folk artist R.A. Miller 's <unk> Farm , and he recruited Athens filmmaker James Herbert to direct it . In March 1984 R.E.M. filmed Left of Reckoning at the <unk> Farm in <unk> , Georgia . The short film draws its title from the fact that it is soundtracked by five songs that appear on the " L " side of the vinyl version of Reckoning : " Harborcoat " , " 7 Chinese Bros. " , " So . Central Rain ( I 'm Sorry ) " , " Pretty Persuasion " , " Time After Time ( <unk> ) " , in addition to " Second Guessing " from the R side . In contrast to standard music video imagery , the film consists primarily of footage of the band members wandering around the farm , while Herbert utilizes close @-@ ups , silhouettes , and slow motion footage . Herbert utilized <unk> during the editing process , which involved taking photographs of film frames at random , while also closing in or pulling back from the image with no regard to narrative . According to Buck , " It was really inexpensive to make and kind of fun . We just asked [ Herbert ] to edit something to four minutes ' length , but he 's used to making 20 @-@ minute films , that 's the length he works in . He just made this film that goes along with the first side of the record . " While MTV did not air the complete film , the channel 's program The Cutting Edge ( funded by I.R.S. ) aired the " Time After Time ( <unk> ) " segment , and the snippet featuring " Pretty Persuasion " was aired by other music programs . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written by Bill Berry , Peter Buck , Mike Mills , and Michael Stipe except where noted . 
 Side one – Left 
 " Harborcoat " – 3 : 54 
 " 7 Chinese Bros. " – 4 : 18 
 " So . Central Rain ( I 'm Sorry ) " – 3 : 15 
 " Pretty Persuasion " – 3 : 50 
 " Time After Time ( Annelise ) " – 3 : 31 
 Side two – Right 
 " Second Guessing " – 2 : 51 
 " Letter Never Sent " – 2 : 59 
 " Camera " – 5 : 52 
 " ( Don 't Go Back To ) Rockville " – 4 : 55 
 " Little America " – 2 : 58 
 1992 I.R.S. Vintage Years reissue bonus tracks 
 " Wind Out " ( with friends ) ( Jerry Ayers , Berry , Buck , Mills , Stipe ) – 1 : 58 
 " Pretty Persuasion " ( live in studio ) – 4 : 01 
 " White Tornado " ( live in studio ) – 1 : 51 
 " Tighten Up " ( Archie Bell and Billy Butler ) – 4 : 08 
 " Moon River " ( Henry Mancini and Johnny Mercer ) – 2 : 21 
 2009 Deluxe Edition bonus disc ( Live at the Aragon Ballroom , Chicago , Illinois , July 7 , 1984 ) 
 " Femme Fatale " ( Lou Reed ) – 3 : 19 
 " Radio Free Europe " – 3 : 54 
 " Gardening at Night " – 3 : 38 
 " 9 – 9 " – 2 : 48 
 " <unk> " – 2 : 13 
 " Letter Never Sent " – 3 : 03 
 " Sitting Still " – 3 : 13 
 " Driver 8 " – 3 : 28 
 " So . Central Rain " – 3 : 23 
 " 7 Chinese Bros. " – 4 : 27 
 " Harborcoat " – 4 : 34 
 " Hyena " – 3 : 26 
 " Pretty Persuasion " – 3 : 49 
 " Little America " – 3 : 23 
 " Second Guessing " – 3 : 07 
 " ( Don 't Go Back To ) Rockville " – 4 : 30 
 A vintage radio promo for the album is hidden in the pregap of the bonus disc . 
 The original pressing of Reckoning included a clip of an untitled song at the end of the album , making " Little America " 3 : 43 . This was restored on the Mobile Fidelity Sound Labs re @-@ release of the album and on the Deluxe Edition . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 R.E.M. 
 Bill Berry – drums , percussion , and backing vocals 
 Peter Buck – guitar 
 Mike Mills – bass , piano and backing vocals 
 Michael Stipe – lead vocals and harmonica 
 Additional musicians 
 Bertis Downs – backing vocals on " Wind Out " ( With Friends ) 
 Jefferson Holt – lead vocals on " Wind Out " ( With Friends ) 
 Production 
 Don Dixon – co @-@ producer 
 Mitch Easter – co @-@ producer 
 Howard Finster – art direction 
 = = Chart positions = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 † † Remastered Deluxe Edition , with Live at Aragon Ballroom bonus disc 
 = The Boat Race 1934 = 
 The 86th Boat Race took place on 17 March 1934 . Held annually , the Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing race between crews from the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge along the River Thames . Umpired by the former rower Herbert Aylward Game , Cambridge won by four @-@ and @-@ a @-@ quarter lengths in a time of 18 minutes 3 seconds , the fastest winning time in the history of the Boat Race at the time of the event . The record eleventh consecutive victory took the overall record in the event to 45 – 40 in Cambridge 's favour . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing competition between the University of Oxford ( sometimes referred to as the " Dark Blues " ) and the University of Cambridge ( sometimes referred to as the " Light Blues " ) . The race was first held in 1829 , and since 1845 has taken place on the 4 @.@ 2 @-@ mile ( 6 @.@ 8 km ) Championship Course on the River Thames in southwest London . The rivalry is a major point of honour between the two universities ; it is followed throughout the United Kingdom and , as of 2014 , broadcast worldwide . Cambridge went into the race as reigning champions , having won the 1933 race by two and a quarter lengths , and led overall with 44 victories to Oxford 's 40 ( excluding the " dead heat " of 1877 ) . 
 Cambridge were coached by T. A. Brocklebank ( who had rowed for Cambridge three times between 1929 and 1931 ) , Francis Escombe , F. E. Hellyer ( who had rowed for the Light Blues in the 1910 and 1911 races ) and Peter Haig @-@ Thomas ( four @-@ time Blue for Cambridge between 1902 and 1905 ) . Oxford 's coaches were Stanley Garton ( who had rowed three times between 1909 and 1911 ) , John Houghton Gibbon ( who had rowed for the Light Blues in the 1899 and 1900 races ) and A. E. Kitchin ( who had rowed in the 1908 race ) . The race was umpired by the former Cambridge rower Herbert Aylward Game , who had represented the Light Blues in the 1895 and 1896 races . Both crews rowed in boats built by Sims and used Ayling oars . 
 Oxford performed well in training , and according to the rowing correspondent of The Times they " were definitely a much better crew than Cambridge " . However , the crew lost three members through illness , including president Gerald Ellison , and were forced to reorganise the boat . Cambridge had difficulty finding a suitable stroke for the race , eventually opting to place N. J. Bradley in that seat , even though The Times 's correspondent noted that he " is not , and never could be , anything but a makeshift stroke " . By the time of the race , Cambridge were markedly favourite to win , with former Oxford rower E. P. Evans , writing in The Manchester Guardian that the Light Blues would " win with comparative ease " . 
 = = Crews = = 
 The Oxford crew weighed an average of 12 st 12 @.@ 5 lb ( 81 @.@ 7 kg ) , 1 @.@ 75 pounds ( 0 @.@ 8 kg ) per rower more than their opponents ; at the time , jointly the crews were the heaviest in the history of the event . Bradley and A. V. Sutcliffe were also the heaviest strokes on record . Two of the Cambridge crew returned to participate in the race , including Sambell who was rowing in his third consecutive event . Oxford 's boat contained five former Blues including R. W. G. Holdsworth who was making his third appearance in four years for the Dark Blues . Three of the participants in the race were registered as non @-@ British : Oxford 's number six J. H. Lascelles was from New Zealand , while Cambridge 's crew contained two Australians in William Sambell and D. J. Wilson . 
 = = Race = = 
 Cambridge won the toss and elected to start from the Surrey station , handing the Middlesex side of the river to Oxford . Umpire Game started the race at 2 : 16 p.m. in sunny conditions , with both crews making an " excellent start " . Oxford went off the quicker , out @-@ rating the Light Blues by two strokes per minute and taking a canvas @-@ length lead . By Beverley Brook the crews were level again and Cambridge took a small lead by the time they passed Craven Steps . The Dark Blues began to look tired by Craven Cottage and Bradley took the opportunity to push away and passed the Mile Post with a third of a length advantage . A spurt from Oxford at the Crab Tree pub was responded to by Cambridge who held a half @-@ length lead before spurting again to go clear before Harrods Furniture Depository . 
 The Light Blues passed below Hammersmith Bridge two lengths ahead with another spurt by The Doves pub taking them further away from Oxford . A mistake from Duckworth , the Cambridge cox , took Cambridge into slower water which " must have lost his crew quite a couple of lengths " , but Oxford could not capitalise on the error . Entering Chiswick Reach , the Dark Blues were two and a half lengths down and showed further signs of tiredness . Cambridge coped with the head wind and choppy water better and passed Chiswick Steps three lengths ahead . Despite another push from Oxford along King 's Meadow , they failed to reduce the gap and the Light Blues passed below Barnes Bridge with a ten @-@ second lead . Cambridge passed the finishing post leading by four and a quarter lengths in a time of 18 minutes 3 seconds . It was the Light Blues ' eleventh consecutive victory in the quickest winning time in the history of the race , beating the existing record set by Oxford in the 1911 race by 26 seconds . The Dark Blues also beat the existing record as they passed the finishing post in 18 minutes 18 seconds . The victory took the overall record in the event to 45 – 40 in Cambridge 's favour . 
 = Eagleton ( Parks and Recreation ) = 
 " Eagleton " is the twelfth episode of the third season of the American comedy television series Parks and Recreation , and the 42nd overall episode of the series . It originally aired on NBC in the United States on May 5 , 2011 . In the episode , Leslie becomes angry when her former friend , the current parks director of the more prosperous neighboring town Eagleton , builds a fence through a park that runs through both Pawnee and Eagleton . Meanwhile , Leslie plans a secret birthday party for Ron , much to his chagrin . 
 The episode was written by Emily Spivey and directed by Nicole Holofcener . Parker Posey guest starred as Leslie 's rival and former best friend , Lindsay Carlisle Shay . A longtime fan of Parks and Recreation and its star Amy Poehler , Posey had expressed an early interest in appearing on the show , and reportedly became frustrated with how long it took to be asked . 
 A fight scene between Poehler 's and Posey 's characters among piles of garbage was performed with stuntwomen during temperatures of more than 100 degrees . The subplot involving Ron 's birthday had been conceived by the Parks staff early in the development of the show . Series co @-@ creator Michael Schur called a final scene with Leslie and Ron , in which the two voice their mutual admiration for each other , his favorite of the season . " Eagleton " also featured a guest appearance by Eric Pierpoint as the Pawnee police chief Hugh Trumple and a cameo by Mike Scully , a writer and producer with the Fox animated series The Simpsons who has also previously worked on Parks and Recreation . 
 " Eagleton " received generally positive reviews and , according to Nielsen Media Research , was seen by an estimated 5 @.@ 06 million household viewers , an increase over the previous original episode , " Jerry 's Painting " . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Tom ( Aziz Ansari ) informs the department that Eagleton , a more prosperous neighboring town of Pawnee , has erected a tall fence in the shared Lafayette Park to keep Pawnee residents out of their side . Leslie ( Amy Poehler ) suspects it is the work of Lindsay Carlisle Shay ( Parker Posey ) , Eagleton 's parks and recreation director , a former Pawnee parks department employee and Leslie 's former best friend . Meanwhile , Leslie has discovered Ron 's ( Nick Offerman ) upcoming birthday , a date he has kept secret for years . Leslie promises a horrified and annoyed Ron that she will throw a surprise party for him . 
 In a typically rowdy and disorderly public meeting , the citizens of Pawnee demand the fence be removed . Leslie meets with Lindsay , who condescendingly refuses to remove the fence and insults Pawnee in the process . Leslie , Tom and Ben ( Adam Scott ) attend an Eagleton town meeting to plead their case to its citizens . The Eagleton meeting is much different than those of Pawnee : it is a catered affair at a country club , where the citizens are wealthy and civil . Citing the poor maintenance of Pawnee 's side of Lafayette Park , the Eagleton citizens prefer the fence stay up . Leslie reveals to Tom and Ben that she was offered the job of Eagleton parks director five years ago but turned it down , as she and Lindsay both made a promise to remain in Pawnee . However , Eagleton then offered Lindsay the job and she accepted , thus turning her back on Pawnee and Leslie . Meanwhile , Ron becomes increasingly paranoid of Leslie 's birthday plans , especially after he overhears April ( Aubrey Plaza ) and Andy ( Chris Pratt ) discuss outrageous party plans . When Ron asks Ann ( Rashida Jones ) about Leslie 's last birthday bash for Ann and learns what a huge party she threw , Ron eventually becomes so paranoid that he resorts to sleeping in his office to avoid any potential surprises at home . 
 Leslie quickly seeks revenge against Lindsay by getting her parks employees to throw garbage over the Eagleton side of the fence . When Lindsay arrives to stop it , the two get into a fight amid the garbage bags . The police arrive and arrest both women : Lindsay is jailed in Pawnee , while Leslie is jailed in Eagleton 's pristine and hotel @-@ like holding cell . After Ann bails Leslie out , she tells her that Lindsay built the fence because she is jealous that Leslie was offered the Eagleton job first and wants to get a rise out of her . Ann suggests that Lindsay should be hit with a baseball bat , which gives Leslie the idea to turn Pawnee 's side of Lafayette Park into a wiffle ball field , with the fence serving as the outfield wall . Lindsay is impressed by how fast Leslie turned the fence into something positive , and remembers why she and Leslie joined the parks department in the first place . With their relationship on the mend , the two agree to get a drink together . Later , Leslie returns to the office to throw Ron 's party : she takes him to an empty room with steak , whiskey and his favorite movies waiting for him , and reveals that April and Andy 's duties were false leads to trick him . Leslie explains she made a party that he would want and leaves a content Ron alone to enjoy his birthday . 
 = = Production = = 
 Parker Posey , who previously worked with Amy Poehler on the 2009 comedy film Spring Breakdown , described herself as a fan of both Poehler and Parks and Recreation , and had wanted to make a guest appearance on the series even before it first aired . Posey discussed it with Poehler at the Spring Breakdown premiere during the 2009 Sundance Film Festival in January 2009 , a few months before the first season of Parks debuted . She later met with the staff of the show about one year before " Eagleton " was filmed . After several months without an invitation to appear on the show , Posey said she became frustrated and stopped watching the show , but later changed her mind and started watching it again . Shortly after that , she received an e @-@ mail message from Poehler inviting her to play Lindsay Carlisle Shay : " She said , ' You 'll play my nemesis ! We get to fight in a garbage dump ! ' " Posey said . " I remember reading that and thinking , ' Dreams do come true . ' " 
 Posey was sent a script for " Eagleton " and enjoyed it so much she immediately agreed to play the part . She also said she was excited to work with director Nicole Holofcener . The episode was filmed in November 2010 . Posey was shooting scenes for a film in Boston at the time , and flew in to Los Angeles for the Parks and Recreation filming just a few hours before the shots began . As a result , Posey was exhausted during the filming , including the Eagleton public forum scene , which was shot at the Toluca Lake Sports Center in Toluca Lake district of Los Angeles . The scene in which Leslie and Lindsay fight among piles of garbage was filmed during temperatures of more than 100 degrees . Although stuntwomen were used , Poehler and Posey performed some of the fight themselves . Despite wearing wool blazers that made the heat even harder to endure , the two actresses said they enjoyed filming the scene . Poehler jokingly said it was included in the script " just because it 's in Parker and I 's contract , that that 's how we will work together . It 's the only way we 'll work together , is fighting in garbage . " 
 The staff of Parks and Recreation conceived the idea that Ron Swanson had his birthdate redacted from all government documents early in the development of the series , and it eventually developed into the subplot featured in " Eagleton " where Leslie finds out about his birthday and plans a surprise for him . Michael Schur , co @-@ creator of the series , said the scene when Leslie surprises Ron with a quiet evening alone was his favorite scene in the show . During the scene , Leslie and Ron declare their mutual admiration for one another . Schur said it was difficult to make such an outwardly emotional scene effective in a comedy , but he believed it ultimately worked because of Amy Poehler and Nick Offerman 's strong performances . Poehler said of the scene : " It 's really sweet and it 's just an example of how it 's important to Leslie who she works with . It 's just as important as the job itself . I completely relate to that . " Rashida Jones also praised the scene , which she said made her cry during a cast read @-@ through of the script . 
 Eric Pierpoint resumed his role as Pawnee Police Chief Hugh Trumple , a character he previously played in the earlier third season episode " Ron & Tammy : Part Two " . " Eagleton " features a cameo appearance by Mike Scully , a writer and producer on the Fox Broadcasting Company animated comedy series The Simpsons , as a speakers at the Pawnee public forum who suggests the building of a second fence around the Eagleton fence . Scully has worked as a screenwriter and consulting producer on Parks and Recreation since the first season . He did not originally wish to take the part and only agreed to it reluctantly . Originally , he only had one line , but improvised additional dialogue after Amy Poehler asked him why he believed a second fence should be built . 
 The outside view of the Eagleton correctional facility is of the <unk> County Courthouse located in Lamar , Colorado . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 When Leslie leaves Ron with his favorite movies for his surprise birthday party , one of them is The Bridge on the River Kwai , a 1958 film about British World War II prisoners forced to build a bridge in Thailand . The scene Ron watches on television is an actual scene from that film . The other film Leslie gives Ron is The Dirty Dozen , a 1967 war film about a team of convicted murderers being trained for mission to assassinate German officers , also during World War II . Leslie only finds out Ron 's birthday , which was a closely guarded secret , by bribing an employee from Baskin @-@ Robbins , an ice cream parlor chain that gives free scoops of ice cream to customers on their birthdays . Eagleton is such a rich town that , after their town meeting , they distribute gift bags that include an iPod Touch , a portable music player by Apple , Inc . Lindsay Carlisle Shay also drives a Cadillac Escalade , an expensive luxury sport utility vehicle brand by Cadillac . During another scene , Ron declares that birthdays were made up by Hallmark , a greeting cards company , to sell more cards . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 In its original American broadcast , " Eagleton " was seen by an estimated 5 @.@ 06 million household viewers , according to Nielsen Media Research , with a 2 @.@ 5 rating / 7 share among viewers between ages 18 and 49 . A rating point represents one percent of the total number of television sets in American households , and a share means the percentage of television sets in use tuned to the program . This constituted an increase over the previous episode , " Jerry 's Painting " , which was seen by an estimated 4 @.@ 71 million households . The ratings improvement came despite the fact that the lead @-@ in episode of The Office that immediately followed Parks and Recreation – " The Inner Circle " , the first not to feature Steve Carell as a regular cast member – dropped significantly in the ratings . 
 In its 9 : 30 p.m. timeslot , " Eagleton " was outperformed by the Fox crime drama series Bones , which was seen by 10 @.@ 94 million household viewers ; the CBS forensic crime series CSI : Crime Scene Investigation , which was seen by 10 @.@ 67 million households ; and the ABC medical drama series Grey 's Anatomy , which was seen by 10 @.@ 11 million household viewers . Parks and Recreation outperformed an episode of the CW Television Network drama series Nikita , which was seen by 2 million households . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 " Eagleton " received generally positive reviews . James Poniewozik of Time magazine strongly praised Posey 's performance , and said the garbage fight scene was one of the funniest of the season . He also complimented the show for giving Poehler 's and Posey 's characters a strong back story that helped further develop the history of Pawnee and the characters . Alan Sepinwall of HitFix said " Eagleton " strongly developed Leslie , particularly in the way she ends the feud with Lindsay by building something new rather than resorting simply to revenge . He also praised Nick Offerman 's comedic performance , and said the episode continues the strong development between Leslie and Ron 's characters . Steve Kandell of New York magazine enjoyed the comedic chemistry between Poehler and Posey – and especially enjoyed the garbage fight scene – but said the sudden resolution to their feud felt forced . Kandell said Nick Offerman stole the episode , and that the final scene between Leslie and Ron about his birthday party could be the best scene of the series . Damian Holbrook of TV Guide said Posey was perfectly cast in her guest role , and said of the episode : " Sometimes TV gets it right , and last night , Parks and Recreation got it uber @-@ right . " Matt Fowler of IGN found Posey 's character " somewhat one @-@ note " , but felt the episode was an improvement over the previous week 's " Jerry 's Painting " , and with great comedy coming from the portrayal of Eagleton and Ron 's paranoia about his surprise birthday party . 
 Entertainment Weekly writer Ken Tucker said the pairing of Poehler and Posey led to great comedic scenes , but that the " heart of the episode " was Leslie 's celebration of Ron 's birthday . Tucker praised the show 's optimistic tone , with characters who genuinely respect and love each other , even while many other comedies remained cynical . Hillary Busis , also of Entertainment Weekly , called Posey 's performance " pitch @-@ perfect " and called Leslie 's construction of the baseball diamond " a sweet coda to a great , funny episode " . Postmedia News writer Alex Strachan praised the episode not only for its likable and easily relatable characters , but for its willingness to address social issues like the divide between classes in Pawnee and Eagleton . Eric Sundermann of Hollywood.com said " Eagleton " seemed less story @-@ driven and more over @-@ the @-@ top than usual , but that it works for the series because those episodes are funny and only happen periodically . Nick McHatton of TV Fanatic complimented Posey 's performance , but especially praised Leslie 's birthday surprise for Ron , and claimed it was the first time since the NBC series Friends that he responded to a television comedy so emotionally . Rick Porter of Zap2it said the episode handled the rivalry between Pawnee and Eagleton nearly as well as some of the classic Cheers episodes about that bar and its rival , the Old Towne Tavern . He also called Offerman " pitch @-@ perfect " in what Porter described as an excellent B @-@ story . 
 Steve Heisler of The A.V. Club said " Eagleton " further added to the mythology Parks and Recreation has built for itself by fleshing out the neighboring town . " He also praised Leslie 's birthday surprise for Ron , claiming it " sets Parks & Rec even more ahead of its competitors . Us Weekly writer John Griffiths gave the episode three @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half out of four stars , and called it one of the show 's " sharpest outings yet " . He described Poehler and Posey 's performance off of each other as " smart and feisty fun " . USA Today writer Whitney Matheson called " Eagleton " the best episode of television of the week , and noted that Posey 's performance contributed to an " already @-@ great series " . Joel Keller of TV Squad said it was one of his favorite episodes of the season because the humor was driven by the characters Leslie and Ron had developed into throughout the series . However , Keller said he believed Eagleton seemed too unrealistic and exaggerated as parody of rich towns . Not all reviews were positive . The Atlantic writer Scott Meslow called it a cartoonish and " strangely uneven " episode , and felt Posey 's appearance was distracting and disruptive to the natural flow of the show . However , Meslow called the subplot about Ron 's birthday " one of the season 's best " and said it demonstrated the strength of the relationships between the characters . 
 = Vitalian ( general ) = 
 Vitalian ( Latin : Flavius <unk> , Greek : <unk> ; died 520 ) was a general of the East Roman ( Byzantine ) Empire . A native of Moesia in the northern Balkans , and probably of mixed Roman and barbarian descent , he followed his father into the imperial army , and by 513 had become a senior commander in Thrace . 
 In that year he rebelled against Emperor Anastasius I ( r . 491 – 518 ) , whose fiscal stringency and promotion of Miaphysitism were widely unpopular , and allowed Vitalian to quickly win over large parts of the army and the people of Thrace to his cause . After scoring a series of victories over loyalist armies , Vitalian came to threaten Constantinople itself , and forced Anastasius to officially recant his adoption of Miaphysitism in summer 515 . Soon after , however , as Anastasius failed to honour some of the terms of the agreement , Vitalian marched on Constantinople , only to be decisively defeated by Anastasius ' admiral , Marinus . 
 Vitalian fled to his native Thrace and remained in hiding until Anastasius 's death in 518 . As a staunch promoter of Chalcedonian orthodoxy , he was pardoned by the new emperor Justin I ( r . 518 – 527 ) and was engaged in the negotiations with the Pope to end the Acacian Schism . He was named consul for the year 520 , but was murdered shortly after , probably on the orders of Justin 's nephew and heir @-@ apparent , Justinian ( r . 527 – 565 ) , who saw in him a potential rival for the throne . His sons also became generals in the East Roman army . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Origins and family = = = 
 Vitalian was born in <unk> in Lower Moesia ( usually identified with modern <unk> in north @-@ eastern Bulgaria ) . He is called a " Goth " or a " Scythian " in the Byzantine sources . Since Vitalian 's mother was a sister of <unk> II , Patriarch of Constantinople in 496 – 511 , this points to a mixed marriage and a probable barbarian origin for his father , <unk> . On the other hand , the assertion that he was a " Goth " is based on a single Syriac source , and is today considered dubious . Likewise , the " Scythian " label commonly applied to him by some contemporary authors is non @-@ conclusive , since the term " Scythian " could mean an inhabitant of Scythia Minor , or simply , in the classicizing language usual in Byzantine texts , someone from the north @-@ eastern fringes of the Graeco @-@ Roman world , centred on the Mediterranean ; the term had a wide @-@ encompassing meaning , devoid of clear ethnic attributes . Furthermore , since none of the " Scythian Monks " , to whom Vitalian and members of his family seem to have been related , expressed any kinship , by blood or spiritually , with the Arian Goths who at that time ruled Italy , a Gothic origin for Vitalian is questionable . Whatever <unk> 's origin , his name was Latin , while of Vitalian 's own sons , the generals Bouzes and <unk> had Thracian names and <unk> a Gothic name . His nephew , John , later also became a distinguished general in the wars against the Ostrogoths of Italy . 
 According to the chroniclers ' descriptions , Vitalian was short of stature and stammered , but his personal bravery and military skills were widely acknowledged . 
 = = = Revolt against Anastasius = = = 
 Vitalian is first mentioned in 503 , when he accompanied his father in the Anastasian War against the Persians . By 513 , he had risen to the rank of comes in Thrace , possibly comes <unk> , " count of the foederati " , barbarian soldiers serving in the East Roman army . 
 From this post , he rebelled against Emperor Anastasius I ( r . 491 – 518 ) , taking advantage of widespread resentment over the emperor 's military , religious , and social policies . In 511 , Anastasius had changed the form of the <unk> prayer and officially adopted the Miaphysite dogma , angering the Empire 's Chalcedonian population , adding to the disaffection caused by his strict financial policies . Furthermore , Anastasius had refused to supply the annonae ( " rations , provisions " ) due to the foederati , allowing Vitalian to quickly gain the allegiance of the regular troops stationed in the provinces of Thrace , Moesia II , and Scythia Minor from the unpopular magister militum per Thracias , Anastasius ' nephew Hypatius . Hypatius 's subordinate commanders were either killed or joined the rebellion . At the same time , posing as a champion of Chalcedonian orthodoxy , Vitalian was able to gain the support of the local people , who flocked to join his force . According to contemporary Byzantine historians , he quickly assembled an army of 50 @,@ 000 – 60 @,@ 000 men , " both soldiers and peasants " , and marched on Constantinople , possibly hoping that the mostly Chalcedonian inhabitants would join him . Indeed , it appears that Vitalian 's revolt was primarily motivated by religious reasons , something suggested by his repeatedly demonstrated willingness to reach an accommodation with Anastasius . To counter Vitalian 's propaganda , Anastasius ordered bronze crosses to be set up on the city walls inscribed with his own version of events . The emperor also reduced taxes in the provinces of Bithynia and Asia to prevent them from joining the rebellion . 
 When Vitalian 's forces reached the capital , they encamped at the suburb of Hebdomon and blockaded the landward side of the city . Anastasius opted for negotiations , and sent out Vitalian 's former patron , the former consul and magister militum praesentalis Patricius , as ambassador . To him , Vitalian declared his aims : the restoration of Chalcedonian orthodoxy and the settling of the Thracian army 's grievances . Patricius then invited him and his officers in the city itself for negotiations . Vitalian refused for himself , but allowed his senior officers to go on the next day . The officers were well treated by Anastasius , who gave them gifts and promised that their soldiers ' grievances would be settled . He also pledged to submit the religious dispute for resolution to the Patriarch of Rome . Upon their return to the rebel camp , these officers unanimously pressured Vitalian to accept this settlement . Faced with no alternative , only eight days after his arrival before the capital , Vitalian retreated and returned with his men to Lower Moesia . 
 Anastasius then appointed as magister militum per Thracias an officer called Cyril , who proceeded to attack Vitalian 's forces . After a few inconclusive skirmishes , Vitalian managed to bribe his army 's entry into <unk> , Cyril 's base , at night . Cyril was captured at his residence and killed . At this point , Anastasius had Vitalian declared as a " public enemy " and sent out a new huge army – reportedly 80 @,@ 000 men – under Hypatius , with a Hun called <unk> as the new magister militum of Thrace . After winning a minor initial victory , the imperial army was eventually pushed back towards <unk> ( autumn 513 ) . At Acris , on the Black Sea coast , Vitalian 's men attacked their fortified laager in darkness and dealt them a crushing defeat : the larger part of the imperial army was killed , and both imperial commanders were taken prisoner and held for ransom . 
 The victory consolidated Vitalian 's position . With the spoils , he was able to lavishly reward his followers , and at the news of the imperial army 's annihilation , the remaining cities and forts in Lower Moesia and Scythia surrendered to him . Soon after , he had another stroke of luck : at <unk> , his men captured an embassy sent by Anastasius to ransom Hypatius , including the ransom money of 1 @,@ 100 pounds of gold . Hypatius , whom Vitalian hated because he had once insulted his wife , was not released until a year later . In 514 , Vitalian marched again towards Constantinople , this time gathering , in addition to his army , a fleet of 200 vessels from the Black Sea ports , which sailed down the Bosporus menacing the city from the sea as well . Anastasius was further disquieted by riots in the city , which left many casualties , and resolved to once again negotiate with Vitalian . Vitalian accepted , on the conditions of his nomination to the post of magister militum per Thracias and the receipt of ransom money and gifts worth in total 5 @,@ 000 pounds of gold for the release of Hypatius . Anastasius also conceded the removal of the changes from the <unk> , the restoration of the deposed Chalcedonian bishops , and the convocation of a general church council at Constantinople on 1 July 515 . 
 The council never materialized , since Pope <unk> and Anastasius continued to be at loggerheads over the Acacian Schism . Neither were the deposed bishops returned to their sees . Seeing Anastasius failing to honour his promises , in late 515 Vitalian mobilized his army and marched again towards Constantinople . Vitalian 's army captured the suburb of <unk> ( modern Galata ) across the Golden Horn from the city and encamped there . The two magistri militum praesentalis , Patricius and John , were unwilling to engage their old friend Vitalian , thus Anastasius gave command of his forces to the former praetorian prefect of the East , Marinus , a trusted and influential aide . Despite his lack of military experience , Marinus defeated the rebel fleet in a battle at the entrance of the Golden Horn ; according to the report of John Malalas , this was achieved through the use of a sulphur @-@ based chemical substance invented by the philosopher Proclus of Athens , similar to the later Greek fire . Marinus then landed with his men on the shore of <unk> and defeated the rebels he found there . Disheartened by the losses suffered , Vitalian and his army fled north under cover of night . As a sign of his victory , Anastasius led a procession to the village of <unk> , where Vitalian had established his headquarters , and attended a service of thanks at the famed local church dedicated to the Archangel Michael . 
 = = = Later life = = = 
 Once back in northern Thrace , Vitalian went into hiding , while many of his erstwhile aides were captured and executed . Nothing is known of him for the next three years , although a short remark by a chronicler seems to indicate that he resurfaced and led another armed rebellion during the last months of Anastasius 's life . When Anastasius died in July 518 , he was succeeded by Justin I , the comes excubitorum ( commander of the imperial bodyguard ) . The new emperor quickly moved to strengthen his rule , dismissing a number of potential rivals or enemies . At the same time , he called upon Vitalian to come to Constantinople . 
 Upon his arrival , Vitalian was made magister militum in <unk> , named honorary consul , and soon after raised to the rank of patricius . As a well @-@ known champion of Chalcedonian orthodoxy , Vitalian was to play a role in the new regime 's reaffirmation of the Chalcedonian doctrines and reconciliation with Rome . He played an active role in the negotiations with the Pope , and in 519 , he was one of the prominent men who escorted a papal delegation into the capital . Vitalian also took vengeance on the staunchly Monophysite Patriarch of Antioch , Severus , who had celebrated Vitalian 's defeat in his panegyric On Vitalian the tyrant and on the victory of the Christ @-@ loving Anastasius the king : Justin ordered Severus 's tongue to be cut , and Severus fled to Egypt along with Julian , Bishop of Halicarnassus . 
 Finally in 520 , Vitalian was appointed ordinary consul for the year , sharing the office with Rusticius . Nevertheless , the former rebel continued to pose a potential challenge to Justin , and more importantly to his nephew and heir @-@ apparent , Justinian ( r . 527 – 565 ) . Thus , in July of the same year he was murdered inside the Great Palace along with his secretary Paulus and his domesticus ( aide ) <unk> . According to John of <unk> , he was killed because he was plotting against Justin ; most chroniclers , however , put the responsibility for the crime on Justinian 's desire to rid himself of a potential rival for his uncle 's succession . 
 = = = = Primary = = = = 
 = = = = Secondary = = = = 
 = Dan Castellaneta = 
 Daniel Louis " Dan " Castellaneta ( born October 29 , 1957 ) is an American actor , voice actor , comedian , singer and screenwriter . Noted for his long @-@ running role as Homer Simpson on the animated television series The Simpsons , he voices many other characters on the show , including Abraham " Grampa " Simpson , Barney Gumble , Krusty the Clown , Sideshow Mel , Groundskeeper Willie , Mayor Quimby and Hans Moleman . 
 Born in Oak Park , Illinois , a suburb of Chicago , Castellaneta started taking acting classes at a young age . He would listen to his father 's comedy records and do impressions of the artists . After graduating from Northern Illinois University , Castellaneta joined Chicago 's Second City in 1983 , and performed with the troupe until 1987 . He was cast in The Tracey Ullman Show , which debuted in 1987 . The Tracey Ullman Show included a series of animated shorts about a dysfunctional family . Voices were needed for the shorts , so the producers decided to ask Castellaneta to voice Homer . His voice for the character started out as a loose impression of Walter Matthau , but later evolved into a more robust voice . The shorts would eventually be spun off into The Simpsons . Castellaneta has won four Primetime Emmy Awards for Outstanding Voice @-@ Over Performance for his work on the show as well as an Annie Award for Outstanding Individual Achievement in the Field of Animation in 1993 . Castellaneta has co @-@ written four episodes of The Simpsons with his wife Deb Lacusta . 
 Castellaneta has also had roles in several other television programs , including the live @-@ action sitcom Sibs , The Adventures of Dynamo Duck , and the animated series Back to the Future : The Animated Series , Earthworm Jim , Aladdin , Hey Arnold ! , Rugrats , Futurama , and Darkwing Duck . In 1999 , he appeared in the Christmas special Olive , the Other Reindeer and won an Annie Award for his portrayal of the Postman . Castellaneta has also released a comedy CD , I Am Not Homer , and wrote and starred in a one @-@ person show titled Where Did Vincent van Gogh ? 
 = = Early life = = 
 Daniel Louis Castellaneta was born in Oak Park , Illinois , a suburb of Chicago , on October 29 , 1957 , to Elsie ( née Lagorio , 1926 – 2008 ) and Louis Castellaneta ( 1915 – 2014 ) , an amateur actor who worked for a printing company . He is of Italian descent . Castellaneta became adept at impressions at a young age and his mother enrolled him in an acting class when he was sixteen years old . He would listen to his father 's comedy records and do impressions of the artists . He was a " devotee " of the works of many performers , including Alan Arkin and Barbara Harris and directors Mike Nichols and Elaine May . He attended Oak Park and River Forest High School and upon graduation , started attending Northern Illinois University ( NIU ) in the fall of 1975 . 
 Castellaneta studied art education , with the goal of becoming an art teacher . He became a student teacher and would entertain his students with his impressions . Castellaneta was also a regular participant in The Ron <unk> and His Dead Uncle Show , a radio show at NIU . The show helped Castellaneta hone his skills as a voice @-@ over actor . He recalled " We did parodies and sketches , we would double up on , so you learned to switch between voices . I got my feet wet doing voiceover . The show was just barely audible , but we didn 't care . It was the fact that we got a chance to do it and write our own material . " He took a play @-@ writing class and auditioned for an improvisational show . A classmate first thought Castellaneta would " fall on his face with improvisation " but soon " was churning out material faster than [ they ] could make it work . " 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Early career = = = 
 Castellaneta started acting after his graduation from Northern Illinois University in 1979 . He decided that if his career went nowhere he would still have a chance to try something else . He began taking improvisation classes , where he met his future wife Deb Lacusta . Castellaneta started to work at The Second City , an improvisational theatre in Chicago , in 1983 and continued to work there until 1987 . During this period , he did voice @-@ over work with his wife for various radio stations . He auditioned for a role in The Tracey Ullman Show and his first meeting underwhelmed Tracey Ullman and the other producers . Ullman decided to fly to Chicago to watch Castellaneta perform . His performance that night was about a blind man who tries to become a comedian and Ullman later recalled that although there were flashier performances that night , Castellaneta made her cry . She was impressed and Castellaneta was hired . 
 = = = The Simpsons = = = 
 Castellaneta is most famous for his role as Homer Simpson on the longest running animated television show The Simpsons . The Tracey Ullman Show included a series of animated shorts about a dysfunctional family . Voices were needed for the shorts , so the producers decided to ask Castellaneta and fellow cast member Julie Kavner to voice Homer and Marge Simpson rather than hire more actors . Homer 's voice began as a loose impression of Walter Matthau , but Castellaneta could not " get enough power behind that voice " and could not sustain his Matthau impression for the nine- to ten @-@ hour long recording sessions . He tried to find something easier , so he " dropped the voice down " , and developed it into a more versatile and humorous voice during the second and third season of the half @-@ hour show . Castellaneta 's normal speaking voice has no similarity to Homer 's . To perform Homer 's voice , Castellaneta lowers his chin to his chest , and is said to " let his IQ go . " Castellaneta likes to stay in character during recording sessions , and tries to visualize a scene in his mind so that he can give the proper voice to it . Despite Homer 's fame , Castellaneta claims he is rarely recognized in public , " except , maybe , by a die @-@ hard fan . " 
 Castellaneta also provides the voices for numerous other characters , including Grampa Simpson , Barney Gumble , Krusty the Clown , Groundskeeper Willie , Mayor Quimby , Hans Moleman , Sideshow Mel , Itchy , Kodos , the Squeaky Voiced Teen and Gil Gunderson . Krusty 's voice is based on Chicago television 's Bob Bell , who had a very raspy voice and portrayed WGN @-@ TV 's Bozo the Clown from 1960 to 1984 . Barney 's trademark is a loud belch . During early recording sessions for the show , he recorded a new version of the belch for every episode but discovered that it was not easy for him to do it every time a script called for it . Castellaneta chose a recording of what he believed was his best belch and told the producers to make that the standard . Groundskeeper Willie 's first appearance was in the season two episode " Principal Charming " . The character was written as an angry janitor and Castellaneta was assigned to perform the voice . He did not know what voice to use and Sam Simon , who was directing at the time , suggested he use an accent . Castellaneta first tried using a Hispanic voicing , which Simon felt was too clichéd . He then tried a " big dumb Swede " , which was also rejected . For his third try , he used the voice of an angry Scotsman , which was deemed appropriate enough and was used in the episode . The voice was based partially on Angus Crock , a kilt @-@ wearing chef from the sketch comedy show Second City Television , who was portrayed by Dave Thomas . Mayor Quimby , who first appeared in " Bart Gets an F " , is a parody of various members of the Kennedy family . The episode script did not call for Quimby to be a parody of them , and Castellaneta improvised the accent . Sideshow Mel 's voice is Castellaneta 's impression of Kelsey Grammer , the voice of Sideshow Bob . Gil is a spoof of actor Jack Lemmon 's portrayal of Shelley Levene in the 1992 film adaptation of the play Glengarry Glen Ross . Show runner Mike Scully thought that Gil would be " a one @-@ shot thing " but " Dan Castellaneta was so funny at the table read doing the character , we kept making up excuses in subsequent episodes to put him in . " The Blue @-@ Haired Lawyer 's voice , as well as his demeanor , is based on lawyer Roy Cohn . 
 Castellaneta has won several awards for voicing Homer , including four Primetime Emmy Awards for " Outstanding Voice @-@ Over Performance " in 1992 for " Lisa 's Pony " , 1993 for " Mr. Plow " , 2004 for voicing several characters in " Today I Am a Clown " , and 2009 for voicing Homer in " Father Knows Worst " . In 1993 , Castellaneta was given a special Annie Award , " Outstanding Individual Achievement in the Field of Animation " , for his work as Homer on The Simpsons . In 2004 , Castellaneta and Julie Kavner ( the voice of Marge ) won a Young Artist Award for " Most Popular Mom & Dad in a TV Series " . Homer was placed second on TV Guide 's 2002 Top 50 Greatest Cartoon Characters , and in 2000 , Homer and the rest of the Simpson family were awarded a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame located at 7021 Hollywood Boulevard . 
 Until 1998 , Castellaneta was paid $ 30 @,@ 000 per episode . During a pay dispute in 1998 , Fox threatened to replace the six main voice actors with new actors , going as far as preparing for casting of new voices . The dispute was soon resolved and he received $ 125 @,@ 000 per episode until 2004 when the voice actors demanded that they be paid $ 360 @,@ 000 an episode . The issue was resolved a month later , and Castellaneta earned $ 250 @,@ 000 per episode . After salary re @-@ negotiations in 2008 , the voice actors received approximately $ 400 @,@ 000 per episode . Three years later , with Fox threatening to cancel the series unless production costs were cut , Castellaneta and the other cast members accepted a 25 percent pay cut , down to over $ 300 @,@ 000 per episode . 
 In the early 1990s , Castellaneta and Deb Lacusta wrote a script for an episode in which Barney becomes sober . They pitched their idea to showrunner Al Jean . Jean liked the story , but turned it down because he felt that it was too similar to " Duffless " , an episode that the writers were already working on . They waited several years and offered their script , which they updated , to then @-@ show runner Mike Scully , who liked it and had them make a few changes . Their script became the eleventh season episode " Days of Wine and D 'oh 'ses " , which first aired April 9 , 2000 . Castellaneta and his wife have also written the episodes " Gump Roast " , " The Ziff Who Came to Dinner " , " Kiss Kiss , Bang Bangalore " , and " The Fight Before Christmas " . In 2007 , they were nominated for a Writers Guild of America Award for the episode " Kiss Kiss , Bang Bangalore " . Castellaneta is also credited as a consulting producer . 
 = = = Further career = = = 
 Castellaneta has been a regular cast member in several other television series . In 1991 , he played Warren Morris in the short @-@ lived ABC live @-@ action sitcom Sibs . Heide Perlman , creator of Sibs , wrote the part with Castellaneta in mind . He also provided the voice of the eponymous character in The Adventures of Dynamo Duck , <unk> in Darkwing Duck , " Doc " Emmett Brown in Back to the Future : The Animated Series , the lead character in Earthworm Jim and several characters , including Grandpa Phil and the Jolly Olly Man , the mentally unstable ice cream truck driver , on Nickelodeon 's Hey Arnold ! . He guest starred as The Robot Devil in five episodes of Futurama , as well as the film The Beast with a Billion Backs . 
 Castellaneta has also made guest appearances in a number of television series episodes . In 1992 , he guest @-@ starred in an episode of the legal drama L.A. Law , as a Homer Simpson <unk> character at a California amusement park who is dismissed for inappropriate behavior while in costume . In 2005 , he appeared in the episode " Sword of Destiny " in Arrested Development as Dr. Stein , a deadpan incompetent doctor . In 2005 , Castellaneta guest @-@ starred as Joe Spencer in the Stargate SG @-@ 1 season eight episode " Citizen Joe " . He also appeared in episodes of ALF , Campus Ladies , Castle , Entourage , Everybody Loves Raymond , Frasier , Friends , Greek , How I Met Your Mother , Mad About You , Married ... with Children , Murphy Brown , NYPD Blue , Parks and Recreation , Reba , Reno 911 ! , That ' 70s Show , Veronica Mars , Hot in Cleveland , Yes , Dear , and Desperate Housewives . 
 He appeared as the Genie in the Aladdin sequel The Return of Jafar and on the 1994 Aladdin television series . The Genie had been voiced by Robin Williams in Aladdin , and Castellaneta described replacing him as " sort of like stepping into Hamlet after Laurence Olivier did it , how can you win ? " He also provided Genie 's voice in the Kingdom Hearts video game series for both Kingdom Hearts and Kingdom Hearts II ( with archived audio used for Kingdom Hearts : Chain of Memories and its remake as well as for the later HD collections HD 1 @.@ 5 Remix and HD 2 @.@ 5 Remix ) . Castellaneta portrayed Aaron Spelling in the 2004 NBC film Behind the Camera : The Unauthorized Story of Charlie 's Angels , which followed the true story of how Spelling created the show . Other films in which Castellaneta has appeared include Nothing in Common , Say Anything ... , Super Mario Bros. , The Client , Space Jam , My Giant , The Simpsons Movie , Rugrats in Paris : The Movie , Recess : School 's Out , Hey Arnold ! : The Movie , The Cat in the Hat and The Pursuit of Happyness . In 2000 , he won an Annie Award for his portrayal of the Postman in the animated Christmas television special Olive , the Other Reindeer . In 2006 , he appeared in Jeff Garlin 's independent film I Want Someone to Eat Cheese With along with several other Second City alumni . 
 On February 22 , 2000 , his first music CD Two Lips was published . It was followed on April 23 , 2002 by his first comedy CD , I Am Not Homer , in which he and his wife perform several comedy skits . The majority of the sketches had been written and performed before the CD was recorded , and Castellaneta thought that it would be a good idea to preserve them " since [ he and Lacusta ] don 't perform them much anymore . " Some came from their sketch series on a local radio station in Chicago and had to be lengthened from the " two @-@ minute bits " that they were originally , while several others were stage sketches performed in a comedy club in Santa Monica . Additionally , " Citizen Kane " , a sketch in which two people discuss the film Citizen Kane with different meanings , was something the pair had performed at an art gallery . Castellaneta noted that " we already knew that these skits were funny , [ but ] some of them we polished and tightened . " The skits were principally written by improvising from a basic point , transcribing the results and then editing them to the finished scene . Castellaneta chose the title I Am Not Homer as a parody of Leonard Nimoy 's famous first autobiography I Am Not Spock , as well as to show that most of the comedy featured " is not the typical Homer comedy . " 
 Alongside his television and film work , Castellaneta has appeared in a number of theatrical productions . In 1992 , he starred in Deb & Dan 's Show alongside his wife . In 1995 , Castellaneta started writing Where Did Vincent van Gogh ? , a one man play in which he portrays a dozen different characters , including artist Vincent van Gogh . He first officially performed the play at the ACME Comedy Theatre in Los Angeles in 1999 . In 2007 , he appeared in The Bicycle Men at The King 's Head Theatre in London . 
 Castellaneta hosted the final of New York comedy show Thrills and Spills on 31 December 2015 . The final was held in Montgomery , Alabama . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Castellaneta lives in Los Angeles with his wife Deb Lacusta . He is a vegetarian , teetotaler and exercises regularly ( despite being known for voicing very opposite type characters in The Simpsons ) . Castellaneta also practises T 'ai Chi . His mother Elsie Castellaneta died in January 2008 aged 81 . His father died at age 99 on August 15 , 2014 ; both had " Simpsons " episodes dedicated to their memories . 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = = Discography = = 
 Also featured in : 
 The Simpsons Sing the Blues ( 1990 ) 
 Songs in the Key of Springfield ( 1997 ) 
 The Yellow Album ( 1998 ) 
 Go Simpsonic with The Simpsons ( 1999 ) 
 The Simpsons : Testify ( 2007 ) 
 = = Awards = = 
 = Rhodes piano = 
 The Rhodes piano ( also known as the Fender Rhodes piano or simply Fender Rhodes or Rhodes ) is an electric piano invented by Harold Rhodes , which became particularly popular throughout the 1970s . It generates sound using keys and hammers in the same manner as an acoustic piano , but instead of strings , the hammers strike thin metal tines , which are then amplified via an electromagnetic pickup . 
 The instrument evolved from Rhodes ' attempt to manufacture pianos to teach recovering soldiers during World War II under a strict budget , and development continued throughout the 1940s and 1950s . Fender started marketing the Piano Bass , a cut @-@ down version of the piano , but the full @-@ size instrument did not appear until after the sale to CBS in 1965 . CBS oversaw mass production of the Rhodes piano in the 1970s , and it was used extensively through the decade , particularly in jazz , pop and soul music . It fell out of fashion for a while in the mid @-@ 1980s , principally due to the emergence of polyphonic and later digital synthesizers , especially the Yamaha DX7 , and partly through inconsistent quality control in production due to cost @-@ cutting measures . The company was eventually sold to Roland , who manufactured digital versions of the Rhodes without authorization or approval from its inventor . 
 In the 1990s , the instrument enjoyed a resurgence in popularity , resulting in Rhodes re @-@ obtaining the rights to the piano in 1997 . Although he died in 2000 , the instrument has since been reissued , and his teaching methods are still receiving active use . 
 = = Features = = 
 The Rhodes piano features a keyboard with a similar layout to an acoustic piano , but some models contain 73 keys instead of 88 . The touch and action of the keyboard is designed to be as close to an acoustic piano as possible . Pressing a key results in a hammer striking a thin metal rod called a tine , connected to a larger " tone bar " . The whole " tone generator assembly " acts as a tuning fork , the tone bar reinforcing and extending the vibrations of the tine . A pickup sits opposite the tine , picking up its vibrations and inducing an electric current in a similar manner to an electric guitar . The basic mechanical act of hitting tines does not need an external power supply and a Rhodes will make a sound even when not plugged into an amplifier , though like an unplugged electric guitar the sound will be weak . 
 The Suitcase model Rhodes includes a built @-@ in power amplifier and a tremolo feature that bounces the output signal from the piano in stereo across two speakers . This feature is mistakenly labeled " vibrato " ( which is a variation in pitch ) on some models to be consistent with the labelling on Fender amplifiers . 
 Although the Rhodes has the same mechanical operation as an acoustic piano , its sound is very different . The sound produced by the tines has a more mellow timbre , but varies depending on the location of the tine to the pickup . Putting the two close together gives a characteristic " bell " sound . The instrument 's sound has been frequently compared with the Wurlitzer electric piano , which used a similar technology , but with the hammers striking metal reeds instead of tines . The Rhodes has a better sustain , while the Wurlitzer produces significant harmonics when the keys are played hard , giving it a " bite " that the Rhodes does not have . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early models = = = 
 Rhodes started teaching piano when he was 19 . He dropped out of studying at the University of Southern California in 1929 to support his family through the Great Depression by full @-@ time teaching . As a teacher , he designed a method that combined classical and jazz music , which became popular across the United States , and resulted in an hour @-@ long nationally syndicated radio show . Rhodes continued to teach the piano through his lifetime , and the piano method continues to be taught today by a team led by Joseph <unk> . 
 By 1942 , Rhodes was working for the Army Air Corps , where he was asked to devise a teaching program to provide therapy for soldiers recovering from combat in hospital . He was unable to supply enough acoustic pianos , so decided to develop a miniature electric model that could be made from surplus army parts . Rhodes won a service award for his piano design and subsequently put the model into production for piano teachers during the 1950s . These were retrospectively known as the " Pre @-@ Piano " . 
 In 1959 , Rhodes entered a joint venture with Leo Fender to manufacture the instruments . Fender , however , disliked the higher tones of the pre @-@ piano , and decided to manufacture a keyboard bass using the bottom 32 notes , known as the " Piano Bass " . The instrument introduced the design that would become common to subsequent Rhodes pianos , with the same <unk> body as Fender amplifiers and a fiberglass top . The tops came from a boat manufacturer who supplied whatever color happened to be available ; consequently a number of different colored piano basses went into production . 
 = = = Under CBS = = = 
 Fender was bought by CBS in 1965 . Rhodes stayed with the company , and released the first Fender Rhodes piano , a 73 note model . The instrument consisted of two components — the piano and a separate enclosure containing the power amplifier and loudspeaker , which was placed underneath the former . Like the piano bass , it was finished in black <unk> , and came with a fiberglass top . During the late 1960s , two models of the Fender Rhodes Celeste also became available , which used the top three or four octaves , respectively , of the Fender Rhodes piano . The Celeste didn 't sell particularly well and examples are now hard to find . 
 The Student and Instructor models were also introduced in the late 1960s . They were designed to teach the piano in the classroom . By connecting the output of a network of student models , the teacher could listen to each student in isolation on the instructor model , and send an audio backing track to them . This allowed the teacher to monitor individual students ' progress . 
 In 1970 , the 73 @-@ note Stage Piano was introduced as a lighter and more portable alternative to the existing two @-@ piece style , featuring four detachable legs ( used in Fender steel pedal guitars ) , a sustain pedal and a single output jack . Although the Stage could be used with any amplifier , catalogs suggested the use of the Fender Twin Reverb . The older style piano continued to be sold alongside the Stage and was renamed the Suitcase Piano , with 88 note models also becoming available . 
 = = = Later models = = = 
 During the 1970s various internal changes and improvements were made to the mechanics . In 1969 the hammer tips were changed to neoprene rubber instead of felt , to avoid the excessive need for regular maintenance , while in 1975 harp supports were changed from wood to aluminum . Although this made production cheaper , it changed the resonance of the instrument slightly . In 1977 the power amplifier design was changed from an 80 to a 100 @-@ watt model . The Mk II model was introduced in late 1979 , which was simply a set of cosmetic changes over the most recent Mk I models . A new 54 @-@ note model was added to the range . 
 The Rhodes Mk III EK @-@ 10 was a combination electric piano and synthesizer instrument , introduced in 1980 before when CBS bought ARP Instruments in 1981 . It used analog oscillators and filters alongside the existing electromechanical elements . The overall effect was that of a Rhodes piano and a synthesizer being played simultaneously . The instrument was unreliable with a problematic production , particularly when a shipment of 150 units to Japan caused interference with local television reception . Compared to the new polyphonic synthesizers being marketed at the same time , it was limited in scope and sound , and very few units were sold . 
 The final Rhodes produced by the original company was the Mk V in 1984 . Among other improvements , it had a lighter plastic body and an improved action that varied the dynamics with each note . The Mark V is the easiest of the original Rhodes pianos for touring musicians to transport to gigs . 
 One of the key problems with production of Rhodes pianos under the original company was the desire to mass @-@ produce the instrument , which caused a variation in quality . Collectors are advised to take care when buying a second @-@ hand instrument . 
 = = = After CBS = = = 
 In 1983 , Rhodes was sold to CBS boss William Schultz , who closed down the main factory in 1985 and subsequently sold the business to Roland in 1987 . Roland manufactured digital pianos under the Rhodes name , but Harold Rhodes disapproved of the instruments , which were made without his consultation or endorsement . 
 Rhodes subsequently re @-@ acquired the rights to the instrument in 1997 . However , by this time he was in ill health and died in December 2000 . In 2007 , a re @-@ formed Rhodes Music Corporation introduced a reproduction of the original electric piano , called the Rhodes Mark 7 . This was a version of the Rhodes housed in a molded plastic enclosure . 
 = = = Dyno My Piano = = = 
 During the late 1970s and 1980s , Chuck Monte manufactured an after @-@ market modification to the Rhodes , known as " Dyno My Piano " . It included a lever that moved the relative position of the tines to the pickups , modifying the sound , and fed the output signal through additional electronics . This sound was emulated by the Yamaha DX7 with a patch ( known as the DX7 Rhodes ) that was popular during the 1980s , and caused several players to abandon the Rhodes in favor of the DX7 . 
 = = Notable users = = 
 The Doors ' Ray Manzarek began using Rhodes instruments when the band was formed in 1965 . He played bass parts on a Piano Bass with his left hand , while playing organ with his right . He also played a full @-@ size Rhodes on later studio recordings , such as " Riders on the Storm " . Manzarek later said " if Mr. Rhodes hadn ’ t created the keyboard bass , the Doors would never have existed " . 
 The Rhodes piano became a popular instrument in jazz in the late 1960s , particularly for several sidemen who played with Miles Davis . Herbie Hancock first encountered the instrument in 1968 while booked for a session with Davis . He immediately became an enthusiast , noting that the amplification allowed him to be heard much more easily in groups when compared to the acoustic piano . Hancock continued to experiment with the Rhodes over the next few years , including playing it through a wah wah . Another former Davis sideman , Chick Corea started using the Rhodes prominently during the 1970s , as did Weather Report founder Joe Zawinul . Zawinul favored the sound of the Rhodes over the Wurlitzer , because it had a fuller and rich tone . From 1969 's In A Silent Way and Bitches Brew onwards , the Rhodes became the most prominent keyboard on Davis ' recordings until the mid @-@ 1970s . Vince Guaraldi started using a Rhodes in 1968 , and toured with it alternating with an acoustic piano . He achieved particular prominence with his soundtrack music for A Charlie Brown Christmas and other Peanuts / Charlie Brown films . 
 Billy Preston has been described as " The Ruler of the Rhodes " by Music Radar magazine , and played one during The Beatles ' rooftop concert in 1969 , and on the group 's hit single " Get Back " . Many of Stevie Wonder 's recordings from the 1970s feature him playing the Rhodes , often alongside the Hohner Clavinet . Donny Hathaway regularly used the Rhodes . His hit single , " This Christmas " , which receives seasonal radio play on African American stations , makes a prominent use of the instrument . Although better known for playing the Wurlitzer , Ray Charles played a Rhodes on his performance of " Shake A <unk> " in the film The Blues Brothers . 
 The instrument features in " Angela " , the 1978 instrumental theme from the sitcom Taxi by Bob James . The French band Air make regular use of the Rhodes piano in their recordings . 
 = Music of the United States = 
 The music of the United States reflects the country 's multi @-@ ethnic population through a diverse array of styles . It is a mixture of music influenced by West African , Irish , Scottish , Mexican , and Cuban music traditions among others . The country 's most internationally renowned genres are jazz , blues , country , bluegrass , rock , rhythm and blues , ragtime , hip hop , barbershop , pop , experimental , techno , house , dance , boogaloo , salsa , and rock and roll . The United States has the world 's largest music market with a total retail value of 4 @,@ 898 @.@ 3 million dollars in 2014 , and its music is heard around the world . Since the beginning of the 20th century , some forms of American popular music have gained a near global audience . 
 Native Americans were the earliest inhabitants of the land that is today known as the United States and played its first music . Beginning in the 17th century , immigrants from the United Kingdom , Ireland , Spain , Germany , and France began arriving in large numbers , bringing with them new styles and instruments . African slaves brought musical traditions , and each subsequent wave of immigrants contributed to a melting pot . 
 Much of modern popular music can trace its roots to the emergence in the late 19th century of African American blues and the growth of gospel music in the 1920s . The African American basis for popular music used elements derived from European and indigenous musics . There are also strong African roots in the music tradition of the original white settlers , such as country and bluegrass . The United States has also seen documented folk music and recorded popular music produced in the ethnic styles of the Ukrainian , Irish , Scottish , Polish , Hispanic , and Jewish communities , among others . 
 Many American cities and towns have vibrant music scenes which , in turn , support a number of regional musical styles . Along with musical centers such as Philadelphia , Seattle , New York City , San Francisco , New Orleans , Detroit , Minneapolis , Chicago , Miami , Atlanta , Nashville , Austin , and Los Angeles , many smaller cities such as Asbury Park , New Jersey have produced distinctive styles of music . The Cajun and Creole traditions in Louisiana music , the folk and popular styles of Hawaiian music , and the bluegrass and old time music of the Southeastern states are a few examples of diversity in American music . Modern day music is heavily influenced by previous and present African @-@ American music genres . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 The music of the United States can be characterized by the use of syncopation and asymmetrical rhythms , long , irregular melodies , which are said to " reflect the wide open geography of ( the American landscape ) " and the " sense of personal freedom characteristic of American life " . Some distinct aspects of American music , like the call @-@ and @-@ response format , are derived from African techniques and instruments . 
 Throughout the later part of American history , and into modern times , the relationship between American and European music has been a discussed topic among scholars of American music . Some have urged for the adoption of more purely European techniques and styles , which are sometimes perceived as more refined or elegant , while others have pushed for a sense of musical nationalism that celebrates distinctively American styles . Modern classical music scholar John <unk> Struble has contrasted American and European , concluding that the music of the United States is inherently distinct because the United States has not had centuries of musical evolution as a nation . Instead , the music of the United States is that of dozens or hundreds of indigenous and immigrant groups , all of which developed largely in regional isolation until the American Civil War , when people from across the country were brought together in army units , trading musical styles and practices . Struble deemed the ballads of the Civil War " the first American folk music with discernible features that can be considered unique to America : the first ' American ' sounding music , as distinct from any regional style derived from another country . " 
 The Civil War , and the period following it , saw a general flowering of American art , literature and music . Amateur musical ensembles of this era can be seen as the birth of American popular music . Music author David Ewen describes these early amateur bands as combining " the depth and drama of the classics with undemanding technique , eschewing complexity in favor of direct expression . If it was vocal music , the words would be in English , despite the snobs who declared English an <unk> language . In a way , it was part of the entire awakening of America that happened after the Civil War , a time in which American painters , writers , and ' serious ' composers addressed specifically American themes . " During this period the roots of blues , gospel , jazz , and country music took shape ; in the 20th century , these became the core of American popular music , which further evolved into the styles like rhythm and blues , rock and roll , and hip hop music . 
 = = = Social identity = = = 
 Music intertwines with aspects of American social and cultural identity , including through social class , race and ethnicity , geography , religion , language , gender , and sexuality . The relationship between music and race is perhaps the most potent determiner of musical meaning in the United States . The development of an African American musical identity , out of disparate sources from Africa and Europe , has been a constant theme in the music history of the United States . Little documentation exists of colonial @-@ era African American music , when styles , songs , and instruments from across West Africa commingled in the melting pot of slavery . By the mid @-@ 19th century , a distinctly African American folk tradition was well @-@ known and widespread , and African American musical techniques , instruments , and images became a part of mainstream American music through spirituals , minstrel shows , and slave songs . African American musical styles became an integral part of American popular music through blues , jazz , rhythm and blues , and then rock and roll , soul , and hip hop ; all of these styles were consumed by Americans of all races , but were created in African American styles and idioms before eventually becoming common in performance and consumption across racial lines . In contrast , country music derives from both African and European , as well as Native American and Hawaiian , traditions and yet has long been perceived as a form of white music . 
 Economic and social classes separates American music through the creation and consumption of music , such as the upper @-@ class patronage of symphony @-@ goers , and the generally poor performers of rural and ethnic folk musics . Musical divisions based on class are not absolute , however , and are sometimes as much perceived as actual ; popular American country music , for example , is a commercial genre designed to " appeal to a working @-@ class identity , whether or not its listeners are actually working class " . Country music is also intertwined with geographic identity , and is specifically rural in origin and function ; other genres , like R & B and hip hop , are perceived as inherently urban . For much of American history , music @-@ making has been a " feminized activity " . In the 19th century , amateur piano and singing were considered proper for middle- and upper @-@ class women . Women were also a major part of early popular music performance , though recorded traditions quickly become more dominated by men . Most male @-@ dominated genres of popular music include female performers as well , often in a niche appealing primarily to women ; these include gangsta rap and heavy metal . 
 = = Diversity = = 
 The United States is often said to be a cultural melting pot , taking in influences from across the world and creating distinctively new methods of cultural expression . Though aspects of American music can be traced back to specific origins , claiming any particular original culture for a musical element is inherently problematic , due to the constant evolution of American music through transplanting and hybridizing techniques , instruments and genres . Elements of foreign musics arrived in the United States both through the formal sponsorship of educational and outreach events by individuals and groups , and through informal processes , as in the incidental transplantation of West African music through slavery , and Irish music through immigration . The most distinctly American musics are a result of cross @-@ cultural hybridization through close contact . Slavery , for example , mixed persons from numerous tribes in tight living quarters , resulting in a shared musical tradition that was enriched through further hybridizing with elements of indigenous , Latin , and European music . American ethnic , religious , and racial diversity has also produced such intermingled genres as the French @-@ African music of the Louisiana Creoles , the Native , Mexican and European fusion Tejano music , and the thoroughly hybridized slack @-@ key guitar and other styles of modern Hawaiian music . 
 The process of transplanting music between cultures is not without criticism . The folk revival of the mid @-@ 20th century , for example , appropriated the musics of various rural peoples , in part to promote certain political causes , which has caused some to question whether the process caused the " commercial commodification of other peoples ' songs ... and the inevitable dilution of mean " in the appropriated musics . The issue of cultural appropriation has also been a major part of racial relations in the United States . The use of African American musical techniques , images , and conceits in popular music largely by and for white Americans has been widespread since at least the mid @-@ 19th century songs of Stephen Foster and the rise of minstrel shows . The American music industry has actively attempted to popularize white performers of African American music because they are more palatable to mainstream and middle @-@ class Americans . This process has been related to the rise of stars as varied as Benny Goodman , Eminem , and Elvis Presley , as well as popular styles like blue @-@ eyed soul and rockabilly . 
 = = Folk music = = 
 Folk music in the US is varied across the country 's numerous ethnic groups . The Native American tribes each play their own varieties of folk music , most of it spiritual in nature . African American music includes blues and gospel , descendants of West African music brought to the Americas by slaves and mixed with Western European music . During the colonial era , English , French and Spanish styles and instruments were brought to the Americas . By the early 20th century , the United States had become a major center for folk music from around the world , including polka , Ukrainian and Polish fiddling , Ashkenazi , klezmer , and several kinds of Latin music . 
 The Native Americans played the first folk music in what is now the United States , using a wide variety of styles and techniques . Some commonalities are near universal among Native American traditional music , however , especially the lack of harmony and polyphony , and the use of vocables and descending melodic figures . Traditional instrumentations use the flute and many kinds of percussion instruments , like drums , rattles , and shakers . Since European and African contact was established , Native American folk music has grown in new directions , into fusions with disparate styles like European folk dances and Tejano music . Modern Native American music may be best known for pow wows , pan @-@ tribal gatherings at which traditionally styled dances and music are performed . 
 The Thirteen Colonies of the original United States were all former English possessions , and Anglo culture became a major foundation for American folk and popular music . Many American folk songs are identical to British songs in arrangements , but with new lyrics , often as parodies of the original material . American @-@ Anglo songs are also characterized as having fewer pentatonic tunes , less prominent accompaniment ( but with heavier use of drones ) and more melodies in major . Anglo @-@ American traditional music also includes a variety of broadside ballads , humorous stories and tall tales , and disaster songs regarding mining , shipwrecks , and murder . Legendary heroes like Joe <unk> , John Henry , and Jesse James are part of many songs . Folk dances of British origin include the square dance , descended from the quadrille , combined with the American innovation of a caller instructing the dancers . The religious communal society known as the Shakers emigrated from England during the 18th century and developed their own folk dance style . Their early songs can be dated back to British folk song models . Other religious societies established their own unique musical cultures early in American history , such as the music of the Amish , the Harmony Society , and the Ephrata Cloister in Pennsylvania . 
 The ancestors of today 's African American population were brought to the United States as slaves , working primarily in the plantations of the South . They were from hundreds of tribes across West Africa , and they brought with them certain traits of West African music including call and response vocals and complexly rhythmic music , as well as syncopated beats and shifting accents . The African musical focus on rhythmic singing and dancing was brought to the New World , and where it became part of a distinct folk culture that helped Africans " retain continuity with their past through music " . The first slaves in the United States sang work songs , field hollers and , following Christianization , hymns . In the 19th century , a Great Awakening of religious fervor gripped people across the country , especially in the South . Protestant hymns written mostly by New England preachers became a feature of camp meetings held among devout Christians across the South . When blacks began singing adapted versions of these hymns , they were called Negro spirituals . It was from these roots , of spiritual songs , work songs , and field hollers , that blues , jazz , and gospel developed . 
 = = = Blues and spirituals = = = 
 Spirituals were primarily expressions of religious faith , sung by slaves on southern plantations . In the mid to late 19th century , spirituals spread out of the U.S. South . In 1871 Fisk University became home to the Fisk Jubilee Singers , a pioneering group that popularized spirituals across the country . In imitation of this group , gospel quartets arose , followed by increasing diversification with the early 20th @-@ century rise of <unk> and singing preachers , from whence came the popular style of gospel music . 
 Blues is a combination of African work songs , field hollers , and shouts . It developed in the rural South in the first decade of the 20th century . The most important characteristics of the blues is its use of the blue scale , with a flatted or indeterminate third , as well as the typically lamenting lyrics ; though both of these elements had existed in African American folk music prior to the 20th century , the codified form of modern blues ( such as with the AAB structure ) did not exist until the early 20th century . 
 = = = Other immigrant communities = = = 
 The United States is a melting pot consisting of numerous ethnic groups . Many of these peoples have kept alive the folk traditions of their homeland , often producing distinctively American styles of foreign music . Some nationalities have produced local scenes in regions of the country where they have clustered , like Cape Verdean music in New England , Armenian music in California , and Italian and Ukrainian music in New York City . 
 The Creoles are a community with varied non @-@ Anglo ancestry , mostly descendant of people who lived in Louisiana before its purchase by the U.S. The Cajuns are a group of Francophones who arrived in Louisiana after leaving Acadia in Canada . The city of New Orleans , Louisiana , being a major port , has acted as a melting pot for people from all over the Caribbean basin . The result is a diverse and syncretic set of styles of Cajun music and Creole music . 
 Spain and subsequently Mexico controlled much of what is now the western United States until the Mexican – American War , including the entire state of Texas . After Texas joined the United States , the native Tejanos living in the state began culturally developing separately from their neighbors to the south , and remained culturally distinct from other Texans . Central to the evolution of early Tejano music was the blend of traditional Mexican forms such as mariachi and the corrido , and Continental European styles introduced by German and Czech settlers in the late 19th century . In particular , the accordion was adopted by Tejano folk musicians around the start of the 20th century , and it became a popular instrument for amateur musicians in Texas and Northern Mexico . 
 = = Classical music = = 
 Classical music was brought to the United States with some of the first colonists . European classical music is rooted in the traditions of European art , ecclesiastical and concert music . The central norms of this tradition developed between 1550 and 1825 , centering on what is known as the common practice period . Many American classical composers attempted to work entirely within European models until late in the 19th century . When Antonín Dvořák , a prominent Czech composer , visited the United States from 1892 to 1895 , he iterated the idea that American classical music needed its own models instead of imitating European composers ; he helped to inspire subsequent composers to make a distinctly American style of classical music . By the beginning of the 20th century , many American composers were incorporating disparate elements into their work , ranging from jazz and blues to Native American music . 
 = = = Early classical music = = = 
 During the colonial era , there were two distinct fields of what is now considered classical music . One was associated with amateur composers and pedagogues , whose style was originally drawn from simple hymns and gained sophistication over time . The other colonial tradition was that of the mid @-@ Atlantic cities like Philadelphia and Baltimore , which produced a number of prominent composers who worked almost entirely within the European model ; these composers were mostly English in origin , and worked specifically in the style of prominent English composers of the day . 
 Classical music was brought to the United States during the colonial era . Many American composers of this period worked exclusively with European models , while others , such as William Billings , Supply Belcher , and Justin Morgan , also known as the First New England School , developed a style almost entirely independent of European models . Of these composers , Billings is the most well @-@ remembered ; he was also influential " as the founder of the American church choir , as the first musician to use a pitch pipe , and as the first to introduce a violoncello into church service " . Many of these composers were amateur singers who developed new forms of sacred music suitable for performance by amateurs , and often using harmonic methods which would have been considered bizarre by contemporary European standards . These composers ' styles were untouched by " the influence of their sophisticated European contemporaries " , using modal or pentatonic scales or melodies and eschewing the European rules of harmony . 
 In the early 19th century , America produced diverse composers such as Anthony Heinrich , who composed in an idiosyncratic , intentionally American style and was the first American composer to write for a symphony orchestra . Many other composers , most famously William Henry Fry and George Frederick Bristow , supported the idea of an American classical style , though their works were very European in orientation . It was John Knowles Paine , however , who became the first American composer to be accepted in Europe . Paine 's example inspired the composers of the Second New England School , which included such figures as Amy Beach , Edward MacDowell , and Horatio Parker . 
 Louis Moreau Gottschalk is perhaps the best @-@ remembered American composer of the 19th century , said by music historian Richard Crawford to be known for " bringing indigenous or folk , themes and rhythms into music for the concert hall " . Gottschalk 's music reflected the cultural mix of his home city , New Orleans , Louisiana , which was home to a variety of Latin , Caribbean , African American , Cajun , and Creole music . He was well acknowledged as a talented pianist in his lifetime , and was also a known composer who remains admired though little performed . 
 = = = 20th century = = = 
 The New York classical music scene included Charles Griffes , originally from Elmira , New York , who began publishing his most innovative material in 1914 . His early collaborations were attempts to use non @-@ Western musical themes . The best @-@ known New York composer was George Gershwin . Gershwin was a songwriter with Tin Pan Alley and the Broadway theatres , and his works were strongly influenced by jazz , or rather the precursors to jazz that were extant during his time . Gershwin 's work made American classical music more focused , and attracted an unheard of amount of international attention . Following Gershwin , the first major composer was Aaron Copland from Brooklyn , who used elements of American folk music , though it remained European in technique and form . Later , he turned to the ballet and then serial music . Charles Ives was one of the earliest American classical composers of enduring international significance , producing music in a uniquely American style , though his music was mostly unknown until after his death in 1954 . 
 Many of the later 20th @-@ century composers , such as John Cage , John Corigliano , and Steve Reich , used modernist and minimalist techniques . Reich discovered a technique known as phasing , in which two musical activities begin simultaneously and are repeated , gradually drifting out of sync , creating a natural sense of development . Reich was also very interested in non @-@ Western music , incorporating African rhythmic techniques in his compositions . Recent composers and performers are strongly influenced by the minimalist works of Philip Glass , a Baltimore native based out of New York , Meredith Monk , and others . 
 = = Popular music = = 
 The United States has produced many popular musicians and composers in the modern world . Beginning with the birth of recorded music , American performers have continued to lead the field of popular music , which out of " all the contributions made by Americans to world culture ... has been taken to heart by the entire world " . Most histories of popular music start with American ragtime or Tin Pan Alley ; others , however , trace popular music to the Renaissance and through broadsheets , ballads , and other popular traditions . Other authors typically look at popular sheet music , tracing American popular music to spirituals , minstrel shows , vaudeville , and the patriotic songs of the Civil War . 
 = = = Early popular song = = = 
 The patriotic lay songs of the American Revolution constituted the first kind of mainstream popular music . These included " The Liberty Tree " by Thomas Paine . Cheaply printed as broadsheets , early patriotic songs spread across the colonies and were performed at home and at public meetings . Fife songs were especially celebrated , and were performed on fields of battle during the American Revolution . The longest lasting of these fife songs is " Yankee Doodle " , still well known today . The melody dates back to 1755 and was sung by both American and British troops . Patriotic songs were based mostly on English melodies , with new lyrics added to denounce British colonialism ; others , however , used tunes from Ireland , Scotland or elsewhere , or did not utilize a familiar melody . The song " Hail , Columbia " was a major work that remained an unofficial national anthem until the adoption of " The Star @-@ Spangled Banner " . Much of this early American music still survives in Sacred Harp . 
 During the Civil War , when soldiers from across the country commingled , the multifarious strands of American music began to cross @-@ fertilize each other , a process that was aided by the burgeoning railroad industry and other technological developments that made travel and communication easier . Army units included individuals from across the country , and they rapidly traded tunes , instruments and techniques . The war was an impetus for the creation of distinctly American songs that became and remained wildly popular . The most popular songs of the Civil War era included " Dixie " , written by Daniel Decatur Emmett . The song , originally titled " Dixie 's Land " , was made for the closing of a minstrel show ; it spread to New Orleans first , where it was published and became " one of the great song successes of the pre @-@ Civil War period " . In addition to popular patriotic songs , the Civil War era also produced a great body of brass band pieces . 
 Following the Civil War , minstrel shows became the first distinctively American form of music expression . The minstrel show was an indigenous form of American entertainment consisting of comic skits , variety acts , dancing , and music , usually performed by white people in blackface . Minstrel shows used African American elements in musical performances , but only in simplified ways ; storylines in the shows depicted blacks as natural @-@ born slaves and fools , before eventually becoming associated with abolitionism . The minstrel show was invented by Daniel Decatur Emmett and the Virginia Minstrels . Minstrel shows produced the first well @-@ remembered popular songwriters in American music history : Thomas D. Rice , Daniel Decatur Emmett , and , most famously , Stephen Foster . After minstrel shows ' popularity faded , coon songs , a similar phenomenon , became popular . 
 The composer John Philip Sousa is closely associated with the most popular trend in American popular music just before the start of the 20th century . Formerly the bandmaster of the United States Marine Band , Sousa wrote military marches like " The Stars and Stripes Forever " that reflected his " nostalgia for [ his ] home and country " , giving the melody a " stirring virile character " . 
 In the early 20th century , American musical theater was a major source for popular songs , many of which influenced blues , jazz , country , and other extant styles of popular music . The center of development for this style was in New York City , where the Broadway theatres became among the most renowned venues in the city . Theatrical composers and lyricists like the brothers George and Ira Gershwin created a uniquely American theatrical style that used American vernacular speech and music . Musicals featured popular songs and fast @-@ paced plots that often revolved around love and romance . 
 = = = Blues and gospel = = = 
 The blues is a genre of African American folk music that is the basis for much of modern American popular music . Blues can be seen as part of a continuum of musical styles like country , jazz , ragtime , and gospel ; though each genre evolved into distinct forms , their origins were often indistinct . Early forms of the blues evolved in and around the Mississippi Delta in the late 19th and early 20th centuries . The earliest blues music was primarily call and response vocal music , without harmony or accompaniment and without any formal musical structure . Slaves and their descendants created the blues by adapting the field shouts and hollers , turning them into passionate solo songs . When mixed with the Christian spiritual songs of African American churches and revival meetings , blues became the basis of gospel music . Modern gospel began in African American churches in the 1920s , in the form of worshipers proclaiming their faith in an improvised , often musical manner ( testifying ) . Composers like Thomas A. Dorsey composed gospel works that used elements of blues and jazz in traditional hymns and spiritual songs . 
 Ragtime was originally a piano style , featuring syncopated rhythms and chromaticisms . It is primarily a form of dance music utilizing the walking bass , and is generally composed in sonata form . Ragtime is a refined and evolved form of the African American cakewalk dance , mixed with styles ranging from European marches and popular songs to jigs and other dances played by large African American bands in northern cities during the end of the 19th century . The most famous ragtime performer and composer was Scott Joplin , known for works such as " Maple Leaf Rag " . 
 Blues became a part of American popular music in the 1920s , when classic female blues singers like Bessie Smith grew popular . At the same time , record companies launched the field of race music , which was mostly blues targeted at African American audiences . The most famous of these acts went on to inspire much of the later popular development of the blues and blues @-@ derived genres , including the legendary delta blues musician Robert Johnson and Piedmont blues musician Blind Willie McTell . By the end of the 1940s , however , pure blues was only a minor part of popular music , having been subsumed by offshoots like rhythm & blues and the nascent rock and roll style . Some styles of electric , piano @-@ driven blues , like boogie @-@ woogie , retained a large audience . A bluesy style of gospel also became popular in mainstream America in the 1950s , led by singer Mahalia Jackson . The blues genre experienced major revivals in the 1950s with Chicago blues musicians such as Muddy Waters and Little Walter , as well as in the 1960s in the British Invasion and American folk music revival when country blues musicians like Mississippi John Hurt and Reverend Gary Davis were rediscovered . The seminal blues musicians of these periods had tremendous influence on rock musicians such as Chuck Berry in the 1950s , as well as on the British blues and blues rock scenes of the 1960s and 1970s , including Eric Clapton in Britain and Johnny Winter in Texas . 
 = = = Jazz = = = 
 Jazz is a kind of music characterized by swung and blue notes , call and response vocals , polyrhythms and improvisation . Though originally a kind of dance music , jazz has been a major part of popular music , and has also become a major element of Western classical music . Jazz has roots in West African cultural and musical expression , and in African American music traditions including blues and ragtime , as well as European military band music . Early jazz was closely related to ragtime , with which it could be distinguished by the use of more intricate rhythmic improvisation . The earliest jazz bands adopted much of the vocabulary of the blues , including bent and blue notes and instrumental " growls " and smears otherwise not used on European instruments . Jazz 's roots come from the city of New Orleans , Louisiana , populated by Cajuns and black Creoles , who combined the French @-@ Canadian culture of the Cajuns with their own styles of music in the 19th century . Large Creole bands that played for funerals and parades became a major basis for early jazz , which spread from New Orleans to Chicago and other northern urban centers . 
 Though jazz had long since achieved some limited popularity , it was Louis Armstrong who became one of the first popular stars and a major force in the development of jazz , along with his friend pianist Earl Hines . Armstrong , Hines , and their colleagues were improvisers , capable of creating numerous variations on a single melody . Armstrong also popularized scat singing , an improvisational vocal technique in which nonsensical syllables ( vocables ) are sung . Armstrong and Hines were influential in the rise of a kind of pop big band jazz called swing . Swing is characterized by a strong rhythm section , usually consisting of double bass and drums , medium to fast tempo , and rhythmic devices like the swung note , which is common to most jazz . Swing is primarily a fusion of 1930s jazz fused with elements of the blues and Tin Pan Alley . Swing used bigger bands than other kinds of jazz , leading to bandleaders tightly arranging the material which discouraged improvisation , previously an integral part of jazz . Swing became a major part of African American dance , and came to be accompanied by a popular dance called the swing dance . 
 Jazz influenced many performers of all the major styles of later popular music , though jazz itself never again became such a major part of American popular music as during the swing era . The later 20th @-@ century American jazz scene did , however , produce some popular crossover stars , such as Miles Davis . In the middle of the 20th century , jazz evolved into a variety of subgenres , beginning with bebop . Bebop is a form of jazz characterized by fast tempos , improvisation based on harmonic structure rather than melody , and use of the flatted fifth . Bebop was developed in the early and mid @-@ 1940s , later evolving into styles like hard bop and free jazz . Innovators of the style included Charlie Parker and Dizzy Gillespie , who arose from small jazz clubs in New York City . 
 = = = Country music = = = 
 Country music is primarily a fusion of African American blues and spirituals with Appalachian folk music , adapted for pop audiences and popularized beginning in the 1920s . The origins of country are in rural Southern folk music , which was primarily Irish and British , with African and continental European musics . Anglo @-@ Celtic tunes , dance music , and balladry were the earliest predecessors of modern country , then known as hillbilly music . Early hillbilly also borrowed elements of the blues and drew upon more aspects of 19th @-@ century pop songs as hillbilly music evolved into a commercial genre eventually known as country and western and then simply country . The earliest country instrumentation revolved around the European @-@ derived fiddle and the African @-@ derived banjo , with the guitar later added . String instruments like the ukulele and steel guitar became commonplace due to the popularity of Hawaiian musical groups in the early 20th century . 
 The roots of commercial country music are generally traced to 1927 , when music talent scout Ralph Peer recorded Jimmie Rodgers and The Carter Family . Popular success was very limited , though a small demand spurred some commercial recording . After World War II , there was increased interest in specialty styles like country music , producing a few major pop stars . The most influential country musician of the era was Hank Williams , a bluesy country singer from Alabama . He remains renowned as one of country music 's greatest songwriters and performers , viewed as a " folk poet " with a " honky @-@ tonk swagger " and " working @-@ class sympathies " . Throughout the decade the roughness of honky tonk gradually eroded as the Nashville sound grew more pop @-@ oriented . Producers like Chet Atkins created the Nashville sound by stripping the hillbilly elements of the instrumentation and using smooth instrumentation and advanced production techniques . Eventually , most records from Nashville were in this style , which began to incorporate strings and vocal choirs . 
 By the early part of the 1960s , however , the Nashville sound had become perceived as too watered @-@ down by many more traditionalist performers and fans , resulting in a number of local scenes like the Bakersfield sound . A few performers retained popularity , however , such as the long @-@ standing cultural icon Johnny Cash . The Bakersfield sound began in the mid to late 1950s when performers like Wynn Stewart and Buck Owens began using elements of Western swing and rock , such as the breakbeat , in their music . In the 1960s performers like Merle Haggard popularized the sound . In the early 1970s , Haggard was also part of outlaw country , alongside singer @-@ songwriters such as Willie Nelson and Waylon Jennings . Outlaw country was rock @-@ oriented and lyrically focused on the criminal antics of the performers , in contrast to the clean @-@ cut country singers of the Nashville sound . By the middle of the 1980s , the country music charts were dominated by pop singers , alongside a nascent revival of honky @-@ tonk @-@ style country with the rise of performers like Dwight Yoakam . The 1980s also saw the development of alternative country performers like Uncle Tupelo , who were opposed to the more pop @-@ oriented style of mainstream country . At the beginning of the 2000s , rock @-@ oriented country acts remained among the best @-@ selling performers in the United States , especially Garth Brooks . 
 = = = R & B and soul = = = 
 R & B , an abbreviation for rhythm and blues , is a style that arose in the 1930s and 1940s . Early R & B consisted of large rhythm units " smashing away behind screaming blues singers ( who ) had to shout to be heard above the clanging and strumming of the various electrified instruments and the churning rhythm sections " . R & B was not extensively recorded and promoted because record companies felt that it was not suited for most audiences , especially middle @-@ class whites , because of the suggestive lyrics and driving rhythms . <unk> like Louis Jordan innovated the sound of early R & B , using a band with a small horn section and prominent rhythm instrumentation . By the end of the 1940s , he had had several hits , and helped pave the way for contemporaries like Wynonie Harris and John Lee Hooker . Many of the most popular R & B songs were not performed in the rollicking style of Jordan and his contemporaries ; instead they were performed by white musicians like Pat Boone in a more palatable mainstream style , which turned into pop hits . By the end of the 1950s , however , there was a wave of popular black blues rock and country @-@ influenced R & B performers like Chuck Berry gaining unprecedented fame among white listeners . 
 Soul music is a combination of rhythm and blues and gospel which began in the late 1950s in the United States . It is characterized by its use of gospel @-@ music devices , with a greater emphasis on vocalists and the use of secular themes . The 1950s recordings of Ray Charles , Sam Cooke , and James Brown are commonly considered the beginnings of soul . Charles ' Modern Sounds ( 1962 ) records featured a fusion of soul and country music , country soul , and crossed racial barriers in music at the time . One of Cooke 's most well @-@ known songs " A Change Is Gonna Come " ( 1964 ) became accepted as a classic and an anthem of the American Civil Rights Movement during the 1960s . According to AllMusic , James Brown was critical , through " the gospel @-@ impassioned fury of his vocals and the complex polyrhythms of his beats " , in " two revolutions in black American music . He was one of the figures most responsible for turning R & B into soul and he was , most would agree , the figure most responsible for turning soul music into the funk of the late ' 60s and early ' 70s . " The Motown Record Corporation of Detroit , Michigan became highly successful during the early and mid @-@ 1960s by releasing soul recordings with heavy pop influences to make them palatable to white audiences , allowing black artists to more easily crossover to white audiences . 
 Pure soul was popularized by Otis Redding and the other artists of Stax Records in Memphis , Tennessee . By the late 1960s , Atlantic recording artist Aretha Franklin had emerged as the most popular female soul star in the country . Also by this time , soul had splintered into several genres , influenced by psychedelic rock and other styles . The social and political ferment of the 1960s inspired artists like Marvin Gaye and Curtis Mayfield to release albums with hard @-@ hitting social commentary , while another variety became more dance @-@ oriented music , evolving into funk . Despite his previous affinity with politically and socially @-@ charged lyrical themes , Gaye helped popularize sexual and romance @-@ themed music and funk , while his 70s recordings , including Let 's Get It On ( 1973 ) and I Want You ( 1976 ) helped develop the quiet storm sound and format . One of the most influential albums ever recorded , Sly & the Family Stone 's There 's a Riot Goin ' On ( 1971 ) has been considered among the first and best examples of the matured version of funk music , after prototypical instances of the sound in the group 's earlier work . Artists such as Gil Scott @-@ Heron and The Last Poets practiced an eclectic blend of poetry , jazz @-@ funk , and soul , featuring critical political and social commentary with <unk> sentiment . Scott @-@ Heron 's proto @-@ rap work , including " The Revolution Will Not Be Televised " ( 1971 ) and Winter in America ( 1974 ) , has had a considerable impact on later hip hop artists , while his unique sound with Brian Jackson influenced neo soul artists . 
 During the mid @-@ 1970s , highly slick and commercial bands such as Philly soul group The O 'Jays and blue @-@ eyed soul group Hall & Oates achieved mainstream success . By the end of the 1970s , most music genres , including soul , had been disco @-@ influenced . With the introduction of influences from electro music and funk in the late 1970s and early 1980s , soul music became less raw and more slickly produced , resulting in a genre of music that was once again called R & B , usually distinguished from the earlier rhythm and blues by identifying it as contemporary R & B. 
 The first contemporary R & B stars arose in the 1980s , with the dance @-@ pop star Michael Jackson , funk @-@ influenced singer Prince , and a wave of female vocalists like Tina Turner and Whitney Houston . Michael Jackson and Prince have been described as the most influential figures in contemporary R & B and popular music because of their eclectic use of elements from a variety of genres . Prince was largely responsible for creating the Minneapolis sound : " a blend of horns , guitars , and electronic synthesizers supported by a steady , bouncing rhythm . " Jackson 's work focused on smooth balladry or disco @-@ influenced dance music ; as an artist , he " pulled dance music out of the disco doldrums with his 1979 adult solo debut , Off the Wall , merged R & B with rock on Thriller , and introduced stylized steps such as the robot and moonwalk over the course of his career . " 
 Janet Jackson collaborated with former Prince associates Jimmy Jam and Terry Lewis on her third studio album Control ( 1986 ) ; the album 's second single " Nasty " has been described as the origin of the new jack swing sound , a genre innovated by Teddy Riley . Riley 's work on Keith Sweat 's Make It Last Forever ( 1987 ) , Guy 's Guy ( 1988 ) , and Bobby Brown 's Don 't Be Cruel ( 1998 ) made new jack swing a staple of contemporary R & B into the mid @-@ 1990s . New jack swing was a style and trend of vocal music , often featuring rapped verses and drum machines . The crossover appeal of early contemporary R & B artists in mainstream popular music , including works by Prince , Michael and Janet Jackson , Whitney Houston , Tina Turner , Anita Baker , and The Pointer Sisters became a turning point for black artists in the industry , as their success " was perhaps the first hint that the greater cosmopolitanism of a world market might produce some changes in the complexion of popular music . " 
 The use of melisma , a gospel tradition adapted by vocalists Whitney Houston and Mariah Carey would become a cornerstone of contemporary R & B singers beginning in the late 1980s and throughout the 1990s . Hip hop came to influence contemporary R & B later in the 1980s , first through new jack swing and then in a related series of subgenres called hip hop soul and neo soul . Hip hop soul and neo soul developed later , in the 1990s . <unk> by the work of Mary J. Blige and R. Kelly , the former is a mixture of contemporary R & B with hip hop beats , while the images and themes of gangsta rap may be present . The latter is a more experimental , edgier , and generally less mainstream combination of 1960s and 1970s @-@ style soul vocals with some hip hop influence , and has earned some mainstream recognition through the work of D 'Angelo , Erykah Badu , Alicia Keys , and Lauryn Hill . D 'Angelo 's critically acclaimed album Voodoo ( 2000 ) has been recognized by music writers as a masterpiece and the cornerstone of the neo soul genre . 
 = = = Rock , metal , and punk = = = 
 Rock and roll developed out of country , blues , and R & B. Rock 's exact origins and early influences have been hotly debated , and are the subjects of much scholarship . Though squarely in the blues tradition , rock took elements from Afro @-@ Caribbean and Latin musical techniques . Rock was an urban style , formed in the areas where diverse populations resulted in the mixtures of African American , Latin and European genres ranging from the blues and country to polka and zydeco . Rock and roll first entered popular music through a style called rockabilly , which fused the nascent sound with elements of country music . Black @-@ performed rock and roll had previously had limited mainstream success , but it was the white performer Elvis Presley who first appealed to mainstream audiences with a black style of music , becoming one of the best @-@ selling musicians in history , and brought rock and roll to audiences across the world . 
 The 1960s saw several important changes in popular music , especially rock . Many of these changes took place through the British Invasion where bands such as The Beatles , The Who , The Rolling Stones , became immensely popular and had a profound effect on American culture and <unk> changes included the move from professionally composed songs to the singer @-@ songwriter , and the understanding of popular music as an art , rather than a form of commerce or pure entertainment . These changes led to the rise of musical movements connected to political goals , such as the American Civil Rights Movement and the opposition to the Vietnam War . Rock was at the forefront of this change . 
 In the early 1960s , rock spawned several subgenres , beginning with surf . Surf was an instrumental guitar genre characterized by a distorted sound , associated with the Southern California surfing youth culture . Inspired by the lyrical focus of surf , The Beach Boys began recording in 1961 with an elaborate , pop @-@ friendly , and harmonic sound . As their fame grew , The Beach Boys ' songwriter Brian Wilson experimented with new studio techniques and became associated with the counterculture . The counterculture was a movement that embraced political activism , and was closely connected to the hippie subculture . The hippies were associated with folk rock , country rock , and psychedelic rock . Folk and country rock were associated with the rise of politicized folk music , led by Pete Seeger and others , especially at the Greenwich Village music scene in New York . Folk rock entered the mainstream in the middle of the 1960s , when the singer @-@ songwriter Bob Dylan began his career . AllMusic editor Stephen Thomas Erlewine attributes The Beatles ' shift toward introspective songwriting in the mid @-@ 1960s to Bob Dylan 's influence at the time . He was followed by a number of country @-@ rock bands and soft , folky singer @-@ songwriters . Psychedelic rock was a hard @-@ driving kind of guitar @-@ based rock , closely associated with the city of San Francisco . Though Jefferson Airplane was the only local band to have a major national hit , the Grateful Dead , a country and bluegrass @-@ flavored jam band , became an iconic part of the psychedelic counterculture , associated with hippies , LSD and other symbols of that era . Some say that the Grateful Dead were truly the most American patriotic rock band to have ever existed ; forming and molding a culture that defines Americans today . 
 Following the turbulent political , social and musical changes of the 1960s and early 1970s , rock music diversified . What was formerly a discrete genre known as rock and roll evolved into a catchall category called simply rock music , which came to include diverse styles like heavy metal and punk rock . During the 1970s most of these styles were evolving in the underground music scene , while mainstream audiences began the decade with a wave of singer @-@ songwriters who drew on the deeply emotional and personal lyrics of 1960s folk rock . The same period saw the rise of bombastic arena rock bands , bluesy Southern rock groups and mellow soft rock stars . Beginning in the later 1970s , the rock singer and songwriter Bruce Springsteen became a major star , with anthemic songs and dense , inscrutable lyrics that celebrated the poor and working class . 
 Punk was a form of rebellious rock that began in the 1970s , and was loud , aggressive , and often very simple . Punk began as a reaction against the popular music of the period , especially disco and arena rock . American bands in the field included , most famously , The Ramones and Talking Heads , the latter playing a more avant @-@ garde style that was closely associated with punk before evolving into mainstream new wave . Other major acts include Blondie , Patti Smith , and Television . In the 1980s some punk fans and bands became disillusioned with the growing popularity of the style , resulting in an even more aggressive style called hardcore punk . Hardcore was a form of sparse punk , consisting of short , fast , intense songs that spoke to disaffected youth , with such influential bands as Bad Religion , Bad Brains , Black Flag , Dead Kennedys , and Minor Threat . Hardcore began in metropolises like Washington , D.C. , though most major American cities had their own local scenes in the 1980s . 
 Hardcore , punk , and garage rock were the roots of alternative rock , a diverse grouping of rock subgenres that were explicitly opposed to mainstream music , and that arose from the punk and post @-@ punk styles . In the United States , many cities developed local alternative rock scenes , including Minneapolis and Seattle . Seattle 's local scene produced grunge music , a dark and brooding style inspired by hardcore , psychedelia , and alternative rock . With the addition of a more melodic element to the sound of bands like Nirvana and Pearl Jam , grunge became wildly popular across the United States in 1991 . Three years later , bands like Green Day , The Offspring , Rancid , Bad Religion , and NOFX hit the mainstream ( with their respective then @-@ new albums Dookie , Smash , Let 's Go , Stranger than Fiction and Punk in Drublic ) and brought the California punk scene exposure worldwide . 
 Heavy metal is characterized by aggressive , driving rhythms , amplified and distorted guitars , grandiose lyrics , and virtuosic instrumentation . Heavy metal 's origins lie in the hard rock bands who took blues and rock and created a heavy sound built on guitar and drums . Most of the pioneers in the field were British ; the first major American bands came in the early 1970s , like Blue Öyster Cult , KISS , and Aerosmith . Heavy metal remained , however , a largely underground phenomenon . During the 1980s the first major pop @-@ metal style arose and dominated the charts for several years kicked off by metal act Quiet Riot and dominated by bands such as Mötley Crüe and Ratt ; this was glam metal , a hard rock and pop fusion with a raucous spirit and a glam @-@ influenced visual aesthetic . Some of these bands , like Bon Jovi , became international stars . The band Guns N ' Roses rose to fame near the end of the decade with an image that was a reaction against the glam metal aesthetic . 
 By the mid @-@ 1980s heavy metal had branched in so many different directions that fans , record companies , and fanzines created numerous subgenres . The United States was especially known for one of these subgenres , thrash metal , which was innovated by bands like Anthrax , Metallica , Megadeth , Slayer , Testament , Exodus , Nuclear Assault , Death Angel , Mono Men , The DT 's , OFF ! , and Overkill , with Metallica being the most commercially successful . The United States was known as one of the birthplaces of Death Metal during the mid to late 1980s . The Florida scene was the most well @-@ known , featuring bands like Death , Morbid Angel , Deicide , Cannibal Corpse , Malevolent Creation , Obituary , and many others . There are now countless death metal and deathgrind bands across the country . 
 = = = Hip hop = = = 
 Hip hop is a cultural movement , of which music is a part . Hip hop music for the most part is itself composed of two parts : rapping , the delivery of swift , highly rhythmic and lyrical vocals ; and DJing and / or producing , the production of instrumentation through sampling , instrumentation , turntablism , or beatboxing , the production of musical sounds through vocalized tones . Hip hop arose in the early 1970s in The Bronx , New York City . Jamaican immigrant DJ Kool Herc is widely regarded as the progenitor of hip hop ; he brought with him from Jamaica the practice of toasting over the rhythms of popular songs . Emcees originally arose to introduce the soul , funk , and R & B songs that the DJs played , and to keep the crowd excited and dancing ; over time , the DJs began isolating the percussion break of songs ( when the rhythm climaxes ) , producing a repeated beat that the emcees rapped over . 
 By the beginning of the 1980s , there were popular hip hop songs , and the celebrities of the scene , like LL Cool J , gained mainstream renown . Other performers experimented with politicized lyrics and social awareness , or fused hip hop with jazz , heavy metal , techno , funk and soul . New styles appeared in the latter part of the 1980s , like alternative hip hop and the closely related jazz rap fusion , pioneered by rappers like De La Soul . 
 Gangsta rap is a kind of hip hop , most importantly characterized by a lyrical focus on macho sexuality , physicality , and a dangerous criminal image . Though the origins of gangsta rap can be traced back to the mid @-@ 1980s style of Philadelphia 's Schoolly D and the West Coast 's Ice @-@ T , the style broadened and came to apply to many different regions in the country , to rappers from New York , such as Notorious B.I.G and influential hip hop group Wu @-@ Tang Clan , and to rappers on the West Coast , such as Too Short and N.W.A. A distinctive West Coast rap scene spawned the early 1990s G @-@ funk sound , which paired gangsta rap lyrics with a thick and hazy sound , often from 1970s funk samples ; the best @-@ known proponents were the rappers 2Pac , Dr. Dre , Ice Cube , and Snoop Dogg . Gangsta rap continued to exert a major presence in American popular music through the end of the 1990s and early into the 21st century . 
 The dominance of gangsta rap in mainstream hip @-@ hop was supplanted in the late @-@ 2000s , largely due to the mainstream success of hip @-@ hop artists such as Kanye West . The outcome of a highly publicized sales competition between the simultaneous release of his and gangsta rapper 50 Cent 's third studio albums , Graduation and Curtis respectively , has since been accredited to the decline . The competition resulted in record @-@ breaking sales performances by both albums and West outsold 50 Cent , selling nearly a million copies of Graduation in the first week alone . Industry observers remark that West 's victory over 50 Cent proved that rap music did not have to conform to gangsta @-@ rap conventions in order to be commercially successful . West effectively paved the way for a new wave of hip @-@ hop artists , including Drake , Kendrick Lamar and J. Cole , who did not follow the hardcore @-@ gangster mold and became platinum @-@ selling artists . 
 = = = Other niche styles = = = 
 The American music industry is dominated by large companies that produce , market , and distribute certain kinds of music . Generally , these companies do not produce , or produce in only very limited quantities , recordings in styles that do not appeal to very large audiences . Smaller companies often fill in the void , offering a wide variety of recordings in styles ranging from polka to salsa . Many small music industries are built around a core fanbase who may be based largely in one region , such as Tejano or Hawaiian music , or they may be widely dispersed , such as the audience for Jewish klezmer . 
 The single largest niche industry is based on Latin music . Latin music has long influenced American popular music , and was an especially crucial part of the development of jazz . Modern pop Latin styles include a wide array of genres imported from across Latin America , including Colombian cumbia , Puerto Rican reggaeton , and Mexican corrido . Latin popular music in the United States began with a wave of dance bands in the 1930s and 1950s . The most popular styles included the conga , rumba , and mambo . In the 1950s Perez Prado made the cha @-@ cha @-@ cha famous , and the rise of Afro @-@ Cuban jazz opened many ears to the harmonic , melodic , and rhythmic possibilities of Latin music . The most famous American form of Latin music , however , is salsa . Salsa incorporates many styles and variations ; the term can be used to describe most forms of popular Cuban @-@ derived genres . Most specifically , however , salsa refers to a particular style that was developed by mid @-@ 1970s groups of New York City @-@ area Cuban and Puerto Rican immigrants , and stylistic descendants like 1980s salsa romantica . Salsa rhythms are complicated , with several patterns played simultaneously . The clave rhythm forms the basis of salsa songs and is used by the performers as a common rhythmic ground for their own phrases . 
 Latin American music has long influenced American popular music , jazz , rhythm and blues , and even country music . This includes music from Spanish , Portuguese , and ( sometimes ) French @-@ speaking countries and territories of Latin America . 
 Today , the American record industry defines Latin music as any type of release with lyrics mostly in Spanish . Mainstream artists and producers tend to feature more on songs from Latin artists and it 's also become more likely that English language songs crossover to Spanish radio and vice versa . 
 The United States played a significant role in the development of electronic dance music , specifically house and techno , which originated in Chicago and Detroit , respectively . 
 = = Government , politics and law = = 
 The government of the United States regulates the music industry , enforces intellectual property laws , and promotes and collects certain kinds of music . Under American copyright law , musical works , including recordings and compositions , are protected as intellectual property as soon as they are fixed in a tangible form . Copyright holders often register their work with the Library of Congress , which maintains a collection of the material . In addition , the Library of Congress has actively sought out culturally and <unk> significant materials since the early 20th century , such as by sending researchers to record folk music . These researchers include the pioneering American folk song collector Alan Lomax , whose work helped inspire the roots revival of the mid @-@ 20th century . The federal government also funds the National Endowments for the Arts and Humanities , which allocate grants to musicians and other artists , the Smithsonian Institution , which conducts research and educational programs , and the Corporation for Public Broadcasting , which funds non @-@ profit and television broadcasters . 
 Music has long affected the politics of the United States . Political parties and movements frequently use music and song to communicate their ideals and values , and to provide entertainment at political functions . The presidential campaign of William Henry Harrison was the first to greatly benefit from music , after which it became standard practice for major candidates to use songs to create public enthusiasm . In more recent decades , politicians often chose theme songs , some of which have become iconic ; the song " Happy Days Are Here Again " , for example , has been associated with the Democratic Party since the 1932 campaign of Franklin D. Roosevelt . Since the 1950s , however , music has declined in importance in politics , replaced by televised campaigning with little or no music . Certain forms of music became more closely associated with political protest , especially in the 1960s . Gospel stars like Mahalia Jackson became important figures in the Civil Rights Movement , while the American folk revival helped spread the counterculture of the 1960s and opposition to the Vietnam War . 
 = = Industry and economics = = 
 The American music industry includes a number of fields , ranging from record companies to radio stations and community orchestras . Total industry revenue is about $ 40 billion worldwide , and about $ 12 billion in the United States . Most of the world 's major record companies are based in the United States ; they are represented by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) . The major record companies produce material by artists that have signed to one of their record labels , a brand name often associated with a particular genre or record producer . Record companies may also promote and market their artists , through advertising , public performances and concerts , and television appearances . Record companies may be affiliated with other music media companies , which produce a product related to popular recorded music . These include television channels like MTV , magazines like Rolling Stone and radio stations . In recent years the music industry has been embroiled in turmoil over the rise of the Internet downloading of copyrighted music ; many musicians and the RIAA have sought to punish fans who illegally download copyrighted music . 
 Radio stations in the United States often broadcast popular music . Each music station has a format , or a category of songs to be played ; these are generally similar to but not the same as ordinary generic classification . Many radio stations in the United States are locally owned and operated , and may offer an eclectic assortment of recordings ; many other stations are owned by large companies like Clear Channel , and are generally formatted on smaller , more repetitive playlists . Commercial sales of recordings are tracked by Billboard magazine , which compiles a number of music charts for various fields of recorded music sales . The Billboard Hot 100 is the top pop music chart for singles , a recording consisting of a handful of songs ; longer pop recordings are albums , and are tracked by the Billboard 200 . Though recorded music is commonplace in American homes , many of the music industry 's revenue comes from a small number of devotees ; for example , 62 % of album sales come from less than 25 % of the music @-@ buying audience . Total CD sales in the United States topped 705 million units sold in 2005 , and singles sales just under three million . 
 Though the major record companies dominate the American music industry , an independent music industry ( indie music ) does exist . Most indie record labels have limited , if any , retail distribution outside a small region . Artists sometimes record for an indie label and gain enough acclaim to be signed to a major label ; others choose to remain at an indie label for their entire careers . Indie music may be in styles generally similar to mainstream music , but is often inaccessible , unusual , or otherwise unappealing to many people . Indie musicians often release some or all of their songs over the Internet for fans and others to download and listen . In addition to recording artists of many kinds , there are numerous fields of professional musicianship in the United States , many of whom rarely record , including community orchestras , wedding singers and bands , lounge singers , and nightclub DJs . The American Federation of Musicians is the largest American labor union for professional musicians . However , only 15 % of the Federation 's members have steady music employment . 
 = = Education = = 
 Music is an important part of education in the United States , and is a part of most or all school systems in the country . Music education is generally mandatory in public elementary schools , and is an elective in later years . High schools generally offer classes in singing , mostly choral , and instrumentation in the form of a large school band . Music may also be a part of theatrical productions put on by a school 's drama department . Many public and private schools have sponsored music clubs and groups , most commonly including the marching band that performs at high school sports games , a trend that began with the wide popularity of Sousa 's bands in the 1880s and 1890s . 
 Large universities account for most of the music degrees in the United States , though there are important small music academies and conservatories . University music departments may sponsor bands ranging from marching bands that are an important part of collegiate sporting events , prominently featuring fight songs , to barbershop groups , glee clubs , jazz ensembles and symphonies , and may additionally sponsor musical outreach programs , such as by bringing foreign performers to the area for concerts . Universities may also have a musicology department , and do research on many styles of music . 
 = = Scholarship = = 
 The scholarly study of music in the United States includes work relating music to social class , racial , ethnic and religious identity , gender and sexuality , as well as studies of music history , musicology , and other topics . The academic study of American music can be traced back to the late 19th century , when researchers like Alice Fletcher and Francis La <unk> studied the music of the Omaha peoples , working for the Bureau of American Ethnology and the Peabody Museum of Archaeology and Ethnology . In the 1890s and into the early 20th century , musicological recordings were made among indigenous , Hispanic , African @-@ American and Anglo @-@ American peoples of the United States . Many worked for the Library of Congress , first under the leadership of Oscar <unk> , chief of the Library 's Music Divisions . These researchers included Robert W. Gordon , founder of the Archive of American Folk Song , and John and Alan Lomax ; Alan Lomax was the most prominent of several folk song collectors who helped to inspire the 20th century roots revival of American folk culture . 
 Early 20th scholarly analysis of American music tended to interpret European @-@ derived classical traditions as the most worthy of study , with the folk , religious , and traditional musics of the common people denigrated as low @-@ class and of little artistic or social worth . American music history was compared to the much longer historical record of European nations , and was found wanting , leading writers like the composer Arthur Farwell to ponder what sorts of musical traditions might arise from American culture , in his 1915 Music in America . In 1930 , John Tasker Howard 's Our American Music became a standard analysis , focusing on largely on concert music composed in the United States . Since the analysis of musicologist Charles Seeger in the mid @-@ 20th century , American music history has often been described as intimately related to perceptions of race and ancestry . Under this view , the diverse racial and ethnic background of the United States has both promoted a sense of musical separation between the races , while still fostering constant acculturation , as elements of European , African , and indigenous musics have shifted between fields . Gilbert Chase 's America 's Music , from the Pilgrims to the Present , was the first major work to examine the music of the entire United States , and recognize folk traditions as more culturally significant than music for the concert hall . Chase 's analysis of a diverse American musical identity has remained the dominant view among the academic establishment . Until the 1960s and 1970s , however , most musical scholars in the United States continued to study European music , limiting themselves only to certain fields of American music , especially European @-@ derived classical and operatic styles , and sometimes African American jazz . More modern musicologists and ethnomusicologists have studied subjects ranging from the national musical identity to the individual styles and techniques of specific communities in a particular time of American history . Prominent recent studies of American music include Charles Hamm 's Music in the New World from 1983 , and Richard Crawford 's America 's Musical Life from 2001 . 
 = = Holidays and festivals = = 
 Music is an important part of several American holidays , especially playing a major part in the wintertime celebration of Christmas . Music of the holiday includes both religious songs like " O Holy Night " and secular songs like " Jingle Bells " . Patriotic songs like the national anthem , " The Star @-@ Spangled Banner " , are a major part of Independence Day celebrations . Music also plays a role at many regional holidays that are not celebrated nationwide , most famously Mardi Gras , a music and dance parade and festival in New Orleans , Louisiana . 
 The United States is home to numerous music festivals , which showcase styles ranging from the blues and jazz to indie rock and heavy metal . Some music festivals are strictly local in scope , including few or no performers with a national reputation , and are generally operated by local promoters . The large recording companies operate their own music festivals , such as Lollapalooza and Ozzfest , which draw huge crowds . 
 = White @-@ tailed ptarmigan = 
 The white @-@ tailed ptarmigan ( Lagopus leucura ) , also known as the snow quail , is the smallest bird in the grouse family . It is a permanent resident of high altitudes on or above the tree line and is native to Alaska and the mountainous parts of Canada and the western United States . It has also been introduced into the Sierra Nevada in California , the Wallowa Mountains in Oregon and the Uinta Mountains in Utah . Its plumage is cryptic and varies at different times of the year . In the summer it is speckled in gray , brown and white whereas in winter it is wholly white . At all times of year the wings , belly and tail are white . The white @-@ tailed ptarmigan has a diet of buds , leaves , flowers and seeds . The nest is a simple depression in the ground in which up to 8 eggs are laid . After hatching , the chicks soon leave the nest . At first they eat insects but later move on to an adult diet , their mother using vocalisations to help them find suitable plant food . The population seems to be stable and the IUCN lists this species as being of " Least Concern " . 
 = = Description = = 
 The white @-@ tailed ptarmigan is the smallest of the ptarmigans and the smallest bird in the grouse family . It is a stocky bird with rounded wings , square @-@ ended tail , small black beak and short legs with feathering extending to the toes . Adults are 11 @.@ 8 to 12 @.@ 2 inches ( 30 to 31 cm ) long , with the males being only slightly larger than the females . The average weight is 11 @.@ 6 to 16 @.@ 9 ounces ( 330 to 480 g ) . During the summer , the white @-@ tailed ptarmigan is a speckled grayish brown with white underparts , tail and wings . In the fall , the plumage has turned a much more reddish @-@ brown color and white feathers begin to grow through . By winter all the summer brown feathers are lost and the bird is completely white . A further molt in the spring precedes the breeding season and the bird returns to its summer plumage . The finely @-@ barred greyish coloration on the back makes it easy to distinguish this species from the much browner willow ptarmigan and rock ptarmigan . Both sexes maintain white tail and wing feathers all the year and males can be identified by their reddish <unk> ( fleshy growths above the eye ) , also present year @-@ long . In general this bird is silent but it sometimes makes quiet , low @-@ pitched hoots and soft clucking noises . 
 = = Distribution = = 
 The white @-@ tailed ptarmigan is an alpine species , a permanent resident of the high mountains above or near the timber line . It occupies open country and flies a great deal more than forest grouse , but still prefers running to flying . It ranges from Alaska and western Canada south to northern New Mexico . Males return from their wintering areas to establish territories on spruce @-@ willow timber line breeding grounds in April . Females arrive in early May and pairs are formed . 
 The white @-@ tailed ptarmigan is the only bird in North America to reside permanently in the alpine zone . Its habitat includes areas of boulders , krummholz , snowfields , rock slides , frost @-@ heaved soil and upland herbage . Even in winter it stays in high valleys and mountain slopes where alder , willow , birch and spruce poke through the snow cover . 
 The white @-@ tailed ptarmigan was introduced into the Sierra Nevada of California , Wallowa Mountains in Oregon , and Uinta Mountains of Utah in the 1970s . It may have been native here during the early Pleistocene but became locally extinct due to climate changes with greater snow @-@ cover in spring impacting on its breeding season . Alternatively , it may have been unable to colonize the Sierra Nevada because of the barriers provided by the Columbia River and the Great Basin , and the low altitudes of the intervening South Cascades . 
 = = Diet = = 
 This herbivorous bird 's diet varies seasonally . Nitrogen @-@ rich snow buttercup leaves are favored in the spring season , while willow catkins , mountain avens flowers , and chickweed blooms , other flowers and leaves , lichens and berries form the majority of the ptarmigan 's diet in the summer . Once fall and winter arrive in the region , the ptarmigan feeds on pine needles , seeds , willow and alder buds and twigs . Winter food sources have a much higher cellulose content than does summer forage , so the ptarmigan relies on bacteria @-@ aided digestion in the cecum to extract essential nutrients . During the summer , the ptarmigan eats grit to assist in digesting plant material . 
 = = Breeding = = 
 White @-@ tailed ptarmigan males are usually monogamous and remain with the same mate for one breeding season . To attract females , a male will strut and display his tail feathers . The female builds a simple scrape nest on the ground , while the male acts as a sentry to guard the area . The nest is a shallow depression in a snow @-@ free area , generally protected from the wind and is softened with grasses and a few feathers . One side of the nest generally provides a quick escape route . 
 A clutch consists of two to eight eggs , which retain a cinnamon color for most of the incubation period , but develop brown spots when they are nearly ready to hatch . Males remain in the vicinity of the nest until the eggs hatch , a period of about 23 days . The precocial young leave the nest six to twelve hours after hatching . They are at first covered with down but become fully fledged in seven to ten days . 
 Ptarmigan chicks begin their lives eating insects . Once the chicks ' digestive tracts and ceca are more fully developed , their diets shift to one of flowers and leaves . Hens choose foraging patches where plant species containing proteins are abundant . The hens call their chicks to these plants , which are critical for the growth and development of the chicks . This suggests that the hens ' food calls assist in enhancing survival rates of juvenile ptarmigans . The young birds remain with their mother throughout the summer and autumn season . 
 = = Adaptations and status = = 
 The white @-@ tailed ptarmigan is well @-@ camouflaged when on the ground . In his pioneering 1909 book on the subject , Concealing @-@ Coloration in the Animal Kingdom , the American artist Abbott Thayer wrote : 
 There is perhaps no other bird which moults as gradually as the Ptarmigan , and this fact goes very far to strengthen the supposition that it has developed a peculiarly fluid and perfect system of perennial protective coloration . Figs . 8 , 9 , 10 and 39 show White @-@ tailed <unk> , of the Rocky Mountains , in winter and transitional plumages ... Supremely beautiful and potent is the grass @-@ pattern of this same species in summer plumage ... This pattern ... is achieved by light @-@ brown marginal bands , with a few small internal spots , on the dark feathers of the upper parts ; the predominance of light and dark being gradually reversed as the lower breast is approached . The belly is entirely white , as are the quill feathers of the wings and tail . 
 The white @-@ tailed ptarmigan has feathers located on its feet to serve as protection from the extreme cold often experienced in the alpine tundra environment . In addition , these birds have feathers around their nostrils to warm the air prior to entry into the respiratory tract . The most obvious adaptation is this bird 's cryptic coloration , which enables it to blend in with its environment and avoid predation by golden eagles or other birds of prey . To conserve energy during the winter months , the ptarmigan avoids flight as much as possible and roosts in snowbanks . 
 The white @-@ tailed ptarmigan is listed as being of " Least Concern " by the International Union for Conservation of Nature . This is because , although populations may be in slight decline , its range is too wide and the total number of birds too large to fit the criteria for being listed as " Vulnerable " . This bird serves as an indicator species for the alpine tundra , and denotes overall ecosystem health . It is not a conservation concern and is abundant in alpine zones across North America , indicating that this region is not undergoing dramatic climatic , temperature , or precipitation shifts . The lack of overgrazing by cattle , the lack of human development in alpine zones , the difficulty in accessing its remote habitat , the low densities at which it occurs and the laws regarding the limits to hunting bags allow the white @-@ tailed ptarmigan to thrive . 
 = = Taxonomy and etymology = = 
 The white @-@ tailed ptarmigan was given the scientific name Tetrao ( Lagopus ) leucurus by the Arctic explorer John Richardson in 1831 . It was later determined that Lagopus had sufficient distinguishing features to be regarded as a separate genus and the bird became Lagopus leucurus . Molecular studies have shown that Lagopus is monophyletic , with the rock ptarmigan ( Lagopus muta ) and White @-@ tailed ptarmigan being sister species . The position of the willow ptarmigan ( Lagopus lagopus ) is less clear cut , it showing some genetic divergence over its wide range . 
 The genus name Lagopus is derived from Ancient Greek lagos ( <unk> ) , meaning " hare " , + pous ( πους ) , " foot " , in reference to the bird 's feathered legs . The species name leucura was for a long time misspelt leucurus , in the erroneous belief that the ending of Lagopus denotes masculine gender . However , as the Ancient Greek term <unk> is of feminine gender , and the species name has to agree with that , the feminine leucura is correct . The species name leucura is derived from the Latinized version of the Greek leukos , meaning " white " and oura , meaning " tail " , in reference to the bird 's permanently white tail . 
 = Prinz Adalbert @-@ class cruiser = 
 The Prinz Adalbert class was a type of armored cruiser built for the Imperial German Navy in the early 1900s . Two ships of the class were built , Prinz Adalbert , and Friedrich Carl . Friedrich Carl was commissioned first , on 12 December 1903 and Prinz Adalbert followed on 12 January 1904 . They were an improvement upon the design of the previous unique armored cruiser , Prinz Heinrich . Their armor belts were the same thickness but were more extensive than that of their predecessor . The two ships were also armed with four main guns in twin gun turrets , as opposed to the two single gun turrets of Prinz Heinrich . 
 Both ships saw extensive service with the German Navy ; Prinz Adalbert was used as a gunnery training ship for the entirety of her peacetime career , while Friedrich Carl served with the fleet until 1909 , when she was withdrawn to act as a torpedo training vessel . At the outbreak of World War I in August 1914 , both vessels were mobilized and assigned to the cruiser squadron in the Baltic . Friedrich Carl was sunk by Russian naval mines off Memel in November 1914 , though most of her crew was safely evacuated . Prinz Adalbert was torpedoed twice by British submarines operating in the Baltic ; the first , on 1 July 1915 , caused serious damage that was ultimately repaired . The second , on 23 October 1915 , caused a catastrophic explosion in the ship 's ammunition magazines that destroyed the ship . Six @-@ hundred and seventy @-@ two men were killed , the greatest single loss of life for the German Navy in the Baltic during the war . 
 = = Design = = 
 The Second Naval Law in Germany , passed in 1900 , envisioned a force of fourteen armored cruisers intended for overseas service in the German colonies . However , the German Navy required cruisers for operations with the fleet as well , and attempted to design ships that could fulfill both roles , primarily due to budget constraints . The first product of the 1900 Naval Law , Prinz Heinrich , was an alteration of an earlier vessel , Fürst Bismarck , equipped with fewer guns and thinner armor in a trade @-@ off for higher speed and lower cost . The subsequent design — that of the Prinz Adalbert class — prepared in 1899 – 1900 , was an improvement on Prinz Heinrich . Four quick @-@ firing 21 cm ( 8 @.@ 3 in ) guns were substituted for the pair of slower 24 cm ( 9 @.@ 4 in ) guns mounted on the older vessel . Armor thickness remained similar in strength to that of Prinz Heinrich , though it was made more comprehensive . 
 = = = General characteristics = = = 
 The ships of the Prinz Adalbert class were 124 @.@ 9 meters ( 410 ft ) long at the waterline and 126 @.@ 5 m ( 415 ft ) overall , and had a beam of 19 @.@ 6 m ( 64 ft ) . The ships were designed to displace 9 @,@ 087 metric tons ( 8 @,@ 943 long tons ; 10 @,@ 017 short tons ) , but at full combat load displaced up to 9 @,@ 875 t ( 9 @,@ 719 long tons ; 10 @,@ 885 short tons ) ; they had a draft of 7 @.@ 43 m ( 24 @.@ 4 ft ) forward and 7 @.@ 9 m ( 26 ft ) aft . The ships ' hulls were constructed from transverse and longitudinal steel frames , over which the steel hull plates were riveted . The vessels contained fourteen watertight compartments and a double bottom that extended for 60 percent of the length of the hull . 
 The German navy regarded the vessels as good sea boats , with gentle motion when the ships ' lower fuel bunkers were full . The ships were responsive to commands from the helm . They lost up to 60 percent speed with the rudder hard over , but suffered only minimal speed loss in heavy seas . The ships ' casemate guns were placed too low , which rendered them exceedingly wet even in a slight swell . They had a transverse metacentric height of <unk> m ( 2 ft 4 @.@ 9 in ) . The ships had a standard crew of 35 officers and 551 enlisted men , though when serving as a squadron flagship this could be augmented by another nine officers and 44 enlisted men . The ships were equipped with several boats , including a pair of picket boats , a launch , a pinnace , two cutters , two yawls , and two dinghies . 
 Prinz Adalbert and Friedrich Carl were powered by three vertical 3 @-@ cylinder triple expansion engines ; the center shaft drove a three @-@ bladed screw 4 @.@ 5 m ( 15 ft ) in diameter , while the two outboard shafts powered four @-@ bladed screws 4 @.@ 8 m ( 16 ft ) in diameter . The engines were supplied with steam by fourteen Dürr boilers produced by Düsseldorf @-@ Ratinger Röhrenkesselfabrik . The propulsion system was rated at 16 @,@ 200 indicated horsepower ( 12 @,@ 100 kW ) for Prinz Adalbert and 17 @,@ 000 ihp ( 13 @,@ 000 kW ) for Friedrich Carl and top speeds of 20 knots ( 37 km / h ; 23 mph ) and 20 @.@ 5 knots ( 38 @.@ 0 km / h ; 23 @.@ 6 mph ) , respectively . Both ships reached higher horsepower figures on trials , though their speeds were not significantly improved . The ships were designed to carry 750 t ( 740 long tons ; 830 short tons ) of coal , though storage could be increased to 1 @,@ 630 t ( 1 @,@ 600 long tons ; 1 @,@ 800 short tons ) . This enabled a maximum range of up to 5 @,@ 080 nautical miles ( 9 @,@ 410 km ; 5 @,@ 850 mi ) at a cruising speed of 12 knots ( 22 km / h ; 14 mph ) . Electrical power was supplied by four generators with a total output of 246 kilowatts ( 330 hp ) at 110 volts . 
 = = = Armament = = = 
 Prinz Adalbert and Friedrich Carl were armed with a main battery of four 21 cm ( 8 @.@ 3 in ) SK L / 40 guns in two twin turrets , one on either end of the main superstructure . The four guns were supplied with a total of 340 rounds of ammunition , or 85 shells per gun . The turrets could depress to − 5 ° and elevate to 30 ° , which provided a maximum range of 16 @,@ 300 m ( 53 @,@ 500 ft ) . The 21 cm gun fired a 238 @-@ pound ( 108 kg ) shell at a muzzle velocity of 780 m ( 2 @,@ 560 ft ) per second . The ships ' secondary armament consisted of ten 15 cm ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) SK L / 40 guns , all placed in the sides of the hulls . Three guns were mounted in casemates amidships on either side , with a pair of gun turrets above them . These guns were provided with a total of 1 @,@ 400 shells , or 140 per gun . These guns fired an 88 @.@ 2 @-@ pound ( 40 @.@ 0 kg ) projectile at a muzzle velocity of 800 m ( 2 @,@ 600 ft ) per second . The guns could elevate to 30 ° , allowing a maximum range of 13 @,@ 700 m ( 44 @,@ 900 ft ) . 
 The ships also carried twelve 8 @.@ 8 cm SK L / 35 guns for close in defense ; these were arranged in groups of four in shielded pivot mounts . Four guns were mounted around the forward conning tower , four were emplaced around the rear two funnels amidships , with the last four guns placed on top of the rear superstructure . These guns fired a 15 @.@ 4 lb ( 7 @.@ 0 kg ) shell at a muzzle velocity of 770 m ( 2 @,@ 530 ft ) per second . They could elevate to 25 ° and could engage targets out to 9 @,@ 090 m ( 29 @,@ 820 ft ) . The vessels ' armament system was rounded out by four 45 cm ( 18 in ) submerged torpedo tubes . They were mounted in the bow , stern , and on each broadside , and supplied with eleven torpedoes . 
 = = = Armor = = = 
 The steel armor used on the two ships was produced by the Krupp firm . The main belt armor consisted of a layer of teak that was 50 mm ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) thick , covered by 100 mm ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) thick steel plating in the central section , which covered the ships ' machinery spaces and ammunition magazines . The belt was reduced to 80 mm ( 3 @.@ 1 in ) on either ends of the central portion ; the bow and stern were unprotected . The armored deck ranged in thickness from 40 mm ( 1 @.@ 6 in ) to 80 mm . Sloped armor , which ranged in thickness from 50 to 80 mm , connected the deck to the armored belt . The ships ' casemate guns , which were placed above the main belt , were protected by 100 mm thick armor plating , as were the 15 cm turret guns . The two 21 cm guns had 150 mm thick sides and 30 mm roofs . The forward conning tower was protected by 150 mm ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) sides and had a 30 mm ( 1 @.@ 2 in ) thick roof . The rear conning tower was much less thoroughly protected , with only 20 mm ( 0 @.@ 79 in ) worth of armor protection . 
 = = Service history = = 
 Prinz Adalbert was laid down at the Imperial Dockyard in Kiel in 1900 , under construction number 27 . She was ordered under the contract name " B " . The completed hull was launched on 22 June 1901 , after which fitting @-@ out work was effected . The ship was finally completed by 12 January 1904 , the day she was commissioned into the German Navy . Friedrich Carl was ordered as Ersatz König Wilhelm and assigned to the Blohm & Voss shipyard ; her keel was laid in 1901 . She was launched on 21 June 1902 , almost exactly a year after her sister ship . After fitting out work was completed , Friedrich Carl was commissioned into the Navy on 12 December 1903 , a month before her sister ship . 
 Prinz Adalbert went into service as a gunnery training vessel for the fleet after her commissioning , while Friedrich Carl served with the cruiser division of the battle fleet . In 1909 , Friedrich Carl joined her sister ship as a training vessel , being used as a torpedo training ship . The two ships were re @-@ mobilized after the outbreak of World War I in August 1914 . Both ships were assigned to Admiral Behring 's cruiser squadron in the Baltic Sea , with Friedrich Carl serving as his flagship . The squadron was based in Neufahrwasser in Danzig . Behring was ordered to undertake actions against the Russian port of Libau , which was believed to be acting as a staging area for British submarines . On the first assault on the port , on 17 November 1914 , Friedrich Carl struck a pair of Russian naval mines off Memel . The ship 's crew managed to keep the cruiser afloat long enough to allow nearby vessels to take off the entire crew ; only seven men were killed in the attack . The operation proceeded as planned , however , and several blockships were sunk in the harbor entrance . 
 After the sinking of Friedrich Carl , Behring shifted his flag to Prinz Adalbert . The ship conducted several operations against Russian forces , including bombardments of Libau . In May 1915 , she supported the German Army attack that captured the city . On 1 July 1915 , the ship sortied to reinforce a German minelaying operation that had come under attack by a Russian cruiser flotilla . While en route with the armored cruiser Prinz Heinrich , Prinz Adalbert was torpedoed by the British submarine E9 . The damage was severe , though the cruiser was able to return to Kiel for repairs . 
 Repairs were finally completed by October 1915 . Prinz Adalbert was steaming some 20 miles west of Libau in company with a pair of destroyers on 23 October when she was intercepted by the submarine E8 . E8 fired a spread of torpedoes at a range of approximately 1 @,@ 200 m ( 1 @,@ 300 yd ) , which detonated the ship 's ammunition magazine . The massive explosion destroyed the ship , which sank immediately with the loss of 672 crew . There were only three survivors . The sinking was the greatest single loss of life for the German Baltic forces for the duration of the war . 
 = Hedley Verity = 
 Hedley Verity ( 18 May 1905 – 31 July 1943 ) was a professional cricketer who played for Yorkshire and England between 1930 and 1939 . A slow left @-@ arm orthodox bowler , he took 1 @,@ 956 wickets in first @-@ class cricket at an average of 14 @.@ 90 and 144 wickets in 40 Tests at an average of 24 @.@ 37 . Named as one of the Wisden Cricketers of the Year in 1932 , he is regarded as one of the most effective slow left @-@ arm bowlers to have played cricket . Never someone who spun the ball sharply , he achieved success through the accuracy of his bowling . On pitches which made batting difficult , particularly ones affected by rain , he could be almost impossible to bat against . 
 Verity was born in Leeds and , from an early age , wished to play cricket for Yorkshire . After establishing a good reputation in local cricket , he signed a contract as a professional cricketer playing in the Lancashire League . His first season was not a success but , after moving clubs , he began to make a name for himself . Initially a medium @-@ paced bowler , he switched to bowling spin in an attempt to secure a place in the Yorkshire team . When Wilfred Rhodes , the incumbent Yorkshire left @-@ arm spinner , announced his retirement , Verity had a successful trial in the team in 1930 , and led the national bowling averages . In 1931 , his first full season , he achieved the rare feat of taking all 10 wickets in an innings , against Warwickshire County Cricket Club ; the following year , he again took all 10 wickets , against Nottinghamshire , while conceding just 10 runs . The latter bowling figures remain a record in first @-@ class cricket for the fewest runs conceded while taking all 10 wickets . He established himself as part of a strong bowling unit , which assisted Yorkshire to the County Championship seven times in his ten seasons with the club . In that time , Verity was never lower than fifth in the bowling averages and took over 150 wickets in every year except his first . 
 In 1931 , he was chosen to play for England for the first time and rose to prominence during a tour to Australia in 1932 – 33 . Afterwards , he played regularly for England and achieved the best performance of his career when he took 15 wickets against Australia in a Test match at Lord 's Cricket Ground in 1934 . However , critics claimed he was ineffective on good batting pitches , and he was occasionally left out of the England team over the following years . Even so , he had one of the best records of any bowler against Donald Bradman , generally regarded as the greatest batsman in the history of cricket . Verity continued to play for Yorkshire and England until 1939 , when the outbreak of the Second World War ended his career . 
 Verity joined the Green Howards in 1939 , and after training was posted overseas to India , Persia and Egypt , achieving the rank of captain . During the Allied invasion of Sicily in 1943 , Verity was severely wounded and captured by the Germans . Taken to the Italian mainland , he died in Caserta from his injuries and was buried there . 
 = = Early years = = 
 Verity was born in Headingley , an area of Leeds , on 18 May 1905 . He was the eldest child of Hedley Verity , who worked for a local coal company , and Edith Elwick , a Sunday school teacher . Verity also had two sisters , Grace and Edith . The family moved to Armley , then to the more rural location of Rawdon . From an early age , Verity watched Yorkshire play County Cricket matches at Leeds , Bradford and , during family holidays , Scarborough . Later , at Yeadon and Guiseley Secondary School , Verity played school cricket , bowling left @-@ arm medium @-@ paced deliveries ; he maintained this style until 1929 and was capable of bowling both inswingers and outswingers . Verity left school aged 14 to work for his father , who had established a coal business in Guiseley , and played cricket for Rawdon 's second team . Success on the field persuaded Verity to seek a career in professional cricket and a place in the Yorkshire team . While working for his father , he devoted increasing amounts of time to cricket practice . 
 In 1921 , Verity made his debut for Rawdon in league cricket ; some of his subsequent performances attracted the notice of the local press , and he took 29 wickets at an average of 13 @.@ 80 that season . The following season , he was spotted by Yorkshire coach George Hirst and former England spinner Bobby Peel , who were talent scouting for Yorkshire , and given a trial in the cricket nets at Headingley cricket ground . Peel realised Verity was an intelligent bowler who had excellent control of where he pitched the ball , but believed he was not fast enough to be effective for Yorkshire . Meanwhile , critics in Rawdon began to see increased potential in his batting , which improved steadily ; by 1924 , the Yorkshire Evening Post described Verity as " one of the most promising cricketers in the Leeds district " . 
 Verity moved to play for Horsforth Hall Park in 1924 , where his batting became more productive than his bowling . By 1926 , when he scored a total of 488 runs and took 62 wickets to win the Yorkshire Council League prize for best junior bowler , his all @-@ round potential secured a second trial at Yorkshire . Receiving coaching from Hirst , Verity played several matches for the Yorkshire Colts . He was given little bowling to do , suggesting that he was chosen more for his batting at this stage , and was near the bottom of the team 's bowling averages . Yorkshire did not allocate him to a local club , their practice towards promising cricketers at the time . Hirst was nevertheless impressed by Verity and recommended him to Accrington Cricket Club , a team in the Lancashire League looking for a professional cricketer . After a trial , Verity signed a contract in September 1926 . 
 = = League professional = = 
 Verity was unsuccessful during the 1927 season , his only one with Accrington . His bowling was less effective than the club had hoped ; he endured spells where he took few wickets and was unable to implement the tactics or bowl in the style that the club expected . His batting average for the season was 5 @.@ 25 . The team , containing players far more experienced than Verity , were unimpressed by his performances and unsympathetic to his difficulties , offering him little support in the field . Even so , the club were prepared to offer an improved contract for 1928 , but he declined as Accrington had previously refused to release their players for county cricket . Verity signed a contract with Middleton , a club in the Central Lancashire Cricket League . Limited in resources , the club paid him less than Accrington , but guaranteed his release to play for Yorkshire if he were selected . Playing with young team @-@ mates , Verity worked hard to coach the players and develop team spirit . He made a modest start in his first season , and was initially rated as a useful but unimpressive all @-@ rounder . A visit to the Yorkshire nets around this time prompted Verity to alter his bowling style . Wilfred Rhodes , Yorkshire 's main spinner since 1898 , was considering retirement ; he and Hirst suggested that , as there were fewer spinners than medium @-@ pace bowlers , Verity was more likely to achieve selection if he switched to spin bowling . With the support of the Middleton team and committee , Verity started bowling spin at the beginning of the 1929 season and immediately began to attract attention from counties , culminating in an unsuccessful nets trial for Warwickshire . Later in the season , when Verity went to Headingley to watch Yorkshire play , he was asked to fill a vacancy in the Yorkshire Colts team . In the match , he took five wickets for seven runs in the second innings . By the end of the season , he had taken 100 wickets for Middleton and topped the Central Lancashire League bowling averages . 
 For the 1930 season , Verity received lucrative contract offers from several Lancashire League clubs , worth more than three times his Middleton salary . Although recently married and receiving little encouragement from the Yorkshire committee , he eventually rejected the offers . In the event , Middleton allowed Verity to play for Yorkshire during 1930 and later released him from his contract . Cricket historian Derek Hodgson notes that Verity 's years in the Lancashire Leagues " meant that he reached Yorkshire ... as a hardened and experienced performer " . 
 = = County cricketer = = 
 = = = First @-@ class debut = = = 
 Early in 1930 , Wilfred Rhodes announced that he intended to retire from first @-@ class cricket at the end of the season . Several spin bowlers were considered as his replacement ; Hirst , who watched them all bowl in the nets , considered Verity the most impressive . Verity made his first @-@ class debut on 21 May 1930 in an early @-@ season non @-@ Championship match against Sussex . Rhodes , who missed the match , spent the game watching Verity and seemed convinced afterwards that his successor had been found . Bowling in two innings , Verity took three wickets for 96 in 46 @.@ 1 overs ; in the process , he won praise from the press , particularly for preventing the batsmen from scoring . Rhodes returned for the next match ; Verity appeared only once more in May , taking eight wickets in the match against Leicestershire , and once in June . In his fourth game , he took nine for 60 in the second innings against Glamorgan and 12 wickets in the match . Rain had damaged the pitch , making it difficult to bat against spinners . After this , Verity played regularly alongside Rhodes , and , helped by a succession of rain @-@ affected pitches , took a total of 64 wickets in 12 games at an average of 12 @.@ 42 , figures which placed him top of the national bowling averages . His best performance came against Hampshire when he took 13 wickets for 83 runs , including seven for 26 in the first innings . 
 Rhodes and Emmott Robinson , the senior professionals in the Yorkshire team , discussed tactics with Verity and his friend and team @-@ mate Bill Bowes , to analyse their errors . Bowes later wrote : " To Wilfred Rhodes and Emmott Robinson ... I owe most for what I learned of first @-@ class cricket — and Hedley Verity shared my debt . " Verity enjoyed long technical discussions with Rhodes and , according to Hirst , took in the advice " like a sponge takes water " . Even successful performances were critiqued , including Verity 's against Glamorgan and Hampshire . At the end of the season , critics in the press seemed convinced a successor to Rhodes had been found , and Verity was spoken of as a certainty to become an England regular . 
 = = = Test debut = = = 
 When the 1931 season started , many critics and journalists watched Verity closely to see how he compared to Rhodes . Their initial impressions were favourable as Verity took five for 42 against the Marylebone Cricket Club ( MCC ) in Yorkshire 's first match of the season and five for 42 against Cambridge University . Then , in his fifth game , Verity became only the second man , after Alonzo Drake , to take all 10 wickets in a single innings for Yorkshire . Against Warwickshire , on his 26th birthday , Verity took 10 for 36 in the second innings , having taken three wickets in the first innings , to give Yorkshire an innings victory . 
 Verity followed this performance with five for 54 against Lancashire , but a week after his 10 wickets against Warwickshire , Frank Woolley hit four sixes from Verity 's bowling as the Yorkshire bowler conceded 70 runs from 12 overs without taking a wicket . The rest of his season was successful . Favoured by pitches made receptive to his bowling by rain , he recorded impressive performances , earning selection for the Players against the Gentlemen at Lord 's Cricket Ground , where he took five wickets in the Gentlemen 's first innings . He was also selected in the less prestigious Gentlemen v Players fixtures at The Oval and Scarborough and was awarded his county cap by Yorkshire . Having been watched by England selectors , and after taking 11 wickets for Yorkshire in their match against the touring New Zealand team , Verity was selected in the final two Test matches of the series between England and the tourists . The first match was drawn after the New Zealand team performed above expectations and England brought in four new players , one of whom was Verity . On his debut , he took four wickets for 75 runs in the game . The Cricketer noted room for improvements in his technique but observed he could spin the ball well . England won the match and Verity was retained for the final Test . However , rain disrupted the match and he did not bowl . In his first full season of first @-@ class cricket , Verity took 188 wickets at an average of 13 @.@ 52 , finishing on top of the Yorkshire bowling averages and second in the national averages . Yorkshire won the County Championship and , according to Wisden , owed much of their success to Verity 's bowling . Verity was selected as one of Wisden 's Cricketers of the Year for his performances in the season . However , the citation said that despite his success and ability , he needed to improve the variety in the pace and flight of his bowling . 
 = = = World record = = = 
 Yorkshire made a poor start to the 1932 season . The team lost heavily to Lancashire , for whom Eddie Paynter scored 152 runs and hit Verity for five sixes . Although Verity had figures of eight for 107 , he was expected to be more successful as the pitch conditions were perfect for spin bowling . Neville Cardus wrote that his figures were " bad for the pitch . He can spin the ball keenly enough , but lacks a plan in his control of length . Moreover , he seldom gets the batsman guessing while the ball is in the air . " However , Yorkshire improved their form in the rest of the season to retain the County title . Between them , Verity and Bowes took 352 wickets in the season , and Verity took 162 wickets at an average of 13 @.@ 88 to finish second in the national bowling averages . Verity 's best performance of the season came at Headingley on 12 July , the third and final day of Yorkshire 's match against Nottinghamshire . After heavy rain on the second day , Brian Sellers , the Yorkshire captain , closed his team 's innings while they still trailed by 71 runs . When Nottinghamshire began their second innings , Verity did not concede any runs from his first nine overs . Subsequently , the pitch became difficult to bat on as it dried in the sun and Verity took all 10 wickets while 10 runs were hit from his bowling . Making the ball spin sharply , he took seven wickets in 15 deliveries , including a hat @-@ trick . His bowling figures of 10 for 10 beat the previous record for fewest runs conceded while taking all 10 wickets , and remain the best bowling analysis in first @-@ class cricket . He is the only Yorkshire bowler to take all 10 wickets in an innings on two separate occasions . Yorkshire won the match by 10 wickets . Despite Verity 's success , he was not selected for any Gentlemen v Players matches , nor in the Test match against India . His only representative cricket came in a Test trial at the end of July , in which he did not bowl as the match was washed out by rain . 
 Verity had been advised by friends at the start of the season that he would need an exceptional performance to achieve selection on the 1932 – 33 Ashes tour of Australia ; Alan Hill believes the performance against Nottinghamshire guaranteed Verity would be chosen to tour . In the middle of August , Verity was one of the last men added to the MCC team captained by Douglas Jardine . 
 = = International cricketer = = 
 = = = Bodyline tour = = = 
 Jardine planned to use Verity to contain the batsmen and prevent them scoring runs , while the fast bowlers rested . However , Verity was not expected to be a big success on the tour . The good batting conditions , the aggressive Australian approach to playing spin bowlers and Verity 's lack of experience led critics to dismiss his potential contribution to the English bowling attack , but Verity had a successful start to the tour . Assisted by overnight rain , he took seven for 37 , including the wicket of Don Bradman , against a Combined XI , comprising some of the best Australian players . In the following game , against South Australia , Verity took eight wickets , including five for 42 in the second innings . By now , the press had begun to pay attention to Verity 's achievements , and former Australian batsman Clem Hill expressed his admiration for Verity . Selected for the first Test on the strength of his early tour performances , Verity bowled just 17 overs in the game , mainly being used to give the fast bowlers a rest . He did not take any wickets and Verity himself believed he had bowled poorly . England won the match , using Bodyline tactics which had first been used earlier in the tour . After the Test , the tourists travelled to Tasmania to play two matches against the state team . Verity played in the second , and although rain interrupted play , restricting Verity to five overs , he scored his first half @-@ century in first @-@ class cricket . However , he was left out of the team for the second Test and was replaced by Bill Bowes . England played four fast bowlers but Jardine had misjudged the playing surface ; the Australian spinners were very effective on a slow @-@ paced pitch and Australia levelled the series . 
 Verity regained his place in the team for the third Test , replacing Bowes . The match was highly controversial owing to England 's continued and increased use of Bodyline tactics . Verity 's main contributions to the match came from his batting : he shared partnerships worth over 90 runs in both innings , scoring 45 runs in the first innings and 40 in the second . He took one wicket in the game ; after 16 wicketless overs in the first innings , Verity dismissed Bradman in the second , his first Test wicket against Australia , and England won the match by 338 runs . After the third Test , the MCC played New South Wales again . Rain before the beginning of the third day affected the pitch ; Bradman , possibly irritated by a minor show of bravado from Verity , scored 71 in conditions which should have been perfect for the Yorkshireman , who took only two wickets . During the fourth Test , Verity took few wickets but Wisden noted that he kept a good length and prevented the Australian batsmen scoring quickly . His batting was important once more . In their first innings , England had lost eight wickets , and were still 76 runs behind Australia 's score when Verity joined Paynter , who had left a hospital bed where he had been confined with tonsillitis . The two men scored 92 runs together , to give England a small lead . Verity scored 23 not out in two @-@ and @-@ three @-@ quarter hours , although he was lucky not to be dismissed several times . Australia were bowled out in their second innings and Verity took two wickets ; England scored the required runs to record a six @-@ wicket win which ensured victory in the series — and the Ashes . Verity 's bowling was most successful in the final Test , when Jardine allowed him to depart from his role of restricting the batsmen 's scoring and bowl a more attacking line and length in an attempt to take wickets . Having taken three for 62 in Australia 's first innings , he took five for 33 in the second , assisted by a worn pitch that helped him to spin the ball . He dismissed Bradman for 71 and later took two wickets with successive deliveries . 
 In the Test series , Verity totalled 11 wickets at an average of 24 @.@ 65 , second in the bowling averages to Larwood . Verity took three more wickets in his last matches of the tour , which included his appearance in one of the two Tests against New Zealand at the end of the tour . In all first @-@ class games in Australia , he took 44 wickets at 15 @.@ 86 , leading the first @-@ class bowling averages for the tourists ; he took one further wicket in New Zealand . Wisden 's tour report noted Verity 's " fine bowling record " and that he performed well . Jardine , in a letter to Verity 's father , wrote : " Hedley has come through his first tour triumphantly , no mean feat to start with the stiffest tour , but particularly for a slow left @-@ hander . On and off the field , Hedley has been a real friend and a grand help to me " . 
 = = = Series against West Indies = = = 
 In the 1933 season , when Yorkshire won their third consecutive County Championship , Verity took 190 wickets at an average of 13 @.@ 43 to be fifth in the national averages ; in eight matches he took 10 or more wickets , and achieved five wickets in an innings 18 times . In seven consecutive innings , he secured a total of 50 wickets , becoming only the third player to achieve this feat in first @-@ class cricket . He also scored over 600 runs in the season , his highest aggregate to date , including three fifties – his first in English first @-@ class cricket . Verity represented the Players against the Gentlemen and played in the first two of three Tests against the West Indies , taking four for 45 in the first match and capturing seven wickets at an average of 21 @.@ 85 in the series . He was left out of the final game in favour of Charles Marriott , but in two other games against the tourists , Verity took a total of 22 wickets . Against Essex , Verity achieved another record by taking 17 wickets in a single day 's play , the second of three players to achieve this feat , on a pitch damaged by rain . In contrast , against Surrey , Yorkshire conceded 560 runs and Verity , frustrated at the lack of a declaration , first bowled extremely negatively and then bowled two underarm deliveries that the umpire called no ball as Verity had not informed the batsmen of his intention . This was an unusually public reaction for Verity and his captain ordered him to resume normal bowling . At the end of the season , an MCC team toured India and played Tests there for the first time . Jardine was chosen as captain , and Verity was the only other player from the Bodyline series to tour , although others declined an invitation . 
 = = = Tour of India = = = 
 Jardine approached the tour with a competitive attitude and made thorough preparations . The match attendances were high and the public followed the cricket very closely . Verity enjoyed the tour and established a lasting friendship with Charlie Barnett ; Verity helped Barnett to overcome his homesickness and to develop his understanding of cricket . Verity was the leading first @-@ class wicket @-@ taker on the tour , although he was second in the team averages , with 72 wickets at an average of 15 @.@ 54 . In the first match of the tour against Sind , he took six for 46 and 10 wickets in the game . His best figures were seven for 37 against the Viceroy 's XI and he took five wickets in an innings on five occasions . Against an Indian XI , he achieved his then @-@ highest first @-@ class score of 91 not out . On the same ground , in the second Test match , Verity took eight wickets in the drawn game and scored 55 not out , his maiden Test fifty . As England had won the first Test , the third and final match would decide the series . Verity was again successful with the bat , scoring 42 and sharing a partnership of 97 with Jardine . Then with the ball , Verity took seven for 49 as the Indian batsmen struggled against his accuracy . Four wickets in the second innings gave him eleven wickets for 153 in the match , the first time he had taken 10 or more wickets in a Test match . In the three Tests , Verity took 23 wickets at an average of 16 @.@ 82 , leading the bowling averages for the series . 
 Jardine , who retired from regular first @-@ class cricket after the tour , had little patience with his fast bowlers on the tour . On one occasion , when they were having difficulty in the heat , Jardine said : " Thank God we have one bowler in the side " — referring to Verity . The two men admired each other greatly . Verity was impressed with the depth of Jardine 's thinking on the game and his intelligence , enjoying tactical discussions with him on the voyage to Australia . According to Alan Hill , Verity did not relish the Bodyline tactics on that tour but supported his captain 's stance completely . Verity even named his second son Douglas after Jardine . Jardine considered Verity to be the best slow left @-@ arm bowler of all time , writing : " I venture to doubt whether any other bowler of his type has proved such a master on all kinds of wickets ... No captain could have a greater asset on his side than Verity . He would make a great captain himself . " Historian David Frith writes that Verity was " probably the cricketer [ Jardine ] admired above all others " , while Bob Wyatt believed the two men were very similar in outlook , temperament and desire to succeed . 
 = = = Series against Australia in 1934 = = = 
 In the 1934 season , Verity took 150 wickets at an average of 17 @.@ 63 , placing him third in the national averages . That year , the Australians toured England and Verity was selected for all five Test matches . Australia won the first game — Verity took two wickets . At Lord 's , in the second match , England scored 440 in their first innings but after the second day 's play , Australia were well positioned , having reached 192 for two wickets . Verity was the only bowler to trouble the batsmen and caught and bowled Bradman , who had scored a quick 36 runs . After rain fell overnight , the pitch changed to become helpful to spin ; Wisden reported that : " although the wicket certainly helped [ Verity ] considerably it could scarcely be described as genuinely sticky except for one period after lunch . " On the third day , Australia lost their last eight wickets while scoring 92 runs . Verity took six of the wickets to achieve bowling figures of seven for 61 . The tourists just failed to score enough runs to make England bat again and were forced to follow on : Cardus wrote : " Verity settled the issue like a great bowler " . England wicket @-@ keeper Les Ames believed this was crucial to an England victory , or the home team would have batted in very difficult conditions . When Australia batted again , Verity took eight for 43 , dismissing Bradman a second time , to give him match figures of 15 for 104 ; 14 of the wickets came on the third day . Cardus believed the Australian batsmen played very badly against Verity 's spin , while the Wisden correspondent wrote : " This amazing achievement would probably have been only possible to a man possessed of such length and finger @-@ spin as Verity ... Verity 's length was impeccable and he made the ball come back and lift so abruptly that most of the Australians were helpless . The majority of them had had no experience in England of such a pitch , and they showed no ability or skill in dealing with bowling like that of Verity under these conditions ; their efforts at playing back were , to say the least , immature . " Afterwards , this game became known in cricket circles as " Verity 's match " ; it was the only occasion in the 20th century when England beat Australia at Lord 's , and their last such win for 75 years . 
 The third match was played on a very good pitch for batting in extremely hot weather , and England did not have a strong bowling attack in the view of Wisden . England scored 627 , of which Verity scored 60 not out ; Wisden commented that he batted slowly but well . Australia replied with 491 when they batted ; Verity took four for 78 in 53 overs and was able to prevent the batsmen scoring quickly . The match was eventually drawn . Cardus , in criticising the English bowlers in the game , wrote : " Verity is apparently the only England bowler in existence at the present time — and he is not subtle on a hard wicket . " Poor weather prevented an English defeat in the fourth Test , as Bradman and Bill Ponsford shared a partnership of 388 runs ; Verity took three wickets but , in doing so , conceded 113 runs . The final , decisive game , was won by Australia , who therefore regained the Ashes . Bradman and Ponsford this time scored 451 runs together as their team totalled 701 ; Verity was wicketless in the match and conceded 166 runs . Cardus , assessing the English bowling , regretted that England did not have a bowler capable of flighting the ball , a role usually performed by left @-@ arm spinners . Verity took 24 wickets in the series at 24 @.@ 00 , finishing second in the averages . Reviewing the series , Wisden editor Sydney Southerton wrote , " Verity , apart from his one amazing performance at Lord 's , could be complimented upon his steadiness rather than upon his effectiveness on hard wickets " . Verity also made other representative appearances in the season ; Yorkshire dropped to sixth position , handicapped by the limited appearances of four players who were regularly absent at representative matches . 
 = = = Career in the mid @-@ 1930s = = = 
 During the 1935 season Yorkshire regained the County Championship , and Verity passed 200 wickets for the first time in his career , taking 211 at an average of 14 @.@ 36 to finish third in the national averages . He took five wickets in an innings 22 times and had 10 or more wickets in seven matches . South Africa played England in a five @-@ Test series that year and won the series 1 – 0 . Verity was selected in the first four games . In the first , his figures were three for 52 in 41 overs on a pitch which assisted spin bowlers . England were in a position of dominance when rain ruined the game . Shortly afterwards , the tourists defeated Yorkshire ; in the second innings , Jock Cameron hit 30 runs from a single over bowled by Verity . Arthur Wood , the Yorkshire wicket @-@ keeper , commented during the over : " Go on , Hedley , you have him in two minds . He doesn 't know whether to hit you for four or six ! " South Africa won the second Test match , their first Test win in England , although Verity took six wickets in the match . In the third game , Verity had bowling figures of two wickets for nine runs from 25 overs in the match and in the fourth , he took one for 72 from 40 overs . These two games were drawn , leaving England needing a victory in the final match . By now , Verity had acquired a reputation for being unable to take wickets on good batting pitches . In the report on the fourth Test , Wisden 's correspondent observed : " Verity again failed to worry South Africa 's batsmen " . With victory essential , Verity was dropped for the last match . He was replaced by off @-@ spinner Johnnie Clay , regarded by critics as effective at flighting the ball . The Times correspondent wrote : " Verity has not been impressive on firm wickets : he seems to have checked suddenly in a career which promised so well three seasons ago , and it is not surprising that he has been left out of this side . " Nevertheless , he took 12 wickets at 20 @.@ 83 , leading the Test bowling averages for England . Verity was not selected in any other representative cricket that season . 
 The Yorkshire team played three first @-@ class matches in Jamaica in early 1936 . Yorkshire won the first game , Jamaica 's first defeat at home in a first @-@ class game for 10 years . Verity took 10 for 106 in 57 overs . The other matches , played on very good batting wickets , were drawn . In the final game , Verity scored 101 , his only first @-@ class century . Batting aggressively , he hit 10 fours and his second fifty runs came in just over an hour . In total , Verity took 16 wickets , averaging 22 @.@ 50 , and scored 195 runs at 48 @.@ 75 . 
 In the 1936 English season , in which Yorkshire finished second to Derbyshire in the Championship , Verity took 216 wickets , the highest seasonal total of his career , at an average of 13 @.@ 18 , which placed him second in the national averages . Against Kent , he returned nine wickets for 12 runs and took 15 wickets in the game , one of seven games in which he captured 10 or more wickets . In addition , he scored his highest aggregate of runs , accumulating 855 runs at an average of 31 @.@ 66 ; at one point , Verity led the Yorkshire batting averages . Playing for his county against the Indian touring team , Verity achieved his highest first @-@ class innings in England with 96 not out . He played in all three Test matches against India , a team which failed to live up to expectations and suffered internal divisions . G. O. B. " Gubby " Allen , the England captain , won the toss in the first Test and bowled first on the advice of Verity , but the latter was less successful than expected and Allen later described this as one of the few occasions he saw him bowl poorly . India established a first innings lead , but were bowled out for 93 in their second innings and easily lost the match ; Verity took four for 17 . The second Test was a draw in which he took four for 41 in the first innings and scored 66 , his highest Test score . England won the final Test to take the series 1 – 0 ; Verity took four wickets in the game . In the series he took 15 wickets at an average of 15 @.@ 20 , finishing top of the England bowling averages . He also appeared for the Players against the Gentlemen and in a Test trial for the North against the South . Regarded as a certainty to tour Australia during the 1936 – 37 , Verity was among the first seven players selected and his name was announced before the second Test against India . 
 = = = Second tour to Australia = = = 
 Under the captaincy of Allen , Verity began the tour well . He took 16 wickets before the Tests began with best figures of five for 50 against Queensland , his only five wicket haul of the Australian leg of the tour . England won the first two Tests of the series , assisted by poor weather which altered pitch conditions in their favour . In the first match , England scored 358 and bowled Australia out for 234 . Although Verity took just one wicket , Wisden 's correspondent praised him , reporting : " Among the bowlers ... Verity must not be forgotten . In the first innings he bowled in his best form and contributed to many of [ Bill ] Voce 's wickets ... So difficult was Verity to score from that batsmen in desperation tried to get runs off Voce , with disastrous results to themselves . " After England set Australia 381 to win , rain damaged the pitch ; Allen and Voce bowled the home team out for 58 . In the second Test , England won by an innings , again assisted by rain . Verity took three wickets in the match , including that of Bradman . 
 The turning point of the series was the third Test . On the first day , Verity again dismissed Bradman and the England bowlers performed well in good batting conditions before rain altered the state of the pitch . Australia declared their innings closed at 200 for nine and after losing nine wickets for 76 , England also declared , hoping to make Australia bat on a still @-@ difficult pitch . In much easier batting conditions , Australia made 564 , of which Bradman scored 270 . Verity bowled nearly 38 eight @-@ ball overs and took three for 79 . Cardus wrote : " Verity was magnificent ... In his absence Bradman might have scored another 100 runs . Nothing but consummate length and flight could have checked Bradman , in circumstances made for Bradman ... Every run from Verity had to be earnt . It was beautiful bowling , delightful to the eye and intellect . " Wisden 's report said : " Voce and Verity were outstanding England bowlers . The latter kept an immaculate length and allowed no batsman to take liberties with him . " England were bowled out for 323 and lost the game . 
 In an attempt to solve their problem in finding a reliable opening partnership in the series , England promoted Verity to open the batting in the fourth Test . After Australia were bowled out for 288 , Verity and Barnett put on 53 runs together , England 's best opening partnership of the series . Wisden praised Verity 's defence but said he had not solved the problem of finding a partner for Barnett . England scored 330 but Australia 's second innings of 433 left England needing 392 . Barnett and Verity began with a stand of 45 , but England lost by 148 runs . In two innings , Verity scored 19 and 17 , but was wicketless in the match . Having levelled the series , Australia won the final match by a large margin to take the series 3 – 2 . Verity took just one wicket in the match . In the series , he took 10 wickets at an average of 45 @.@ 50 ; in all first @-@ class matches in Australia , he captured 28 wickets at 30 @.@ 75 and secured 10 wickets at 18 @.@ 20 in two matches in New Zealand at the end of the tour . The Wisden report on the tour said : " Verity admirably performed the task of keeping one end closed and took high honours for his consistently good work . " The Times correspondent , noting the failure of the wrist spinners selected to tour , wrote : " Australia ... beat us because they have spin bowlers who make the ball truly spin . Verity certainly never had a wicket on which to demonstrate his art , so exposing the fact that real spin bowling does not at the moment exist in England . " 
 During the 1937 season , Verity played only one of the three Tests against the touring New Zealanders . He took two wickets , and although batsmen found it difficult to score from his bowling , he did not look dangerous and was left out of the remaining Tests in an attempt to strengthen the English bowling attack . He was not selected for the Players and his only other representative cricket was for the North against the South and for teams selected from those who had toured Australia during the English winter . Nevertheless , Verity took 202 wickets at 15 @.@ 67 which placed him third in the bowling averages . 
 = = = Ashes series of 1938 = = = 
 Verity took 158 first @-@ class wickets in 1938 at an average of 15 @.@ 38 , placing him third once more in the national averages ; Bowes was second in the list and Yorkshire retained the Championship . After appearing in a trial match , Verity played in all four Tests against Australia , during a series which was tied 1 – 1 . In the first match , England scored 658 and according to Wisden , the new England captain Wally Hammond decided to keep Verity in reserve in the expectation of making Australia follow @-@ on ; he bowled just 45 balls in Australia 's first innings . Australia did follow @-@ on , and in the second innings , Verity bowled 62 overs to take three wickets for 102 , bowling very accurately , but the batsmen played him skilfully and the match was drawn . In the second match , Verity took four for 103 out of an Australian total of 422 , in reply to England 's 494 . After Verity had taken two wickets in eight balls , Australia were in danger of having to follow @-@ on , but Bill O 'Reilly struck him for two consecutive sixes to remove the possibility . Verity took two wickets in the second innings , but the match was drawn . After the third match was abandoned owing to rain , Australia won the fourth Test , held at Headingley , by five wickets to ensure the Ashes were retained . Wisden commented that : " At no time was the wicket easy for batting and Australia won largely because they possessed better spin bowling . " Verity took two wickets in the match , but some critics believed his bowling could have won the match had Hammond used him more effectively . In a match where the Australian spinner O 'Reilly took 10 wickets , Hammond used his fast bowlers Bowes and Ken Farnes for the majority of both innings . Commentators believed Hammond over @-@ used his fast bowlers ; Cardus wrote : " Hammond 's faith in fast bowling rather exceeded his faith in the arts of Verity and Wright . The result was sad disillusionment . " Barnett also said that Hammond refused to allow Verity to alter his bowling tactics , when the Yorkshire bowler wished to aim for a worn area on the pitch . 
 As neither side had established a winning lead in the series , the final match at The Oval was to be played to a finish , no matter how long it took . England scored a record team total of 903 runs and Australia were heavily defeated . Verity , one of five Yorkshire players in the team , bowled 12 overs in the game and took two wickets . He also played a part in the achievement of Len Hutton , who scored 364 runs , breaking the record for the highest individual innings in a Test match . As Hutton 's innings began to assume epic proportions , Verity stayed with him throughout the intervals , helping him to maintain concentration . On the Sunday of the match , when there was no play , Verity arranged for Hutton to have a break by the sea to relax away from cricket . Hutton commented : " I owe [ Verity ] the kind of debt that one can never fully repay ... His quiet , natural dignity was an immense source of strength to me throughout those long hours " . The series was drawn ; Verity took 14 wickets at an average of 25 @.@ 28 , finishing second in the England bowling averages , behind Bowes . However , Charlie Barnett , who played in the series but disliked Hammond , believed that Hammond 's poor tactical use of Verity cost England potential victories in the second and fourth Tests . Verity played no other representative cricket that season , but appeared once more against the Australians for H. D. G. Leveson @-@ Gower 's team which defeated the tourists by 10 wickets . 
 = = = Tour to South Africa and final season = = = 
 In the winter of 1938 – 39 , Verity toured South Africa with the MCC team under Hammond 's captaincy . He took 47 wickets at 19 @.@ 93 in first @-@ class games . In the first game of the tour , Verity took 11 wickets against Griqualand West . In the Test matches , the batsmen played in a negative fashion , despite pitches that were very good for batting . High scoring games left the bowlers with expensive figures and Verity had the best bowling average on either side , bowling accurately and reliably . He played in all five Test matches , taking 19 wickets at 29 @.@ 05 . The first two matches were drawn : in the first innings of the opening Test , he took four for 61 in 44 eight @-@ ball overs ; in the first innings of the second Test , he took five for 70 in nearly 37 overs . England won the third match , the only result in the series and the fourth was also drawn . The final game was to be played without a time limit until there was a winner ; after 10 days it had to be abandoned as the MCC had to catch a boat home . The match established a record at the time for the total number of runs scored in a first @-@ class game , as both teams combined to post an aggregate of 1 @,@ 981 runs . Verity took four wickets and bowled 766 balls in the game , establishing a new record for deliveries in a first @-@ class game . It proved difficult to score runs from Verity 's bowling but the batsmen generally were very cautious . 
 Verity 's final first @-@ class cricket came in the 1939 season which was overshadowed by the forthcoming war . Yorkshire won their third successive County Championship and the seventh of Verity 's career . Verity took 191 wickets at an average of 13 @.@ 13 , to top the bowling averages for the second time in his career . Verity 's only representative cricket came in the first Test match against West Indies , when he took two wickets in the match . He was subsequently left out of the team for the second Test in favour of Tom Goddard , and did not play any more Test matches . However , Wisden 's report on the third Test commented that his absence and that of several other bowlers left the English attack weaker . In a career total of 40 Tests , Verity took 144 wickets at an average of 24 @.@ 37 and scored 669 runs at an average of 20 @.@ 90 . With much of the end of the cricket season abandoned prior to the expected outbreak of war , Verity played his last match against Sussex . In the second innings , Verity took seven wickets for nine runs on a rain @-@ affected pitch to bowl Sussex out for 33 and take Yorkshire to a win , although the match was played in a strained , tense atmosphere . This was Verity 's last performance in first @-@ class cricket . In total , he had taken 1 @,@ 956 wickets at an average of 14 @.@ 90 and scored 5 @,@ 603 runs at 18 @.@ 07 . 
 = = Style and technique = = 
 As a bowler , Verity delivered the ball at almost medium pace , faster than usual for a spinner . R. C. Robertson @-@ Glasgow , a cricket writer and journalist , wrote " He is a scholarly bowler ... He is tall , and much stronger than his pace needs . His run up , longer than most of his kind , has a measured delicacy that you would expect from this fastidious and nearly prim craftsman . Only his delivery has a grace which mathematics can 't explain . " His main asset as a bowler was an ability to bowl straight and with great accuracy , on a good length . He could also make the ball bounce sharply . His most effective delivery curved through the air , pitched on middle and leg stump and spun away from the batsman , causing many of them to edge the ball into the slips . On rain @-@ affected pitches he bowled more slowly , and was almost unplayable at times . However , the period in which Verity played was notable for good batting pitches , and batsmen often dominated . In these conditions , Verity prevented batsmen scoring runs and constantly tried new strategies to try to take wickets . Verity also used different types of delivery to keep batsmen uncertain : he could bowl at a slower and faster pace to his normal style and occasionally bowled a much faster ball which regularly took wickets . 
 Verity never spun the ball very far , particularly after his second tour to Australia , and preferred to concentrate on bowling a good length . However , critics did not think that Verity posed enough of a threat to batsmen and could be dull to watch . By the middle of his career , he had a reputation for being ineffective on good batting pitches , and was occasionally dropped from the England team for his lack of effectiveness . Even so , he only missed one Test against Australia and one against South Africa , the two strongest Test playing teams , after he made his debut . Verity believed his performances in unfavourable conditions for his bowling had greater merit than his successes in favourable ones . He once said : " Do not praise me when I have taken 8 for 20 on a sticky wicket , but when I have got 2 for 100 on a perfect wicket . " At times , Verity almost seemed bored when bowling and performed less effectively , particularly if his side were winning without needing his contribution . Bowes once told the Yorkshire captain , Brian Sellers , that the way to get the best out of Verity was to tell him that everything depended on him . 
 Verity earned the respect of Bradman , generally regarded as the greatest batsman to have played cricket , and enjoyed bowling at him . Bradman described Verity as a great cricketer and wrote that throughout their respective careers , he " grew more and more to respect [ Verity ] both as a gentleman and as a player . " Robertson @-@ Glasgow thought that Verity was " one of only three or four bowlers who came to the battle with Bradman on not unequal terms " . During the 17 Tests in which they faced each other , Verity dismissed Bradman eight times , more than any other bowler . Robertson @-@ Glasgow believed that , but for Verity , Bradman would have averaged over 150 in Tests instead of his actual batting average . In all first @-@ class cricket , Verity dismissed Bradman 10 times in total , on two occasions twice in the same game . Only Clarrie Grimmett equalled 10 first @-@ class dismissals of Bradman . However , Bradman once said : " I think I know all about Clarrie ( Grimmett ) , but with Hedley I am never sure . You see , there 's no breaking @-@ point with him . " 
 Verity is often cited as one of the greatest slow left @-@ arm spinners to play the game . Robertson @-@ Glasgow wrote : " We can only say that , in his own short time , he was the best of his kind . " The writer considered Verity may not quite have achieved the heights of some other great bowlers of his type , but " as a workman @-@ artist , he will take some beating . " Douglas Jardine rated him higher than any previous Yorkshire spinners , and Les Ames considered him the best left @-@ arm spinner he had played against . Bradman wrote : " Undoubtedly he was one of the greatest slow left @-@ handed spinners of all time . His record testifies to that . No Australian left @-@ hander of that type was Verity 's equal and of the Englishmen I saw ... there is no doubt that Hedley was as good or better than the others . " 
 As a batsman , Verity occasionally showed potential to become good , but concentrated his energy on bowling . He modelled his batting on Herbert Sutcliffe , and Robertson @-@ Glasgow wrote : " As a batsman , he looks like Sutcliffe gone stale . That is , pretty good . " 
 = = Military service = = 
 = = = Training with the Green Howards = = = 
 Since around 1937 , Verity had expected the outbreak of the Second World War and had prepared for it through reading military literature . He and Bowes decided to enlist together , and after briefly serving in the Air Raid Precautions in Guiseley until Bowes ' wife gave birth , they attempted to join the infantry . However , Bowes was hampered by an old knee complaint and later became a gunnery officer . After serving as a sapper in the Royal Engineers , Verity was commissioned in January 1940 as a second lieutenant in the Green Howards , and later promoted to captain . Following a spell at the Infantry Training Centre , he was posted to the 1st Battalion . He served at the regimental depot in Richmond , North Yorkshire , where he was responsible for training recruits . In the spring of 1941 , the battalion moved to Omagh in Northern Ireland for further training . Verity 's Yorkshire and England team @-@ mate Norman Yardley was also in the 1st Battalion ; the fame of these cricketers made an impression on the local population . Playing several cricket matches , Verity frequently took wickets on rough pitches that were unsuitable for batting . There was even time for his appearance in a charity match at Lord 's . In August , he returned to England and after a spell in London , he was posted overseas . 
 The 1st battalion of the Green Howards transferred early in 1942 to Ranchi in India , where the climate badly affected Verity 's health . After suffering from dysentery , he was weak and his doctors wished to send him home . However , he resumed his position and , by the end of the year , his battalion was sent to Persia . In March 1943 , the battalion was posted to Kibrit Air Base in Egypt for training and then to Qatana in Syria . Here , preparations were finalised for the Allied invasion of Sicily . Verity remained below peak fitness and was struggling a little owing to his age . His commanding officers planned to withdraw him from front @-@ line fighting and move him to a staff position at headquarters once the Sicily campaign had concluded . 
 = = = Death = = = 
 The invasion of Sicily was initially successful until the Allied forces reached the plains outside Catania , where German forces put up strong resistance . The Green Howards , as part of the 15th Brigade , made a night attack on 19 July . However , conditions were more difficult than expected and the brigade came under heavy fire . Verity commanded B Company , which was surrounded in the confusion . Attempting to secure the position , Verity was hit in the chest by shrapnel and had to be left behind as the company retreated . The last order he gave was " keep going " . 
 Severely wounded and subsequently captured by the Germans , Verity was taken to a field hospital and underwent an operation . Taken by boat across the Strait of Messina to the Italian mainland , Verity first went to a hospital in Reggio Calabria and was then transported for two days by train to Naples . The German hospital was full , so Verity was sent to the Italian hospital at Caserta . By this stage , Verity was very ill and had another operation to relieve pressure from his rib onto his lung . The operation seemed successful but Verity deteriorated rapidly over the following three days , bleeding heavily . He died on 31 July , and was buried with full military honours . His grave was later moved from the town 's cemetery to the military cemetery established by the Commonwealth War Graves Commission . Several Yorkshire players later visited the grave ; some members of the MCC team under Len Hutton 's captaincy in 1954 – 55 , including Hutton , journalists and former Yorkshire player Abe Waddington paid tribute at Verity 's grave while en route for Australia . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Verity married Kathleen Alice Metcalfe , a bookbinder and the daughter of a sales agent , on 7 March 1929 . The two had known each other as children in Headingley and met again at a Rawdon youth club social event . They had two sons , first Wilfred , named after Wilfred Rhodes , and then George Douglas , named after George Hirst and Douglas Jardine . 
 Shortly before the outbreak of the war , Kathleen Verity began to suffer from poor health , and the family planned a trip to South Africa in the English winter of 1939 to aid her recovery and so Verity could take up one of several offers of a coaching job . In the last months before Hedley Verity went overseas during the war , Kathleen joined him in Omagh and later in London just before he went away . 
 = Tropical Storm Amelia ( 1978 ) = 
 Tropical Storm Amelia was a weak , poorly organized tropical storm that formed during the 1978 Atlantic hurricane season . It caused a severe flooding disaster in Texas after it dissipated . Amelia developed from a tropical wave that moved through the Atlantic Ocean uneventfully . The disturbance then entered an area of the Gulf of Mexico that was conducive to tropical cyclogenesis and became the first tropical depression of the season , after which it was forecast to make landfall before any significant intensification . However , the tropical depression defied predictions , quickly strengthening into a weak tropical storm just hours before making landfall in Corpus Christi . The storm lasted roughly a day over land before becoming unidentifiable after being active for just under 48 hours . 
 Amelia affected the Texas coast for two days , causing several shipping incidents and minor damage in Corpus Christi and South Padre Island . While active , there were no deaths linked to the storm . However , the biggest impact from the storm followed its dissipation , when its remnants contributed to record rainfall totals over the state . The state , already suffering from a previous drought , believed that the rain would help alleviate the conditions . However , the dry ground aided the flooding from the storm . The rainfall caused several rivers and creeks to flood , especially around the Texas Hill Country and northern Texas , leading to severe damage . Following the storm , President Jimmy Carter declared six counties in the state as federal disaster areas , allowing residents to seek aid from the government . Additional aid was brought in from as far away as New York . Overall , Amelia caused 33 fatalities with an estimated $ 110 million in damages in what then @-@ governor Dolph Briscoe called one of the worst floods in the history of the state . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 A tropical wave moved off the African coast on July 19 . The system headed eastward through the Atlantic Ocean for the next week with no change in development . After entering the Caribbean Sea on July 26 , convection began to come together two days later due to the influence of anticyclonic flow . The disturbance passed the Yucatan Peninsula on July 29 and entered the Gulf of Mexico . No circulation was found in the developing system , however . 
 On July 30 , the disturbance turned to the northwest and entered an area of the Gulf with slightly above normal sea surface temperatures and low vertical wind shear , which favored further development . At this point , the presentation seen on satellite imagery had indicated that a tropical cyclone was beginning to form in the Gulf . After a reconnaissance aircraft went into the system , the cyclone was upgraded into the first tropical depression of the season that afternoon while 30 miles ( 48 km ) south of Brownsville , Texas . When it formed , it was moving north @-@ northwest at 12 mph ( 19 km / h ) , which was thought at the time to inhibit further strengthening due to the depression moving onto land . Several hours later , the depression was upgraded to Tropical Storm Amelia , a decision that one forecaster said was made to be on the safe side . Amelia peaked at 50 mph ( 80 km / h ) in wind speed when it was upgraded , with the system beginning to skirt the Texas coast . At peak intensity , the storm had gale @-@ force winds along a diameter of 150 miles ( 240 km ) . 
 Amelia , which never had a well @-@ defined center , went up the coast during the afternoon and evening of July 30 , making landfall in Corpus Christi the next day . The system was tracked until passing just west of San Antonio , where it became indiscernible after the morning of August 1 . The storm was active for a short span of time — just under two days — forming and dissipating so quickly that , following the storm , there was some controversy about the reliability of the weather forecasters . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 While the storm was over water , small craft advisories were issued by the Coast Guard in addition to cautioning people on vacation in South Padre Island to avoid the beaches . However , as it was a Sunday evening , most of the ships were already coming into port . As Amelia approached the Texas coast , gale warnings were issued for the area from Brownsville to Port O 'Connor on July 30 . Due to it forming in close proximity to the coast , warnings were issued as soon as the storm was named . As the state had been in the midst of a severe drought the previous six weeks , there was hope that Amelia would relieve the dry conditions . However , the drought conditions would benefit the floods from the storm due to the ground being rendered so dry that it was unable to soak up all the rain from the storm . 
 = = Impact = = 
 Effects from Amelia as a tropical cyclone ranged from 38 miles per hour ( 61 km / h ) winds in Brownsville to gusts of up to 58 miles per hour ( 93 km / h ) in Corpus Christi . Inland Texas fared much worse , though . The continuous flow of tropical moisture during Amelia 's dissipation and remnant stage brought heavy flooding for two to three days , putting 25 counties under flash flood warnings . The orographic effect of the Edwards Plateau enhanced the flooding , leading to rainfall totals as high as 30 inches ( 760 mm ) in a two @-@ day period . Although the showers stretched into Dallas , Oklahoma , and Arkansas , any damages from the storm in these areas are unknown . The final toll from the storm was 33 dead , most of which occurred a week after the storm made landfall , and $ 110 million in damage . Most of the damage was located in two specific areas : an area consisting of the towns of Albany and Graham , and the Texas Hill Country , although light flooding was reported elsewhere . 
 = = = Gulf of Mexico and the Texas Coast = = = 
 In coastal areas of Texas , damage was limited to the sinking of several shrimp boats and the beaching of sail boats . One ship — the Mermaid of the Sea — was caught in the middle of the storm . Although it sunk , its crew was rescued . A pleasure boat with three occupants and the two @-@ man crew of a beached catamaran were all reported missing , but were later found . Three other people on board a fishing vessel were treated for exposure . Rescue ships were hampered by anchored Mexican boats and surfers in a channel near the Coast Guard station . According to the Coast Guard , all nine ships that had been reported missing in the storm were later accounted for . Along with the ships , an oil drilling rig in the Gulf was ripped from its location and ran aground near Matagorda Island by the storm . The 19 crew members of the rig were rescued by helicopter . As the rig had not yet begun drilling , there was no threat from an oil spill . 
 In Port Isabel , there was some flooding on the southeast part of the town which was alleviated when some of the manhole covers were opened . In addition , a tornado was thought to have touched down , causing minor damage . South Padre Island reported power outages after receiving over 4 inches ( 100 mm ) of rain and the Queen Isabella Causeway was rendered nearly impassable due to rainfall . During its time as a tropical cyclone , there were no deaths linked to Amelia . 
 = = = Northern Texas = = = 
 The town of Albany was hit hard when the town drainage system and Hubbard Creek both flooded . The ensuing torrent destroyed 25 – 30 houses and a dozen businesses and damaged hundreds more while inundating 80 % of the town . In addition , all incoming roads were flooded , the pavement on U.S. Route 283 was washed away , and a bridge on U.S. Route 180 buckled , preventing anyone from entering or leaving on land . The town 's water supply was contaminated and the electricity and communications were also knocked out . The death toll from Albany was set at nine dead and twelve missing , although the town sheriff said that four people who were missing would likely never be found due to several cave @-@ ins along the creek , possibly burying them up to 20 feet ( 6 @.@ 1 m ) deep in mud . Rescue efforts here were hampered by overflowing creeks and a lack of communication . The rain was also responsible for carving a 50 feet ( 15 m ) deep hole in an earthen dam at nearby Lake Throckmorton , but the water from the dam was safely taken up by a nearby creek . The town of Throckmorton itself was completely evacuated and , like Albany , had its fresh water supply contaminated . 
 North of Albany , the Brazos River also flooded , with the Clear Fork Brazos River becoming 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) wide at one point , despite normally being a dry creek bed . The Brazos overflowing , in addition to the flooding of the nearby Salt Creek , resulted in the west side of Graham — the county seat of Young County where flood victims from <unk> and South Bend had taken shelter — becoming flooded over to within blocks of the Young County Courthouse . Later , the flood waters were reported to have entered the basement of the courthouse . Effects from the flooding in Graham ranged from 150 houses and 40 – 50 businesses being inundated to the loss of water and electrical utilities . No fatalities were reported , however , due to the water levels rising gradually , leaving time for residents to evacuate . The crest of the Brazos flood then headed for the Possum Kingdom Lake with a threat of lowland flooding , resulting in evacuations of riverside towns in Parker and Palo Pinto counties , although a report from Palo Pinto said that no flooding was expected . The flooding was alleviated at the Possum Kingdom Lake , as the lake was already down 6 feet ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) from normal and some of the floodgates there were opened , taking most of the water from the flood . Elm Creek , near Abilene , also swelled , flooding into the town , but the only reported damage there was street flooding . An additional death was reported in the town of Morse . 
 = = = Southern Texas = = = 
 The hardest hit area during the storm was the Guadalupe River basin and its tributaries . A sign of the oncoming problem was a wall of water witnessed cascading down the Leona River in Uvalde . Like with Graham , Uvalde was ultimately flooded up to a block away from the courthouse . The Guadalupe River became heavily flooded , rising 10 feet ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) in one hour . The rapid rise covered a bridge on U.S. Route 281 , 40 miles ( 64 km ) north of San Antonio and prompted evacuations in a 20 miles ( 32 km ) area near the flood plains . The overflowing river was responsible for ten total deaths in Kendall and Kerr Counties and submerging Comfort under seven feet of water , killing four people there . The towns of Welfare and Center Point were also reported to be flooded . In nearby Hunt , a group of military personnel who entered the region to assist with rescues got stranded themselves . After receding , the Guadalupe steadily became filled again , prompting re @-@ evacuations . Near Stonewall , the Pedernales overflowed its banks , covering the area in up to 28 feet ( 8 @.@ 5 m ) of water and swamping the Lyndon B. Johnson National Historical Park . The only overflow to emanate from Mexico was from the Rio Conchos , which dumped its overflowing water into the Rio Grande and subsequently damaged the international bridge between Mexico and the United States in Presidio . 
 The worst impact was confined to Bandera County . The impact in the county stemmed from flooding of the Medina River which , infused with high rainfall , produced a 500 @-@ year flood . In Bandera , the Medina turned into a 50 feet ( 15 m ) wall of water , which destroyed several of the trees along the river in addition to causing various items to litter the roads . In isolated areas , there was an odor from decaying livestock . Two people were witnessed clinging to a roof that was swept into the Medina . A further 100 people were cut off due to the river flood . 10 – 15 houses were washed away and the courthouse became an evacuation center by virtue of being the only area above the water . Electricity and all phone lines save the Sheriff Department line were knocked out in the city and several houses that were still standing had standing water inside them . At the riverfront Camp <unk> , eight people were reported killed while 100 children escaped by staying at the church camp nearby . The Peaceful Valley Ranch was nearly decimated , with only the building foundations still remaining . Six people were killed by the floods while sleeping while 20 guests and staff rode out the storm by clinging to trees and roofs for six hours . The town of Medina was rendered inaccessible by road after the Medina combined with the Sabinal River . There were also reports of looting in the county , but no arrests were made . One of the survivors of the flooding in this area was former Miss USA Kimberly Tomes , whose family was vacationing at a dude ranch in the area . After leaving and grabbing onto a tree , she witnessed cars and mobile homes passing by . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Following the storm , there was some controversy as to the nature of the storms . A cloud seeding project was underway near Albany only hours before the town was hit with flooding . However , the rains were determined to have been tropical in origin . At the request of Governor Dolph Briscoe , President Jimmy Carter declared Kendall , Kerr , and Bandera Counties as disaster areas , allowing citizens in these areas to receive federal aid . All three counties had previously been declared disaster areas due to the prior drought . Later , three more counties — Young , Shackleford , and Haskell — were added to the list . Briscoe described the disaster as one of the worst floods in the history of the state . Evacuation centers were set up in Kerrville , Comfort , and Center Point to allow refugees to wait out the floods . In Bandera , 300 people applied for relief and 200 mobile homes were sent to help the homeless . The cafeteria of the junior high school was used as both a morgue and a Red Cross emergency center . 
 In Albany , New York , a disk jockey named Bryan Jackson helped organize a relief effort for the Texas town of the same name , with sponsorship from radio station <unk> and a local supermarket chain . After raising six tons of emergency aid and $ 1 @,@ 000 from area residents , a C @-@ 130 airplane was loaded with the provisions , but the plane was continuously grounded due to calls saying that Albany , Texas was not a disaster area and did not need the relief . After what was described by U.S. Senator Samuel S. Stratton as almost a comedy of errors , the flight was funded by the Defense Department and was able to take off . In addition , a sheriff dispatch in the Texas town mentioned that aid was possibly being sent from several other towns with the same name as well as from other Texas towns like Abilene . 
 = = = Records = = = 
 Amelia and its remnants set several records for rainfall and flooding . The Medina River crested at 45 feet ( 14 m ) , breaking the record for flood stage reached on the river that was set in 1919 at 43 feet ( 13 m ) as well as breaking the record for water flow , or the rate in which water flows down the river , at 79 billion gallons per day . Additionally , the Brazos River had its highest flooding since 1957 . Records were also set for flowing on the Guadalupe , which flowed at 149 billion gallons a day , more than twice the previous record and nearly 1500 times its usual rate of 100 million gallons per day . The storm total of 48 inches ( 1 @,@ 200 mm ) measured at Medina is the wettest known storm total rainfall amount for both the state of Texas and any tropical cyclone impacting the continental United States . A 12 @-@ hour total of 26 inches ( 660 mm ) of rain at Abilene was an extreme example of the precipitation . 
 = Reception history of Jane Austen = 
 The reception history of Jane Austen follows a path from modest fame to wild popularity . Jane Austen ( 1775 – 1817 ) , the author of such works as Pride and Prejudice ( 1813 ) and Emma ( 1815 ) , has become one of the best @-@ known and most widely read novelists in the English language . Her novels are the subject of intense scholarly study and the centre of a diverse fan culture . 
 During her lifetime , Austen 's novels brought her little personal fame . Like many women writers , she chose to publish anonymously and it was only among members of the aristocracy that her authorship was an open secret . At the time they were published , Austen 's works were considered fashionable by members of high society but received few positive reviews . By the mid @-@ 19th century , her novels were admired by members of the literary elite who viewed their appreciation of her works as a mark of cultivation . The publication in 1870 of her nephew 's Memoir of Jane Austen introduced her to a wider public as an appealing personality — dear , quiet aunt Jane — and her works were republished in popular editions . By the start of the 20th century , competing groups had sprung up — some to worship her and some to defend her from the " teeming masses " — but all claiming to be the true Janeites , or those who properly appreciated Austen . 
 Early in the 20th century , scholars produced a carefully edited collection of her works — the first for any British novelist — but it was not until the 1940s that Austen was widely accepted in academia as a " great English novelist " . The second half of the 20th century saw a proliferation of Austen scholarship , which explored numerous aspects of her works : artistic , ideological , and historical . With the growing professionalisation of university English departments in the first half of the 20th century , criticism of Austen became progressively more esoteric and , as a result , appreciation of Austen splintered into distinctive high culture and popular culture trends . In the late 20th century , fans founded Jane Austen societies and clubs to celebrate the author , her time , and her works . As of the early 21st century , Austen fandom supports an industry of printed sequels and prequels as well as television and film adaptations , which started with the 1940 Pride and Prejudice and continued in 2005 when three new adaptations of Mansfield Park , Northanger Abbey and Persuasion which were presented on British public television and home video . 
 = = Background = = 
 Jane Austen lived her entire life as part of a large and close @-@ knit family on the lower fringes of the English gentry . Her family 's steadfast support was critical to Austen 's development as a professional writer . Austen read draft versions of all of her novels to her family , receiving feedback and encouragement , and it was her father who sent out her first publication bid . Austen 's artistic apprenticeship lasted from her teenage years until she was about thirty @-@ five . During this period , she experimented with various literary forms , including the epistolary novel which she tried and then abandoned , and wrote and extensively revised three major novels and began a fourth . With the release of Sense and Sensibility ( 1811 ) , Pride and Prejudice ( 1813 ) , Mansfield Park ( 1814 ) and Emma ( 1815 ) , she achieved success as a published writer . 
 Novel @-@ writing was a suspect occupation for women in the early 19th century , because it imperiled their social reputation by bringing them publicity , viewed as unfeminine . Therefore , like many other female writers , Austen published anonymously . Eventually , though , her novels ' authorship became an open secret among the aristocracy . During one of her visits to London , the Prince Regent invited her , through his librarian , James Stanier Clarke , to view his library at Carlton House ; his librarian mentioned that the Regent admired her novels and that " if Miss Austen had any other Novel forthcoming , she was quite at liberty to dedicate it to the Prince " . Austen , who disapproved of the prince 's extravagant lifestyle , did not want to follow this suggestion , but her friends convinced her otherwise : in short order , Emma was dedicated to him . Austen turned down the librarian 's further hint to write a historical romance in honour of the prince 's daughter 's marriage . 
 In the last year of her life , Austen revised Northanger Abbey ( 1817 ) , wrote Persuasion ( 1817 ) , and began another novel , eventually titled Sanditon , which was left unfinished at her death . Austen did not have time to see Northanger Abbey or Persuasion through the press , but her family published them as one volume after her death and her brother Henry included a " Biographical Notice of the Author " . This short biography sowed the seeds for the myth of Austen as a quiet , retiring aunt who wrote during her spare time : " Neither the hope of fame nor profit mixed with her early motives ... [ S ] o much did she shrink from notoriety , that no accumulation of fame would have induced her , had she lived , to affix her name to any productions of her pen ... in public she turned away from any allusion to the character of an authoress . " However , this description is in direct contrast to the excitement Austen shows in her letters regarding publication and profit : Austen was a professional writer . 
 Austen 's works , although a noted part of high British Idealism and high British Romanticism , are also noted for their literary realism , biting social commentary , and masterful use of free indirect speech , burlesque and irony . This biting social commentary often focused on the realistic depiction of landed English aristocracy . Her books critique the romantic novels of sensibility of the second half of the 18th century and are part of the literature leading to the eventual transition to 19th @-@ century literary realism . As Susan Gubar and Sandra Gilbert explain , Austen makes fun of " such novelistic clichés as love at first sight , the primacy of passion over all other emotions and / or duties , the chivalric exploits of the hero , the vulnerable sensitivity of the heroine , the lovers ' proclaimed indifference to financial considerations , and the cruel crudity of parents " . Austen 's plots , though comic , highlight the way women of the gentry depended on marriage to secure social standing and economic security . Like the writings of Samuel Johnson , a strong influence on her , her works are fundamentally concerned with moral issues . 
 = = 1812 – 1821 : Individual reactions and contemporary reviews = = 
 Austen 's novels quickly became fashionable among opinion @-@ makers , namely , those aristocrats who often dictated fashion and taste . Lady Bessborough , sister to the notorious Georgiana , Duchess of Devonshire , commented on Sense and Sensibility in a letter to a friend : " it is a clever novel . ... tho ' it ends stupidly , I was much amused by it . " The fifteen @-@ year @-@ old daughter of the Prince Regent , Princess Charlotte Augusta , compared herself to one of the book 's heroines : " I think Marianne & me are very like in disposition , that certainly I am not so good , the same imprudence , & <unk> " . After reading Pride and Prejudice , playwright Richard Sheridan advised a friend to " [ b ] <unk> it immediately " for it " was one of the cleverest things " he had ever read . Anne Milbanke , future wife of the Romantic poet Lord Byron , wrote that " I have finished the Novel called Pride and Prejudice , which I think a very superior work . " She commented that the novel " is the most probable fiction I have ever read " and had become " at present the fashionable novel " . The Dowager Lady Vernon told a friend that Mansfield Park was " [ n ] ot much of a novel , more the history of a family party in the country , very natural " — as if , comments one Austen scholar , " Lady Vernon 's parties mostly featured adultery . " Lady Anne Romilly told her friend , the novelist Maria Edgeworth , that " [ Mansfield Park ] has been pretty generally admired here " and Edgeworth commented later that " we have been much entertained with Mansfield Park " . 
 Despite these positive reactions from the elite , Austen 's novels received relatively few reviews during her lifetime : two for Sense and Sensibility , three for Pride and Prejudice , none for Mansfield Park , and seven for Emma . Most of the reviews were short and on balance favourable , although superficial and cautious . They most often focused on the moral lessons of the novels . Moreover , as Brian Southam , who has edited the definitive volumes on Austen 's reception , writes in his description of these reviewers , " their job was merely to provide brief notices , extended with quotations , for the benefit of women readers compiling their library lists and interested only in knowing whether they would like a book for its story , its characters and moral " . Asked by publisher John Murray to review Emma , famed historical novelist Walter Scott wrote the longest and most thoughtful of these reviews , which was published anonymously in the March 1816 issue of the Quarterly Review . Using the review as a platform from which to defend the then disreputable genre of the novel , Scott praised Austen 's works , celebrating her ability to copy " from nature as she really exists in the common walks of life , and presenting to the reader ... a correct and striking representation of that which is daily taking place around him " . Modern Austen scholar William <unk> has noted that " unlike some of Austen 's lay readers , who recognized her divergence from realistic practice as it had been prescribed and defined at the time , Walter Scott may well have been the first to install Austen as the realist par excellence " . Scott wrote in his private journal in 1826 , in what later became a widely quoted comparison : 
 Also read again and for the third time at least Miss Austen 's very finely written novel of Pride and Prejudice . That young lady had a talent for describing the involvement and feelings and characters of ordinary life which is to me the most wonderful I ever met with . The Big Bow @-@ wow strain I can do myself like any now going , but the exquisite touch which renders ordinary commonplace things and characters interesting from the truth of the description and the sentiment is denied to me . What a pity such a gifted creature died so early ! 
 Northanger Abbey and Persuasion , published together posthumously in December 1817 , were reviewed in the British Critic in March 1818 and in the Edinburgh Review and Literary Miscellany in May 1818 . The reviewer for the British Critic felt that Austen 's exclusive dependence on realism was evidence of a deficient imagination . The reviewer for the Edinburgh Review disagreed , praising Austen for her " <unk> invention " and the combination of the familiar and the surprising in her plots . Overall , Austen scholars have pointed out that these early reviewers did not know what to make of her novels — for example , they misunderstood her use of irony . Reviewers reduced Sense and Sensibility and Pride and Prejudice to didactic tales of virtue prevailing over vice . 
 In the Quarterly Review in 1821 , the English writer and theologian Richard Whately published the most serious and enthusiastic early posthumous review of Austen 's work . Whately drew favourable comparisons between Austen and such acknowledged greats as Homer and Shakespeare , praising the dramatic qualities of her narrative . He also affirmed the respectability and legitimacy of the novel as a genre , arguing that imaginative literature , especially narrative , was more valuable than history or biography . When it was properly done , as in Austen , Whately said , imaginative literature concerned itself with generalised human experience from which the reader could gain important insights into human nature ; in other words , it was moral . Whately also addressed Austen 's position as a female writer , writing : " we suspect one of Miss Austin 's [ sic ] great merits in our eyes to be , the insight she gives us into the peculiarities of female characters . ... Her heroines are what one knows women must be , though one never can get them to acknowledge it . " No more significant , original Austen criticism was published until the late 19th century : Whately and Scott had set the tone for the Victorian era 's view of Austen . 
 = = 1821 – 1870 : Cultured few = = 
 Austen had many admiring readers during the 19th century , who , according to critic Ian Watt , appreciated her " scrupulous ... fidelity to ordinary social experience " . However , Austen 's novels did not conform to certain strong Romantic and Victorian British preferences , which required that " powerful emotion [ be ] authenticated by an egregious display of sound and colour in the writing " . Victorian critics and audiences were drawn to the work of authors such as Charles Dickens and George Eliot ; by comparison , Austen 's novels seemed provincial and quiet . Although Austen 's works were republished beginning in late 1832 or early 1833 by Richard Bentley in the Standard Novels series , and remained in print continuously thereafter , they were not best @-@ sellers . Southam describes her " reading public between 1821 and 1870 " as " minute beside the known audience for Dickens and his contemporaries " . 
 Those who did read Austen saw themselves as discriminating readers — they were a cultured few . This became a common theme of Austen criticism during the 19th and early 20th centuries . Philosopher and literary critic George Henry Lewes articulated this theme in a series of enthusiastic articles in the 1840s and 1850s . In " The Novels of Jane Austen " , published anonymously in Blackwood 's Magazine in 1859 , Lewes praised Austen 's novels for " the economy of art ... the easy adaptation of means to ends , with no aid from superfluous elements " and compared her to Shakespeare . Arguing that Austen lacked the ability to construct a plot , he still celebrated her dramatisations : " The reader 's pulse never throbs , his curiosity is never intense ; but his interest never wanes for a moment . The action begins ; the people speak , feel , and act ; everything that is said , felt , or done tends towards the entanglement or disentanglement of the plot ; and we are almost made actors as well as spectators of the little drama . " 
 Reacting against Lewes 's essays and his personal communications with her , novelist Charlotte Brontë admired Austen 's fidelity to everyday life but described her as " only shrewd and observant " and criticised the absence of visible passion in her work . To Brontë , Austen 's work appeared formal and constrained , " a carefully fenced , highly cultivated garden , with neat borders and delicate flowers ; but no glance of bright vivid physiognomy , no open country , no fresh air , no blue hill , no bonny beck " . 
 = = 19th @-@ century European translations = = 
 Austen 's novels appeared in some European countries soon after their publication in Britain , beginning in 1813 with a French translation of Pride and Prejudice , quickly followed by German , Danish , and Swedish editions . Their availability in Europe was not universal . Austen was not well known in Russia and the first Russian translation of an Austen novel did not appear until 1967 . Despite the fact that Austen 's novels were translated into many European languages , Europeans did not recognise her works as part of the English novel tradition . This perception was reinforced by the changes made by translators who injected sentimentalism into Austen 's novels and eliminated their humour and irony . European readers therefore more readily associated Walter Scott 's style with the English novel . 
 Because of the significant changes made by her translators , Austen was received as a different kind of novelist on the Continent than in Britain . For example , the French novelist Isabelle de Montolieu translated several of Austen 's novels into a genre in which Montolieu herself wrote : the French sentimental novel . In Montolieu 's Pride and Prejudice , for example , vivacious conversations between Elizabeth and Darcy were replaced by decorous ones . Elizabeth 's claim that she has " always seen a great similarity in the turn of [ their ] minds " ( her and Darcy 's ) because they are " unwilling to speak , unless [ they ] expect to say something that will amaze the whole room " becomes " Moi , je garde le silence , parce que je ne sais que dire , et vous , parce que vous <unk> vos traits pour <unk> avec effet . " ( " Me , I keep silent , because I don 't know what to say , and you , because you excite your features for effect when speaking . " ) As <unk> and <unk> explain in their essay on Austen translations , " the equality of mind which Elizabeth takes for granted is denied and gender distinction introduced " . Because Austen 's works were seen in France as part of a sentimental tradition , they were overshadowed by the works of French realists such as Stendhal , Balzac , and Flaubert . German translations and reviews of those translations also placed Austen in a line of sentimental writers , particularly late Romantic women writers . However , a study of other important dimensions of the French translations , such as free indirect discourse ( FID ) do much to nuance our understanding of Austen 's initial " aesthetic " reception with her first French readership . Austen uses a narrative technique known as free indirect discourse ( FID ) to represent Anne Elliot 's consciousness in Persuasion . Indeed , the portrayal of the heroine 's subjective experience is central to its narration . The frequent use of FID imbues <unk> 's narrative discourse with a high degree of subtlety , placing a huge burden of interpretation on Austen 's first translators . Recent studies demonstrate that FID from Persuasion was translated extensively in Montolieu 's La Famille Elliot . Indeed , Montolieu was aware of the propensity of Austen 's narrator to delve into the heroine 's psychology in Persuasion as she comments on this in the Preface to La Famille Elliot . She characterises it as " almost imperceptible , delicate nuances that come from the heart " : des nuances <unk> presque <unk> qui <unk> du fond du cœur , et dont miss <unk> <unk> avait le secret plus qu <unk> autre <unk> . Montolieu 's extensive translations of Austen 's FID demonstrate that she was in fact one of Austen 's first critical readers , whose own finely nuanced reading of Austen 's narrative technique meant that her first French readers could also share in Anne Elliot 's psychological drama in much the same way that her English readership could . 
 = = 1870 – 1930 : Explosion in popularity = = 
 = = = Family biographies = = = 
 For decades , Scott 's and Whately 's opinions dominated the reception of Austen 's works and few people read her novels . In 1869 , this changed with the publication of the first significant Austen biography , A Memoir of Jane Austen , which was written by Jane Austen 's nephew , James Edward Austen @-@ Leigh . With its release , Austen 's popularity and critical standing increased dramatically . Readers of the Memoir were presented with the myth of the amateur novelist who wrote masterpieces : the Memoir fixed in the public mind a sentimental picture of Austen as a quiet , middle @-@ aged maiden aunt and reassured them that her work was suitable for a respectable Victorian family . James Edward Austen @-@ Leigh had a portrait of Jane Austen painted , based on the earlier watercolour , softening her image and making her presentable to the Victorian public . The engraving by Bentley which formed the frontispiece of Memoir is based on the idealised image . 
 The publication of the Memoir spurred a major reissue of Austen 's novels . The first popular editions were released in 1883 — a cheap sixpenny series published by Routledge . This was followed by a proliferation of elaborate illustrated editions , collectors ' sets , and scholarly editions . However , contemporary critics continued to assert that her works were sophisticated and only appropriate for those who could truly plumb their depths . Yet , after the publication of the Memoir , more criticism was published on Austen 's novels in two years than had appeared in the previous fifty . 
 In 1913 , William Austen @-@ Leigh and Richard Arthur Austen @-@ Leigh , descendants of the Austen family , published the definitive family biography , Jane Austen : Her Life and Letters — A Family Record . Based primarily on family papers and letters , it is described by Austen biographer Park Honan as " accurate , staid , reliable , and at times vivid and suggestive " . Although the authors moved away from the sentimental tone of the Memoir , they made little effort to go beyond the family records and traditions immediately available to them . Their book therefore offers bare facts and little in the way of interpretation . 
 = = = Criticism = = = 
 During the last quarter of the 19th century , the first books of critical analysis regarding Austen 's works were published . In 1890 Godwin Smith published the Life of Jane Austen , initiating a " fresh phase in the critical heritage " , in which Austen reviewers became critics . This launched the beginning of " formal criticism " , that is , a focus on Austen as a writer and an analysis of the techniques that made her writing unique . According to Southam , while Austen criticism increased in amount and , to some degree , in quality after 1870 , " a certain uniformity " pervaded it : 
 We see the novels praised for their elegance of form and their surface ' finish ' ; for the realism of their fictional world , the variety and vitality of their characters ; for their pervasive humour ; and for their gentle and <unk> morality and its <unk> delivery . The novels are prized for their ' perfection ' . Yet it is seen to be a narrow perfection , achieved within the bounds of domestic comedy . 
 Among the most astute of these critics were Richard Simpson , Margaret Oliphant , and Leslie Stephen . In a review of the Memoir , Simpson described Austen as a serious yet ironic critic of English society . He introduced two interpretative themes which later became the basis for modern literary criticism of Austen 's works : humour as social critique and irony as a means of moral evaluation . Continuing Lewes 's comparison to Shakespeare , Simpson wrote that Austen : 
 began by being an ironical critic ; she manifested her judgment ... not by direct censure , but by the indirect method of imitating and exaggerating the faults of her models . ... Criticism , humour , irony , the judgment not of one that gives sentence but of the mimic who quizzes while he mocks , are her characteristics . 
 Simpson 's essay was not well known and did not become influential until Lionel Trilling quoted it in 1957 . Another prominent writer whose Austen criticism was ignored , novelist Margaret Oliphant , described Austen in almost proto @-@ feminist terms , as " armed with a ' fine vein of feminine cynicism , ' ' full of subtle power , keenness , finesse , and self @-@ restraint , ' blessed with an ' exquisite sense ' of the ' ridiculous , ' ' a fine stinging yet soft @-@ voiced contempt , ' whose novels are ' so calm and cold and keen ' " . This line of criticism would not be fully explored until the 1970s with the rise of feminist literary criticism . 
 Although Austen 's novels had been published in the United States since 1832 , albeit in bowdlerised editions , it was not until after 1870 that there was a distinctive American response to Austen . As Southam explains , " for American literary nationalists Jane Austen 's cultivated scene was too pallid , too constrained , too refined , too downright unheroic " . Austen was not democratic enough for American tastes and her canvas did not extend to the frontier themes that had come to define American literature . By the start of the 20th century , the American response was represented by the debate between the American novelist and critic William Dean Howells and the writer and humourist Mark Twain . In a series of essays , Howells helped make Austen into a canonical figure for the populace whereas Twain used Austen to argue against the Anglophile tradition in America . That is , Twain argued for the distinctiveness of American literature by attacking English literature . In his book Following the Equator , Twain described the library on his ship : " Jane Austen 's books ... are absent from this library . Just that one omission alone would make a fairly good library out of a library that hadn 't a book in it . " 
 = = = Janeites = = = 
 The Encyclopædia Britannica 's changing entries on Austen illustrate her increasing popularity and status . The eighth edition ( 1854 ) described her as " an elegant novelist " while the ninth edition ( 1875 ) lauded her as " one of the most distinguished modern British novelists " . Around the start of the 20th century , Austen novels began to be studied at universities and appear in histories of the English novel . The image of her that dominated the popular imagination was still that first presented in the Memoir and made famous by Howells in his series of essays in Harper 's Magazine , that of " dear aunt Jane " . Author and critic Leslie Stephen described a mania that started to develop for Austen in the 1880s as " <unk> " — it was only after the publication of the Memoir that readers developed a personal connection with Austen . However , around 1900 , members of the literary elite , who had claimed an appreciation of Austen as a mark of culture , reacted against this popularisation of her work . They referred to themselves as Janeites to distinguish themselves from the masses who , in their view , did not properly understand Austen . 
 American novelist Henry James , one member of this literary elite , referred to Austen several times with approval and on one occasion ranked her with Shakespeare , Cervantes , and Henry Fielding as among " the fine painters of life " . But , James thought Austen an " unconscious " artist whom he described as " instinctive and charming " . In 1905 , James responded frustratingly to what he described as " a beguiled infatuation " with Austen , a rising tide of public interest that exceeded Austen 's " intrinsic merit and interest " . James attributed this rise principally to " the stiff breeze of the commercial , ... the special bookselling spirits . ... the body of publishers , editors , illustrators , producers of the pleasant twaddle of magazines ; who have found their ' dear , ' our dear , everybody 's dear , Jane so infinitely to their material purpose , so amenable to pretty reproduction in every variety of what is called tasteful , and in what seemingly proves to be salable , form . " 
 In an effort to avoid the sentimental image of the " Aunt Jane " tradition and approach Austen 's fiction from a fresh perspective , in 1917 British intellectual and travel writer Reginald Farrer published a lengthy essay in the Quarterly Review which Austen scholar A. Walton <unk> calls the best single introduction to her fiction . Southam describes it as a " <unk> " piece without the worship . Farrer denied that Austen 's artistry was unconscious ( contradicting James ) and described her as a writer of intense concentration and a severe critic of her society , " radiant and remorseless " , " dispassionate yet pitiless " , with " the steely quality , the incurable rigor of her judgment " . Farrer was one of the first critics who viewed Austen as a subversive writer . 
 = = 1930 – 2000 : Modern scholarship = = 
 Several important early works — glimmers of brilliant Austen scholarship — paved the way for Austen to become solidly entrenched within the academy . The first was Oxford Shakespearean scholar A. C. Bradley 's 1911 essay , " generally regarded as the starting @-@ point for the serious academic approach to Jane Austen " . Bradley emphasised Austen 's ties to 18th @-@ century critic and writer Samuel Johnson , arguing that she was a moralist as well as humourist ; in this he was " totally original " , according to Southam . Bradley divided Austen 's works into " early " and " late " novels , categories which are still used by scholars today . The second path @-@ breaking early @-@ 20th century critic of Austen was R. W. Chapman , whose magisterial edition of Austen 's collected works was the first scholarly edition of the works of any English novelist . The Chapman texts have remained the basis for all subsequent editions of Austen 's works . 
 In the wake of Bradley and Chapman 's contributions , the 1920s saw a boom in Austen scholarship , and the novelist E. M. Forster primarily illustrated his concept of the " round " character by citing Austen 's works . It was with the 1939 publication of Mary Lascelles ' Jane Austen and Her Art — " the first full @-@ scale historical and scholarly study " of Austen — that the academic study of her works matured . Lascelles included a short biographical essay ; an innovative analysis of the books Austen read and their effect on her writing ; and an extended analysis of Austen 's style and her " narrative art " . Lascelles felt that prior critics had all worked on a scale " so small that the reader does not see how they have reached their conclusions until he has patiently found his own way to them " . She wished to examine all of Austen 's works together and to subject her style and techniques to methodical analysis . Subsequent critics agree that she succeeded . Like Bradley earlier , she emphasised Austen 's connection to Samuel Johnson and her desire to discuss morality through fiction . However , at the time some fans of Austen worried that academics were taking over Austen criticism and it was becoming increasingly esoteric — a debate that has continued to the beginning of the 21st century . 
 In an outpouring of mid @-@ century revisionist views , scholars approached Austen more sceptically . D. W. Harding , following and expanding upon Farrer , argued in his essay " Regulated Hatred : An Aspect of the Work of Jane Austen " that Austen 's novels did not support the status quo but rather subverted it . Her irony was not humorous but caustic and intended to undermine the assumptions of the society she portrayed . Through her use of irony , Austen attempted to protect her integrity as an artist and a person in the face of attitudes and practices she rejected . Almost simultaneously , influential critic Q. D. Leavis argued in " Critical Theory of Jane Austen 's Writing " , published in Scrutiny in the early 1940s , that Austen was a professional , not an amateur , writer . Harding 's and Leavis 's articles were followed by another revisionist treatment by Marvin Mudrick in Jane Austen : Irony as Defense and Discovery ( 1952 ) . Mudrick portrayed Austen as isolated , defensive , and critical of her society , and described in detail the relationship he saw between Austen 's attitude toward contemporary literature and her use of irony as a technique to contrast the realities of her society with what she felt they should be . These revisionist views , together with prominent critic F. R. Leavis 's pronouncement in The Great Tradition ( 1948 ) that Austen was one of the great writers of English fiction , a view shared by Ian Watt , who helped shape the scholarly debate regarding the genre of the novel , did much to cement Austen 's reputation amongst academics . They agreed that she " combined [ Henry Fielding 's and Samuel Richardson 's ] qualities of interiority and irony , realism and satire to form an author superior to both " . 
 The period after the Second World War saw a flowering of scholarship on Austen as well as a diversity of critical approaches . One of the most fruitful and contentious has been the consideration of Austen as a political writer . As critic Gary Kelly explains , " Some see her as a political ' conservative ' because she seems to defend the established social order . Others see her as sympathetic to ' radical ' politics that challenged the established order , especially in the form of patriarchy ... some critics see Austen 's novels as neither conservative nor subversive , but complex , criticizing aspects of the social order but supporting stability and an open class hierarchy . " In Jane Austen and the War of Ideas ( 1975 ) , perhaps the most important of these works , Marilyn Butler argues that Austen was steeped in , not insulated from , the principal moral and political controversies of her time , and espoused a partisan , fundamentally conservative and Christian position in these controversies . In a similar vein , Alistair M. Duckworth in The Improvement of the Estate : A Study of Jane Austen 's Novels ( 1971 ) argues that Austen used the concept of the " estate " to symbolise all that was important about contemporary English society , which should be conserved , improved , and passed down to future generations . As Rajeswari Rajan notes in her essay on recent Austen scholarship , " the idea of a political Austen is no longer seriously challenged " . The questions scholars now investigate involve : " the [ French ] Revolution , war , nationalism , empire , class , ' improvement ' [ of the estate ] , the clergy , town versus country , abolition , the professions , female emancipation ; whether her politics were Tory , Whig , or radical ; whether she was a conservative or a revolutionary , or occupied a reformist position between these extremes " . 
 In the 1970s and 1980s , Austen studies was influenced by Sandra Gilbert and Susan Gubar 's seminal The Madwoman in the Attic ( 1979 ) , which contrasts the " decorous surfaces " with the " explosive anger " of 19th @-@ century female English writers . This work , along with other feminist criticism of Austen , has firmly positioned Austen as a woman writer . The interest generated in Austen by these critics led to the discovery and study of other woman writers of the time . Moreover , with the publication of Julia Prewitt Brown 's Jane Austen 's Novels : Social Change and Literary Form ( 1979 ) , Margaret Kirkham 's Jane Austen : Feminism and Fiction ( 1983 ) , and Claudia L. Johnson 's Jane Austen : Women , Politics and the Novel ( 1988 ) , scholars were no longer able to easily argue that Austen was " apolitical , or even unqualifiedly ' conservative ' " . Kirkham , for example , described the similarities between Austen 's thought and that of Mary Wollstonecraft , labelling them both as " Enlightenment feminists " . Johnson similarly places Austen in an 18th @-@ century political tradition , however , she outlines the debt Austen owes to the political novels of the 1790s written by women . 
 In the late @-@ 1980s , 1990s , and 2000s ideological , postcolonial , and Marxist criticism dominated Austen studies . Generating heated debate , Edward Said devoted a chapter of his book Culture and Imperialism ( 1993 ) to Mansfield Park , arguing that the peripheral position of " Antigua " and the issue of slavery demonstrated that colonial oppression was an unspoken assumption of English society during the early 19th century . In Jane Austen and the Body : ' The Picture of Health ' , ( 1992 ) John Wiltshire explored the preoccupation with illness and health of Austen 's characters . Wiltshire addressed current theories of " the body as sexuality " , and more broadly how culture is " inscribed " on the representation of the body . There has also been a return to considerations of aesthetics with D. A. Miller 's Jane Austen , or The Secret of Style ( 2003 ) which connects artistic concerns with queer theory . 
 = = Modern popular culture = = 
 = = = Modern Janeites = = = 
 Critic Claudia Johnson defines " <unk> " as " the self @-@ consciously idolatrous enthusiasm for ' Jane ' and every detail relative to her " . Janeites not only read the novels of Austen ; they also re @-@ enact them , write plays based on them , and become experts on early 19th @-@ century England and its customs . Austen scholar Deidre Lynch has commented that " cult " is an apt term for committed Janeites . She compares the practices of religious pilgrims with those of Janeites , who travel to places associated with Austen 's life , her novels and the film adaptations . She speculates that this is " a kind of time @-@ travel to the past " which , by catering to Janeites , preserves a " vanished Englishness or set of ' traditional ' values " . The disconnection between the popular appreciation of Austen and the academic appreciation of Austen that began with Lascelles has since widened considerably . Johnson compares Janeites to Trekkies , arguing that both " are derided and marginalized by dominant cultural institutions bent on legitimizing their own objects and protocols of expertise " . However , she notes that Austen 's works are now considered to be part of both high culture and popular culture , while Star Trek can only claim to be a part of popular culture . 
 = = = Adaptations = = = 
 Sequels , prequels , and adaptations based on Jane Austen 's work range from attempts to enlarge on the stories in Austen 's own style to the soft @-@ core pornographic novel Virtues and Vices ( 1981 ) and fantasy novel Resolve and Resistance ( 1996 ) . Beginning in the middle of the 19th century , Austen family members published conclusions to her incomplete novels . By 2000 , there were over one hundred printed adaptations of Austen 's works . According to Lynch , " her works appear to have proven more hospitable to <unk> than those of almost any other novelist " . Relying on the categories laid out by Betty A. Schellenberg and Paul <unk> , Lynch describes two different kinds of Austen sequels : those that continue the story and those that return to " the world of Jane Austen " . The texts that continue the story are " generally regarded as dubious enterprises , as reviews attest " and " often feel like throwbacks to the Gothic and sentimental novels that Austen loved to burlesque " . Those that emphasise nostalgia are " defined not only by retrograde longing but also by a kind of postmodern playfulness and predilection for insider joking " , relying on the reader to see the web of Austenian allusions . Interest in Austen and adaptations of her novels have been common throughout the 20th century ; between 1900 and 1975 , more than sixty radio , television , film , and stage productions of Austen 's various works were produced . 
 The first feature film adaptation of an Austen novel was the 1940 MGM production of Pride and Prejudice starring Laurence Olivier and Greer Garson . A Hollywood adaptation was first suggested by the entertainer Harpo Marx , who had seen a dramatisation of the novel in Philadelphia in 1935 , but production was delayed . Directed by Robert Z. Leonard and written in collaboration with the English novelist Aldous Huxley and American screenwriter Jane <unk> , the film was critically well @-@ received although the plot and characterisations notably strayed from Austen 's original . Filmed in a studio and in black and white , the story 's setting was relocated to the 1830s with opulent costume designs . 
 In direct opposition to the Hollywood adaptations of Austen 's novels , BBC dramatisations from the 1970s onward aimed to adhere meticulously to Austen 's plots , characterisations , and settings . The 1972 BBC adaptation of Emma , for example , took great care to be historically accurate , but its slow pacing and long takes contrasted unfavourably to the pace of commercial films . The BBC 's 1980 adaptation of Pride and Prejudice adopted many film techniques — such as the use of long landscape shots — that gave the production a greater visual sophistication . Often seen as the start of the " heritage drama " movement , this production was the first to be filmed largely on location . A push for " fusion " adaptations , or films that combined Hollywood style and British heritage style , began in the mid @-@ 1980s . The BBC 's first fusion adaptation was the 1986 production of Northanger Abbey , which combined authentic style and 1980s punk , with characters often veering into the surreal . 
 A wave of Austen adaptations began to appear around 1995 , starting with Emma Thompson 's 1995 adaptation of Sense and Sensibility for Columbia Pictures , a fusion production directed by Ang Lee . This star @-@ studded film departed from the novel in many ways , but it quickly became a commercial and critical success . It was nominated for numerous awards , including seven Oscars . The BBC produced two adaptations in 1995 : the traditional telefilm Persuasion and Andrew Davies 's immensely popular Pride and Prejudice . Starring Colin Firth and Jennifer Ehle , Davies 's film outshone the small @-@ scale Persuasion and became a runaway success , igniting " <unk> " in Britain and launching the stars ' careers . Critics praised its smart departures from the novel as well as its sensual costuming , fast @-@ paced editing , and original yet appropriate dialogue . This BBC production sparked an explosion in the publication of printed Austen adaptations ; in addition , 200 @,@ 000 video copies of the serial were sold within a year of its airing — 50 @,@ 000 were sold within the first week alone . 
 Books and scripts that use the general storyline of Austen 's novels but change or otherwise modernise the story also became popular at the end of the 20th century . Clueless ( 1995 ) , Amy Heckerling 's updated version of Emma that takes place in Beverly Hills , became a cultural phenomenon and spawned its own television series . Bridget Jones 's Diary ( 2001 ) , based on the successful 1996 book of the same name by Helen Fielding , was inspired by both Pride and Prejudice and the 1995 BBC adaptation . The <unk> production Bride and Prejudice , which sets Austen 's story in present @-@ day India while including original musical numbers , premiered in 2004 . Yet another adaptation of Pride and Prejudice was released the following year . Starring Keira Knightley , who was nominated for an Academy Award for her portrayal of Elizabeth Bennet , Joe Wright 's film marked the first feature adaptation since 1940 that aspired to be faithful to the novel . 
 On 10 November 2005 , Julia Day from The Guardian reported ITV controller of drama , Nick Elliott , had ordered three new adaptations of Mansfield Park , Northanger Abbey and Persuasion . Elliot commented that the adaptations would be " important remakes for the new generation " . He explained , " About every 10 years , all the great stories need retelling . These films will be very much 2007 films ... we 've asked and pushed the production team to make them young . Her stories always make great TV drama and our Jane Austen season will feature the absolute cream of British acting talent . " The three films were also produced and distributed on DVD for home video use . 
 In January 2016 a film version of Austen 's early epistolary novel Lady Susan directed by Whit Stillman premiered at the Sundance Film Festival starring Kate Beckinsale and Chloe Sevigny under the borrowed title of another one of Austen 's early novels Love & Friendship . 
 = Phallus indusiatus = 
 Phallus indusiatus , commonly called the bamboo fungus , bamboo pith , long net stinkhorn , crinoline stinkhorn or veiled lady , is a fungus in the family Phallaceae , or stinkhorns . It has a cosmopolitan distribution in tropical areas , and is found in southern Asia , Africa , the Americas , and Australia , where it grows in woodlands and gardens in rich soil and well @-@ rotted woody material . The fruit body of the fungus is characterised by a conical to bell @-@ shaped cap on a stalk and a delicate lacy " skirt " , or indusium , that hangs from beneath the cap and reaches nearly to the ground . First described scientifically in 1798 by French botanist Étienne Pierre Ventenat , the species has often been referred to a separate genus Dictyophora along with other Phallus species featuring an indusium . P. indusiatus can be distinguished from other similar species by differences in distribution , size , color , and indusium length . 
 Mature fruit bodies are up to 25 cm ( 10 in ) tall with a conical to bell @-@ shaped cap that is 1 @.@ 5 – 4 cm ( 0 @.@ 6 – 1 @.@ 6 in ) wide . The cap is covered with a greenish @-@ brown spore @-@ containing slime , which attracts flies and other insects that eat the spores and disperse them . An edible mushroom featured as an ingredient in Chinese haute cuisine , it is used in stir @-@ frys and chicken soups . The mushroom , grown commercially and commonly sold in Asian markets , is rich in protein , carbohydrates , and dietary fiber . The mushroom also contains various bioactive compounds , and has antioxidant and antimicrobial properties . Phallus indusiatus has a recorded history of use in Chinese medicine extending back to the 7th century AD , and features in Nigerian folklore . 
 = = Taxonomic history = = 
 Phallus indusiatus was initially described by French naturalist Étienne Pierre Ventenat in 1798 , and sanctioned under that name by Christiaan Hendrik Persoon in 1801 . One author anonymously gave his impressions of Ventenat 's discovery in an 1800 publication : 
 This beautiful species , which is sufficiently characterised to distinguish it from every other individual of the class , is copiously produced in Dutch Guiana , about 300 paces from the sea , and nearly as far from the left bank of the river of Surinam . It was communicated to me by the elder Vaillant , who discovered it in 1755 on some raised ground which was never overflowed by the highest tides , and is formed of a very fine white sand , covered with a thin stratum of earth . The prodigious quantity of individuals of this species which grow at the same time , the very different periods of their expansion , the brilliancy and the varied shades of their colours , present a prospect truly picturesque . 
 The fungus was later placed in a new genus , Dictyophora , in 1809 by Nicaise Auguste Desvaux ; it was then known for many years as Dictyophora indusiata . Christian Gottfried Daniel Nees von Esenbeck placed the species in Hymenophallus in 1817 , as H. indusiatus . Both genera were eventually returned to synonyms of Phallus and the species is now known again by its original name . 
 Curtis Gates Lloyd described the variety <unk> in 1909 , originally as a new species , Phallus <unk> . It was found in Kew , Australia . A form with a pink @-@ coloured indusium was reported by Vincenzo de <unk> in 1879 as Hymenophallus roseus , and later called Dictyophora indusiata f. rosea by <unk> Kobayasi in 1965 ; it is synonymous with Phallus cinnabarinus . A taxon described in 1936 as Dictyophora lutea and variously known for years as Dictyophora indusiata f. lutea , D. indusiata f. aurantiaca , or Phallus indusiatus f. citrinus , was formally transferred to Phallus in 2008 as a distinct species , Phallus luteus . 
 The specific epithet is the Latin adjective <unk> , " wearing an undergarment " . The former generic name Dictyophora is derived from the Ancient Greek words <unk> ( <unk> , " net " ) , and <unk> ( <unk> , " to bear " ) , hence " bearing a net " . Phallus indusiatus has many common names based on its appearance , including long net stinkhorn , crinoline stinkhorn , basket stinkhorn , bridal veil fungus , and veiled lady . The Japanese name <unk> ( <unk> or <unk> ) , derived from the word <unk> , refers to the wide @-@ brimmed hats that featured a hanging silk veil to hide and protect the wearer 's face . A Chinese common name that alludes to its typical growth habitat is " bamboo mushroom " ( simplified Chinese : <unk> ; traditional Chinese : <unk> ; pinyin : <unk> ) . 
 = = Description = = 
 Immature fruit bodies of P. indusiatus are initially enclosed in an egg @-@ shaped to roughly spherical subterranean structure encased in a peridium . The " egg " ranges in color from whitish to buff to reddish @-@ brown , measures up to 6 cm ( 2 @.@ 4 in ) in diameter , and usually has a thick mycelial cord attached at the bottom . As the mushroom matures , the pressure caused by the enlargement of the internal structures cause the peridium to tear and the fruit body rapidly emerges from the " egg " . The mature mushroom is up to 25 cm ( 9 @.@ 8 in ) tall and girded with a net @-@ like structure called the indusium ( or less technically a " skirt " ) that hangs down from the conical to bell @-@ shaped cap . The netlike openings of the indusium may be polygonal or round in shape . Well @-@ developed specimens have an indusium that reaches to the volva and flares out somewhat before collapsing on the stalk . The cap is 1 @.@ 5 – 4 cm ( 0 @.@ 6 – 1 @.@ 6 in ) wide and its reticulated ( pitted and ridged ) surface is covered with a layer of greenish @-@ brown and foul @-@ smelling slime , the gleba , which initially partially obscures the reticulations . The top of the cap has a small hole . The stalk is 7 – 25 cm ( 2 @.@ 8 – 9 @.@ 8 in ) long , and 1 @.@ 5 – 3 cm ( 0 @.@ 6 – 1 @.@ 2 in ) thick . The hollow stalk is white , roughly equal in width throughout its length , sometimes curved , and spongy . The ruptured peridium remains as a loose volva at the base of the stalk . Fruit bodies develop during the night , and require 10 – 15 hours to fully develop after emerging from the peridium . They are short @-@ lived , typically lasting no more than a few days . At that point the slime has usually been removed by insects , leaving the pale off @-@ white , bare cap surface exposed . Spores of P. indusiatus are thin @-@ walled , smooth , elliptical or slightly curved , hyaline ( translucent ) , and measure 2 – 3 by 1 – 1 @.@ 5 μm . 
 = = = Similar species = = = 
 Phallus multicolor is similar in overall appearance , but it has a more brightly coloured cap , stem and indusium , and it is usually smaller . It is found in Australia , Guam , Sumatra , Java , Borneo , Papua New Guinea , Zaire , and Tobago as well as Hawaii . The cap of the Indo @-@ Pacific species P. <unk> appears smooth when covered with gleba , and is pale and wrinkled once the gleba has worn off . In contrast , the cap surface of P. indusiatus tends to have conspicuous reticulations that remain clearly visible under the gleba . Also , the indusium of P. <unk> is more delicate and shorter than that of P. indusiatus , and is thus less likely to collapse under its own weight . Common in eastern North America and Japan , and widely recorded in Europe , the species P. <unk> has a smaller indusium that hangs 3 – 6 cm ( 1 @.@ 2 – 2 @.@ 4 in ) from the bottom of the cap , and sometimes collapses against the stalk . 
 Found in Asia , Australia , Hawaii , southern Mexico , and Central and South America , P. cinnabarinus grows to 13 cm ( 5 @.@ 1 in ) tall , and has a more offensive odor than P. indusiatus . It attracts flies from the genus Lucilia ( family Calliphoridae ) , rather than the house flies of the genus Musca that visit P. indusiatus . P. <unk> , described from China in 1988 , is closely related to P. indusiatus , but can be distinguished by its volva that has a spiky ( <unk> ) surface , and its higher preferred growth temperature of 30 to 35 ° C ( 86 to 95 ° F ) . P. luteus , originally considered a form of P. indusiatus , has a yellowish reticulate cap , a yellow indusium , and a pale pink to reddish @-@ purple peridium and rhizomorphs . It is found in Asia and Mexico . 
 = = Ecology and distribution = = 
 The range of Phallus indusiatus is tropical , including Africa ( Congo , Nigeria , Uganda , and Zaire ) South America ( Brazil Guyana , and Venezuela ) , Central America ( Costa Rica ) , and Tobago . In North America , its range is restricted to Mexico . Asian localities include Indonesia , Malaysia , India , Southern China , Japan , and Taiwan . It has also been collected in Australia . 
 Like all Phallus species , P. indusiatus is saprobic — deriving nutrients from breaking down wood and plant organic matter . The fruit bodies grow singly or in groups in disturbed ground and among wood chips . In Asia , it grows among bamboo forests , and typically fruits after heavy rains . The method of reproduction for stinkhorns , including P. indusiatus , is different from most agaric mushrooms , which forcibly eject their spores . <unk> instead produce a sticky spore mass that has a sharp , sickly @-@ sweet odor of carrion . The cloying stink of mature fruit bodies — detectable from a considerable distance — is attractive to certain insects . Species recorded visiting the fungus include stingless bees of the genus <unk> , and flies of the families Drosophilidae and <unk> . Insects assist in spore dispersal by consuming the gleba and depositing excrement containing intact spores to germinate elsewhere . Although the function of the indusium is not known definitively , it may visually entice insects not otherwise attracted by the odour , and serve as a ladder for crawling insects to reach the gleba . 
 = = Edibility and cultivation = = 
 In eastern Asia , P. indusiatus is considered a delicacy and an aphrodisiac . Previously only collected in the wild , where it is not abundant , it was difficult to procure . The mushroom 's scarcity meant that it was usually reserved for special occasions . In the time of China 's Qing Dynasty , the species was collected in Yunnan Province and sent to the Imperial Palaces to satisfy the appetite of Empress Dowager Cixi , who particularly enjoyed meals containing edible fungi . It was one of the eight featured ingredients of the " Bird 's Nest Eight Immortals Soup " served at a banquet to celebrate her 60th birthday . This dish , served by descendants of the Confucius family in celebrations and longevity banquets , contained ingredients that were " all precious food , delicacies from land and sea , fresh , tender , and crisp , appropriately sweet and salty " . Another notable use was a state banquet held for American diplomat Henry Kissinger on his visit to China to reestablish diplomatic relations in the early 1970s . One source writes of the mushroom : " It has a fine and tender texture , fragrance and is attractive , beautiful in shape , fresh and crispy in taste . " The dried fungus , commonly sold in Asian markets , is prepared by rehydrating and soaking or simmering in water until tender . Sometimes used in stir @-@ frys , it is traditionally used as a component of rich chicken soups . The rehydrated mushroom can also be stuffed and cooked . 
 Phallus indusiatus has been cultivated on a commercial scale in China since 1979 . In the Fujian Province of China — known for a thriving mushroom industry that cultivates 45 species of edible fungi — P. indusiatus is produced in the counties of <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> . Advances in cultivation have made the fungus cheaper and more widely available ; in 1998 , about 1 @,@ 100 metric tons ( 1 @,@ 100 long tons ; 1 @,@ 200 short tons ) were produced in China . The Hong Kong price for a kilogram of dried mushrooms reached around US $ 770 in 1982 , but had dropped to US $ 100 – 200 by 1988 . Additional advances led to it dropping further to US $ 10 – 20 by 2000 . The fungus is grown on agricultural wastes — bamboo @-@ trash sawdust covered with a thin layer of non @-@ sterilised soil . The optimal temperature for the growth of mushroom spawn and fruit bodies is about 24 ° C ( 75 ° F ) , with a relative humidity of 90 – 95 % . Other substrates that can be used for the cultivation of the fungus include bamboo leaves and small stems , soybean pods or stems , corn stems , and willow leaves . 
 A nutritional analysis of P. indusiatus ( based on specimens collected from Nigeria ) determined that the egg stage of the fungus contains ( per 100 g of fungus , dry weight ) 33 @.@ 6 g of crude protein , 1 @.@ 66 g of fat , and 3 @.@ 98 g of carbohydrates . The egg stage was also measured to comprise 20 @.@ 9 g dietary fibre , and 88 @.@ 76 % moisture . The high levels of protein and fibre ( which are comparable to values found in meat and vegetables , respectively ) suggest that the egg form of P. indusiatus is a good food source . The concentration of several mineral elements , including potassium , sodium , and iron , was also favourable compared to fruits and vegetables , although the mineral composition in the fungus is dependent on their corresponding concentrations in the soil in which they grow . 
 = = Folklore = = 
 According to ethnomycologist R. Gordon Wasson , P. indusiatus was consumed in Mexican divinatory ceremonies on account of its suggestive shape . On the other side of the globe , New Guinea natives consider the mushroom sacred . In Nigeria , the mushroom is one of several stinkhorns given the name <unk> by the Yoruba people . The name is derived from a combination of the Yoruba words ku ( " die " ) , fun ( " for " ) , ode ( " hunter " ) , and wa ( " search " ) , and refers to how the mushroom 's stench can attract hunters who mistake its odour for that of a dead animal . The Yoruba have been reported to have used it as a component of a charm to make hunters less visible in times of danger . In other parts of Nigeria , they have been used in the preparation of harmful charms by ethnic groups such as the <unk> and the Ibibio people . The Igbo people of east @-@ central Nigeria called stinkhorns <unk> <unk> , from the Igbo words for " mushroom " and " beauty " . 
 = = Bioactive properties = = 
 Medicinal properties have been ascribed to Phallus indusiatus from the time of the Chinese Tang Dynasty when it was described in pharmacopoeia . The fungus was used to treat many inflammatory , stomach , and neural diseases . Southern China 's Miao people continue to use it traditionally for a number of afflictions , including injuries and pains , cough , dysentery , enteritis , leukemia , and feebleness , and it has been prescribed clinically as a treatment for laryngitis , <unk> , fever , and <unk> ( low urine output ) , diarrhea , hypertension , cough , hyperlipidemia , and in anticancer therapy . Modern science has probed the biochemical basis of these putative medicinal benefits . 
 The fruit bodies of the fungus contain biologically active polysaccharides . A β @-@ D @-@ glucan called T @-@ 5 @-@ N and prepared from alkaline extracts has been shown to have anti @-@ inflammatory properties . Its chemical structure is a linear chain backbone made largely of α @-@ 1 → 3 linked D @-@ <unk> residues , with traces of 1 → 6 linked D @-@ <unk> residues . The polysaccharide has tumour @-@ suppressing activity against subcutaneously implanted sarcoma 180 ( a <unk> , non @-@ <unk> connective tissue tumour often used in research ) in mice . 
 Another chemical of interest found in P. indusiatus is <unk> , which has attracted attention as a tyrosinase inhibitor . <unk> catalyzes the initial steps of <unk> in mammals , and is responsible for the undesirable browning reactions in damaged fruits during post @-@ harvest handling and processing , and its inhibitors are of interest to the medical , cosmetics , and food industries . <unk> , which occurs naturally in several foods , is not associated with serious health risks . P. indusiatus also contains a unique ribonuclease ( an enzyme that cuts RNA into smaller components ) possessing several biochemical characteristics that differentiate it from other known mushroom ribonucleases . 
 Two novel sesquiterpenes , <unk> A and B , have been identified from the fruit bodies of the fungus . These compounds , based on the <unk> skeleton ( a common structure found in plant @-@ derived flavours and fragrances ) , are the first <unk> derivatives isolated from fungi and were found to promote the synthesis of nerve growth factor in <unk> cells . Related compounds isolated and identified from the fungus include three <unk> derivatives ( a class of compounds rare in nature ) , <unk> A , B , and C. These chemicals were shown in laboratory tests to have a protective effect on cultured mouse neurons that had been exposed to neurotoxins . A total synthesis for the <unk> was reported in 2007 . 
 The fungus has long been recognised to have antibacterial properties : the addition of the fungus to soup broth was known to prevent it from spoiling for several days . Experiments have shown that extracts of P. indusiatus have antioxidant in addition to antimicrobial properties . Mushroom extracts were tested against a variety of bacteria and fungi pathogenic to humans , and in some cases had antimicrobial activity comparable to the antibiotics ampicillin , tetracycline , and <unk> . One of the responsible antibiotics , <unk> , was isolated in 2011 . It is a sesquiterpenoid that was already known from the soil bacterium Streptomyces <unk> . The antioxidant effect of the fungus is due to the presence of polyphenols whose role in reducing cellular damage from oxidative stress is well known . 
 A 2001 publication in the International Journal of Medicinal Mushrooms attempted to determine its efficacy as an aphrodisiac . In the trial involving only sixteen women , six self @-@ reported the experience of a mild orgasm while smelling the fruit body , and the other ten , who received smaller doses , self @-@ reported an increased heart rate . All of the twenty men tested considered the smell displeasing . The study used fruit bodies found in Hawaii , not the edible variety cultivated in China . 
 = = = Cited literature = = = 
 Chang S @-@ T , Miles PG ( 2004 ) . " Dictyophora , formerly for the few " . Mushrooms : Cultivation , Nutritional Value , Medicinal Effect , and Environmental Impact ( 2nd ed . ) . Boca Raton , Florida : CRC Press. pp. 343 – 56 @.@ doi : 10 @.@ 1201 / <unk> ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 1043 @-@ 1 . 
 Hall IR . ( 2003 ) . Edible and Poisonous Mushrooms of the World . Portland , Oregon : Timber Press . ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 586 @-@ 1 . 
 Hu D. ( 2005 ) . Chinese food culture and mushroom ( PDF ) ( Report ) . Wageningen , Netherlands : Wageningen University and Research Centre , Agricultural Economics Research Institute , <unk> BV . 
 = Me Against the Music = 
 " Me Against the Music " is a song recorded by American singers Britney Spears and Madonna for Spears ' fourth studio album , In the Zone ( 2003 ) . It was written by Spears , Madonna , Christopher " Tricky " Stewart , Thabiso " Tab " <unk> , Penelope Magnet , Terius Nash and Gary O 'Brien . The song was released on October 14 , 2003 , by Jive Records , as the lead single of In the Zone . After bonding with Spears during a night in New York City , Stewart and Magnet started working on the song for her . During rehearsals for the 2003 MTV Video Music Awards , Spears played Madonna the track and asked her to do the song with her . 
 " Me Against the Music " contains influences of hip hop and usage of funk guitars . Spears and Madonna trade lines during the verses , and Madonna sings the bridge . Lyrically , the song talks about battling the music and the pleasures of letting go on the dancefloor . The song received generally mixed reviews from music critics . Some felt it was a strong dance track of In the Zone , while others referred to it as lackluster and disappointing . The song was a commercial success , peaking atop of the charts in countries such as Australia , Denmark , Hungary , Ireland and Spain , as well as the European Hot 100 Singles . It also peaked at number two in Canada , Italy , Norway and the United Kingdom , and inside the top five in many other nations . The song won the " Hot Dance Single of the Year " accolade at the 2004 Billboard Music Awards . 
 The accompanying music video for " Me Against the Music " shows Spears and Madonna playing opposites in a nightclub . A cat @-@ and @-@ mouse chase ensues , and Spears finds Madonna in the end , only for the latter to disappear before they kiss . The video received positive reviews from critics , who noted it as symbolic of the sexual roles between the women . Spears has performed the song in a number of live appearances including the 2003 NFL Kickoff Live , Saturday Night Live , 2003 American Music Awards and TRL . She has also performed remixed versions with elements of bhangra music at The Onyx Hotel Tour ( 2004 ) and The Circus Starring Britney Spears ( 2009 ) . Spears is currently performing the song on her Las Vegas residency show Britney : Piece of Me . " Me Against the Music " has been sampled by Justice , while the music video was recreated by television series Glee and included an appearance by Spears . 
 = = Background and writing = = 
 American producers Christopher " Tricky " Stewart and Penelope Magnet , known collectively as RedZone Entertainment , presented Spears with the third song they had written and produced , " Pop Culture Whore " . While her management liked the track , she rejected it , telling them the song " sucked " . After bonding with Spears during a night in New York City to " get in her world " , as Magnet explained , it was easier to " actually write and know what she would and wouldn 't say , to know where her real vibe is " . Stewart and Magnet began working on the first version of the song ; Stewart came up with the track , while Magnet developed the melody on a piano and some of the lyrics . American producer The @-@ Dream became involved after Stewart proposed him to work together on the track for Spears . He explained , " I was just getting into the business . I 'm in Atlanta , driving home in a ' 92 Cadillac , and I get the call [ ... ] I hung up and just screamed out joyous sounds . " During the recording sessions , Stewart recalls that the studio 's air @-@ conditioning died for three days , but Spears " didn 't complain or anything , and for me that shows she 's where she is for a reason . " 
 While rehearsing for their performance at the 2003 MTV Video Music Awards , Spears played a finished version of " Me Against the Music " to Madonna . After Madonna commented that she liked the track , Spears asked her to do the song with her . RedZone then handed " Me Against the Music " to Madonna , who arranged and recorded her vocal additions on her own , therefore making the song a duet . Spears , who has been a Madonna fan for years , was " beyond surprised " when she heard Madonna 's verse . She said " I just asked her to do a little thing , but she really went there . She did a lot of stuff to it . " Jive Records hoped " Outrageous " would be released as the first single from the album , but Spears pushed for " Me Against the Music " . After she performed the song for the first time at the 2003 NFL Kickoff Live , Spears refused to answer if it was the first single from the album , but said that " there are some surprises that are going to come up in the song that I 'm really excited about . " On September 16 , 2003 , it was confirmed that " Me Against the Music " would be released as the first single from In the Zone . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Me Against the Music " is a dance and hip hop song with usage of funk guitars . The song features Madonna , but was constructed as a duet after she was added to the track . Spears and Madonna trade lines during the verses , and Madonna sings solo in the bridge . Stewart described the sound as " half @-@ rapping , half @-@ singing " and " beat @-@ driven " . According to the sheet music published at Musicnotes.com by Hal Leonard Corporation , " Me Against the Music " is set in a moderate dance beat , with a tempo of 120 beats per minute . Spears 's vocal range span from the low @-@ note of G2 to the high @-@ note of B4 . Gavin Mueller of Stylus Magazine deemed Spears 's vocals as " sexy and sultry " and compared them to those of Prince . 
 In the song , Spears and Madonna sing of the pleasures of letting go on the dancefloor , in lyrics such as " I 'm up against the speaker / Trying to take on the music / It 's like a competition " . Spears explained the concept of the song as " basically about just going to a club and letting yourself go and battling with whoever is around you and battling against the music as well . " Magnet continued , saying , " Like she was hearing the music and trying to out @-@ dance the track or out @-@ beat the drum or out @-@ pluck the guitar . It 's as if she 's in the club , losing herself in the music . " William Shaw of Blender stated Madonna 's verse could be interpreted as her passing the baton to a new talent , as well as " a taunt from the old guard to the uptight youngster . " 
 = = Critical response = = 
 Stephen Thomas Erlewine of Allmusic selected " Me Against the Music " as one of the ' track picks ' from In the Zone . Caryn Ganz of Spin called the song " a fine specimen of Britney 4 @.@ 0 — a fast @-@ paced dance anthem , all grinding percussion shuttling through a traffic jam of synths . " Dave De Sylvia of Sputnikmusic said that " Aside from numerous rather awful name @-@ dropping passages and a disappointing chorus , the track is an ideal way to open the album . It 's an up @-@ tempo dance track with a big name attached ; what else could you ask for ? " Sal Cinquemani of Slant Magazine deemed it as " arguably one of Britney 's finest moments and one of her mentor 's worst " . Nick Southall of Stylus Magazine said that " Madonna vamps it up ( literally – her appearance here is not Sapphic but vampiric , the wizened old crone bleeding another period of forced longevity into her career like a <unk> corpse leaking plasma backwards ) on ' Me Against The Music ' , but can 't make it a bad tune . " Gavin Mueller , also writing for Stylus Magazine , said that the single " benefits from a kinetic garage @-@ inspired beat , even when a tepid Madonna threatens to spoil the fun . " 
 Spence D. of IGN commented , " Initially catchy , it 's ultimately forgettable other than it 's the musical counterpart / fallout to / from the duo 's lip lock publicity stunt on the 2003 MTV Music Video Awards . " Jamie Gill of Yahoo ! Music Radio stated that " Madonna 's appearance on the brilliantly titled but deeply dreary ' Me Against The Music ' was a postmodern prank designed to make all sane listeners think ' actually , American Life was pretty good , after all . ' " While reviewing The Singles Collection , Mayer Nissim of Digital Spy said that " the only arguable weak link is the Madonna @-@ featuring ' Me Against The Music ' , but in this context what once looked like a respectful passing of the baton now seems like an unconditional surrender of pop Queendom to its rightful heir . " David Browne of Entertainment Weekly called " Me Against the Music " " the album 's coy , overly busy single " . Dorian Lynskey of The Guardian noted it as " the only duff track " of the album . Jon Pareles of Rolling Stone wrote , " Madonna shows up in the album 's first song , ' Me Against the Music ' , as if endorsing Spears 's foray into come @-@ hither posing and club @-@ land beats . " 
 Larry Flick from The Advocate denounced the track as an " ' Into the Groove ' redux " . He added that the song " propels the listener into Spears ' collaborations with heavy @-@ hitting producers . There 's nary a hint of her pristine pop past on Kelly 's hip @-@ grinding ' Outrageous ' or Perry 's ' Girls & Boys ' . Instead Spears swims through dark , often hip @-@ hop hued waters with occasional forays into minor keyed electro dance terrain . " Ali Fenwick of The Johns Hopkins News @-@ Letter said , " Despite bringing out the big guns in a duet with Madonna , ' Me Against The Music ' is not danceable , the measure of success in any pop tune . " Linda McGee of RTÉ.ie commented that although much of the content of In the Zone is " catchy " , " it is hard to see any potential singles impressing as much as ' Me Against The Music ' . " Kelefa Sanneh of The New York Times deemed it as " an odd , overstuffed track , not so much a song as a series of party chants " . Mim Udovitch of Blender called it " lackluster " . 
 = = Remixes = = 
 A number of remixes were commissioned by Jive Records , to accompany the song . The Australian CD singles included remixes by artists such Peter Rauhofer , Rishi Rich , Passengerz and <unk> . The US CD single also contained remixes by Trak Starz , Gabriel & Dresden , Bloodshy & Avant and Kanye West . The Rishi Rich 's Desi Kulcha Remix was later included in the tracklist of In the Zone . The remix removes the original melody of the song and adds a clattering backbeat and Punjabi shouts . Kelefa Sanneh of The New York Times called the remix " excellent " , noting that it is " so frenetic you barely notice Ms. Spears and Madonna – it 's odd to hear two such ubiquitous figures sounding so anonymous . " Britney had also contacted Outkast to remix " Me Against the Music " but the remix was not released . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 On October 25 , 2003 , " Me Against the Music " debuted at number 50 on the Billboard Hot 100 . It was Spears 10th chart hit , as well as the first of her entries that she had co @-@ written . " Me Against the Music " was incidentally Madonna 's 50th chart entry , 20 years after her first appearance on the Hot 100 with " Holiday " the week of October 29 , 1983 . It was also the first song in chart history to feature Madonna , and her first chart entry not produced by her since " Love Don 't Live Here Anymore " in 1996 . On the issue dated November 29 , 2003 , " Me Against the Music " peaked at number 35 . On the component charts , the song peaked at the top of Hot Dance Club Songs and at number 11 on Pop Songs . It won the " Hot Dance Single of the Year " accolade at the 2004 Billboard Music Awards . As of June 2012 , it has sold 60 @,@ 000 physical copies and 281 @,@ 000 digital downloads according to Nielsen Soundscan . " Me Against the Music " also peaked at number two on the Canadian Singles Chart . 
 In Australia , " Me Against the Music " debuted at number one on November 17 , 2003 , replacing Kylie Minogue 's " Slow " , and remained at the top for two weeks . It was certified platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) for shipments of 70 @,@ 000 units . On November 24 , 2003 , the song debuted at number 13 in New Zealand . " Me Against the Music " debuted in the United Kingdom at number two , on the week of November 16 , 2003 . It was blocked from ascending the top spot by Busted 's " Crashed the Wedding " . The song became Spears ' most successful single since " I 'm Not a Girl , Not Yet a Woman " in April 2002 . According to the Official Charts Company , the song has sold 240 @,@ 000 copies there . " Me Against the Music " also topped the Eurochart Hot 100 Singles chart for three consecutive weeks . The song topped the charts in Denmark , Hungary and Ireland ; reached number two in Italy and Norway ; the top five in Belgium ( Flanders and Wallonia ) , Czech Republic , Finland , Sweden , Switzerland and the Netherlands . " Me Against the Music " also charted in the top 20 of Austria and France . 
 = = Music video = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 The music video for " Me Against the Music " was filmed over three days in October 2003 , at Silvercup Studios in Long Island City , New York . It was directed by Paul Hunter , who revealed that the concept was setting Spears and Madonna apart , hence Spears wore a black outfit whereas Madonna sported a white suit . Spears stated , " The video is more sensual than I 'm used to [ ... ] It was my first time doing a collaboration and I got Madonna . It 's really interesting to see the two different styles together . " Kevin Tancharoen was the choreographer of the video . The vehicle used in the video , a Mazda RX @-@ 8 , was autographed by Spears on the hood and auctioned off to benefit the Britney Spears Foundation . In 2009 , Hunter talked to MTV News about the video , saying , " Madonna is an icon of an earlier generation , and then Britney of the newer generation . She was at her peak at that point [ ... ] So it was a challenge to kind of bring both of the worlds together . I wanted it to be a bit of a cat @-@ and @-@ mouse sort of game and a little bit of a foreplay between Britney and Madonna and just sort of tease the audience . " 
 = = = Synopsis = = = 
 The video starts with Britney parking the Mazda vehicle and going into a New York nightclub . She enters a wooden room populated with ' cool kids ' flaunting pink and purple hair while taking <unk> from an oxygen tank . Madonna , who is in a room filled with men smoking cigars , observes her from television monitors throughout the club . She wears a white trouser suit and carries a cane , signifying a position of moneyed power . Her suit is also notably fitted , especially in the waistcoat , revealing Madonna 's body to be female and not masculine . Although the areas are separated by a wall , Spears and Madonna sense their presences through extrasensory perception and dance in synchronicity . Julie Andsager in Sex in consumer culture ( 2006 ) noted that the video hints at a same @-@ sex relationship between the two . 
 This is followed with Spears performing a dance routine inside a <unk> paint graffiti room , and the two women dancing around a metal <unk> . Spears then begins chasing Madonna in a wooden @-@ like maze , and the latter enters a room covered with fallen leaves and stands in a swing . Once Spears finds the room , Madonna is nowhere to be found . Throughout the video , Madonna gradually loses her symbolic power , paralleled by her disposing the cane and jacket , becoming less phallic and more noticeably female biologically and more feminine socially . Although it ultimately seems that Spears becomes the dominant figure , Madonna recovers her phallic power in the form of a cigar from an onlooking male . Spears appears in Madonna 's room and throws her against the wall , and Madonna vanishes just as they are about to kiss . The video ends as Madonna 's laugh is heard in the background . 
 = = = Release and reception = = = 
 The video premiered on television on Making the Video on October 21 , 2003 at 23 : 00 EDT . Its online premiere was on Yahoo ! Music . It was viewed more than 2 million times in its first five days . The video reached number one on the AOL Music Top Video chart in November 2003 , with 3 @,@ 356 @,@ 007 million streams . In January 2004 , the video topped the same chart again with 1 @,@ 198 @,@ 920 million streams . Jocelyn Vena of MTV said , " It was the changing of the guard — or at least the meeting of two of the most influential pop divas of all time . [ ... ] The superstars tantalize the audience ( and each other ) throughout the flirty video . " Antonella Lazzeri of The Sun commented , " Just weeks after <unk> at the MTV Video Music Awards they teamed up for another raunchy double act . [ ... ] The video highlight comes with the pair embracing against a wall , only for Madonna [ ... ] to vanish just as they are about to kiss . " 
 Julie Andsager stated the ' fantasy @-@ fulfillment ' strategy of Spears continued with the Madonna kiss and the " Me Against the Music " video , but added that " she has , perhaps , taken her sexuality to its extreme — for network television , at least — at the age of 22 " . <unk> Volkmann said that it showcases an entire range of different female roles between ' older ' and ' younger ' sign systems . Author Judith Ann <unk> commented , " In 1963 , Judy Garland presented Barbra Streisand as her protégée as songstress and gay icon ; in 2003 , Madonna instated Spears as her protégée in same @-@ sex erotica and icon of polymorphous sexuality . " 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Spears performed " Me Against the Music " at the 2003 NFL Kickoff Live on September 4 , 2003 at the National Mall . She sported shoulder @-@ length blond hair and was dressed in black football pants , a black @-@ and @-@ white referee halter top and boots from Reebok . The performance segued into a medley of " ... Baby One More Time " and " I 'm a Slave 4 U " , which included pyrotechnics . Her outfit was later auctioned off to benefit the Britney Spears Foundation . On September 14 , 2003 , Spears played a surprise concert at Rain Nightclub in the Palms Casino Resort , and " Me Against the Music " was the first song in the set . On October 18 , 2003 , the song was performed by Spears during the twenty @-@ ninth season of the American comedy show Saturday Night Live . William Shaw of Blender stated , " Dancing and singing , Spears is in her element . She drips song @-@ and @-@ dance confidence . Within a few seconds , her shiny hat falls off , sending her blond hair everywhere , but Spears doesn 't miss a step . When it comes to Madonna 's verse , she can 't help mouthing along to the words . " Spears opened the 2003 American Music Awards telecast with a performance of " Me Against the Music " . She floated down on a wire from the rafters in a gold overcoat , which she quickly shed to reveal a pink bustier , black vinyl thigh @-@ high boots and black hot pants . She was accompanied by a troupe of brightly dressed faux punk rock dancers and a dizzying set that featured shooting flames , Vegas @-@ style neon signs and a massive video screen . 
 It was also performed by Spears at Britney Spears : In the Zone , a concert special that aired in ABC on November 17 , 2003 . The following day , she performed on the American music show TRL at Times Square , wearing a fedora and her signature half @-@ shirt . " Me Against the Music " was also performed on American late @-@ night show The Tonight Show with Jay Leno and American morning show Live with Regis and Kelly on November 17 and 24 , 2003 . She performed the song as the headliner of the Jingle Ball on December 8 , 2003 , at the Staples Center . The Rishi Rich 's Desi Kulcha Remix of " Me Against the Music " was performed as the encore number of 2004 's The Onyx Hotel Tour . It began with a system malfunction where a female voice counted down as the screens sketched Spears 's outline , which then rose to reveal her at the top of a staircase . Spears wore a red ensemble , an ended the performance on the staircase where the screen is lowered . She made her exit as a shower of confetti was shot towards the audience . " Me Against the Music " was also performed on 2009 's The Circus Starring Britney Spears , in a Bollywood @-@ inspired group dancing routine which included mudras . Spears wore green and gold harem pants ensemble . Jim Farber of Daily News said , " In a nod to <unk> , the shows included a mock @-@ Bollywood dance sequence during ' Me Against The Music , ' eagerly riding the ' Slumdog ' gravy train . " Spears performed the song during her Las Vegas residency show Britney : Piece of Me . During the performance , Spears is seen doing a dance routine with walls made of wood , which is a resemblance to the labyrinth scene from its music video . 
 = = Cover versions and samples = = 
 The music video was parodied during the 2003 French & Sanders Christmas Special episode of American comedy show MADtv . " Me Against the Music " was sampled by Justice on their tracks " <unk> " and " Valentine " , from their debut album † ( 2007 ) . The music video was recreated on the 2010 American series Glee episode " Britney / Brittany " . The characters of Brittany Pierce ( Heather Morris ) and Santana Lopez ( Naya Rivera ) are put under general anesthesia during a trip to the dentist 's office . They share an hallucination , in which Morris appears as Spears , whereas Rivera plays Madonna . Morris explained , " The ' Me Against the Music ' montage , it 's literally copied exactly from the video , the shots and looks , but the choreography is made so much more for a dancer — none of it is from the video . [ ... ] It 's insane . " At the end of the number , Spears replaces Santana and pins Brittany against the wall , announcing to her that she is in a fantasy . Spears applauded the cover , pointing out that it " looks just like the original , " and adding , " Santana does a great Madonna impression . " The song charted at number ninety @-@ three in Australia , fifty @-@ four in Canada and fifty @-@ six in the United States . 
 = = Track listings = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Britney Spears – lead vocals and background vocals , songwriting , co @-@ production 
 Madonna – lead vocals and background vocals , songwriting 
 RedZone Entertainment – songwriting , production , background vocals 
 Thabiso <unk> – songwriting 
 Terius Nash – songwriting 
 Gary O 'Brien – songwriting , guitar 
 Courtney Copeland – background vocals 
 Emma Roads – background vocals 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Welcome Wagon ( Veronica Mars ) = 
 " Welcome Wagon " is the season premiere of the third season of the American mystery television series Veronica Mars , and the forty @-@ fifth episode overall . Written by series creator Rob Thomas and directed by John T. Kretchmer , the episode premiered on The CW on October 3 , 2006 . The series depicts the adventures of Veronica Mars ( Kristen Bell ) as she deals with life as a college student while moonlighting as a private detective . 
 In this episode , Veronica transitions to life at Hearst College , meeting several new people and reconnecting with several acquaintances from Neptune High . Meanwhile , a student named Piz ( Chris Lowell ) gets his belongings stolen , and Veronica helps him . In addition , Keith ( Enrico Colantoni ) trails Kendall Casablancas ( Charisma Carpenter ) in the aftermath of receiving a large sum of money from her in " Not Pictured " before learning that she is actually a target of the Fitzpatricks . At the end of the episode , one of Veronica 's newfound friends , Parker Lee ( Julie Gonzalo ) becomes the next victim of the Hearst serial rapist . 
 " Welcome Wagon " is the first episode of Veronica Mars to air on The CW as opposed to UPN . In order to attract new viewers , Thomas and the crew decided to make several changes to the show , including altering the theme song and the show 's narrative structure , beginning with this episode . In contrast to previous seasons , which involved one major season @-@ long mystery , the show 's writers planned to have three consecutive mysteries play out over the course of the third season . 
 The episode also sees the introduction of series regulars Stosh " Piz " Piznarski and Parker Lee as well as the promotion of Cindy " Mac " Mackenzie and Don Lamb to series regular status . Upon airing , the episode received 3 @.@ 36 million viewers and received mixed to positive reviews . Eric Goldman of IGN thought that the episode " proves that the show is as clever and witty as ever " , while Rowan Kaiser of The A.V. Club was critical of the show 's increasing focus on rape . 
 = = Plot synopsis = = 
 Veronica starts her criminology class . Veronica solves a mystery given out in the class in six minutes . Logan ( Jason Dohring ) , who is also at Hearst , is still dating Veronica . Dick ( Ryan Hansen ) has just returned , getting into Hearst , but he is shaken up from Beaver ’ s suicide . Vinnie ( Ken Marino ) approaches Keith ( Enrico Colantoni ) with a case , but he denies it . Keith is tracking a bail @-@ jumper . Stosh “ Piz ” Piznarski becomes Wallace ’ s ( Percy Daggs III ) roommate , and Piz loses all his belongings . Veronica comes in to help . Keith ’ s bail @-@ jumper , Cormac Fitzpatrick ( Jason Beghe ) and he gets into the car with Keith . Veronica and Mac listen to a rape victim protesting the university ’ s policies on the issue . Soon , Dick crashes the rally . Keith tells Cormac that he helped Kendall ( Charisma Carpenter ) get out of town , and Cormac is being targeted by the Fitzpatricks . Veronica and Piz visit the police department , and they say there have been other victims . Veronica learns that the Hearst “ Welcome Wagon ” is actually fake . 
 Veronica meets Parker Lee ( Julie Gonzalo ) , who annoys both Veronica and Mac . Veronica , Parker , Mac , Wallace , and Piz go to a concert . Veronica talks about Piz ’ s problem at the concert , and three kids say that they saw a white girl who was faking being fat . Dick shows up at Mac ’ s door and tells her that Beaver never cared about her . Veronica finds Piz ’ s guitar , and they visit the seller . The seller ’ s description matches that of other people . Veronica talks to Piz about a suspect , but he says that it doesn ’ t match the woman he saw . Keith and the bail @-@ jumper ’ s car gets stranded . Veronica signs up for the mentoring program in criminology class , and she notices that one of the kids at the concert has a criminal record . Dick gets beaten up when he talks to another man ’ s girlfriend , but Logan tases the man . Veronica finds the Welcome Wagon girl , the seller ’ s husband . 
 Piz asks Veronica if Logan is her boyfriend . Keith and the bail @-@ jumper go to Kendall ’ s house , and Kendall is romantically involved with the Cormac . They have dinner , but Keith learns that Vinnie is working for Liam Fitzpatrick . When Keith returns , it is too late — Cormac has already killed Kendall and leaves Keith for dead in the cold night air . A disheveled Dick shows up at Logan ’ s door and cries . Veronica sleeps on Mac ’ s couch one night , and the next morning , they awaken to find that Parker has been raped , her head shaved . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 " Welcome Wagon " is the first episode of the series to air on The CW as opposed to UPN . Paul Maguire , the spokesman for The CW , said that the series was picked up because " the critics are behind it and our research has consistently shown that Gilmore shared more audience commonality with Veronica than with any other show from UPN , except Top Model " . Veronica Mars was placed on Tuesdays after Gilmore Girls , with the network hoping for the Gilmore Girls audience to stay tuned for Veronica Mars . Thomas stated that The CW had requested some changes to the show to fit in better with the Gilmore Girls audience : " The network really wants us to be a good companion piece to Gilmore Girls . They 've had a couple of thoughts on storylines that are too dark . " " Welcome Wagon " also introduces a new title sequence for the show . The visuals of the theme song are different , and although " We Used to Be Friends " by The Dandy Warhols was still employed as the theme song , a remix was used instead of the original . Regarding the changes , Thomas elaborated : 
 Alright , the main titles . Why the change ? As you 'll see here , the previous titles were such a high school aesthetic . It would have felt silly for me to go back to college with the same sort of look — the notebook paper . So it felt like we needed to change for college anyway . And in season one when we first did the titles , the network was very clear on wanting to sell it as a high school show rather than a noir show . But once we went to college and had a chance to redo the titles I wanted it to feel noir . 
 For the new theme song , Thomas asked The Dandy Warhols to commission a remix of their original track , which Thomas reported enjoying upon first listening . 
 Thomas and the crew also introduced several narrative changes to the show starting in the third season . Thomas wanted to " invite new viewers to the show " by " trying to start with a clean slate " and ridding the show of references to former plotlines and character development . With regards to " Welcome Wagon " , Thomas stated that he " wanted episode one this year to not rely much on past knowledge . " He also tried to make the episode " very sort of breezy , and <unk> and funny . " The episode reintroduces the case of the Hearst serial rapist , a storyline presented in a second season episode . In contrast to the previous seasons , which had several concurrent mysteries , Thomas planned for season 3 to have three consecutive mysteries , the first of which would be the serial rapist . " To service a 22 @-@ episode mystery , you have to have a large playing field . To service a 9 @-@ episode mystery , we can keep that tighter , more focused . " It was made available on MSN for the week leading up to broadcast . However , the episode was only available for Microsoft users and not for Apple users . 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 " Welcome Wagon " was written by series creator Rob Thomas and directed by John T. Kretchmer , marking Thomas 's seventh writing credit for the series and Kretchmer 's tenth directing credit for the show . On September 26 , 2006 , a week before its broadcast on The CW . " Welcome Wagon " features the final appearance by Charisma Carpenter as Kendall Casablancas , who appeared on a total of 11 episodes on the show . The previous summer , when asked about her role in season 3 , Carpenter responded that she would be performing " a little more of the same , with a really , really interesting twist . And it starts the first episode ; you 've got to watch it . You miss the first episode , you 're out of the loop . Gotta tune in right away . " 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 " Welcome Wagon " sees the promotion of four actors to star billing , two of whom , Cindy " Mac " Mackenzie ( Tina Majorino ) and Don Lamb ( Michael Muhney ) , had previously served as recurring characters , and two of whom , Stosh " Piz " Piznarski ( Chris Lowell ) and Parker Lee ( Julie Gonzalo ) make their first appearance in the episode . Thomas revealed that Majorino was going to be a series regular the previous summer , a move that pleased many fans . Asked by Michael Ausiello whether Veronica and Mac would be roommates , Thomas replied that they would not , citing that such a living arrangement would prevent Veronica from having scenes with Keith . Nevertheless , Majorino commented that Mac and Veronica 's relationship would continue to be close throughout the season . " The friendship with Veronica is one of my favorite parts of the entire show . It 's great to have two really strong personalities getting along so well . " 
 Muhney was told that he would be a series regular in season 3 the previous February , only a few days after his wedding . Muhney was very pleased to be a series regular , comparing his status to becoming a family member in the show rather than " someone who comes over for dinner occasionally . " Piz ( Chris Lowell ) was named after the director of the show 's pilot episode , Mark Piznarski . He was created in order to give Veronica a male friend who was not upper class . Thomas called Piz a " Lloyd Dobler mold " and " a middle @-@ class kid from a Portland suburb who has too many words coming out of his mouth most of the time . " 
 Parker Lee serves as Mac 's roommate , with Thomas calling her " everything that Mac is not . " Thomas also said that the character was not created or introduced in a reaction to negative fan opinion towards second season character Jackie Cook ( Tessa Thompson ) . The episode features the first appearance of teaching assistant Tim Foyle ( James Jordan ; Jordan previously played another character , Lucky , in season 2 ) . In addition , " Welcome Wagon " is the first appearance of the character of Moe Flater . Originally , Michael Cera , who guest starred in " The Rapes of Graff " , was going to play a similar role , but the role of Moe Flater was created after Cera couldn 't take the role due to scheduling conflicts . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original broadcast , " Welcome Wagon " received 3 @.@ 36 million viewers , ranking 82nd of 91 in the weekly rankings . This was an increase from both " Normal Is the Watchword " , the second season premiere , which received 3 @.@ 29 million viewers and the second season finale , " Not Pictured " , which garnered 2 @.@ 42 million viewers . 
 The episode received mixed to positive reviews . Eric Goldman of IGN gave the episode an 8 out of 10 , indicating that it was " great . " He wrote that although " Welcome Wagon " was designed to appeal to new viewers , that it was still a good episode . " ' Welcome Wagon ' , written by Thomas , proves the show is as clever and witty as ever . [ … ] The more exposition @-@ heavy aspects of the premiere mean the episode isn 't a true standout for the series , but that 's understandable , given what it 's trying to accomplish . " He went on to state that the episode featured more " lighthearted " content before what he predicted would be a return to more dramatic elements . Price Peterson , writing for TV.com , gave a positive review , stating , " Great first episode back … There was a lot to accomplish in setting up the new environment and characters , but it still felt really organic to the series as a whole . " While criticizing the fact that the rape victims experienced a backlash against them , he enjoyed the characterization of Piz . 
 Rowan Kaiser , of The A.V. Club , gave a mixed review of the episode , commenting on the show 's increasing focus on rape . He wrote that " There are things that I appreciate about the focus on rape . [ … ] It 's fairly rare for a show to treat rape from the victim 's perspective . " However , he went on to state that he had " pretty significant issues " with the subject matter as well . He also disapproved of the killer 's choice of victims , setting , and new characters , especially Piz . Television Without Pity gave the episode a " B " . Reviewer Alan Sepinwall was fairly positive towards the episode . He was mixed towards the inclusion of the Kendall @-@ Keith @-@ Cormac storyline in the premiere , but he also praised the new cast members : " Piz and Parker both add new colors to the gang , though it 's hard to say what Parker will be like post @-@ rape . " He eventually called the episode a " pretty good start " . 
 = River Road National Scenic Byway = 
 The River Road National Scenic Byway ( also called the River Road National Forest Scenic Byway ) is a National Scenic Byway and National Forest Scenic Byway in the US state of Michigan . This 23 1 ⁄ 2 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 37 @.@ 8 km ) byway follows M @-@ 65 and River Road ; it extends eastward into the Huron National Forest and ends in the historic community of Oscoda near Lake Huron . The road parallels the historic Au Sable River ( French : Rivière aux Sable , " River of Sand " ) which has historically been a major transportation route for floating Michigan ’ s giant white pine from the forest to the saw mill towns on Lake Huron . Along its course , the roadway offers access to several recreational areas as well as the local scenery . The section of the River Road that follows M @-@ 65 was added to the State Trunkline Highway System in the 1930s . The River Road was given National Forest Scenic Byway status in 1988 , and National Scenic Byway status in 2005 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 The scenic byway starts at the intersection of M @-@ 65 and <unk> Road and runs eastward along M @-@ 65 near Loud Dam Pond . The road runs through the Huron National Forest and along the Five Channels Dam Pond to a junction with River Road . There , the byway leaves M @-@ 65 to follow River Road eastward along the south bank of the Au Sable River . The road passes the <unk> 's Memorial , the Kiwanis Monument and the Lumberman 's Monument near Cooke Dam Pond . River Road runs away from the river , cutting across forest land near a bend in the Au Sable . Near the Old Orchard Park , the byway follows the southern shore of Foote Dam Pond . From here east , the roadway continues along the south bank of the river , across from Oscoda @-@ Wurtsmith Airport , as it runs into Oscoda . The eastern terminus of the byway is at a junction with US 23 in town , a few blocks from Lake Huron . The segment of the byway that follows M @-@ 65 is maintained by the Michigan Department of Transportation ( MDOT ) , while River Road is under the jurisdiction of the Iosco County Road Commission ( ICRC ) . 
 = = Recreational opportunities = = 
 Byway travelers will find abundant , year @-@ round recreation opportunities , with many trails for hiking and cross @-@ country skiing . Camping , fishing , and wildlife viewing are popular activities along the byway . Visitors can enjoy the forest and vistas from the scenic overlooks along the route . Other sites along the byway include the Lumberman 's Monument and its visitors ' center which are dedicated to telling the story of Michigan 's lumber industry in the 19th century . The <unk> Springs Interpretive Site presents visitors with exhibitions on natural springs and boardwalks along the river . 
 = = History = = 
 The section of the byway that follows M @-@ 65 was first added to the state highway system in the mid @-@ 1930s . On December 20 , 1988 , the National Forest Service designated the River Road National Forest Scenic Byway in Iosco County . A second designation was added on September 22 , 2005 , when the Federal Highway Administration listed the roadway as the River Road National Scenic Byway . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire byway is in Iosco County . 
 = Multiple sclerosis = 
 Multiple sclerosis ( MS ) is a demyelinating disease in which the insulating covers of nerve cells in the brain and spinal cord are damaged . This damage disrupts the ability of parts of the nervous system to communicate , resulting in a range of signs and symptoms , including physical , mental , and sometimes psychiatric problems . Specific symptoms can include double vision , blindness in one eye , muscle weakness , trouble with sensation , or trouble with coordination . MS takes several forms , with new symptoms either occurring in isolated attacks ( relapsing forms ) or building up over time ( progressive forms ) . Between attacks , symptoms may disappear completely ; however , permanent neurological problems often remain , especially as the disease advances . 
 While the cause is not clear , the underlying mechanism is thought to be either destruction by the immune system or failure of the myelin @-@ producing cells . Proposed causes for this include genetics and environmental factors such as being triggered by a viral infection . MS is usually diagnosed based on the presenting signs and symptoms and the results of supporting medical tests . 
 There is no known cure for multiple sclerosis . Treatments attempt to improve function after an attack and prevent new attacks . Medications used to treat MS , while modestly effective , can have side effects and be poorly tolerated . Physical therapy can help with people 's ability to function . Many people pursue alternative treatments , despite a lack of evidence . The long @-@ term outcome is difficult to predict , with good outcomes more often seen in women , those who develop the disease early in life , those with a relapsing course , and those who initially experienced few attacks . Life expectancy is on average 5 to 10 years lower than that of an unaffected population . 
 Multiple sclerosis is the most common autoimmune disorder affecting the central nervous system . In 2013 , about 2 @.@ 3 million people were affected globally with rates varying widely in different regions and among different populations . That year about 20 @,@ 000 people died from MS , up from 12 @,@ 000 in 1990 . The disease usually begins between the ages of 20 and 50 and is twice as common in women as in men . MS was first described in 1868 by Jean @-@ Martin Charcot . The name multiple sclerosis refers to the numerous scars ( <unk> — better known as plaques or lesions ) that develop on the white matter of the brain and spinal cord . A number of new treatments and diagnostic methods are under development . 
 = = Signs and symptoms = = 
 A person with MS can have almost any neurological symptom or sign , with autonomic , visual , motor , and sensory problems being the most common . The specific symptoms are determined by the locations of the lesions within the nervous system , and may include loss of sensitivity or changes in sensation such as tingling , pins and needles or numbness , muscle weakness , very pronounced reflexes , muscle spasms , or difficulty in moving ; difficulties with coordination and balance ( ataxia ) ; problems with speech or swallowing , visual problems ( nystagmus , optic neuritis or double vision ) , feeling tired , acute or chronic pain , and bladder and bowel difficulties , among others . Difficulties thinking and emotional problems such as depression or unstable mood are also common . Uhthoff 's phenomenon , a worsening of symptoms due to exposure to higher than usual temperatures , and Lhermitte 's sign , an electrical sensation that runs down the back when bending the neck , are particularly characteristic of MS. The main measure of disability and severity is the expanded disability status scale ( <unk> ) , with other measures such as the multiple sclerosis functional composite being increasingly used in research . 
 The condition begins in 85 % of cases as a clinically isolated syndrome ( CIS ) over a number of days with 45 % having motor or sensory problems , 20 % having optic neuritis , and 10 % having symptoms related to brainstem dysfunction , while the remaining 25 % have more than one of the previous difficulties . The course of symptoms occurs in two main patterns initially : either as episodes of sudden worsening that last a few days to months ( called relapses , exacerbations , bouts , attacks , or flare @-@ ups ) followed by improvement ( 85 % of cases ) or as a gradual worsening over time without periods of recovery ( 10 @-@ 15 % of cases ) . A combination of these two patterns may also occur or people may start in a relapsing and remitting course that then becomes progressive later on . Relapses are usually not predictable , occurring without warning . Exacerbations rarely occur more frequently than twice per year . Some relapses , however , are preceded by common triggers and they occur more frequently during spring and summer . Similarly , viral infections such as the common cold , influenza , or gastroenteritis increase their risk . Stress may also trigger an attack . Women with MS who become pregnant experience fewer relapses ; however , during the first months after delivery the risk increases . Overall , pregnancy does not seem to influence long @-@ term disability . Many events have not been found to affect relapse rates including vaccination , breast feeding , physical trauma , and Uhthoff 's phenomenon . 
 = = Causes = = 
 The cause of MS is unknown ; however , it is believed to occur as a result of some combination of genetic and environmental factors such as infectious agents . Theories try to combine the data into likely explanations , but none has proved definitive . While there are a number of environmental risk factors and although some are partly modifiable , further research is needed to determine whether their elimination can prevent MS. 
 = = = Geography = = = 
 MS is more common in people who live farther from the equator , although exceptions exist . These exceptions include ethnic groups that are at low risk far from the equator such as the Samis , Amerindians , Canadian Hutterites , New Zealand Māori , and Canada 's Inuit , as well as groups that have a relatively high risk close to the equator such as Sardinians , inland Sicilians , Palestinians and Parsis . The cause of this geographical pattern is not clear . While the north @-@ south gradient of incidence is decreasing , as of 2010 it is still present . 
 MS is more common in regions with northern European populations and the geographic variation may simply reflect the global distribution of these high @-@ risk populations . Decreased sunlight exposure resulting in decreased vitamin D production has also been put forward as an explanation . A relationship between season of birth and MS lends support to this idea , with fewer people born in the northern hemisphere in November as compared to May being affected later in life . Environmental factors may play a role during childhood , with several studies finding that people who move to a different region of the world before the age of 15 acquire the new region 's risk to MS. If migration takes place after age 15 , however , the person retains the risk of his home country . There is some evidence that the effect of moving may still apply to people older than 15 . 
 = = = Genetics = = = 
 MS is not considered a hereditary disease ; however , a number of genetic variations have been shown to increase the risk . Some of these genes appear to have higher levels of expression in microglial cells than expected by chance . The probability of developing the disease is higher in relatives of an affected person , with a greater risk among those more closely related . In identical twins both are affected about 30 % of the time , while around 5 % for non @-@ identical twins and 2 @.@ 5 % of siblings are affected with a lower percentage of half @-@ siblings . If both parents are affected the risk in their children is 10 times that of the general population . MS is also more common in some ethnic groups than others . 
 Specific genes that have been linked with MS include differences in the human leukocyte antigen ( HLA ) system — a group of genes on chromosome 6 that serves as the major histocompatibility complex ( MHC ) . That changes in the HLA region are related to susceptibility has been known since the 1980s , and additionally this same region has been implicated in the development of other autoimmune diseases such as diabetes type I and systemic lupus erythematosus . The most consistent finding is the association between multiple sclerosis and alleles of the MHC defined as <unk> and <unk> . Other loci have shown a protective effect , such as HLA @-@ <unk> and HLA @-@ <unk> * 11 . Overall , it has been estimated that HLA changes account for between 20 and 60 % of the genetic predisposition . Modern genetic methods ( genome @-@ wide association studies ) have discovered at least twelve other genes outside the HLA locus that modestly increase the probability of MS. 
 = = = Infectious agents = = = 
 Many microbes have been proposed as triggers of MS , but none have been confirmed . Moving at an early age from one location in the world to another alters a person 's subsequent risk of MS. An explanation for this could be that some kind of infection , produced by a widespread microbe rather than a rare one , is related to the disease . Proposed mechanisms include the hygiene hypothesis and the prevalence hypothesis . The hygiene hypothesis proposes that exposure to certain infectious agents early in life is protective , the disease being a response to a late encounter with such agents . The prevalence hypothesis proposes that the disease is due to an infectious agent more common in regions where MS is common and where in most individuals it causes an ongoing infection without symptoms . Only in a few cases and after many years does it cause demyelination . The hygiene hypothesis has received more support than the prevalence hypothesis . 
 Evidence for a virus as a cause include : the presence of <unk> bands in the brain and cerebrospinal fluid of most people with MS , the association of several viruses with human demyelination encephalomyelitis , and the occurrence of demyelination in animals caused by some viral infection . Human herpes viruses are a candidate group of viruses . Individuals having never been infected by the Epstein – Barr virus are at a reduced risk of getting MS , whereas those infected as young adults are at a greater risk than those having had it at a younger age . Although some consider that this goes against the hygiene hypothesis , since the non @-@ infected have probably experienced a more hygienic upbringing , others believe that there is no contradiction , since it is a first encounter with the causative virus relatively late in life that is the trigger for the disease . Other diseases that may be related include measles , mumps and rubella . 
 = = = Other = = = 
 Smoking has been shown to be an independent risk factor for MS. Stress may be a risk factor although the evidence to support this is weak . Association with occupational exposures and toxins — mainly solvents — has been evaluated , but no clear conclusions have been reached . Vaccinations were studied as causal factors ; however , most studies show no association . Several other possible risk factors , such as diet and hormone intake , have been looked at ; however , evidence on their relation with the disease is " sparse and unpersuasive " . Gout occurs less than would be expected and lower levels of uric acid have been found in people with MS. This has led to the theory that uric acid is protective , although its exact importance remains unknown . 
 = = Pathophysiology = = 
 The three main characteristics of MS are the formation of lesions in the central nervous system ( also called plaques ) , inflammation , and the destruction of myelin sheaths of neurons . These features interact in a complex and not yet fully understood manner to produce the breakdown of nerve tissue and in turn the signs and symptoms of the disease . Additionally , MS is believed to be an immune @-@ mediated disorder that develops from an interaction of the individual 's genetics and as yet unidentified environmental causes . Damage is believed to be caused , at least in part , by attack on the nervous system by a person 's own immune system . 
 = = = Lesions = = = 
 The name multiple sclerosis refers to the scars ( <unk> – better known as plaques or lesions ) that form in the nervous system . These lesions most commonly affect the white matter in the optic nerve , brain stem , basal ganglia , and spinal cord , or white matter tracts close to the lateral ventricles . The function of white matter cells is to carry signals between grey matter areas , where the processing is done , and the rest of the body . The peripheral nervous system is rarely involved . 
 To be specific , MS involves the loss of oligodendrocytes , the cells responsible for creating and maintaining a fatty layer — known as the myelin sheath — which helps the neurons carry electrical signals ( action potentials ) . This results in a thinning or complete loss of myelin and , as the disease advances , the breakdown of the axons of neurons . When the myelin is lost , a neuron can no longer effectively conduct electrical signals . A repair process , called <unk> , takes place in early phases of the disease , but the oligodendrocytes are unable to completely rebuild the cell 's myelin sheath . Repeated attacks lead to successively less effective <unk> , until a scar @-@ like plaque is built up around the damaged axons . These scars are the origin of the symptoms and during an attack magnetic resonance imaging ( MRI ) often shows more than ten new plaques . This could indicate that there are a number of lesions below which the brain is capable of repairing itself without producing noticeable consequences . Another process involved in the creation of lesions is an abnormal increase in the number of astrocytes due to the destruction of nearby neurons . A number of lesion patterns have been described . 
 = = = Inflammation = = = 
 Apart from demyelination , the other sign of the disease is inflammation . Fitting with an immunological explanation , the inflammatory process is caused by T cells , a kind of lymphocyte that plays an important role in the body 's defenses . T cells gain entry into the brain via disruptions in the blood – brain barrier . The T cells recognize myelin as foreign and attack it , explaining why these cells are also called " <unk> lymphocytes " . 
 The attack of myelin starts inflammatory processes , which triggers other immune cells and the release of soluble factors like cytokines and antibodies . Further breakdown of the blood – brain barrier in turn causes a number of other damaging effects such as swelling , activation of macrophages , and more activation of cytokines and other destructive proteins . Inflammation can potentially reduce transmission of information between neurons in at least three ways . The soluble factors released might stop neurotransmission by intact neurons . These factors could lead to or enhance the loss of myelin , or they may cause the axon to break down completely . 
 = = = Blood – brain barrier = = = 
 The blood – brain barrier is a part of the capillary system that prevents the entry of T cells into the central nervous system . It may become permeable to these types of cells secondary to an infection by a virus or bacteria . After it repairs itself , typically once the infection has cleared , T cells may remain trapped inside the brain . Gadolinium cannot cross a normal BBB and , therefore , Gadolinium @-@ enhanced MRI is used to show BBB breakdowns . 
