 Musically , " Gambler " is an upbeat song that combines elements of synthpop and disco , composed in the style of the songs on Madonna 's self @-@ titled debut album . The song features instrumentation from drums , electronic handclaps and percussion , which is accompanied by a bass synths and keyboards . The song starts with an initial four @-@ chord chorus , and a brief three @-@ chord verse , eventually reaching a middle eight , where Madonna 's voice is in echoes . Near the end , the coda of the song uses a new musical sequence , with some whistling , and the line " You can 't stop me now " ending echoes . 
 According to the sheet music published at Musicnotes.com by Alfred Publishing , the song is set in the time signature of common time , with a tempo of 100 beats per minute . Madonna 's vocal range spans from B ♭ 3 to E5 . " Gambler " is composed in the key of D minor and has a basic sequence of Dm – G – Dm – G – Dm – G – Am as its chord progression . The lyrics have Madonna asserting her independence and daredevil attitude towards life , to a lover who , according to her , would not be able to understand or put up with her speed . 
 = = Critical response = = 
 Rikky Rooksby , author of The Complete Guide to the Music of Madonna , compared the song to the music of the band Blondie , and said : " The rapid movement through the various sections , can 't save the song from being fairly ordinary , but it passes quick enough . Bit like 24 @-@ hour flu , really . " Alex Henderson from Allmusic called the song " an ultra @-@ infectious gem that , unfortunately , isn 't on any of the Material Girl 's [ Madonna 's ] CDs " and felt that " ' Gambler ' is one of those songs that should have been a major hit but wasn 't , whereas ' Crazy for You ' soared to the top of the pop charts . " Alfred Soto of Stylus Magazine , described " Gambler " as a " disco @-@ punk , Flashdance edition " and called it " the most aggressive track of Madonna 's career . " Soto added , " ' Gambler ' is the only possible response to a slow dance in which you were left as unfulfilled as you were five minutes earlier . It deserves immortality beside ' Into the Groove ' [ ... ] The music is keyed to her vocals — insistent , strident , hip @-@ thrusting ; she slurs the line " You 're just jealous ' cuz you can 't be me " like it 's a shot of <unk> ; meanwhile <unk> synths blow up her skirt . Robert Christgau gave a mixed review of the song . R. Serge <unk> and William D. <unk> , authors of Risky business : rock in film , felt that the song seemed " jammed into the movie with a plunger and little thought to appropriateness . " The Motion Picture Guide of 1986 included the song as one of the soundtrack 's standouts . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 " Gambler " was released in October 1985 in the United Kingdom , and debuted at position 20 on the UK Singles Chart . After two weeks it peaked at number four , and was present for a total of 14 weeks . By the end of 1985 , Madonna achieved up another record with the song , becoming the first female artist to have eight UK top @-@ ten singles in one calendar year . The song was certified silver by the British Phonographic Industry ( BPI ) for shipment of 250 @,@ 000 copies of the single . According to the Official Charts Company , the song has sold 295 @,@ 000 copies there . In Australia , " Gambler " debuted on the Kent Music Report at number 51 , and at number 17 in the top 50 , reaching a peak of number ten . In Germany , the song debuted at number 39 on the Media Control Charts , and reached a peak of number 25 after five weeks , being present on the chart for a total of 12 weeks . Across Europe , the song reached the top @-@ ten of the charts in Belgium , Ireland , Italy , Netherlands and Norway . It also reached peaks of number 23 in Switzerland and number 45 in New Zealand . 
 = = Live performance = = 
 Madonna has only performed this song live once , on The Virgin Tour in 1985 . It was the first song , of the second act of the show . Madonna wore a black , fringed micro @-@ top and similar skirt , with her belly @-@ button exposed , and a number of crucifixes in different sizes , hanging from different parts of her body . As the guitar intro of the song started , Madonna appeared on the side @-@ stage and started dancing energetically , while flashlights fell on her . While singing the song , she sometimes opened her jacket and sometimes straddled the steel structure present on the stage . The performance ended with Madonna jumping off the side stage , onto the main stage . It was included on the video release , titled Madonna Live : The Virgin Tour , which was shot in Detroit . 
 = = Track listing and formats = = 
 Germany / UK / Australia / Netherlands 7 " single 
 " Gambler " – 3 : 54 
 " Nature of the Beach " ( Black ' n Blue ) – 3 : 45 
 UK / Netherlands 12 " single 
 " Gambler " ( Extended Dance Mix ) – 5 : 34 
 " Gambler " ( Instrumental Remix ) – 3 : 55 
 " Nature of the Beach " ( Black ' n Blue ) – 3 : 45 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Madonna – writer , vocals 
 John " Jellybean " Benitez – producer 
 Stephen Bray – arranger 
 Greg <unk> – mastering 
 John Kalodner – executive producer 
 Credits adapted from the soundtrack 's liner notes . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Tempest ( Smallville ) = 
 " Tempest " is the twenty @-@ first episode and season finale of the first season of the WB original series Smallville . The episode originally aired on May 21 , 2002 ; Alfred Gough and Miles Millar wrote the script , and Greg Beeman directed . In the episode 's narrative , Lex attempts to forge his own destiny away from LuthorCorp ; Whitney leaves Smallville for the Marines ; Roger Nixon discovers Clark 's secret and attempts to expose him to the world ; and Lana is pulled into a tornado . 
 Director Greg Beeman attempted to create a visual theme among the characters that would parallel the approaching storm . The episode would mark the departure of Eric Johnson as Whitney Fordman , though he would return as a special guest in seasons two and four . Although the Smallville finale pulled in just over half of the viewership attained by the pilot episode , it was still favorably received by critics . It was also nominated for two awards . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Lionel Luthor ( John Glover ) shows up at the Smallville LuthorCorp plant , and announces that " management failure " has forced him to shut the plant down . Effectively blaming the problem on Lex ( Michael Rosenbaum ) , Lionel informs his son he wants him to return to Metropolis . Clark ( Tom Welling ) , Pete ( Sam Jones III ) , Chloe ( Allison Mack ) , and Lana ( Kristin Kreuk ) make plans for the spring formal . Whitney ( Eric Johnson ) informs Lana that he is enlisting in the Marine Corps , and he leaves for basic training the day of the dance . 
 Lex tries to initiate an employee buyout , and convinces the employees to mortgage their homes to help provide the financial resources to complete the buyout . Lionel learns of Lex 's plans and buys the Smallville Savings & Loan , so that he may immediately foreclose on all the property when Lex 's employees miss their payments . Roger Nixon ( Tom O 'Brien ) tests Clark 's abilities by setting off a bomb in his truck , while he is inside . Nixon confronts Clark in the Talon coffee shop , but Lex intervenes on Clark 's behalf . Nixon follows Clark home and overhears a conversation about Clark 's ship being in the storm cellar , and that Lex has the missing piece from the ship . Nixon goes to the Luthor mansion and steals the octagonal key , and immediately returns to the storm cellar with a video camera . 
 Clark , Chloe , and Pete arrive at the dance , and say their goodbyes to Whitney before he leaves for training . The weather begins to deteriorate , and a storm picks up , as Lana takes Whitney to the bus stop . Jonathan ( John Schneider ) and Martha ( Annette O 'Toole ) decide to head to the storm cellar to seek cover from the storm , and they discover Nixon just as the octagonal disk activates the ship . Nixon attempts to escape with the videotape , and Jonathan chases out into the storm after him . The ship levitates off the ground and flies out of the storm cellar . Lana says goodbye to Whitney and drives home . On her way , storm winds force her off the road , right next to three tornadoes that have touched down . The students at the dance are alerted to the tornados that have been sighted , and Clark races off to make sure Lana is all right . The three tornadoes merge into one large tornado and move in Lana 's direction . Clark arrives just as Lana , in the truck , is sucked into the tornado 's vortex ; Clark speeds into the tornado to rescue her . 
 = = Production = = 
 When thinking of how to end the first season , two things were clear to Alfred Gough and Miles Millar : the final episode would have the school prom , and there would be tornadoes . Although Jeph Loeb 's Superman For All Seasons , which inspired Gough and Millar when they created the show , contains an event where a tornado hits Smallville , the pair insist that the tornado idea came from a story they overheard on the radio about a tornado that hit a high school during their prom night . The episode would mark the departure of Eric Johnson as series star Whitney Fordman , though he would return as a special guest in seasons two and four . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Director Greg Beeman filmed the episode with a tone that was thematically similar to a " rising storm " . According to Beeman , the episode would start very calm and then begin to build upon itself . As he explains : 
 " I began with Lex being blasted by the wind from the helicopter landing as Lionel arrives to shut the plant down . I wanted to set the mood for the storm which was coming . Then everything settles down , and the show starts calmly , but then as it builds the camera starts to move more and circle more , until the storm arrives and it builds to this fever pitch . The whole episode had this steady , graceful arc to chaos , which I really tried to control . " 
 The hard part of filming was controlling the buildup ; Beeman wanted to build the drama , visuals , and the wind from the storm up together . Mike Walls brought in " jet @-@ powered wind machines " , which had been used for the movie Twister , to simulate the high velocity winds for the storm that was going to blow through Smallville . The " wind " is first introduced when Chloe arrives to pick Clark up for the prom . What begins as a " gentle " introduction is built upon , little by little , with each progressing scene . By the time Lana drops Whitney off at the bus station , the wind has become very strong . 
 Another dilemma Beeman faced was keeping the performances realistic , and not " over @-@ the @-@ top " . Beeman believes that " Tempest " proves exactly what he thought about Smallville , that the show is " seen and experienced from the point of view of a teenager " . Beeman explains , " If you ’ re in love , you ’ re head over heels in love . If you ’ re scared , you ’ re terrified . If you ’ re sad , you ’ re in grief . The emotions are strong , but it doesn ’ t mean that the performances are over @-@ the @-@ top . " 
 For " Tempest " , this boils down to : the departure of Whitney , which causes distress in Lana ; the experimental relationship between Clark and Chloe , who are trying to figure out whether or not " they ’ ll be in love " ; the evilness of Roger Nixon , and how Jonathan fights to protect his family ; and the battle between father and son ( Lionel and Lex ) . Beeman saw these events as if they were part of an opera , and that the performances needed to match that tone without going over @-@ the @-@ top . 
 Rob Maier , construction coordinator and production designer for " Tempest " was very busy for this episode , as scenes were filmed at the Andalinis farm , and Zero Avenue ( which is the name of the road that runs along the US / Canadian border ) for the scene where the three tornadoes touch down beside Lana . He also had to work on shattering the windows at the Luthor Mansion for Lex and Lionel ’ s final confrontation . The band Remy Zero , whose single " Save Me " is the opening theme for the show , was asked to perform for the episode . The band quickly learned that filming a live performance for a television show is not as straight forward as its sounds . In order to be able to film everything , Beeman could not have the band playing full volume throughout the scene . There were times when everyone had to be quiet and pretend to play , or dance , while the actors exchanged their dialogue . There were other times when they had to be as loud as they could . 
 = = = Effects = = = 
 Mike Walsh was worried about filming the moment when a beam breaks inside the Luthor mansion , from the wind generated by the storm , and lands on top of Lionel . His crew already knew which beam was going to fall , but they did not know where to cut the beam because they were not sure how Beeman intended to shoot the scene . When the day of shooting came around everything worked out well . They used a stunt double for the initial impact of the beam , and then John Glover stepped back into the scene and fell down with the beam on top of him . The wind effects also created potential danger for the cast and crew . As Eric Johnson recalls , even the smallest piece of debris flying around at such high speeds can cause damage . Annette O ’ Toole had a similar experience for her scenes in the storm cellar . When Jonathan races into the storm after Nixon , the special effects crew used one of their jet fans and some dry leaves to simulate the winds that were coming from outside ; the dry leaves were smacking O ’ Toole in the face , smothering her . 
 = = Character development = = 
 This episode featured a lot of character development that many of the actors had been waiting for . Lana 's jealousy over Clark and Chloe going to the prom begins to come out ; although Kristin Kreuk believes that Lana does not want to be jealous , and wants to be able to support Clark with his newfound feelings for Chloe . According to Eric Johnson , Whitney finally gets to show a side of himself that Johnson wishes the audience would have been able to see sooner , as Whitney gives Lana a private dance before the prom knowing that she will not be able to go because he is leaving town . To add further depth to his character not previously seen , Millar and Gough decided to send Whitney off to war , instead of killing the character outright . The idea of sending Whitney off to war was something that came to Millar and Gough midway through the season . They knew they did not want to kill him , because they wanted the ability to bring him back at some point in the future , so they came up with this " noble , heroic , send @-@ off " for the character . For Lex , this episode featured the moment when he finally began to contemplate what his life would be like if his father was no longer a part of it . As Rosenbaum sees it , the moment that Lex hesitates to free his father from the support beam that collapses on him is the moment that the audience gets to see a hint of the evil man they know Lex will one day become . This is a brief moment where Lex forgets who he is , and if he had let his father die he would have certainly made his " turn to the dark side " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Tempest " premiered on The WB on May 21 , 2002 . " Tempest " achieved a Nielsen rating of 3 @.@ 8 , meaning that approximately 3 @.@ 8 percent of all television @-@ equipped households were tuned in to the episode , putting the episode 68th in viewership for the week of May 20 – 26 . The episode went on to be nominated for two awards , although it did not win either . The first was a 2003 Golden Reel award for " Best Sound Editing in Television Episodic " . Attila Szalay also received a nomination by the Canadian Society of Cinematographers for his work . 
 Reviews for " Tempest " were mostly positive . The Futon Critic 's Brian Ford Sullivan felt that the season finale gave every element the " four @-@ star treatment " , and that the cliffhanger ending was " riveting " enough to leave the reviewer in anticipation all summer long of the season two premiere . Sullivan would go on to rank " Tempest " as the fifteenth best television episode of 2002 . Jonathan Boudreaux , a reviewer for <unk> , felt the episode was one of the season 's strongest , thanks to the focus on characters , with " kryptonite taking a backseat " ; he referred to " Tempest " as the " slam bang season ending cliffhanger " . Eric Moro of Mania.com believed that " Tempest " proved Smallville could " utilize the supernatural as a metaphor for teenage life " , and that the finale managed to " recap the theme of the entire season , brought every dangling plot point to a head and closed with an ending sure to bring viewers back for a second season of super @-@ entertainment " . Author Neal Bailey was little more mixed in his opinion . He felt that for all the episode accomplished , it was not better than any previous episode that had aired that season ; the episode lacked anticipation , based on the predictability of each character 's actions . 
 = Indian Army during World War I = 
 The Indian Army during World War I contributed a large number of divisions and independent brigades to the European , Mediterranean and the Middle East theatres of war in World War I. Over one million Indian troops served overseas , of whom 62 @,@ 000 died and another 67 @,@ 000 were wounded . In total at least 74 @,@ 187 Indian soldiers died during the war . 
 In World War I the Indian Army fought against the German Empire in German East Africa and on the Western Front . At the First Battle of Ypres , Khudadad Khan became the first Indian to be awarded a Victoria Cross . Indian divisions were also sent to Egypt , Gallipoli and nearly 700 @,@ 000 served in Mesopotamia against the Ottoman Empire . While some divisions were sent overseas others had to remain in India guarding the North West Frontier and on internal security and training duties . 
 Field @-@ Marshal Sir Claude Auchinleck , Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief of the Indian Army from 1942 asserted that the British " couldn 't have come through both wars [ World War I and II ] if they hadn 't had the Indian Army . " 
 = = Kitchener 's reforms = = 
 Herbert Kitchener was appointed Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief , India in 1902 and after five years , his term of office was extended by a further two — during which he reformed the Indian Army . The reforms now directed that there would be only one Indian Army , the three armies of the Presidencies being merged into a unified force . At the same time , the regiments of the Princely states were made available to be called out to become Imperial Service Troops . The British Army also continued to supply units for service in India , in addition to those of the Indian Army . The term Army of India was instituted to refer to the overall command structure which included both the British and Indian Army units . The new formation for the Army of India was set at nine divisions , each division with one cavalry and three infantry brigades and these nine divisions together with three independent infantry brigades would serve in India . The Indian Army was also responsible for supplying a division in Burma and a brigade in Aden . 
 To assist command and control of the new divisions , two field armies were formed — the Northern Army and the Southern Army . The Northern Army had five divisions and three brigades and was responsible for the North West Frontier to Bengal while the Southern Army , which had four divisions in India and two formations outside the subcontinent , was responsible for Baluchistan to southern India . The regiments and battalions of the new organisation would be numbered in a single sequence and the old titles of the Bombay , Madras and the Bengal Armies would be discontinued . The new regiments and battalions , instead of remaining at their home base , could now all be called upon to serve anywhere in the country , and a tour of duty on the North West Frontier would be an established posting . One change that was not accepted was the formation of all @-@ British or all @-@ Indian brigades and the system of having one British regiment or battalion in each brigade remained . 
 = = Organisation = = 
 In 1914 , the Indian Army was one of the two largest volunteer armies in the world with a total strength of 240 @,@ 000 men , ( The British Army had a strength of 247 @,@ 432 regular volunteers at the outbreak of the war ) and by November 1918 it contained 548 @,@ 311 men , being considered the Imperial Strategic Reserve . It was regularly called upon to deal with incursions and raids on the North West Frontier and to provide garrison forces for the British Empire in Egypt , Singapore and China . This field force was divided into two armies : The Northern Army which stretched from the North @-@ West Frontier to Bengal with five divisions and three brigades under command and the Southern Army which stretched from Baluchistan to southern India and it in turn had four divisions under command and two formations outside the subcontinent . The two armies contained 39 cavalry regiments , 138 infantry battalions ( including 20 Gurkha ) , a joint cavalry @-@ infantry unit the Corps of Guides , three sapper regiments and 12 mountain artillery batteries . 
 The nine divisions formed by these reforms each consisted of one cavalry and three infantry brigades . The cavalry brigade had one British and two Indian regiments while the infantry brigades consisted of one British and three Indian battalions . Indian Army battalions were smaller than the British battalions , consisting of 30 officers and 723 other ranks as compared to the British 29 officers and 977 other ranks . Indian battalions were often segregated , with companies of different tribes , castes or religions . Additional troops attached to the headquarters of each division included a cavalry regiment , a pioneer battalion and artillery provided by the British Royal Field Artillery . Each division had about 13 @,@ 000 men on strength , somewhat weaker than a British division in part due to the smaller infantry battalions and smaller artillery forces . The Indian Army was also weakened when 500 British officers on home leave , enough to officer 38 Indian battalions , were posted to the new British divisions being formed for Kitchener 's Army . 
 In addition to the regular Indian Army , the armies of the Princely States and regiments of the Auxiliary Force ( European volunteers ) could also be called upon to assist in an emergency . The Princely States formed the Imperial Service Brigades and in 1914 , had 22 @,@ 613 men in 20 cavalry regiments and 14 infantry battalions . By the end of the war 26 @,@ 000 men had served overseas on Imperial Service . The Auxiliary force could field another 40 @,@ 000 men in 11 regiments of horse and 42 volunteer infantry battalions . Also available were the Frontier Militia and the Military Police which could field 34 @,@ 000 men between them . 
 The field force headquarters was located in Delhi and the senior officer ( Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief , India ) was assisted by a Chief of the General Staff , India . All the senior command and staff positions in the Indian Army alternated between senior officers of the British and Indian Armies . In 1914 , the Commander – in – Chief was General Sir Beauchamp Duff of the Indian Army , and the Chief of the General Staff was Lieutenant General Sir Percy Lake of the British Army . Each Indian battalion was staffed by 13 officers from the British Army in India and 17 officers from the Indian Army — expatriate British officers serving under colonial Indian administration . As the war intensified and officer casualties mounted , the ability to replace casualties with officers of British origin became extremely difficult and in many cases the officer allotment to battalions was reduced accordingly . Only in 1919 were the first Officer Cadets of Indian descent permitted to be selected for officer training at the Royal Military College . 
 The normal annual recruitment for the Indian army was 15 @,@ 000 men , during the course of the war over 800 @,@ 000 men volunteered for the army and more than 400 @,@ 000 volunteered for non @-@ combatant roles . In total almost 1 @.@ 3 million men had volunteered for service by 1918 . Over one million Indian troops served overseas during the war . In total , at least 74 @,@ 187 Indian soldiers died in World War I. 
 Britain used Indian child soldiers , some as young as 10 years old , in the war . 
 = = Home service = = 
 Before World War I , the Indian Army was deployed maintaining internal security and defending the North West Frontier against incursions from Afghanistan . These tasks did not end with the declaration of war . The divisions deployed along the frontier were the existing 1st ( Peshawar ) Division , the 2nd ( Rawalpindi ) Division , the 4th ( Quetta ) Division . The only war @-@ formed division to serve in India was the 16th Indian Division formed in 1916 , it was also stationed on the North West Frontier . All these divisions were still in place and took part in the Third Afghan War at the end of World War I. 
 In supporting the war effort , India was left vulnerable to hostile action from Afghanistan . A Turco @-@ German mission arrived in Kabul in October 1915 , with obvious strategic purpose . Habibullah Khan abided by his treaty obligations and maintained Afghanistan 's neutrality , in the face of internal opposition from factions keen to side with the Ottoman Sultan . Despite this , localised actions along the frontier still took place and included Operations in the Tochi ( 1914 – 15 ) , Operations against the <unk> , <unk> and <unk> ( 1915 ) , Kalat Operations ( 1915 – 16 ) , Mohmand Blockade ( 1916 – 17 ) , Operations against the <unk> ( 1917 ) and Operations against the <unk> and <unk> tribes ( 1918 ) . 
 On the North East Frontier between India and Burma punitive actions were carried out against the <unk> tribes between December 1914 – February 1915 , by the Burma Military Police supported by the 1 / 7th Gurkha Rifles and the 64th Pioneers . Between November 1917 – March 1919 , operations were carried out against the Kuki tribes by auxiliary units of the Assam Rifles and the Burma Military Police . 
 The other divisions remaining in India at first on internal security and then as training divisions were the 5th ( Mhow ) Division , the 8th ( Lucknow ) Division and the 9th ( Secunderabad ) Division . Over the course of the war these divisions lost brigades to other formations on active service ; The 5th ( Mhow ) Division lost the 5th ( Mhow ) Cavalry Brigade to the 2nd Indian Cavalry Division . The 8th ( Lucknow ) Division lost the 8th ( Lucknow ) Cavalry Brigade to the 1st Indian Cavalry Division and the 22nd ( Lucknow ) Brigade to the 11th Indian Division . The 9th ( Secunderabad ) Division lost the 9th ( Secunderabad ) Cavalry Brigade to the 2nd Indian Cavalry Division and the 27th ( Bangalore ) Brigade which was sent to British East Africa . The other pre war units the Burma Division , remained in Burma throughout the war on internal security duties , likewise the Aden brigade remained in Aden . 
 = = Indian Army entry into the war = = 
 In 1901 oil had been discovered in commercial quantities at Masjid @-@ e @-@ Suleiman at the head of the Persian Gulf . At the start of the war in 1914 , the privately owned Anglo @-@ Persian Oil Company which owned the concessions for these fields was about to be bought by the British Government , primarily to fuel the British Fleet . It soon became clear that the Ottoman Turkish Army was being mobilised and in August the Indian Government was instructed to prepare contingency plans to protect these strategic assets . The plans dictated that in the event of the Turkish Army coming out in support of the Germans , the Indian Army was to act to secure the oilfields . As a contingency , the Indian Expeditionary Force D ( see below ) under command of Lieutenant – General Sir Arthur Barrett sailed from Bombay on 16 October 1914 for Bahrain . They , together with Expeditionary Force A who had been hurriedly sent to Europe at the end of September in response to a request from the Imperial General Staff for men to support the war effort — became the first Indian elements committed to war outside of India . 
 = = Independent brigades = = 
 In addition to the permanent divisions , the Indian Army also formed a number of independent brigades . As part of the Southern Army the Aden Brigade was stationed in the Aden Protectorate on the strategically important naval route from Europe to India , where there was limited fighting . The Bannu Brigade , the Derajat Brigade and the Kohat Brigade were all part of the Northern Army and they were deployed along the North West Frontier . On 12 May 1918 , the Bannu and Derajat brigades were designated as the Waziristan Field Force under the command General G W Baynon . The South Persia Brigade was formed in 1915 at the start of the Persian Campaign to protect the Anglo – Persian oil installations in south Persia and the Persian Gulf . 
 = = Expeditionary Forces = = 
 The Indian Army formed and dispatched seven expeditionary forces overseas during World War I. 
 = = = Indian Expeditionary Force A = = = 
 On the outbreak of war the Indian Army had 150 @,@ 000 trained men and the Indian Government offered the services of two cavalry and two infantry divisions for service overseas . The force known as Indian Expeditionary Force A was under the command of General Sir James Willcocks . Force A was attached to the British Expeditionary Force and the four divisions were formed into two army corps : an infantry Indian Corps and the Indian Cavalry Corps . 
 Upon arrival in Marseilles on 30 September 1914 , only six weeks after the declaration of war , they were moved to the Ypres Salient and took part in the Battle of La Bassée in October 1914 . In March 1915 , the 7th ( Meerut ) Division was chosen to lead the assault in the Battle of Neuve Chapelle . The Expeditionary Force was hampered by a lack of familiarity with new equipment , only being issued Lee – Enfield rifles on their arrival in France and they had almost no artillery , relying on support from their neighbouring corps when in the front line . They were not accustomed to the continental weather and were poorly equipped to resist the cold , leading to low morale which was further compounded by the reserve system , whereby reinforcements were drafted in from any regiment and had no affiliation to their new units . Officer casualties were even more of a handicap , as replacements were unfamiliar with the Indian Army and could not speak the language . With morale low , many soldiers fled the scene of the battle and the infantry divisions were finally withdrawn to Egypt in October 1915 , when they were replaced by the new British divisions of Kitchener 's Army . 
 With the withdrawal of the infantry divisions , the only Indian Army units on the Western Front were the two cavalry divisions . In November 1916 , the two Indian cavalry divisions were renumbered from 1st and 2nd to the 4th and 5th Cavalry Divisions . Serving alongside British cavalry divisions they were held behind the front line awaiting the hoped for breakthrough . At times during the war they served in the trenches as infantry , each cavalry brigade when dismounted formed a dismounted regiment . This meant that when the divisions went into the front line , they could only cover a brigade area . Before being themselves withdrawn to Egypt in March 1918 , they took part in the Battle of the Somme , the Battle of Bazentin , the Battle of Flers @-@ Courcelette , the advance to the Hindenburg Line and finally the Battle of Cambrai . 
 Of the 130 @,@ 000 Indians who served in France and Belgium , almost 9 @,@ 000 died . 
 = = = Indian Expeditionary Force B = = = 
 In 1914 , the Governor of British East Africa requested assistance to deal with the German forces in German East Africa and the problem was handed to the India Office , which assembled two forces and shipped them to his aid . Indian Expeditionary Force B consisted of the 27th ( Bangalore ) Brigade from the 9th ( Secunderabad ) Division and an Imperial Service Infantry Brigade , a pioneer battalion , a mountain artillery battery and engineers were sent to Tanganyika with the task of invading German East Africa . The force under the command of Major General Arthur Aitken landed at Tanga on 2 – 3 November 1914 . In the following Battle of Tanga , <unk> ' 8 @,@ 000 men were badly beaten by the 1 @,@ 000 men under their German commander Paul von Lettow @-@ Vorbeck . The force re – embarked on 5 November 1914 , having suffered 817 casualties and the loss of several hundred rifles , 16 machine guns and 600 @,@ 000 rounds of ammunition . 
 = = = Indian Expeditionary Force C = = = 
 Indian Expeditionary Force C was the second force assembled for service in British East Africa in 1914 . This force was formed from the Indian Army 's 29th Punjabis , together with half battalions from the Princely states of Jind , Bharatpur , Kapurthala and Rampur , a volunteer 15 pounder artillery battery , 22nd ( Derajat ) Mountain Battery ( Frontier Force ) , a volunteer maxim gun battery and a Field Ambulance . It was planned that the force was to be a defensive one ( unlike force B ) and be primarily used to guard the railway to Uganda and to support the King 's African Rifles in communications protection duties . After arriving in Mombasa , Force C was broken up and its units subsequently served separately . The one action they were involved in was the Battle of Kilimanjaro , in October 1914 . Force C with 4 @,@ 000 men gathered near the border of British and German East Africa , commanded by Brigadier General J. M. Stewart . Flawed intelligence reports estimated the German military presence in the region at 200 men ; however , there were 600 askaris in three companies plus the colonial volunteers , 86 young Germans on horseback . On 3 November 1914 , some 1 @,@ 500 Punjabis of the British force advanced up the slope at night near <unk> were caught in the crossfire of a strong German defensive position as they advanced in the morning fog . The large force of Indian infantry effectively resisted counterattacks , however , during the day the British attackers made no headway and suffered substantial casualties . By mid @-@ morning , a German mounted patrol ambushed a supply column and roughly 100 mules carrying water for the troops were stampeded away by the Germans . The British officers , with their now widely scattered troops , waited until darkness and having determined their situation to be untenable , withdrew down the mountain and marched back to British East Africa having accomplished nothing . 
 = = = Indian Expeditionary Force D = = = 
 The largest Indian Army force to serve abroad was the Indian Expeditionary Force D in Mesopotamia , under the command of Lieutenant @-@ General Sir John Nixon . The first unit sent in November 1914 , was the 6th ( Poona ) Division and they were tasked with guarding British oil installations in and around Basra . As part of the Mesopotamian campaign they served under the command of Major General Barrett and then under Major General Townshend . After a string of early successes , the campaign was delivered a setback at the Battle of Ctesiphon in November 1915 due to logistical constraints . Following this engagement , the Poona Division withdrew back to Kut , where Townshend made the decision to hold the city and the Siege of Kut began . 
 Between January and March 1916 , Townshend launched several attacks in an attempt to lift the siege . In sequence , the attacks took place at the Battle of Sheikh Sa 'ad , the Battle of the Wadi , the Battle of Hanna , and the Battle of <unk> Redoubt . 
 These attempts to break through the encirclement did not succeed and the cost was heavy with both sides suffering high casualties . In February food , and hopes were running out for Townshend in Kut @-@ al @-@ Amara . Disease spread rapidly and could not be contained or cured and Townshend surrendered in April 1916 . In December 1916 , the 3rd and 7th Divisions arrived from the Western Front . 
 In 1917 , the British force , under Frederick Stanley Maude , which now included one cavalry and seven infantry divisions from the Indian Army , in the III Corps ( India ) advanced towards Baghdad which was captured in March . The advance continued in 1918 , and after the Battle of <unk> in October , the Turkish forces surrendered and the Armistice of Mudros was signed . The Mesopotamian campaign was largely an Indian Army campaign as the only British formations involved were the 13th ( Western ) Division and British battalions assigned to Indian brigades . In the campaign , 11 @,@ 012 were killed , 3 @,@ 985 died of wounds , 12 @,@ 678 died of disease , 13 @,@ 492 were either missing or prisoners ( including the 9 @,@ 000 prisoners from Kut ) , and 51 @,@ 836 were wounded . 
 = = = Indian Expeditionary Force E = = = 
 Indian Expeditionary Force E consisted of the 22nd ( Lucknow ) Brigade sent to Egypt in October 1914 . The designation was retained for all subsequent forces sent there . 
 Two Indian cavalry divisions ( 4th Cavalry Division and 5th Cavalry Division ) transferred from France in 1918 , for service in Palestine . They were joined by the 15th Imperial Service Cavalry Brigade , a unit formed by three regiments of Lancers from the princely states of Mysore , Hyderabad , and Jodhpur . The 3rd ( Lahore ) Division and the 7th ( Meerut ) Division were transferred from Mesopotamia . At the same time 36 Indian army battalions were sent to reinforce the British 10th ( Irish ) , 53rd ( Welsh ) , 60th ( 2 / 2nd London ) and 75th Divisions , which were reformed on Indian division lines with one British and three Indian battalions per brigade . 
 = = = Indian Expeditionary Force F = = = 
 Indian Expeditionary Force F consisted of the 10th Indian Division and the 11th Indian Division both of which were formed in Egypt in 1914 , to defend the Suez canal . Other formations attached were the regular 22nd ( Lucknow ) Brigade from the 8th Lucknow Division without their British battalions and an Imperial Service Cavalry Brigade . 
 The 10th Division was disbanded in 1916 , and its brigades assigned to other formations . The 28th Indian Brigade was assigned to the 7th ( Meerut ) Division in 1915 ; the 29th Indian Brigade served as an independent brigade in the Gallipoli campaign , and then disbanded in June 1917 ; and the 30th Indian Brigade was first assigned to the 12th Indian Division in April 1915 , then transferred to the 6th ( Poona ) Division in September 1915 and was captured in the fall of Kut . 
 The 11th Division was disbanded earlier in 1915 , but its brigades did not survive much longer . The 22nd ( Lucknow ) Brigade was broken up in January 1916 ; the 31st Indian Brigade joined the 10th Division in January 1916 , but was disbanded a month later ; and the 32nd ( Imperial Service ) Brigade was disbanded in January 1916 . 
 = = = Indian Expeditionary Force G = = = 
 In April 1915 , Indian Expeditionary Force G was sent to reinforce the Gallipoli Campaign . It consisted of the 29th Brigade , serving away from its parent 10th Indian Division . Consisting of three battalions of <unk> and one of Sikhs , the brigade was dispatched from Egypt and attached to the British 29th Division which had been decimated in the earlier battles . Held in reserve for the Second Battle of Krithia they played a major part in the Third Battle of Krithia . Advancing on the left the Brigade was quickly halted except along the Aegean shore where the 1 / 6th Gurkha Rifles managed to advance . The 14th <unk> Sikhs , advancing along the floor of Gully Ravine , were almost wiped out , losing 380 men out of 514 and 80 % of their officers . The Brigade was next involved in the Battle of Gully Ravine and here the 2 / 10th Gurkha Rifles managed to advance half a mile . The Brigade next took part in the Battle of Sari Bair , under cover of a naval bombardment the 1 / 6th Gurkha Rifles assaulted and captured the hill , which was then shelled by the Royal Navy . With their casualties mounting and under command of the battalion medical officer they were forced to withdraw to their starting positions . With the failure of the assault at Sari Bair the brigade was withdrawn to Egypt . Over the duration of the campaign the 29th Brigade had suffered 1 @,@ 358 dead and 3 @,@ 421 wounded . 
 = = Other operations = = 
 = = = Siege of Tsingtao = = = 
 One Indian Army battalion that was part of the Garrison of Tianjin in China , the 36th Sikhs took part in the Siege of Tsingtao . Tsingtao was a German controlled port in China . The British Government and the other Allied European powers were concerned about Japanese intentions in the region and decided to send a small symbolic British contingent from Tianjin in an effort to allay their fears . The 1 @,@ 500 @-@ man contingent was commanded by Brigadier @-@ General Nathaniel Walter <unk> and consisted of 1 @,@ 000 soldiers of the 2nd Battalion , South Wales Borderers who were later followed by 500 soldiers of the 36th Sikhs . The Japanese led force laid siege to the port between 31 October – 7 November 1914 . At the end of the siege , Japanese army casualties numbered 236 killed and 1 @,@ 282 wounded ; the British / Indians had 12 killed and 53 wounded . The German defenders suffered 199 dead and 504 wounded . 
 = = = 1915 Singapore Mutiny = = = 
 The 1915 Singapore Mutiny involved up to half of the 850 sepoys comprising the 5th Light Infantry against the British in Singapore during the War , part of the 1915 Ghadar Conspiracy . The 5th Light Infantry had arrived in Singapore from Madras in October 1914 . They had been sent to replace the Yorkshire Light Infantry , which had been ordered to France . The 5th Light Infantry consisted of roughly equal numbers of Punjabi Muslims and Pathans serving in separate companies . Their morale was constantly low , being effected by poor communication , slack discipline and a weak leadership . The regiment had been employed to guard the captured crew from the German ship , SMS Emden and reportedly attempts were made to fan the discontent amongst the sepoys . The regiment was under orders to embark for further garrison duty in Hong Kong , however rumours started that they were going to be sent to fight in the Middle East against fellow Muslims from the Ottoman Empire . 
 On 16 February 1915 , while preparations for departure were under way , the four companies of Punjabi Muslims mutinied while the Pathan sepoys of the remaining four companies scattered in confusion . Two of the British officers at the Tanglin barracks were killed and the mutineers then moved on the German prisoner of war camp where they killed thirteen camp guards and other military personnel . The Germans however refused to join them . The mutineers then roamed the streets of Singapore , killing European civilians that they encountered . The mutiny continued for nearly five days and was suppressed by local volunteer and British regular units plus naval detachments from allied warships , and with assistance from the Sultan of Johor . 
 Following immediate courts @-@ martial a total of 47 mutineers were executed , while 64 were transported for life and another 73 imprisoned for varying terms . Later in 1915 the 5th Light Infantry saw service in the Kamerun Campaign and was subsequently sent to East Africa and Aden . 
 = = = 1918 Malleson Mission = = = 
 500 men of the 19th Punjabis were deployed by General Wilfrid Malleson in Transcaspia in support of the <unk> Committee , and known as the Malleson Mission . The <unk> Committee was a revolutionary organisation led by Mensheviks and Socialist Revolutionaries who were in an armed conflict with the Bolshevik Tashkent Soviet . Many of the soldiers who composed the Red Army were former Austro @-@ Hungarian prisoners of war , who had joined up when they found themselves destitute after their prison camps were closed following the February Revolution . 
 = = Victoria Cross recipients = = 
 Indian soldiers had not been not eligible for the Victoria Cross until 1911 , instead they received the Indian Order of Merit , an older decoration originally set up in the days of East India Company rule in India . The honour of being the first Indian recipient of the Victoria Cross ( VC ) in any conflict went to Khudadad Khan , 129th Duke of Connaught 's Own <unk> . When on 31 October 1914 , at Hollebeke , Belgium , the British Officer in charge of the detachment having been wounded , and the other gun put out of action by a shell , Sepoy Khudadad , though himself wounded , remained working his gun until all the other five men of the gun detachment had been killed . 
 Other members of the Indian Army awarded the Victoria Cross during World War I were : 
 <unk> Singh Negi , 39th Garhwal Rifles 
 For great gallantry on the night of the 23 – 24 November 1914 , near Festubert , France , when the regiment was engaged in retaking and clearing the enemy out of our trenches , and , although wounded in two places in the head , and also in the arm , being one of the first to push round each successive traverse , in the face of severe fire from bombs and rifles at the closest range . 
 Frank Alexander de Pass , 34th Prince Albert Victor 's Own Poona Horse 
 For conspicuous bravery near Festubert on 24 November 1914 , in entering a German sap and destroying a traverse in the face of the enemy 's bombs , and for subsequently rescuing , under heavy fire , a wounded man who was lying exposed in the open . 
 William Bruce , 59th Scinde Rifles 
 On 19 December 1914 , near Givenchy , during a night attack , Lt. Bruce was in command of a small party which captured one of the enemy 's trenches . In spite of being severely wounded in the neck , he walked up and down the trench , encouraging his men to hold on against several counter @-@ attacks for some hours until killed . The fire from rifles and bombs was very heavy all day , and it was due to the skilful disposition made , and the example and encouragement shown by Lt. Bruce that his men were able to hold out until dusk , when the trench was finally captured by the enemy . 
 Eustace Jotham , 51st Sikhs attached North Waziristan Militia 
 On 7 January 1915 , at Spina <unk> ( Tochi Valley ) During operations against the <unk> tribesmen , Captain Jotham , who was commanding a party of about a dozen of the North Waziristan Militia , was attacked in a nullah and almost surrounded by an overwhelming force of some 1 @,@ 500 tribesmen . He gave the order to retire , and could have himself escaped , but most gallantly sacrificed his own life by attempting to effect the rescue of one of his men who had lost his horse . 
 Mir <unk> , 55th Coke 's Rifles ( Frontier Force ) 
 On 26 April 1915 , at Wieltje , Belgium , <unk> Mir <unk> led his platoon with great bravery during the attack , and afterwards collected various parties of the regiment ( when no British officers were left ) and kept them under his command until the retirement was ordered . He also displayed great courage that day when he helped to carry eight British and Indian officers to safety while exposed to heavy fire . 
 John Smyth 15th Ludhiana Sikhs 
 For most conspicuous bravery near <unk> L <unk> on 18 May 1915 . With a bombing party of 10 men , who voluntarily undertook this duty , he conveyed a supply of 96 bombs to within 20 yards of the enemy 's position over exceptionally dangerous ground , after the attempts of two other parties had failed . Lieutenant Smyth succeeded in taking the bombs to the desired position with the aid of two of his men ( the other eight having been killed or wounded ) , and to effect his purpose he had to swim a stream , being exposed the whole time to howitzer , shrapnel , machine @-@ gun and rifle fire . 
 <unk> Thapa , 3rd Gurkha Rifles . 
 On 25 September 1915 in <unk> , France , Rifleman Thapa , having been wounded himself , found a wounded soldier of The Leicestershire Regiment behind the first line German trench . Although urged to save himself , the Gurkha stayed with the wounded man all day and night . Early next day , in misty weather , he took him through the German wire and , leaving him in a place of comparative safety , returned and brought in two wounded Gurkhas , one after the other . He then went back , and , in broad daylight , fetched the British soldier , carrying him most of the way under enemy fire . 
 Lala , 41st Dogras 
 On 21 January 1916 , at El Orah , Mesopotamia , finding a British officer lying close to the enemy , Lance @-@ Naik Lala dragged him into a temporary shelter . After bandaging his wounds , the lance @-@ <unk> heard calls from his own adjutant who was lying wounded in the open . The enemy was only 100 yards ( 91 m ) away . Lala insisted on going to help . He stripped off his own clothing to keep the wounded officer warm and stayed with him until just before dark when he returned to the shelter . After dark he carried the first wounded officer to safety and then , returning with a stretcher , carried back his adjutant . 
 John Alexander Sinton , Indian Medical Service 
 On 21 January 1916 , at the Orah Ruins , Mesopotamia , Captain Sinton attended to the wounded under very heavy fire . " For most conspicuous bravery and devotion to duty . Although shot through both arms and through the side , he refused to go to hospital , and remained as long as daylight lasted , attending to his duties under very heavy fire . In three previous actions Captain Sinton displayed the utmost bravery . " 
 <unk> Khan , 89th Punjabis 
 On 12 – 13 April 1916 near Beit <unk> , Mesopotamia , Naik <unk> Khan was in charge of a machine @-@ gun covering a gap in our new line within 150 yards of the entrenched enemy . He beat off three counter @-@ attacks and worked his gun single @-@ handed after all his men , except two belt @-@ fillers , had become casualties . For three hours he held the gap under very heavy fire and when his gun was knocked out , he and his two belt @-@ fillers held their ground with rifles until ordered to withdraw . With help he then brought back his gun , ammunition and one severely wounded man , and finally all remaining arms and equipment . 
 Gobind Singh , 28th Light Cavalry 
 On the night of 30 November and 1 December 1917 , east of Pozières , France , Lance @-@ <unk> Gobind Singh three times volunteered to carry messages between the regiment and brigade headquarters , a distance of 1 @.@ 5 miles ( 2 @.@ 4 km ) over open ground which was under heavy fire from the enemy . He succeeded each time in delivering the message , although on each occasion his horse was shot and he was compelled to finish the journey on foot . 
 <unk> Rana , 3rd Gurkha Rifles 
 On 10 April 1918 , at El <unk> , Egypt , during an attack , Rifleman <unk> Rana and a few other men crept forward with a Lewis gun under intense fire to engage an enemy machine @-@ gun . No. 1 of the Lewis gun team opened fire but was shot almost immediately , whereupon the rifleman pushed the dead man off the gun , opened fire , knocked out the enemy gun crew and then silenced the fire of the enemy bombers and riflemen in front of him . During the remainder of the day he did magnificent work and finally assisted with covering fire in the withdrawal , until the enemy were close on him . 
 <unk> Singh , 14th Murray 's Jat Lancers 
 On 2 September 1918 on the west bank of the River Jordan , Palestine , when his squadron was charging a strong enemy position , <unk> <unk> Singh realised that heavy casualties were being inflicted from a small hill occupied by machine @-@ guns and 200 infantry . Without any hesitation he collected six other ranks and with entire disregard of danger he charged and captured the position . He was mortally wounded on the very top of the hill when capturing one of the machine @-@ guns single handed , but all the guns and infantry had surrendered to him before he died . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 For further information , see World War I and its aftermath and List of regiments of the Indian Army ( 1922 ) 
 In 1919 , the Indian Army could call upon 491 @,@ 000 men , but there was a shortage of experienced officers , most of the officers having been killed or wounded in the war . In 1921 , the Indian government started a review of their military requirements with the protection of the North West Frontier and internal security their priority . By 1925 , the Army in India had been reduced to 197 @,@ 000 troops , 140 @,@ 000 of them Indian . Battalions were now allocated one of three roles : The field army of four infantry divisions and five cavalry brigades ; covering troops , 12 infantry brigades and supporting arms to act as a reserve force in case of invasion ; and finally internal security troops , 43 infantry battalions to aid the civil power and support the field army when required . The number of cavalry regiments was reduced from 39 to 21 . The infantry regiments were converted into 20 large regiments with four or five battalions in each regiment plus a training battalion , always numbered the 10th , also included were ten Gurkha regiments . Nine single battalion regiments were disbanded by 1922 . Two of the large regiments were later disbanded , the 3rd Madras Regiment for economic reasons , and the 20th Burma Rifles when Burma ceased to be governed by India . 
 The end of World War I did not see the end of fighting for the Indian Army — they were involved in the Third Afghan War in 1919 , and then the Waziristan Campaign between 1919 – 1920 and again between 1920 – 1924 . Operations against the <unk> between 1930 – 1931 , the <unk> in 1933 and again in 1935 and finally just before the outbreak of World War II operations in Waziristan again between 1936 – 1939 . 
 The India Gate in New Delhi , built in 1931 , commemorates the Indian soldiers who lost their lives fighting in World War I. 
 = Washington State Route 503 = 
 State Route 503 ( SR 503 ) is a 54 @.@ 11 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 87 @.@ 08 km ) state highway serving Clark and Cowlitz counties in the U.S. state of Washington . The highway travels north from a short concurrency with SR 500 in Orchards through Battle Ground , the eastern terminus of SR 502 , and communities in rural Clark County before crossing the Lewis River on the Yale Bridge . SR 503 intersects its spur route and turns west to parallel the Lewis River downstream to Woodland , where the highway ends at an interchange with Interstate 5 ( I @-@ 5 ) . The highway was part of the Lewis River Road , signed as State Road 15 , from 1909 until 1919 . The current route of SR 503 was split between Secondary State Highway 1S ( SSH 1 ) from Woodland to Battle Ground and SSH 1U from Battle Ground to Orchards in 1937 , combined to form SR 503 during the 1964 highway renumbering . A spur route , established in 1991 , travels northeast into the Gifford Pinchot National Forest along Yale Lake , serving the community of Cougar . 
 = = Route description = = 
 SR 503 begins concurrent to SR 500 at an intersection with Fourth Plain Road in Orchards . The two highways travel north on the four @-@ lane 117th Avenue through Orchards until SR 500 turns east onto Padden Parkway , while SR 503 continues north into rural Clark County , passing Prairie High School . The roadway bypasses Brush Prairie on its west side and crosses the <unk> Prairie Railroad , before it turns northeast onto 122nd Avenue . SR 503 enters Battle Ground as 10th Avenue and intersects the eastern terminus of SR 502 west of Battle Ground High School . The highway crosses the East Fork of the Lewis River and leaves Battle Ground to pass Lewisville Park , listed on the National Register of Historic Places and located in Lewisville . SR 503 continues heading northeast into a heavily forested region of the Cascades foothills , toward <unk> Lake and Amboy . 
 SR 503 turns east onto <unk> Lake Highway at Rock Creek and enters Amboy by following <unk> Creek towards Yale Lake . The highway travels north and crosses the Lewis River into Cowlitz County on the 532 @-@ foot @-@ long ( 162 m ) Yale Bridge . The one @-@ lane warren truss bridge , listed on the National Register of Historic Places , is located downstream from the Yale Dam on Yale Lake and upstream of Lake Merwin . SR 503 continues into Cowlitz County and turns west onto Lewis River Road at an intersection with its spur route that heads east to Skamania County . The highway travels southwestward in the Lewis River valley and passes through the communities of Yale and Ariel . SR 503 enters Woodland and turns south onto <unk> Street before ending at a diamond interchange with I @-@ 5 near the confluence of the Lewis and Columbia rivers . 
 Every year , the Washington State Department of Transportation ( WSDOT ) conducts a series of surveys on its highways in the state to measure traffic volume . This is expressed in terms of average annual daily traffic ( AADT ) , which is a measure of traffic volume for any average day of the year . In 2011 , WSDOT calculated that the busiest section of the highway was the SR 500 concurrency in Orchards , serving 34 @,@ 000 vehicles , while the least busiest section was at the western terminus of SR 503 Spur east of Yale , serving 720 vehicles . SR 503 between Orchards and Battle Ground is designated as part of the National Highway System , which includes roadways important to the national economy , defense , and mobility . 
 = = History = = 
 SR 503 follows the route of State Road 15 , established in 1909 as the Lewis River Road , traveling east from Woodland to the Skamania county line in Columbia National Forest . The Lewis River Road was removed from the state highway system in 1919 and transferred to Cowlitz County for maintenance . Clark and Cowlitz counties contracted the Portland Bridge and Iron Company to build a bridge over the Lewis River in 1917 and the bridge was opened to traffic in September 1920 at a cost of $ 15 @,@ 000 . After the completion of the Merwin Dam downstream in 1931 caused water levels on the Lewis River to rise , the two counties completed a one @-@ lane warren truss bridge named the Yale Bridge over the Lewis River the following year to serve the remote communities of Yale and <unk> . 
 During the creation of the primary and secondary state highways in 1937 , State Road 15 was added back to the state highway system as part of SSH 1S , which traveled 57 @.@ 60 miles ( 92 @.@ 70 km ) from Primary State Highway 1 ( PSH 1 ) and U.S. Route 99 ( US 99 ) to SSH 1U in Battle Ground and turned west to end at PSH 1 and US 99 north of Mount Vista . PSH 1U , also established in 1937 , traveled 8 @.@ 56 miles ( 13 @.@ 78 km ) south from SSH 1S in Battle Ground to SSH 8A in Orchards . The Yale Bridge was maintained by Clark and Cowlitz counties until the 1940s and had its timber approach spans replaced with steel in 1958 under maintenance of the Department of Highways . 
 SR 503 was established during the 1964 highway renumbering and codified in 1970 as the successor to SSH 1U and part of SSH 1S between Battle Ground and Woodland , while the remaining portion of SSH 1S between Mount Vista and Battle Ground became SR 502 . The highway in the Lewis River valley , between Woodland and the Yale Bridge , was closed following the May 18 , 1980 eruption of Mount St. Helens and re @-@ opened after the Yale Bridge was placed on the National Register of Historic Places in July 1982 . The spur route of SR 503 was added to the state highway system in 1991 as part of the original Lewis River Road between Yale and the Skamania county line in the Gifford Pinchot National Forest . Between Orchards and Amboy , SR 503 was designated as the " Lewisville Highway " , serving historic Lewisville Park . 
 = = Spur route = = 
 SR 503 Spur , known locally as the Lewis River Road , begins its 8 @.@ 42 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 13 @.@ 55 km ) route at an intersection with SR 503 east of Yale and north of the Yale Bridge . The highway travels northeast along Yale Lake through a forested region of Cowlitz County , passing Yale Park and the community of Cougar . SR 503 Spur turns east at Beaver Bay Park and ends shortly thereafter at Forest Route 90 on the Skamania County line south of Mount St. Helens National Volcanic Monument and Gifford Pinchot National Forest . The Lewis River Road was part of State Road 15 from 1909 until 1919 and was re @-@ established in 1991 as a spur route of SR 503 . WSDOT conducted a series of surveys to measure traffic volume in terms of AADT and calculated that 650 to 1 @,@ 300 vehicles per day used the spur route in 2011 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = Sesame Street international co @-@ productions = 
 Sesame Street international co @-@ productions are educational children 's television series based on the American Sesame Street but tailored to the countries in which they are produced . Shortly after the debut of Sesame Street in the US in 1969 , television producers , teachers , and officials of several countries approached the show 's producers and the executives of Children 's Television Workshop ( CTW ) about the possibility of airing international versions of Sesame Street . Creator Joan Ganz Cooney hired former CBS executive Mike Dann to field offers to produce versions of the show in other countries . 
 The producers of these shows developed them using a variant on the CTW model , a flexible model of production based upon the experiences of the creators and producers of the US show . The model consisted of the combination of producers and researchers working together on the show , the development of a unique curriculum , and extensive test screening of the shows . The shows came to be called co @-@ productions , and they contained original sets , characters , and curriculum goals . Different co @-@ productions were produced , depending upon each country 's needs and resources . They included both dubbed versions of the American show and versions created , developed , and produced in each country that reflected their needs , educational priorities , and culture . For example , the first HIV @-@ positive Muppet , Kami , from the South African co @-@ production Takalani Sesame was created in 2003 to address the epidemic of AIDS in South Africa , and was met with controversy in the US . By 2006 , there were 20 co @-@ productions in countries all over the world . In 2001 , there were more than 120 million viewers of all international versions of Sesame Street , and by the US show 's 40th anniversary in 2009 , they were seen in more than 140 countries . 
 = = History = = 
 A few months after the 1969 debut of Sesame Street on PBS in the US , producers from Brazil , Mexico , Canada , and Germany requested that the organization responsible for the show 's production , the Children 's Television Workshop ( CTW ) create and produce versions of Sesame Street in those countries . Even before the American show 's debut , the CTW established an international division , which oversaw its licensing in other countries . According to Gregory J. Gettas , the division immediately developed four main licensing policies : ( 1 ) like the American version , all foreign versions had to be broadcast without commercials ; ( 2 ) any changes would have to meet high production standards , which protected the CTW 's proprietary interests ; ( 3 ) all versions had to reflect the country 's cultural values and traditions ; and ( 4 ) all changes would have to be approved , initiated , and supervised by a local committee working with the CTW . 
 Many years later , co @-@ creator Joan Ganz Cooney recalled , " To be frank , I was really surprised , because we thought we were creating the quintessential American show . We thought the Muppets were quintessentially American , and it turns out they 're the most international characters ever created " . Mike Dann , a former CBS executive whom Cooney had hired as a CTW vice @-@ president and her assistant , was assigned to field offers from other countries to produce their own versions of Sesame Street . Dann 's appointment led to television critic Marvin Kitman stating , " After he [ Dann ] sells [ Sesame Street ] in Russia and Czechoslovakia , he might try Mississippi , where it is considered too controversial for educational TV " . 
 By summer 1970 , Dann had made the first international agreements for what the CTW later called " co @-@ productions " . 38 Canadian Broadcasting Corporation television stations broadcast Sesame Street to Canada 's English @-@ speaking provinces . The Armed Forces Radio and Television Network agreed to air the first 130 episodes of the US @-@ made show for children of military personnel serving in 16 countries , including Iceland , Greece , Ethiopia , and South Korea . During his tenure at CTW , Dann also made agreements with several Caribbean nations , Mexico , Australia , Japan , the Philippines , France , Israel , and Germany . He later told author Michael Davis , " I was aggressive and I knew people around the world " . During the same period there were discussions about broadcasting the US version in England or producing a British version of Sesame Street but British broadcasters found the show too controversial and rejected the idea . The American version was broadcast throughout the UK on a limited basis starting in 1971 , but went off the air in 2001 . 
 As of 2006 , there were 20 active " co @-@ productions " . CTW vice @-@ president Charlotte Cole , in 2001 , estimated that there were more than 120 million viewers of all international versions of Sesame Street , and by the show 's 40th anniversary in 2009 , they were seen in more than 140 countries . In 2005 , Doreen Carvajal of The New York Times reported that income from the co @-@ productions accounted for US $ 96 million . Cole stated , " Children 's Television Workshop ( CTW ) can be regarded as the single largest informal educator of young children in the world " . Studies conducted on the effects of several co @-@ productions ( Mexico in 1974 , Turkey in 1990 , Portugal in 1993 , and Russia in 1998 ) , found that viewers of these shows gain basic academic skills , especially literacy and numeracy , from watching them . 
 In 2001 , the Workshop introduced Sesame English , a series focused on teaching children and their families the basics of the English language and on familiarizing them with some aspects of American culture . As of 2009 , it aired in several countries , including Japan , Korea , and Italy . In 2003 , in response to the epidemic of AIDS in South Africa , the co @-@ producers of Takalani Sesame included the first preschool AIDS / HIV curriculum . They created the first HIV @-@ positive Muppet , Kami , to confront the stigma of HIV and AIDS in South Africa . According to the documentary , The World According to Sesame Street , the reaction of many in the US surprised Sesame Workshop . Some members of Congress attacked Sesame Street , Sesame Workshop ( previously , the CTW ) , and PBS . According to co @-@ producer Naila Farouky , " The reaction we got in the US blew me away . I didn 't expect people to be so horrible ... and hateful and mean " . The controversy in the US was short @-@ lived , and died down when the public discovered the facts about the South African co @-@ production , and when Kofi Anan and Jerry Falwell praised the Workshop 's efforts . 
 Gettas explained what he called " Sesame Street 's unprecedented appeal abroad " was its broad appeal and adaptability to other cultures . Gettas stated , " Here is a program that speaks to them in their own language , on their level , and with respect for their intelligence " . According to Cooper Wright , the Sesame Workshop 's vice @-@ president of International Co @-@ Productions in 2006 , the " mission " of the co @-@ productions was to " help children reach their highest potential " . The producers were further galvanized to accomplish this goal after the events of 9 / 11 . Cooney stated , " Our producers are like old @-@ fashioned missionaries . It 's not religion they 're spreading , but it is learning and tolerance and love and mutual respect " . 
 = = Production = = 
 The earliest international versions were what then @-@ CTW vice @-@ president Charlotte Cole called " fairly simple " , consisting of dubbed versions of the show with local language voice @-@ overs and instructional cutaways . Dubbed versions of the show continued to be produced if the country 's needs and resources warranted it . They utilized a variant of a flexible model called the CTW model , developed by the producers and creators of the original show , to create and produce independently produced preschool television shows in other countries . The Workshop recognized that the production model developed in the US , which reflected its needs and culture at the time , served as a framework for other countries that wanted to repeat it . Its inherent flexibility was attractive to producers in other countries , who saw the model as " a methodological approach that is neither doctrinaire nor culture @-@ bound " that could be used to achieve different results in different countries . According to the 2006 documentary , The World According to Sesame Street , the producers of the co @-@ productions repeated the " experiment " undertaken by the original US show , but adapted it to each specific situation . In 1969 , the producers of the original show depended upon government and foundation funding , but as Sesame Workshop CEO Gary Knell stated in 2009 , the US funding model would not necessarily be effective in countries with different economic and political structures . All co @-@ productions share elements with the American show , but because of their different needs , no two are exactly alike . According to Gettas , the producers of the programs would " rely on variants of the CTW model to help them create programming that faithfully reflects the linguistic , cultural , social , or religious diversity of their native lands " . 
 The need for preschool education in each country was assessed through research and interviews with television producers , researchers , and educational experts , which paralleled what the producers of Sesame Street did in the late 1960s . Then they convened the experts in a series of meetings , held in the individual countries , to create and develop a curriculum , the show 's educational goals , and its set and characters , as was done in 1968 in the US . Finally , they held a series of meetings , both at the CTW offices in New York City and in the individual countries , to train the co @-@ production team in the CTW model . Writing seminars were also held in New York . 
 The co @-@ productions consisted of unique characters , sets , and curricula designed to meet the needs of their own children . Cole reported that the goal of the co @-@ productions was to provide children in each country a program that reflected their country 's culture , local values , and educational priorities . She stated that this cultural specificity was the reason for the co @-@ productions ' success , popularity , and educational impact . The co @-@ productions combined universal curriculum goals that were common around the world with educational content that specifically addressed the needs of children in each country . Another goal of the international co @-@ productions of Sesame Street was , as executive producer <unk> Horne stated in 1987 , the improvement of " the overall quality of a country 's television " . He added , " We give a country a model of how television can be used effectively to address people 's needs " . 
 US cast members Kevin Clash and Marty Robinson have cast and trained the international puppeteers . At first , Muppet builder Kermit Love constructed the puppets for the new shows in the US . According to Gikow in 2009 , Jim Henson 's Creature Shop , overseen by Connie Peterson , has taken over puppet creation . The producers of Sisimpur , the Bangladesh co @-@ production , created their own traditional puppets because their puppet @-@ making craft is thousands of years old and an important part of their culture . The producers of each co @-@ production developed and built their own sets , live @-@ action videos , and animations in @-@ country . After they developed , produced , and aired the new show , they conducted research to ascertain whether their curriculum goals were met , just as was done in the US after the first season of Sesame Street . According to producer Nadine <unk> , they faced unusual challenges rarely experienced in the US . For example , riots and conflicts between Serbs and Albanians in 2004 delayed production of the Kosovo co @-@ production for three months . In 2005 , a nationwide strike in Bangladesh temporarily stalled production of their show . 
 When countries were not able to afford creating original co @-@ productions , the Workshop provided alternatives for them . They created Open Sesame , a series with no specific cultural references in it , and with , as Horne described , " universally acceptable material " . The show was also broadcast in US military bases . The Workshop 's library of Muppet skits , short films , and animations were sold to many countries and were either broadcast in English or dubbed in the local language . According to Gikow , it often served as the basis for the creation of new material for their own co @-@ productions . As of 2009 , the Workshop opened its entire library of episodes , short films , and animations created all over the world so that poorer countries could use and adapt them for their purposes . 
 = = Co @-@ productions = = 
 = = = 1970s = = = 
 The first international co @-@ production of Sesame Street was Brazil 's Vila Sésamo , which first aired in 1972 and had an initial run of two years . Its set consisted of an open plaza . The Muppet Garibaldo was " the centerpiece " of the Brazil co @-@ production and remained popular with viewers when the show was revived in 2007 . Garibaldo 's performer in the revival , Fernando Gomes , became a puppeteer because of the original Brazilian show 's influence . It was broadcast in Portuguese . Also in 1972 , Plaza Sésamo was produced in Mexico . This co @-@ production has also been broadcast in Puerto Rico and in Spanish @-@ speaking Latin America since 1973 , and has aired on Spanish television stations in the US since 1995 . 
 In 1973 , West Germany , one of the first countries to approach CTW , began airing Sesamstraße . It has been continually produced since . At first , this co @-@ production incorporated original German animation and live action segments into the US version . Starting in 1978 , its producers began using puppets filmed in their own studio in Germany . The Netherlands ' version , Sesamstraat , began in 1976 . This show has aired in both Dutch and Flemish . In Sesamstraat 's early years , Belgium television participated in its production , so it also aired there . In 2011 , to celebrate the show 's 35th anniversary , the Sesame Workshop partnered with the Vincent van Gogh Museum in Amsterdam to recreate a version of van Gogh 's " Bedroom in Arles " , featuring Muppets from both the American and Dutch shows . France aired Open Sesame in the early 1970s before creating its own co @-@ production . One version , created in 1974 , Bonjour Sesame , was fifteen minutes long and had no street scenes . 5 , Rue <unk> began in 1976 ; its set consists of a courtyard of a building in a small French town . 
 The final two co @-@ productions of the 70s , both made in 1979 , occurred in Kuwait and Spain . The Kuwaiti show , Iftah Ya Simsim , which ran until 1990 , was the first of its kind in the Arab world . It used Modern Standard Arabic ( MSA ) , and was broadcast in 22 Arab countries . The show continued to be well @-@ known decades after it went off the air . It returned in 2013 , and had similar goals and objectives as the original version , including the use of MSA . Barrio Sésamo , made in Spain , featured a snail character who was able to hide a thousand and one things in her shell . One of the show 's Muppet characters , Dr. Valentin <unk> , was based upon Dr. Valentin Fuster , a native Spaniard who worked at Mount Sinai Hospital in New York City . Dr. Fuster 's likeness was created to educated children in Spain about exercise and eating healthy . 
 = = = 1980s = = = 
 Sweden 's version of Sesame Street , Svenska Sesam ( 1981 – 1983 ) , was originally a single season full co @-@ production , but did not integrate puppets . Dubs have aired before and after . Israel filmed its co @-@ production , called <unk> <unk> , in 1983 . It was the first co @-@ production to devote an entire section of its curriculum to educating children about mutual respect , which was a priority due to " profound political tension in the region " . Its curriculum , which was based upon their viewers ' needs , differed from many other countries and exposed Israeli children to children from different cultures . The show 's counterpart of Big Bird was a hedgehog named <unk> . 
 Also in 1983 , the Philippines created <unk> , the first fully bilingual ( Tagalog and English ) version of Sesame Street . In 1989 , <unk> <unk> , a co @-@ production filmed in Turkey , featured versions of Big Bird and an " exuberant little @-@ girl Muppet host " named Simi . There have been three versions of Sesame Street in Portugal , including one co @-@ production created in 1989 . Rua Sésamo was also broadcast in the Portuguese @-@ speaking nations Angola , Mozambique , Guinea , Cape Verde , and São Tomé . Play with Me Sesame is the title of the current version . 
 = = = 1990s = = = 
 Norway 's co @-@ production , entitled Sesam <unk> , began filming in 1991 . Three co @-@ productions premiered in 1996 , in Russia , Canada , and Poland . Russia 's version , <unk> Sezam ( <unk> <unk> ) , debuted in 1996 . No longer on the air , one of its curriculum goals was to prepare Russian children to live in a " new open society " . Poland 's Ulica <unk> has been since replaced by dubs of various Sesame Workshop programs and has changed its name to <unk> <unk> . Canada aired Sesame Street Canada , a combination of locally produced and US @-@ made content from 1972 to 1996 . A French @-@ dubbed version was shown in 1975 , which demonstrated the producers ' commitment to bilingualism , one of their curriculum goals . In 1996 , a half @-@ hour program called Sesame Park was produced by the country 's public broadcasting corporation and consisted of more content created in @-@ country . The series featured a polar bear , an otter , a female bush pilot , and a girl in a wheelchair . 
 In 1998 , the Chinese co @-@ production of Sesame Street , <unk> Jie , was created . An auto mechanic became the head writer of this show , broadcast in Mandarin Chinese , because there were few people with experience in writing for children in the country . It has aired in 40 local markets , comprising forty percent of all Chinese homes . Its curriculum emphasized aesthetics . The Chinese puppeteers were trained by Kevin Clash and Caroll Spinney . Also in 1998 , a fifteen @-@ minute version of the Israeli show was dubbed in Arabic and renamed Shara 'a Simsim ; this Palestinian co @-@ production promoted children 's sense of national identity . 
 = = = 2000s = = = 
 In 2000 , Egypt 's co @-@ production , entitled Alam Simsim ( <unk> سمسم ) , began to air throughout the Arab World and was broadcast in Arabic . Its curriculum focused on literacy , math , cognitive and social skills , girls ' education , the environment , and health . The show was sponsored by its patron , Egyptian First Lady Suzanne Mubarak . A study conducted in 2004 showed that the show 's efforts to educate Egyptian children about health were substantially influential . 
 South Africa aired Takalani Sesame , also in 2000 ; it focused on AIDS education with the creation of the first HIV @-@ positive Muppet , Kami , who was declared a UNICEF " Champion for Children " in 2003 . The show reached almost 70 percent of children in urban areas and almost 50 percent in rural areas , and its viewers had improvements in HIV / AIDS knowledge , attitudes , and communication . In 2007 , it began airing in almost all of the country 's official languages , and its Muppets were used in health educational campaigns . In 2008 , the show began to focus on diversity within South Africa and technology . Takalani Sesame 's tenth anniversary in 2010 was marked by a series of workshops in South Africa focusing on the future of the show and the needs of the country 's children . Research conducted about the show 's affects showed that viewers gained in four major areas : basic knowledge , blood safety , discrimination , and numeracy skills . They also improved in life skills , such as safety , sounds , nature , emotions , and self @-@ esteem . 
 Hikayat Simsim premiered in 2003 in Jordan . According to its producers , its goal was to " promote respect in the face of conflict " . The show also focused on literacy , numeracy , health and hygiene , emotions , road safety , and the environment . Afghanistan temporarily aired its first version of Sesame Street , called <unk> Sesame in 2004 , to help rebuild its educational system . Although this production filmed its own live @-@ action films , it used Muppet segments filmed in the U.S. , which were dubbed in Dari , one of the country 's two main languages . The show 's producers donated 400 education kits , which included a message from President Hamid Karzai , to schools , orphanages , and TV stations across the country . Its curriculum focused on encouraging awareness of other cultures , increasing opportunities for women and girls , and fostering children 's interests in education . 
 In 2005 , Sisimpur aired in Bangladesh . This co @-@ production 's goal was to improve school achievement and decrease drop @-@ out rates for children before the third grade . This difficult co @-@ production , which was beset by political difficulties and severe flooding that delayed production , was depicted in the 2006 documentary , The World According to Sesame Street . Also in 2005 , the producers of the Kosovo co @-@ production ( Rruga Sesam / Ulica Sezam ) chose to present the languages of the region more evenly . Instead of showing words on screen , children were challenged to label objects verbally , thus learning that there are different ways to say the same thing . The Workshop worked in conjunction with UNICEF to produce this show , to aid in the peace process between Albanians and Serbs . One of its goals was to demonstrate to Albanian and Serbian children that their counterparts were like them . 
 In 2008 , Cambodia produced Sabai Sabai Sesame , a dubbed version of the original US show . It aired twice weekly , and emphasized basic literacy , numeracy , and social skills . Northern Ireland 's production , which was broadcast throughout the U.K. but was " rooted in everyday life in Northern Ireland " , was called Sesame Tree , and was set in and around a whimsical tree . The show 's curriculum focused on mutual respect and understanding . Also in 2008 , Jalan <unk> , the <unk> co @-@ production , premiered . Its focus was the country 's rich diversity . Denmark created <unk> in 2009 , which contained elements of Play With Me Sesame and locally produced segments with Elmo . 
 = = = 2010s = = = 
 Nigeria produced its own version of Sesame Street , called Sesame Square , in 2010 . Previously , they aired the US version . Funded in part by a grant from the US government , the show focused on AIDS , malaria nets , gender equality , and yams . It also featured the HIV @-@ positive Muppet Kami from the South African co @-@ production . 
 After an absence of ten years , and almost 30 years after the 1983 movie Big Bird in China , 53 eleven @-@ minute episodes of Sesame Street 's Big Bird Looks at the World , filmed in Mandarin Chinese , debuted in early 2011 in China . Inspired by the 2008 Sichuan earthquake , the program emphasized emergency preparedness . In the first week of December 2011 , a Pashto and Dari @-@ language version called <unk> @-@ e @-@ Simsim was launched in Afghanistan , and in the same month Pakistan began airing its own Urdu @-@ language version , called SimSim Humara , which was supposed to run for three years . In June 2012 , the United States terminated funding for SimSim Humara due to serious allegations of corruption by the local Pakistani puppet theater working on the initiative . 
 = Washington State Route 16 = 
 State Route 16 ( SR 16 ) is a 27 @.@ 16 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 43 @.@ 71 km ) state highway in the U.S. state of Washington , connecting Pierce and Kitsap counties . The highway , signed as east – west , begins at an interchange with Interstate 5 ( I @-@ 5 ) in Tacoma and travels through the city as a freeway towards the Tacoma Narrows . SR 16 crosses the narrows onto the Kitsap Peninsula on the partially tolled Tacoma Narrows Bridge and continues through Gig Harbor and Port Orchard before the freeway ends in Gorst . The designation ends at an intersection with SR 3 southwest of the beginning of its freeway through Bremerton and Poulsbo . SR 16 is designated as a Strategic Highway Network ( STRAHNET ) corridor within the National Highway System as the main thoroughfare connecting Tacoma to Naval Base Kitsap and a part of the Highways of Statewide Significance program . 
 SR 16 was created during the 1964 state highway renumbering as the successor to Primary State Highway 14 ( PSH 14 ) . PSH 14 , which had itself been the successor to State Road 14 , traveled northeast from Shelton to Gorst and south to Gig Harbor . PSH 14 was extended over the Tacoma Narrows in 1939 on the unfinished Tacoma Narrows Bridge , which would later collapse months after opening in 1940 , into Tacoma over Secondary State Highway 14C ( SSH 14C ) . SR 16 has been expanded into a freeway in stages beginning with the original Nalley Valley Viaduct in Tacoma in 1971 , and ending with the opening of an interchange near Port Orchard in 2009 . Future improvements to the corridor include the installation of high @-@ occupancy vehicle lanes that connect to I @-@ 5 and the rest of the freeway network in Pierce County , scheduled for completion by 2022 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 SR 16 begins on the Nalley Valley Viaduct in Tacoma at an interchange with I @-@ 5 between the Tacoma Mall and Downtown . The freeway travels northwest over the Sound Transit Sounder commuter train to a semi @-@ directional T interchange with Sprague Avenue , where it begins paralleling the Scott Pierson Trail . SR 16 continues west past a diamond interchange with Union Avenue and an interchange with Center Street at Cheney Stadium towards the Skyline neighborhood of North Tacoma . The freeway travels around Tacoma Community College past partial cloverleaf interchanges with 19th Street and Pearl Street , the latter being signed as SR 163 as it heads north into Ruston and towards Vashon Island . SR 16 continues west past a partial cloverleaf interchange with Jackson Avenue and towards the Tacoma Narrows on the twin @-@ suspension Tacoma Narrows Bridges . The 5 @,@ 979 @-@ foot @-@ long ( 1 @,@ 822 m ) westbound span and the tolled 5 @,@ 400 @-@ foot @-@ long ( 1 @,@ 600 m ) eastbound span combine to carry six lanes of SR 16 onto the Kitsap Peninsula . The eastbound span is tolled via electronic toll collection through the Good To Go ! program on the Kitsap Peninsula side of the bridge . Tolls for two passengers and / or a motorcycle are set at $ 4 for Good To Go ! accounts and $ 6 collected at the toll plaza , with prices increasing for each additional passenger by $ 2 for Good To Go ! accounts and by $ 2 @.@ 50 for non @-@ Good To Go ! users . 
 SR 16 continues onto the Kitsap Peninsula and intersects 24th Street in a partial diamond interchange east of the Tacoma Narrows Airport as it passes the toll plaza for the eastbound Tacoma Narrows Bridge . The freeway travels northwest through Gig Harbor past interchanges with Olympic Drive and <unk> Drive near Gig Harbor High School before it reaches Henderson Bay . SR 16 continues through an interchange with Burnham Drive and past the Washington Corrections Center for Women and St. Anthony Hospital towards Purdy , intersecting the southern terminus of SR 302 . The freeway bypasses Purdy and Peninsula High School to the east before intersecting SR 302 Spur and entering Kitsap County . SR 16 passes the community of Burley and intersects its main access highway , Burley @-@ Olalla Road , in an interchange before entering the city of Port Orchard . The freeway ends after serving as the western terminus of SR 160 and SR 166 on the west side of the city . The four @-@ lane highway continues west along the Sinclair Inlet into Gorst , intersecting its spur route and ending at an intersection with SR 3 . 
 Every year , the Washington State Department of Transportation ( WSDOT ) conducts a series of surveys on its highways in the state to measure traffic volume . This is expressed in terms of average annual daily traffic ( AADT ) , which is a measure of traffic volume for any average day of the year . In 2012 , WSDOT calculated that the busiest section of SR 16 was west of its interchange with Union Avenue in downtown Tacoma , serving 112 @,@ 000 vehicles , while the least busiest section is after the SR 160 interchange west of Port Orchard , serving 32 @,@ 000 vehicles . SR 16 is designated as a Strategic Highway Network corridor , connecting Naval Base Kitsap to the state highway system along with SR 3 , within the National Highway System that classifies it as important to the national economy , defense , and mobility . WSDOT designates the entire route of SR 16 as a Highway of Statewide Significance , which includes highways that connect major communities in the state of Washington . 
 = = History = = 
 The present route of SR 16 roughly follows the route of several state highways signed during the 20th century , the first of which was State Road 14 . State Road 14 traveled north from Shelton to Gorst and south into Gig Harbor as the primary connector between the Olympic and Kitsap peninsulas . State Road 14 was re @-@ designated in 1937 as PSH 14 and included a secondary highway named SSH 14C that traveled from Gig Harbor to the Tacoma Narrows , site of an under @-@ construction suspension bridge to open in 1940 . PSH 14 was extended southeast over SSH 14C and the unfinished Tacoma Narrows Bridge into the city of Tacoma as part of a transfer of bridge ownership to the state of Washington in 1939 . After the collapse of the original bridge on November 7 , 1940 , PSH 14 was truncated to Gig Harbor and traffic was redirected to a ferry landing in Manchester . The second Tacoma Narrows Bridge was opened on October 14 , 1950 , and PSH 14 was extended the following year to an intersection with U.S. Route 99 ( US 99 ) in Downtown Tacoma . 
 PSH 14 was replaced by SR 16 under the sign route system created during the 1964 state highway renumbering , traveling from US 99 in Tacoma to SR 3 in Gorst . WSDOT began converting the SR 16 corridor to a controlled @-@ access freeway with the construction of the Nalley Valley Viaduct in 1969 , designed with tetrapod columns at a cost of $ 3 @.@ 67 million . The viaduct opened in 1971 and connected SR 16 to I @-@ 5 in Tacoma , part of a new freeway replacing <unk> Boulevard between I @-@ 5 and the Tacoma Narrows Bridge . A bypass of Purdy on the Pierce – Kitsap county line was opened in 1977 and the former route of SR 16 was divided between SR 302 and its spur route . The remainder of SR 16 in Port Orchard was upgraded to a freeway during the 1980s ; however , an at @-@ grade intersection remained at Burley @-@ Olalla Road until a diamond interchange was completed in 2009 . 
 WSDOT has been installing high @-@ occupancy vehicle lanes ( HOV lanes ) on SR 16 as part of a Pierce County HOV system , scheduled for completion by 2022 . Beginning in the early 2000s , frontage roads and the Scott Pierson Trail were built along the freeway and sound walls were erected near residential areas in Tacoma . From Tacoma to Gig Harbor , WSDOT began installing exit numbers to interchanges with SR 16 that correspond to its milepost . The Nalley Valley Viaduct was replaced by a new westbound structure in 2011 , carrying all four lanes of SR 16 towards I @-@ 5 in Tacoma , while the original viaduct was closed and demolished . The eastbound Nalley Valley Viaduct began construction in November 2011 and is scheduled to be completed by WSDOT in 2014 , with the westbound viaduct being widened to its full planned width . 
 On February 23 , 2016 a 10 @-@ mile section of SR 16 beginning from the Kitsap @-@ Pierce county line , and extended North to Gorst was dedicated as the Washington State Patrol Trooper Tony <unk> Memorial Highway , in honor of the <unk> Trooper who was killed in the line of duty on that stretch of highway four years earlier . 
 = = = Tacoma Narrows Bridge = = = 
 The Tacoma Narrows Bridge , which carries SR 16 across the Tacoma Narrows between Tacoma and the Kitsap Peninsula , was first proposed by locals during the late 19th century and credited to local rancher John G. Shindler while traveling through the Narrows by steamboat in 1888 . The Northern Pacific Railway planned to build a trestle bridge over the Narrows to connect its western terminus in Tacoma to the proposed Puget Sound Naval Shipyard in Port Orchard . The Washington State Legislature , after extensive lobbying by local auto groups and businesses , authorized the construction of a road bridge over the Narrows in February 1929 . The Washington Toll Bridge Authority was created in March 1937 to construct and maintain toll bridges throughout the state , beginning with the Tacoma Narrows Bridge from Tacoma to Gig Harbor and the Lake Washington Floating Bridge from Seattle to Mercer Island . 
 The bridge , designed by American suspension bridge engineer Leon <unk> , began construction on November 23 , 1938 , by the Pacific @-@ General @-@ Columbia Company , a partnership between three companies that received a $ 2 @.@ 88 million grant from the Public Works Administration and a $ 3 @.@ 52 million loan from the Reconstruction Finance Corporation , to be repaid through tolls . The Tacoma Narrows Bridge opened on July 1 , 1940 , and included ceremonies attended by an estimated 10 @,@ 000 people , including Governor of Washington Clarence D. Martin . The 2 @,@ 800 @-@ foot @-@ long ( 850 m ) bridge , christened the name " Galloping Gertie " by its construction workers , cost $ 6 @.@ 4 million to build and became the third longest suspension span in the world after its completion . The following day , the art deco MV <unk> was chosen to make the commemorative final ferry crossing of the Tacoma Narrows . The original toll for the bridge cost 55 cents per car , 15 cents per extra passenger , and 15 cents for pedestrians . The bridge , which was prone to movement during windstorms , collapsed at approximately 11 : 00 am on November 7 , 1940 , because of winds in excess of 42 miles per hour ( 68 km / h ) . The only fatality during the collapse was a dog trapped in a car belonging to local reporter Leonard Coatsworth of Tacoma . 
 A second , 5 @,@ 979 @-@ foot @-@ long ( 1 @,@ 822 m ) Tacoma Narrows Bridge was constructed between 1948 and 1951 , officially opening to traffic on October 14 , 1950 . The bridge was designed to let wind pass through the structure with perforated girders and open grating in the deck . Traffic on the two @-@ lane bridge began increasing from 6 @,@ 000 vehicles in 1960 to nearly 67 @,@ 000 vehicles by 1990 , according to WSDOT AADT data . The increased traffic prompted the Washington State Legislature to approve the construction of a tolled eastbound bridge in 1999 , to be finished during the early 2000s . The 5 @,@ 400 @-@ foot @-@ long ( 1 @,@ 600 m ) eastbound bridge was constructed between 2002 and 2007 , opening on July 15 , 2007 , during ceremonies attended by 60 @,@ 000 people , including Governor Christine Gregoire . The newer eastbound bridge provided the debut for the Good To Go ! RFID pass from WSDOT , which allows frequent users to bypass the toll booths by way of a prepaid transponder placed on the inside of the windshield and reducing the toll . 
 = = Bannered routes = = 
 = = = Spur route = = = 
 SR 16 has a 0 @.@ 39 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 0 @.@ 63 km ) spur route located in Gorst that travels west from SR 16 to southbound SR 3 . The spur route was added to the state highway system in 1988 after SR 16 was re @-@ aligned to avoid traffic signals in Gorst . WSDOT included the road in its annual AADT survey in 2012 and calculated that between 4 @,@ 100 and 8 @,@ 600 vehicles used the spur route . 
 = = = Alternate route = = = 
 SR 16 has a 0 @.@ 68 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 1 @.@ 09 km ) alternate route serving the eastbound toll plaza of the Tacoma Narrows Bridge in Pierce County . The alternate route was added to the state highway system in 2007 after the completion of the eastbound Tacoma Narrows Bridge on July 15 . WSDOT included the road in its annual AADT survey in 2012 and calculated that 9 @,@ 100 vehicles used the alternate route . 
 = = Exit list = = 
 = Inseminoid = 
 Inseminoid ( titled Horror Planet in the United States ) is a British @-@ Hong Kong science @-@ fiction horror film released in 1981 . Director Norman J. Warren 's eighth film , the plot of Inseminoid concerns a group of future scientists excavating the ruins of an ancient civilisation on a distant planet . When a monstrous alien creature attacks and inseminates one of the women in the team , chaos ensues as the unbalanced victim , possessing unnatural strength , murders her colleagues one after another in a psychotic bid to protect her unborn twin hybrid offspring . It stars Judy Geeson , Robin Clarke , and Stephanie Beacham . Victoria Tennant makes an early film appearance . 
 Filmed between May and June 1980 , Inseminoid is based on a script written by Nick and Gloria Maley , a couple who had contributed to the special effects of Warren 's films starting with Satan 's Slave ( 1976 ) . A low budget of £ 1 million , half of which was contributed by the Hong Kong Shaw Brothers , funded location filming in both the Chislehurst Caves in Kent and on the island of Gozo in Malta . Composer John Scott perfected the electronic score of Inseminoid in multiple hours @-@ long studio sessions following the completion of shooting . 
 Although initial box office reception was positive both in the United Kingdom and overseas , Inseminoid has since failed to impress a majority of critics , who have faulted Warren 's film for perceived poor acting , special effects and set design . Despite praise for actress Judy Geeson 's depiction of the lead character , Sandy , approval of the film in general has been tarnished due to its concept of an extraterrestrial insemination , which has been viewed negatively in comparison to the premise of Alien ( 1979 ) . Both Warren and Alien distributors 20th Century Fox have rejected claims that the script of Inseminoid was influenced by that of the earlier film . 
 Academic criticism of Inseminoid has concentrated on the film 's treatment of the female sex and female sexualities in the context of corruption by an alien source . In addition to its depiction of the abject Sandy , who is rendered a distorted Other in the aftermath of her unnatural impregnation , the film has been seen to incorporate a clash between the patriarchal and the maternal towards its climax , as the new mother kills her former friends one by one . Complementing the film 's successful VHS run , a novelisation of Inseminoid was written by Larry Miller . 
 = = Plot = = 
 On a desolate planet , a team of 12 Xeno project scientists are conducting an archaeological excavation of the ruins of an ancient civilisation . Shortly after an underground tomb network is found to contain crystals and wall inscriptions , photographer Dean White ( Dominic <unk> ) is engulfed in a rock blast and left incapacitated . Deciphering the alien language in the caves , <unk> Mitch ( Trevor Thomas ) theorises that the civilisation was built on the concept of dualism : the planet orbits a binary star , and a pair of twins seems to have ruled the race that once inhabited it . Medical assistant Sharon ( Heather Wright ) discovers that an energy field surrounds the crystals , which causes her to deduce that a " chemical intelligence " controlled life on the planet . 
 A mentally unbalanced Ricky Williams ( David <unk> ) is driven to re @-@ enter the caves when a sample of crystals pulsates and the chemical intelligence exerts its influence through a mark on his arm . Thrown into a grille in a compromised environmental suit , Gail ( Rosalind Lloyd ) commits suicide , removing her helmet and freezing to death in the toxic atmosphere while trying to amputate her trapped foot with a chainsaw . Documentation officer Kate Frost ( Stephanie Beacham ) shoots Ricky with a harpoon gun before he opens both the inner and outer airlock doors and renders the air inside the base <unk> . 
 Following the burial of Ricky and Gail , Mitch and Sandy ( Judy Geeson ) return to the caves to collect more crystals . A monstrous creature appears and dismembers Mitch before raping Sandy . Found distraught , Sandy receives treatment from Sharon and chief medical officer Karl ( Barry Houghton ) , who discovers that the assault has triggered an accelerated pregnancy despite the regular intravenous injections of contraceptives given to the women in the team . When further explosions within the catacombs scupper chances of deeper investigation , the surviving members of the team are left with nothing to do but await the arrival of a Xeno rescue shuttle . 
 The intelligence assumes control of Sandy , who has been marked in the same way as Ricky . She stabs Barbra ( Victoria Tennant ) to death with a pair of scissors , demonstrating superhuman strength while committing the murder , and then mutilates Dean and the remains of Mitch , drinking their blood . The rest of the team seek refuge in the Operations Room as Sandy destroys essential machinery – including the base transmitter – with explosives . When the imbalance in Sandy 's mind appears to correct itself , Karl , Sharon and Commander Holly McKay ( Jennifer Ashley ) attempt to sedate her to spare the unborn children . Sandy 's madness returns and Holly and Karl are killed in an accident with heat @-@ sealing apparatus , whereupon Sandy disembowels the corpses . 
 Senior officer Mark ( Robin Clarke ) radios Sandy – his romantic interest – from the Operations Room to stall for time as Kate and operations chief Gary ( Steven <unk> ) depart to requisition chainsaws from a storage room . The ruse is uncovered and Sandy harpoons Gary outside the airlock , breathing the atmosphere to no ill effect as she mauls his flesh . Preparing for a final confrontation , Mark stumbles across Sandy 's newborn , mutant twins . He entrusts them to Sharon as the mother blasts through the Operations Room door and destroys all the equipment inside , although it is evident that she no longer possesses unnatural strength . Crippled by an explosive charge , Kate is gored to death . In a last stand , Mark strangles and kills Sandy with a ripped @-@ out cable . He returns to Sharon to discover one of the twins biting at her slit neck , before its sibling launches itself at him . 
 Twenty @-@ eight days later , Xeno Auxiliary Module 047 lands on the planet to investigate the loss of contact with the team . With the base in ruins , the mission records destroyed and the scientists either murdered or missing , combat marksmen Corin ( Kevin O 'Shea ) and Roy ( Robert Pugh ) abandon the search for survivors and pilot Jeff ( John Segal ) contacts Xeno control to request clearance to return . The final shots reveal that Sandy 's children have stowed themselves away inside a storage compartment on board the shuttle . 
 = = Cast = = 
 = = Production = = 
 Following the releases of Satan 's Slave ( 1976 ) , Prey ( 1978 ) and Terror ( 1979 ) , Norman J. Warren had at first been attached to direct a film titled Gargoyles . When this production collapsed at the scripting stage , Warren and his producer , Richard Gordon , accepted a plot proposal from the husband @-@ and @-@ wife team of Nick and Gloria Maley , who had worked on Satan 's Slave as members of the special effects department besides Star Wars Episode IV : A New Hope ( 1977 ) and Superman ( 1978 ) . The <unk> drafted their concept as a composite of their favourite science @-@ fiction ideas and an opportunity to exhibit their best effects work , although the suggested title , <unk> , had to be changed to avoid confusion with the 1977 film Demon Seed . The script for the new Inseminoid , which indicates that the film is set two decades in the future in a militaristic universe , required amendments prior to filming , although the premise received Warren and Gordon 's approval . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Producer Richard Gordon cast American actors Clarke and Ashley while on business in Hollywood . Prior to Inseminoid , Ashley had starred in minor films of such independent studios as Crown International Pictures , while Clarke had just completed filming on the 1980 film The Formula . Warren recalls that although Ashley " was not the greatest actress , she was very enthusiastic and very easy to work with . " The professional relationship between Warren and Clarke broke down during the filming of sequences such as Dean 's incapacitation inside the caves , when the director and actor disagreed about the extent to which Clarke needed to respond to the script when his character raises his voice to a shout . Warren asserts that Clarke 's " high opinion of himself " made the actor " a nightmare to work with " , and adds that he " could be extremely difficult , making every scene with him an uphill struggle . " 
 Rapports between the director and other cast members proved to be positive : in particular , Geeson is credited as " an absolute dream to work with " and praised for her acting of the maddened expectant mother , which Warren argues avoids descending into unintentional humour . Gordon also offers a positive assessment , stating that Geeson accepted the demands of her part with enthusiasm and did not complain that it demeaned her as an actress . 
 Warren retains fond memories of Beacham 's " very professional " performance , and remarks that , " with tongue firmly in cheek , she would often wind me up by asking what her motivation was for a particular action , just as I about to call ' Action ! ' , knowing full well that my answer would be , ' Because it 's in the script ' . " Beacham , a mother of two infant children , agreed to appear in the film to support her family : " I had to choose between a play that I really , really wanted to do , which would have paid me £ 65 a week , and this script for a film called Inseminoid . Hey ! No choice . Two pink babies asleep upstairs ! No choice ! " 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Agreeing to fund half of the proposed £ 1 million budget , the Hong Kong Shaw Brothers became partners in the film 's production . Elder brother Sir Run Run Shaw is credited as the presenter of Inseminoid in the opening titles . With a production staff of 75 , principal photography commenced on 12 May 1980 . John Metcalfe , camera operator for Satan 's Slave and Terror , assumed the role of cinematographer . His former role fell to the less experienced Dick Pope . Three weeks of location filming at the Chislehurst Caves in Kent preceded a one @-@ week indoor session at Lee International Studios at Wembley Park in London . The second unit completed special effects and linking shots in a fifth week , based at Film House in Wardour Street . To simulate the desolate landscape of the alien planet in long shots , the production team departed for the island of Gozo off Malta for a final recording session of two days , capitalising on the strong Mediterranean sun to produce good lighting . 
 Opting to record using Mitchell cameras incorporating 35 mm Eastman Kodak film and anamorphic lenses , Warren recalls that the produced footage boasted " an incredibly sharp image and what I would term as the ' American ' look . " He remembers that the setting of the Chislehurst Caves rendered the subterranean complex more realistic than a potential in @-@ studio alternative given the modest budget of Inseminoid . However , the cold , damp , airless conditions , combined with the uneven surface of the cave floors , complicated the filming sessions and necessitated frequent repairs of equipment . 
 Shooting often ran for 12 hours at a time and led to frequent minor injuries among the cast and production staff , while some developed intense feelings of claustrophobia in the confined space . Gordon suggests that the uncomfortable working conditions made the performances of the cast more realistic , but concedes that although , " I think all this paid off in terms of what we got on the screen for the budget , but the circumstances were very difficult . " In the absence of suitable facilities inside the caves , the personnel established administrative , dressing and make @-@ up rooms in a car park some distance from the recording area . Co @-@ writer Nick Maley reprised his role as a special effects technician to produce the infant twin props that appear in the climax of the film . 
 The filming of Inseminoid wrapped two days behind schedule . Warren remembers making a major cut to scenes of Ricky 's rampage to help the shooting finish on time : " I had to put the " blue pencil " through part of the scene , which involved a chase through various tunnels . Three pages of script , which I had to condense into one shot . Having to make such an enormous compromise was not a happy choice for me , but it was the only way of getting us back on schedule . " On his contribution to Inseminoid , Warren stated that Peter Boyle proved to be " a pleasure to work with , because he had a natural feel for the material and managed to create just the right pace and rhythm throughout the film . " During the post @-@ production process , the editing staff increased the brightness of the original print , concerned that a dim appearance would damage the chances of sales to television broadcasters , and removed the most graphic shots of the birth of the mutant children for the purposes of classification . The opening title visuals , consisting of vibrant oil frames , are a contribution of Oxford Scientific Films . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 Determining that the low budget precluded an orchestral soundtrack , Warren and his long @-@ serving composer , John Scott , agreed that all the music should be electronic . Produced after hours of studio multi @-@ tracking and overdubbing , Warren considers the final score an " amazing achievement " and praises Scott 's realisation of a soundtrack incorporating the " experimental " electronic brand of music . The score received an LP release in 1982 . 
 = = Release = = 
 In the UK , Inseminoid premiered on 22 March 1981 in the Midlands . It later opened at 65 cinemas in the region , and reached London in October . Overseas , German cinemas had begun to exhibit the film in January under the title <unk> des <unk> ( English : Seeds of Evil ) . To the dislike of Warren , distributors <unk> released the film under the title Horror Planet in the United States and Canada , but later restored the name to the original Inseminoid . 
 Original pre @-@ release advertising included a regional " mail drop " of circulars presenting screenshots of a screaming Geeson and the tagline " Warning ! An <unk> Alien Birth ! A Violent Nightmare in Blood ! Inseminoid at a Cinema Near You Soon ! " Warren , who regrets the decision to publicise the film in such a graphic manner , comments , " The problem with mail @-@ drops is that you have no way of knowing who lives in the house , or who will see it first . It could be a pregnant woman , and old lady , or even worse , a young child . So it was not such a good idea . " 
 Rated " X " in the UK , in the United States Inseminoid screened under the " R " certificate for its " profanity , nudity , violence , rape and gore " . In 2005 , the British Board of Film Classification revised its certification of Inseminoid , re @-@ rating the film " 15 " from " 18 " for its " strong , bloody violence " . Inseminoid became one of the first films to be released on VHS soon after its appearance in cinemas , and reached seventh position in British video sales charts in November 1981 . Renewed editions became available in 1992 and 1998 . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Inseminoid attracted positive critical reception on its original release . In terms of box office performance , it reached a high of fifth position in the 1981 British charts . At one point it ranked seventh at the box office in France , while in the United States it proceeded to enter the Los Angeles Times list of top ten films . American director Roger Corman congratulated Warren on the film and considered commissioning him for further productions . However , a private screening had failed to impress members of the British Academy of Film and Television Arts , who dismissed Inseminoid as " ' Commercial rubbish ! ... Not the sort of thing the Academy should be showing ... And certainly not the kind of film the British film industry should be making ! ' " 
 In 1982 , Inseminoid received a minor accolade at the Italian <unk> ( winning the Best Special Effects prize ) and a nomination at the Fantasporto convention in Portugal ( for the Best Film award ) . Recalling how the depiction the female sex in Inseminoid displeased women 's circles , Warren states , " It seems it is quite common for pregnant women to have nightmares about giving birth to some kind of monster . Of course , all their complaints and their letters which were printed in the local papers only helped to increase the queue at the box office . " 
 Examining the acting in a review published in Starlog magazine , Alan Jones expressed a preference for the British members of the cast , crediting Geeson as " absolutely first @-@ rate " and criticising " the weak performances from the token Americans , Robin Clarke and Jennifer Ashley " . Praising the production values for cost @-@ effectiveness , he discerned signs of Warren 's " particular trademark " in such murder scenes as that of Barbra ( through repeated scissor @-@ stabbing ) and Holly ( through heat @-@ searing ) . He professed his opinion that Inseminoid " is not faultless by any means " , citing a predictable and often " ridiculous " plot as factors detracting from his pleasure in viewing the film . Nevertheless , he asserted that Inseminoid meets audience demands for a B film of its genre , progressing " at such a pace that you nearly almost forget that you 've seen it all before " , and declared it to be " far less routine and far more enjoyable than I had expected . " 
 Critical response in the United States proved to be less favourable . In a review published in Virginia in January 1983 , Edward Jones of The Free @-@ Lance Star offered praise for the " novel touch " of casting a would @-@ be @-@ mother as the principal villain , commenting , " In what has to be a new low , even for extraterrestrial @-@ horror films , all the men end up punching this pregnant woman in the stomach . What a time to have twins ! " Nevertheless , Inseminoid is discarded as " no more than a mix of everything @-@ you 've @-@ ever @-@ seen @-@ in @-@ a @-@ horror @-@ movie @-@ and @-@ didn 't @-@ particularly @-@ want @-@ to @-@ see @-@ again . " In a November 1983 edition of the Floridian newspaper Boca Raton News , Skip Sheffield branded the film " horrible " and " cheapo " , suggesting that his readers " Imagine Alien without the fantastic sets , convincing special effects and literate dialogue , and you have a picture of Horror Planet . " He added his opinion that brutal violence does not guarantee narrative suspense , punning on the name Run Run Shaw in his downbeat conclusion that " Horror Planet is a film to run , run away from — fast . " 
 In 2004 , Douglas Pratt argued that Inseminoid consists of " some gooey gore shots but few other thrills " and denounced the quality of the acting and props used . He still conceded that Inseminoid " goes through the motions properly , however , so fans will probably find it worth passing the time . " The film is award one star out of five on the AllRovi website , where reviewer Cavett Binion rules that it is a " fairly standard rip @-@ off " of Alien in spite of the originality of its core premise , with a " rabid , eye @-@ popping performance " from Geeson that is " more than a bit uncomfortable to watch . " The rape sequence is seen as a " surreal and truly disgusting flashback " and the title of the film itself deemed " sleazy " . 
 Warren rejects the label " video nasty " , which has been applied to Inseminoid on the incorrect assumption that its violent content made it impossible to release uncut on home video formats in the UK . The film was incorrectly labelled as previously banned in 1984 when it was rereleased in its cut cinema print in 1994 by <unk> . It has long been uncut in the UK on DVD . In response to the idea that the film has attained cult status , he remarks , " if Inseminoid has become some form of cult movie , then I am very pleased and , indeed , very flattered . " On his private response to his work , he answers that " I don 't think you could ever be one hundred percent satisfied with any film you make " , and that , in the scenario of remaking Inseminoid , he would darken the lighting of certain scenes to heighten the tension and demand a longer filming schedule . 
 = = = Analysis = = = 
 Inseminoid has been criticised as a perceived imitation , " knock @-@ off " or " rip @-@ off " of the 1979 science @-@ fiction horror film Alien . Peter Wright , a film historian and lecturer at the University of Liverpool , interprets both the " atmospheric " scenes set in the underground tomb network , and the mess hall sequence preceding Rick 's madness , as potential derivations from Ridley Scott 's film : while the first recalls the setting of the remote planetoid , LV @-@ 426 , the second resonates with the " chestburster " horror scene . Wright asserts that the connection of Inseminoid to Alien could appear to be " exploitative " , while Barry Langford of the University of London views Inseminoid as representative of the dependence of British cinema on its American counterpart . 
 Alan Jones of Starlog magazine suggests that " any similarity between Inseminoid and Alien is totally intentional . Except here is the basic idea contained in Alien taken to its sleaziest extreme . " He interprets one such parallel in the character of Kate who , it is argued , emulates the appearance of Sigourney Weaver in the role of Ellen Ripley . However , he also cites Contamination ( 1980 ) and Scared to Death ( 1981 ) as less effective imitations of Scott . Besides Alien , Edward Jones of the newspaper The Free Lance – Star discerns elements of the novel Dracula ( 1897 ) , the TV series The Bionic Woman ( 1976 – 78 ) , and the films Night of the Living Dead ( 1968 ) and The Thing ( 1982 ) in the plot of Inseminoid . 
 Warren denies claims of an imitation , noting the discrepancies between the production schedules : when Inseminoid entered the shooting stage , Alien , which had been filmed in closed studios , had been released months before . While the director accepts the often " uncanny " similarities between the two films , he states that Alien distributors 20th Century Fox discounted the possibility of derivation after watching the final cut of Inseminoid : " ... in fact , the head of Fox sent us a very nice letter saying how much he enjoyed the film and wished us luck with the release ... I find it flattering that anyone can compare Alien , which cost in the region of $ 30 million , with Inseminoid which cost less than £ 1 million . We must have done something right . " 
 Wright interprets the transformation of Sandy from innocent female to a murderous mother @-@ to @-@ be of human @-@ alien hybrid twins as a " direct manifestation of masculine anxiety regarding female reproductive capacity " . He comments that the origin of the horror of Inseminoid is internalised as the seed of a violent alien life form , which renders Sandy " woman @-@ as @-@ other " , or " abject Other " . This opposes the transferring of " fear of woman onto the alien other " as demonstrated in the extraterrestrial villain of Alien . Inseminoid is also judged to be reminiscent of the 1977 film Demon Seed , which casts an advanced computer as the source of a rape resulting in insemination : " in both films , women are framed as ' Other ' by their sexual congress with more conventional iconic others : the machine and the alien . " <unk> are depicted as sources of horror , an attitude apparent in the " uterine and cervical " opening credits of Inseminoid , which are suggestive of the viewer " entering the realm of the monstrous womb ... the titling reveals a microscopic insect resident in the body of a larger organism . " 
 Wright argues that Warren 's inspiration of terror through a distorted representation of the uterus strikes a chord with the 1979 film The Brood , in which a woman produces deformed children through asexual reproduction . Commenting further , he examines the rape sequence itself , in which Sandy witnesses Karl injecting her with an unknown substance prior to the alien insemination , and makes a connection to dialogue from other scenes indicating that the female Xeno scientists are regularly administered intravenous injections for contraceptive purposes . The impregnation of Sandy through perverted intercourse , conflicting with the suppression of childbirth that is manifested through Karl 's use of a hypodermic and ( phallic ) needle , reveals " coherent sexism " in so far as Inseminoid " attacks the very notion of female sexual freedom , while suggesting , paradoxically , that contraception is the responsibility of women . " That Sandy reproduces at an accelerated pace and regresses into an animalistic state are factors adding to her depiction as an abject Other , or object of " male paranoia " . 
 During the final struggle , which pits the patriarchal social structure of the Xeno team against Sandy 's maternal element , it is not until Gary has half @-@ suffocated in the toxic atmosphere that he is murdered . Wright argues that the sequence is reassuring from a male perspective despite its graphic content , since it implies that no woman , even one with superhuman strength , possesses the power to kill a man in cold blood . A murderer of colleagues of both sexes , that Sandy dies at the hands of Mark ultimately renders her an aid to the re @-@ empowerment of the male sex , although the twin offspring are quick to avenge her . Comparing the plot of Inseminoid to Biblical scriptures , Christopher Partridge of Lancaster University turns his attention to the nature of the twins , referring to them as " essentially space Nephilim , technological demons with appetites and habits reminiscent of the mythic forebears . " 
 Maternal images endure as far as the epilogue , featuring the arrival of Jeff , Corin and Roy at the Xeno base . In an allusion to the human menstrual cycle , it is said that 28 days have elapsed since the communications break @-@ down . The destruction of the installation and the deaths of its personnel are attributed to an " internal disturbance of some kind " , forming " an ironic phrase which encapsulates the film 's vision of pregnancy as an irruption of Otherness from within . " Focusing on Larry Miller 's 1981 novelisation , described as " imaginative and misogynistic " , Wright refers to sequences that are absent from the film and inspire repulsion on <unk> part of the reader at the distortion of the female form . New transformations that afflict Sandy include oozing sores ( which Wright construes as an aberration of natal oil secretion ) and pus emanating from the nipples ( argued to mirror colostrum , or pre @-@ milk ) . Sandy accepts such unnatural metamorphoses , which culminate in the onset of labour , with fascination . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 An American punk rock band from Long Island , New York named themselves after the film 's alternative title , Horror Planet . Their eponymous theme song contained lyrical references to horrific aspects of the plot . The song was not released as a record but was circulated on cassette demonstration tapes prior to the only official release by the band . In 1985 , Horror Planet released a professionally produced recording on an EP record with hand @-@ painted fabric sleeves . The songs from the Horror Planet record were subsequently re @-@ released in their entirety on the anthology CD compilation , Something in the Water : the Secret History of Long Island Punk , by Winged Disk Records . 
 A brief clip of Inseminoid is featured in the South Park episode " Helen Keller ! The Musical " ( 2000 ) , seen during character Eric Cartman 's disturbing vision while he uses sensory deprivation to penetrate the mind of Helen Keller . 
 = New York State Route 225 = 
 New York State Route 225 ( NY 225 ) is a state highway in the Southern Tier of New York in the United States . It is a 15 @.@ 54 @-@ mile ( 25 @.@ 01 km ) loop route off NY 352 that connects the town of Big Flats ( near the city of Elmira ) and the city of Corning to the hamlet of Caton . The route begins in Big Flats and follows a generally east – west alignment across rural areas to Caton , where it turns to run in a north – south direction toward Corning . Development along the highway increases once it enters the Corning suburb of South Corning , and the rest of the route serves residential neighborhoods in South Corning and Corning . NY 225 is two lanes wide for its entire length ; however , part of the highway in South Corning also has a center turn lane . 
 The Caton – Corning segment of the route was acquired by the state of New York in 1911 and designated as part of NY 44 ( now NY 414 ) as part of the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York . It received its current designation in 1949 when NY 414 was truncated to begin in Corning . The highway leading east from Caton to Big Flats was county @-@ maintained from the 1930s through the 1970s , even though it had been part of NY 13 from the 1930 renumbering to the 1940s . The state of New York assumed maintenance of the highway by 1986 , and the new state highway became an extension of NY 225 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 NY 225 begins at an intersection with NY 352 ( West Water Street ) in a residential area of the town of Big Flats , located 3 miles ( 5 km ) west of the city of Elmira in southwest Chemung County . It heads southwest as the two @-@ lane Hendy Creek Road to the Chemung River , which it crosses by way of the Fitch Bridge . On the opposite riverbank , NY 225 passes through the community of Golden Glow Heights as it turns to follow a more westerly routing into substantially less developed parts of the town . Over the next 4 miles ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) , the route meanders along the Big Flats – Southport town line while running along the base of a narrow , remote valley surrounding Hendy Creek . Along the way , the highway meets the north end of County Route 36 ( CR 36 , named Dutch Hill Road ) . The creek valley ultimately leads to the Chemung – Steuben county line , where NY 225 becomes known as Hendy Hollow Road . 
 Across the county line in the town of Caton , NY 225 continues west through the gully for another 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) , slowly rising in elevation as it heads past a small number of isolated homes . The creek reaches its source near NY 225 's junction with the southern terminus of CR 34 ( Whiskey Creek Road ) , at which point the route ascends out of the valley and heads southwest across lightly developed , relatively level terrain to the small hamlet of Caton . In the center of the community , NY 225 intersects CR 32 ( Caton – Seeley Creek Road ) and CR 120 ( Tannery Creek Road ) . NY 225 turns northwest at this intersection , becoming Caton Road as it follows Caton Creek out of the hamlet . 
 The change in direction brings the route into another rural valley , which follows a winding , generally northward course for 4 miles ( 6 km ) . As the highway runs along the gully , it meets CR 40A ( West Caton Road ) at a junction just south of the Caton – Corning town line and the north end of CR 34 at an intersection a half @-@ mile ( 0 @.@ 8 km ) north of the boundary . The Caton Creek valley eventually gives way to more open terrain as NY 225 re @-@ approaches the Chemung River and reenters its surrounding valley . Here , the route transitions from a rural highway to a residential street as it enters the riverside village of South Corning . Caton Road terminates at the center of the village , with the route following a northeastward alignment for its last few blocks . NY 225 turns northwestward onto Park Avenue at this point , following the right @-@ of @-@ way established by River Road , a highway designated as CR 44 east of the village limits . 
 As Park Avenue , NY 225 is initially a two @-@ lane road with a center turn lane . The route parallels the Chemung River to the Corning city line , where the center turn lane ends and the highway reverts to a two @-@ lane undivided road . Within the city limits , NY 225 continues to serve mostly residential neighborhoods while traversing the southeastern part of the city . The route proceeds to the eastern edge of downtown Corning , at which point it veers north onto <unk> Street . NY 225 ends just one block later at an intersection with Denison Parkway ( NY 352 ) . The 0 @.@ 45 miles ( 0 @.@ 72 km ) of NY 225 within Corning are maintained by the city , while the rest of the route is maintained by the New York State Department of Transportation ( NYSDOT ) . 
 = = History = = 
 The roadway leading north from Caton to the Corning city line was originally improved to state highway standards under a contract awarded by the state of New York on April 5 , 1910 . Reconstruction of the highway cost $ 71 @,@ 092 ( equivalent to $ 1 @.@ 81 million in 2016 ) , and the rebuilt road was added to the state highway system on December 21 , 1911 , as unsigned State Highway 850 ( SH 850 ) . In the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York , SH 850 became the southernmost portion of the new NY 44 , a route continuing north through the city of Corning to the Wayne County village of Wolcott . At the same time , the road extending east from Caton to the town of Big Flats outside of Elmira became part of an extended NY 13 . NY 44 was renumbered as NY 414 c . 1935 to eliminate duplication with the newly designated U.S. Route 44 . 
 Most of NY 13 between Caton and Big Flats was county @-@ maintained as part of CR 120 in Steuben County and as CR 7 in Chemung County . East of the Fitch Bridge , however , the road had been state @-@ maintained since 1912 as part of SH 946 . In the early 1940s , NY 13 was truncated on its southern end to downtown Elmira , leaving the Caton – Big Flats highway without a signed state route designation . The county @-@ maintained parts of the road remained designated as CR 120 in Steuben County and CR 7 in Chemung County , while the short state @-@ owned segment in Big Flats eventually became part of an unsigned reference route extending from Golden Glow Heights Drive to Water Street ( modern NY 352 ) . 
 NY 414 was truncated on January 1 , 1949 , to begin in downtown Corning . Its former routing from Caton to Corning was redesignated as NY 225 as part of the change . On April 1 , 1980 , ownership and maintenance of CR 120 east of NY 225 in Caton was transferred from Steuben County to the state of New York as part of a highway maintenance swap between the two levels of government . All of CR 7 in Chemung County was also transferred to the state sometime after 1978 . The Caton – Big Flats roadway , now state @-@ maintained along its entire length , became an eastward extension of NY 225 by 1986 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = Thrilling Cities = 
 Thrilling Cities is the title of a travelogue by the James Bond author and The Sunday Times journalist Ian Fleming . The book was first published in the UK in November 1963 by Jonathan Cape . The cities covered by Fleming were Hong Kong , Macau , Tokyo , Honolulu , Los Angeles , Las Vegas , Chicago , New York , Hamburg , Berlin , Vienna , Geneva , Naples and Monte Carlo . 
 Thrilling Cities was initially a series of articles Fleming wrote for The Sunday Times , based on two trips he took . The first trip was in 1959 , in which he travelled around the world , and the second was in 1960 , in which he drove around Europe . The first trip was at the behest of The Sunday Times 's features editor Leonard Russell ; the paper 's chairman , Roy Thomson , enjoyed the series so much he requested Fleming undertook a second trip . The book version includes material edited out of the original articles , as well as photographs of the various cities . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 Thrilling Cities is Ian Fleming 's view of thirteen cities he visited in two trips in 1959 and 1960 . The cities covered are : Hong Kong , Macau , Tokyo , Honolulu , Los Angeles and Las Vegas ( the two cities are examined in one chapter ) , Chicago , New York , Hamburg , Berlin , Vienna , Geneva , Naples and Monte Carlo . Fleming 's account is highly personal and deals with his visit and his experiences and impressions . Each chapter closes with what Fleming called " Incidental Intelligence " , dealing with the hotels , restaurants , food and night life . 
 = = Background = = 
 In 1959 the features editor of the The Sunday Times , Leonard Russell , suggested to Ian Fleming that he take a five @-@ week , all @-@ expenses @-@ paid trip around the world for a series of features for the paper . Fleming declined , saying he was a terrible tourist who " often advocated the provision of roller @-@ skates at the door of museums and art galleries " . Russell persuaded him , pointing out that Fleming could also get some material for the Bond books in the process . Fleming took £ 500 ( £ 9 @,@ 442 in 2016 pounds ) of travellers cheques for expenses and flew BOAC to his first stop , Hong Kong . He was guided around the city by his friend Richard Hughes , the Australian correspondent for The Sunday Times ; Hughes was later the model for the character Dikko Henderson in You Only Live Twice , as well as for " Old Craw " in John le Carré 's The Honourable Schoolboy . Fleming stayed just three days in Hong Kong , before he and Hughes flew to Tokyo where they were joined by Torao Saito — also known as " Tiger " — a journalist with the Asahi Shimbun newspaper group . Saito later became the model for the character Tiger Tanaka in You Only Live Twice . Fleming spent three days in Tokyo and decided there would be " no politicians , museums , temples , Imperial palaces or Noh plays , let alone tea ceremonies " on his itinerary ; he instead visited a judo academy , a Japanese soothsayer and the Kodokan , a local gymnasium . 
 Fleming left Tokyo on Friday the 13th to fly to Hawaii ; 2 @,@ 000 miles into the Pacific one of the Douglas DC @-@ 6 's engines caught fire and the plane nearly crashed , although it managed to make an emergency landing on Wake Island . After Honolulu , Fleming moved on to Los Angeles , where he visited a number of places he had been before , including the Los Angeles Police Intelligence headquarters , where he again met Captain James Hamilton , much as he had done during his research for Diamonds Are Forever . By the time Fleming got to New York he was fed up with travelling and his biographer , Andrew Lycett notes that " his sour mood transferred to the city and indeed the country he had once loved " . The series opened in The Sunday Times on 24 January 1960 , with an introduction from Fleming , followed by the article on Hong Kong the following week . The series finished on 28 February 1960 with the article about Chicago and New York . 
 Roy Thomson , the chairman of The Sunday Times , enjoyed Fleming 's articles and suggested a number of other cities , including Rio de Janeiro , Buenos Aires , Havana , New Orleans and Montreal . Others , such as The Sunday Times editor Harry Hodson , were less enthusiastic ; Hodson considered that " more serious readers have tut @-@ <unk> a bit about missing the really important things " . 
 Fleming planned to drive most of his second tour of cities , which concentrated on places he wanted to visit in Europe . For the trip he took his own car , a Ford Thunderbird convertible , crossing the channel and journeying through Ostend , Antwerp and Bremen before arriving at his first destination : Hamburg . He stayed only briefly in the city , praising the sex industry by writing " how very different from the prudish and hypocritical manner in which we so disgracefully <unk> these things in England " . Fleming moved on to Berlin , where he was shown round the city by The Sunday Times correspondent Anthony Terry and his wife Rachel . Terry took Fleming into East Berlin and told him many of the details about Operation Stopwatch , the Anglo @-@ American attempt to tunnel into the Soviet @-@ occupied zone to tap into landline communication of the Soviet Army headquarters . In comparison to Hamburg , Fleming thought Berlin was " sinister " . 
 Fleming moved on to Vienna and found the city boring , calling it " clean , tidy , God @-@ fearing " , before travelling into Geneva . He met Ingrid <unk> , a journalist and old girlfriend , who was resident in the city and who provided him with much of his background material . Fleming then travelled to Les Avants , the villa near Montreux of his close friend Noël Coward , where Coward introduced Fleming to Charlie Chaplin . Fleming had asked Coward to set up the meeting as Chaplin was writing his memoirs and Leonard Russell had asked Fleming to secure the rights for the paper ; Fleming was successful in his approach and the memoirs were later serialised in the paper . 
 Fleming 's wife Ann had joined him in Les Avants and the couple then moved on to Naples , where Fleming interviewed Lucky Luciano , finding him " a neat , quiet , grey @-@ haired man with a tired good @-@ looking face . " After Naples , the Flemings moved to Monte Carlo , the final stop on Fleming 's journey ; Despite spending time at the casino , Fleming thought Monte Carlo somewhat seedy . The second series of articles started on 31 July 1960 with Fleming 's trip to Hamburg , and finished with his visit to Monte Carlo . Overall the series was considered popular and successful . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 Thrilling Cities was first published in the UK by Jonathan Cape , in November 1963 ; the book was 223 pages long and cost 30 shillings . The cover was designed by artist Paul Davis and shows " a surreal version of Monte Carlo " . For the US market , the book was released in June 1964 through New American Library and cost $ 4 @.@ 95 . Fleming 's comments on New York were so cutting that when the book was published in the US , the American publishers asked if he could tone down the wording . Fleming refused , but instead wrote the short story " 007 in New York " to be included in the US version by way of recompense . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 The reviews for Thrilling Cities were broadly good . The critic for The Times thought that Fleming 's style was " no nonsense over fine writing " , and summed up the book as " Fleming 's smooth , sophisticated , personally conducted tours " , noting that the author " has a knack of enjoying himself " . John Raymond , in The Sunday Times , wrote that " Mr Fleming 's prose arouses the voyeur that lurks in all but the best of us " , and considered that the book remained " supremely readable " throughout . Writing for The Times Literary Supplement , Xan Fielding found the title of the book to be misleading , noting that apart from a very small win at the casinos of Las Vegas , " his personal experience of thrills seems to have been just as limited everywhere else on his itinerary . " Fielding considered that the cities Fleming visited had the potential for thrills , and hoped that the material gathered was used in Fleming 's literary works with thrills included . 
 Christopher Wordsworth , writing for The Listener , believed that Thrilling Cities was " a fascinating informative mock @-@ up , disarmingly snob @-@ ridden " . Writing for the Daily Express , Peter Grosvenor thought that Fleming — a " tourist extraordinary " — was " never afraid to record a controversial view " , citing Fleming 's views on the differences between oriental and western women 's approaches to men . 
 The critic for The Financial Times , James <unk> , declared that Thrilling Cities " can — and will , compulsively — be read at a sitting " , although he found that overall " it is an unsatisfying report " because of the brevity of the subject . Honor Tracy , providing the critique for The Guardian thought Fleming praiseworthy , as he " writes without any pretension at all " , while also managing to be " invariably entertaining and often funny " . Overall Tracy considered that Thrilling Cities was " a lively , enjoyable book , written from an unusual point of view and well illustrated . " Writing for The Observer , Francis Hope was surprised by Fleming 's written style , which he found to be " more flabby verbose than one expects of a thriller writer " , although this was redeemed by Fleming having " some interesting conversations with local experts on crime " . 
 The reviewer for the Los Angeles Times , Robert Kirsch , did not enjoy the book and considered Fleming to be " a second @-@ rate reporter , filled with the irritating prejudices and pomposities of a middle @-@ class English traveller . " For Kirsch , Fleming 's style was a combination of Sax Rohmer and James Fitzpatrick , although he also considered that " Fleming 's wit is provincial " . Writing the review for The Boston Globe , Marjory Adams thought Thrilling Cities to have " an acid gaiety in its descriptions " , which contributed to her overall summary of the book : " it is fun ! " 
 = Breaker boy = 
 A breaker boy was a coal @-@ mining worker in the United States and United Kingdom whose job was to separate impurities from coal by hand in a coal breaker . Although breaker boys were primarily children , elderly coal miners who could no longer work in the mines because of age , disease , or accident were also sometimes employed as breaker boys . The use of breaker boys began in the mid @-@ 1860s . Although public disapproval of the employment of children as breaker boys existed by the mid @-@ 1880s , the practice did not end until the 1920s . 
 = = Coal breaking = = 
 Coal came into wide use in late 1590s in the United Kingdom after the island nation was widely deforested and a ban was placed on the harvesting of wood by Charles I of England so that forests could be used solely by the Royal Navy . A newly emergent middle class increasingly demanded glass for windows , and the glass @-@ making industry relied heavily on charcoal for fuel . With charcoal no longer available , this industry turned to coal . Demand for coal also increased after the invention of the <unk> furnace and the development of methods for casting iron objects such as cannon . 
 The first function of a coal breaker is to break coal into pieces and sort these pieces into categories of nearly uniform size , a process known as breaking . But coal is often mixed with impurities such as rock , slate , sulphur , ash ( or " bone " ) , clay , or soil . Thus , the second function of a coal breaker is to remove as many impurities as economically desirable and technologically feasible , and then grade the coal based on the percent of impurities remaining . This was not necessary when coal was used in cottage @-@ industry grade production methods , but became necessary when economies of scale moved production into early factories with a larger workforce and those installations began producing glass and iron in greater quantities . 
 In the U.S. prior to 1830 , very little bituminous coal was mined and the fuel of the early American Industrial Revolution — anthracite coal underwent little processing before being sent to market , which was primarily iron works and smithies producing wrought iron . The miner himself would use a sledgehammer to break up large lumps of coal , then use a rake whose teeth were set two inches apart to collect the larger pieces of coal for shipment to the surface for such were easiest to pack densely in the sack @-@ like bags that could be slung over the back , or onto a pack animal for the trip out of the mine . 
 The smaller lumps of coal were considered non @-@ marketable and left in the mine . Beginning about 1830 , surface processing of coal in the US began concurrent with various canal projects in Eastern Seaboard . These developments lagged behind Great Britain better matching the timing of similar developments in Continental Europe . Great Britain with its heavily deforested landscapes simply had to find economic alternatives sooner , stimulating Coal , Iron , and machine developments leading ultimately to Railroads and the infant industrial chemicals industries of the 1860s . Lumps of coal were placed on plates of perforated cast iron and " breakers " would hammer on the coal until it was in pieces small enough to fall through the holes . A second screen caught the coal , and was shaken ( by hand , animal , steam , or water power ) to remove the unmarketable smaller lumps . This " broken and screened " coal was worth much more than " broken " coal or lump coal for the even sizes combusted with less trouble and need for tending once past the ignition point . 
 = = Use of breaker boys = = 
 Until about 1900 , nearly all coal breaking facilities in the United States were labor @-@ intensive . The removal of impurities was done by hand , usually by breaker boys between the ages of eight and 12 years old . The use of breaker boys began around 1866 . For 10 hours a day , six days a week , breaker boys would sit on wooden seats , perched over the chutes and conveyor belts , picking slate and other impurities out of the coal . Breaker boys working on top of chutes or conveyor belts would stop the coal by pushing their boots into the stream of fuel flowing beneath them , briefly pick out the impurities , and then let the coal pass on to the next breaker boy for further processing . Others would divert coal into a horizontal chute at which they sat , then pick the coal clean before allowing the fuel to flow into " clean " coal bins . 
 The work performed by breaker boys was hazardous . Breaker boys were forced to work without gloves so that they could better handle the slick coal . The slate , however , was sharp , and breaker boys would often leave work with their fingers cut and bleeding . Breaker boys sometimes also had their fingers amputated by the rapidly moving conveyor belts . Others lost feet , hands , arms , and legs as they moved among the machinery and became caught under conveyor belts or in gears . Many were crushed to death , their bodies retrieved from the gears of the machinery by supervisors only at the end of the working day . Others were caught in the rush of coal , and crushed to death or smothered . Dry coal would kick up so much dust that breaker boys sometimes wore lamps on their heads to see , and asthma and black lung disease were common . Coal was often washed to remove impurities , which created sulfuric acid . The acid burned the hands of the breaker boys . 
 = = Public condemnation = = 
 Public condemnation of the use of breaker boys was so widespread that in 1885 Pennsylvania enacted a law forbidding the employment of anyone under the age of 12 from working in a coal breaker , but the law was poorly enforced ; many employers forged proof @-@ of @-@ age documentation , and many families forged birth certificates or other documents so their children could support the family . Estimates of the number of breaker boys at work in the anthracite coal fields of Pennsylvania vary widely , and official statistics are generally considered by historians to undercount the numbers significantly . One estimate had 20 @,@ 000 breaker boys working in the state in 1880 , 18 @,@ 000 working in 1900 , 13 @,@ 133 working in 1902 , and 24 @,@ 000 working in 1907 . Technological innovations in the 1890s and 1900s ( such as mechanical and water separators designed to remove impurities from coal ) dramatically lowered the need for breaker boys , but adoption of the new technology was slow . 
 By the 1910s , the use of breaker boys was dropping because of improvements in technology , stricter child labor laws , and the enactment of compulsory education laws . The practice of employing children in coal breakers largely ended by 1920 because of the efforts of the National Child Labor Committee , sociologist and photographer Lewis Hine , and the National Consumers League , all of whom educated the public about the practice and succeeded in obtaining passage of national child labor laws . 
 = = Union activities = = 
 Breaker boys were known for their fierce independence and rejection of adult authority . Breaker boys often formed and joined trade unions , and precipitated a number of important strikes in the anthracite coal fields of Pennsylvania . Among these were the strike which culminated in the Lattimer Massacre and the Coal Strike of 1902 . 
 = Marching Men = 
 Marching Men is a 1917 novel by American author Sherwood Anderson . Published by John Lane , the novel is Anderson 's second book ; the first being the 1916 novel Windy McPherson 's Son . Marching Men is the story of Norman " Beaut " McGregor , a young man discontented with the powerlessness and lack of personal ambition among the miners of his hometown . After moving to Chicago he discovers his purpose is to empower workers by having them march in unison . Major themes of the novel include the organization of laborers , eradication of disorder , and the role of the exceptional man in society . The latter theme led post @-@ World War II critics to compare Anderson 's militaristic approach to homosocial order and the fascists of the War 's Axis powers . 
 Marching Men was written as a hobby project while Sherwood Anderson was still working in advertising . A combination of a small first run , mediocre reviews , and poor sales , convinced Anderson 's publisher not to give Marching Men a second run . The novel has since been reprinted several times by other publishers including a 1927 Russian translation , yet is generally forgotten by the reading public except as a step in the development of its author . 
 = = Development history = = 
 Like Windy McPherson 's Son , Sherwood Anderson wrote his second novel while he worked as an advertising copywriter in Elyria , Ohio between 1906 and 1913 , several years before he published his first literary writing and a decade before he became an established writer . At least part of Marching Men was written in an attic room of Anderson 's Elyria home , which he set up to escape familial demands and focus on writing . Though the author later claimed that he had written his first novels in secret , Anderson 's secretary remembers typing the manuscript on company time " around 1911 or 1912 " . 
 Inspiration for Marching Men came in part from the author 's time as a laborer in Chicago between 1900 and 1906 ( where he , like his protagonist , worked in a warehouse , went to night school , was robbed , and fell in love several times ) and his service in the Spanish – American War which took place towards the end of the war and just after the armistice in 1898 – 99 . Of the latter , Anderson wrote in his Memoirs about the time he had been marching and got a rock in his shoe . After separating from his fellow soldiers to remove it , he observed them and recalled " I had become a giant . ... I was , in myself , something huge , terrible and at the same time noble . I remember that I sat , for a long time , while the army passed , opening and closing my eyes " . Combined with his later reading of works by Thomas Carlyle , Mark Twain , and possibly Jack London , Anderson had inspiration for Marching Men that was both experiential and literary . 
 = = Plot summary = = 
 = = = Books I – II = = = 
 The novel begins with the fourteen @-@ year @-@ old Norman McGregor packaging a loaf of bread for his uncle , the " village wit " , – who ironically nicknames him " Beaut " because of his off @-@ putting appearance – in his mother Nance 's Coal Creek bakery ( bought with the savings of her late husband / Beaut 's father " Cracked " McGregor ) . Not long after , frustrated by the local miners expecting bread on credit without first settling their debts , Beaut closes the bakery during a miner 's strike . That evening , as the now @-@ drunk miners move to ransack the bakery ( and assault Beaut ) , he is saved by a troupe of soldiers marching in formation . After the episode , the bakery remains closed and Nance goes to work at the mining office while Beaut idles about . When Beaut is 18 years old , his mother becomes too ill to work and the young man gets a job as a stableboy . One day , as a prank , his fellow <unk> get Beaut ( a teetotaler up to that point ) blind drunk with a " horrible mess " made just for that purpose . Having reached a breaking point , Beaut takes the rest of his father 's savings and leaves Coal Creek for Chicago on the same evening . He arrives in the City just after the 1893 World 's Fair . Despite a shortage of jobs , McGregor easily finds a warehouse job and settles into a routine of work during the day and night school / independent reading at night . One day , in a break from the ordinary , the usually unsocial McGregor gives in to the urging of his neighbor Frank Turner , a barber and amateur violin @-@ maker , and goes to a dance . Despite his aloofness , McGregor meets Edith Carson , a frail , mousy , and somewhat homely milliner / shop owner , with whom he develops a platonic relationship . 
 = = = Books III – IV = = = 
 Book III begins with Beaut returning to Coal Creek for his mother 's funeral . During the funeral procession , the miners who attend fall spontaneously into step and Beaut is once @-@ again inspired by the power of marching men . Back in Chicago , Edith Carson , who had gained a modicum of wealth through her shrewd business dealings , loans McGregor the money necessary for him to quit working full @-@ time and attend school to become a lawyer , his long @-@ time ambition . Not long after McGregor is admitted to the bar , the son of a wealthy industrialist is found murdered . In order to quell newspaper speculation as to their involvement , the political bosses decide to redirect the media 's attention by framing and demonizing small @-@ time thief Andy Brown , an acquaintance of McGregor . From jail , Brown requests that McGregor act as his lawyer . Though McGregor refuses at first , he ends up with the job . After an unsuccessful solo investigation , McGregor turns to wealthy heiress @-@ turned @-@ settlement house @-@ volunteer , Margaret Ormsby , for help . Margaret , a " new woman " who dresses fashionably , is self @-@ assured in demeanor , and is capable of acting independently is bothered by McGregor 's bluntness , but decides to aid him nevertheless . On a tip from Edith Carson , and with Ormsby 's connections , McGregor is able to clear Andy Brown of any wrongdoing . In the interim , Margaret Ormsby and McGregor develop a romance . 
 = = = Books V – VII = = = 
 While McGregor is slowly building up his idea of marching men ( his law practice on the backburner ) , he decides that he wants to marry Margaret Ormsby . As he is leaving a formal party at her family 's mansion , McGregor asks Margaret to marry him , but gets nervous and flees before she can respond . A few weeks later , McGregor falls asleep at the house of Edith Carson and wakes up with her stroking his hair . Realizing that their relationship is more intimate then he had thought , he goes to Margaret and reveals his past experiences with women . Margaret hears McGregor 's confession and declares that she will still marry him , but first , she must go talk to Edith . A few weeks later , when McGregor is in the neighborhood for a teamster 's strike , he finds that Edith 's shop had recently come under new ownership . Rushing to the train station , he finds Edith about to depart . Together , they go to the Ormsby house and in a confrontation Margaret cedes her claim over McGregor to Edith . As Edith and McGregor are leaving , Margaret 's father , David , leader of a plow trust ( nicknamed " Ormsby the Prince " by the City 's oligarchs ) , extends a hand to McGregor . The two men shake , the narrator noting their polite antagonism towards each other . 
 Soon , the marching men idea blooms with workers coming together and marching to and from work in the evenings . Becoming nervous over newspaper reports and rumors of the worker gatherings , several " men of affairs " discuss the matter . David Ormsby volunteers to dissuade to McGregor from further organizing but cannot communicate his point to the impassive McGregor . The marching men movement peaks during a demonstration on Labor Day , climaxing with a speech by McGregor . Riding in a carriage with her father at the fringe of the demonstration , Margaret Ormsby is overcome by McGregor 's oration , but later professes her allegiance to her father . The book ends that same night with a solitary David Ormsby , a foil to the stereotype of the ruthless businessman , at his window overlooking the city , meditating on his life choices : " What if McGregor and his woman knew both roads ? What if they , after looking deliberately along the road toward beauty and success in life , went , without regret , along the road to failure ? What if McGregor and not myself knew the road to beauty ? " 
 = = Themes = = 
 = = = Unity of workers = = = 
 As with Anderson 's novels Poor White ( 1920 ) and Beyond Desire ( 1932 ) , class struggle is a major theme in Marching Men . In addition to it being dedicated " To American Workingmen " , one critic placed Marching Men as part of a " proletarian trend " alongside Ernst Toller 's play Man and the Masses ( 1920 ) . Another critic noted the novel 's plot shows " ... the inexorable clicking @-@ into @-@ place of a process of dialectic . It is Marxist reasoning , and imposes a vision of historical necessity upon its time " . 
 From the beginning of the novel , the narrator , and by extension McGregor , treats disorganized workers with scorn ; from the miners of Coal Creek , to the downtrodden laborers of Chicago who are shown mastered by their bosses ( unlike McGregor , who does not follow this trend ) . It is when McGregor comes back to Coal Creek to bury his mother and sees the usually jumbled miners marching in step as part of the funeral procession does he have an epiphany that together the workers are a powerful force , to be organized specifically by him . Indeed , this realization is foreshadowed in Chapter 3 of Book I when as a young man he sees a troupe of marching soldiers disperse a rowdy mob of miner 's ( and , as a consequence , save his family 's bakery ) during a strike . 
 Towards the end of the novel , the heretofore nascent power of the marching workers organized by McGregor is affirmed when the city 's oligarchs deem it necessary to act against it . Though opposed to the oligarchs and their brand of ruthless capitalism , McGregor also rejects socialism , opting instead to act within the system as an individual with a " ... moral acknowledgement of social responsibility " . 
 = = = Order versus disorder = = = 
 In line with the McGregor 's ideal of unified workers was a " quest " to make order from the chaos around him . Throughout Marching Men distinctions between order and disorder are put forward both as ruminations of the narrator and as elements of the plot . Examples of comparisons in the plot begin early on when miners in disarray are compared with organized soldiers . Later , an unbridled Chicago is contrasted with McGregor 's orderly routine . Finally , the frustrated mass of job @-@ seekers McGregor encounters upon his arrival to the city is seen against the neat groups of marching men that excite a young reporter in Book VI . Beyond plot points , phrases such as " In the heart of all men lies sleeping the love of order ... " and speaking of McGregor , " His body shook with the strength of his desire to end the vast disorder of life " , among others also work to set up the dichotomy of order and chaos . 
 Despite the repetition of this theme in the text , there is some discussion about its pervading influence . It is ironic , critic Clarence B. Lindsay posits , that while McGregor is busy organizing the marching men , he ( as opposed to the narrator ) all but ignores the chaos in the city he is constantly traversing . On a larger scale , it is difficult to know whether Sherwood Anderson takes seriously the nostalgic notion of Civil War soldiers marching together as an inspiration for the McGregor 's " aesthetic of power " or whether the exaggerated traits of McGregor are , in fact , ironic representations of the benefits of order . This view is furthered by Mark <unk> who likened Anderson 's " imposition of order by masculine force " to the " masculine misogyny " of the Italian Futurists many of whom , unlike Anderson ( who did not actually see combat during his military service ) , moved away from their glorification of violence after experiencing World War I. 
 = = = The exceptional man = = = 
 From the book 's opening chapter , the narrator of Marching Men portrayed McGregor as separate from those around him . Over the course of the novel McGregor is compared several times to " certain men , all soldiers or leaders of soldiers ... " that he reads about such as Nero and Napoleon . In fact , Anderson elevates his protagonist to the level of the " <unk> Great Man or Nietzschean Supermen ... " making him the dream @-@ object of women and envy of men from Coal Creek to Chicago . His size and strength , which is noted even during his teenage years is later joined by brains when he completes night school and becomes a lawyer . 
 To some critics McGregor 's exceptionalism helps Marching Men read as a proletarian novel , while others see in it an antecedent to the grotesqueness of the characters in Anderson 's 1919 short story cycle , Winesburg , Ohio . To biographer John Earl Bassett , McGregor represents , in part , the author 's disdain and fear for parts of modern American life , " ... that America will breed Beaut <unk> — talented , charismatic , romantic , cruel — who will use their powers to achieve frightening goals " . Combining the ideas of an exceptional leader and unified workers has raised questions among critics concerning the parallels between the " militaristic impulse " in Marching Men and the fascism of the WWII @-@ era , a charge Anderson acknowledged in his posthumously @-@ published Memoirs . 
 = = Literary significance and criticism = = 
 Upon publication , reviews of Marching Men were moderate with a small number of reviewers taking strong negative stances . In one such review , an anonymous critic from the New York Times Book Review noted that the beginning of the novel was " sufficiently well done to lead the reader to expect a novel of possibly a trifle more than average interest and average merit " but ultimately concludes that neither McGregor , " nor the book ever seems to get anywhere in particular " . Other reviewers too did not hesitate to mention the novel 's stunted character development and anti @-@ climactic ending . Aside from these faults , several critics also commented on Marching Men 's " deliberate vagueness " , calling the book a " generous if misty vision of the future " . 
 Despite the book 's deficiencies , reviewers were practically unanimous in praising the realistic description and mood of Anderson 's settings from Coal Creek to Chicago . Within these settings , McGregor 's scheme was acknowledged by the even @-@ tempered New York Tribune reviewer as a " clever and original idea " . Others , like editor Francis Hackett wrote " Where Marching Men succeeds is in thrusting the greater American realities before us ... " to which critic George Bernard Donlin , in his Dial review , adds " Mr. Anderson 's book interested me chiefly as the expression of a vigorous and sincere mind ... " . 
 Written almost a decade before Sherwood Anderson established himself as a writer with the release of his 1919 short story cycle , Winesburg , Ohio , Marching Men is generally considered , along with Windy McPherson 's Sons and two other unpublished novels , as one of Anderson 's " apprentice novels " . Viewed in hindsight , the shiftless plot and weak ending of Marching Men can be seen as a precursor to similar criticism in Anderson 's later novels . 
 = = Publication history = = 
 Marching Men was the second book of Anderson 's three @-@ book contract with the publisher John Lane ( the first being Windy McPherson 's Son ( 1916 ) and the third being Mid @-@ American Chants , published in 1918 ) . A first edition of 2 @,@ 500 copies was printed , but poor sales ( around 1 @,@ 000 copies ) kept the novel from being reprinted until B.W. <unk> picked it up in 1921 following Anderson 's success with Winesburg , Ohio , novel Poor White , and short story collection The Triumph of an Egg . In 1972 , the Press of Case Western Reserve University put out a critical edition of Marching Men with an introduction by noted Sherwood Anderson scholar Ray Lewis White which used as its basis Anderson 's early manuscripts in addition to the John Lane / B.W. <unk> version . A Russian edition of Marching Men was published as V <unk> ! ( loosely translated , " In Step " ) ( Leningrad : <unk> , 1927 ) . 
 = Farhan Akhtar = 
 Farhan Akhtar ( born 9 January 1974 ) is an Indian film director , screenwriter , producer , actor , playback singer , lyricist and television host . Born in Mumbai to screenwriters Javed Akhtar and Honey Irani , he grew up under the influence of the Hindi film industry . He began his career in Bollywood by working as an assistant director in Lamhe ( 1991 ) and Himalay Putra ( 1997 ) . 
 Akhtar , after establishing a production company named Excel Entertainment along with Ritesh Sidhwani , made his directorial debut with Dil Chahta Hai ( 2001 ) and received critical acclaim for portraying modern youth . The film also won a National award . Following it , he made Lakshya ( 2004 ) and had his Hollywood debut through the soundtrack of Bride and Prejudice ( 2004 ) , for which he wrote the lyrics . He went on to make the commercially successful Don ( 2006 ) . He directed a short @-@ film titled Positive ( 2007 ) to spread awareness on HIV @-@ AIDS . 
 He started his acting career with Rock On ! ! ( 2008 ) , for which he won a second National Award for Best Feature Film in Hindi as producer , and indulged in further experimentation before he acted in , produced and wrote the dialogues for the critical and commercial success Zindagi Na Milegi Dobara ( 2011 ) , which won him two Filmfare Awards , including Best Supporting Actor . In the same year , he directed a sequel to Don titled Don 2 ( 2011 ) , which remains as his highest @-@ grossing film till date . He achieved further success by portraying Milkha Singh in the 2013 film Bhaag Milkha Bhaag , earning him the Filmfare Award for Best Actor . In 2016 , Akhtar received praise for starring in the crime thriller Wazir and the comedy drama Dil Dhadakne Do . 
 = = Early life and background = = 
 Farhan Akhtar was born to screenwriters Javed Akhtar and Honey Irani in Mumbai . His sister is writer – director Zoya Akhtar . His parents divorced during his early days , and his father married Shabana Azmi in 1984 . Akhtar has termed his parents as the " harshest " critics in his career , and also considered Robert De Niro as an " inspiration " in the film industry . 
 His great grand father , <unk> @-@ e @-@ Haq Khairabadi , a scholar of Islamic studies and theology , notably edited the first diwan of Mirza Ghalib on his request , and later became an important figure during the Indian Rebellion of 1857 in his native <unk> . He is great @-@ grandson of renowned Urdu poet <unk> Khairabadi and grandson of Jan Nisar Akhtar . He is also the cousin of Farah Khan and Sajid Khan . He did his schooling in Maneckji Cooper school in Mumbai and went on to study a law degree in the HR College , also in Mumbai , during which he was dismissed from the institution in his second year due to lack of attendance . His next few years were spent mostly just watching movies . 
 = = Career = = 
 Akhtar worked as an apprentice in cinematography and direction for Yash Chopra 's Lamhe ( 1991 ) when he was 17 years old and later shifted to an advertisement production house named ' Script Shop ' to spend an approximate 3 years there . He also assisted Pankaj Parashar as a director in Himalay Putra ( 1997 ) before launching himself into direction and writing . 
 = = = Directing , writing and producing = = = 
 Akhtar made his writing and directorial debut with the critically acclaimed film Dil Chahta Hai ( 2001 ) , produced by Excel Entertainment Pvt. Ltd . , a production company he established along with Ritesh Sidhwani in 1999 . It was shot over a period of three months in Sydney , Goa and Mumbai . Due to its acclaim , he called it a " turning point " in his career . The film dealt with the lives of westernised urban youth in Mumbai . Akhtar had written the script based on his trips to Goa and New York , as well as a narration of a story outline by a friend of his . After its release , the film failed to do well at the box office by taking up a ' below average ' opening and proceeded to become an ' average ' grosser . However , it received international critical acclaim and attained an iconic status , with Akhtar receiving credit for starting a " new wave " in Indian cinema . Critic Ziya Us Salam praised Akhtar 's direction and commented for The Hindu : " In his maiden venture , Javed Akhtar 's son shows enough glimpses of his pedigree to indicate that promise will attain fulfilment sooner than later . " Various award shows conferred accolades on the film and nominated it for several categories . The year 's National Film Award for Best Feature Film in Hindi for 2002 was won by the film . It was also screened at the International Film Festival of India , the Palm Springs International Film Festival , and the Austin Film Festival . In the same year , he and his sister Zoya Akhtar assisted their father in writing the English lyrics of a song in Lagaan , for which the soundtrack was scored by A. R. Rahman . 
 Akhtar 's next project was Lakshya ( 2004 ) , a film about an aimless youngster finally setting a goal for himself , starring Hrithik Roshan and Preity Zinta . It was shot in Ladakh , Dehra Dun and Mumbai , and marked the beginning of the collaborations between Akhtar and Hrithik . He had to research the army before writing the script and directing the venture . The theme of the film , as stated by Akhtar , was about " finding oneself " . He also believed that if the same characters and situation were set elsewhere , the main core of the story would remain the same as the film was not about war , as it had been reported . Post @-@ release , the film failed to make a mark at the box office and became a commercial failure . <unk> Gupta of The Times of India gave it a negative review and explained that " It 's hard to reconcile to such triviality when it comes from Farhan Akhtar , considered the ultimate symbol of cool in Hindi <unk> . " On the contrary , Manish Gajjar from BBC wrote , in his positive review , " Young Farhan Akhtar , proves yet again that he is one of the finest directors Bollywood has to date . He has paid full attention to the script and the technical aspects , giving rise to a polished product " . 
 Meanwhile , Akhtar wrote the English lyrics of Gurinder Chadha 's Hollywood film , Bride and Prejudice ( 2004 ) along with his sister , Zoya Akhtar after being recommended by his father . The music for the film was composed by Anu Malik and consisted of a mixture of Hindi songs , West side story , Fiddler on the Roof and Grease . 
 In 2006 , Akhtar directed , produced and wrote the screenplay of Don starring Shah Rukh Khan in the title role , a remake of the 1978 film Don , starring Amitabh Bachchan . It marked his first project holding the status of a remake . The character of Don became iconic and popular . Despite so , he noted that he did not mean to be a " torchbearer of the remake brigade " and did not feel comfortable with being credited for the trend of remakes in the film industry . The film released on 20 October 2006 and was declared as a " hit " at the box office , grossing around ₹ 105 crore worldwide . It became widely known for its dialogues . However , critics predominantly condemned Akhtar 's direction and screenplay . Taran Adarsh of Bollywood Hungama said Akhtar had " climbed the ladder as far as craftsmanship is concerned [ every frame is well decorated and makes a spellbinding impact ] but despite a <unk> classic at his disposal , the storyteller just doesn 't get it right this time . " 
 In 2007 , Akhtar produced the film Honeymoon Travels Pvt. Ltd . , directed by debutant Reema Kagti and starring Abhay Deol , <unk> Lamba , Shabana Azmi and Boman Irani . The music for the film was composed by Vishal @-@ Shekhar , marking their first collaboration with him . Akhtar was supposed to make his acting debut with the project , but he had to be replaced by Abhay Deol as he was involved with Don . The film was financed and funded by <unk> Bank . This was the first time Excel Entertainment collaborated with a different director as all their previous projects had been involving Farhan as a director . The story of the film revolved around six couples who went to Goa on a honeymoon . The film opened up on 23 February and received mixed reviews from critics , and ended up with an ' average ' box office result . 
 In the same year , Akhtar directed Positive , a film produced by Shernaz Italia and Frenzy <unk> , starring Boman Irani and Shabana Azmi . It was a short @-@ film running for 12 minutes . Dealing with a family 's attitude towards a person suffering from HIV @-@ AIDS , the film was shot in Mumbai and aimed at creating awareness about the problem . It also introduced Arjun Mathur in the film industry . Speaking about the purpose of the project , Akhtar stated that " Just as a social stigma , many people believe that an HIV patient should be isolated . They also have certain misconceptions about dealing with the disease . And since India has a lot of joint families ; it becomes very important for them to understand the value of support to the person who has acquired this disease . This is exactly what Positive talks about . " The film had its background score composed by Ram Sampath but no soundtrack . It was a part of the ' AIDS <unk> ' ( ' AIDS Awake ' ) , a series of four short films , directed by Mira Nair , Santosh Sivan , Vishal Bhardwaj and himself , in a joint initiative of Mira Nair 's <unk> Films , voluntary organisations <unk> and the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation . 
 Akhtar 's first project in 2011 was the drama thriller Game , directed by <unk> Deo . The lead cast consisted of Abhishek Bachchan , Kangana Ranaut , Boman Irani and Jimmy Shergill . He wrote the dialogues and produced the venture . The film received highly negative reviews after release , with critics panning almost all the aspects of it . At the box office , it had a poor opening , and later resulted in giving losses for the distributors , due to a heavily negative word @-@ of @-@ mouth . It was described as a " washout " by trade analysts . 
 Later that year , Akhtar wrote , produced and directed Don 2 , a sequel to his 2006 Don . It marked his return to direction after a gap of nearly 5 years . His decision of making a sequel was explained by him in an interview , " I am wary of sequels having to be made . With Don 2 I could finally make an action thriller the way I wanted to . Good story , classic action and simple plot which has one goal and work towards it effectively and dramatically . " The film was a major success in India and went on to become the year 's highest @-@ grossing Bollywood production abroad with a worldwide gross of ₹ 210 crore . However , it received mixed reviews from critics , with Khalid Mohammed stating , " Throughout , you can ’ t help feeling that Farhan Akhtar could have made three far more valuable films out of the budget squandered on this thriller where cars are smashed as if they were tea cups . " 
 Next year , Akhtar produced and wrote the dialogues of the neo @-@ noir thriller Talaash : The Answer Lies Within . His production work was followed by the comedy films : <unk> ( 2013 ) and <unk> ( 2015 ) . 
 = = = Acting and singing = = = 
 In 2008 , Akhtar made his acting and singing debut in a musical film titled Rock On ! ! , for which he wrote the dialogues and also produced . The film was directed by Abhishek Kapoor . Prachi Desai , Arjun Rampal and <unk> Kohli co @-@ starred along with him . As he had been learning guitar ever since the start of his directing career , he had been well @-@ versed with it and used it for the film . The role played by him was that of Aditya , lead singer of the rock band " Magik " . He sang five songs from the soundtrack album . The film was acclaimed by critics and received positive reviews upon release . Gaurav Malani of The Economic Times wrote that the film seemed to be " clearly designed by Farhan <unk> as his own acting debut and he doesn 't let himself down . Lending voice to all his songs helps him to get into his character with effortless ease . One could certainly overlook the lisp in his dialogue delivery . " Manish Gajjar of BBC wrote of his performance : " Director @-@ turned @-@ actor , Farhan <unk> surprises all with his superb , flawless performance , transforming from a hippy @-@ style lead @-@ singer to a subdued , dismal workaholic banker . " Akhtar received several accolades for his debut performance . The film , in addition won the National Award for Best Feature Film in Hindi . However , it did not create an impact at the box office and turned out to be an ' average ' grosser . For his role in Rock On ! ! Salim Khan , Salman Khan 's father gave him a <unk> trophy won by himself as a praise for his performance . 
 After refusing an offer to sing a song for A. R. Rahman 's album Blue , Akhtar acted in , and produced his sister Zoya 's directorial and written debut , Luck By Chance which had Hrithik Roshan and Konkona Sen Sharma in the lead roles . He was cast in the film after being deemed as a " perfect choice " for it . The story of the film revolved around a struggling actor who arrives in Mumbai to become a film star . It was released on 30 January 2009 . Though failing to do well at the box office and being declared as a " flop " , the film received generally positive reviews from critics . Neil Genzlinger from The New York Times said : " It is Mr. Akhtar whose understated performance holds together this far @-@ ranging , cameo @-@ filled film . He manages to remain sympathetic even while wreaking romantic havoc . " Rajeev Masand noted : " Farhan Akhtar delivers a simple @-@ enough likeable performance that is just what the film required — no showy flourishes , no loud outbursts , just a straight off spontaneous act that works like a dream . " 
 Following Luck By Chance , Akhtar acted in a project titled The Fakir of Venice , which was initially scheduled to release before Rock on ! ! and was supposed to be his acting debut . Due to several delays , it was released in mid @-@ 2009 . It was written and directed by Anand <unk> , and accepted by Akhtar after he described its script as " very powerful " , while emphasising that it " touches upon weaknesses and confusions in all human beings . " Before release , it premiered at the Indian Film Festival of Los Angeles , and the Venice Film Festival at the ArcLight Hollywood . Kirk Honeycutt of The Hollywood Reporter praised the film and felt that " Akhtar , a producer , director and writer making his film debut here as an actor , is talented and handsome enough – and with looks that could translate into any number of ethnicities – to have a huge career ahead of him . " 
 Akhtar acted in , and produced his next film , Karthik Calling Karthik ( 2010 ) , a psychological thriller directed by Vijay Lalwani . He played Karthik , an introvert character , starring alongside Deepika Padukone for the first time . Preparation for the role involved working on the Rubik 's Cube , which he learnt from the director . The film received mixed reviews and praise for Akhtar 's acting from critics , with Sukanya Verma highlighting that " He conveys the anxiety , simplicity and frailty of Karthik even when the script isn 't doing it for him . Perhaps it 's his innate filmmaker instinct . " The film had a good opening at the box office , as it was targeted towards the youth of the multiplexes . However , it failed to continue on its business and went on to become a ' below average ' grosser . 
 Akhtar produced and appeared as one of the three leads in his sister , Zoya Akhtar 's coming @-@ of @-@ the @-@ age film Zindagi Na Milegi Dobara along with Hrithik Roshan and Abhay Deol , Katrina Kaif and Kalki Koechlin , starring opposite Ariadna Cabrol . He was also credited as the dialogue writer for the film . He was the first actor to be cast in the film , and described his role as a " fun character " and a " guy who for the longest time takes nothing seriously . " His real life father , Javed Akhtar wrote poetry for the film , which he performs as a voice @-@ over . His performance was favourably received by critics , with Shaikh Ayaz of Rediff.com highlighting his dialogues as " gentle , they won 't make you <unk> ; they are more like tender dig in the ribs . " Kaveree Bamzai of India Today called his acting as " sensitive , soulful " , further saying that he was " perfectly capable of reading out his father 's poetry . " The film made ₹ 153 crore worldwide and was declared as a commercial success at the box office . It also became one of the highest grossing Bollywood films overseas , earning around US $ 7 @.@ 25 million . It won two National Awards , for the Best Choreography and Best Audiography . 
 Following Don 2 , Akhtar was signed up for the biopic Bhaag Milkha Bhaag , directed by Rakeysh Omprakash Mehra . He plays the role of Milkha Singh . For his role , he had to undergo a training phase at the gym and study the character of Milkha Singh by researching his body language . He also had to prepare his looks to depict a 17 @-@ year @-@ old army recruit and endure an on @-@ the @-@ spot preparation at an army cantonment . In 2014 , Akhtar acted for the romantic comedy Shaadi Ke Side Effects alongside Vidya Balan , a film directed by Saket Chaudhary and produced by Pritish Nandy . It was a sequel to Pyaar Ke Side Effects ( 2006 ) . 
 Next year , Akhtar featured in the supporting role in his sister Zoya Akhtar 's Dil Dhadakne Do , an ensemble comedy @-@ drama starring Anil Kapoor , Shefali Shah , Priyanka Chopra , Ranveer Singh and Anushka Sharma . 
 In 2016 , Akhtar played the lead role of an Anti Terrorist Squad officer in Bejoy Nambiar 's Wazir . It was his first action role as an actor , and for which he went through intense physical training and put on eight kilograms of weight . Raja Sen in his review called him " pretty good [ .. ] early on in the film , but his performance starts to unravel once the film hits hysterical gear and he is required to do more than frown . " Akhtar also sang the duet " <unk> <unk> " with Amitabh Bachchan for Wazir . The film was a box @-@ office success . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 = = = Relationships & Marriage = = = 
 He married <unk> <unk> in 2000 , after being in a relationship with her for 3 years . They first met during the filming of his directorial debut Dil Chahta Hai in 2001 which also marked <unk> 's debut as a Bollywood hairstylist . The couple have two daughters named Shakya and Akira . On January 21 , 2016 the couple officially announced their separation after 16 years of marriage . 
 = = = Non @-@ film work = = = 
 Akhtar appeared as one of the nine judges in the beauty pageant , Femina Miss India ( 2002 ) . He was the judge on the first season of the dance @-@ reality show , Nach Baliye ( 2005 ) . He hosted a TV show on NDTV Imagine , called Oye ! It 's Friday ! in the same year . He has endorsed several brands as a part of his career , especially after the release of Zindagi Na Milegi Dobara . These include Hindustan Unilever 's water purifier product titled <unk> , Vijay Mallya 's alcohol firm United Spirits , and watchmaker Titan Industries . His endorsements are managed by Atul Kasbekar . 
 = = = Men Against Rape and Discrimination = = = 
 Men Against Rape and Discrimination or <unk> is a social campaign launched by Akhtar . The idea came to the mind of Akhtar when in August 2012 , Pallavi <unk> , a lawyer by profession , was sexually assaulted and then killed by her home watchman . 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = = = Director , actor and producer = = = 
 = = = Playback singer = = = 
 = = Awards = = 
 = A1 in London = 
 The A1 in London is the southern part of the A1 road . It starts at Aldersgate in the City of London , passing through the capital to Borehamwood on the northern fringe of Greater London , before continuing to Edinburgh . The road travels through the City and three London boroughs : Islington , Haringey and Barnet , which include the districts of Islington , Holloway , Highgate , Hendon and Mill Hill , and travels along Upper Street and Holloway Road , crossing the North Circular Road in Hendon , a district in the London Borough of Barnet . 
 The A1 is the most recent in a series of routes north out of London to York and beyond . It was designated in 1921 by the Ministry of Transport under the Great Britain road numbering scheme , comprising existing roads and streets , mostly historic , and later using stretches of purpose @-@ built new roads in what is now the outer London borough of Barnet . The Archway Road section was built by Thomas Telford using Roman cement and gravel , an innovative technique that was used there for the first time , and is the basis for modern road building . The route closely follows the historic route of the Great North Road , though from 1954 it has diverted round the congested suburbs of Finchley and High Barnet along modern roads constructed in the 1920s and 1930s . 
 The A1 is one of London 's main roads , providing a link to the M1 and the A1 ( M ) motorways , and on to the Midlands , Northern England and Scotland . Despite this , its main use is to connect a number of neighbourhoods within north London ; less than 5 % of its vehicles are through traffic – the bulk is local . The roads along which the A1 route travels are the shared responsibility of the local boroughs , the Greater London Authority , and the British Government via the Department for Transport . 
 = = History = = 
 The A1 is the latest in a series of routes north from London to York and beyond , and was formed in 1921 by the Ministry of Transport as part of the Great Britain road numbering scheme . The earliest documented northern routes out of London are the roads created by the Romans during the period 43 to 410 AD , which consisted of a variety of " <unk> " on the Antonine Itinerary , a combination of which were used by the Anglo @-@ Saxons as the route from London to York , and which became known as Ermine Street . Ermine Street later became known as the Old North Road , and is used within London by the current A10 . By the 12th century , because of flooding and damage by traffic on Ermine Street , an alternative route out of London was found through Islington and Muswell Hill , and this was the origin of the Great North Road that would become the A1 . Until the 14th century the route went up what is now Hornsey Road – the <unk> road , but when that became impassable a new route along Holloway Road via Highgate was created in the 14th century . The section through Highgate was bypassed in the early 19th century by the creation of a new road , Archway Road , and around the same time a turnpike road , New North Road and Canonbury Road ( the <unk> road ) , was constructed linking the start of the Old North Road around Shoreditch with the Great North Road at Highbury Corner . 
 The route of the A1 in London originally started at Aldersgate Bars , which marked the boundary of the City of London , and followed the Great North Road mail coach route through Barnet ; the route was re @-@ designated in 1954 to follow the East Finchley and Barnet by @-@ passes built in the 1920s and 1930s , so within London the coaching route is now mainly only followed when passing through the borough of Islington . During the early 1970s plans to widen the A1 along the Archway Road section were abandoned after considerable opposition and four public inquiries during which road protesters disrupted proceedings . The scheme was finally dropped in 1990 . 
 = = Governance = = 
 The roads along which the A1 route travels are the shared responsibility of the local boroughs , the Greater London Authority ( GLA ) , and the British Government . The first organised London @-@ wide authority dealing with roads in London was the Metropolitan Board of Works ( MBW ) , set up in 1856 . The MBW replaced the disparate turnpike trusts which had already been amalgamated in 1826 into the single control of Government Commissioners , and was itself replaced by the London County Council ( LCC ) in 1889 . The LCC became the Greater London Council ( GLC ) in 1965 , and during the 1960s when traffic management in London was being modernised , and the London Ringways was proposed , the GLC , which was not in favour of increasing traffic into central London , had control of the inner London roads , while the government , through the Ministry of Transport , which was in favour of widening roads , had control of outer London . These different approaches resulted in the Ministry of Transport widening a stretch of the A1 until it reached the control of the GLC , when the widening abruptly stopped . Due to the problems associated with two different and opposing bodies having responsibility for London 's roads , the government were keen to take control of the major routes , and made plans in 1983 for the Department of Transport to take over 70 miles of road , including significant parts of the A1 ; when the GLC was abolished in 1986 , the Department of Transport took over direct control of the 70 miles of major routes , plus had a significant influence on another 300 . In 2000 control of roads in London passed to Transport for London , a department of GLA created in 2000 as part of the Greater London Authority Act 1999 , and the major roads , including the A1 , were declassified as trunk roads . 
 = = Route = = 
 The route of the A1 in London runs from the northern end of St. Martin 's Le Grand in the City to Borehamwood in Hertfordshire , then travels on the northern fringe of Greater London to Bignell 's Corner , where it crosses the M25 and becomes a motorway , designated A1 ( M ) , which alternates with the dual carriageway A1 as it continues to Edinburgh . The London section of the road passes through part of the City of London and three London boroughs : Islington , Haringey and Barnet . The A1 is one of London 's main northern routes , providing a link to the M1 motorway and the A1 ( M ) motorway , and on to the Midlands , Northern England and Scotland . It connects a number of major areas within London , and sections of it serve as the High Street for many of the now @-@ joined villages that make up north London . Even though it is one of London 's major roads , less than 5 % of its approximate 60 @,@ 000 vehicles a day are through traffic – the bulk is local . 
 The current start of the A1 is the modern roundabout at the northern end of St. Martin 's Le Grand where it meets Aldersgate Street , near the site of the now demolished General Post Office , London , the headquarters of the Post Office from 1829 to 1910 . When originally designated in 1921 the A1 started a little further north along Aldersgate Street at Aldersgate Bars , which marked the boundary of the City , though some later maps indicate it starting at the southern end of St. Martin 's Le Grand , near St Paul 's Cathedral . The route runs north from Aldersgate along Aldersgate Street which is a modern dual carriageway , and from the 13th century was known as a wide street with fine buildings and travellers ' inns ; these were destroyed or badly damaged during the Blitz , and from 1965 to 1976 the 40 acre ( <unk> ² ) Barbican Estate , an arts complex and residential estate , was constructed along the entire eastern side of the street . At the end of Aldersgate Street stood Aldersgate Bars , which marked the limits of the City of London . 
 = = = Islington = = = 
 The route enters the London Borough of Islington at Goswell Road becoming a single carriageway running north from the border of the City to Angel through a mix of offices and urban housing . Goswell Road and St John Street were the ancient routes from the City to Islington , with St John Street being the start of the Great North Road until the General Post Office headquarters was built at St Martin 's @-@ le @-@ Grand in 1829 , whereafter stagecoaches used Aldersgate Street and Goswell Road . The New River originally flowed down the centre of Goswell Road , but is now underground and no trace of it can be seen at the surface . The street was reported in 1720 to be " meanly built and inhabited " , containing numerous inns and brothels , and it largely remained a slum area until the rebuilding that took place after the Second World War , and in particular the residential development that spread out from the Barbican since 1980 . 
 At the northern end of Goswell Road , the route northwards follows a one @-@ way section to the Angel , turning right into Islington High Street . The southwards route from Islington High Street follows City Road for a short distance before joining Goswell Road via <unk> Street . The earliest reference to Islington High Street is its appearance on a 1590 map of the area . At this time , nine inns ( including the Angel , which subsequently gave its name to the area ) , as well as housing and a public pond were shown lining the street . The Peacock Inn , one of the nine inns , and which operated on Islington High Street from 1564 to 1962 , was where Tom of Tom Brown 's Schooldays stayed prior to travelling to Rugby School . In 1716 Islington High Street came under the control of the newly formed Islington Turnpike Trust . The Trust grew rapidly and soon had control of most major roads in the area , building a number of major road arteries through the expanding residential areas , including Caledonian Road , Euston Road , City Road and New North Road . 
 Upper Street , running roughly north from Islington High Street to Highbury Corner , is the main shopping street of Islington , and dates back to at least the 12th century . Livestock herded along the Great North Road for Smithfield Market , would – when passing through what was mainly fields and farmland – pause at lairs built between Upper Street and Liverpool Road by an enterprising farmer , Richard Laycock ; Laycock 's lairs would be used in 1861 for the site of the Royal Agricultural Hall , and a number of pubs and shops existed along the street to serve farmers and travellers headed for Smithfield . In the 18th century , Upper Street began to develop from an agricultural to a residential area . Ten houses were built in 1768 ( later named Hornsey Row ) , and a further group built immediately south of Hornsey Row in 1792 . Liverpool Road , originally called Back Road , was used as an alternative to Upper Street for the Smithfield herders , and both streets have a " high pavement " constructed to protect pedestrians from being splashed by the passing animals ; in places , the pavement is approximately 1 m above the road surface . 
 After reaching the eight @-@ way interchange at Highbury Corner , the A1 turns north @-@ west as Holloway Road . Until the 14th century the route turned off along what is now Hornsey Road – the <unk> road – to go through Muswell Hill , but when that became impassable a new route along Holloway Road via Highgate was created in the 14th century . The earliest record giving the name of the road as the Holloway dates from 1307 . The main stretch of Holloway Road runs through the site of the villages of Tollington and Stroud . The exact time of their founding is not known , but the earliest record of them dates from 1000 . The names ceased to be used by the late 17th century but are still preserved in the local place names " Tollington Park " and " Stroud Green " ; since that time , the area has been known as Holloway . The northern point of Holloway Road is the complex interchange at Archway . The construction of the interchange left a few buildings isolated in the centre of the roundabout , including the Archway Tavern , which appears on the cover of The Kinks ' 1971 album Muswell Hillbillies . 
 = = = Haringey = = = 
 After the Archway roundabout , the A1 enters a cutting , and becomes Archway Road . The original road north went up the very steep Highgate Hill ( now the <unk> ) to the village of Highgate . By the early 19th century , this was proving unsuitable for increasingly heavy traffic , and a road , crossing the hill through a tunnel at a shallower gradient , was proposed by a mining engineer , Robert <unk> , in 1808 ; a turnpike trust – the Highgate Archway Company – was set up and work started in 1810 . The brick built tunnel collapsed during construction on 13 April 1812 , and John Nash constructed a brick bridge , using a series of arches like a canal viaduct , to carry Hornsey Lane over what was now a cutting . Nash 's Archway Bridge , a little way south of the current bridge , and the new Archway Road were opened in 1813 , though the road surface , being constructed of sand and gravel , proved difficult for heavy traffic . Parliamentary Commissioners took over the road , and John Benjamin <unk> , chief engineer to Thomas Telford , proposed using Roman cement and gravel , an innovative technique that was used for the first time on Archway Road , and is the basis for modern road building . The construction was financed by tolls which were abolished in 1876 – traffic increased substantially thereafter , particularly after the introduction of trams on the road . 
 Between 1897 and 1900 , Nash 's bridge was replaced with the present cast @-@ iron Hornsey Lane Bridge , designed by Sir Alexander Binnie , accessible from the Archway Road level by a steep flight of steps . Hornsey Lane Bridge is informally called " Suicide Bridge " as it is a known suicide spot . It was the venue for the mental illness campaign group Mad Pride 's inaugural vigil in 2000 , and was the subject of Johnny Burke 's 2006 film The Bridge . When , at the end of 2010 , three men in three weeks committed suicide by jumping from the bridge , a campaign was set up by local residents for better anti @-@ suicide measures to be put in place . Hornsey Lane and the bridge marks the boundary between the Inner London Borough of Islington and the Outer London Borough of Haringey . 
 An inquiry was held into widening the section from the Archway intersection to the Hornsey Lane Bridge to a three lane dual carriageway in 1969 and work started in 1971 . It was originally intended to widen a further section of the road , but severe disruption led to the first inquiry being abandoned in 1978 , and a second inquiry in 1984 , chaired by Air Marshal Sir Michael Giddings , was also abandoned . The traffic flow was projected to increase to 180 @,@ 000 cars a day by 1981 , but by 1986 the actual flow was only 30 @,@ 000 a day . 
 When originally constructed , Archway Road went through countryside with few buildings - though by 1828 the Woodman pub at the junction with Muswell Hill Road , and the now demolished Wellington pub at the junction with North Hill provided refreshments to travellers ; however , with the coming of the railways in 1867 ribbon development started along the road , including the <unk> Heritage listed Winchester Tavern with the distinctive attached parade of shops and house with deep arched eaves built by the Imperial Property Investment Co in 1881 . At the northern end of Archway Road , the road re @-@ intersects with the traditional Great North Road route ( at this point called North Hill ) . The roads almost immediately re @-@ diverge , with the Great North Road route heading north as the A1000 towards Finchley , Whetstone and Barnet and the A1 heading west as Aylmer Road . 
 Aylmer Road is a very short stretch of road , running west for less than half a mile between the junction with the A1000 in Haringey to the junction with The Bishops Avenue in Barnet . The entire southern side of the road is taken up by Highgate Golf Course , while the northern side is a mixture of small shops , flats and allotments . The road is named for General Sir Fenton John Aylmer , VC KCB , who received the Victoria Cross for his part in the assault on <unk> Fort on 2 December 1891 . 
 = = = Barnet = = = 
 After crossing The Bishops Avenue , the A1 becomes Lyttelton Road , which was laid out in 1931 as part of the residential development of the area , and runs east – west along the northern foot of Highgate Hill between Hampstead Garden Suburb and East Finchley . It is for the most part residential ; on the northern side stands the Belvedere Court block of flats . Built with the road in the 1930s , the building is now Grade II Listed as an example of 1930s architecture . After passing playing fields to the south , the A1 briefly becomes Market Place , a former street market that has evolved into a short stretch of shops , then becomes <unk> Way – built between 1914 and 1924 as part of a programme of planned extensions to Hampstead Garden Suburb , and runs on an embankment due to a dip in the ground caused by Mutton Brook , a tributary of the River Brent , which runs parallel to the road immediately to the south for its entire length . The north side of the road is occupied by 1930s housing blocks , whilst the southern side is occupied by a narrow strip of parkland following the brook , and by the northern tip of Big Wood and Little Wood – two of the few surviving remnants of the ancient woodland that once covered what is now north London . 
 The A1 merges with the North Circular Road ( A406 ) and the two routes run briefly together , crossing over the Henlys Corner interchange . Henlys Corner is a junction with the 1820s turnpike road , Finchley Road , which was built to provide a by @-@ pass to the route north from London through Hampstead ; the name changes to Regents Park Road on the northern , Finchley , side of the junction . The junction had an £ 8 million upgrade completed in January 2012 , which included Britain 's first " hands @-@ free " pedestrian crossing to allow Orthodox Jews to reach the nearby Finchley Synagogue , one of Europe 's largest , without operating machinery on the Sabbath . While a synagogue has stood on the site since 1935 , the current building dates from 1967 . 
 After the Henlys Corner interchange , the routes diverge , with the A406 going south to Brent Cross , while the A1 turns north @-@ west as Great North Way through the leafy suburbs of Mill Hill and Hendon . Great North Way , built in 1926 , joins Watford Way carrying the A41 , completed in 1927 , at <unk> Corner , and in 1970 a junction with the M1 motorway was created . The A41 and A1 continue together as Watford Way via Mill Hill Circus to Apex Corner , where they separate , with the A41 turning west , and the A1 turning to run straight north . After passing Apex Corner , the A1 runs north and out of London as the dual carriageway Barnet Way / Barnet Bypass . This dual carriageway was part of a 1920 – 4 road improvement programme that was mentioned in parliament in 1928 as hopefully being completed by the end of that summer . The northbound carriageway passes the entrance to <unk> , an area of ancient forest which is now a local nature reserve , then crosses the <unk> from Watford to Barnet at the Stirling Corner roundabout . A 0 @.@ 6 miles ( 0 @.@ 97 km ) proposed link road at this roundabout , estimated at £ <unk> in 1987 , would have provided access to the M1 , but the plans were subsequently abandoned . The link had been planned during discussions for the Hendon Urban Motorway , which was intended to carry the M1 all the way down to Hyde Park Corner as part of the London Ringways scheme ; the interchange would have been junction 3 on the motorway ; which is currently the unnumbered junction for London Gateway services . 
 Past Stirling Corner , the A1 skirts Borehamwood , before turning northeast and running through open countryside to Bignell 's Corner . At Bignell 's Corner the A1 crosses under the M25 motorway at a large roundabout near South Mimms services . North of Bignell 's Corner the A1 becomes the A1 ( M ) motorway for a while , and follows the Great North Road route , running north to Edinburgh . 
 = = Construction = = 
 The A1 route was designated in 1921 by the Ministry of Transport under the Great Britain road numbering scheme . Through the inner boroughs of the City , Islington , and Haringey it uses existing roads and streets ; when it reaches what is now the outer London borough of Barnet , some stretches of purpose @-@ built new roads were built , and others have been widened and made into dual carriageways . In 1828 , John Benjamin <unk> , chief engineer to Thomas Telford , used Roman cement and gravel to solve problems with wear and tear on the Archway Road section of what is now the A1 , an innovative technique that was used there for the first time , and is the basis for modern road building . 
 = P. K. van der Byl = 
 Pieter Kenyon Fleming @-@ Voltelyn van der Byl , ID ( 11 November 1923 – 15 November 1999 ) was a Rhodesian politician who served as his country 's Foreign Minister from 1974 to 1979 as a member of the Rhodesian Front ( RF ) . A close associate of Prime Minister Ian Smith , Van der Byl opposed attempts to compromise with the British government and domestic black nationalist opposition on the issue of majority rule throughout most his time in government . However , in the late 1970s he supported the moves which led to majority rule and internationally recognised independence for Zimbabwe . 
 After a high @-@ flying international education , Van der Byl moved to the self @-@ governing British colony of Southern Rhodesia in 1950 to manage family farms . He went into politics in the early 1960s through his involvement with farming trade bodies , and became a government minister responsible for propaganda . One of the leading agitators for Rhodesia 's Unilateral Declaration of Independence in 1965 , Van der Byl was afterwards responsible for introducing press censorship . He was unsuccessful in his attempt to persuade international opinion to recognise Rhodesia as a new nation , but was popular among the members of his own party . 
 Promoted to the cabinet in 1968 , Van der Byl became a spokesman for the Rhodesian government and crafted a public image as a die @-@ hard supporter of continued white minority rule . In 1974 he was made Minister of Foreign Affairs and Defence at a time when Rhodesia 's only remaining ally , South Africa , was supplying military aid . His extreme views and brusque manner made him a surprising choice for a diplomat ( a November 1976 profile in The Times described him as " a man calculated to give offence " ) . After offending the South African government , Van der Byl was removed from the Defence Ministry . 
 In the late 1970s Van der Byl was willing to endorse the Smith government 's negotiations with moderate black nationalist leaders and rejected attempts by international missions to broker an agreement . He served in the short @-@ lived government of Zimbabwe Rhodesia in 1979 , following the Internal Settlement . After the country 's reconstitution as Zimbabwe in 1980 , Van der Byl remained in politics and close to Ian Smith ; he loudly attacked former RF colleagues who had gone over to support Robert Mugabe . He retired to South Africa after the Mugabe government abolished the parliament seats reserved for whites in 1987 . 
 = = Family and early life = = 
 Van der Byl was born in Cape Town , and was the son of Major Pieter Voltelyn Graeme van der Byl , a member of Jan Smuts ' South African cabinet during World War II , and his wife Joy Fleming . Like his father , Van der Byl was educated at the Diocesan College in Rondebosch but his studies were interrupted by war in 1941 . He served with the South African Army during the Second World War and was briefly attached to the British 7th Queen 's Own Hussars ; he saw active service in the Middle East , Italy and Austria . 
 After being demobilised , Van der Byl studied law at Pembroke College , Cambridge where his aristocratic manner stood out . " P. K. " was always elegantly dressed and coiffured , and acquired the nickname " the Piccadilly Dutchman " . He obtained a Third @-@ class degree in his Part II Law examinations in 1947 , and went on from Cambridge to study at the Harvard University Graduate School of Business Administration from 1947 to 1948 ( although he did not obtain a degree at the latter ) . He also studied at the University of Witwatersrand in South Africa . 
 One of the most conspicuous features of Van der Byl was his manner of speech : although his ancestry was Cape Dutch and his early life was in Cape Town , South Africa , he had what were described ( by the pro @-@ Rhodesian Chris Whitehead ) as " what he thought was an aristocratic English nasal drawl and imperial English mannerisms " . Whitehead was of the opinion that Van der Byl had " adopted " this accent , in common with others who heard him like Denis Hills , who wrote of Van der Byl having " a flow of mannered phrases which he delivers in a flawed Guards officer accent " . 
 This personal characteristic was intensely irritating to many people including South African government ministers , but Van der Byl 's aristocratic mannerisms appeared uncontentious to many Rhodesian whites . They believed that his " nasal drawl " was the product of his time as an officer in the Hussars and his Cambridge education : William Higham described him as " a popular Minister of Defence who , despite his British upper crust accent – undoubtedly honed during his swashbuckling career as an officer in the hussars – hailed from a noble Cape family . " 
 = = = Move to Rhodesia = = = 
 Van der Byl moved to Southern Rhodesia in 1950 to manage some of his family 's tobacco farming interests , hoping to make his own fortune . He welcomed the move as it allowed him to indulge his hobby of big game hunting : in that year in Angola he set a world record for the biggest elephant shot which stood until 1955 . 
 In 1957 Van der Byl was made a Director of the United Dominions Corporation ( Rhodesia ) Ltd , having already become an active member of the Rhodesia Tobacco Association . In 1956 , he was elected by the members of the Selous – Gadzema district to represent them on the Tobacco Association council . He was also Deputy Chair of the Selous Farmers ' Association in 1957 . His first involvement in government was in 1960 when the Rhodesia Tobacco Association made him one of their representatives on the National Native Labour Commission , on which he served for two years . In 1961 , he also represented the Rhodesia Tobacco Association on the council of the Rhodesian National Farmers Union . He was recognised as a leading spokesman for Rhodesian tobacco farmers . 
 Dominion Party politician Winston Field had also led the Rhodesia Tobacco Association , and Van der Byl agreed with him on politics in general . He joined the Rhodesian Front when it was set up under Field 's leadership . At the 1962 general election , Van der Byl was elected comfortably to the Legislative Assembly for the Hartley constituency , a rural area to the south @-@ west of Salisbury . 
 = = Political career = = 
 = = = Ministerial office = = = 
 In 1963 , Winston Field appointed Van der Byl as a junior government whip , and on 16 March 1964 he was made Parliamentary Secretary to the Ministry of Justice with responsibility for the Information Service . Although the Van der Byl family were identified as strongly liberal in South African politics , he became identified with the right wing of the party and helped to depose Field from the premiership in early April 1964 , when Field failed to persuade the British government to grant Southern Rhodesia its independence . The new Prime Minister , Ian Smith , appointed him Deputy Minister for Information . At this time , Van der Byl 's chief adviser was a South African called Ivor Benson , who also served as press censor . Benson believed that an international communist conspiracy was plotting to overthrow white rule in Rhodesia . 
 Speaking in the Legislative Assembly on 12 August 1964 he attacked proposals for greater independence for broadcasters by referring to what he perceived to be the social effect in Britain : 
 To suggest that the BBC , forming opinion in the minds of the people of England , has been an influence for good in any way , when you consider the criminality of large areas of London ; when you consider the Mods and Rockers , and all those other things ; when you consider the total moral <unk> which have been taking place in England , much to all our distress , in the last fifteen to twenty years , the Hon. Member can hardly bring that up as an argument in favour of the freedom of broadcasting . 
 By the end of 1964 , Van der Byl and his Ministry had control of broadcasting in Rhodesia . Speaking in Parliament he described the aims of his Department as " not merely to disseminate information from an interesting point of view but to play its part in fighting the propaganda battle on behalf of the country " . He defined propaganda as " simply the propagation of the faith and the belief in any particular ideology or thing " , and also stated that the Department would seek the " resuscitation of the determination of the European to survive and fight for his rights " . 
 = = = 1965 election = = = 
 In May 1965 the Rhodesian Front government went to the country in a general election with Van der Byl one of the leading campaigners . Discussion of unilaterally declaring independence had already begun . Van der Byl argued that only a small fraction of Rhodesian business opposed it ; however , his campaign speeches typically included an argument against business involvement in politics . He cited Johannesburg mining interests ' support for the Progressive Party in South Africa , big business support for the Nazi Party in Germany , and the Bolshevik revolution in Russia being financed by United States big business . 
 The Rhodesian Front won a landslide victory , winning every single one of the 50 constituencies which had predominantly European voters . At the Rhodesian Front Congress of August 1965 , party members strongly attacked the press for failing to support the government . A demand for it to be made compulsory for all political articles to be signed by the author met with Van der Byl 's approval . 
 = = = UDI = = = 
 Within the government , Van der Byl was one of the loudest voices urging Ian Smith to proceed to a Unilateral Declaration of Independence . He angrily denounced the threat of sanctions from Britain , saying on 4 May 1965 that economic destruction of Rhodesia would mean total economic destruction of Zambia , formerly Northern Rhodesia . This statement was interpreted as a military threat by David Butler , the Leader of the Opposition . Van der Byl was given the task of selling the UDI to Rhodesian whites and to world opinion . In September 1965 , it was announced that he would tour the United Kingdom to promote Rhodesian independence . According to David Steel , he claimed then that France and the United States would lead the international recognition of the UDI government . He was appointed Deputy Minister of Information on 22 October and so was present at , but did not sign , the Unilateral Declaration of Independence on 11 November 1965 . 
 Van der Byl was greeted by a speech strongly critical of the Rhodesian government from the Archbishop of Canterbury , Michael Ramsey , who supported the use of armed force to bring the Rhodesians in line with United Kingdom policy on decolonisation . He responded by comparing the speech to " the tragic connivance at the destruction of Czechoslovakia in exchange for the useless appeasement at Munich in 1938 " . Van der Byl 's response used the phrase " kith and kin " to refer to the ethnic links between the white Rhodesians and the people of the United Kingdom . He saw no contradiction between signing a letter declaring " constant loyalty " to the Queen and declaring independence a few days later ; the Rhodesian Government was careful at the time of UDI to state its continued loyalty to the British Crown , though it later declared a Republic . 
 Despite his enthusiasm for propaganda , Van der Byl was outraged when the BBC subsequently set up a radio station at <unk> in Botswana which broadcast for 27 months , criticising UDI and urging Rhodesians to revoke it . He was later to claim the station was inciting violence , although this was denied by some who had been regular listeners . On 26 January 1966 , two months after the UDI , Van der Byl was willing to be quoted as saying that Rhodesian Army troops would follow a " scorched earth " policy should the United Kingdom send in troops , comparing their position to that of the Red Army when Nazi forces invaded the Soviet Union in 1941 . He was highly critical of Harold Wilson , describing him as a " highly dangerous , uninformed and conceited little man . " 
 = = = Censorship = = = 
 Internally , his policy was enforced through Ministry control of TV and radio and through censorship of newspapers . From 31 December 1965 , the Ministry of Information expanded its brief and was renamed the Ministry of Information , Immigration and Tourism , which meant that it was also responsible for deciding whether to grant or revoke permits to visit Rhodesia . Several foreign journalists were expelled : John Worrall , correspondent for The Guardian , went in January 1969 . The Rhodesia Herald , then in opposition to both the Rhodesian Front and UDI , frequently appeared with large white spaces on its news pages where censored stories had been placed . Stories and editorials personally critical of Van der Byl were immediately removed . 
 Censorship was tightened still further on 8 February 1966 when it was made illegal to indicate where material had been removed . The censor was also given the power to alter existing material or to move it around the newspaper . Dr <unk> Palley , the lone white opposition MP , described the powers as " censorship gone mad " , and insisted that there would no longer be any guarantee that anything published in the newspapers was authentic . Van der Byl responded by saying that the new measures were a reflection on the newspapers which had made such powers necessary . In 1967 Van der Byl was reported by Malcolm Smith , the former editor of the Herald , as remarking that a high degree of self @-@ censorship was required , and support for the government was essential . 
 The Herald ( and the Bulawayo Chronicle ) defied the restrictions , boldly printing blank spaces which identified removed material . Van der Byl personally visited the newspaper offices on the day the new regulations came in to warn the staff that if the paper was printed as proposed , they would " publish at your peril . " However the papers continued to appear with identifiable censorship in defiance of the government , and in 1968 the regulations were scrapped . 
 = = = = Deportation = = = = 
 Shortly after UDI , 46 academics working at University College , a racially non @-@ segregated institution , in Rhodesia wrote to The Times in London , denouncing the move . Officers of the British South Africa Police visited many of those who had signed to search their houses . Shortly afterwards , the residence permit of one of the academics came up for renewal , which would normally be automatic . In fact , it was revoked and the academic was deported . Van der Byl was the responsible minister and all but admitted that the reason was his opposition to UDI . 
 Van der Byl 's strategy seemed to work at home , with many Rhodesians remaining unaware until the end just how much was their country 's vulnerability and isolation . The Times was later to describe him as a " skilled propagandist who believed his own propaganda . " When sanctions on Rhodesia were confirmed in January 1967 , Van der Byl compared their situation with Spain following World War II , saying that the isolation of Spain had not stopped it from becoming one of the most advanced and economically successful countries in Europe . However , the reality of the situation must have been brought home to Van der Byl in April 1966 when he made informal approaches to see if he might visit Britain " for social reasons " during a tour of Europe . The Commonwealth Relations Office replied that he would not be recognised as enjoying any form of recognition or immunity . Other European governments refused to recognise his passport and expelled him from the country . 
 = = = Wider role in politics = = = 
 On 13 September 1968 he was promoted to be the full Minister of Information , Immigration and Tourism . Van der Byl 's aristocratic background , military experience and academic credentials combined to give him an almost iconic status within the Rhodesian Front . Many were impressed by his exploits as a big @-@ game hunter , which began when he shot his first lion in a garden in Northern Rhodesia at the age of 15 . Many in the Rhodesian Front believed him to be " a 19th century @-@ style connoisseur , a man of culture and an aristocrat @-@ statesman " in the words of Michael <unk> , a South African journalist . <unk> went on to observe " <unk> are an incipient hazard in any unsophisticated society . " Within the somewhat claustrophobic confines of white Rhodesian society outside the RF , Van der Byl was achieving some degree of respect . 
 In politics he assumed the position of hard @-@ line opponent of any form of compromise with domestic opponents or the international community . He made little secret of his willingness to succeed Ian Smith as Prime Minister if Smith showed even " the least whiff of surrender , " and did his best to discourage attempts to get the Rhodesians to compromise . When Abel Muzorewa had his passport withdrawn in September 1972 after returning from a successful visit to London , the government did not attempt to counter the rumour that its action was taken following Van der Byl 's personal order . 
 In April 1972 Van der Byl sparked a row over the agreement which Rhodesia and the United Kingdom had made in November 1971 . Under this agreement , Rhodesia had agreed to certain concessions to African nationalism in return for the prospect of recognition of its independence ; however , implementation of the agreement was to be delayed until the Pearce Commission reported on whether the settlement proposals would be approved by the people of Rhodesia . Van der Byl insisted that Rhodesia would not implement any part of the agreement unless Rhodesia 's independence was first acknowledged , regardless of the answer from the Pearce Commission . When the Pearce Commission reported that the European , Asian and Coloured ( mixed race ) populations of Rhodesia were in support but the African population were opposed , the agreement was ditched . Many outside and inside Rhodesia had hoped that the government would implement some of the agreement even if Pearce reported against it . 
 His derision of working class British Labour politicians also caused problems . When , in January 1966 , three visiting Labour MPs were manhandled , kicked and punched while attempting to address 400 supporters of the Rhodesian Front , Van der Byl blamed the three for refusing an offer from his Ministry to co @-@ ordinate the visit , and pointed out that they were breaking the law which required government permission for any political meeting of more than 12 people . 
 The propaganda circulated by his Ministry ( typically including references to " happy , smiling natives " ) was considered laughable . Visiting British journalist Peregrine Worsthorne , who knew Van der Byl socially , reported seeing a copy of Mein Kampf on his coffee table . His propaganda strategy became increasingly unsuccessful abroad , where Van der Byl alienated many of the foreign journalists and politicians that he came into contact with . Max Hastings , then reporting for the Evening Standard , described him as " appalling " and said that he and Smith " would have seemed ludicrous figures , had they not possessed the power of life and death over millions of people " ; Van der Byl had him deported . 
 While still popular with the Rhodesian Front members , he was criticised at the 1972 Party Congress for his lack of success in improving Rhodesia 's image around the world ; however , he retained the confidence of Ian Smith and was kept on in a government reshuffle on 24 May 1973 . That winter saw him promote a new Broadcasting Bill to transfer control of the monopoly Rhodesian Broadcasting Corporation . Allan Savory , then the lone white opposition MP , criticised the Bill for the composition of the proposed board , which was dominated by strong supporters of the Rhodesian Front . Van der Byl insisted , somewhat unsuccessfully to foreign observers , that the government was not trying to take over broadcasting . 
 = = = Minister of Defence = = = 
 Van der Byl was appointed Minister of Foreign Affairs and Defence on 2 August 1974 . These were two distinct portfolios , the first of which ( Foreign Affairs ) did not amount to much in a state which lacked any form of international recognition . The Defence portfolio , at a time when Rhodesia was drifting into civil war , was an important post ; although his previous political experience had been largely in the area of public relations , he was now charged with responsibilities which were central to the survival of Rhodesia . 
 He promoted aggressive measures against the insurgents , and in so doing , he also sought to raise his own political profile . Clad in immaculately tailored battledress , he would fly by helicopter to a beleaguered army outpost ; wearing dark glasses and sporting a swagger stick , deliver a rousing speech for the benefit of the troops and the TV cameras – then return to Salisbury in time for dinner . He drew heavily on Winston Churchill 's oratory style for some of his inspiring speeches . As Minister of Defence , Van der Byl was known to join army counter @-@ insurgency operations while armed with a hunting rifle ( with the words " I 'd like to bag one of these chaps ... " ) , and would regularly visit army positions and entertain the troops with his own generous supply of " scotch whisky and fine wines . " Such behaviour endeared him to many in Rhodesia : he was far more popular with the troops than his predecessor as Minister of Defence , Jack Howman . However , this popularity did not extend to senior members of the South African and Rhodesian governments . 
 Rhodesia 's strategic position underwent a fundamental change in June 1975 when the Portuguese government suddenly withdrew from Mozambique which bordered Rhodesia on the east . Mozambique now came under the control of a Soviet @-@ allied government which was supportive of black nationalist forces in both South Africa and Rhodesia . This created a delicate situation since Rhodesia 's main road and rail links to the outside world were via the Mozambican ports of Beira and Maputo . Initially , the new Mozambican government allowed the Rhodesians continued use of these links . This was so even while ZANU guerrillas were allowed to base themselves in Tete province adjoining north eastern Rhodesia . 
 There were rumours in February 1976 that Soviet tanks were being unloaded in Mozambique to help in the war . Unluckily for Van der Byl , the British Foreign Office minister was David Ennals , one of those who had received rough treatment in 1966 . Ennals announced that in the event of a racial war breaking out in Rhodesia , there would be no British help . Van der Byl responded by claiming this indicated Britain accepting Rhodesia 's independence . He attacked Abel Muzorewa for supporting President Machel , saying that " being a good churchman and a Bishop there is a very strong possibility he might be a communist " . 
 Following the example of Mozambique , the Zambian and Botswana governments permitted guerrillas to establish bases from which they could threaten and infiltrate Rhodesia . Van der Byl told a newspaper reporter that this had to be expected . As infiltration grew , he declared at the beginning of July that the Rhodesian Army would not hesitate to bomb and destroy villages that harboured guerillas . 
 In 1975 and 1976 , the South African government conducted delicate negotiations with neighbouring states : the South Africans wanted to encourage those states to maintain economic relations with South Africa and Rhodesia while limiting the activities of the ANC , ZANU and ZAPU . However , increasingly aggressive actions by the Rhodesian army outside its own borders resulted in the failure of this conciliatory approach . 
 A cross @-@ border Selous Scouts raid into Mozambique on 9 August 1976 ( dubbed " the <unk> Raid " ) killed over 1 @,@ 000 people without Rhodesian fatalities , with Van der Byl insisting that the government had irrefutable proof that the raid had targeted a guerrilla training camp . He was unwilling to disclose the nature of the proof , though he invited the UN to conduct its own investigation into the raid . The raid produced a high body count and a major haul of intelligence and captured arms ; according to ZANLA 's own figures , which were not publicly circulated , most of those present in the camp had been armed guerrillas , though there were some civilians present . In a successful attempt to win global sympathy , ZANU clamoured that <unk> had been full of unarmed refugees , leading most international opinion to condemn the Rhodesian raid as a massacre . Although cross @-@ border raids into Mozambique had been approved by the Rhodesian cabinet , the depth and severity of the August incursion was greater than had been intended . Van der Byl had sanctioned the incursion largely on his own initiative . Although a tactical success , the incursion caused a final break with Zambia and Mozambique . The South African government was greatly displeased that its earlier diplomatic efforts were compromised and made this clear to Ian Smith . Smith appeared to consider this " the final straw " as far as Van der Byl 's defence portfolio was concerned . 
 = = = Foreign affairs = = = 
 Van der Byl took over at a time when South Africa was putting increasing pressure on the Rhodesians to make an agreement on majority rule . In March 1975 , he had to fly urgently to Cape Town to explain why the Rhodesian government had detained Rev. Ndabaningi Sithole of the Zimbabwe African National Union , who was accused of plotting against other black nationalist leaders . The South Africans were extremely displeased with this action and suspected that the real reason was that the Rhodesians objected to Sithole and preferred to negotiate with Joshua Nkomo . Van der Byl was unsuccessful in reassuring the South Africans and Ian Smith was forced to follow him . 
 Gradually the South Africans grew unwilling to help Rhodesia . The remaining 200 South African policemen transferred to help in the guerilla war were removed suddenly in August 1975 , a move which appeared to precede even more disengagement . Van der Byl responded in a speech on 8 August which asserted that " The terrorists who are trained and equipped outside our border and who invade our country with the willing help of other governments are here for a much wider purpose than the overthrow of Rhodesia . They are here to represent a force which sees Rhodesia as just one more stepping stone to victory over South Africa because they see South Africa as a vital key to the security of America , Europe and the rest of the western world . " 
 When the Rhodesian government held talks with the African National Council on the railway bridge across the Victoria Falls in August 1975 ( the train in which the talks took place was strategically in the middle of the bridge so that the ANC were in Zambia while the Rhodesians remained in Rhodesia ) , Van der Byl was not a member of the Rhodesian delegation . This was a curious omission given his position . He did however participate in talks with Joshua Nkomo that December . 
 Van der Byl 's habit of referring to the African population as " <unk> " ( he asserted that " Rhodesia is able to handle the <unk> " ) led to extreme unpopularity with the South African government , and he did not attend talks with South African Prime Minister John Vorster in October 1975 . This was interpreted as being connected to a personal dislike . When , on 26 August 1976 , the South African government announced the withdrawal of all its military helicopter crews from Rhodesia , Van der Byl was outspoken in his criticism and Vorster was reported to have refused to have anything to do with " that dreadful man Van der Byl . " Smith decided that he " clearly ... had no option " and on 9 September 1976 executed a sudden cabinet reshuffle that ended Van der Byl 's tenure as Defence Minister . Smith claimed the South African dislike of Van der Byl was partly motivated by the memory of his father , who had been in opposition to the National Party . 
 = = = Contribution to diplomacy = = = 
 As the prominence of the issue of Rhodesia increased in the late 1970s , attention on Van der Byl increased . Reporters noted his impressively quotable lines at press conferences ( such as his explanation for why the Rhodesian government did not usually give the names of guerrillas which it had hanged : " It 's an academic question , because they are normally dead " ) . While negotiating with the Patriotic Front put together by ZANU and ZAPU at the Geneva Conference in November 1976 , he described ZANU leader Robert Mugabe as " this bloodthirsty Marxist puppet " and the Patriotic Front proposals as " almost a parody , a music hall caricature of communist invective " . Mugabe repeatedly arrived late to the meetings held during the conference , and on one occasion Van der Byl tersely reprimanded the ZANU leader for his tardiness . Mugabe flew into a rage and shouted across the table at Van der Byl , calling the Rhodesian minister a " foul @-@ mouthed bloody fool ! " 
 At this conference , which was organised by Britain with American support , Van der Byl rejected the idea of an interim British presence in Rhodesia during a transition to majority rule , which was identified as one of the few ways of persuading the Patriotic Front to endorse a settlement . The conference was adjourned by the British foreign minister , Anthony Crosland , on 14 December 1976 , and ultimately never reconvened . The nationalist leaders said they would not return to Geneva or take part in any further talks unless immediate black rule were made the only topic for discussion . Soon after , on 7 January 1977 , Van der Byl announced the Rhodesian government 's rejection of every proposal made in Geneva . 
 Later that month , Van der Byl was finding pressure put on him by more moderate voices within Rhodesia and hinted that the government might amend the Land Tenure Act , which effectively split the country into sections reserved for each racial group . He also remarked that Bishop Abel Muzorewa " can be said to represent the African in this country " , which indicated the direction in which the Smith government was hoping to travel : an accommodation with moderate voices within Rhodesia was likely to be a better end than a capitulation to the Patriotic Front . Van der Byl was prepared to support this strategy and did not go along with the 12 Rhodesian Front MPs who formed the Rhodesian Action Party in early 1977 claiming that the Front had not adhered to party principles . 
 Although Van der Byl was now prepared to say that he supported the transition to majority rule , he was quick to put restrictions on it when interviewed in April 1977 . He insisted that majority rule would only be possible on a " very qualified franchise — that 's what the whole thing is about " , and also said that any settlement must be endorsed by a two @-@ thirds majority of the existing House of Assembly ( which was largely elected by white Rhodesians ) . Over the summer of 1977 he continued to warn that insistence on capitulation to the Patriotic Front would produce a white backlash and put negotiations back . 
 However , the Rhodesian government was forced to put its internal settlement negotiations on hold during a joint US @-@ UK initiative in late 1977 . Van der Byl 's public comments seemed to be aimed at ensuring this mission did not succeed , as he insisted that it had no chance of negotiating a ceasefire , described the Carter administration as " mindless " , and the joint mission as being " Anglo @-@ American @-@ Russian " . When a plan was published , he described it as " totally outrageous " and involving " the imposition of unconditional surrender on an undefeated people who are not enemies " . 
 = = = Internal settlement = = = 
 The mission did fail and the internal settlement talks were resurrected , resulting in a deal on 4 March 1978 . A transitional joint Council of Ministers was set up , with Van der Byl having to work with Dr Elliott <unk> as his co @-@ Minister of Foreign Affairs . The Patriotic Front took no notice of this accord and the guerrilla war continued ; Lord Richard Cecil , a close family friend working as a photo @-@ journalist , was killed by guerrillas on 20 April 1978 after Van der Byl had ensured he had full access to military areas denied to other reporters . 
 In May Van der Byl greeted news of massacres in Zaire as " a blessing in disguise " because they might ensure that warnings about Soviet penetration in Africa were heeded . He denounced the British government the following month for refusing to recognise that a massacre of Elim missionaries was perpetrated by the Patriotic Front . As the date for the full implementation of the internal settlement grew nearer , Van der Byl 's profile decreased , but he remained active in politics : he was elected unopposed for the whites @-@ only Gatooma / Hartley seat to the Zimbabwe @-@ Rhodesia House of Assembly . He handed over power to his African successor on 1 June 1979 , and became instead Minister of Transport and Power and Minister of Posts in the new government . 
 = = = Lancaster House = = = 
 When " the wheels came off the wagon " ( as he put it ) at Lancaster House in 1979 , Van der Byl greeted the event with amused detachment . He was not a member of any delegation at the conference and did not attend . The weekend after the agreement , he called on the Rhodesian Front to revitalise itself as the only true representative of Europeans in Rhodesia , and he ascribed the result of the conference to " a succession of perfidious British governments " . 
 According to Ian Smith 's memoirs , Van der Byl organised a meeting between Ian Smith and Lieutenant @-@ General Peter Walls , Commander of the Rhodesian Army , shortly before the first Zimbabwean elections in February 1980 , where they agreed a strategy to prevent Robert Mugabe winning . They met again on 26 February the day before polling began in the Common Roll election . The consensus at this meeting was that Abel Muzorewa 's interim government would win enough seats , when put together with the 20 seats reserved for whites which were all Rhodesian Front , to deny Mugabe victory . However , the early election results in March dented this confidence . 
 Smith asked Walls for details of his plan ( " Operation Quartz " ) for using force to prevent ZANU @-@ PF taking power by force if it lost the election . Walls insisted that ZANU @-@ PF would not win the election . When it did happen , both Smith and Van der Byl believed that the Army should step in to prevent Mugabe taking over . Walls took the view that it was already too late , and while the others wished for some move , they were forced to concede to this view . 
 = = = In Zimbabwe = = = 
 Van der Byl had been elected unopposed to the new House of Assembly for Gatooma / Hartley and remained a close associate of Smith , becoming Vice @-@ President of the ' Republican Front ' ( later renamed the Conservative Alliance of Zimbabwe ) . At the 1985 general election the boundaries for the White Roll seats were altered and Van der Byl fought in Mount Pleasant , opposing Chris Andersen . Andersen had broken with the Rhodesian Front to sit as an Independent and became Minister of State for the Public Service in Robert Mugabe 's government . Van der Byl lost the election heavily , polling only 544 votes to 1 @,@ 017 for Andersen and 466 for a third candidate . The Conservative Alliance of Zimbabwe still controlled the election of ten white Senators and Smith agreed to elect Van der Byl to one of the Senate seats . 
 Parliamentary seats reserved for whites were abolished in 1987 . Van der Byl made his last speech in Parliament on 10 September , in which he praised Robert Mugabe for the " absolute courtesy " he had shown since independence . He noted that he was the last surviving member of the 1965 government remaining in Parliament , and declared he hoped " I would have been cherished .. as a sort of national monument , and not flung into the political wilderness " . His speech loudly denounced the former Republican Front and Conservative Alliance of Zimbabwe members who had gone over to the government , describing them as " dreadful souls screaming in agony " . The government minister Dr Edson <unk> responded with a poorly written poem referring to the number of rebels killed fighting troops under Van der Byl 's command . 
 = = Marriage , issue and retirement = = 
 On 31 August 1979 at Schloss Waldstein in Austria , Van der Byl married Princess Charlotte Maria Benedikte Eleonore Adelheid of Liechtenstein . She was thirty years his junior , the daughter of Prince Heinrich of Liechtenstein and granddaughter of Karl I , the last emperor of Austria . The couple had three sons : Pieter Vincenz , Valerian , and Casimir . 
 In 1983 Van der Byl had inherited from his mother a property described as " the magnificent estate .. near Caledon in the Western Cape , " and following the end of his political career had no need to keep a home in Zimbabwe , so he quit the place . He left as a rich man , with an attractive young wife , and enjoyed his retirement . He frequently visited London , where he was a good friend of Viscount Cranborne , who put him up for membership of the Turf Club . Both were members of White 's Club and were often seen there when Van der Byl was in town . 
 Four days after his 76th birthday , Van der Byl died at Fairfield , in Caledon , Western Cape . In his obituary , Dan van der Vat wrote " The arrival of majority rule in South Africa made no difference , and he died a very wealthy man . " 
 = Eday = 
 Eday is one of the islands of Orkney , which are located to the north of the Scottish mainland . One of the North Isles , Eday is about 24 kilometres ( 15 mi ) from the Orkney Mainland . With an area of 27 square kilometres ( 10 sq mi ) , it is the ninth largest island of the archipelago . The bedrock of the island is Old Red Sandstone , which is exposed along the sea @-@ cliffs . 
 There are various well @-@ preserved Neolithic tombs , as well as evidence of Bronze Age settlement and the remains of a Norse @-@ era castle . During the period of Scottish rule the substantial property of Carrick House was developed at Calfsound , which became a burgh for a short period . During the British era many agricultural improvements were introduced , although there has been a substantial decline in the population since the mid @-@ nineteenth century . In the twenty @-@ first century the Eday Partnership has had success in promoting the island 's economy . Local placenames reflect the diverse linguistic heritage and the landscapes of the island and its surrounding seas attract abundant wildlife . 
 = = Geography and geology = = 
 Eday is 14 kilometres ( 8 @.@ 7 mi ) long from north to south but only just over 500 metres wide at the narrow neck of land between the Sands of Doomy and Bay of London and has been described as being " nipped at the waist " . The centre of the island is largely moorland covered with heather , and cultivation is confined to the coasts . 
 The highest points are <unk> Hill at the island 's centre , Fersness Hill at West Side , Vinquoy Hill to the north and Ward Hill to the south , which reaches 101 metres ( 331 ft ) . In Orkney this last name , which derives from the Norse <unk> , is a common one for the highest point on an island as in the past they were used for lighting warning beacons . 
 The largest body of fresh water is the 10 @-@ hectare ( 25 @-@ acre ) Mill Loch , south east of Vinquoy Hill . Loch of Doomy lies on the western side of the narrow " waist " and the smaller Loch Carrick on the north coast . 
 The population is dispersed along the coastal farmsteads and nowhere on the island has the status of a village . Calfsound is the most populous of the settled areas , with other concentrations at <unk> on the east coast , which has a post office and a community facility in a converted chapel , and <unk> in the south where the ferry from the Mainland docks . 
 Eday is surrounded by other small islands that make up the " seemingly impossible green and russet jigsaw of Orkney 's North Isles " . Calf of Eday lies 350 metres ( 0 @.@ 2 mi ) to the north of the settlement of Calfsound . Further east is Sanday across the Eday Sound . Stronsay and Linga Holm are to the south east and Muckle Green Holm to the south west beyond the straits known as the Fall of Warness . Egilsay lies some 5 kilometres ( 3 @.@ 1 mi ) due west . Rusk Holm , Faray and Holm of Faray lie beyond the Sound of Faray to the north west and beyond them is the larger island of Westray . 
 In common with its neighbouring isles , Eday is largely formed from Middle Devonian Old Red Sandstone deposited in the Orcadian Basin . The Eday Group is the name for a substantial sequence of sandstones that is found at many locations in Orkney , for which Eday and the area around Eday Sound are the type area . In places it is up to 800 metres ( 2 @,@ 600 ft ) thick , and is largely composed of yellow and red sandstones with intervening grey flagstones and marls . The rock is easily quarried and some of the yellow sandstones from Fersness were used in the construction of St Magnus Cathedral in Kirkwall . The Devonian sequence is deformed into a major fold , the north @-@ south trending Eday Syncline , with the youngest part of the sequence , the Upper Eday Sandstone outcropping in the north of the island from Bay of <unk> to Red Head . The oldest part of the sequence , the Rousay Flagstones are found on the eastern side of the island at Bight of Milldale and from Kirk <unk> to War Ness , and to the west from <unk> Bay to Fersness . Veness is formed of Upper Eday Sandstone <unk> against the flagstones . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Prehistory = = = 
 The very limited archaeological record provides scant evidence of Mesolithic life in Orkney , but the later assemblage of houses and monumental Neolithic structures in the archipelago is without parallel in the United Kingdom . 
 The chambered cairn of Vinquoy , located in a commanding position overlooking the Calf Sound , is 17 metres ( 56 ft ) in diameter and 2 @.@ 5 metres ( 8 @.@ 2 ft ) high . The narrow entrance passage of this Maeshowe @-@ type tomb leads to a central chamber with four side @-@ cells . Other sites of interest on Eday include the Stone of Setter standing stone that dominates the col north of Mill Loch , and which at 4 @.@ 5 metres ( 15 ft ) high is one of the tallest monoliths in Orkney . There are two more chambered cairns at <unk> and <unk> and another on the Calf of Eday . Rectangular in shape , it was excavated in 1936 – 37 and contains a small chamber with two compartments and a larger one with four stalls that has a separate entrance and was probably added at a later date . 
 Although there are several Bronze Age sites on the island , they provide less dramatic remains . At Warness in the south west there is a burnt mound from this period and there are the ruins of two houses of a similar age on Holm of Faray near the Point of Dogs Bones . The Fold of Setter is an 85 @-@ metre @-@ diameter ( 279 ft ) Bronze Age enclosure located to the north of Mill Loch . There is the site of a large Iron Age roundhouse containing a saddle <unk> at <unk> in north west Eday . Latterly , Orkney was settled by the Picts although the archaeological evidence is sparse . 
 = = = Norse colonisation = = = 
 It is not known " when and how the Vikings conquered and occupied the Isles " , and although Norse contacts with Scotland certainly predate the first written records in the 8th century , their nature and frequency are unknown . The place name evidence of a Norse presence on Eday is conclusive and very little is known about the specifics of life on the island at this time . The Norse @-@ era ruins of the Castle of <unk> Brae , which dates from the 12th or 13th centuries , lie under a green mound to the east of the Bay of <unk> . The castle may have been the most important building on Eday at this time . 
 = = = Scottish rule = = = 
 In 1468 Orkney became part of the Kingdom of Scotland and an influx of Scottish entrepreneurs helped to create a diverse and independent community that included farmers , fishermen and merchants that called themselves <unk> Orcadie and who proved themselves increasingly able to defend their rights against their feudal overlords . Nonetheless , the actions of the aristocracy continue to provide much of the information known about affairs on Eday at the time . In 1561 , during the Reformation , Edward Sinclair was granted the feu of Eday by Adam Bothwell , Bishop of Orkney . These were turbulent times — Sinclair 's duties included to defend the reforming Bishop " against whatsoever invaders " — and later that year he was one of the ringleaders of an anti @-@ Catholic riot in Kirkwall . 
 His son William took over the running of the Eday estate in due course , but it became burdened with debt . In 1601 when Edward was " an auld decrepit man ... aged 100 or thereby " William attempted to sell the family interest to George Sinclair the Earl of Caithness . The new proprietor sent half a dozen boatloads of " <unk> , broken Highland men of Caithness " to Eday , much to the alarm of the notorious Earl Patrick of Orkney . Earl Patrick was able to use the poor relationship between the elderly father Edward and his son , ( the former claiming William fired muskets at him and grabbed him by the neck like a dog ) to take action . Acting , so he alleged , on behalf of Edward , Earl Patrick evicted William , took the Eday the rents for himself and profited from the extraction of building stone from <unk> quarry . 
 John Stewart , Earl of Carrick , the brother of Earl Patrick , was granted Eday in 1632 and he constructed Carrick House at Calfsound shortly thereafter . He used peat to manufacture salt from salt pans at both Carrick and on the Calf of Eday . The product was described as " quite fine " in the 17th century when it was undertaken on a substantial scale although of " indifferent quality " in the early 19th century when it was being conducted as a cottage industry . Peat extraction was also an important industry in the past as Sanday and North Ronaldsay obtained most of their fuel from Eday and this material was also exported to whisky distilleries on mainland Scotland . 
 Stewart 's ambitions for Calfsound were considerable . Described as the " town and port " of Carrick it became a burgh ( the only other one in Orkney being Kirkwall ) with the right to appoint <unk> and hold markets but it was never likely to flourish in such a location . 
 = = = British era = = = 
 From the first decade of the 18th century Orkney became part of the new Kingdom of Great Britain . This was a time of great interest in agricultural improvement although the changes this brought about were not of significance in Orkney until the mid @-@ nineteenth century . For example , no potatoes were grown on Eday until around 1780 . By comparison to these gradual changes , Carrick House saw drama in 1725 . The property was now owned by James Fea who had been a school friend of a " Mr Smith " , a trader of Stromness . When Smith was unmasked as the notorious pirate John Gow he sought to escape the attentions of the authorities by making for Eday via a raid on Hall of <unk> , in Orphir . When Gow 's ship Revenge ran aground on the Calf of Eday , Fea 's men took him prisoner and held him at Carrick House , for which Fea was given a £ 1 @,@ 700 reward . The bell from the Revenge is still in Carrick House . 
 In the early nineteenth century the kelp industry provided significant employment on some of the Orkney islands , but when the market collapsed between 1830 and 1832 it caused considerable hardship . North Ronaldsay was especially hard @-@ hit and several families were allowed to resettle from there to develop land at Westside on Eday . Rising populations meant increasing land values , especially for small tenancies . In 1843 crofts were valued at £ 1 / acre on Eday , nearly three times the price for larger farms . However , the 20th century saw decline . Immigration from mainland Scotland was essentially unknown even in the late 1950s and the population in 2001 was about an eighth of the total 160 years earlier . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 " Eday " is a name derived from the Old Norse eið and means " isthmus island " . This is a name specifically associated with economic activity used only where the isthmus has been a " route for the movement of goods and / or boats from one coast to another " . 
 There are numerous other eið names in the islands of the North Atlantic and those in Orkney include Hoxa ( <unk> ) on South Ronaldsay , <unk> ( found on Walls , Stronsay and the west Mainland ) and Scapa in St Ola which is derived from the Norse <unk> . Bay of Doomy , near the central isthmus on Eday , may also have a name derived from <unk> @-@ eið , meaning " isthmus of the courthouse " , indicating it could have been an important meeting place during the Norse period of Scottish history . In the 17th century Eday was also known as " Heth <unk> " . 
 In common with elsewhere in the Orkney islands , place names are generally a mixture of Norse , Scots and English influences . Any Pictish names that existed before the arrival of Scandinavian settlers on Eday appear to have been completely obliterated . The common suffix <unk> is from the Old Norse <unk> @-@ ló and signifies an enclosure in a marshy area . Skaill on the east coast is from the Norse <unk> and suggests an important farm on good fertile land that was associated with several smaller <unk> . The Bay of London also has Norse origins , lund @-@ inn meaning " woodland " , although this is no longer an apt description for this largely treeless landscape . Old Norse <unk> means " puffin " , which creatures may once have nested in sandy land at the back of the bay . 
 Orkney was Christianised before the arrival of Viking settlers , and there are various local " Papa " names that reflect the activities of the pre @-@ Norse <unk> monks there . The farm of <unk> near <unk> may indicate such a link to the past , although the connection is by no means certain . The name " geo " , which occurs frequently around the rocky coast , is from the Norse <unk> and means a narrow and deep cleft in the face of a cliff . 
 = = Transport and economy = = 
 Eday can be reached by both sea and air from the Orkney Mainland . Orkney Ferries provide daily ferry crossings to <unk> on Eday from Kirkwall . The Orkney inter @-@ island air service , operated by Loganair , connects Kirkwall Airport with Eday Airport . 
 Farming and crofting are mainstays of the local economy , especially livestock husbandry . Flocks of sheep are also kept on Faray . 
 The European Marine Energy Centre ( EMEC ) based at Stromness is a Scottish Government @-@ backed research facility . They have installed a wave testing system at Billia Croo on the Orkney mainland and a tidal power testing station , overlooking the Fall of Warness , on Eday . The test site was chosen because of the marine currents that reach almost 4 metres per second ( 7 @.@ 8 kn ) at spring tides . There are seven offshore testing berths connected to the <unk> North Isles section of the national grid , via an underground cable . 
 Eday Partnership , the local development trust is active in promoting the island 's economy and has instigated numerous projects , including Eday Heritage Centre , and the purchase of a new diesel tank for the island . Eday 's various community projects contributed £ 380 @,@ 000 to the island 's economy from 2005 @-@ 7 and a 900 kW community @-@ owned wind turbine is planned . The income that this asset will generate is expected to reduce fuel poverty on the island , support new community enterprises and create affordable housing . 
 In July 2008 , the island celebrated the opening of the Eday Heritage and Visitor Centre in the restored former Baptist Church . There is a heritage display area , a permanent archive , a café and a tourist information point . The Eday Oral History Project records life on the island in the past and is also housed within the centre , which has its own 6 kW wind turbine . 
 The island 's population was 160 as recorded by the 2011 census an increase of over 30 % since 2001 when there were 121 usual residents . During the same period Scottish island populations as a whole grew by 4 % to 103 @,@ 702 . 
 = = Natural history = = 
 In the early 19th century Patrick Neill wrote of the local flora that " Eda is a mossy island ; a great part of it consisting of barren marshy heaths . Juncus uliginosus here covers whole acres ; and the pretty little plant <unk> <unk> , or all @-@ seed , is everywhere strewed . " Over 120 species of wild plants have been recorded on the island including bog myrtle found nowhere else in Orkney . 
 In the mid @-@ 17th century , Eday was described as being " absolutely full of moorland birds " and today there are red @-@ throated divers on Mill Loch , Arctic skuas and bonxies on the moors and black guillemot offshore . Shore birds include meadow pipit , rock pipit and ringed plover . The woodland at Carrick House attracts a variety of migrants and otters can be seen around the coasts . There are colonies of harbour and grey seals on Muckle Green Holm , Little Green Holm , Faray and Holm of Faray , and white @-@ beaked dolphin , minke whale and killer whale are occasional visitors to the area . A ranger <unk> guided walks throughout the year . 
 = = Prominent natives = = 
 Australian pioneer union leader and Australian Labor Party politician , William Spence was born on Eday in 1846 . 
 John Flaws Reid , who represented Mackenzie in the Canadian House of Commons , was born on Eday in 1860 . 
 = Comeback ( Glee ) = 
 " Comeback " is the thirteenth episode of the second season of the American musical television series Glee , and the thirty @-@ fifth overall . It was written by series creator Ryan Murphy , directed by Bradley Buecker , and premiered on Fox on February 15 , 2011 . In the episode , glee club director Will Schuester ( Matthew Morrison ) allows cheerleading coach Sue Sylvester ( Jane Lynch ) to join the McKinley High glee club in an attempt to ease her depression . Club member Sam ( Chord Overstreet ) creates a tribute band to teen singer Justin Bieber in order to win the heart of Quinn ( Dianna Agron ) , and is later joined by the group 's other male members , minus co @-@ captain Finn ( Cory Monteith ) , to recreate Bieber 's " Somebody to Love " and woo their significant others . 
 Prior to broadcast , Murphy dismissed rumors that " Comeback " would serve as a tribute to Bieber , and stated that such episodes are reserved for artists with extensive musical catalogs . " Comeback " was met with mixed reception from critics , who deemed it neither bad nor a standout . Critics such as Bobby Hankinson of the Houston Chronicle appreciated the episode 's early Glee aesthetic . Amy Reiter of The Los Angeles Times felt that the episode lacked substance . Sue 's storyline , which focuses on her depression and a suicide attempt , was widely criticized for its inappropriateness . The other storylines had mixed to positive reviews , as many critics deemed the Bieber @-@ related subplot the strongest . James Poniewozik of Time compared it favorably to the Madonna tribute episode " The Power of Madonna " . 
 The episode features six musical performances , five of which were released as singles . Upon its initial airing , " Comeback " was watched by over 10 @.@ 53 million US viewers , and acquired a 4 @.@ 2 / 12 Nielsen rating / share in the 18 – 49 demographic . Unlike the story itself , most critics received the musical numbers with acclaim . The Glee take on Bieber 's songs was praised , as were the vocals of cast members Amber Riley and Lea Michele in their duet of " Take Me or Leave Me " from Rent , and the confidence and performance of Ashley Fink in " I Know What Boys Like " . 
 = = Plot = = 
 After her cheerleading squad loses a competition for the first time in seven years , coach Sue Sylvester ( Jane Lynch ) becomes depressed , and stages an apparent suicide by " overdosing " on gummy vitamins . Her colleague , school guidance counselor Emma Pillsbury ( Jayma Mays ) , suggests that she temporarily join the school glee club , New Directions , to lift her spirits . Hoping to create discord within the group , Sue pits members Mercedes ( Amber Riley ) and Rachel ( Lea Michele ) against one another . Her plan backfires when a duet between the two results in a deepening of their respect for one another vocally . In an attempt to bring out the good in Sue , club director Will Schuester ( Matthew Morrison ) takes her to a pediatric cancer ward , where they sing " This Little Light of Mine " with the patients . 
 Club member Sam Evans ( Chord Overstreet ) establishes a one @-@ man tribute band to teen singer Justin Bieber , which he calls " The Justin Bieber Experience " , in the hope of winning over his girlfriend Quinn ( Dianna Agron ) , whom he suspects still has feelings for her ex @-@ boyfriend Finn ( Cory Monteith ) . Sam performs Bieber 's " Baby " for the glee club , and dedicates it to Quinn ; the performance also excites the other girls in the club . Several of the male members — Puck ( Mark Salling ) , Artie ( Kevin McHale ) and Mike ( Harry Shum , Jr . ) — are impressed by the effect he has on the girls , and convince him to let them join his tribute band . The foursome then perform " Somebody to Love " , and recreate the music video for the song in the auditorium to the girls ' delight . Quinn chooses Sam over Finn , but when Santana Lopez ( Naya Rivera ) convinces Sam that Quinn cheated on him , he breaks up with her and begins dating Santana . 
 Meanwhile , Lauren Zizes ( Ashley Fink ) enlists Puck to help her with her first glee club solo . With Puck 's assistance , she performs " I Know What Boys Like " by The Waitresses , and using a trick he taught her , imagines the club members in their underwear for confidence . Later , Sue suggests that the club perform the anthem " Sing " by My Chemical Romance , as they must present an anthem at the forthcoming Regionals competition . They rehearse the song , and it is well received by most of the members , who disregard Rachel 's suggestion that they should instead compose an original anthem . Her week with New Directions over , Sue reveals that she has become the vocal coach for one of the glee club 's Regionals competitors , Aural Intensity . 
 = = Production = = 
 In January 2011 , rumors began to circulate that Glee was planning a Justin Bieber tribute episode , similar to " The Power of Madonna " for Madonna , and " Britney / Brittany " for Britney Spears . Series creator Ryan Murphy refuted the claims , and stated that such episodes are reserved for artists with extensive musical catalogs . He confirmed , however , that Bieber 's music would be used in an episode in season two as a " small plot point " , and Overstreet 's Sam would perform a song by the artist for Quinn 's approval . On the red carpet at the 68th Golden Globe Awards , cast member Riley confirmed to MTV News that Bieber 's songs " Baby " and " Somebody to Love " would be featured in the upcoming episode , and the singer would receive a tribute similar to Lady Gaga in " Theatricality " — a tribute , but without a full episode devoted to his catalog . Via his official Facebook page , Bieber stated that he was " truly honoured " to have his music covered on Glee . Prior to broadcast , Overstreet and Bieber interacted via the social networking website Twitter , where Bieber told him " we just gotta work on those moves " , and to " kill it ! " 
 In addition to " Baby " and " Somebody to Love " , the episode featured cover versions of " I Know What Boys Like " by The Waitresses performed by Fink , " Take Me or Leave Me " from Rent performed by Michele and Riley , " Sing " by My Chemical Romance , and an acoustic performance of the gospel children 's song " This Little Light of Mine " . The pediatric oncology scenes were filmed at the Children 's Hospital Los Angeles ' Center for Cancer and Blood Diseases , where eleven real patients performed alongside Morrison and Lynch . Bailey , the pediatric ward nurse , was played by guest @-@ star Charlene Amoia , who had worked for the series ' sound department during the first season . In June 2011 , she deemed her " Comeback " appearance her favorite guest role in any series , due to working alongside the children , whom she was " so touched by " . Amoia expanded : " They were the most vibrant , energetic kids . It was a really awesome storyline to be a part of . I was really moved by everything . " Though she was not initially aware that the role would involve singing , Amoia was part of the " This Little Light of Mine " group number . The episode 's recurring guest cast members were Overstreet as Sam , Iqbal Theba as Principal Figgins , Shum , Jr. as Mike and Fink as Lauren . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 " Comeback " was watched by 10 @.@ 53 million US viewers . It attained a 4 @.@ 2 / 12 Nielsen rating / share in the 18 – 49 demographic , which made it the highest rated show of the night . It was the third most @-@ watched scripted show of the week amongst adults aged 18 – 49 , and placed 21st amongst all viewers . The episode declined by 9 percent and 1 @.@ 12 million viewers on the previous episode , " Silly Love Songs " . 
 With its Canadian broadcast , also on February 15 , 2011 , " Comeback " attained 1 @.@ 75 million viewers and placed 18th in the weekly program rankings . It was again down on " Silly Love Songs " , which ranked tenth and was watched by 2 @.@ 08 million viewers . In Australia , where the episode aired on February 28 , 2011 , it was watched by 909 @,@ 000 viewers and was the 11th most @-@ viewed show of the night . Viewership was marginally down on the previous episode , which attracted 921 @,@ 000 viewers and also placed 11th . In the UK , the episode was broadcast on April 4 , 2011 . It attained 2 @.@ 57 million viewers — 2 @.@ 14 million on E4 , and 427 @,@ 000 on E4 + 1 — and was the most @-@ watched show on cable for the week . Viewership again declined slightly from the previous episode , which drew 2 @.@ 63 million viewers . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 The episode received mixed reviews from critics . Bobby Hankinson of the Houston Chronicle and E ! Online 's Jenna Mullins were pleased by how " Comeback " reminded them of early episodes of Glee — Mullins hailed the return of familiar characterization , and Hankinson commented : " It felt like old times , and it felt good . " Though he observed that the episode was light on plot , Hankinson praised the writing and comedy . CNN 's Lisa Respers France found the episode 's title apt , as Glee was " firing on all cylinders " with little room for improvement . Erica Futterman of Rolling Stone was " pleasantly surprised " , as she had anticipated a decline in quality from the previous episode , and Kevin Fallon of The Atlantic commented that apart from the Bieber jokes , " the rest of the episode was sharply written and loaded with self @-@ referential jokes " . Other critics found " Comeback " mediocre . Entertainment Weekly 's Sandra Gonzalez wrote that it was " a bit off " , The A.V. Club 's Todd VanDerWerff felt that " something was missing , making the whole thing stultifying , lifeless , and boring " , and Robert Canning of IGN deemed it " fine and inoffensive " , but ultimately forgettable . Amy Reiter of the Los Angeles Times was " a little disappointed " in the episode for a lack of substance , creativity and emotional maturity . James Poniewozik of Time deemed it amongst his least favorite episodes , for " not even [ being ] bad in a memorable way " . He noted that " Comeback " was " essentially a collection of subplots " , and questioned its purpose . 
 The Sue storyline garnered many unfavorable reviews . Reiter criticized her inconsistent characterization , which made her actions seem " like fragments pasted together to form a disjointed collage . " While VanDerWerff was more favorable , he wrote that Sue 's jokes about committing " Sue @-@ <unk> " were " neither dark enough to provoke a startled burst or laughter nor funny enough to overcome their central tastelessness " , and called the scene in the pediatric oncology ward " woefully misjudged and inappropriately hilarious . " The Atlantic 's Meghan Brown found the use of seriously ill children " borderline offensive " , and called Sue 's suicide attempt " in totally bad taste " . Miriam Krule of NPR felt that Glee treated suicide too lightly , and in doing so sent a mixed message to its youth audience . Poniewozik wrote that Sue has become " a burden on the show " , and described her as " a breakout character who 's broken out of the constraints of recognizable character . " He questioned the point of her arc , and suggested that the attempt at humanizing her was redundant , as viewers already know Sue to be capable of compassion . 
 Other storylines received a more mixed response . Canning disliked the focus placed on Sam and his thin , " loveable dope " characterization . He found that the love @-@ triangle plot made little sense , and as such was hard to invest in . In contrast , Poniewozik called Sam 's Bieber subplot the episode 's strongest element , and deemed it fun if inessential . He praised Glee for capturing the " disposable fun " of Bieber 's music , " without either sneering at it or making it more than it is " , and called it better in this respect than " The Power of Madonna " . Lauren received several positive reviews . While VanDerWerff found her relationship with Puck " a lot less assured " than in " Silly Love Songs " , Mullins and Gonzalez praised their " endearing " dynamic . Reiter felt that in " Comeback " , while new characters like Sam and Lauren " managed to shine " , established favorites fared less well : " Finn continues to be <unk> drained of all that once made him so adorable , and Rachel , too , has been deprived of the depth and sex appeal she so carefully developed over time . " Several critics raised similar criticism of Rachel — Gonzalez found her need for Brittany 's help " too much of a regression " , and disliked her return to " old , desperate habits " after several episodes of personal growth . Canning felt that the storyline was forced , and Poniewozik observed that the episode " seemed to be trying less to advance her character [ than ] simply to give her something to do . " VanDerWerff wrote that Rachel appeared to have five different subplots , none of which came together cohesively , and that it reflected the awkward construction of the episode . 
 = = = Music and performances = = = 
 The episode 's musical covers and performances were mostly well received by critics . Hankinson wrote that the songs " blended all of the show 's best charms " , which he listed as " kitschy <unk> [ sic ] " , " slick production " and " raw vocal ability . " Futterman also praised all of the music . 
 The Bieber numbers received a mostly positive reception . Mullins complimented them both , particularly Overstreet 's performance of " Baby . " Futterman said this performance was impressive , " a total pop star package that recalled the Biebs ' swag " . She found this element " smooth [ ed ] over " in " Somebody to Love " , but called the recreation admirable nonetheless . Gonzalez highlighted the Bieber songs as the best of the episode ; she gave " Baby " and " Somebody to Love " grades of " A " and " B + " , respectively . On the former song , Gonzalez enjoyed Sam 's performance , particularly his " <unk> dance moves that made [ her ] ache for the boy @-@ band era . " Although she complimented the male vocalists and their " almost perfect re @-@ creation " of the video , Gonzalez was disappointed the show chose to repeat , rather than reinterpret , the choreography . Fallon praised the two songs : he called Sam " quite charming while channeling Bieber " and said " the acoustic opening to ' Baby ' was actually very sweet , just as it was when Biebs stripped down the tune to open his Grammy performance " . He added that the dancing " stood out " in " Somebody to Love " . Raymund Flandez of The Wall Street Journal expressed disappointment in the Bieber performances " displayed so awkwardly and so <unk> " by Sam . On " Baby " , he opined that Overstreet lacked " swagger " , coordination and charm . He was more impressed by the rendition of " Somebody to Love " , but noted that Sam was vocally overshadowed by Artie . 
 The performance of the duet " Take Me or Leave Me " elicited praise from Brown and Fallon , who both deemed it the highlight of the episode . Brown noted that " it had that addictive Glee quality of actually feeling like high school , and watching Mercedes and Rachel have a blast blasting each other was a treat . " Gonzalez gave the duet a " B " , as , while there was " so much to swoon for " , she is more partial to ballads because they " discourage oversinging throughout the entire song " . Futterman wrote that while Mercedes had more sass than Rachel , " both ladies sang " . VanDerWerff did not see how the song was relevant , and felt that Michele 's voice was ill @-@ suited to it . 
 Flandez called Lauren 's " I Know What Boys Like " the highlight of the episode , and VanDerWerff praised it as the best musical number . He complimented her confidence , but said the underwear joke was " unnecessary and overstated " . In contrast , Gonzalez cited the underwear shots as a factor in raising her grade to a " C- " for a song without " basic musicality " . Patrick Burns of The Atlantic was also unimpressed , and questioned Lauren 's spot in glee club , as " her brazen character never ceases to please , but it 's just not believable that she would join the glee club if she cannot sing . " In December 2012 , TV Guide named the cover one of Glee 's worst performances . 
 On the New Directions collaboration with Sue on " Sing " , Futterman wrote , " By turning down the rock and bringing in a choral element , the song actually came off as a great anthem for the bunch of misfits that is the New Directions . We kind of wish they had put on their choir robes instead and fully embraced the arrangement . " Although Gonzalez gave the performance a " B " , she called it " lacking " and not " regionals material " : " We need to be blown away . " TV Guide also listed this rendition as one of Glee 's worst performances . 
 = = = Chart history = = = 
 Of the five cover versions released as singles — the cover of " This Little Light of Mine " was not released — four debuted on the Billboard Hot 100 , and appeared on other musical charts . These same four songs were also featured on the sixth soundtrack album of the series , Glee : The Music , Volume 5 . On the Hot 100 , the show 's rendition of " Baby " debuted at number forty @-@ seven ; it was at number fifty @-@ two on the Billboard Canadian Hot 100 . The Glee cover version of " Sing " debuted on the Hot 100 at number forty @-@ nine , placing higher than the original by My Chemical Romance , which climbed from number ninety @-@ two to number fifty @-@ eight , its best showing to that point ; in Canada , both versions debuted on the Canadian Hot 100 in the same week , with the Glee version at number thirty @-@ seven , the highest of the four Glee singles there , while the original charted twenty slots below it at number fifty @-@ seven . The other two songs on the Hot 100 were " Take Me or Leave Me " at number fifty @-@ one , which also made number sixty on the Canadian Hot 100 , and " Somebody to Love " at number sixty @-@ two , which also made number fifty @-@ three on the Canadian Hot 100 . " I Know What Boys Like " did not chart . 
 = Bovet Fleurier = 
 Bovet Fleurier SA is a Swiss brand of luxury watchmakers chartered May 1 , 1822 in London , U.K. by Édouard Bovet . It is most noted for its pocket watches manufactured for the Chinese market in the 19th century . Today it produces high @-@ end artistic watches ( priced between US $ 18 @,@ 000 and $ 2 @.@ 5 million ) with a style that references its history . The company is known for its high @-@ quality dials ( such as the Fleurier Miniature Painting models ) , engraving , and its seven @-@ day <unk> . The original Bovet watches were also among the first to emphasize the beauty of their movements with skeletonized views and highly decorative movements . Bovet watches were also among the first to include a second hand while the company has a tradition of employing women artisans , which is rare for traditional watch making companies in Europe . Pascal Raffy is the current owner . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Fleurier , home of Bovet = = = 
 Watch making was introduced to Fleurier by Daniel @-@ Jean @-@ Jacques @-@ Henri Vaucher , an apprentice of Daniel <unk> , in 1730 . At the time the area was known for metal working , a natural result of the iron deposits discovered locally in the 15th century . <unk> flourished in and around Fleurier during the late 18th century but because production was sold on credit for the international markets , prices were undercut and economic destabilization brought about by the Napoleonic wars caused watch making in the area to decrease significantly . By the mid @-@ 19th century , Fleurier produced watches almost exclusively for the Chinese market while the municipality 's current renown as a watch making centre is attributed to Bovet watches . 
 = = = The founder = = = 
 Édouard Bovet ( 1797 – 1849 ) was the son of the watchmaker Jean @-@ Frédéric Bovet . He studied the art with his father in Fleurier , but in 1814 left home for political reasons with two of his brothers , Alphonse and Frederic , to study watch making in London . After studying in the city for a few years with the firm of Messrs. <unk> & <unk> , <unk> sent Bovet to Canton , China in 1818 . Almost as soon as he arrived he was able to sell four of his watches for the equivalent of US $ 1 million in 2008 currency . 
 = = = The 19th century : Founding of the company and China = = = 
 The original Bovet company was founded in London in 1822 by Edouard Bovet for the purposes of manufacturing watches exclusively for the Chinese market . Some watch historians believe that the company was established in London due to the ease of shipping watches to China on the frequent ships of the East India Company . Edouard 's brothers , Alphonse and Frederic , stayed in London to manage shipping ; another brother , Charles @-@ Henri , managed manufacturing in Fleurier , while Edouard developed the market in Canton . 
 Bovet was neither the first nor the last company to target the Chinese watch market . They shared it with <unk> , Jaques Ullmann , and Vacheron Constantin , among others . Edouard Bovet discovered the potential of the Chinese market as a student of <unk> in London , from whom he borrowed some design ideas . While from 1820 onwards Vacheron Constantin dominated the market in imperial northern China , Bovet remained market leader in the more populous south of the country . Although the 19th @-@ century Chinese watch market was predated by a few Jesuit watch makers as early as the 15th century , by the early 19th century watch making in China had become of such a low quality that the new European watches were quickly appreciated . 
 Notwithstanding their high price , the popularity of Bovet watches in China meant that the company had to contract with other Swiss manufacturers such as Guinand to help them meet demand . Even though Juvet Fleurier also sold pieces in China , it was not uncommon to see Bovet pieces with a Juvet movement . In the 1830s Bovet established a manufacturing facility in Canton , but because of restrictions resulting from the Opium Wars , they had to close that facility and open a smaller one in Macau . It was about this time that the company created a Chinese name to more effectively market to the middle class . The Chinese name for Bovet , " Bo Wei " , became a common noun for watches in China for many years . 
 The Chinese watch market collapsed around 1855 due to competition from France and the United States along with the tremendous number of Chinese @-@ made counterfeits . By 1864 problems caused by the Opium War caused the Bovet family to sell their interest in the company . They sold the company to their manufacturing inspectors in Fleurier , Jules <unk> and Ernest <unk> , who were soon joined by Ami Leuba . 
 As of 2013 , watches made for the Chinese market by this manufacturer and others such as William <unk> of London command high prices as collectible art objects . 
 = = = Into the 20th century : Beyond China = = = 
 After the virtual closure of the Chinese market , Bovet continued to manufacture pocket watches , though at a much reduced rate , and would frequently offer its manufacturing services on a contract basis to other watch companies . The Landry Freres purchased Bovet in 1888 but did not invest in it . In 1901 , the Bovet trademark was sold at auction in Paris to Cesar and Charles Leuba , sons of Ami Leuba . Jacques Ullmann and Co . , another successful produce of watches for the Chinese market , purchased the Bovet brand in 1918 . After Jacques Ullmann went out of business in 1932 , the Bovet name was acquired by Albert and Jean Bovet , who were successful watch makers and registered several patents for chronographs , such as the mono <unk> — a device that would pause the second hand for a reading while the mechanism continued to run . The company Favre @-@ Leuba purchased the name and manufacturing facilities from the Bovet brothers in 1948 . 
 Favre @-@ Leuba stopped producing Bovet branded watches in 1950 , and then only manufactured its own branded watches from the facilities it acquired from the Bovet brothers . Favre @-@ Leuba sold the Bovet brand and facilities in 1966 to a cooperative of individual watch makers . 
 = = = The modern company = = = 
 In 1989 , <unk> Fleurier purchased Bovet and registered the trademark for " all watchmaking products , mechanical watches and clocks and naval instruments , of Swiss origin " , but no Bovet branded timepieces were produced . <unk> sold Bovet in 1990 to investors , and Bovet Fleurier SA was established . However , no watches were actually manufactured by the company until after it was acquired by Roger <unk> and Thierry <unk> in 1994 , who opened a branch office in Geneva . 
 The company was acquired by Pascal Raffy , its current president , on February 6 , 2001 . In June 2006 , Mr. Raffy purchased several manufacturing structures , such as the STT group , which produced complicated watch movements , in order to obtain complete control over the quality of all phases of the watch crafting process . STT was renamed Dimier 1738 Manufacture de Haute <unk> <unk> and went into a full restructuring over the next two years in order to bring the standards up to those of Bovet . The second purchase was a dial and precious gem setting manufacture located in Plan @-@ les @-@ <unk> in Geneva . The name was changed also from Valor , Lopez , et Villa to Dimier 1738 Manufacture <unk> de <unk> et de <unk> . With the same philosophy as the movement factory , Mr. Raffy turned this factory into an artisan center providing dials for Bovet , Dimier 's watch brand , and a select group of clients in luxury watchmaking . There are currently about 150 employees of Bovet Fleurier SA and the Dimier manufactures , and the company only produces under 2 @,@ 000 watches a year . Some modern Bovet watches are fitted with mechanisms manufactured by Vaucher Manufacture , a company that also supplied watches to the Chinese market in the 19th century . Bovet spends very little to advertise and prefers to have private salons for clients instead of attending public fairs . About a third of the watches it manufactures are one @-@ of @-@ a @-@ kind pieces that are made to order . 
 = = Watches = = 
 = = = Legacy of the Bovet style = = = 
 Bovet watches include much artistic detail , and the company gives the artisans a great deal of independence in creating the elements of the watches , thus encouraging creativity . The Chinese watches were originally sold in pairs in a mahogany box , both for good luck and so that the user would have a back @-@ up watch if one needed repair , as repairs would sometimes take more than six months to complete . The design characteristics of the watch emphasized the elements which appealed to Chinese consumers . One of these appealing characteristics was the mechanics of clocks and watches , and so Bovet emphasized the beauty of the movements with its skeletonized views and highly decorative movements , the first watches to emphasize these characteristics in this way . For the same reason the watches were also among the first to include a second @-@ hand . The enamel decorations were usually of European scenes or plant life , which made the watches more appealing to the Chinese consumers , since such images were as exotic to them as the European @-@ made watches themselves . 
 The original Chinese Bovet watches often fetch more than US $ 300 @,@ 000 for the most decorative models , and more than $ 50 @,@ 000 for the simpler ones . The simplest metal Chinese watches in moderate condition are usually sold for at least $ 500 . Replicas have become increasingly common on the Internet , and while some are the counterfeits produced in China in the 19th century , some more modern counterfeits have also been seen , particularly in markets in Europe and on eBay . 
 = = = The chronographs = = = 
 The Bovet branded watches sold by Bovet Freres in the early 1940s ( and possibly as early as the 1930s ) and by Favre @-@ Leuba from 1948 to 1950 contained a number of ebauches , or blank movements manufactured by other companies . Initially the signature , or logo , on the dial of the Bovet Freres watches simply had the name of the company in a typical typeface , but in the early 1940s their watches had their stylized logo without the " Freres " . When Favre @-@ Leuba purchased the company , the stylized logo was replaced with simply " Bovet " in normal type , then with a stylized " Bovet " . In the transition just before the Favre @-@ Leuba watches no longer used the Bovet brand , watches assembled at the Bovet facility bore the name of both Favre @-@ Leuba and Bovet . 
 The most commonly used ebauches during this period were those manufactured by <unk> SA ( now ETA , SA ) , namely the Valjoux and Landeron calibres . The 17 jewel Valjoux 84 lever movement with stem wind was the most common Valjoux movement for the Bovet chronographs , but sometimes the 77 calibre was also used . The Landeron movements were more varied , which included the 47 , 48 , 51 , 57 , 59 , 80 , 81 calibres , and for the rare date and <unk> models , the Landeron 186 was used . Most of the Bovet Freres watches contained Valjoux movements , while most of the Favre @-@ Leuba watches contained Landeron movements . It has been said that the Valjoux were the better produced of the ebauches , indeed the best at the time , and that over time the Landeron became more common and cheap in quality , and it is said that the poor quality of the Landeron had a negative impact on the Bovet name . These chronographs were produced in large numbers , and are fairly commonly found on the internet for purchase . This was a commercial divergence in the Bovet identity which is unique in the Bovet history , as it is normally known for refined artistic pieces , and not utility . 
 = = = The restoration of the Bovet style = = = 
 When the company began to make watches again in the 1990s it produced a unique style of watch which incorporated various elements of the pocket watch form in its construction , such as at the lugs , and won awards after its introduction in 1997 . Most Bovet watches use this trademark style today . The watches are unique for their high @-@ quality <unk> ( such as the Fleurier Miniature Painting models ) , engraving , and a seven @-@ day self @-@ winding <unk> . Bovet watches are also unique for the company 's tradition of employing women artisans , which is rare for traditional watch making companies in Europe . Some of the limited edition modern Bovet watches can cost more than US $ 1 million , and the purchaser of such a watch is usually flown out to the manufacturing facility in Switzerland by the company to witness the production process and meet the artisans . 
 = Naughty Girl ( Beyoncé song ) = 
 " Naughty Girl " is a song recorded by American singer Beyoncé from her debut studio album , Dangerously in Love ( 2003 ) . It was written by Robert Waller , Angela Beyincé , Scott Storch and Beyoncé , and produced by the Storch and Beyincé . Musician Aaron Fishbein added the iconic guitar riff and wah wah licks . The song was released by Columbia Records as the fourth and final single from the album to US radios on March 14 , 2004 , and was available as a physical release the next month . An official remix featuring Lil ' Kim was released in the following month , as well . Musically , " Naughty Girl " is an R & B and disco song that interpolates from the Donna Summer 's song , " Love to Love You Baby " ( 1975 ) . Influenced by Arabic music , dancehall and reggae , the song contains lyrics that reference to a celebration of sexual lust and conquest , leading up to a desire for a one @-@ night stand . 
 " Naughty Girl " was received with positive reviews by music critics , who praised Beyoncé 's assertive vocals and the song 's sensual vibe . However , opinions about how convincingly Beyoncé was able to portray a naughty girl were polarized . The song was nominated in the category Best R & B / Soul Single by a Female Artist at the 2005 Soul Train Music Awards . " Naughty Girl " peaked at number three on the US Billboard Hot 100 , becoming Beyoncé 's fourth consecutive release from the album to reach the top five on that chart . The single reached the top ten in New Zealand , Australia , the Netherlands and the United Kingdom . " Naughty Girl " was certified gold by the American and Australian trade associations of record producers . It was also certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of New Zealand . 
 The single 's accompanying music video was directed by Jake Nava and was inspired by the dancing of Cyd Charisse and Fred Astaire in the 1953 musical comedy film , The Band Wagon . In it , Beyoncé flirtatiously and seductively dances with R & B singer Usher to portray a naughty girl . The video received four nominations at the 2004 MTV Video Music Awards and eventually won the Best Female Video accolade . The song was included on Beyoncé 's set lists on her tours . The American Society of Composers , Authors and Publishers ( ASCAP ) recognized " Naughty Girl " as one of the most performed songs of 2005 at the ASCAP Pop Music Awards . " Naughty Girl " has been covered by singer @-@ songwriter <unk> and band Richard Cheese and Lounge Against the Machine . 
 = = Background and release = = 
 After the release of her former group Destiny 's Child 's 2001 album Survivor , Beyoncé began a solo career and recorded her debut solo album , Dangerously in Love ( 2003 ) . Beyoncé stated that it is more personal than her previous records because she was writing for herself . She contacted Scott Storch , Robert Waller and her cousin and personal assistant Angela Beyincé ; together , they composed " Naughty Girl " among many other songs . It was planned to be the lead single from the album but " Crazy in Love " was eventually chosen . " Naughty Girl " was subsequently released as the fourth and final single by Columbia Records ; it was serviced for airplay in the United States on March 14 , 2004 under formats that included rhythmic contemporary and urban contemporary ones . The single was added to contemporary hit radios playlists on an unknown date . 
 " Naughty Girl " was first released in the United Kingdom as a maxi single , which contained four tracks as well as a multimedia one , on April 5 , 2004 , and later as a CD single on May 18 , 2004 . In the US , it was later released as a 12 " single and a CD single on April 20 , 2004 . A different CD single was released in Australia on April 23 , 2004 ; it included the album version and two remixes of the song , and Destiny 's Child 's song " I Know " from The Fighting Temptations soundtrack . " Naughty Girl " was also made available as a digital download in the same country on June 1 , 2004 . On April 26 , 2004 , it was released in Germany as a maxi single and different CD singles were additionally made available in its iTunes Store and on Amazon.com. The song was released as a digital EP in several European countries , including Austria , Belgium , Denmark , Ireland , the Netherlands , Norway , Switzerland , and Sweden in early May 2004 . The same EP was also serviced in Canada and was exclusively released as a CD single in Switzerland on May 31 , 2004 . " Naughty Girl " was released as a download @-@ only single in New Zealand on June 1 , 2004 . 
 = = Music and lyrics = = 
 According to the sheet music published at Musicnotes.com by Alfred Music Publishing , " Naughty Girl " is an R & B song based on the A @-@ sharp Phrygian dominant scale . It is written in common time and moves at a moderate tempo of 100 beats per minute . Beyoncé 's vocal range spans around one and a half octaves in the song , from B ♯ 3 to F5 . Storch and Beyoncé interpolated the refrain of the 1975 song " Love to Love You Baby " , originally performed by Donna Summer and written by Summer , Pete <unk> and Giorgio Moroder . Musically , " Naughty Girl " is influenced by Middle Eastern and Arabic music , resulting to an uptempo and disco @-@ oriented sound . The song also displays dancehall as well as reggae influences , and is built on <unk> synth grooves weave . 
 According to Spence D. of IGN Music , Beyoncé 's vocals on the song are layered , making them sound like " a harem of Beyoncé 's warbling for the affections of some sultan of swing . " According to James Poletti of Yahoo ! Music , the female protagonist in the song sings about her " potential to turn on the filth . " Lyrically , the song is a celebration of sexual lust and conquest , culminating in a desire for a one @-@ night stand . This " lustful sexual confidence " is further demonstrated in the lyrics of the first verse : " I 'm feeling sexy / Wa [ nt to ] hear you say my name , boy / If you can reach me , you can feel my burning flame / Feeling kind of N A S T Y / I might just take you home with me " and the chorus lines : " Tonight I 'll be your naughty girl / I 'm <unk> ' all my girls / We 're gonna turn this party out / I know you want my body . " Throughout the song , Beyoncé sings the lines " I 'd love to love you , baby " almost whispering as stated by Ed Masley of The Arizona Republic . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 " Naughty Girl " was critically lauded for its sensual vibe . Sal Cinquemani of Slant Magazine wrote that Beyoncé delivers a " convincing impression of Donna Summer " . Los Angeles Times ' Natalie Nichols wrote that " the deliberately Donna Summer @-@ esque ' Naughty Girl ' [ ... ] successfully meld [ Beyoncé ] breathy cooing with hip , interesting production . " Lewis Dene of BBC commented that Beyoncé sings " lustfully and sexually confident " , and Spence D. of IGN stated that she creates " a brief aura of aural hypnotism " , an effect made during the line " I 'm feeling sexy " . He also added that the song was guaranteed to have even " the most staid of folks slithering across the dance floor . " James Poletti of Yahoo ! Music wrote that " Naughty Girl " mingles " Holly Valance Moorish exoticism with a typically tight R & B groove . " 
 Rob Fitzpatrick of NME characterized Beyoncé 's breathing heavily while grabbing the " imaginary " bedsheets but remained a " devout young Christian woman singing what the public wants her to sing . " Describing " Naughty Girl " as an uptempo party track , Lisa Verrico of The Times commented that the song features " an unusually high @-@ pitched Beyoncé singing lines such as ' The rhythm ’ s got me going crazy ' " . Neil Drumming of Entertainment Weekly found Beyoncé 's singing " not quite convincingly a naughty girl " . This was echoed by Kelefa Sanneh of The New York Times who said it was fun to hear Beyoncé mimicking " the pizzicato line " in " Naughty Girl " , and that it was not much fun to hear her try to sing " like a naughty girl " . Ed Masley of The Arizona Republic commented that " Storch does his most convincing imitation of the Neptunes writing their own Kashmir in a Middle Eastern restaurant " . 
 = = = Recognition and accolades = = = 
 Bill Lamb writing for About.com ranked the song at number three on his list of the Top 100 Pop Songs 2004 , and at number forty @-@ two on his list of the Top 100 Pop Songs of the 2000s , writing : " Beyonce borrowed a portion of Donna Summer 's naughty classic " Love to Love You Baby " to create this celebration of sensual naughtiness . " On the occasion of Beyoncé 's thirtieth birthday , Erika Ramirez and Jason Lipshutz of Billboard magazine placed " Naughty Girl " at number 12 on their list of Beyoncé 's 30 Biggest Billboard Hits . The staff members of Pitchfork Media placed it at number ten on their list of The Top 50 Tracks of 2004 praising its minimal production which " absolutely burns " and further describing the song as " delicious and practically perfect " . 
 In 2013 , John Boone and Jennifer Cady of E ! Online placed the song at number eight on their list of Beyoncé 's ten best songs , writing " Every now and then Bey likes to get a little funky , like on this reggae @-@ infused dancehall tune that finds our naughty girl cooing Donna Summer @-@ style ... Sexiest . Disco . Ever . " " Naughty Girl " was nominated in the category Best R & B / Soul Single by a Female Artist at the 2005 Soul Train Music Awards . Beyoncé was awarded the " Songwriter of the Year " — shared with Scott Storch , Robert Walker , Angela Beyincé , and Donna Summer — at the American Society of Composers , Authors and Publishers ' 2005 Pop Music Awards . It also won the " Most Performed Songs " award , along with " Baby Boy " and " Me , Myself and I " . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 " Naughty Girl " did not achieve the chart success of " Crazy in Love " and " Baby Boy " . However , like the latter and " Me , Myself and I " , " Naughty Girl " attained more immediate and commercial success than its predecessors , propelling the album onto the charts and helping it be certified as multi @-@ platinum . " Naughty Girl " debuted at number 68 on the US Billboard Hot 100 issue dated March 27 , 2004 . After eleven weeks on the chart , " Naughty Girl " received the digital gainer title and peaked at number three on the Billboard Hot 100 issue dated June 5 , 2004 . It remained at number three for another week and became Beyoncé 's fourth consecutive top @-@ five release from Dangerously in Love and Beyoncé 's fifth consecutive top @-@ five hit . The single performed equally well on most of Billboard component charts , including Rhythmic Top 40 and Top 40 Tracks . It reached number one on the US Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Singles Sales and the US Hot Dance Music / Club Play charts . The single remained on the chart for twenty @-@ two weeks . " Naughty Girl " single was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) on October 22 , 2004 . 
 In Oceania , the single peaked at number six in New Zealand on May 31 , 2004 while it debuted and peaked at number nine in Australia on May 9 , 2004 . After tumbling down some places , it returned to its high point of number nine for four non @-@ consecutive weeks and was certified gold by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) for selling over 35 @,@ 000 units . " Naughty Girl " debuted and peaked at number 10 in the United Kingdom on April 17 , 2004 , making it Beyoncé 's third UK top ten single . It charted for eight consecutive weeks in 2004 . In Europe , the single reached number ten in the Netherlands , and the top twenty in the Belgian territories of Flanders and Wallonia , Denmark , Germany , France , Norway , Sweden and Switzerland . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The music video for " Naughty Girl " was directed by Jake Nava , who directed Beyoncé 's videos , " Crazy in Love " and " Baby Boy " . The video is inspired by the dancing of Cyd Charisse and Fred Astaire in the 1953 musical comedy film , The Band Wagon and has a Studio 54 style . Paired with Usher , Beyoncé dances seductively and flirts with him to portray a naughty girl . She felt that they were a " perfect match " for the dancing scenes in the video . According to Usher , the video is a homage to classic " ultimate entertainers " ; including dancers , singers and actors . He further talked about the collaboration on the video , saying , " Beyoncé and me have been talking about doing a record together . She reached out to me and said she had an idea and really wanted me to be the lead in her video ... I was like , ' Well let me hear the idea . ' It sounded like something totally different than what had been on TV . " 
 The video begins with Beyoncé performing a simple dance routine surrounded by a wall of mirrors and then undressing until she is naked behind a white curtain , revealing only her silhouette . Beyoncé enters the club with a different outfit and hairstyle and some friends . Male patrons seated at the tables look on . She and Usher notice each other . They meet on the dance floor and dance intimately . Beyoncé performs an elaborate dance scene with female backing dancers . She swirls around in a champagne glass filled with bubbles . In the final scene , Beyoncé sits atop a piano and after being lifted down by a gentleman , she dances and poses as confetti falls everywhere . 
 Joseph Patel of MTV News described Beyoncé 's and Usher 's moves in the video as " graceful " . Gordon Smart of The Sun praised Beyoncé 's figure with her " famous " and " real " curves . He further highlighted the scene where she takes off her dress in the video , saying that it was a " naked ambition " which outstripped Britney Spears . Philadelphia 's Patrick DeMarco described the video as " sexy " . A reviewer from Vibe compared Beyoncé 's " booty dance " in the music video to those by Christina Aguilera in the music video for " Dirrty " ( 2002 ) . On MTV 's Total Request Live , " Naughty Girl " debuted at number ten on March 22 , 2004 and peaked at number one . It retired to TRL 's " Hall of Fame " at number seven and after being on the countdown for fifty days . The video won Best Female Video at the 2004 MTV Video Music Awards and was nominated in the categories Best Choreography , Best Dance Video and Best Cinematography . At the 2005 MTV Australia Video Music Awards , the video received two nominations for Best R & B Video and Sexiest Video . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 During the Verizon Ladies First Tour which also featured Alicia Keys , Missy Elliott and Tamia , Beyoncé performed " Naughty Girl " as part of the concert 's set list . Before starting to sing , she asked the audience : " Do I have any naughty girls in the house tonight ? Her DJ yelled : " Do the A @-@ Town stomp ! " Beyoncé then walked onto the stage with some female dancers . As she sang , more dancers appeared on smaller , circular platforms while fire shot from the floor and a long , rectangular screen merged video of flames with images of the performers . Beyoncé then performed portions of Vanity 6 's song " Nasty Girl " ( 1982 ) as a small dance break . The song was included on the set list of Beyoncé 's Dangerously in Love World Tour that began in late 2003 . During the tour , she appeared suspended from the ceiling of the arena and was lowered into a red lounger . 
 The song was included on Beyoncé 's set list on her concert tours The Beyoncé Experience ( 2007 ) and I Am ... Tour ( 2009 @-@ 2010 ) . It was featured on the live albums The Beyoncé Experience Live ( 2007 ) , and the deluxe edition of I Am ... World Tour ( 2010 ) which contained performances from the tour . On August 5 , 2007 , Beyoncé performed the song at the Madison Square Garden in Manhattan . Before starting to sing , she asked loudly for " all the naughty girls present " at the concert to respond , which they did " with enthusiasm " . While singing , Beyoncé was accompanied by her all @-@ female band and she incorporated Donna Summer 's " Love to Love You Baby " into " Naughty Girl " . Jon Pareles of The New York Times complimented the performance , stating : " Beyoncé needs no distractions from her singing , which can be airy or brassy , tearful or vicious , rapid @-@ fire with staccato syllables or sustained in curlicued melismas . But she was in constant motion , strutting in costumes " . Shaheem Reid of MTV News also praised the performance , writing : " For all the dancing she did , Beyoncé got an equally big — if not more resounding — response for displaying her undeniable vocal ability " . Frank Scheck of The Hollywood Reporter wrote : " The largely uptempo show featured some surprising arrangements that gave the material freshness , such [ ... ] an injection of ' Love to Love You Baby ' into ' Naughty Girl ' . " 
 In Los Angeles , Beyoncé gave a full @-@ length performance of the song , dressed in a green belly dancing costume . She performed with several female backup dancers and live instrumentation . When Beyoncé performed the song in Sunrise , Florida on June 29 , 2009 , she was wearing a glittery gold leotard . As she sang , animated graphics of turntables , faders and other club equipment were projected behind the dancers and musicians . Beyoncé was accompanied by two drummers , two keyboardists , a percussionist , a horn section , three imposing backup vocalists called the Mamas and a lead guitarist , Bibi McGill . Beyoncé performed the song at the Wynn Theatre in Las Vegas , Nevada on August 2 , 2009 as part of her show revue I Am ... Yours . The performance was recorded and distributed in a DVD / CD package titled I Am ... Yours : An Intimate Performance at Wynn Las Vegas . 
 Beyoncé performed " Naughty Girl " live at the 2011 Glastonbury Festival on June 26 , 2011 . In May , 2012 , Beyoncé performed " Naughty Girl " during her Revel Presents : Beyoncé Live revue in Atlantic City , New Jersey , United States ' entertainment resort , hotel , casino and spa , Revel . Before the performance of the song , one of the in @-@ between films was shown , where of Beyoncé said , " Harnessing the power of your body requires responsibility " . Then , she appeared dressed in a feathered headdress . During the performance of the song , Beyoncé performed it as a tribute to Donna Summer , singing her song " Love to Love You Baby " . Maura Johnston of The Village Voice wrote that " the sinuous ' Naughty Girl ' had its source material laid bare at the outset when a sample of the groans and coos from ' Love To Love You Baby ' was laid over it " . According to Spin 's Caryn Ganz , she was " breaking out fluffy feathered fans " during the performance of the song . 
 = = Cover versions and usage in media = = 
 " Naughty Girl " has been covered by several artists . Irish singer @-@ songwriter <unk> produced a version of the song which appeared on the 2004 charity album Even Better Than the Real Thing Vol . 2 . Richard Cheese and Lounge Against the Machine covered the song on their 2006 album Silent Nightclub . 
 In January 2011 , " Naughty Girl " was used in a commercial for L ’ <unk> Paris <unk> hair color in which Beyoncé bleached her hair blonde . Beyoncé wears body @-@ conforming outfits and whips her hair back and forth as she shows off " her luscious locks . " " Naughty Girl " was also used in the trailer for the 2004 Paramount Pictures film " Mean Girls " . 
 = = Formats and track listings = = 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = = = Chart precession and succession = = = 
 = Agatha Christie : Murder on the Orient Express = 
 Agatha Christie : Murder on the Orient Express is a 2006 point @-@ and @-@ click third @-@ person adventure game developed by AWE Productions and published by The Adventure Company for Microsoft Windows . The game is the second installment in The Adventure Company 's Agatha Christie series . The setting is five years before the events in Agatha Christie : And Then There Were None , with a largely unrelated storyline . The plot follows an amateur sleuth , Antoinette Marceau , and her investigation of a murder with twelve possible suspects aboard the Orient Express , which has been blocked by an avalanche in the Kingdom of Yugoslavia during 1934 . She is aided by famous detective Hercule Poirot . 
 Murder on the Orient Express retains the main plot elements of Agatha Christie 's novel of the same name . An additional ending is presented in the game which differs from the conclusion of Christie 's novel . As with And Then There Were None , Christie 's novel has been bundled with the game . Some reviewers of Murder on the Orient Express criticized the game because of the repetitive nature of tasks the player must complete , and also complained about the inefficient and cumbersome inventory system . Others have praised it for improved graphics compared to And Then There Were None , as well as convincing voice acting and audio effects . Murder on the Orient Express is followed by Agatha Christie : Evil Under the Sun , the third installment in the Agatha Christie series . 
 Murder on the Orient Express is the first game in the Agatha Christie series to feature Hercule Poirot , Christie 's most popular and famous detective . David Suchet , whose portrayal of Poirot achieved fame through the popular television series Agatha Christie 's Poirot , was hired to provide Poirot 's voice . His performance was generally met with praise . Some have criticized the game for not allowing the player to actually control Poirot ; the developers explained this choice by saying that adventure gamers who make mistakes throughout the game do not reflect the genius of Poirot , but are better represented by amateur sleuth Antoinette Marceau . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 A player can navigate and interact with the game 's environment , mainly carriages on the Orient Express , through use of a context @-@ sensitive cursor . The cursor changes when it is placed over an item with which the player can interact , and can be used to talk to other characters , listen to other characters ' conversations , look around the environment , and move . The player can walk to a location with a single click , and run to a location with a double @-@ click . Double @-@ clicking on the edge of the screen instantly takes the player to the next screen . There is a map of the train in the game 's interface at the top of the screen , and once each carriage has been unlocked , the player can click on any part of the map and instantly be transported to that location , saving the player from having to travel through the train screen by screen . Another accessible feature is an objectives menu interface which states the general tasks the player should be attempting to complete . This menu is designed to guide players in the right direction without giving any explicit hints . 
 Murder on the Orient Express , as with its predecessor , features an inventory system . There are several components of the inventory , including a fingerprint examination screen , a scrapbook , and a passport screen for managing and viewing the passengers ' passports . There are a total of eighty slots for carrying items in the inventory , spread across five separate screens . Items cannot be discarded from the inventory once they have been acquired . The player can access the inventory by clicking on an icon on the game 's interface , or can simply right @-@ click . After items are used , a right @-@ click returns them to the inventory , and the exact slot they were originally placed in . Each item is labelled , and the player can inspect each inventory item in more detail by dragging it over a magnifying glass icon , and can also listen for a soft hissing sound which indicates that there is something relevant for the player to note about a certain item . In a divergence from other games in its genre , Murder on the Orient Express does not allow the player to combine items in the main inventory screen . There is a separate interface for item combinations , and the player must drag items into this screen if they wish to try to combine them . 
 A large portion of gameplay in Murder on the Orient Express has the player questioning characters and listening to lengthy periods of dialogue in order to acquire clues which may lead to the murderer . Other tasks the player must complete include collecting passports and other paraphernalia left by the passengers in an effort to acquire clues to lead to the solution of the murder , and retrieving certain objects for various characters . Combining items in the inventory forms a major part of the puzzles in the game . There are no puzzles with time limits in the game , although some puzzles require correct timing . There are also several single screen puzzles , such as a safe @-@ cracking puzzle . 
 A unique feature of Murder on the Orient Express is Poirot , who serves as a hint system for the duration of the game . The player can access Poirot at any time during the game , and can receive hints to help them proceed . The game has two difficulty levels , and the player can determine which one they prefer to play at soon after the murder occurs . Poirot challenges the player , allowing them to choose to either readily accept help from him and allow him to guide the player through the game , or alternatively try to outsmart the famous sleuth by solving the mystery with obscure , and in some cases nonexistent hints . If the player has trouble once they have chosen the more difficult setting , Poirot will gradually become more forthcoming with information . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 = = = Setting and characters = = = 
 Murder on the Orient Express is set in Europe in 1934 . The game is initially set in Istanbul , while the remaining majority occurs within the carriages of the Orient Express , when it is blocked by an avalanche in Yugoslavia . However , the player has some opportunities to venture outside the train into the snowy exterior environment . 
 The setting helped make the book more intense and made the audience knew that it would be harder to escape . 
 The sole player character is Antoinette Marceau , an employee of the Compagnie Internationale des Wagons @-@ Lits . She is aided throughout her investigation by famous detective Hercule Poirot , as well as his friend Dr. Constantine . 10 of the 13 murder suspects from Christie 's novel are included in the game adaption . These are Count and Countess <unk> , Colonel Arbuthnot , Mary Debenham , Princess <unk> , Greta Ohlsson , Antonio <unk> , Cyrus Hardman , Caroline Hubbard , Hector McQueen , and several staff on the Orient Express . The victim is Samuel Ratchett . In total , there are over twenty characters featured in the game . 
 = = = Plot = = = 
