 Murder on the Orient Express begins with the Armstrong kidnapping redated and relocated in New Paltz , New York City , during 1924 , in which police officers surround an unidentified house . After a brief gun battle , two men walk out of the house and surrender . 
 The scene changes to the Turkish city of Istanbul ten years later . The game 's protagonist , a devoted junior clerk at the Istanbul offices of the Compagnie Internationale des Wagon @-@ Lits , Antoinette Marceau , receives instructions from her employer Marcel <unk> , the Director of the Compagnie Internationale des Wagon @-@ Lits , to attend to the wishes of his good friend Hercule Poirot . He tasks Marceau with ensuring that Poirot 's journey on the Orient Express is favourable . Marceau begins her adventure in Sirkeci Terminal , Istanbul , where she becomes acquainted with Poirot , whom she admires , as well as the other characters who later accompany her aboard the Orient Express . 
 Soon after the train departs Istanbul , its passage is blocked by an avalanche , stopping it . The sudden stop causes Poirot to fall out of his bunk and sprain his ankle , rendering him bed @-@ ridden . Soon after , Ratchett is found murdered , with twelve possible suspects to the murder , and the investigation begins . Marceau is challenged by Poirot to find the solution to the murder and do the " legwork " by gathering clues . 
 Marceau splits her time between seeing to the duties of the train ( such as helping to fix the heat in the engine ) , interviewing passengers about the murder , and examining the train and surrounding area for clues . She travels to several additional locations that Poirot does not travel to in the book , such as the engine , the baggage car , and an old shack outside of the snowed in train . Additionally , a sabotaged ham radio is in one of the compartments which , when repaired , allows Antoinette to contact Poirot 's nephew and ask him to research the passengers . 
 <unk> to the novel , Ratchett is revealed to be Cassetti , the criminal mastermind behind the Daisy Armstrong kidnapping . Each of the passengers on the train as well as the conductor are connected in some way to the Armstrong family , each with a motive for murder . Additionally , each person had an alibi corroborated by other passengers . 
 When Marceau believes she has solved the murder , Poirot gathers the passengers and poses a series of questions to Marceau about the clues found . He goes on to reveal three possible solutions to Ratchett 's death . The first two are identical to the novel . Poirot suggests that an assassin may have come aboard the train during the night , killed Cassetti , and then escaped the train , which is supported by evidence such as a bloodied stiletto with fingerprints that do not match anyone on the train . The second solution pieces together a number of clues showing that all of the trains ' passengers and the conductor , Pierre Michel , are responsible for the murder , to which they confess . 
 Unique to this adaptation of the story , Marceau finds additional clues such as a crate full of living accommodations in the security vault of the baggage compartment and a picture of Michel 's family , despite the fact that Poirot 's nephew radios that the man has none . After explaining the second solution , Poirot reveals that Michel is not who he appears , but is in fact Robert Perkinson , Cassetti 's criminal partner . Perkinson confirms this to the shock of the other passengers and reveals that Cassetti kept Daisy Armstrong at his house , but Cassetti gunned down Perkinson 's daughter , Teresa , whom he mistook for Daisy . 
 Perkinson reveals that he previously met Pierre Michel on a train and that Michel had told him of the plan to murder Cassetti , but he was too afraid to do it . Since the others had not seen Michel in person , Perkinson volunteered to impersonate Michel and stab Cassetti on his behalf so that he could get revenge for Teresa 's death . He then reveals that a now 13 @-@ year @-@ old Daisy Armstrong , whom he had been raising as his own daughter , is alive and has been hidden in the baggage compartment of the train during the journey . Daisy then comes out to meet the people who thought she was dead . Poirot , Dr. Constantine , and Marceau decide to tell the police officials the first solution – that an unknown assassin came aboard the train , killed <unk> , and left . The passengers are overjoyed that Daisy is alive and Poirot concludes that it is " a most satisfying ending . " 
 = = Development = = 
 Murder on the Orient Express was announced on May 2 , 2006 , as the second installment in The Adventure Company 's Agatha Christie series . As with the game 's predecessor , And Then There Were None , Murder on the Orient Express was developed by AWE Productions , in collaboration with producer The Adventure Company . The production team remained largely the same , with Lee Sheldon reprising his role as Lead Designer , and Scott Nixon from AWE Productions reprising his position as Managing Director . 
 The Adventure Company and Chorion , the owners of the rights to Christie 's works , chose Agatha Christie 's novel Murder on the Orient Express , widely considered the author 's magnum opus , as the basis for the next game in the Agatha Christie series . AWE Productions had little influence in the choice , other than being asked for an opinion . Lee Sheldon created a concept document for the new game and sent it to Chorion , who sent it back with some suggestions . Sheldon agreed to some of these , but refused others . Chorion was generally more comfortable with the development team for their second outing . They did not have to scrutinize every aspect of the game as with And Then There Were None , and generally had fewer complaints with Murder on the Orient Express , as opposed to its predecessor . 
 Mike Adams , the Producer of Murder on the Orient Express , was extremely determined to have David Suchet as the voice actor for Poirot , a major character in the game . Scott Nixon thought that Suchet had become so intertwined with the character of Poirot , after his success with the television series Agatha Christie 's Poirot , that it would be hard to imagine someone else doing Poirot 's voice without constantly being compared to Suchet . Nixon described the situation as a catch @-@ 22 , saying that he " worried about someone coming in and doing a Suchet impression instead of a unique rendition of Poirot , yet the more the voice strays from Suchet 's version , the more people will wish it was Suchet doing it ! " Another reason for the development team 's determination to have Suchet aboard was that they thought he would spur the other voice actors in the game , such as Vanessa Marshall who portrayed Antoinette Marceau , to step up and compete with Suchet 's skillful portrayal of Poirot . Fairly late in the game 's development , Suchet agreed to do the voice acting . He admitted that one reason for his acceptance of the offer was that he felt possessive of the role of Poirot , considering he had been portraying the character for so long . Mike Adams expressed pride at having succeeded in convincing Suchet to do voice acting for Murder on the Orient Express , and said that his skillful voice acting would bring " tremendous excitement and authenticity " to the game . 
 As with And Then There Were None , Lead Designer Lee Sheldon introduced a new character to the plot of Murder on the Orient Express , who was not present in Christie 's novel , in order to fulfill the role of a player character and protagonist . The character , Antoinette Marceau , is described by Sheldon as an amalgam of two characters from the novel . These were Poirot 's friend who ran the Orient Express , Marcel <unk> , and a young soldier who is present in both the novel and the film version of the story , who shepherds Poirot to Istanbul . Sheldon stated that he did not want to create entirely new protagonists for the Christie games , but rather preferred to draw from sources in Christie 's novels to piece together the games ' protagonists . Sheldon also addressed concerns from several early previews of the game , which asked why the player could not actually play as Poirot . He explained the choice of Marceau as the protagonist , saying " the reason for choosing Marceau over Poirot as the protagonist is that most of the fun of Poirot is seeing what he is up to , watching how he acts and solves things . I 've always thought the more interesting character was the ' Watson ' character rather than the Sherlock Holmes character . " 
 To make Poirot an even more integral part of Murder on the Orient Express , Sheldon made him into an elaborate hint system . After players complained about a sense of aimlessness in And Then There Were None , which arose whilst they tried to find a trigger to begin the next section of gameplay , Sheldon made Poirot an " oracle of sorts , " who can provide help whenever the player is stuck or unsure of what to do next . 
 The development team decided that , as with And Then There Were None , they would change Christie 's original ending for Murder on the Orient Express . The aim of the developers was to create games that would not only appeal to casual gamers , but also to Christie fans . As nearly all Christie fans have read Murder on the Orient Express , and know the solution , and considering that the novel was to be included with the game , the developers decided that the ending needed to be changed . The novel has two solutions – one being what appears to be happening and the other being what is actually occurring – and the developers aimed to develop a third solution which drew on these two solutions and still surprised the player . Lee Sheldon admitted that his variation to the ending of And Then There Were None received some criticism , and said that in Murder on the Orient Express changing the ending was even harder because of the sheer fame of the book and its solution . He also expressed his hatred of adaptations of older material which make fun of that time period , and said that he was trying to stay as faithful to Christie 's work and time era as possible . 
 A major difference between And Then There Were None and Murder on the Orient Express that Sheldon pointed out was that in the former , the premise of the novel was that no one solved the murder . This forced Sheldon to desperately try to find a way to integrate clues into the story so that the player could actually discover the murderer , although the game remained quite <unk> . In Murder on the Orient Express , the actual novel follows an investigation , so Sheldon could more easily integrate clues to lead to all three possible solutions . Sheldon also excised unnecessary puzzles from Murder on the Orient Express , as they were an unpopular feature of its predecessor . 
 Several graphical improvements were made to Murder on the Orient Express over And Then There Were None . These were mostly dedicated to character design and animation , which were extremely poorly received features of the first Christie game . The development team introduced animation layers , allowing them to control parts of character models independently . This allowed the developers to use the same animations whether the character was sitting , standing or lying down , and also gave them more head and upper body control . In And Then There Were None , characters had to rotate their entire bodies to talk to one another , whereas in Murder on the Orient Express , characters can simply turn their heads . The game has no physics features , but screen resolution has been increased , more detailed backgrounds have been made , and characters models contain more polygons . 
 Research was a major component of the developmental stages of Murder on the Orient Express . Most of the research was focused on Yugoslavia in 1934 , the game 's setting . Sheldon focused on the political and scientific situation of this era , and explained his intensive research , saying " all of the puzzles have to be contextual . They all have to either help character , help story or define period . " The developers also drew influence from a train museum outside Miami with an original Pullman carriage - the same as the carriages used on the Orient Express in the 1930s . The museum also contained a locomotive similar to the one the developers were looking for . The developers ended up using the train museum , several books about the Orient Express , the 1974 film version of Christie 's novel , and the internet as research resources . With Murder on the Orient Express being the first Poirot game produced , Sheldon was careful that the game fitted into Christie 's timeline of Poirot 's exploits . The television series often took liberties with the time in which stories were set , but Sheldon was determined to keep everything in strict accordance with Christie 's work . There are several references in the game to Poirot 's earlier cases , all of which are chronologically accurate . This was partly so that Sheldon could use the culture of specific eras of time , and also so that in the future other Poirot @-@ based games will be chronologically accurate . 
 The official site for Murder on the Orient Express was unveiled on September 21 , 2006 , and contains screenshots , character biographies and photos , environment artwork , trailers , demos , music , wallpaper and contests . Murder on the Orient Express was shipped to stores on November 14 , 2006 in North America . The Adventure Company held a launch party for the gaming press on November 16 , two days after the game was shipped . Among the guests were the development team of Murder on the Orient Express , and actors portraying the game 's various characters . The demo for Murder on the Orient Express was released on December 20 , 2006 , and contained a small portion of the game which has the player exploring the train . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Since its release , Murder on the Orient Express has received widely differing reviews . GameRankings gave it a score of 65 @.@ 22 % , while Metacritic gave it 60 out of 100 . 
 An aspect of gameplay in Murder on the Orient Express which received largely negative reactions was the repetitive nature of many tasks the player must complete . 2404 accused the game of reducing Christie 's novel , and the game , into a series of repetitive and secretarial tasks , such as collecting fingerprints , passports , and other random items . The site further went on to say that the player is made to feel " like a secretary for Poirot . " Game Over Online agreed with this view , saying that much of the game consisted of " goofy little errands " such as completing tasks for characters and mindlessly searching for objects . Eurogamer provides an example of this , by saying that at one point in the game the player is required to go through each cabin checking the shoe sizes of the various passengers ' shoes to check if one matches shoe prints outside the train . The inventory system featured in Murder on the Orient Express has also received significant criticism . IGN complained that instead of being able to find item combinations through trial and error in the main screen , the player is forced to drag items to a separate screen , leading to tedious gameplay . Some reviewers , in contrast , praised the inventory system , with Quandary calling it intuitive , and easy for players to organize . The puzzles in Murder on the Orient Express received positive responses from some reviewers . GameSpot commented favourably on the relatively small number of puzzles in the game , saying that they are integrated fairly well within the plot , and are not excessively difficult . The review went on to say that later puzzles in the game often rely more heavily on inventory combinations , but are still reasonably satisfying to solve . Game Over Online , in comparison , accused the game of giving the player too little information to solve puzzles , and also called the puzzles convoluted . The choice of the developers of Murder on the Orient Express to use Antoinette Marceau , rather than Poirot , as the protagonist and player character was criticized by some . 2404 disapproved of the choice , accusing the developers of not fully utilizing the talent of David Suchet , arguably the most famous and successful portrayer of Poirot . The reviewer even went so far as to tell AWE Productions to " make use of talent like David Suchet when you 've got it . " Like its predecessor , Murder on the Orient Express was criticized for diverging from Christie 's original ending . Adventure Gamers called the new ending " a little too contrived for the game 's good . " 2404 also disapproved of the ending , commenting that it goes off in too much of a Hollywood direction , and that the original ending is much better and a far more satisfying conclusion . 
 Murder on the Orient Express received some praise for graphical improvements over its predecessor . Among the aspects of the game which received positive reactions were the game 's environments . Just Adventure called the game environments " head and shoulders above And Then There Were None , " describing the train 's carriages on the Orient Express as oozing with elegance , and a faithful and accurate recreation of the 1930s . The site criticized the game for suffering graphically in later stages , but praised it overall for improving on the graphics of And Then There Were None . Game Chronicles was less enthusiastic , calling the graphics above average , but standard fare for a current adventure game . Character models were another aspect of Murder on the Orient Express which received positive attention . Quandary described the character modelling as much improved from And Then There Were None , and while still a tinge woody , " all the characters feel as if they just stepped out of the book . " Adventure Gamers called the characters " some of the best seen in recent adventure games , " saying that each character has a unique design and costume perfect for the game 's setting . The reviewer also pointed out several small touches added to the characters , such as the main character shivering when she is outside the train in the cold weather , and also brushing lint off her clothing while waiting for the player to decide what to do next . Adventure Gamers also complimented AWE Productions for lighting effects in the game , and for creating a " very soft glow to the scenes , which give a much more lifelike look to the characters . " IGN agreed that the interior of the Orient Express is quite sharp , but complained that character models lack detail and are animated awkwardly . Another complaint from IGN was that the compression used for cutscenes causes the animations to look " washed out and blocky , " and that this problem continues as the cutscenes are noticeably pixelated throughout Murder on the Orient Express . 
 An aspect of Murder on the Orient Express which many reviewers praised was the game 's audio . The voice acting in particular gained widespread positive reviews . GameSpot called the voice acting excellent , with the voice actors bringing the characters to life , thanks largely to David Suchet as Poirot . IGN also called the voice acting well done , despite a few characters sounding artificial . Music in the game was positively reviewed by 2404 , who said that it was tense at moments , but probably could have been played more frequently throughout the game . 2404 also praised the game for providing realistic sound effects , such as noises coming from the Orient Express itself , and other environmental noises such as howling wind . IGN , in contrast , heavily criticized the game for a lack of background music , and simplistic and monotonous sound effects . 
 = Samir Nasri = 
 Samir Nasri ( born 26 June 1987 ) is a French professional footballer who plays for English club Manchester City . He primarily plays as an attacking midfielder and a winger , although he has also been deployed in central midfield . 
 Nasri is known for his dribbling , ball control and passing ability . Of Algerian heritage , he is described as a player whose " vision and imagination make him an unpredictable opponent " . His playing style , ability , and cultural background have drawn comparisons to French legend Zinedine Zidane . 
 Nasri began his football career playing for local youth clubs in his hometown of Marseille . At the age of nine , he joined professional club Olympique de Marseille and spent the next seven years developing in the club 's youth academy at La Commanderie , the club 's training center . In the 2004 – 05 season , Nasri made his professional debut in September 2004 at the age of 17 against Sochaux . In the following season , he became a regular starter in the team and also participated in European competition for the first time after playing in the 2005 – 06 edition of the UEFA Cup . In the 2006 – 07 campaign , Nasri won the National Union of Professional Footballers ( UNFP ) Young Player of the Year award and was also named to the Team of the Year . He finished his career with Marseille amassing over 160 appearances . He played in the teams that reached back @-@ to @-@ back Coupe de France finals in 2006 and 2007 . 
 In June 2008 , Nasri joined Premier League club Arsenal , agreeing to a four @-@ year contract . He reached prominence with the team in his third season winning the Professional Footballers ' Association ( PFA ) Fans ' Player of the Month award on three occasions and being named to the association 's Team of the Year . In December 2010 , he was named the French Player of the Year for his performances during the calendar year . In August 2011 , after three seasons with Arsenal , Nasri joined Manchester City on a four @-@ year contract . In his first season with the club , he won his first major honour as a player as the club won the 2011 – 12 edition of the Premier League . 
 Nasri is a former French youth international and has represented his nation at every level for which he was eligible . Prior to playing for the senior team , he played on the under @-@ 17 team that won the 2004 UEFA European Under @-@ 17 Football Championship . Nasri made his senior international debut in March 2007 in a friendly match against Austria . Two months later , he scored his first senior international goal in a 1 – 0 UEFA Euro 2008 qualifying win over Georgia . Nasri has represented France at two major international tournaments : UEFA Euro 2008 and UEFA Euro 2012 . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Samir Nasri ( Arabic : <unk> <unk> ) was born in <unk> @-@ les @-@ <unk> , a northern suburb of Marseille , to French nationals of Algerian descent . His mother , <unk> Ben Saïd , and father , Abdelhafid Nasri , were both born in France ; his father being born and raised in Marseille , while his mother being from nearby Salon @-@ de @-@ Provence . Nasri 's grandparents emigrated to France from Algeria . His mother is a housewife and his father previously worked as a bus driver before becoming his son 's personal manager . At the start of his football career , Nasri initially played under his mother 's surname , Ben Saïd , before switching to Nasri , his father 's surname , following his selection to the France under @-@ 16 team . He is the eldest of four children and is a non @-@ practising Muslim . Nasri has a younger sister named Sonia and twin brothers named Walid and Malik . All four were raised in La Gavotte Peyret . After joining Arsenal in England , Nasri settled in Hampstead , a district of North London . 
 = = Club career = = 
 = = = Early career = = = 
 While growing up in La Gavotte Peyret , Nasri grew an attraction to the sport of football at a young age . He regularly played the sport on the streets where he learned many of his skills . Upon noticing his prodigious talent , his parents signed him up to play with the local club in his hometown . Nasri spent one year playing with the club in La Gavotte Peyret before moving to <unk> Mirabeau in nearby Mirabeau at the age of seven . While playing with <unk> , Nasri was discovered by Marseille scout Freddy Assolen who had been informed of the player 's talent through local word of mouth . After noticing Nasri 's skill in person , Assolen recruited the player to travel with a group of other young players to Italy to participate in a youth tournament where they would play against the youth academies of Milan and Juventus . Nasri impressed at the tournament and Assolen was jokingly told by a Milan scout that " he ( Nasri ) stays here , you leave him . " After returning to France , Marseille officials organized a meeting with the player 's father and the group agreed to allow Nasri insertion into the club 's academy at the age of nine . 
 = = = Marseille = = = 
 Upon entering the Marseille youth academy , Nasri quickly impressed . Upon moving to Bastide , where the club 's youth players reside , his style of play began to take shape . In 2007 , Nasri admitted that the move to Bastide really helped his game stating , " That ’ s where I really started to progress . Training was different and the facilities are beautiful , all of which helps you work well . " As a result of his quick progression , Nasri was an integral part of every youth team he was a part of winning several trophies , such as the Championnat de Provence , Coupe de Provence , and the Ligue de la Méditerranée . After spending most of the 2003 – 04 season playing with the club 's under @-@ 18 team , for the latter part of the season , the now 16 @-@ year @-@ old Nasri was promoted to the club 's reserve team in the Championnat de France amateur , the fourth division of French football . He appeared primarily as a substitute in a few matches during the campaign as the reserve team failed to rebound from its bad start to the season , which resulted in a 16th @-@ place finish and relegation to the Championnat de France amateur 2 . 
 = = = = Debut season = = = = 
 Ahead of the 2004 – 05 season , several clubs were reported to be interested in signing Nasri , most notably English clubs Arsenal , Chelsea , Liverpool and Newcastle United . In an effort to decrease the speculation , Nasri was offered a three @-@ year professional contract by Marseille officials led by president Pape Diouf and manager José Anigo . On 13 August 2004 , Nasri agreed to the contract . Marseille officials had been eager to sign Nasri to a contract in an attempt to not undergo a situation similar to the departure of Mathieu Flamini , in which the player departed the club without Marseille receiving any compensation . As a result of his professional contract , Nasri was promoted to the senior team by Anigo and assigned the number 22 shirt . He began the season playing on the club 's reserve team and appeared in four matches before earning a call up to the senior team in September 2004 . Nasri made his professional debut on 12 September in a 2 – 0 league defeat to Sochaux appearing as a substitute for Bruno Cheyrou . On 17 October , he made his first professional start playing the entire match in a 1 – 1 draw with Saint @-@ Étienne . Nasri featured heavily within the team under Anigo and later Philippe <unk> . In the team 's first match following the winter break , he scored his first professional goal in a 2 – 1 away victory over Lille . Nasri finished his rookie campaign with 25 total appearances , one goal , and two assists . 
 = = = = 2005 – 06 season = = = = 
 The 2005 – 06 season saw Marseille boosted by the arrival of attackers Franck Ribéry and Djibril Cissé ; the latter arriving after having a successful loan stint with the club the previous season . Nasri , who was now given a more prominent role within the team by new manager Jean Fernandez , formed impressive partnerships with the two along with lead striker Mamadou Niang . He appeared in 49 total matches , which included appearances in both the UEFA Cup and the UEFA Intertoto Cup . Nasri made his European debut on 16 July 2005 in the first round of the 2005 UEFA Intertoto Cup against Swiss club BSC Young Boys . Marseille won the first leg 3 – 2 . In the second leg , Nasri scored his first European goal in a 2 – 1 win . Marseille ultimately won the competition after beating Spanish outfit Deportivo de La Coruña 5 – 3 on aggregate . In the league , Nasri appeared in 30 matches , 25 as a starter . He scored his only league goal of the season on 29 April 2007 in a 4 – 2 win over Sochaux . In the Coupe de France , Nasri appeared in five matches as Marseille reached the final of the competition where the club faced Le Classique rivals Paris Saint @-@ Germain . Nasri appeared as a substitute in the match as Marseille were defeated 2 – 1 . Following the season , Nasri signed a two @-@ year contract extension with the club until 2009 . 
 = = = = 2006 – 07 season = = = = 
 Nasri began the 2006 – 07 season playing under Albert Emon , his fourth different manager in three years . Despite this , Marseille 's now heightened popularity saw increased speculation from writers and supporters that the club would finally win its first league title since the 1991 – 92 season . Nasri began the season on a quick note scoring the second goal in the team 's 3 – 1 win over Paris Saint @-@ Germain in September 2006 . On 29 April 2007 , Nasri scored a goal in Marseille 's 4 – 2 hammering of Sochaux . Marseille were due to face the same club in the 2007 Coupe de France Final just days later and were , subsequently , heavy favorites as a result of the team 's two @-@ goal victory in the previous match . However , Sochaux recorded an upset victory defeating Marseille 5 – 4 on penalties after the match ended 2 – 2 following extra time . On the final match day of the season , Nasri converted the only goal in a 1 – 0 win over Sedan . The victory secured 2nd place for Marseille and was the club 's best finish since finishing runner @-@ up to Bordeaux in the 1998 – 99 season . Nasri finished the season with a career @-@ high 50 appearances , 37 of them in the league . For his efforts , he was awarded the UNFP Young Player of the Year award and named to the Team of the Year . Nasri was also voted the Club Player of the Year by supporters , receiving 62 % of the votes ahead of the likes of Ribéry and Niang . 
 = = = = 2007 – 08 season = = = = 
 Similar to his previous three years at Marseille , Nasri began the new season under new management as the club was now being led by the Belgian Eric Gerets . Due to the departure of Ribéry to Bayern Munich , Gerets installed Nasri as the focal point of the attack and he responding by having his best season at the club . He appeared in 42 total matches scoring a career @-@ high six goals and also assisting on a career @-@ high 15 goals . Nasri formed partnerships in the midfield with winger Mathieu Valbuena and midfielders Lorik Cana and Benoît Cheyrou as Marseille boasted the third @-@ best attack in the league behind champions Lyon and Bordeaux , who finished first and second in the league , respectively . Nasri , initially , struggled during the infancy of the campaign due to dealing with the effects of a severely sprained ankle suffered in the pre @-@ season . He failed to score a goal or provide an assist in the team 's first eight league matches . On 24 November 2007 , he assisted on two goals in a 2 – 0 victory over Metz . Nasri closed out the fall season by assisting on the equalizing goal in a 2 – 2 draw with Bordeaux and making the final pass on the game @-@ winning goal against Le Mans . 
 Following the winter break , Nasri 's goal @-@ scoring began to take form . In late January , he scored goals in back @-@ to @-@ back matches against Nancy and Caen . In European competition , Nasri participated in the UEFA Champions League for the first time in his career , however he failed to make an impact in the four group stage matches he appeared in . He missed the club 's upset victory over Liverpool at Anfield due to dealing with a bout of meningitis . Marseille ultimately finished the group in third place , which resulted in the team qualifying for the Round of 32 of the UEFA Cup . The club was defeated in the Round of 16 by Russian club Zenit Saint Petersburg despite being up 3 – 1 heading into the second leg . Of those three goals Marseille scored in the first leg , Nasri assisted on two of them . On 16 March 2008 , Nasri scored a goal in a 3 – 3 draw with Lens . A month later , he scored the game @-@ winning goal in a 2 – 1 victory over Metz . In his final match with Marseille against Strasbourg , Nasri scored a goal and assisted on another in a 4 – 3 victory . Marseille finished the league campaign in third place , which resulted in the club qualifying for the Champions League for the second consecutive season . On 8 May 2008 , with all the transfer speculation surrounding the player , Nasri surprised many by signing a three @-@ year contract extension with the club until 2012 . 
 = = = Arsenal = = = 
 = = = = 2008 – 09 season = = = = 
 A week later , despite signing a contract extension with Marseille , Nasri was linked with a move to Premier League club Arsenal . Arsenal manager Arsène Wenger had been tracking Nasri since watching him play at the 2004 UEFA European Under @-@ 17 Football Championship . It was later revealed that the contract extension Nasri signed with Marseille was simply protocol to allow Marseille to get a higher transfer fee for the player . The Bouches @-@ du @-@ Rhône @-@ based club was seeking £ 14 million for the young midfielder . Ahead of UEFA Euro 2008 , both Nasri 's agent and Wenger admitted that offers were made for the player and that a move to the English club was imminent . The deal was ultimately concluded following the competition on 11 July 2008 with Nasri agreeing to a four @-@ year contract . The transfer fee was undisclosed , but has been purported to be in the region of £ 12 million . Upon arriving to the club , Nasri admitted that Wenger was one of the primary reasons for him joining the club , stating , " The fact that Arsène Wenger gives great opportunities to young players is very important for me . Arsène has a great reputation and he is one of the best managers in the world . " 
 Nasri was given the number 8 shirt and made his club debut on 30 July 2008 in a friendly match against German club VfB Stuttgart in a 3 – 1 win . He made his Premier League debut in the team 's first game of the season on 16 August 2008 against West Bromwich Albion . In the match , Nasri scored his first league goal scoring with a close range effort , after four minutes in a 1 – 0 victory . As a result of his debut goal , he became the 83rd player in Premier League history to score on his league debut and the 22nd Arsenal player . On 27 August , Nasri scored his second goal for the club in the team 's 2008 – 09 UEFA Champions League third round qualifying second leg tie against Dutch club Twente . Arsenal won the match 4 – 0 and the tie 6 – 0 on aggregate . On 8 November , Nasri scored both of Arsenal 's goals in a 2 – 1 win over Manchester United . 
 On 21 December , Nasri assisted on the opening goal scored by Robin van Persie in the team 's 1 – 1 draw with Liverpool . Nasri returned to his scoring form in the new year . On 17 January 2009 , he scored the second goal in the club 's 3 – 1 win over Hull City at the KC Stadium . It took Nasri another two months to score another goal , which came in Arsenal 's 3 – 1 away win against Newcastle United . He finished his first campaign at Arsenal appearing in 44 matches , scoring seven goals , and providing five assists . 
 = = = = 2009 – 10 season = = = = 
 On 21 July 2009 , while participating in a training match during pre @-@ season with Arsenal in Bad <unk> , Nasri suffered a broken leg . The injury required two to three months of rest and , as a result , Nasri missed the opening of the 2009 – 10 Premier League season . He made his debut late in the campaign on 25 October 2009 in a Football League Cup tie against Liverpool . Nasri played the entire match in a 2 – 1 win . On 4 November , he scored his first goal of the season in the team 's Champions League group stage match against Dutch outfit AZ . Three weeks later , Nasri converted another Champions League goal , this time against Belgium club Standard Liège in a 2 – 0 win . He featured heavily with the team during the winter months and he ended the 2009 calendar year by scoring a goal and providing an assist 4 – 1 win over Portsmouth away at Fratton Park . 
 After going nearly two months without scoring a goal , Nasri marked his goal @-@ scoring return in emphatic fashion in the team 's 5 – 0 second leg victory over Portuguese club Porto in the Round of 16 of the Champions League knockout stage . The goal , described by English newspaper The Guardian columnist David Lacey as " reminiscent of a lost art in British football , " showcased Nasri 's dribbling , as well as his individuality . Upon receiving the ball on the right wing from midfielder Abou Diaby , Nasri dribbled through and past three Porto players in a small area of space before bringing the ball past <unk> Álvaro Pereira and driving it across the goalkeeper , sending the ball in off the far post . Nasri goal was subsequently compared by the English media to similar goals that occurred in the country . Three weeks later , after appearing as a substitute in the second half , Nasri scored the opening goal against Birmingham City . Birmingham later equalized through a late goal from Kevin Phillips . The draw ended a string of seven consecutive league victories for Arsenal and Wenger admitted that the draw " was a big blow for our chances [ of winning the league ] . " In the team 's final seven league matches , Nasri assisted on goals in a 3 – 2 loss to Wigan and a 4 – 0 home win over Fulham . Arsenal ultimately finished the campaign in third place . Nasri concluded his second season at Arsenal appearing 34 games scoring five goals and issuing the same amount of assists . 
 = = = = Breakthrough season = = = = 
 Ahead of the 2010 – 11 season , Nasri admitted that he was determined to re @-@ capture his form that resulted in Arsenal signing him two years prior . He also admitted that he did not take missing out on the 2010 FIFA World Cup well , stating , " When I discovered that I wasn 't part of the squad for the World Cup , I got a big slap in the face . " However , after speaking to Wenger , who informed him that he should use the non @-@ callup as motivation , he was reassured . Nasri started the campaign well . He was named in Arsenal 's starting line @-@ up to play against Liverpool for the first match of the season on 15 August 2010 . Nasri played the entire match in a 1 – 1 draw . After the match , Arsenal confirmed that Nasri had suffered a knee injury that would keep him out for a month . However , the player returned to the team after just three matches helping Arsenal defeat Portuguese outfit Braga 6 – 0 in the Champions League on his return . On 21 September , Nasri scored a double in the club 's 4 – 1 extra time victory over North London derby rivals Tottenham Hotspur . Both goals were converted from the penalty spot . Fours days later , Nasri scored another double in a 3 – 2 home defeat to West Bromwich Albion . 
 Nasri continued his fine form as season wore on . In the club 's Champions League group stage tie against Serbian club FK Partizan , he assisted on a Sébastien Squillaci goal in the team 's 3 – 1 victory . In October 2010 , Nasri went on a streak , in which he scored goals in three straight matches . He started the streak by converting a penalty in a 2 – 1 win over Birmingham City . In the club 's following match against Ukrainian competitors Shakhtar Donetsk , Nasri scored on a left @-@ footed volley in a 5 – 1 victory . He also assisted on a goal in the match . Against Manchester City five days later , he scored the first goal and set up the third in a 3 – 0 victory . As a result of his performances in October 2010 , Nasri was named the PFA Fans ' Player of the Month . In November , Nasri was on the score @-@ sheet again netting the opener in a 3 – 2 defeat to Tottenham . A week later , he scored a volley in a 4 – 2 win over Aston Villa . 
 On 4 December , Nasri scored two goals against Fulham to give Arsenal a 2 – 1 win . The victory placed Arsenal at the top of the league table . The two goals were Nasri 's seventh and eighth goals , respectively , in the league and his tenth and 11th overall . Just four days later , Nasri scored a goal in Arsenal 's vital last group game against Partizan . Arsenal won the match 3 – 1 . On 13 December , for his performances during the 2010 calendar year , Nasri was named the France Football French Player of the Year beating out Chelsea midfielder Florent Malouda and Lyon goalkeeper Hugo Lloris . He is the first Arsenal player to achieve the honour since Thierry Henry in 2006 . Nasri was also rewarded domestically for his performances in December winning the Fans ' Player of the Month for the second time in the season and , also , capturing the club 's monthly award . He won the award for the second consecutive month in January . 
 Nasri scored his 13th goal of the season in the 3 – 0 win against Birmingham City on New Year 's Day 2011 . In the FA Cup , Nasri scored his first @-@ ever goal in the competition in a 3 – 1 win over Leeds United in the third round . On 30 January 2011 , Nasri was forced to leave the team 's fourth round FA Cup tie against Huddersfield Town due to a hamstring injury . He , subsequently , missed two weeks and returned to the team ahead of its Champions League knockout round tie with Spanish champions Barcelona . In the first leg , Nasri assisted on the game @-@ winning goal scored by Andrey Arshavin . Arsenal won the match 2 – 1 , but loss the tie 4 – 3 on aggregate after suffering a 3 – 1 defeat at the Camp Nou in the second leg . On 8 April , Nasri was nominated for both the PFA Players ' Player of the Year and PFA Young Player of the Year awards . He lost out on both awards to Tottenham midfielder Gareth Bale and teammate Jack Wilshere , respectively , but was given consolation with an appearance on the association 's Team of the Year . 
 = = = Manchester City = = = 
 On 24 August 2011 , it was confirmed that Nasri had joined Premier League club Manchester City . The transfer fee was priced in the region of £ 25 million and the player signed a four @-@ year contract . 
 = = = = 2011 – 12 = = = = 
 Nasri made his club debut on 28 August in a league fixture away to Tottenham Hotspur . In the match , he assisted on three goals as Manchester City cruised to a 5 – 1 win . In the team 's next match following the September international break , Nasri assisted on one of Sergio Agüero 's three goals in a 3 – 0 win over Wigan Athletic . On 1 October , he scored his first goal for the club netting the third goal in a 4 – 0 victory . Nasri also assisted on two goals in the match . After nearly two months without a league goal , on 3 December , Nasri scored his second goal for Manchester City converting a free kick in a 5 – 1 win against Norwich City . In the following month , Nasri scored his third goal for the club in a 3 – 2 win against Tottenham Hotspur . On 21 March , he scored the game @-@ winning goal in a 2 – 1 win over Chelsea after receiving a through ball from teammate Carlos Tevez . On 22 April , he scored in a 2 – 0 away win against Wolverhampton Wanderers . On 13 May 2012 , Nasri won his first Premier League trophy , as Manchester City were crowned Premier League champions for the 2011 – 12 season after beating Queens Park Rangers 3 – 2 . 
 = = = = 2012 – 13 = = = = 
 At the start of the 2012 – 13 season , Nasri switched his squad number from 19 to 8 . On 12 August , Nasri scored and assisted a goal in the 2012 Community Shield , a 3 – 2 win against FA Cup winners Chelsea . A week later on the opening day of the 2012 – 13 Premier League season he scored and assisted again in a 3 – 2 win , this time against newly promoted Southampton . He then scored against Ajax in a 3 – 1 loss in the UEFA Champions League . In December 2012 , Nasri was criticised for not blocking Robin van Persie 's winning goal in the Manchester Derby . 
 In March 2013 , after a man of the match performance in a 4 – 0 win against Newcastle United , City manager Roberto Mancini said he " would like to give [ Nasri ] a punch " due to his inconsistent form . On 14 April , Nasri scored the opening goal as City defeated Chelsea 2 – 1 in the FA Cup semi @-@ final . 
 = = = = 2013 – 14 = = = = 
 <unk> scored his first goal of the 2013 – 14 season in the game against Manchester United in a 4 – 1 win . On 5 November , Nasri provided assists for goals by Sergio Agüero and Álvaro Negredo as City cruised by CSKA Moscow 5 – 2 to advance to the knockout stages of the Champions League for the first time in club history . On 1 December , Nasri scored twice in a 3 – 0 win over Swansea City . 
 On 2 March 2014 , Nasri scored the second goal as Manchester City defeated Sunderland 3 – 1 to win the 2014 Football League Cup Final . For his performance in the final , Nasri received the Alan Hardaker Trophy , given to the Man of the Match . 
 In a crucial league game away to Everton on 3 May , Nasri provided the assist for Edin Džeko 's game @-@ winning goal as City came from behind to win 3 – 2 and go top of the table with two games remaining . On 11 May , Nasri scored Manchester City 's opening goal in a 2 – 0 defeat of West Ham United as the club won the 2013 – 14 Premier League title . 
 = = = = 2014 – 15 = = = = 
 On 10 July 2014 , Nasri signed a new five @-@ year contract deal with Manchester City , which will keep him at the club until 2019 . 
 = = = = 2015 – 16 = = = = 
 On 22 November 2015 , Manuel Pellegrini confirmed that Nasri would miss 4 – 5 months action because of a tendon injury sustained in training . On 10 April 2016 , during his first match back from injury , he scored the match winning goal against West Bromwich Albion as Manchester City won the match 2 – 1 . 
 = = International career = = 
 = = = Youth = = = 
 Nasri has earned caps with all of France 's youth teams for which he was eligible . He is a member of the group , commonly known as the Génération 1987 , that produced current internationals Hatem Ben Arfa , Karim Benzema and Jérémy Menez , alongside himself . With the under @-@ 16 team , Nasri made 16 appearances scoring eight goals . Of the four players , Nasri was the first player to become a regular starter in the team under coach François <unk> and made his debut in the team 's opening match of the campaign against Spain . France won the match 3 – 0 . Nasri scored his first goal for the team on 29 October in its first group stage match against Sweden at the Tournio du Val @-@ de @-@ Marne . On 11 December , Nasri scored the opening goal in the team 's 6 – 1 defeat of Greece . At the 2003 Aegean Cup in Turkey , he scored two goals in four matches as France finished the competition in third place . Nasri scored in the team 's second group stage match against Israel , a 3 – 1 win . In the next group stage match , he scored a goal in 5 – 0 win over the Ukraine . In the third place match against Belgium , Nasri assisted on a goal scored by Ben Arfa . At the Tournio de Montaigu , Nasri scored his only goal in the team 's 8 – 0 win over Gabon in the team 's opening group match . France finished the competition runner @-@ up to Italy who defeated France 5 – 1 in the final match . 
 At under @-@ 17 level , Nasri , Menez and Ben Arfa were joined by Karim Benzema and tasked with the goal of winning the 2004 UEFA European Under @-@ 17 Football Championship on home soil . Nasri made his debut with the team in the opening match of the season against Sweden netting a goal in a 5 – 2 victory . In the team 's second straight yearly appearance at the Tournio du Val @-@ de @-@ Marne , Nasri scored his lone goal in the competition against the United States in a 2 – 0 win as France were declared champions without conceding a goal . At the 2004 UEFA European Under @-@ 17 Football Championship , Nasri scored against Portugal in the competition 's semi @-@ finals . France went on to win the match 3 – 1 to earn a place in the final . In the final match , France faced Spain . In the match , Nasri scored the game @-@ winning goal to give France its first @-@ ever title in the competition . In total with the under @-@ 17s , he made 16 appearances and scored six goals . Due to increased playing time at his parent club Marseille , Nasri stint with the under @-@ 18 team was uneventful appearing in only four matches . 
 The foursome of Nasri , Ben Arfa , Benzema and Menez returned to international play together for under @-@ 19 duty . The four were joined by Issiar Dia , Blaise Matuidi and Serge Gakpé with the objective of winning the 2006 UEFA European Under @-@ 19 Football Championship . The team opened the campaign with two friendly matches against Norway . Over the course of the two matches , Nasri scored two goals : one in a 4 – 0 win and another in a 5 – 0 victory . In the first round of qualification for the tournament , Nasri assisted on two goals in the team 's 3 – 1 win over Wales . In the team 's next group stage match against San Marino , he scored the third goal in a 3 – 0 victory . In the final group match against Austria , Nasri scored the opening goal and provided the assist on a Benzema goal in a 2 – 0 win . In the final round of qualification , despite finishing the round undefeated , France were eliminated after being beaten on points by Scotland . Nasri earned his first call up to the under @-@ 21 team under coach René Girard in the team 's first match following the 2006 UEFA European Under @-@ 21 Football Championship against Belgium . He started the match and was replaced at half @-@ time by Florent Sinama Pongolle . He featured in qualification matches for the 2007 UEFA European Under @-@ 21 Football Championship and appeared as a substitute in both legs of the team 's surprising defeat to Israel in the qualifying playoffs . Despite still being eligible to represent the team until 2009 , his appearance in the second leg defeat to Israel was Nasri 's last with the team . 
 = = = Senior = = = 
 On 15 March 2007 , Nasri was called up to the senior team for the first time by coach Raymond Domenech for UEFA Euro 2008 qualifying match against Lithuania and a friendly against Austria . Nasri said he was " very happy and very proud " to be called into the national team , stating that the call @-@ up was all the more satisfying as the game was an important European championship qualifier . He appeared on the bench in the match against Lithuania , but failed to make an appearance . Nasri made his international debut on 28 March against Austria at the age of 19 . He started the match and was involved with the only goal , delivering the free kick from which Karim Benzema scored . Nasri returned to the team in June for matches and , on 6 June , scored his first international goal in a 1 – 0 Euro qualifying win over Georgia . On 16 November , Nasri scored his second international goal in a friendly match against Morocco . As a result of his performances , he was named in the 23 @-@ man squad to participate in UEFA Euro 2008 . Nasri made his debut in the tournament on 9 June 2008 in the team 's opening group stage match against Romania appearing as a substitute . He did not appear in the team 's 4 – 1 loss to the Netherlands , but did appear in the team 's final group stage match against Italy . Nasri appeared as a substitute for the injured Franck Ribéry in the tenth minute . Following defender 's Éric Abidal 's red card in the 24th minute , Nasri was taken out of the match in order for defender Jean @-@ Alain <unk> to take Abidal 's spot in the lineup . 
 In November 2008 , Nasri was one of a group of young players who were accused of being insolent during the team 's campaign at the European Championship . The accusation came from domestic teammate William Gallas , who made the charge in his autobiography . Though not explicitly named in the book , Nasri was widely identified as the player in question . As an example of Nasri 's disrespectful attitude Gallas cited an incident in which the young player sat in Thierry Henry 's seat on the team bus and refused to move , which , according to Gallas , undermined the striker 's seniority . The incident ultimately led to a verbal exchange between Nasri and Gallas during a training session . In response , Nasri played down the incident , stating that Gallas was overreacting to a problem that did not exist . In 2010 , after failing to make the World Cup squad , he opened up about the situation stating that during Gallas ' final year at Arsenal , he was one of " four or five " Arsenal players who did not speak to the defender . The feud culminated on 20 November 2010 when Nasri lived up to a pledge that he would not shake the hand of Gallas , who was now playing for Tottenham , during the pre @-@ match build @-@ up . 
 In the 2008 – 09 season , Nasri appeared in only three matches with the national team . After playing against Lithuania on 28 March 2009 , the midfielder went uncapped for the almost a year and a half . During the 2009 – 10 season , Nasri grew weary of his chances of appearing with the team at the 2010 FIFA World Cup . In the end , he did not appear with the team , failing to make the 23 @-@ man squad or even the preliminary squad . Nasri admitted that he took the non @-@ call up hard , recalling " Not being one of those 23 names , it was difficult . " The player also viewed the non @-@ invite from a positive perspective , stating , " But maybe it was for the best in the end , and not just because France had a horrible World Cup . It helped me as a person . I told myself I need to work harder , to make sure I don ’ t miss the next one . " 
 Nasri returned to the national team under the reign of new coach Laurent Blanc for the team 's friendly against Norway on 11 August 2010 . He missed the September call ups due to injury before returning to the team in October for UEFA Euro 2012 qualifying matches against Romania and Luxembourg . On 25 March 2011 , Nasri captained the national team for the first time in its 2 – 0 Euro qualification win over Luxembourg . He provided the assist on the opening goal scored by Philippe <unk> . In the team 's final Euro qualifier against Bosnia and Herzegovina , Nasri scored the equalizing goal , converting a penalty in a 1 – 1 draw . The point gained from the stalemate secured a UEFA Euro 2012 qualifying spot for France . After appearing regularly in qualifying for UEFA Euro 2012 , on 29 May 2012 , Nasri was named to the squad to participate in the competition . In the team 's opening group stage match against England , he scored the equalizing goal in a 1 – 1 draw . 
 After France lost to Spain in the quarter @-@ finals of UEFA Euro 2012 , Nasri subjected a reporter to what was described as a " foul @-@ mouthed tirade " when asked for his views on the match . For that and other misdemeanours , the French Football Federation imposed a three @-@ match international ban . On May 13 , 2014 , manager Didier Deschamps revealed the 23 @-@ man squad that is going to the 2014 FIFA World Cup ; Nasri was again not included . 
 On 9 August 2014 , Nasri confirmed his decision to retire from international football aged just 27 . 
 = = Style of play = = 
 In his early years at Marseille , Nasri was deployed in several positions , most notably as a deep @-@ lying midfielder and a wide midfielder primarily on the right side as he was deemed too small to play in the middle of the park . After two years of developing his physical traits , in the 2006 – 07 season , manager Albert Emon inserted Nasri into the playmaker role , where his vision , technical skill , and ability to read and understand the game suited him . Since that season , Nasri has been primarily deployed in the position or as a central attacking midfielder at both club and international level . The player has personally admitted that playing centrally is his preference . However , as a result of his versatility , Nasri can also function on the wing and spent the majority of his career at Arsenal occupying the role in the team 's 4 – 3 – 3 formation . His close control with the ball , speed , dribbling , crossing , and ability to use both feet suits the position well , which has resulted in former manager Arsène Wenger deploying Nasri in the role during the player 's four @-@ year stay at the club . Nasri often featured centrally for Arsenal in the absence of former club captain Cesc Fàbregas . 
 In 2009 , in order to accommodate the arrival of Russian attacker Andrey Arshavin , it was recommended by both Wenger and former national team coach Raymond Domenech that Nasri revert to his role as a deep @-@ lying midfielder so the player could showcase his underrated defensive abilities . Nasri is also an underrated direct free kick and penalty kick taker . The player had previously developed a superstition with regards to taking spot kicks , but conquered the issue after successfully converting two penalties in the team 's Carling Cup victory over Tottenham in 2010 . Wenger describes Nasri as a " young , quick and technically outstanding player . " He is described in a similar fashion by club scout Gilles Grimandi who states that Nasri is " a fantastic athlete , he 's quick , flexible and good with his feet . " Nasri 's playing style , ability , and cultural background have drawn comparisons to Zinedine Zidane . After joining Arsenal and excelling on the wing , the English media began comparing him to former club player and compatriot Robert Pirès . Nasri has often attempted to disassociate himself from the two players , particularly the former player , stating , " There 's only one Zidane , just as there was only one Platini . " 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = = Club = = = 
 As of match played 17 October 2015 . 
 = = = International = = = 
 As of 31 March 2014 . 
 = = = = International goals = = = = 
 France score listed first , score column indicates score after each Nasri goal . 
 = = Honours = = 
 = = = Club = = = 
 Marseille 
 UEFA Intertoto Cup : 2005 
 Manchester City 
 Premier League : 2011 – 12 , 2013 – 14 
 FA Community Shield : 2012 
 Football League Cup : 2013 – 14 
 = = = International = = = 
 France 
 UEFA European Under @-@ 17 Football Championship : 2004 
 = = = Individual = = = 
 UNFP Ligue 1 Young Player of the Year : 2006 – 07 
 UNFP Ligue 1 Team of the Year : 2006 – 07 
 Premier League Player of the Month : December 2010 
 French Player of the Year : 2010 
 Arsenal Player of the Month : December 2010 
 PFA Fans ' Player of the Month : October 2010 , December 2010 , January 2011 
 Premier League PFA Team of the Year : 2010 – 11 
 Nominated for the Best at Sport award at the British Muslim Awards : 2013 
 Alan Hardaker Trophy : 2014 
 = Buildings and architecture of Bath = 
 The buildings and architecture of Bath , a city in Somerset in the south west of England , reveal significant examples of the architecture of England , from the Roman Baths ( including their significant Celtic presence ) , to the present day . The city became a World Heritage Site in 1987 , largely because of its architectural history and the way in which the city landscape draws together public and private buildings and spaces . The many examples of Palladian architecture are purposefully integrated with the urban spaces to provide " picturesque aestheticism " . It is the only entire city in Britain to achieve World Heritage status , and is a popular tourist destination . 
 Important buildings include the Roman Baths ; neoclassical architect Robert Adam 's Pulteney Bridge , based on an unused design for the Rialto Bridge in Venice ; and Bath Abbey in the city centre , founded in 1499 on the site of an 8th @-@ century church . Of equal importance are the residential buildings designed and built into boulevards and crescents by the Georgian architects John Wood , the Elder and his son John Wood , the Younger – well @-@ known examples being the Royal Crescent , built around 1770 , and The Circus , built around 1760 , where each of the three curved segments faces one of the entrances , ensuring that there is always a classical facade facing the entering visitor . 
 Most of Bath 's buildings are made from the local , golden @-@ coloured , Bath Stone . The dominant architectural style is Georgian , which evolved from the Palladian revival style that became popular in the early 18th century . The city became a fashionable and popular spa and social centre during the 18th century . Based initially around its hot springs , this led to a demand for substantial homes and guest houses . The key architects , John Wood and his son , laid out many of the city 's present @-@ day squares and crescents within a green valley and the surrounding hills . According to UNESCO this provided ... " an integration of architecture , urban design , and landscape setting , and the deliberate creation of a beautiful city " . Development during modern eras , including the development of the transport infrastructure and rebuilding after bomb damage during World War II , has mostly been in keeping with earlier styles to maintain the integrated cityscape . 
 = = Celtic , Roman and Saxon = = 
 Buildings from Bath 's pre @-@ Norman period either no longer exist , or their remains are below street level . Archaeological sites in the central area of the city have supplied some details about how they may have looked , while the lower areas of the Roman Baths reveal significant remains from the Roman period . 
 The Baths were built around hot springs , the only ones naturally occurring in the United Kingdom . Archaeological evidence suggests that the main spring in its natural state was treated as a shrine by the Celts . During the early Roman occupation of Britain , in the 60s or 70s AD , engineers drove oak piles into the mud to provide a stable foundation and surrounded the spring with an irregular stone chamber lined with lead . These still survive . At this early stage the spring was an open pool in the corner of the temple precinct . It fed a bathing complex on its south side within a barrel @-@ vaulted building . The complex was gradually built up over the next 300 years . All the stonework above the level of the baths is from more recent periods including the 12th century , when John of Tours built a curative bath over the King 's Spring reservoir , and the 16th century , when the city corporation built a new bath ( Queen 's Bath ) to the south of the spring . The spring is now housed in 18th @-@ century buildings designed by architects John Wood , the Elder and John Wood , the Younger ; visitor access is via an 1897 concert hall by J M Brydon , which is an eastward continuation of the Grand Pump Room with a glass @-@ domed centre and single @-@ storey radiused corner . 
 Beside the baths , a temple , in classical style with four large , fluted Corinthian columns and dedicated to Minerva was constructed . It stood on a podium above a surrounding courtyard . The columns supported a frieze and decorated pediment parts of which can be seen in the museum within the baths . In the 2nd century it was expanded by the addition of side chapels and an ambulatory , which may have encouraged some historians to argue that there were two temples . The temple remained in use for worship until around the 4th century , but the site is now occupied by the Grand Pump Room . 
 The city was given defensive walls , probably in the 3rd century , but they disappeared during subsequent redevelopments . The line of then formed the basis of the medieval walls enclosing 23 acres ( 9 @.@ 3 ha ) , some which survived until the 18th century . The Anglo @-@ Saxons called the town <unk> , <unk> or <unk> , meaning " at the baths , " the source of the present name . In 675 , Osric , King of the Hwicce , set up a monastic house at Bath , probably using the walled area as its precinct . The Anglo @-@ Saxon poem known as The Ruin may describe the appearance of the Roman site about this time . King Offa of Mercia gained control of this monastery in 781 and rebuilt the church , which was dedicated to St. Peter . By the 9th century the old Roman street pattern had been lost , and Bath had become a royal possession ; King Alfred laid out the town afresh , leaving its south @-@ eastern quadrant as the abbey precinct . 
 = = Norman , Medieval , Tudor , and Stuart = = 
 Bath Abbey was founded in 1499 on the site of an 8th @-@ century church . The original Anglo @-@ Saxon church was pulled down after 1066 , and a grand cathedral dedicated to Saint Peter and Saint Paul was begun on the site by John of Tours , Bishop of Bath and Wells , around 1090 ; however , only the ambulatory was complete when he died in December 1122 . The half @-@ finished cathedral was devastated by fire in 1137 , but work continued until about 1156 ; the completed building was approximately 330 feet ( 101 m ) long . By the 15th century , Bath 's abbey church was badly dilapidated and in need of repairs . Oliver King , Bishop of Bath and Wells , decided in 1500 to rebuild it on a smaller scale . It is in a late Perpendicular style with flying buttresses and crocketed pinnacles decorating a crenellated and pierced parapet . The new church was completed just a few years before Bath Priory was dissolved in 1539 by Henry VIII . Major restoration work was carried out by Sir George Gilbert Scott in the 1860s , funded by the rector , Charles Kemble . The choir and transepts have a fan vault by Robert and William Vertue , in the 1860s , completing the original roof from 1608 . The nave was given a matching vault in the 19th century . The building is lit by 52 windows . 
 The medieval era is represented by the remains of the city walls in Upper Borough Walls . There are no other surviving buildings from this period . Several areas of the city underwent development during the Stuart period , in response to the increasing number of visitors to the spa and resort town who required accommodation . The St Thomas à Becket Church was built between 1490 and 1498 by John <unk> , Prior of Bath Abbey and took the place of an older Norman church . The church was commonly called Old Widcombe Church and used to be the principal church of the parishes of Widcombe and Lyncombe . The Domesday survey of 1086 shows a small settlement around the church although no trace of it remains . In 1847 a much larger church , St Matthews , was built in Widcombe parish . On 22 April 1847 , it was announced that the church bells , which had for centuries been in the tower of St. Thomas à Becket , were to be removed and installed in the new St. Matthew 's . Widcombe Manor was originally built in 1656 and then rebuilt in 1727 for Philip Bennet the local MP . Thomas <unk> , moved to Bath and set up practice in 1668 . He became interested in the curative properties of the waters and he wrote A discourse of Bathe , and the hot waters there . Also , Some Enquiries into the Nature of the water in 1676 . This brought the health @-@ giving properties of the hot mineral waters to the attention of the country and soon the aristocracy started to arrive to partake in them . 
 The early 18th century the central area around the Abbey was expanded including the Abbey Church Yard which contained Marshal Wade 's House , and Trim Street , which was named after George Trim who owned the land . Number 5 , which is also known as General Wolfe 's house , is a 2 @-@ storey building with a parapet and rusticated quoins , built by Thomas Greenway . The doorway has Ionic pilasters and a tympanum decorated with the implements of war . In 1716 the architect William Killigrew was commissioned to rebuild St John 's Hospital which was founded around 1180 , by Bishop Reginald Fitz Jocelin and is among the oldest almshouses in England . The 2 storey Bath stone building has a heavy ground floor arcade of round @-@ headed arches on pillars , and retains its original window mouldings and sashes . Building work continued after 1727 under the 23 @-@ year @-@ old John Wood , the Elder , his first commission in Bath . 
 = = Georgian = = 
 The dominant style of architecture in central Bath is Georgian ; this evolved from the Palladian revival style which became popular in the early 18th century . 
 The original purpose of much of Bath 's architecture is concealed by the honey @-@ coloured classical façades ; in an era before the advent of the luxury hotel , these apparently elegant residences were frequently purpose @-@ built lodging houses , where visitors could hire a room , a floor , or ( according to their means ) an entire house for the duration of their visit , and be waited on by the house 's communal servants . 
 The architects John Wood , the Elder and his son John Wood , the Younger laid out the new quarters in streets and squares , the identical façades of which gave an impression of palatial scale and classical decorum . Much of the creamy gold Bath stone which was used for construction throughout the city , was obtained from the limestone Combe Down and Bathampton Down Mines , which were owned by Ralph Allen ( 1694 – 1764 ) . Allen , in order to advertise the quality of his quarried limestone , commissioned the elder John Wood to build him a country house on his Prior Park estate between the city and the mines , replacing his Town House . Queen Square was the first speculative development by John Wood , the Elder who lived in one of the houses . Queen Square was described by Nikolaus Pevsner as " one of the finest Palladian compositions in England before 1730 " . 
 The west side ( numbers 14 – 18 and 18A , 19 and 20 ) was designed by John Pinch the younger in 1830 and differs from Wood 's original design as the central block is in Neo @-@ Grecian style . The Bath Royal Literary and Scientific Institution ( BRLSI ) now occupies 16 – 18 . The south side ( numbers 5 – 13 ) was originally left open , but is now occupied by a hotel . The obelisk in the centre of the square was erected by Beau Nash in 1738 . 
 The Circus is seen as the pinnacle of Wood 's work . It consists of three long , curved terraces designed by the elder John Wood to form a circular space or theatre intended for civic functions and games . The games give a clue to the design , the inspiration behind which was the Colosseum in Rome . 
 Like the Colosseum , the three façades have a different order of architecture on each floor : Doric on the ground level , then Ionic on the piano nobile and finishing with Corinthian on the upper floor , the style of the building thus becoming progressively more ornate as it rises . 
 Gay Street links Queen Square to The Circus . It was designed by John Wood , the Elder in 1735 and completed by his son John Wood , the Younger . The houses are of 3 storeys with Mansard roofs , with many also having Ionic columns . Hester Thrale , who was also known as Mrs Piozzi , lived at number 8 , with its 4 Corinthian pilasters on the ground and 1st floors in 1781 . 
 Number 41 is on the corner between Gay Street and Queen Square . It was the home of John Wood , the Younger . 
 One of the main shopping streets is now Milsom Street , which was built in 1762 by Thomas <unk> . The buildings were originally grand town houses with mansard roofs and Corinthian columns . 
 The bank at number 24 was built by Wilson and Willcox and includes baroque detail not seen on the other buildings . Numbers 37 to 42 which are known as Somersetshire Buildings have been designated as Grade I listed buildings . 
 The Octagon Chapel was a place of worship when it was built in 1767 , then a furniture shop by Mallett Antiques , and is now a restaurant . 
 Milsom street leads up hill , from the Royal National Hospital for <unk> Diseases , which was founded in 1738 as The Mineral Water Hospital , to The Paragon which overlooks the Walcot area . The Paragon was designed by Thomas Warr Attwood . Each building has matching doors and windows with central pediments and flat entablatures either side of the 1st floor windows and Tuscan pilasters and pediments to the doorways . Numbers 22 to 37 continue the theme from numbers 1 to 21 and were completed in 1775 by Joseph Axford , a local mason . Numbers 28 to 32 were damaged by bombing during World War II but have since been restored . 
 St Swithin 's Church was built between 1779 and 1790 by John Palmer . The church house which forms number 38 The Paragon was built in the early 18th century . The adjoining cemetery has gates with a rusticated base and panels with inverted torches between pilasters . There is an entablature with metopes and triglyphs . 
 The best known of Bath 's terraces is the Royal Crescent , built between 1767 and 1774 and designed by the younger John Wood . But all is not what it seems ; while Wood designed the great curved façade of what appears to be about 30 houses with Ionic columns on a rusticated ground floor , that was the extent of his input . Each purchaser bought a certain length of the façade , and then employed their own architect to build a house to their own specifications behind it ; hence what appears to be two houses is sometimes one . This system of town planning is betrayed at the rear of the crescent : while the front is completely uniform and symmetrical , the rear is a mixture of differing roof heights , juxtapositions and fenestration . This " Queen Anne fronts and Mary @-@ Anne backs " architecture occurs repeatedly in Bath . 
 In front of the Royal Crescent is a Ha @-@ ha , a trench on which the inner side of which is vertical and faced with stone , with the outer face sloped and turfed , making the trench , in effect , a sunken fence or retaining wall . The ha @-@ ha is designed not to interrupt the view from Royal Victoria Park , and to be invisible until seen from close by . 
 The other crescents which give Bath its architectural identity include : Camden Crescent which was built by John Eveleigh in 1788 , and damaged by a landslide in 1889 , Lansdown Crescent , designed by John Palmer and constructed by a variety of builders between 1789 and 1793 , and Somerset Place for which the facades were designed by the architect John Eveleigh who went bankrupt during the building , which started in 1790 but was not completed until the 1820s . Some of Somerset Crescent was destroyed during the Second World War and rebuilt as student accommodation in the 1950s and 1960s . It used to form part of the campus of Bath Spa University , but has since been sold . 
 The area of North Parade , South Parade , Pierrepont and Duke Streets was part of a wider scheme to build a Royal Forum , similar to Queen Square , which was never completed . Wood designed the facade , of Bath stone , after which a variety of builders completed the work with different interiors and rear elevations . Many of the buildings are now hotels and shops whilst some remain as private residences . 
 North Parade Bridge was built almost 100 years later in 1836 by William Tierney Clark . His original bridge was made of cast iron on stone abutments , with lodges and staircases . This was rebuilt in 1936 completely in stone . Many of the buildings in South Parade are now hotels and restaurants whilst some remain as private residences . The area which Wood envisaged as an area of sunken gardens matching the houses is now a car park . 
 On the southern side of the road is the Roman Catholic St John 's Church , which was designed and built between 1861 and 1863 by Charles Francis Hansom who added the 222 @-@ foot ( 68 m ) spire in 1867 . 
 The heart of the Georgian city were Wood 's Assembly Rooms , and the Pump Room , which , together with its associated Lower Assembly Rooms , was designed by Thomas Baldwin , a local builder responsible for many other buildings in the city , including the terraces in Argyle Street , the Guildhall , The Cross Bath , Widcombe Crescent and Royal Baths Treatment Centre in Bath Street . 
 The Grand Pump Room itself includes a North Colonnade of 9 bays , with <unk> Ionic columns . The South Colonnade is similar but had an upper floor added in the late 19th century . 
 The colonnades and side wall of the Pump Room have a facade on Stall Street . Baldwin rose rapidly , becoming a leader in Bath 's architectural history . Great Pulteney Street , where Baldwin eventually lived , is another of his works : this wide boulevard , constructed c . 1789 and over 1 @,@ 000 feet ( 305 m ) long and 100 feet ( 30 m ) wide , leading from Laura Place is lined on both sides by Georgian terraces . 
 Around 1770 the neoclassical architect Robert Adam designed Pulteney Bridge , a three @-@ arched bridge spanning the Avon . He used as his prototype an original , but unused , design by Andrea Palladio for the Rialto Bridge in Venice . Thus , Pulteney Bridge became not just a means of crossing the river , but also a shopping arcade . Along with the Rialto Bridge , is one of the very few surviving bridges in Europe to serve this dual purpose . It has been substantially altered since it was built . The bridge was named after Frances and William Pulteney , the owners of the Bathwick estate for which the bridge provided a link to the rest of Bath . 
 At the end of Great Pulteney Street is the Holburne Museum of Art , which was originally designed as the Sydney Hotel and was built by Charles Harcourt Masters in 1795 – 6 . It stands on Sydney Place and within the Sydney Pleasure Gardens which stretch from the road to the Kennet and Avon Canal . Next to the church of St Mary the Virgin is Bathwick Hill which leads up to Claverton Down , including Claverton Manor which was built in the 1820s and is now home to the American Museum in Britain and the University of Bath . 
 The early 18th century saw Bath acquire its first purpose @-@ built theatre , the Theatre Royal , along with the Grand Pump Room attached to the Roman Baths and assembly rooms . Master of Ceremonies Beau Nash , who presided over the city 's social life from 1705 until his death in 1761 , drew up a code of behaviour for public entertainments . The population of the city had reached 40 @,@ 020 by the time of the 1801 census , making it one of the largest cities in Britain , which was expanding up the surrounding hills . 
 William Thomas Beckford bought a house in Lansdown Crescent in 1822 , eventually buying a further two houses in the crescent to form his residence . Having acquired all the land between his home and the top of Lansdown Hill , north of the city centre , he created a garden over half a mile in length and built Beckford 's Tower at the top . 
 To the west <unk> College was built in the Newbridge area as a large block of almshouses between 1825 and 1827 . It was founded by Ann and Fletcher <unk> for women " who had been left in reduced circumstances " , and still provides accommodation , in 30 terraced houses set around three sides of a quadrangle , for women , aged over 50 in membership of the Church of England . In 1862 , George Gilbert Scott redesigned the original chapel , which had been built by Goodrich . 
 = = Victorian = = 
 In the early 19th century the romantic medieval gothic style appeared as a backlash to the symmetry of Palladianism which brought certain changes to the city 's appearance . Many of the new churches , for example , were built in the gothic style as were a number of new villas . Most of the new civic and retail buildings however continued to be designed in the classical mode but along much more ornamented and <unk> lines than their 18th century predecessors . However virtually all the new buildings were constructed using the local bath stone so the city continued to have a cohesive look . By the middle of the 19th century , as a result of new technology , construction was able to develop incorporating steel as a building component . 
 In 1810 the Kennet and Avon Canal opened linking the River Avon at Bath to Reading . Bath Locks mark the divergence of the River Avon and the canal , 656 yards ( 600 m ) south of Pulteney Bridge . Alongside the bottom lock are a side pound and a pumping station that pumps water up the locks to replace that used each time the lock is opened . 
 The next stage of Bath Deep Lock is numbered 8 / 9 as two locks were combined when the canal was restored in 1976 . The new chamber has a depth of 19 feet 5 inches ( 5 @.@ 92 m ) , making it Britain 's deepest canal lock . Just above the ' deep lock ' is an area of water enabling the lock to refill and above this is Wash House Lock , followed by Abbey View Lock , by which there is another pumping station and , in quick succession , Pultney Lock and Bath Top Lock . 
 Above the top lock the canal passes through Sydney Gardens including two short tunnels and under two cast iron footbridges dating from 1800 . Cleveland tunnel is 173 feet ( 53 m ) long and runs under Cleveland House , the former headquarters of the Kennet and Avon Canal Company . A trap @-@ door in the tunnel roof was used to pass paperwork between clerks above and bargees below . 
 Many of the bridges over the canal are also listed buildings . 
 Victoria Bridge which was built in 1836 across the River Avon , was an important early example of a cable @-@ stayed bridge . 
 As the size of the city and numbers of visitors grew new facilities opened . Cleveland Pools in Hampton Row , is a semi @-@ circular lido built , by John Pinch the elder , around 1814 . It is believed to be the oldest surviving public outdoor swimming pools in England . 
 The Corridor is one of the world 's earliest retail arcades , designed by architect Henry Goodridge and built in 1825 , with a glass roof . The High Street end has a Doric colonnade . Each end has marble columns . A musicians gallery , with a wrought iron balustrade and gilt lions heads and garlands , is in the centre of the arcade . Cleveland Bridge was built in 1826 by William Hazledine with Henry Goodridge as the architect . 
 St Michael 's Church was rebuilt between 1835 and 1837 and St. Stephen 's Church built in <unk> by James Wilson , between 1840 and 1845 . The Bear Flat area south of the city centre was started by the Georgians but the main estate of Poets ' Corner is late Victorian and Edwardian . 
 The opening of the Great Western Railway in 1841 removed much of the canal 's traffic , and in 1852 the railway company took over its running . Bath Spa railway station is the principal railway station in Bath . It was built in 1840 by Brunel . It is in an asymmetrical Tudor style with curving gables , and lies on the north bank of the Avon , with the line swerving elegantly across from the southern bank to the station and then back again . 
 Green Park railway station opened in 1870 as the terminus of Midland Railway 's Mangotsfield and Bath Branch Line . For some of its life , it was known as Bath Queen Square . It includes a vaulted glass roof in a single @-@ span wrought iron arch structure . Parts of the distinctive glass roof were damaged during bombing raids in April 1942 , and the glazing was not re @-@ instated during railway usage after the war . Following the Beeching Report , passenger trains ceased from 1966 and the last goods train ran in 1971 . In the 1980s the rail approaches to the station were redeveloped as a major supermarket opened in December 1982 , and the station itself is used as a pedestrian passageway to and from the city ; there are a number of small shop units in the former station buildings . 
 The Victoria Art Gallery , a free public art museum and library was built between the Guildhall and Pulteney Bridge . It was designed by John McKean Brydon . The exterior of the building includes a statue of Queen Victoria , by A. C. Lucchesi , and friezes of classical figures by G. A. Lawson . 
 = = Twentieth century = = 
 The Empire Hotel was built in 1901 on Orange Grove close to both Bath Abbey and Pulteney Bridge . 
 In the 1920s and 1930s Bath 's architectural traditions combined with an art deco style in buildings such as The Forum which opened as a 2 @,@ 000 @-@ seat cinema in 1934 , and has since been converted into a church and concert venue . The Royal United Hospital opened in the Weston suburb , about 1 @.@ 5 miles ( 2 @.@ 4 km ) from the city centre in 1932 . 
 During World War II , between the evening of 25 April and the early morning of 27 April 1942 , Bath suffered three air raids in reprisal for RAF raids on the German cities of Lübeck and Rostock , part of the Luftwaffe campaign popularly known as the Baedeker Blitz . Over 400 people were killed , and more than 19 @,@ 000 buildings were damaged or destroyed . Houses in the Royal Crescent , Circus and Paragon were burnt out along with the Assembly Rooms , while part of the south side of Queen Square was destroyed . 
 A postwar review of inadequate housing led to the clearance and redevelopment of large areas of the city in a postwar style , often at variance with the Georgian style of the city . In the 1950s the nearby villages of Combe Down , Twerton and Weston were incorporated into Bath to enable the development of further housing , much of it council housing such as the Whiteway estate . 
 In the 1970s and 1980s it was recognised that conservation of historic buildings was inadequate , leading to more care and reuse of buildings and open spaces . In 1987 the city was selected as a UNESCO World Heritage Site , recognising its international cultural significance . 
 In the 1960s and early 1970s the way in which some parts of Bath were redeveloped , resulting in the loss of some 18th- and 19th @-@ century buildings , led to a popular campaign to change the way the city was developing , which drew strength from the publication of Adam Fergusson 's The Sack of Bath . Since 2000 , developments have included the Bath Spa , <unk> , and the Bath Western Riverside project . 
 = = 21st century = = 
 Controversy has continued in recent years with the demolition of the 1930s Churchill House , a neo @-@ Georgian municipal building originally housing the Electricity Board , to make way for the new Bath Bus Station . This was part of the Southgate redevelopment begun in 2007 in which the central 1960s shopping precinct , bus station , and multi @-@ story carpark were demolished and replaced with a new area of mock @-@ Georgian shopping streets . As a result of the changes the city 's status as a World Heritage Site was reviewed by UNESCO in 2009 . The decision was made to let Bath keep its status , but UNESCO has asked to be consulted on future phases of the Riverside development , saying that the density and volume of buildings in the second and third phases of the development need to be reconsidered . It also says that Bath must do more to attract world @-@ class architecture to any new developments . 
 = Staten Island Tunnel = 
 The Staten Island Tunnel is an abandoned , incomplete railway / subway tunnel in New York City . It was intended to connect railways on Staten Island ( precursors to the modern @-@ day Staten Island Railway ) to the BMT Fourth Avenue Line of the New York City Subway , in Brooklyn , via a new crossing under the Narrows . Planned to extend 10 @,@ 400 feet ( 3 @,@ 200 m ) , the tunnel would have been among the world 's longest at the time of its planning , in the late 19th and early 20th centuries . 
 Construction began in 1923 , but New York City Mayor John Hylan , a former Brooklyn – Manhattan Transit Corporation ( BMT ) employee , canceled the project , and the tunnel only went 150 feet ( 46 m ) into the Narrows before it was halted . The tunnel lies dormant under Owl 's Head Park in Bay Ridge , Brooklyn . Later proposals to complete the tunnel , including the 1939 plans for the Independent Subway System 's ambitious Second System , were never funded . 
 Modern proposals for completion of the tunnel have come from New York City Councilman Lewis Fidler , who has proposed 0 @.@ 33 % tax for the tri @-@ state region to pay for the construction . The tunnel was listed as one of many projects that could receive federal funds that were to have been allocated to the Access to the Region 's Core tunnel , which was canceled in October 2010 . State Senator Diane Savino was among the supporters of the tunnel ; Savino stated that if built , the tunnel would cost $ 3 billion and would improve quality of life for Staten Islanders , reduce traffic , and increase the attractiveness of the borough for investment . 
 = = Other names = = 
 Officially called the Brooklyn @-@ Richmond Freight and Passenger Tunnel , the Staten Island Tunnel was also to be referred to by four other names : 
 The Narrows Tunnel , after the Narrows , the body of water it was supposed to run under ; 
 The Saint George Tunnel , after one of its terminals in St. George , Staten Island ( not to be confused with the tunnel between the terminal and the Tompkinsville station ) ; 
 The Hylan Tunnel , after former New York City Mayor John Hylan , who oversaw the project . It has also been referred to as Hylan 's Holes in both derogatory and endearing contexts . 
 = = Original plans = = 
 In 1888 , subsequent to building the Arthur Kill swing bridge between New Jersey and northwestern Staten Island , the Baltimore & Ohio Railroad ( the owners of the Staten Island Railway until 1971 ) proposed a tunnel between Staten Island and Brooklyn . In 1890 , Staten Island developer Erastus Wiman , who controlled the railway , sponsored a plan by the Baltimore and Ohio Railroad to construct a tunnel under the Narrows to connect Staten Island with Brooklyn for both passenger and freight service . The proposal never made it through the approval process when financial challenges stopped the plan at the drawing board . The tunnel would have gone from Vanderbilt Avenue at Fort Wadsworth on Staten Island to Bay Ridge in Brooklyn , traveling 1 1 ⁄ 4 miles ( 2 @.@ 0 km ) at a depth of 35 feet ( 11 m ) below the narrows . There would have been two lines of tunneling , parallel and close together . <unk> believed that the tunneling would cost $ 5 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 and that with the connecting road , the total cost was estimated at $ 6 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 . 
 A rapid transit route to connect Staten Island ( alternately known as Richmond County ) to the remainder of New York City was proposed in 1912 , in conjunction with the Dual Contracts of the New York City Subway . At the time , there were no vehicular or rail connections between Staten Island and the other four boroughs ; the only connection was by ferry . Although not funded by the city , the tunnel was expected to help expand the then @-@ sparsely populated borough in a similar manner to the population and development explosions seen in Brooklyn and the Bronx . 
 Under the Dual Contracts , three routes were proposed — two to Brooklyn and one to Manhattan — which would connect the Staten Island Railway 's rapid transit service ( SIRT ) to existing subway lines . 
 = = = Manhattan route = = = 
 The Manhattan proposal , often called the " direct route , " would have connected with the Interborough Rapid Transit Company ( IRT ) ' s lines under Battery Park , near the current Brooklyn – Battery Tunnel . " Direct Route A " would have utilized a five @-@ section tunnel under the New York Harbor , while " Direct Route B " would have used a partially @-@ elevated route running along the eastern coastline of New Jersey ( near Greenville and Bayonne ) . Both Manhattan plans would have required connections to various points , including Ellis Island or Governors Island , and would have traveled around 5 miles ( 8 @.@ 0 km ) without any stops . Because of this , the high costs of the potential tunnel , and the relatively small population of Staten Island , the Manhattan route was considered impractical . Another 5 @-@ mile tunnel to Battery Park was proposed by the city in the 1950s , but the plan was scrapped due to a lack of funding . 
 = = = Brooklyn routes = = = 
 Both of the shorter , Brooklyn proposals would have connected to the Brooklyn – Manhattan Transit Corporation ( BMT ) ' s Fourth Avenue subway , constructed in 1914 during the Dual Contracts . 
 The first route would have originated in Bay Ridge , Brooklyn at a point between 65th and 67th Streets ( just south of 59th Street Station ) , running to <unk> Street in Tompkinsville , Staten Island near the Tompkinsville Station and one stop away from the Saint George Terminal . This plan , referred to as " Route No. 51 " under the Dual Contracts , would have had connections going north towards St. George and along the North Shore Branch towards Arlington , and south towards Tottenville on the Main Line and Wentworth Avenue along the South Beach Branch . This proposal was estimated to cost $ 12 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 in the year 1912 , with half of it to be paid by railroads , such as the Pennsylvania Railroad ( which operated the Long Island Rail Road ) and the Baltimore and Ohio Railroad ( which operated the SIRT ) . A major part of the 1912 proposal was the inclusion of two 40 inch water mains , which were to be side to side in an immense supply to be installed by the Department of Water Supply , Gas and Electricity alongside the tubes . These mains were intended to carry water from the main New York City supply to Staten Island . 
 The second route would have originated in Fort Hamilton at the south end of the line . Similar to the 1890 proposal , it would have followed the routing of the current Verrazano – Narrows Bridge ( constructed from 1959 to its opening in 1964 ) . The Fort Hamilton proposal was the shortest route of the two , though it would require tunneling through deeper waters . As part of the proposal , it was suggested that the Fourth Avenue Line be extended past its original terminal at 86th Street in Bay Ridge to a temporary ferry terminal at 95th Street ( now the 95th Street Station ) . 
 In anticipation of the northern tunnel route , trackways were constructed diverging from both Fourth Avenue local tracks towards the tunnel site south of the 59th Street Station . An additional portal was built in the SIRT tunnel between Saint George Terminal and Tompkinsville to facilitate the northern wye from the tunnel to the North Shore branch . As a provision for the southern route , the Fourth Avenue line south of 59th Street ( built with only two tracks ) was placed on the west side of Fourth Avenue , which would allow two additional tracks to be added on the east side of the street to facilitate a future express service from Staten Island . 
 = = Groundbreaking and stoppage of construction = = 
 = = = Selection of Bay Ridge @-@ based plan = = = 
 The Bay Ridge @-@ based plan was ultimately selected , running between 65th Street / Shore Road in Brooklyn and the St. George Ferry Terminal in Staten Island . The two tubes would have been 10 @,@ 400 feet ( 3 @,@ 200 m ) long , longer than any tunnel in the United States at that time . Portions of the tunnel would be constructed using a tunnelling shield , while the remainder would be placed in a trench at the bottom of the Narrows . In the final plans , each tunnel was designed to be 24 feet ( 7 @.@ 3 m ) wide to accommodate freight cars in addition to passenger service , with freight trains coming from the Long Island Rail Road ( LIRR ) ' s Bay Ridge Branch ( terminating just north of the tunnel site ) and the Staten Island Railway 's connection with rail lines from New Jersey . 
 Alternate plans included constructing two sets of two tubes , one for commuter and freight service from the LIRR and the other for rapid transit , or two tunnels each with individual tubes for freight and subway service . The freight service would have occurred during off @-@ peak hours only , but simultaneous with subway service , with passenger trains running in 30 @-@ minute or one @-@ hour headways during these times . A 1912 proposal had freight running at night between 1 a.m. and 5 a.m. , while the 1925 plans called for joint freight and passenger service during early mornings ( 5 a.m. to 6 a.m. ) , <unk> ( 10 a.m. to 4 p.m. ) , and overnights ( 8 p.m. to 5 a.m. ) . 
 At the time of the tunnel 's groundbreaking , Jamaica Bay and the <unk> Basin were slated to become industrial complexes , which would have been facilitated by freight service from the tunnel . The tunnel plan was amended in 1919 . In April 1921 , a bill was passed in the state senate requiring the city to begin construction of the 24 @-@ foot @-@ wide ( 7 @.@ 3 m ) tunnel within two years . 
 = = = 1922 plan = = = 
 In May 1922 , John Hylan launched a new plan for the freight and passenger tunnel , and the Board of Estimate recommended that $ 4 @,@ 080 @,@ 000 be initially appropriated for the project . The Transit Commission and the Port Authority refused to accept the plan , as they each had their own plans . This plan was much less extensive than the original plan . The original plan would have had the tunnel from Owl 's Head Park under the Narrows to Staten Island , and then continuing to a freight yard to be built in the center of Staten Island , from which a trunk line would run across the Arthur Kill to New Jersey as far as Paterson , before merging with the West Shore Railroad . The new revised plan would only cover the Narrows Tunnel , and a three @-@ mile spur to Arlington Yard . 
 Under the new plan , freight would still only operate at night through the tunnel . Spurs connecting the tunnel in Brooklyn to the Long Island freight belt line , to the B & O freight sidings on Staten Island , and to the new city piers on Staten Island would have all been built . The project was projected to cost $ 60 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 and if the job was done quickly , it could have been done by 1929 . The route would help develop the waterfront areas in Staten Island and Jamaica Bay . Provisions would be made for connections with the subway system 's Fourth Avenue Line , even though the Transit Commission refused to be involved with the plans . 
 Since the plan would benefit the Baltimore and Ohio Railroad , the Pennsylvania Railroad opposed it , and the railroad , cooperating with the Port Authority , proposed a tunnel from Brooklyn to Greenville , New Jersey , with a spur to Staten Island . The situation become complicated , as the Port Authority plan was approved by the State Legislatures in both New Jersey and New York . In addition , the Transit Commission proposed its own subway tunnel branching from the Fourth Avenue Line to be operated as part of the city 's subway system . 
 = = = Groundbreaking and preparations = = = 
 A groundbreaking ceremony was held by New York City Mayor John Hylan on April 14 , 1923 in Bay Ridge and in Staten Island on July 19 . <unk> were dug and tunneling shafts were sunk at 68th Street and Shore Road in Brooklyn ( the Shore Road Shaft ) , and underneath the Saint George Terminal in Staten Island ( the South Street Shaft ) , costing a total of $ 1 million . In addition , in preparation for the tunnel , the SIRT purchased one hundred ME @-@ 1 subway cars built to BMT specifications and electrified its three passenger branches . The impending completion of the tunnel also sparked real estate interests in Staten Island . 
 = = = Construction halted = = = 
 In 1925 , however — the year bids from contractors were to be entertained by the city — the project was halted and the project 's engineering staff laid @-@ off . Officially , the plan was delayed due to lack of funding , but Hylan and Board of Transportation ( BOT ) Chairman John Delaney also wanted to secure freight service for the tunnel . The status of the tunnel as mixed @-@ use created tension and deadlock between Hylan , Delaney and the New York State Transit Commission ; the latter emphasized passenger service for the tunnel . After an investigation issued by Governor Al Smith , planners eliminated freight service from the plan , as per the Nicoll @-@ Hofstadter Act signed into law by the governor ; this then led to lack of interest from contractors . 
 With the tunnel now designated exclusively for subway service , Mayor Hylan , a former Brooklyn – Manhattan Transit Corporation ( BMT ) employee who was a known opponent of both the BMT and the IRT , supposedly stopped the project as part of an overall effort to cripple the two private subway companies and promote the plans for the city @-@ operated Independent Subway System ( IND ) . It was also reported that Governor Smith , who had a financial stake in the Pennsylvania Railroad company , tried to stall the project in order to prevent the expansion of Baltimore and Ohio Railroad operations farther into the city . The stoppage was also attributed to the political rivalry between Hylan and Smith , who were both members of Tammany Hall 's Democratic Party . 
 Nonetheless , on October 2 , 1925 , the 95th Street subway station , which was built mainly in anticipation for the Staten Island Tunnel , was opened . The station was built with a false wall at its south end , intended for either a planned extension to 100th or 101st Streets or a line leading to a future Fort Hamilton @-@ based tunnel . 
 = = Completion proposals = = 
 The tunnel had gone only 150 feet ( 46 m ) into the Narrows before it was halted ; multiple proposals have resurfaced to complete the tunnel . The tunnel and the Shore Road tunneling shafts currently lie dormant under Owl 's Head Park in Bay Ridge . The South Street Shaft in Staten Island was filled in 1946 during post @-@ World War II renovations of Saint George Terminal . 
 The IND Second System proposal from 1929 estimated that the cost of the southern tunnel route from Fort Wadsworth , Staten Island , to Fort Hamilton would cost upward of $ 75 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 , though the tunnel was not officially part of the subway plans and was illustrated as a vehicular tunnel on the map of the plans . Many of the proposals were part of this ambitious expansion plan , which would have connected the tunnel to the IND South Brooklyn Line ( today 's IND Culver Line ) . An updated proposal in 1931 had the connection to the IND at the current Smith @-@ Ninth Streets station , with the tunnel traveling north from Staten Island through Red Hook and Gowanus . Yet another update , from 1933 , was projected to cost $ 45 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 , running the original route between Saint George and 67th Street in Bay Ridge . The line would then run on Second Avenue north through the Bay Ridge Flats on Brooklyn 's western shore , meeting up with the Culver Line near Hamilton Avenue ( the current Gowanus Expressway ) between the Smith @-@ Ninth Streets and Fourth Avenue stations ; it was suggested that the Hylan tunnel shafts be used . An application for a $ 47 million loan for this extension was approved by the Board of Estimate in 1937 . 
 A revised Second System plan , drawn up in 1939 after the completion of the South Brooklyn line , followed the original Bay Ridge plan , and would have also extended the IND down Fort Hamilton Parkway and / or 10th Avenue to meet up with the tunnel route . The IND connection would be located at either the Fort Hamilton Parkway station ( where the express tracks of the line run on a separate level directly under the street ) or the Church Avenue express station , the former terminus of the line . The Church Avenue connection would have utilized the lower level yard just south of the station , currently used to relay terminating G trains . None of these plans were ever funded , due to the onset of the Great Depression and , subsequently , World War II . 
 In 1945 , the tunnel between New Brighton and the BMT Fourth Avenue Line in Brooklyn was submitted by the Board of Transportation to the City Planning Commission as part of the 1946 budget , this time costing $ 50 @,@ 610 @,@ 000 . Later in 1945 , according to a report by Mayor Fiorello H. La Guardia 's special committee on transportation requirements of the Borough of Richmond , it was deemed that a tunnel to Staten Island from Manhattan was " unthinkable " and that a tunnel between Brooklyn and Staten Island was " not feasible now but must wait ten years " . Robert Moses , who was the chairman of the committee and a known mass transit opponent , said that the best hope for improved transportation between Staten Island and Brooklyn and Manhattan was the reconstruction of the Saint George Terminal , the placing of more and better boats between Staten Island and Manhattan , resumption of 24 @-@ hour ferry service between 39th Street in Brooklyn and Staten Island , and the construction of ramps to the Gowanus elevated improvement at 39th Street . 
 More recently , the Verrazano – Narrows Bridge , built from 1959 to 1964 , had been proposed to serve as the rail link . The 95th Street station was slated to be connected to the bridge , one of the world 's longest suspension bridges , because it followed the route of the planned tunnel . However , no space for any tracks was ever built because of Moses 's opposition to the expansion of New York City public transportation . 
 Modern proposals for completion of the tunnel have come from New York City Councilman Lewis A. Fidler , who has proposed a one @-@ third of one percent tax for the <unk> region to pay for the construction . The tunnel was one of several projects that could have competed for $ 3 billion of federal funds that were to have been allocated to the ARC tunnel , which was canceled by New Jersey governor Chris Christie in October 2010 . State Senator Diane Savino , whose district includes parts of Staten Island and Brooklyn , supported such a plan , saying , " The MTA should complete a 1912 plan that would have rail and freight access from the terminus of Victory Boulevard to Brooklyn , along 67th Street , then utilize the R train along Fourth Avenue . " The plan 's projected cost would be $ 3 billion , " the same as a proposed extension of the 7 line under the Hudson River . " Supporters stated that a rail tunnel would improve quality of life for Staten Islanders , reduce traffic , and increase the attractiveness of the borough for investment . 
 = = Similar proposals = = 
 = = = Cross @-@ Harbor Rail Tunnel = = = 
 The nearby Cross @-@ Harbor Rail Tunnel is being planned to connect northeastern New Jersey and Long Island , with portals in Brooklyn and in Jersey City , New Jersey . The tunnel is being planned as a result of passenger and commuter traffic frequencies being at capacity and precluding freight movements . As early as the 1920s , this tunnel had been planned to cross the entire New York Harbor rather than just the Narrows . As a precursor to the planned project , which could cost up to $ 11 billion to build , the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey ( PANYNJ ) compiled a Tier 1 Draft Environmental Impact Statement ( <unk> ) in November 2014 . 
 = = = Tunnels from Brooklyn to New Jersey via Staten Island = = = 
 The former Pennsylvania Railroad ( PRR ) also planned a railroad tunnel , for freight use , between Brooklyn and Staten Island in 1893 . The PRR also proposed a tunnel from Brooklyn to Jersey City , approximately following the planned path of the Cross @-@ Harbor Rail Tunnel , ten years later . The project was never started , despite efforts by government planners to start the project from the 1920s through the 1940s . 
 In January 1935 , New York City Mayor Fiorello LaGuardia solicited the PANYNJ 's help to create a report , called the " Summary of Cross Bays Freight Tunnel Study ( Routes via Staten Island ) , " detailing four routes for a freight tunnel running to New Jersey via a tunnel to Staten Island . However , the only option that was deemed feasible was one that went from the end of the Bay Ridge Branch in Brooklyn to Greenville Yard in Greenville , New Jersey , which could either go through Staten Island or directly under the New York Bay . While the route via Staten Island , estimated at $ 35 million , could potentially accommodate a passenger line at a cost of another $ 28 million , other costs made the direct route cheaper . 
 In 1978 , Parsons , Brinckerhoff , Quade and Douglas studied four options for a tunnel from Brooklyn to New Jersey , some involving a tunnel to Staten Island . These included an option for a tunnel directly from Greenville Yard to the Bay Ridge Branch , and a link from New Jersey to Manhattan . Also under consideration was a single @-@ tube tunnel with accommodations for electric units only . The Greenville – Brooklyn tunnel would be about $ 331 million , which was cheaper than the approximately $ 405 million tunnel from Staten Island to Brooklyn . 
 = = = Boulevard Subway plan = = = 
 In 1912 , Wood , Harmon & Co proposed a new subway from Bayonne , New Jersey , to Staten Island . This was called the Boulevard Subway . In their advertisements , the company stated , " Five or ten years from now — when the subway to Staten Island is built — … some Doubting Thomases of New Yorkers who don 't buy will be shedding tears at their lack of foresight . " 
 The plan resurfaced in 1929 , when meetings took place between Jersey City Mayor Frank Hague and officials from New York City Mayor Jimmy Walker 's office . This plan proposed a subway line running along the SIRT North Shore Branch and John F. Kennedy Boulevard in New Jersey , before connecting with the Hudson and Manhattan Railroad ( today 's PATH train ) at Exchange Place . The service would have provided access to Lower Manhattan via the H & M 's Downtown Hudson Tubes to Hudson Terminal ( now the site of the World Trade Center station ) . There were also plans to extend the line to the George Washington Bridge in Fort Lee . 
 = Get Me a Lawyer = 
 " Get Me a Lawyer " ( also known as " Pilot " ) is the pilot episode of the legal drama series Damages , which first aired on July 24 , 2007 on FX in the United States . It was written by series creators / executive producers Todd A. Kessler , Glenn Kessler , and Daniel Zelman , and was directed by producer Allen Coulter . In the episode , recent law school graduate Ellen Parsons ( Rose Byrne ) is recruited to Hewes and Associates , a law firm headed by Patty Hewes ( Glenn Close ) , where she is assigned to the " Frobisher case " . Billionaire Arthur Frobisher ( Ted Danson ) is being sued by his former employees , whom he advised to invest in his company while unloading his own stock , and while Frobisher 's attorney Ray Fiske ( Željko Ivanek ) pleads for a settlement price , Patty insists on taking the case to court . 
 When the Kesslers and Zelman devised the series , they did not specifically intend for Patty and Ellen to be lawyers , wanting primarily to explore the power structures between two strong women — Patty and her protégée Ellen — and choosing a profession afterwards . Close agreed to play Patty so long as the series was filmed in New York , where she resides . To prepare for their roles , Close , Byrne and Tate Donovan met with corporate lawyers , while Danson met with the CEOs of Fortune 500 companies . The pilot was filmed in February and FX placed a 13 @-@ episode order for the series in March . Its American airing brought in 3 @.@ 7 million viewers and it was reviewed positively by most critics . It received two Emmy Award nominations for writing and directing and one win for Close for Outstanding Lead Actress in a Drama Series . It was also nominated for an American Cinema Editors Award . 
 = = Plot = = 
 A young woman steps out of an elevator , bloody and half @-@ naked . She leaves the building and runs down a busy street . She is taken to a police station , where two detectives , Dan Williams ( Casey <unk> ) and Rosario Ortiz ( Maya Days ) , find in her pocket a business card for Hollis M. Nye . 
 In an extended flashback to six months earlier , the woman is revealed to be Ellen Parsons , a recent law school graduate . She turns down a generous salary from Nye 's firm to meet with Patty Hewes , head of Hewes and Associates . Later at a bar , Ellen meets Nye ( Philip Bosco ) , who cautions that Patty is dangerous and has her sign a card reading " I was warned . " Ellen finds out that her interview with Patty is on the day of her sister 's wedding . She declines the interview but Patty , intrigued to have been turned down , finds Ellen at the wedding and hires her . 
 Patty is the lead attorney in a high @-@ profile litigation , representing the bankrupted workers of a large company run by Frobisher , who allegedly advised his employees to invest in the company while selling his own stock . Patty insists on taking the case to trial rather than accepting a settlement , but on Ellen 's first day it is revealed that the prosecution cannot yet link Frobisher to his stockbroker — though both were in Palm Beach , Florida over the same weekend — and thus cannot disprove that the selling of his stock was not pre @-@ arranged . When Ellen returns home , her boyfriend David Connor ( Noah Bean ) proposes to her and she accepts . 
 Frobisher 's attorney Ray Fiske visits David 's sister Katie ( Anastasia Griffith ) , who is opening a restaurant in which Frobisher is investing , and asks her to sign a confidentiality agreement . Frobisher meets with his former custodian Larry <unk> ( Victor Arnold ) , who names a settlement price of $ 100 million , which Ray returns to Patty . Patty persuades her clients to decline the offer , but Larry mentions a previous agreement to accept any offer of $ 100 million . Patty suspects that her advisor Tom ( Tate Donovan ) had known about the agreement and fires him . Katie , meanwhile , thinks that she is being watched , and tells Ellen and David that she had catered a function for Frobisher in Florida and that afterwards he had offered to help her open a restaurant . Ellen realizes that Patty hired her to get to Katie , a potential witness . Though Katie is initially hesitant to testify , she finds her dog Saffron dead in her apartment with a note reading " Quiet " pinned to a wall . Assuming that Frobisher is responsible , she agrees to meet with Patty to help bring Frobisher down . Tom meets with Patty , who had only pretended to fire him , and gives her Saffron 's collar , which she throws into the ocean . 
 Returning to the present , the two detectives seek Nye out and he identifies Ellen . They visit Ellen and David 's apartment and find David dead in the bathtub . Ortiz tells Ellen to explain what had happened , and Ellen 's only response is " Get me a lawyer . " 
 = = Production = = 
 Brothers Glenn and Todd Kessler decided to work with Daniel Zelman because " we have a third brother , but Daniel is kind of like our fourth brother that we 've known for over 20 years . " When the Kesslers and Zelman devised the series , they did not specifically intend for Patty and Ellen to be lawyers . They wanted to explore the power structures in two strong women — feeling that the male power dynamics had been seen before — and considered a number of professions , including entertainment and pharmaceuticals , before deciding on law . Zelman said that the writers ' main motivation to write about the law " was our interest in power dynamics , the dynamics of power in society . We 're very much interested in the ambiguity of it . We 're just interested in seeing how far we can push these characters . " According to Kessler , " One thing that 's crucial is that Patty Hewes is on one end of the spectrum and Ellen Parsons is on the other . " The relationship the writers were most interested in showing was that between a mentor and a mentee , which is represented by Patty and her protégée Ellen . Todd Kessler called the real life Enron case " a big part " of the inspiration for Patty 's main case involving Arthur Frobisher , though Zelman claims that Enron was not used as a basis in particular : " It was more just the culture of all those corporate scandals at the time . There seemed to be one after the other of them , and we became very interested in sort of the characters who were a part of those scandals . " 
 After co @-@ starring on 2004 's fourth season of The Shield on cable network FX , Close told network president John Landgraf that she would be open to star in another series , suggesting a spin @-@ off for her Shield character , Captain Monica Rawling . Landgraf pitched Damages to Close , who agreed to play Patty so long as the series was shot in New York City , where she resides . To prepare for her role , Close met New York attorney Mary Jo White and her partner Lorna Scoffield , as well as litigator Patricia Hines , from whom Close learned " some extraordinary things " . The producers sought after Byrne to play Ellen , but she was unavailable during the first round of auditions as she was filming 28 Weeks Later . She says the opportunity " came up again , so I went in , auditioned , and got the role " . Like Close , Byrne spent time with a female lawyer in New York and read books written by <unk> Alan Dershowitz and David DuBois , while Donovan talked to his uncle , a New York corporate lawyer . He visited Manhattan 's Centre Street courts , where he " followed the most intense murder trial " . Ivanek was so eager to work on the series that he auditioned for two different roles , and was cast as Ray . Todd Kessler said that Danson 's 1979 film The Onion Field was " a huge influence on Glenn , Daniel and myself , and that was something that had always stuck in our minds . And when we sought out to cast this role of Arthur Frobisher , Ted kind of came into focus . " In preparation for his role , the producers asked Danson to meet with CEOs of Fortune 500 corporations and watch documentaries such as Enron : The Smartest Guys in the Room , which examines the collapse of Enron . They also suggested that Danson meet with Close 's acting coach Harold <unk> . The producers said that David and Katie were the hardest characters to cast . Noah Bean , who felt that he gave " an awful first audition " for the role of David , was called in for a second reading as he was waiting for an elevator to leave the building , and was ultimately cast . British actress Anastasia Griffith 's agent informed her of the audition for the role of Katie only two hours before it began . When she met the producers , they were initially concerned about a Brit playing an American , especially since Australian Byrne had already signed on . " To put their fears at rest " , Griffith addressed the producers in an American accent from beginning to end of the audition . After being cast , Griffith and Byrne visited New York University dialect coach Deborah Hecht to perfect their accents . 
 The episode was shot in February and edited in March 2007 . Filming took place on location at various sites around Manhattan ; after the first season had been greenlit , sets were built at New York 's Steiner Studios . Byrne said that filming the opening scene on a winter 's morning in only underwear and a coat was " very traumatic " and " very hard " . The series remained untitled during casting and filming , and was named Damages after FX had greenlit the pilot and placed a 13 @-@ episode order for the first season in March . 
 = = Reception = = 
 As the most @-@ watched basic cable show of the night , " Get Me a Lawyer " drew 3 @.@ 7 million viewers on its initial commercial @-@ free airing , with a total of 5 @.@ 1 million including the viewers of repeat airings later in the night . 1 @.@ 2 million people fell into the target demographic of adults aged 18 – 49 , while 1 @.@ 5 million fell into the 25 – 54 age bracket . FX president John Landgraf deemed the pilot 's ratings " middling " by the network 's standards . The Australian premiere on the Nine Network brought in 999 @,@ 000 viewers , making Damages the thirteenth most @-@ watched show of the night . In Britain , BBC One 's airing of the episode was seen by 1 @.@ 9 million people with a share of 11 % . 
 Most critics reviewed " Get Me a Lawyer " positively . The New York Times ' Alessandra Stanley praised FX for choosing another series that " keep [ s ] the light focused on the dark side of its main characters " . Stanley wrote that " Damages is yet another show that requires viewers to tune in to every episode to follow the plot , but it is the most grown @-@ up thriller in the pack [ of serialized drama series ] . " Tim Goodman of the San Francisco Chronicle wrote that , in the episode , " All the drama is in the writing and the acting . " He complimented the " strong cast " , stating that " it 's Close who makes Damages a series to contend with " . Writing for The Age , Robin Oliver called the pilot " terrific @-@ going @-@ on @-@ sensational " . She praised Close and Byrne 's performances , but also highlighted Danson 's role as " a particularly fine piece of casting " . Oliver 's Age colleague Melinda Houston called Close " delicious – and convincing " as Patty and thought that the script was " fabulous " . S. P. <unk> of the Seattle Post @-@ Intelligencer remarked , " For my money , this is what a ' thriller ' is all about . " TV Squad 's Jonathan Toomey enjoyed the episode 's flashbacks , saying that the style of the show " works and it works well " . Matt Mitovich claimed in a TV Guide recap of the episode , " What a pilot it was ! " He praised the acting from Close , Danson and Byrne , while he felt that " the supporting cast is excellent as well " . Stuart Levine , writing for Variety , called the pilot his favorite episode of the first season . 
 Other critics , however , did not respond well to the episode . Andrew Billen of The Times thought that the episode was " not as stylish , intelligent or classy as it hopes " and " about as subtle as Times Square " . He called Close 's performance " not remotely credible but impressive in a Norma Desmond way " and labeled Byrne as " particularly <unk> " . Brian Lowry gave the pilot a lukewarm review for Variety . He praised the " solid cast " and " smart dialogue " , but felt that " the template feels a little too familiar ... moreover , it 's fuzzy how long the show 's mystery will persist " . Entertainment Weekly 's Gillian Flynn graded the episode as a C − , criticizing the characters ' lack of logic and the " many ludicrous scenes " . She thought the storylines to be overcomplicated and called Byrne " bland " and " inexpressive " . 
 " Get Me a Lawyer " received two Primetime Emmy Award nominations : Allen Coulter was nominated for Outstanding Directing for a Drama Series , and Glenn Kessler , Todd A. Kessler , and Daniel Zelman were nominated for Outstanding Writing for a Drama Series . The pilot episode was submitted to the Primetime Emmys judging panel for determining the nominees for Outstanding Drama Series ; Damages was nominated but did not win the award . Close chose the episode as her Outstanding Lead Actress in a Drama Series submission ; she was nominated and went on to win the award . Editor Malcolm Jamieson was nominated for an American Cinema Editors Award for his work on this episode in the " Best Edited One @-@ Hour TV Series ( Commercial Television ) " category . 
 = Zero Hour ( Star Trek : Enterprise ) = 
 " Zero Hour " is the twenty @-@ fourth and final episode of the third season of the American science fiction television series Star Trek : Enterprise ; the seventy @-@ seventh episode overall . It first aired on May 26 , 2003 , on the UPN network within the United States . Set in the 22nd century , the series follows the adventures of the first Starfleet starship , Enterprise , registration NX @-@ 01 . Season three of Enterprise features an ongoing story following an attack on Earth by previously unknown aliens called the Xindi . 
 In this episode , Sub @-@ Commander T 'Pol leads the Enterprise on an attack on ' Sphere 41 ' in an attempt to destroy the sphere network within the Delphic Expanse . Meanwhile , a team led by Captain Jonathan Archer has infiltrated the Xindi weapon while it is en route to Earth . Both the spheres and the weapon are destroyed , but Archer is lost , presumed dead . Enterprise returns to Earth but the crew suddenly find that they have been sent back in time to a very different Second World War . 
 The episode was written by series co @-@ creators Rick Berman and Brannon Braga and was directed by Allan Kroeker . The episode took eight days to film and included a larger guest cast than normal for episodes of Enterprise , as well as two competition winners . The twist at the end of " Zero Hour " was originally conceived by the writers as a joke , but was developed over the course of the third season to become the concept of " alien Nazis " . This twist was further explained and resolved in the season four two @-@ part opener " Storm Front " . Roughly 3 @.@ 91 million viewers watched " Zero Hour " on first broadcast . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Sub @-@ Commander T 'Pol orders Enterprise to ' Sphere 41 ' , in an attempt to destroy the entire sphere network . They arrive to find that the Sphere Builders have created a distortion field around it . Doctor Phlox determines that 12 – 15 minutes exposure will kill the crew . Undeterred , Commander Tucker modifies the deflector dish so that it can be used to destroy the sphere . As they approach , two Guardians arrive and begin damaging the ship 's systems , but they cannot prevent its destruction . It implodes , setting off a chain reaction that successfully destroys the rest of the spheres , ending all spatial anomalies in the region . 
 Meanwhile Captain Archer , accompanied by Lieutenant Reed , Ensign Sato , and a team of MACOs , enters the vortex created by the Xindi weapon . During the pursuit , a recovering Sato is pushed by Archer to decipher Degra 's schematics . Again Archer is suddenly pulled into the future by Temporal Agent Daniels , this time to the founding of the United Federation of Planets , but Archer is again uninterested . Arriving near Earth , Archer receives an unexpected transmission from Commander Shran , who engages and then destroys the Reptilian ship . In the chaos , Archer and his team are able to beam aboard the weapon . A fierce fire @-@ fight ensues , and as Archer and Sato try to disable the weapon , Commander Dolim attempts to stop them . He fails and the weapon is destroyed . 
 Sato and Reed return to Enterprise with the sad news that Archer did not make it off the weapon . <unk> on an Aquatic ship , Enterprise then returns to Earth , but they are unable to contact Starfleet . Surprised , T 'Pol orders Tucker and Ensign Mayweather to fly a shuttlepod down to San Francisco , where they are suddenly attacked by what seem to be P @-@ 51s . The final scene switches to a World War II German field @-@ hospital . A doctor summons some SS officers to examine the unfamiliar uniform of a burns patient who was recently brought in . The patient is revealed as Archer . One of the SS personnel steps out of the shadows , revealing himself to be a gray @-@ skinned alien . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Writing and story = = = 
 " Zero Hour " was the culmination of a season @-@ long storyline first introduced by the events of " The Expanse " , wherein an alien race called the Xindi attacks Earth and kills seven million people . During the course of the third season , the Enterprise went into the previously unexplored Delphic Expanse to search for the Xindi and to prevent a further attack which will destroy Earth . Executive producer and writer Brannon Braga felt that the end of the season in a three @-@ part arc composed of " The Council " , " Countdown " and " Zero Hour " , which he compared to three acts of the same story . The episode was written by Braga alongside Rick Berman . The duo were the co @-@ creators of Star Trek : Enterprise . 
 The idea that Enterprise would be successful in its mission was planned from the start of the development of the year @-@ long storyline . However , the producers and writing team would joke that there would be a " bizarre twist " such as the crew returning to Earth and discovering that it was now ruled by giant cockroaches . The writers decided against a Xindi @-@ based cliffhanger and sought an unusual twist . Braga said that " I can 't remember who said ' Nazis , ' but we just somehow ended up with Nazis . Then that didn 't even feel like enough , so we decided to make them alien Nazis . " He expected it would make the returning episode in season four " really interesting " , and wanted to end the series on something " wacky " . Most of the cast were not given the final few pages of the script until they were already in production . Actor Dominic Keating , who portrays Malcolm Reed on Enterprise , called the ending a " lovely twist ... that just makes you scratch your head and wonder at what you 've just seen . " The twist was wrapped up at the start of season four with the two @-@ part episode " Storm Front " . 
 It was the third time that Nazis had appeared in the Star Trek franchise . The first was in the episode " Patterns of Force " in Star Trek : The Original Series , and then again on the holodeck on Star Trek : Voyager in the two @-@ part " The Killing Game " . In the episode , T 'Pol states that " Zero Hour " takes place in <unk> , a statement which contradicts other episodes . Manny Coto , executive producer and show runner for the following season , explained that this was a mistake in the script . It was later stated in the timeline published in Voyages of Imagination by Jeff Ayers that the events of " Zero Hour " took place on February 14 , 2154 , a day after the setting of the episode " Countdown " . 
 = = = Direction , filming and guest stars = = = 
 Allan Kroeker directed the episode . He had previously directed the season two closing episode " The Expanse " , and the first episode of season three , " The Xindi " . Previously in the franchise , he had directed the finale of both Star Trek : Deep Space Nine and Star Trek : Voyager . Production began on March 5 and was completed eight working days later . Because there was no ability to shoot scenes using a second unit during the production of a following episode , ten pages of script were shot on the final day of filming instead of the normal seven or eight . " Zero Hour " was the final episode of Enterprise to be shot on film stock , as for the following season , the decision was made to switch to high @-@ definition digital video . 
 Scott Bakula stated in an interview on The Wayne Brady Show that there were three endings to the episode filmed . This was later denied by Dominic Keating while on stage at Creation Entertainment 's Grand Slam event in Pasadena in March 2004 . He did clarify that the script for the final scene was delivered to his house in three envelopes , accompanied by a security guard with a dog . Bakula explained later during an online chat for the official Star Trek website that only one ending was ever filmed . 
 " Zero Hour " featured a guest and stunt cast larger than usual for episodes of Enterprise . For the final day of filming , there were 35 extras on set . The additional actors appearing in " Zero Hour " included J. Paul Boehmer , who portrayed an SS agent at the end of the episode . Boehmer had appeared several times previous in the Star Trek franchise , and his first part ever as an actor was as a holographic Nazi Captain in the Voyager episode " The Killing Game " . He had also previously appeared in Enterprise as the Vulcan <unk> in the episode " Carbon Creek " . Boehmer returned to reprise his role from " Zero Hour " during the two @-@ part " Storm Front " in season four . 
 In addition to the actors appearing on the episode , two members of the public made walk on appearances as Starfleet crewmen on the engineering set . These were Amy <unk> , who had won the prize on <unk> @-@ FM . She was a high school English and drama teacher . Joining her was DJ Bob Rivers from the Seattle @-@ based UPN affiliate radio station . Also appearing was Brian D 'Arcy who gained his role through a charity auction held by Wired magazine to benefit the Starbright Foundation . <unk> would later have a cameo in the fan production Star Trek : Of Gods and Men . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Broadcast = = = 
 " Zero Hour " was first broadcast on May 26 , 2004 , on the UPN network within the United States . It was watched by 3 @.@ 91 million viewers . It received a Nielsen rating of 2 @.@ 5 / 4 percent , which meant that it was seen by 2 @.@ 5 percent of all households , and 4 percent of all households watching television at the time of the broadcast . " Zero Hour " placed UPN in fifth place in the ratings during the timeslot . The episode was first broadcast in the UK later that year on June 7 , on Sky One . 
 Prior to the broadcast of the finale of season three , there were rumours that the series was going to be cancelled . UPN decided to renew the series , but moved it for season four to Friday nights , and so " Zero Hour " was the final episode of Enterprise to be broadcast on a Wednesday evening . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Michael Westmore , make @-@ up supervisor on Enterprise , was nominated for Outstanding Makeup for a Series , Miniseries , Movie or a Special ( Prosthetic ) at the 2004 Emmy Awards for his work on " Zero Hour " . The award instead went to James McKinnon for his work on an episode of Nip / Tuck . 
 Michelle Erica Green , in her review for TrekNation , found the ending of the episode amusing , describing it as an " insane left hook of a cliffhanger " . She praised the character development elsewhere in the episode , but kept returning to what she described as " <unk> <unk> <unk> " . Jamahl Epsicokhan , at his website Jammer 's Reviews , gave the episode two and a half out of four stars . He said that the episode featured several science fiction clichés , such as having the Xindi weapon destroyed in Earth 's orbit . He said that the final scene of the episode was the " Ultimate WTF ending " and compared it to the " jarring " finale of Tim Burton 's version of the film Planet of the Apes . 
 In David Greven 's book , Gender and Sexuality in Star Trek , the author states that the declaration by Daniels that Reed and Hoshi were unimportant to future events meant that " racial and cultural Others were not important to the future " . But by saying that Archer was indeed required for the future to proceed as expected , it was a statement about the need for " institutional white male power " . Greven asserted that this was part of the writing on Enterprise which changed following the new political direction after the September 11 attacks , whereas the previous post @-@ Star Trek : The Next Generation series had been progressively multi @-@ cultural during the period of the Bill Clinton administration . 
 = = Home media release = = 
 The first home media release of " Zero Hour " was as part of the season three DVD box set , released in the United States on September 27 , 2005 . The Blu @-@ ray release of Enterprise was announced in early 2013 , and season three was released on January 7 , 2014 . Jay Chattaway 's music for the episode was released as part of the four disc Star Trek : Enterprise Collection on December 2 , 2014 , including the orchestral pieces " Sphere Builder On Board / Andorian Offensive / Sphere / Final Showdown " and " My Captain " . 
 = Ciara : Live in Concert = 
 Ciara : Live in Concert was the debut concert tour of American recording artist Ciara . It supported her second studio album , Ciara : The Evolution ( 2006 ) and visited venues in the United States and Canada . The 16 @-@ city club tour began on October 26 and ended on December 10 , 2006 . Previously unreleased tracks from her then @-@ upcoming second album were previewed during the tour . The singer described the tour as an exclusive event for fans to showcase the album 's musical direction . Ciara : Live in Concert was accompanied by various radio concerts and a concert with hip hop group The Black Eyed Peas . 
 The tour 's set list consisted of tracks from Ciara : The Evolution and Ciara 's debut studio album Goodies ( 2004 ) , along with three featured singles . The show held at Nokia Theatre in New York City was broadcast live via streaming on AOL Music 's website and it was later made available on demand . The tour received mixed to positive reviews ; critics were divided regarding the pre @-@ recorded backing tracks and remarked that Ciara was slightly under @-@ prepared to host her own headlining tour , but ultimately praised her energetic choreography . 
 = = Background and development = = 
 Ciara : Live in Concert was announced by Jive Records on October 10 , 2006 , via a press release . It was Ciara 's first tour as a headliner ; she had previously performed as the opening act for Gwen Stefani at the Harajuku Lovers Tour ( 2005 ) . Ciara : Live in Concert previewed previously unreleased tracks from the singer 's then @-@ upcoming second album Ciara : The Evolution ( 2006 ) . The tour began on October 26 , 2006 , at the club Love in Washington , D.C. and ended on December 10 at the Nokia Theatre in New York City . It was accompanied by several radio concerts and a concert with American hip hop group The Black Eyed Peas in Los Angeles on December 1 , 2006 , as part of the group 's Monkey Business Tour . Regarding the tour , Ciara stated : 
 Previewing the new record in a small setting gives my fans an exclusive experience where they can truly hear and see exactly where I 'm going with Ciara : The Evolution . It 's about so much more than just my personal growth — it 's about the evolution of music , the evolution of dance , the evolution of fashion . I want to bring a taste of all that to the fans in a one @-@ on @-@ one environment to get them excited for [ the album ] . 
 = = Concert synopsis = = 
 The set list for the tour consisted of songs from Ciara : The Evolution and Goodies . As featured artists did not appear on the tour , their part of the songs were edited out , namely on " Oh " and " That 's Right " and the featured singles " Like You " by Bow Wow and " Lose Control " by Missy Elliott . The set decor included risers and multicolored lights . The show began with Ciara appearing on a platform one story above the stage floor . She performed her debut single " Goodies " , which was quickly followed by " Oh " . She wore tight metallic pants , a cut @-@ up white T @-@ shirt and sunglasses . The tempo of " Make It Last Forever " was increased and the backup dancers performed " old @-@ school " breakdancing . The performance ended with Ciara and her dancers freezing in " Vogue poses " . 
 While performing " Lose Control " , Ciara took off her shirt and revealed a silver bra underneath . The male back @-@ up dancers also took their shirts off . Ciara performed her part in Bow Wow 's " Like You " while appearing alone on stage . For " Like a Boy " , Ciara and her female dancers switched to military @-@ style clothing and performed male @-@ oriented choreography . Later in the show came " Promise " , for which Ciara recreated dance moves from the music video while sporting black pants , a jacket and a hoodie . She ended the song by lying face down while pounding on the stage with her fists . She closed the set with " Get Up " . No musicians appeared on stage throughout the show and Ciara wore a headset microphone to fully focus on her dance moves . The show lasted 45 minutes . 
 = = Reception and recordings = = 
 The tour received mixed to positive reviews from critics . The Morning Call 's <unk> Moultrie was positive in his review of the tour and wrote that Ciara " put on one of the best performances I have seen yet at [ Crocodile Rock ] " . Moultrie called her dance steps " incredible " , noting that it was in sync with the music , " each pelvic thrust or body @-@ bending twist " and the periodic bursts of light . In conclusion , Moultrie praised the concert and its " high @-@ energy songs , sexy dance moves , flawless vocals and a top @-@ flight light show " . Bill White of Seattle Post @-@ Intelligencer wrote that due to Ciara 's high energy , " it hardly mattered that she was singing to backing tracks " . Regarding the pre @-@ recorded vocals , he said : " Usually this type of performance seems cut @-@ rate and dishonest , but Ciara , with the help of slick lighting and sharp choreography , made it work " . White concluded : " It may have been a 45 @-@ minute infomercial for her second release , ' Evolution ' , but Ciara 's explosive display of crunk was a <unk> in its own right . " Sia Michel of The New York Times wrote a positive review , stating : " Ciara led a squad of hip @-@ hop dancers through stylishly choreographed routines . Striding about in a headset , she was a commanding and relentlessly professional presence . " 
 Vincent Jackson of The Press of Atlantic City wrote that Ciara " exhibited a great deal of self @-@ confidence during the course of the night " . Jackson commented that Ciara is a " limited vocalist " , stating that she made a " good decision to put most of her energy into her almost nonstop , aerobic dance performance " . Newsday critic Glenn Gamboa was more critical , writing that " Pop concerts require strong personalities and , at 21 , Ciara hasn 't quite perfected hers yet " . Gamboa called the show " as slick as an ice patch and often just as cool " , but noted that sometimes she " got dwarfed by her surroundings " of eight dancers and recorded backing vocals . He praised the up @-@ tempo songs and " Promise " , but criticized the ballad " I 'm Just Me " for " nearly halt [ ing ] " the set . He ended on a more positive note , writing that " Ciara shows that she is well on her way to becoming a superstar herself " . Jon Gilbertson of Milwaukee Journal Sentinel was largely critical of the show and criticized the singer for relying on backing tracks , stating that she failed to stand out as none of the songs " brought forth any recognizable vocal signatures " . 
 AOL Music announced on December 8 , 2006 , that it would broadcast Ciara 's concert at the Nokia Theatre . The concert was available worldwide for free via live streaming on AOL Music 's website . When the show had ended , viewers could access it via an on demand service . 
 = = Shows = = 
 = Hood event = 
 The Hood event ( Turkish : <unk> <unk> ) was an incident on July 4 , 2003 following the 2003 invasion of Iraq where a group of Turkish military personnel operating in northern Iraq were captured , led away with hoods over their heads , and interrogated by the United States military . The soldiers were released after sixty hours , after Turkey protested to the United States . 
 Though neither side ever apologized , a US @-@ Turkish commission set up to investigate the incident later issued a joint statement of regret . In addition , US Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld wrote a letter to the Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdoğan expressing sorrow over the incident . The Hood event damaged diplomatic relations between Turkey and the United States and marked a low point in US @-@ Turkish relations . While the incident received comparatively little coverage in the United States , it was a major event in Turkey , many of whose citizens saw it as a deliberate insult and nicknamed it " The Hood event " . 
 = = Background = = 
 Turkey had long viewed northern Iraq , with its large Kurdish population , as a possible national security threat . During the 1980s and 1990s , Turkey fought against the Kurdistan Workers Party ( PKK ) , a separatist group operating mainly in southeastern Turkey . More than 30 @,@ 000 people were killed and millions more were displaced . During the war , the PKK established bases in Iraq and Syria . 
 Turkish fears intensified after Iraqi Kurdistan gained autonomy after the 1991 Gulf War . In 1996 , after a civil war had broken out there , Turkey deployed troops there to monitor a ceasefire between the two main Kurdish factions . In 1998 , Turkey was able to use military threats to force neighboring Syria to expel PKK leader Abdullah <unk> . However , because of the United States , it was never able to move decisively against the Kurds in northern Iraq . 
 Under American protection , Iraqi Kurdistan had evolved into a successful semi @-@ autonomous region . US pressure helped lead to a peace deal in 1999 between the major Iraqi Kurdish factions , the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan and the Kurdistan Democratic Party of Iraq . While both parties officially swore off independence , the Turkish government remained sufficiently concerned , and continued to keep troops in northern Iraq . 
 = = The Iraq War = = 
 By 2003 , many Turks had come to see American foreign policy in the region as a threat . Matters were not helped by the election in 2002 of the Justice and Development Party ( AKP ) . The election of the AKP led to an immediate increase in tensions with America , especially after the Parliament 's decision not to send any Turkish troops to Iraq further eroded US @-@ Turkish relations . 70 % of the parliament members were Justice and Development Party members . 
 On April 24 , 2003 , only two weeks after the fall of Baghdad , a dozen Turkish special forces were arrested in Da <unk> ( a tribal village 45 minutes north of Kirkuk ) . According to Time , a weekly world news magazine , they were wearing civilian clothes and intended to infiltrate Iraq , lagging behind a humanitarian convoy , in order to destabilize the region to a level where Turkey could reasonably send its own peacekeeping force . However , they were intercepted by American forces , who claimed they had received prior knowledge of the group . 
 Colonel Bill Mayville , a U.S. brigade commander who was responsible for the region where this took place , accused the Turks of having links to the Iraqi Turkoman Front ( ITF ) , an ethnic @-@ Turkish militia . However , US forces made no effort to incarcerate the Turks , merely detaining them for a day , with food , security and comfort , and then escorting them back to the Iraqi @-@ Turkish border . In the following months , Turkey continued its policy of sending small groups of soldiers into Iraqi Kurdistan , ostensibly to search for PKK bases . According to The Economist , Turkey also began covertly arming the ITF as a lever against the Iraqi Kurds . 
 = = Raid on Al Sulaymaniyah = = 
 On July 4 , 2003 , soldiers from the United States Army 's 173d Airborne Brigade raided a safehouse in the Kurdish @-@ held Iraqi city of Sulaymaniyah . Seemingly acting on an intelligence tip that there were individuals in the safehouse plotting to assassinate the Iraqi @-@ Kurdish governor of the province of Kirkuk . The safehouse instead housed members of the Iraq 's Turkoman Front and Turkish Special Forces soldiers , including a colonel and two majors , whom they promptly arrested . Turkish sources refer to eleven soldiers commanded by a major . An unknown number of other individuals were also detained during the raid , although thirteen were later released . Apart from these , and the Turkish soldiers who were to be released after intense diplomatic activity , a British citizen named Michael Todd , who was by chance in town to seek his half @-@ Iraqi daughter , was also put in custody and kept for a fortnight under trying conditions . 
 = = Negotiations = = 
 The Turkish military immediately threatened retaliatory measures , including closing Turkish airspace to US military flights , stopping the use of the southern Incirlik Air Base and sending more troops into northern Iraq . A delegation of Turkish military and diplomatic officials immediately left for Sulaymaniyah on Saturday to discuss the matter with the Americans , but according to the Turks most of the American commanders were off celebrating Independence Day . Following direct protests by Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdoğan to US Vice President Dick Cheney , as well as by Turkish Foreign Minister Abdullah Gül to US Secretary of State Colin Powell , the Turkish soldiers were released after sixty hours in captivity . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The Hood event made a much greater impact in Turkey than in the West , which by and large agreed with the U.S. government 's interpretation . While the story received comparatively little coverage outside of the Middle East , Turkish newspapers loudly condemned the raid , referring to U.S. forces with nicknames such as " <unk> " and " Ugly Americans " . On the last day of the incident , Hilmi <unk> , Chief of the General Staff ( Turkey ) , declared that the Hood event had caused a " crisis of confidence " between the US and Turkey . 
 The event periodically gets front coverage in the Turkish media , such as in the mass @-@ circulation daily Hürriyet , in keeping with new declarations made to the press by the involved parties and new details divulged . Most recently , the key witness in the Ergenekon investigation , Tuncay Güney , alleged that the event was the U.S. response to the discovery of documents about the clandestine Ergenekon network 's Iraq connection in the archives of Tariq Aziz . 
 The Hood event was the inspiration for the 2006 Turkish action film Valley of the Wolves Iraq . The film opens with the depiction of an almost identical incident , following afterwards a fictional story in which the Turkish protagonist seeks retaliation against the American Commander responsible for the incident . 
 = = Claims = = 
 Various municipal and government buildings were put on fire in Mosul and Kirkuk by Kurdish forces on 10 and 11 April 2003 . A Turkish daily newspaper reported that the Turkish Special Forces soldiers , who were captured by US Army and Peshmerga , had already filmed the deed records and sent the digital records to Turkey before the historical records were terminated . The newspaper also reported that the US party was , in fact , in search of those records , but they were unable to find them . However , Turkish Ministry of Public Works declared that the ministry archives holds historical deed records from the Ottoman era and there were no operations involved . 
 Retired Department of Intelligence Chief of General Staff of the Republic of Turkey , Korg . <unk> <unk> Pekin , claims in his book named “ <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> ODA ” that , after the secret archives about Turkmens captured during the raid , local Turkmen leaders were assassinated or died in suspicious traffic accidents . 
 = Brazilian monitor Piauí = 
 The Brazilian monitor Piauí was the fourth ship of the Pará @-@ class river monitors built for the Brazilian Navy during the Paraguayan War in the late 1860s . Piauí passed the fortifications at Humaitá in July 1868 and provided fire support for the army for the rest of the war . The ship was assigned to the Mato Grosso Flotilla after the war . Piauí was scrapped in 1893 . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 The Pará @-@ class monitors were designed to meet the need of the Brazilian Navy for small , shallow @-@ draft armored ships capable of withstanding heavy fire . The monitor configuration was chosen since a turreted design did not have the same problems engaging enemy ships and fortifications as did the central battery ironclads already in Brazilian service . The oblong gun turret sat on a circular platform that had a central pivot . It was rotated by four men via a system of gears ; 2 @.@ 25 minutes were required for a full 360 ° rotation . A bronze ram was fitted to these ships as well . The hull was sheathed with Muntz metal to reduce biofouling . 
 The ships measured 39 meters ( 127 ft 11 in ) long overall , with a beam of 8 @.@ 54 meters ( 28 ft 0 in ) . They had a draft of 1 @.@ 51 to 1 @.@ 54 meters ( 4 ft 11 in to 5 ft 1 in ) and displaced 500 metric tons ( 490 long tons ) . With only 0 @.@ 3 meters ( 1 ft 0 in ) of freeboard they had to be towed between Rio de Janeiro and their areas of operations . Their crew numbered 43 officers and men . 
 = = = Propulsion = = = 
 The Pará @-@ class ships had two direct @-@ acting steam engines , each driving a single 1 @.@ 3 @-@ meter ( 4 ft 3 in ) propeller . Their engines were powered by two tubular boilers at a working pressure of 59 psi ( 407 kPa ; 4 kgf / cm2 ) . The engines produced a total of 180 indicated horsepower ( 130 kW ) which gave the monitors a maximum speed of 8 knots ( 15 km / h ; 9 @.@ 2 mph ) in calm waters . The ships carried enough coal for one day 's steaming . 
 = = = Armament = = = 
 Piauí had a single 120 @-@ pounder Whitworth rifled muzzle loader ( RML ) in her gun turret . The gun had a maximum range of about 5 @,@ 540 meters ( 6 @,@ 060 yd ) . Its 7 @-@ inch ( 178 mm ) shells weighed 151 pounds ( 68 @.@ 5 kg ) and the gun itself weighed 16 @,@ 660 pounds ( 7 @,@ 556 @.@ 8 kg ) . Most unusually the gun 's Brazilian @-@ designed iron carriage was designed to pivot vertically at the muzzle ; this was done to minimize the size of the gunport through which splinters and shells could enter . 
 = = = Armor = = = 
 The hull of the Pará @-@ class ships was made from three layers of wood , with the grain of each layer at right angles to the next layer . It was 457 millimeters ( 18 @.@ 0 in ) thick and was capped with a 102 @-@ millimeter ( 4 in ) layer of peroba hardwood . The ships had a complete wrought iron waterline belt , 0 @.@ 91 meters ( 3 @.@ 0 ft ) high . It had a maximum thickness of 102 millimeters amidships , decreasing to 76 millimeters ( 3 in ) and 51 millimeters ( 2 in ) at the ship 's ends . The curved deck was armored with 12 @.@ 7 millimeters ( 0 @.@ 5 in ) of wrought iron . 
 The rectangular gun turret had rounded corners . It was built much like the hull , but the front of the turret was protected by 152 millimeters ( 6 in ) of armor , the sides by 102 millimeters and the rear by 76 millimeters . Its roof and the exposed portions of the platform it rested upon were protected by 12 @.@ 7 millimeters of armor . The armored pilothouse was positioned ahead of the turret . 
 = = Service = = 
 Piauí was laid down at the Arsenal de Marinha da Côrte in Rio de Janeiro on 8 December 1866 , during the Paraguayan War , which saw Argentina and Brazil allied against Paraguay . She was launched on 8 January 1868 and commissioned later that month . Together with the ironclads Silvado and Cabral , Piauí passed the weakened Paraguayan fortifications at Humaitá on 21 July 1868 . She bombarded Asunción that same day . The monitor and a number of Brazilian ironclads bombarded Paraguayan batteries at Angostura , downstream of Asunción , on 28 October , 19 November and 26 November . Piauí , together with her sister ships Ceará and Santa Catharina , broke through the Paraguayan defenses at Guaraio on 29 April 1869 and drove off the defenders . On 31 August 1869 the monitor unsuccessfully tried to locate and destroy the remnants of the Paraguayan Navy on the Manduvirá River . In the 1880s the ship 's armament was reinforced with a pair of 11 @-@ millimeter ( 0 @.@ 43 in ) machine guns . After the war she was assigned to the Mato Grosso Flotilla and was scrapped in 1893 . 
 = Shi Jianqiao = 
 Shi Jianqiao ( simplified Chinese : <unk> ; traditional Chinese : <unk> ; pinyin : Shī <unk> ; Wade – Giles : Shih Chien @-@ <unk> , 1905 or 1906 – August 27 , 1979 ) was the daughter of the Chinese military officer Shi Congbin , whose killing she avenged by assassinating the former warlord Sun Chuanfang . The revenge killing and the legal proceedings that followed were highly publicized at the time and incited public debates over the concepts of filial piety and the rule of law . 
 = = Names = = 
 Shi Jianqiao 's given name was Shi <unk> , ( simplified Chinese : <unk> ; traditional Chinese : <unk> ; pinyin : Shī <unk> ; Wade – Giles : Shih Ku @-@ lan ; literally : " Valley Orchid " ) . She adopted the name Shi Jianqiao around the time she was planning to assassinate Sun Chuanfang to avenge her father 's killing . The characters of her adopted name mean " sword " and " to raise " alluding to her planned role as an avenging assassin . 
 = = Background = = 
 Shi Jianqiao was born in <unk> City , Anhui Province , in the small village of <unk> . While her grandfather had still been a farmer and tofu seller , her father and one of her uncles rose to become decorated soldiers , which led to an increase in the family 's social status . She grew up in Jinan , Shandong Province and had her feet bound as a young girl . By the year he was killed ( 1925 ) , her father had been promoted to director of military affairs in Shandong Province and served as brigade commander under the local warlord Zhang <unk> . Zhang <unk> and hence Shi Congbin were aligned with the Fengtian clique , one of the two main competing warlord factions at the time . By some accounts , Shi Jianqiao graduated from Tianjin Normal College ( Chinese : <unk> ; pinyin : <unk> <unk> <unk> ) . 
 In October 1925 , during the second war between the Zhili and Fengtian warlord cliques , her father Shi Congbin was leading a brigade of mercenary soldiers in an attempt to capture <unk> , Shandong . However , he found himself surrounded by troops of the Zhili warlord Sun Chuanfang who had been leading a surprise counterattack against the advance of the Fengtian troops . The next day , Sun had Shi decapitated and his severed head displayed in public at the train station of <unk> , Anhui . Less than two years later , in early 1927 , Sun <unk> was deposed by the Northern Expedition , a military campaign by the Kuomintang that was targeted at ending the rule of the local warlords . He retired from his military career and founded the Tianjin <unk> lay @-@ Buddhist society ( Chinese : <unk> ; pinyin : <unk> <unk> <unk> ) together with his former fellow warlord Jin <unk> . 
 = = Revenge = = 
 About 10 years after the death of her father , Shi Jianqiao tracked down Sun Chuanfang in Tianjin . Shortly after 3pm on November 13 , 1935 , she approached him from behind while he was leading a sutra @-@ recitation session at his lay @-@ Buddhist society on <unk> Road . She then killed the kneeling former warlord by shooting him three times with her Browning pistol . After the assassination , she stayed at the crime scene to explain her deed and distribute mimeographed pamphlets to bystanders . Her case drew a significant amount of public and media attention . After a lengthy legal process with two appeals that ultimately reached the Supreme Court in Nanjing and pitted public sentiment against the rule of law , she was finally given a state pardon by the Nationalist government on October 14 , 1936 . The assassination of Sun Chuanfang was ethically justified as an act of filial piety and turned into a political symbol of the legitimate vengeance against the Japanese invaders . 
 = = Later life and death = = 
 In 1949 , Shi Jianqiao was elected as vice @-@ chair of the Women 's Federation of Suzhou . In 1957 , she was appointed to the Beijing Municipal Committee of the Chinese Communist Party . 
 Shi Jianqiao died in 1979 , shortly after surgery for advanced colorectal cancer . Her ashes were buried in the West <unk> Cemetery ( Chinese : <unk> ; pinyin : Xi <unk> <unk> ) in Suzhou City . 
 = Mecha @-@ Streisand = 
 " Mecha @-@ Streisand " is the twelfth episode in the first season of the American animated television series South Park . It originally aired on Comedy Central in the United States on February 18 , 1998 . In the episode , Barbra Streisand obtains the Diamond of <unk> from Stan , Cartman , Kyle and Kenny , and transforms into a giant mechanical dinosaur called Mecha @-@ Streisand . She is ultimately defeated by The Cure frontman Robert Smith , who himself transforms into a giant moth monster . 
 The episode was written by series co @-@ creators Trey Parker and Matt Stone along with writer Philip Stark , and was directed by Parker . " Mecha @-@ Streisand " parodies numerous popular Kaiju films and features portrayals of actor Sidney Poitier and film critic Leonard Maltin . 
 According to Nielsen ratings , " Mecha @-@ Streisand " was seen by 5 @.@ 4 million viewers , a record high viewership for a South Park episode at the time . Streisand herself was critical of the series and her role in " Mecha @-@ Streisand " , although Leonard Maltin was complimentary about his portrayal . 
 = = Plot = = 
 During an archeological dig , Cartman discovers a mysterious stone triangle , which he promptly throws away without interest . Shortly after Kyle picks it up , the archeologist guide identifies the writing on the triangle as Anasazi . Kyle appears on television to discuss the find , making a jealous Cartman want the triangle back . Cartman constantly pesters Kyle until he returns the triangle to him . Meanwhile , Leonard Maltin comes to South Park and asks Chef whether he has seen Barbra Streisand . Maltin , who saw Kyle and the triangle on television , tells Chef the boys are in great danger . 
 Later , Streisand finds the boys at the bus stop and demands the " Triangle of <unk> " , and gets aggravated when they reject her . As they search for Streisand , Maltin tells Chef she is seeking the triangle to complete the ancient relic , the " Diamond of Pantheos " , which will allow her to become an evil and dangerous creature that could conquer the world . Later , Streisand dons a disguise and visits the boys again , offering them a monetary reward for the triangle . Stan , Kenny and Kyle are suspicious , but Cartman insists they go along for the money . Streisand takes them to her condo in the mountains , where she chains the boys up ( while Cartman is attached on rack ) and tortures them with her singing voice . Cartman relents and gives up the triangle . 
 Streisand combines the triangle with the diamond , transforming herself into a giant mechanical dinosaur called Mecha @-@ Streisand , and begins to completely destroy South Park . Maltin and Chef arrive to free the boys , and Maltin asks Chef to call The Cure lead singer Robert Smith for help . Maltin then transforms into a giant robot and battles Mecha @-@ Streisand , but he is quickly defeated . The boys evade fiery debris from the fight , but Kenny is killed when he stops to play tetherball and gets strangled by the rope . Actor Sidney Poitier arrives and turns into a giant turtle with fangs to fight Mecha @-@ <unk> , but he too is easily defeated . After getting a call from the boys , Robert Smith arrives and transforms into a giant moth . After the ensuing battle , Smith punches the Diamond of Pantheos away from Mecha @-@ Streisand , who explodes and dies . The boys split the diamond again to try to prevent anyone else from getting the power by throwing it in the trash can , but the episode ends with the boys cowering in the presence of a Mecha @-@ Ike because Ike went inside the trash can and got the diamond . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Mecha @-@ Streisand " was written by series co @-@ creators Trey Parker and Matt Stone , along with writer Philip Stark , and was directed by Parker . " Mecha @-@ Streisand " first aired on Comedy Central in the United States on February 18 , 1998 . Robert Smith , lead vocalist and guitarist for the English rock band The Cure , makes a guest appearance as himself , marking only the second time a celebrity guest played a major role in an episode , after Natasha Henstridge in " Tom 's Rhinoplasty " . Following the success of " Mr. Hankey , the Christmas Poo " , a large number of celebrities started contacting Comedy Central with the hopes of making guest appearances in South Park episodes , allowing Parker and Stone to practically take their pick of guest stars . Parker , a fan of The Cure , said it was his lifelong dream to meet Smith , and he was one of the few celebrities Parker specifically requested to make an appearance . Smith performed all of his lines via telephone and Parker used the first reading of each line , even though they were executed in a very dead @-@ pan voice . 
 When Parker and Stone made fun of celebrities in previous South Park episodes , they were chosen at random ; however , they chose to mock Barbra Streisand based on a strong distaste for the actress . Part of the reason they disliked her was that after Colorado passed Amendment 2 , an amendment to the Colorado state constitution forbidding homosexuals from being recognized as a protected class , Streisand made a public statement speaking out against the state and all its citizens , promising she would never visit Colorado again . Parker said he also finds her singing voice annoying , which inspired the scene with Streisand torturing the boys by singing to them . The duo tried to make Streisand 's portrayal as " sick and disgusting as possible " in " Mecha @-@ Streisand " . Mary Kay Bergman , a voice artist who had done most of the female voices on South Park , portrayed Barbra Streisand in the episode . 
 South Park animators created the episode using PowerAnimator , the Alias Systems Corporation animation program most commonly known as " Alias " . Eric Stough , director of animation for the series , said " Mecha @-@ Streisand " was slightly more challenging to animate than other first season episodes due to the laser beam @-@ type effects featured in the final monster fight , which were specifically designed to resemble a low @-@ budget monster movie with poor graphics . The scenes with an instructional guide taking the kids on a fossil hunt were based on real @-@ life arrowhead @-@ digging excursions Parker and Stone went on in Red Rocks Park during their childhood in Colorado . During a scene with Chef and Leonard Maltin driving in a car , actual video footage of Colorado roads is visible through the back window of the car . The footage was shot by a friend of Parker and Stone and used because the animators did not yet know how to create roads in perspective . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 " Mecha @-@ Streisand " parodies Kaiju films such as Godzilla , Gamera , Mothra , and Ultraman . Parker and Stone watched many Godzilla films during their childhoods , and Parker said he knew from the beginning of South Park that he would base an episode around the films . Streisand is based on Mechagodzilla , the mechanical doppelgänger of Godzilla . Smith is based on Mothra , the giant moth @-@ like monster from the 1961 film Mothra and also one of Godzilla 's rivals , which Parker described as his favorite of the Kaiju films . The scene in which six @-@ inch @-@ tall twins appear and ask actor Sidney Poitier to fight Mecha @-@ Streisand are based on similar scenes and characters from the Mothra film . Poitier portrays a monster similar to Gamera , a flying turtle monster , and film critic Leonard Maltin transforms into a giant mechanical superhero resembling that of Japanese television superhero Ultraman . During the fights sequence , Stan shouts for Smith to " use robot punch " , a line frequently used in Ultraman television shows . The Diamond of Pantheos , on the other hand , closely resembles the pendant worn by a major character in the anime Galaxy Express 999 . 
 When the monsters battle each other at the end of the episode , a Japanese man sings songs about each of the monsters while they approach . This mirrors a common element throughout actual Japanese monster movies , which commonly have theme songs for the monster characters . Parker wrote the songs in Japanese language . The English translation for the lyrics sung when Robert Smith transforms translates are , " I really like Robert Smith " , and the lyrics sung about Mecha @-@ Streisand translate , " Barbra , Barbra , she 's a bitch , Barbra " . When Streisand becomes Mecha @-@ Streisand , the line was written in Japanese , " From this moment on , I am Mecha @-@ Streisand ! " , but Parker said Bergman misread some of the words so the on @-@ air translation was imperfect . Before Leonard Maltin transforms , he screams in Japanese , " Listen , listen , here 's a tulip " , which Parker said is a phrase Japanese children say before passing gas . 
 During the fight scene , a number of skyscrapers are shown getting destroyed . Parker , who acknowledged the buildings were never featured in any other South Park episode , said they were modeled after real @-@ life skyscrapers in Denver and included in " Mecha @-@ Streisand " only so they could get destroyed during the monster fight , a frequent element of battles in real Japanese monster films . Musical elements from the Hanna @-@ Barbera cartoon Super Friends are also featured during the battle . Actress Sally Struthers , who was previously lampooned in the South Park episode " Starvin ' Marvin " , is briefly seen during a scene in " Mecha @-@ Streisand " , in which she is filming a movie scene with Poitier . Kyle tells Robert Smith , " Disintegration is the best album ever " . The line was based on Parker 's own enthusiasm for The Cure 's 1989 album , Disintegration , and Robert Smith himself would go on to say in an interview that the line was his " happiest moment " . As Smith walks into the sunset , a version of The Cure 's " Let 's Go to Bed " is played on the Japanese Lute ( Biwa ) . Officer Barbrady makes a reference to singer @-@ songwriter Fiona Apple with the line , " Well , you ain 't Fiona Apple , and if you ain 't Fiona Apple , I don 't give a rat 's ass . " 
 = = Reception and release = = 
 In its original American broadcast on February 18 , 1998 , " Mecha @-@ Streisand " received a 6 @.@ 9 Nielsen rating , translating to 5 @.@ 4 million viewers in 3 @.@ 2 million households . At the time , it was a record high viewership for a South Park episode , breaking the record that was set earlier that month by " Damien " , and was ten times the average of Comedy Central 's non @-@ South Park programming . 
 Parker and Stone were very happy with the episode , but received feedback from fans that it was one of the weaker episodes of the first season , and that the constant jokes about Barbra Streisand started to grow redundant . Many fans also did not like Kenny 's tether ball accident death scene because it had nothing to do with the plot of the episode , which Parker and Stone said was supposed to be the joke . 
 Streisand herself took a negative view of her portrayal , stating in a Mirabella interview , 
 Parker and Stone created the second season episode " <unk> " in response , where they took a picture of Streisand 's head , placed the image into all four corners of the screen and called it " Spooky vision " . 
 Leonard Maltin was complimentary about " Mecha @-@ Streisand " , and told Parker and Stone his children particularly enjoyed his portrayal in the episode . Regarding his appearance , Robert Smith had claimed that nothing in his career mattered as much to his younger nephews and nieces as the fact that he was featured on South Park . 
 " Mecha @-@ Streisand " was released , along with 11 other episodes , in a three @-@ disc DVD set in November 1998 . It was included in the third volume , which also included the episodes " Starvin ' Marvin " , " Mr. Hankey , the Christmas Poo " and " Tom 's Rhinoplasty " . " Mecha @-@ Streisand " , along with the other twelve episodes from the first season , was also included in the DVD release " South Park : The Complete First Season " , which was released on November 12 , 2002 . Parker and Stone recorded commentary tracks for each episode , but they were not included with the DVDs due to " standards " issues with some of the statements ; Parker and Stone refused to allow the tracks to be edited and censored , so they were released in a CD separate from the DVDs . In 2008 , Parker and Stone made " Mecha @-@ Streisand " and all South Park episodes available to watch for free on the show 's official website , " South Park Studios " . 
 The episode was revisited twelve years later in the season 14 episode " 200 " , featuring a redesigned Mecha @-@ Streisand . During a duet with Neil Diamond , Mecha @-@ Streisand lets out a green cloud from her groin that disgusts the people of South Park . The original Japanese theme song for the creature also plays in the episode . The Mecha @-@ Streisand featured in " 200 " is designed with more sophisticated computer imagery than the original , as the animation quality of the series has improved over the years in general . 
 = Hyacinthoides non @-@ scripta = 
 Hyacinthoides non @-@ scripta ( formerly Endymion non @-@ scriptus or Scilla non @-@ scripta ) is a bulbous perennial plant , found in Atlantic areas from north @-@ western Spain to the British Isles , and also frequently used as a garden plant . It is known in English as the common bluebell or simply bluebell , a name which is used in Scotland to refer to the harebell , Campanula rotundifolia . In spring , H. non @-@ scripta produces a nodding , one @-@ sided inflorescence of 5 – 12 tubular , sweet @-@ scented violet – blue flowers , with strongly recurved tepals , and 3 – 6 long , linear , basal leaves . 
 H. non @-@ scripta is particularly associated with ancient woodland where it may dominate the understorey to produce carpets of violet – blue flowers in " bluebell woods " , but also occurs in more open habitats in western regions . It is protected under UK law , and in some other parts of its range . A related species , H. hispanica has also been introduced to the British Isles and hybridises with H. non @-@ scripta to produce intermediates known as H. × <unk> . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 Hyacinthoides non @-@ scripta was first described by Carl Linnaeus in his seminal 1753 work Species Plantarum , as a species in the genus Hyacinthus . The specific epithet non @-@ scriptus means " unlettered " or " unmarked " and was intended to distinguish this plant from the classical hyacinth of Greek mythology . This mythical flower , which was almost certainly not the modern hyacinth , sprang up from the blood of the dying prince Hyacinthus . His lover , the god Apollo , shed tears that marked the new flower 's petals with the letters " <unk> " ( " alas " ) as a sign of his grief . 
 In 1803 , Johann <unk> von <unk> and Johann Heinrich Friedrich Link transferred the species to the genus Scilla , and in 1849 Christian August Friedrich <unk> transferred it to the genus Endymion ( now a synonym of Hyacinthoides ) ; it is still widely known as " Scilla non @-@ scripta " or " Endymion non @-@ scriptus " . In 1934 , Pierre <unk> transferred the species to its current placement in the genus Hyacinthoides . Scilla was the original Greek name for the sea squill , <unk> maritima ; Endymion is a character from Greek mythology ; Hyacinthoides means " like a hyacinth " . 
 The type species of Hyacinthoides is H. hispanica , while that of Endymion is " Scilla nutans " , described by James Edward Smith in English Botany in 1797 , but now treated as a synonym of H. non @-@ scripta . Smith had argued that nutans ( " nodding " ) is a more fitting epithet than non @-@ scriptus , which makes no sense once separated from Hyacinthus , but the International Code of Nomenclature for algae , fungi , and plants requires the oldest name to be used , regardless of meaning . 
 Common names for Hyacinthoides non @-@ scripta include bluebell , common bluebell , English bluebell , British bluebell , wild hyacinth , wood bell , fairy flower and bell bottle . In Scotland , the term " bluebell " is used for the harebell , Campanula rotundifolia . 
 = = = Related species = = = 
 Hyacinthoides non @-@ scripta forms a clade with three other species – H. hispanica , H. <unk> and H. <unk> – centred on the Iberian Peninsula . H. <unk> is restricted to a small area of north @-@ western Iberia ( Galicia and neighbouring parts of Portugal ) , while H. <unk> is found in mountainous areas of western North Africa ( Morocco and Algeria ) . Within Iberia , H. non @-@ scripta and H. hispanica are geographically separated by the Duero river . The genus also contains seven further species , mostly distributed further east in the Mediterranean Basin . 
 = = Description = = 
 Hyacinthoides non @-@ scripta is a perennial plant that grows from a bulb . It produces 3 – 6 linear leaves , all growing from the base of the plant , and each 7 – 16 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 28 – 0 @.@ 63 in ) wide . An inflorescence of 5 – 12 ( exceptionally 3 – 32 ) flowers is borne on a stem up to 500 mm ( 20 in ) tall , which droops towards the tip ; the flowers are arranged in a 1 @-@ sided nodding raceme . Each flower is 14 – 20 mm ( 0 @.@ 55 – 0 @.@ 79 in ) long , with two bracts at the base , and the six tepals are strongly recurved at their tips . The tepals are violet – blue . The three stamens in the outer whorl are fused to the perianth for more than 75 % of their length , and bear cream @-@ coloured pollen . The flowers are strongly and sweetly scented . The seeds are black , and germinate on the soil surface . 
 The bulbs produce contractile roots ; when these roots contract , they draw the bulbs down into deeper layers of the soil where there is greater moisture , reaching depths of 10 – 12 cm ( 3 @.@ 9 – 4 @.@ 7 in ) . This may explain the absence of H. non @-@ scripta from thin soils over chalk in South East England , since the bulbs are unable to penetrate into sufficiently deep soils . 
 H. non @-@ scripta differs from H. hispanica , which occurs as an introduced species in the British Isles , in a number of ways . H. hispanica has paler flowers which are borne in radially symmetrical racemes ; their tepals are less recurved , and are only faintly scented . The outer stamens are fused with the tepals for less than 75 % of their length , and the anthers are the same colour as the tepals . These two species are thought to have diverged 8000 years ago . The two species also hybridise readily to produce fertile offspring known as Hyacinthoides × <unk> ; the hybrids are intermediate between the parental species , forming a spectrum of variation which connects the two . 
 = = Distribution and ecology = = 
 Hyacinthoides non @-@ scripta is native to the western parts of Atlantic Europe , from north @-@ western Spain ( occasionally even north @-@ western Portugal ) to the Netherlands and the British Isles . It is found in Belgium , Great Britain , France , Ireland , the Netherlands and Spain , and also occurs as a naturalized species in Germany , Italy , and Romania . It has also been introduced to parts of North America , in both the Pacific Northwest ( British Columbia , Washington and Oregon ) and the north @-@ eastern United States ( Virginia , Kentucky , Indiana , Ohio , Pennsylvania and New York ) . 
 Despite the wide distribution of H. non @-@ scripta , it reaches its greatest densities in the British Isles , where " bluebell woods " ( woodland with the understory dominated by H. non @-@ scripta in spring ) are a familiar sight . H. non @-@ scripta is found throughout the British Isles , with the exception of the northern Outer Hebrides ( Lewis and Harris ) , Orkney and Shetland , and it is estimated that 25 % – 50 % of all common bluebells may be found in the British Isles . 
 Bluebells are a species of deciduous woodland over much of their range , flowering and leafing early before the canopy closes in late spring . They may also be found growing under bracken or Japanese knotweed , perennial plants which also form stands with a dense summer canopy . They are most successful on slightly acid soils ; the same niche in alkaline conditions may be occupied by other species such as Mercurialis perennis . As a species adapted to woodlands , the young shoots are able to penetrate through a thick layer of leaf litter , and bluebells are often used as an indicator species to identify ancient woodland . Bluebells are also frequently found in hedgerows , and in the west of their range they can be found growing in open habitats , including coastal meadows . Bluebell flowers are rich in pollen and nectar , and are chiefly pollinated by bumblebees , although they are also visited by various other insects . They are a host species for the parasitic fungus <unk> <unk> , which causes bluebell rust . The ability of H. non @-@ scripta to take up phosphorus from the soil is greatly enhanced by the presence of arbuscular mycorrhizae in its roots . 
 = = Protection = = 
 Hyacinthoides non @-@ scripta is not protected under international law , such as CITES or the EU Habitats Directive . 
 In the United Kingdom , H. non @-@ scripta is a protected species under the Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981 . Landowners are prohibited from removing common bluebells on their land for sale and it is a criminal offence to remove the bulbs of wild common bluebells . This legislation was strengthened in 1998 under Schedule 8 of the Act making any trade in wild common bluebell bulbs or seeds an offence , punishable by fines of up to £ 5000 per bulb . The species is not protected in the Republic of Ireland . 
 In France , H. non @-@ scripta is largely confined to the northern half of the country . It is not legally protected at the national level , but it is protected in many of the départements towards the edge of its range ( Corrèze , <unk> , Gironde , Lot @-@ et @-@ Garonne , Dordogne , Cher , Eure @-@ et @-@ Loir , Indre @-@ et @-@ Loire and Loir @-@ et @-@ Cher ) . In Wallonia , H. non @-@ scripta is protected under Annexe VII of the Loi sur la conservation de la nature . 
 = = Uses = = 
 Bluebells are widely planted as garden plants , either among trees or in herbaceous borders . They flower at the same time as hyacinths , Narcissus and some tulips . Their ability to reproduce vegetatively using runners , however , means that they can spread rapidly , and may need to be controlled as weeds . 
 Bluebells synthesise a wide range of chemicals with potential medicinal properties . They contain at least 15 biologically active compounds that may provide them with protection against insects and animals . Certain extracts – water @-@ soluble alkaloids – are similar to compounds tested for use in combating HIV and cancer . The bulbs of bluebells are used in folk medicine as a remedy for <unk> , and as a diuretic or styptic , while the sap can be used as an adhesive . 
 The bluebell may be regarded as the United Kingdom 's " favourite flower " . When the wild plant charity Plantlife organised a survey in 2004 to find a favourite flower for each county in the United Kingdom , it decided to ban voters from choosing the bluebell because it had been by far the top choice in an earlier poll for the nation 's favourite flower . A stylised bluebell is used as the logo for the Botanical Society of Britain and Ireland . 
 = Eurasian Land Bridge = 
 The Eurasian Land Bridge ( Russian : <unk> <unk> <unk> , <unk> <unk> most ) , sometimes called the New Silk Road ( <unk> <unk> <unk> , <unk> <unk> put ' ) , is the rail transport route for moving freight and passengers overland between Pacific seaports in the Russian Far East and China and seaports in Europe . The route , a transcontinental railroad and rail land bridge , currently comprises the Trans @-@ Siberian Railway , which runs through Russia and is sometimes called the Northern East @-@ West Corridor , and the New Eurasian Land Bridge or Second Eurasian Continental Bridge , running through China and Kazakhstan . As of November 2007 , about 1 % of the $ 600 billion in goods shipped from Asia to Europe each year were delivered by inland transport routes . 
 Completed in 1916 , the Trans @-@ Siberian connects Moscow with Russian Pacific seaports such as Vladivostok . From the 1960s until the early 1990s the railway served as the primary land bridge between Asia and Europe , until several factors caused the use of the railway for transcontinental freight to dwindle . One factor is that the railways of the former Soviet Union use a wider rail gauge than most of the rest of Europe as well as China . Recently , however , the Trans @-@ Siberian has regained ground as a viable land route between the two continents . 
 China 's rail system had long linked to the Trans @-@ Siberian via northeastern China and Mongolia . In 1990 China added a link between its rail system and the Trans @-@ Siberian via Kazakhstan . China calls its uninterrupted rail link between the port city of Lianyungang and Kazakhstan the New Eurasian Land Bridge or Second Eurasian Continental Bridge . In addition to Kazakhstan , the railways connect with other countries in Central Asia and the Middle East , including Iran . With the October 2013 completion of the rail link across the Bosphorus under the Marmaray project the New Eurasian Land Bridge now theoretically connects to Europe via Central and South Asia . 
 Proposed expansion of the Eurasian Land Bridge includes construction of a railway across Kazakhstan that is the same gauge as Chinese railways , rail links to India , Burma , Thailand , Malaysia and elsewhere in Southeast Asia , construction of a rail tunnel and highway bridge across the Bering Strait to connect the Trans @-@ Siberian to the North American rail system , and construction of a rail tunnel between South Korea and Japan . The United Nations has proposed further expansion of the Eurasian Land Bridge , including the Trans @-@ Asian Railway project . 
 = = History = = 
 Commercial traffic between Europe and Asia took place along the Silk Road from at least the 2nd millennium BC . The Silk Road was not a specific thoroughfare , but a general route used by traders to travel , much of it by land , between the two continents along the Eurasian Steppes through Central Asia . The 5 @,@ 000 miles ( 8 @,@ 000 km ) long route was used to exchange goods , ideas and people primarily between China and India and the Mediterranean and helped create a single @-@ world system of trade between the civilisations of Europe and Asia . 
 Exports from Asia transported along the Silk Road included fabrics , carpets , furs , weapons , utensils , metals , farm produce , livestock and slaves . <unk> active in trading during the road 's history included Scythia , Ancient and Byzantine Greece , the Han and Tang dynasties , Parthia , Rouran , Sogdiana , Göktürks , Xiongnu , Yuezhi and the Mongol Empire . 
 Beginning in the 5th century AD , new land routes between Asia and Europe developed further to the north , in the Rus ' . Many of these routes passed through <unk> and extended to the Baltic region . The Khazars , Volga Bulgaria , and the Rus ' Khaganate were active in trading along the northern trade routes . 
 Traffic along the southern Silk Road routes greatly diminished with the Fall of Constantinople in the 15th century and development of the sea route around the Cape of Good Hope in the 16th century . By the 18th century , European influence on trade and new national boundaries severely restricted the movement of traders along all land routes between Europe and China , and overland trade between East Asia and Europe virtually disappeared . 
 = = Trans @-@ Siberian Railway = = 
 The Trans @-@ Siberian Railway and its various associated branches and supporting lines , completed in 1916 , established the first rail connection between Europe and Asia , from Moscow to Vladivostok . The line , at 9 @,@ 200 kilometres ( 5 @,@ 720 mi ) , is the longest rail line in the world . 
 The Trans @-@ Siberian connects the Russian Pacific ports of Vladivostok and <unk> with Moscow . Rail links at Moscow allow passengers and freight to connect to train lines running further west into Europe . By making further transfers , passengers and freight can eventually reach Western European seaports . The Trans @-@ Siberian also connects with North Korea ( e.g. via <unk> in Northeastern China , or directly at Khasan south of Vladivostok ) . 
 A fully electrified and double @-@ tracked line , the Trans @-@ Siberian Railway line is capable of transporting around 100 million tons of freight annually . The line can handle up to 200 @,@ 000 TEU of containerized international transit freight per year . 
 A more northerly east @-@ west route across Siberia , parallel to the Trans @-@ Siberian line and known as the Baikal – Amur Mainline was mostly completed in 1989 . It terminates at the Pacific ports of <unk> and Sovetskaya Gavan . Although this line is comparatively little used ( the management mentions 6 million tons of freight per year , not indicating the year ) , the management expects the line to be fully used in the foreseeable future for oil and copper ore export , and has plans to double @-@ track it . 
 While the Trans @-@ Siberian has always been used by the Czarist , Soviet and modern Russian government to project political power into their territories in Asia , in the 1960s it was opened by the USSR as an international trade route connecting the Western Pacific with Europe . Freight shipments on the Trans @-@ Siberian , however , experienced increasing problems over time with dilapidated rail infrastructures , theft , damaged freight , late trains , inflated freight fees , uncertain scheduling for return of containers and geopolitical tension . As a result , use of the railway for international trade declined to almost zero by the 1990s . 
 According to Hofstra University , as of 2001 there was renewed interest in using the Trans @-@ Siberian as a route across Asia to Europe . Also , the Trans @-@ Siberian links directly to railways which ultimately connect , via Finland and Sweden to the year @-@ round ice @-@ free port of Narvik in Norway . At Narvik , freight can be transshipped to ships to cross the Atlantic to North America . Rail links from Russia also connect to Rotterdam , but may encounter greater congestion along this route with resulting delays . The trade route between the east coast of North America and eastern Russia using the Trans @-@ Siberian is often called the Northern East West Freight Corridor . 
 In an effort to attract use of the Trans @-@ Siberian to transport goods from Japan , China , and Korea to Europe , in the mid @-@ 1990s Russia lowered tariffs on freight using the railway . As a result , freight volume over the rail line doubled in 1999 and 2000 . 
 In February and March 2011 , Japan 's Ministry of Land , Infrastructure , Transport and Tourism sponsored a test of the route by shipping roof tiles to Europe via the Trans @-@ Siberian . The tiles were transported by ship from Hamada , Shimane to Vladivostok , then by the railway to Moscow . The transit time was expected to be 30 days , in comparison with the 50 days on average it takes to ship cargo by ship from Hamada to ports in western Russia . If successful , the ministry would use the results of the test to encourage other Japanese companies to utilize the Trans @-@ Siberian over the sea route . 
 In 2011 , a direct container rail service began carrying car parts 11 @,@ 000 km from Leipzig , Germany , to inland Shenyang , China , through Siberia in 23 days , every day . 
 In 2013 a direct container , pallet , and general cargo rail service began , 10 @,@ 000 km from Łódź , Poland , to inland Chengdu , China , through Siberia in 14 days , 3 days in week . 
 According to Russian statistics , the amount of international container shipments transiting annually through Russia over the Trans @-@ Siberian has grown by a factor of 7 between 2009 and 2014 , reaching 131 @,@ 000 TEU ( 55 @,@ 000 physical containers ) in 2014 . 
 Belarusian Railways reported similar statistics : in 2014 , the volume of direct container traffic from China to Western Europe crossing Belarus amounted to 40 @,@ 600 TEU , on 25 direct container train routes . This constituted over 20 % of Belarusian Railway 's entire volume of container transportation that year , 193 @,@ 100 TEU . While significant , and growing , this is still much less than 0 @.@ 1 % of the number of containers that travel via China 's sea ports ( some 170 million TEU ) . 
 = = China and the land bridge = = 
 = = = Direct connections between Russia and China = = = 
 The original Moscow – Vladivostok route , completed in 1904 , cut across China 's northeastern provinces , or Manchuria ; the section of the railway located within China was known as the Chinese Eastern Railway . While the more northerly Trans @-@ Siberian route , located entirely on Russian soil , was completed in 1916 , the former Chinese Eastern Railway route continues as an important connector between the two countries ' railway networks . 
 The western border point ( <unk> / <unk> ) and the line connecting it to the Trans @-@ Siberian main line , are now being upgraded , with the goal of enabling the railway by 2010 to pass 30 freight trains in each direction across the border , each one up to 71 cars long . The cross @-@ border freight volume at this rail crossing is expected to reach 25 @.@ 5 million tons by 2010 . Besides cargo ( principally , Russian oil exported to China ) , this crossing sees a direct weekly passenger train , Moscow – Beijing , as well as some local passenger trains . The eastern border point of the former Chinese Eastern Railway , at <unk> / <unk> , sees significant use as well , with over 8 million tons of freight crossing the border there in 2007 , and regular cross @-@ border passenger service . 
 A third , little @-@ known and less used , rail connection between Russia and China was built farther south , between <unk> ( in China 's Jilin province ) and Russian <unk> ( a station on the Ussuriysk – Khasan – North Korean border line , 41 km ( 25 mi ) before Khasan ) . It began operating in February 2000 , and saw only a minor amount of traffic ( 678 railcars of lumber ) over the next two years . The line was closed in 2002 – 03 , briefly reopened in 2003 , and closed again in September 2004 . On 15 February 2011 , the two companies who own the line , Northeast Asia Railway Group , a Chinese company , and JSC Golden Link , a Russian company , signed an agreement to resume operations on the line in May 2011 . 
 In November 2008 , the transport ministries of Russia and the China signed an agreement about creating one more link between the railway systems of the two countries . It will involve a railway bridge between across the Amur ( <unk> ) River , connecting <unk> in China 's Heilongjiang province with <unk> in Russia 's Jewish Autonomous Oblast . On 4 November 2010 , the project director , Wang Jin , told Xinhua News Agency that construction on the bridge would begin in January 2011 . 
 = = = Russia to China via Mongolia = = = 
 The Trans @-@ Mongolian line , connecting Ulan @-@ Ude on the Trans @-@ Siberian with China 's <unk> via the Mongolian capital Ulaanbaatar , both serves as a crucial link to the outside world for landlocked Mongolia , and the shortest connection between the Trans @-@ Siberian Railway and Beijing . This line 's capacity , however , is limited by its being single @-@ track . 
 = = = Kazakhstan to China = = = 
 While the USSR had long been connected with China via the rail links in Northeastern China and Mongolia , since the 1950s plans existed to connect the two countries ' rail networks at the Kazakhstan / Xinjiang border . The Soviets completed their line from <unk> ( a station on the <unk> in eastern Kazakhstan ) to their border station <unk> ( now Dostyk ) , but the construction on the Chinese side stopped because of the Sino @-@ Soviet split of the 1960s . In 1985 construction commenced on the Northern Xinjiang Railway to link the Chinese and Russian rail networks via Kazakhstan . The section between Ürümqi and Alashankou was completed on 16 September 1990 , linking the railway lines of the two countries at Dostyk . In July 1991 the first goods train traveled along the line from China to Kazakhstan 's then @-@ capital of Almaty . In December 2009 , a second rail link from China was built to the Kazakhstan border at Khorgos . The <unk> – Yining – Khorgos Railway forks off of the Northern Xinjiang Railway at <unk> and approaches Kazakhstan from the Ili River Valley . A rail link on Kazakh side will extend the line to <unk> by 2013 . The rail link through the <unk> Pass was completed in December 2012 . 
 Because Kazakhstan was once a member of the USSR , its rail system connects with and carries the same rail gauge as the Russian rail system , as well as the other Central Asian republics of Turkmenistan , Uzbekistan , Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan . 
 From Kazakhstan , four major north @-@ south railways connect with the Russian rail system . Two connect with the Trans @-@ Siberian Railway ( the <unk> and the Shu – Astana – <unk> meridional line ) while the other two ( the Trans @-@ Aral Railway , and the connection via <unk> and Astrakhan Oblast ) go directly to European Russia . These links to the Russian rail system are sometimes called the Eurasian Railway . Kazakhstan plays an important role in the " New Silk Road " initiative , known as " One Belt , One Road " linking China and Europe through Central Asia and Russia . 
 A new direction of the Silk Road was launched in January 2016 and included the Ukraine – Georgia – Azerbaijan – Kazakhstan – China route . 
 = = = Through service between China and Western Europe = = = 
 There are 3 main routes for container services from China to Europe : Eastern route from <unk> Port ( Russia ) , northern route from west China via <unk> / <unk> border stations and southern route from east China via Dostyk border station , through which totally <unk> TEU has been transported on rail by 2014 . 
 In January 2008 China and Germany inaugurated a long @-@ distance freight train service between Beijing and Hamburg . Travelling a total of 10 @,@ 000 kilometres ( 6 @,@ 210 mi ) , the train uses the China Railways and the Trans @-@ Mongolian line to travel from Xiangtan ( in Hunan Province ) to Ulaanbaatar , where it then continues north to the Trans @-@ Siberian . After reaching the end of the Trans @-@ Siberian at Moscow the train continues to Germany via rail links in Belarus and Poland . Total transit time is 15 days , as compared with the 30 days average it would take for the freight to make the same journey by ship . The first train of 50 containers , carrying a mixed load of clothes , ceramics and electronics ( for the Fujitsu company ) , travelled on tracks operated by six different railways . 
 Hartmut <unk> , chairman of Deutsche Bahn ( DB ) , stated in March 2008 that regularly scheduled , weekly China @-@ Germany freight services should be in operation by 2010 . In April 2009 , however , DB postponed the service indefinitely because of the global economic crisis . 
 Another test run , from Chongqing to Duisburg via Alashankou crossing , Kazakhstan , Russia , Belarus , and Poland took place in March – April 2011 , covering 10 @,@ 300 km ( 6 @,@ 400 mi ) in 16 days . It was again said by DB that if there is enough demand , the service can be made regular already in 2011 , As of March 2014 , the <unk> @-@ Duisburg route makes three weekly services carrying up to 50 40 @-@ foot @-@ long containers . 
 The transportation authorities in another industrial center of central China , Wuhan , plan to organize regular runs of direct freight train between Wuhan and European destinations ( Czech Republic , Poland , Germany ) starting in April 2014 . Plans call for the service starting from 1 @-@ 2 trains per month in April – June 2014 , gradually increasing the frequency to 1 @-@ 2 trains per week in 2015 . A new customs facility is under construction in Wuhan 's <unk> ( <unk> ) industrial area ; after its planned opening in October 2015 , exports from the Wuhan region will be able to clear Chinese customs there , instead of Alashankou . 
 By 2016 , the freight rail service between a number of container terminals in China and their counterparts in Europe has become fairly regular . Between some city pairs , there is one train per week . 
 Both with respect to cost and speed , the China @-@ Europe direct train service is in between the air and sea options . While it is estimated that the overall volume of goods moving between China and Europe by rail is not going to surpass 1 @-@ 2 % of the sea cargo volume , it may eat significantly into the air cargo volume . 
 The service is typically used for valuable and somewhat time @-@ sensitive cargo where the time advantage of rail over ship is essential , which , however , is heavy enough to make the cost saving vs. air transport noticeable . Typical cargoes include complex machinery and spare parts ( in both directions ) , as well as high @-@ end groceries and consumer goods ( primarily toward China ) . While major customers ship their products by full container load , freight <unk> also make it possible to send less @-@ than @-@ container shipments . 
 = = = New Eurasian Land Bridge = = = 
 The New Eurasian Land Bridge , also called the New Eurasian Continental Bridge , is the name given to China 's rail link with Central Asia . The route includes China 's east @-@ west railways which , in addition to the <unk> line , are the <unk> Railway and the Lanzhou – Xinjiang Railway . Together , the railways create an uninterrupted rail link between the port city of Lianyungang in Jiangsu province and Kazakhstan . In 1995 the Chinese and Kazakhstan governments signed an agreement which allows the latter to use Lianyungang as its primary seaport for exports and imports , and the former intends for Lianyungang to serve as the designated starting point for the New Eurasian Land Bridge . 
 From Almaty in Kazakhstan , the railway extends to Tashkent and Samarkand , Uzbekistan and then to Tejen , Turkmenistan . From Tejen , another line continues to <unk> , the capital of Turkmenistan . After <unk> , the line ends at <unk> , Turkmenistan , a port on the Caspian Sea . ( After a direct rail link between Kazakhstan and Turkmenistan opened , it became possible for the freight to bypass Uzbekistan , which has poor relations with its neighbors ) . 
 In 1996 a branch railway from Tejen was constructed across the border with Iran ( at <unk> ) and linked to the Islamic Republic of Iran Railways . The link potentially enables rail freight from China to reach ports on the Persian Gulf and via other train lines , to reach into the Caucasus and Turkey . In 2016 , direct container train service was inaugurated on this route , between Yiwu ( Zhejiang Province ) and Teheran ; the trip takes 14 days . 
 The central Asian route did not extend all the way into Europe until October 2013 when the rail link across the Bosphorus though the Marmaray link was opened . Iranian rail lines use <unk> ( 4 ft 8 ½ in ) gauge , requiring freight cars transiting from China into Iran to change wheel gauges twice . The train ferry across Lake Van is also a capacity restriction . 
 Chinese state media claims that the New Eurasian Land / Continental Bridge extends from Lianyungang to Rotterdam , a distance of 11 @,@ 870 kilometres ( 7 @,@ 380 mi ) . The exact route used to connect the two cities , whether through Mongolia or Kazakhstan , however , is unclear . 
 = = = Iron Silk Road via Turkey = = = 
 An alternative way from China to Europe is via Turkey . The route from China follows Kazakhstan , Uzbekistan , Turkmenistan , Iran , Turkey . Due to longer distance , insufficient service and border crossings , this route has never been used for transports from China to Europe . However , a number of projects may strengthen this route in the future . 
 Marmaray is one of them , connecting Europe and Asia via a tunnel under the Bosphorus . After the completion of the project , a continuous run of trains will be possible between Asia and Europe , which is now done by rail ferry service . But Marmaray tunnel , which will give very limited service to freight trains due to dense public transport via tunnel and which will be closed for dangerous goods , may not be able to change the current traffic . 
 Another project is Baku – Tbilisi – Kars railway project , which will be able to shorten the route via the Caspian Sea by bypassing Iran . The new railway lines constructed in Kazakhstan will make it shorter . The new route , in this case , will be China – Kazakhstan – Azerbaijan – Georgia – Turkey . 
 = = = Break of gauge issues = = = 
 Former countries of the USSR , as well as Mongolia , use a track gauge of 1 @,@ 520 mm ( 4 ft 11 27 ⁄ 32 in ) . The international standard rail gauge used in most of Europe and China is 1 @,@ 435 mm ( 4 ft 8 1 ⁄ 2 in ) . As a result , trains cannot run from China or European countries into or out of the former USSR without changing bogies . Large facilities to carry out this procedure exist at most border crossing between the " Russian " and " standard " gauge territories ( e.g. , at <unk> or <unk> ) Changing the bogies on a rail car takes hours and special , heavy equipment . In many cases ( especially , containerized freight ) , freight is transshipped from one train to another instead of changing the bogies . As of 2016 , this is what 's usually done with China @-@ Europe container trains at places such as Khorgos ; it is reported that containers can be moved from one train to another in as little as 47 minutes . In the case of liquids , frozen goods and hazardous materials , however , the bogies are usually changed . 
 It has been suggested that on some lines variable gauge axles would achieve significant time savings in comparison to bogie exchange . Their implementation however would involve a much higher capital cost , requiring either retrofitting or replacement of existing bogies . 
 = = Proposed development = = 
 = = = Expansion projects = = = 
 On 10 March 2004 the Kazakhstan Railway Company Ltd announced that it was looking for investors to fund the construction of a railway stretching 3 @,@ 083 kilometres ( 1 @,@ 920 mi ) from China across Kazakhstan to the Caspian Sea that would be the same gauge as Chinese railways . Thus , the railway would allow trains from China to cross Kazakhstan without having to change bogies . The reported construction cost of the new railway was $ 3 @.@ 5 billion . Chinese media reported that the railway would complete the link between China and Europe via central Asia , but it is unclear where the actual link to Europe would be . Also unclear is whether construction has yet to begin on the project . 
 The governments of India and Burma have proposed building , with China 's cooperation , a link to the Eurasian Land Bridge that would start in India or Burma and connect to the Chinese rail system in Yunnan . The route would allow freight from India and Burma to travel overland to Europe . The link would also give rail access for China to the Indian Ocean . One proposed starting point for the route is Kyaukpyu . The governments of Thailand and Malaysia are also studying the feasibility of establishing rail links with China . 
 Both Russia and China are seeking to establish a permanent rail link with South Korea by way of North Korea to allow South Korean goods to be shipped to Europe via the Eurasian Land Bridge . According to Choi Yeon @-@ Hye , a professor of marketing and management at the Korea National Railway College , a rail connection from Busan to Rotterdam would cut shipping time from 26 to 16 days and save $ 800 per container of freight . As part of its plan to link the Trans @-@ Siberian to North and South Korea , Russia rebuilt its <unk> from Khasan to <unk> , finishing in October 2011 . 
 The South Korean government announced on 2 December 2009 that it would conduct an economic and technical study on the feasibility of constructing undersea tunnels for transporting goods and people to and from the country directly to Kyushu , Japan and Shandong , China . 
 The United Nations Development Programme has advocated greater regional integration along the Eurasian Land Bridge , including development of rail links between the countries of South and Southeast Asia and Central Asia , called the Trans @-@ Asian Railway project . Chinese leaders have called for the establishment of free trade zones at both ends of the Eurasian Land Bridge to facilitate development . Said Khalid Malik , United Nations Resident Coordinator in China , " If this comes true , it will enable the continental bridge to play its due role in enhancing co @-@ operation between Asia and Europe , and promoting world peace and development . " 
 In 2010 and 2011 , China announced plans to finance expansion of the rail systems in Laos , Thailand , Myanmar , Cambodia , and Vietnam and connect them to China 's rail system via Kunming . The plans include construction of a high @-@ speed rail line from Kunming to Vientiane , beginning in April 2011 , with a possible future extension to Bangkok . 
 On 15 December 2011 , Russian Prime Minister Vladimir Putin announced that a rail link was being considered between Sakhalin Island and Japan . The rail line , constructed in an undersea tunnel , would link Japan to the Trans @-@ Siberian . 
 = = = Bering Strait link = = = 
 In April 2007 the Russian government announced that it was considering building a double track broad gauge rail tunnel under the Bering Strait between Chukotka and Alaska . The tunnel , as projected , would be 60 miles ( 100 km ) long and would include oil and gas pipelines , fiber optic cables and power lines . The tunnel project was estimated to cost $ 65 billion and take 15 – 20 years to build . In addition to the Russian government , sponsors of the project apparently include <unk> and <unk> United Energy Systems . 
 The project , as envisioned , would connect the Trans @-@ Siberian via Komsomolsk @-@ on @-@ Amur / Yakutsk in Siberian Russia with the North American rail network ( gauge to be widened ) at Fort Nelson , British Columbia , Canada , a distance of 3 @,@ 700 miles ( 5 @,@ 950 km ) . A significant hurdle for the project is that the nearest major road to the Russian end of the tunnel is 1 @,@ 000 miles ( 1 @,@ 610 km ) away . In addition , Alaska has no direct rail link to either Canada or the contiguous United States . Other leaders , including Wally Hickel , Lyndon LaRouche , Sun Myung Moon , and the 14th Dalai Lama have also advocated the construction of a tunnel or bridge across the strait . 
 = = = High @-@ speed rail = = = 
 It was reported in the press in March 2007 that China intends to build a high @-@ speed rail link between China and Western Europe with the possibility of a high @-@ speed rail journey from Beijing to London taking just two days . 
 In February 2011 , the Chinese government announced that it would jointly sponsor the construction of a high @-@ speed rail line between Astana and Almaty in Kazakhstan . The announced completion date was 2015 . 
 = = = Print = = = 
 Associated Press ( 20 April 2007 ) . " Bering Strait tunnel proposed " . The <unk> p . A1 . 
 <unk> , S. ( 8 April 2009 ) . " Global crisis delays Mongolia @-@ Europe rail freight project " . <unk> . 
 Berk , Michael ( 27 November 2007 ) . " The Arctic Bridge ; Churchill , Man . , is the key to linking Afghans with the world " . National Post ( Canada ) . p . FP 15 . 
 Blomfield , Adrien ( 20 April 2007 ) . " Kremlin revives plan for 60 @-@ mile tunnel to Alaska " . The Daily <unk> p . 19 . 
 " A bridge too far ? : Rev. Moon calls for billions to connect Alaska with Russia " . Church & State . 10 November 2005 @.@ p . 19 . 
 DiBenedetto , Bill ( 3 September 2007 ) . " Getting strait " . Pacific Shipper . 
 Economist Intelligence Unit ( 2008 ) . " Resources and infrastructure : Transport , communications and the Internet " . Country Profile : Mongolia . 
 Fu , Jing ( 27 August 2004 ) . " UN promotes role of Eurasian continental link " . China <unk> p . 2 . 
 Christian , David ( 2000 ) . " Silk Roads or Steppe Roads ? The Silk Roads in World History " . Journal of World History ( University of Hawaii Press ) 2 @.@ 1 ( Spring ) : 1 . 
 Funabashi , Yoichi ( 24 December 2002 ) . " Yoichi Funabashi at Vladivostok " . Asahi Shimbun ( Japan : Asahi Evening News ) . p . 1 . 
 Hearst , David ( 21 April 2007 ) . " Readers ' page : You asked ... : Will a tunnel linking Russia to the US be built ? " . The Guardian. p . 40 . 
 International Railway Journal ( March 2008 ) . " Just 15 days after leaving Beijing , the first demonstration intermodal freight service operated by Eurasian Land Bridge between China and Germany arrived in Hamburg on January 24 " . p . 7 . 
 <unk> @-@ <unk> , Muriel ( 2 August 2000 ) . " Iranian President 's Visit to China Advances Strategic , Cultural Dialogue Part 1 " . Tehran Times . 
 Nicholson , Alex ( 24 April 2007 ) . " A tunnel under the Bering Strait ? Russian , U.S. backers make a new push for a century @-@ old idea " . Financial Times . 
 Ren , Daniel ; Lilian Zhang ; Will Clem ( 11 June 2009 ) . " Jiangsu coast to act as catalyst for growth : Region will be turned into a transport hub " . South China Morning <unk> p . 5 . 
 <unk> , Joe ( 10 September 2001 ) . " Race for 9th District ; As races go , Joe would 've loved this one " . Boston <unk> p . 4 . 
 " Third land link to Europe envisioned " . The Statesman . 21 July 2009 . 
 Underhill , William ( 28 July 2008 ) . " All Tickets , Please – As oil prices rise , businesses and consumers alike are ditching planes and cars for more @-@ efficient rail " . Newsweek . 
 " Three Candidates Face Off In Bid For Incumbent Warner 's Senate Seat ; All Virginia Voters Will Decide Who Among The Candidates Will Begin Serving A Six @-@ Year Term In January " . The Virginian @-@ Pilot . 3 November 2002 . 
 <unk> , George ; Eve Conant ; B. J. Lee ( 13 August 2001 ) . " The Coming Rail Boom – A Moscow @-@ Pyongyang deal to extend the Trans @-@ Siberian Railway could boost Eurasian commerce " . Newsweek . 
 " Experts propose developing SW corridor of third Asia @-@ Europe land @-@ bridge " . Xinhua News Agency . 24 November 2008 . 
 " NW China mulls " New Silk Road " exhibition park " . Xinhua . 1 July 2007 . 
 " China northwest city to host UN meet on Eurasia continental bridge 29 Jun @-@ 4 Jul " . BBC Monitoring . Xinhua . 21 June 2007 . 
 " China : Congress deputies propose free trade zones along continental bridge " . BBC Monitoring . Xinhua . 11 March 2004 . 
 = = = Web = = = 
 " New railway linking China , Europe to be built " ( Newspaper article ) . China Daily . Communist Party of China . 18 March 2004 . Retrieved 11 November 2009 . 
 Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific . " Development of The Trans @-@ Asian Railway ; Trans @-@ Asian railway in the north @-@ south corridor ; Northern Europe to the Persian Gulf " ( PDF ) . United <unk> pp. 56 – 58 . Retrieved 26 November 2009 . 
 Islam , <unk> ( 7 November 2006 ) . " Trans @-@ Asia Railway Network Agreement : Dhaka fails to sign deal for lack of cabinet approval " . New Age . World Prout Assembly . Retrieved 21 November 2009 . 
 " South Korea to study undersea tunnel to Kyushu " . The Japan Times . Kyodo News . 3 December 2009 . Retrieved 8 December 2009 . 
 Ōtsuka , Shigeru ( September 2001 ) . " Central Asia 's Rail Network and the Eurasian Land Bridge " ( PDF ) . Japan Railway and Transport Review . East Japan Railway Culture Foundation . Retrieved 11 November 2009 . 
 <unk> , Iqbal ( 23 January 2003 ) . " Major International Crises Need a Giant Project to Overcome Them " ( Google translation of an Arabic newspaper article ) . Asharq Al @-@ Awsat . H.H. Saudi Research & Marketing ( UK ) Ltd . Retrieved 11 November 2009 . 
 Rodrigue , Jean @-@ Paul ( 1998 – 2009 ) . " The Northern East @-@ West Freight Corridor ( Eurasian Landbridge ) " . The Geography of Transport Systems . Department of Global Studies & Geography , Hofstra University . Retrieved 11 November 2009 . 
 " Bering bridge idea to highlight rally " . The Washington Times . 25 June 2005 . Retrieved 20 November 2009 . 
 = = Further information = = 
 Qi , Yong ; Yan Wang ( 1991 ) . " Analysis of Land Bridge Transportation " . Chinese Geographical Science ( Science Press ) . doi : 10 @.@ 1007 / <unk> . 
 <unk> , Karen E. ( 12 February 1995 ) . " Sea @-@ Land Makes Landbridge Rail Commitment to Former Soviet Union " . Knight Ridder . Retrieved 11 November 2009 – via <unk> Research . 
 = Devil 's Trap = 
 " Devil 's Trap " is the twenty @-@ second episode of the paranormal drama television series Supernatural 's first season . It is the season finale , and was first broadcast on The WB on May 4 , 2006 . The narrative follows series protagonists Sam ( Jared Padalecki ) and Dean Winchester ( Jensen Ackles ) as they search for their missing father ( Jeffrey Dean Morgan ) , who has been kidnapped by demons . 
 Written by series creator Eric Kripke and directed by Kim Manners , the episode featured Nicki Aycox 's final portrayal of recurring villain Meg Masters , and also introduced Jim Beaver as hunter and Winchester @-@ ally Bobby Singer . Morgan 's busy schedule affected the episode 's storyline , and the final scene involved one of the toughest special effects sequences of the series . 
 Giving generally positive reviews , critics praised the actors ' performances and the twist ending , though some had minor issues with the plot . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Trying to locate his father , Dean calls John Winchester 's phone . The demonically @-@ possessed Meg Masters ( Aycox ) answers it instead , and taunts him that his father has been captured . To determine a plan of action , Dean and his brother Sam ( Padalecki ) go to family friend and fellow hunter Bobby Singer ( Beaver ) for help . However , Meg tracks them down and attacks , but is quickly caught underneath a mystical symbol known as a " devil 's trap " that the Winchesters and Bobby had painted on the ceiling ; it renders demons immobile and powerless . Bobby informs the Winchesters that Meg is actually an innocent girl being possessed by a demon , so they begin to perform an exorcism . Dean promises to stop if she reveals the location of their father , and she relents , claiming he is being held in Jefferson City . Despite Bobby 's warning that Meg will die from previously sustained injuries if the demon is exorcised , Dean insists that they go through with it , as it would be better than allowing the demon to continue to use her as a host . After the demon is sent to Hell , a dying Meg thanks them for freeing her . With her remaining strength , she warns them that the demons are setting a trap for them , and says , " By the river . Sunrise , " before she dies . 
 This leads the brothers to the riverside Sunrise Apartments in Jefferson City , Missouri . The boys manage to overpower the demons guarding John , and rescue him . However , they are attacked by Meg 's demonic brother Tom , and Dean is forced to kill him with one of the three remaining bullets of the Colt — a mystical gun capable of killing anything . When the Winchesters later find refuge in a secluded cabin , Azazel reveals himself to be possessing John . Dean , while being tortured by the demon , begs his father to break free and save him . John is able to temporarily gain control , and then begs Sam to use the Colt to kill Azazel . Unable to bring himself to kill his father , Sam instead shoots him in the leg , causing Azazel to flee to safety . The Winchesters rush towards the hospital , but their car is rammed into by a semi @-@ trailer truck being driven by a demonically @-@ possessed truck driver . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Guest stars = = = 
 Actor Jeffrey Dean Morgan portrayed dual roles for the episode . He returned as Winchester patriarch John , and was also the first to play the on @-@ screen physical manifestation of the demon Azazel — the character had been only depicted in silhouette . Morgan was given free rein over the latter 's traits , only being directed to " be different from John " . He changed his voice and modeled Azazel 's speech pattern after Jack Nicholson 's scenes in The Shining in which he " gets all freaky " . This " Nicholson @-@ esque quality " continues in later depictions of the demon . 
 Hunter and Winchester @-@ ally Bobby Singer makes his debut , and is played by Jim Beaver . Beaver had worked with executive producer Robert Singer on the television series Reasonable Doubts , and Singer gave him the part without viewing his audition tape . The episode also features the final appearance of the demonically @-@ possessed Meg Masters as played by Nicki Aycox . Director Kim Manners was sorry to see her go , as he felt Meg had the potential to become a " great nemesis " for the Winchesters . 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 The staff struggled throughout the writing process to decide which Winchester would be kidnapped and possessed , and were forced to revise the script multiple times to reflect the latest choice . Because of Jeffrey Dean Morgan 's recurring role on Grey 's Anatomy , however , the writers realized that he would not be available long enough to be a main focus of the episode . They thus decided late into production for John to be the one who is captured . With this finalized , Kripke found it rather easy to write the episode ; he already knew that the key elements of the episode would be the exorcism of the demon possessing Meg , the death of the real Meg , and the apparent rescue of John Winchester . Kripke felt that it had to be John who was possessed by Azazel , as it united and completed the two main storylines of the season — finding their father and tracking down the demon — and it did so by finding both characters in one body . He found it a " happy accident " to be able to present the brothers with the opportunity to finally kill the demon , but at the cost of their father 's life . 
 The writers believed John 's separation from his sons throughout the season " split the show " by having him away " doing more interesting things than the boys are doing " , with Kripke likewise feeling that John was keeping Sam and Dean away from the " front lines " . His death would allow the brothers to " explore , investigate and confront the yellow @-@ eyed demon directly " . The writers originally intended for John to die at the episode 's end , with Sam and Dean surviving the crash but John dying in their arms . His death , however , was pushed back into the second season premiere because the writers deemed it too dark to kill John after everything else the brothers had gone through in " Devil 's Trap " . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Principal filming took place in Vancouver , British Columbia , with the crash scene being filmed on an old airport space with flat roads . However , other key sequences occurred in the studio . Because the fight scene between the Winchesters and Azazel at the climax was meant to take place in a secluded , forest @-@ enclosed cabin , production built the set on a sound stage . Production designer Jerry Wanek felt the set was extremely important , as viewers would become uninterested if the forest looked fake . With Morgan rendered blind by the yellow contact lenses required to depict his character 's demonic possession , the production crew placed sandbags on the floor to help the actor locate his marks . 
 According to Aycox , the exorcism of the demon from Meg Masters took two days to shoot ; the first day of filming lasted 13 hours , while the second lasted for " about a half a day " . Director Kim Manners used 360 @-@ degree shots and close @-@ ups to make the sequence exciting . In the scene following the exorcism , in which Bobby is bent over a dying Meg , Aycox and Ackles read their lines off @-@ screen so that Beaver 's reaction could be shot . However , the two were " so slap @-@ happy " to be almost done that they could not stop laughing ; to everyone 's surprise , Beaver was able to keep a straight face . The set — Bobby Singer 's home — was filled with waist @-@ high stacks of six thousand books . 
 = = = Effects = = = 
 The semi @-@ trailer truck crashing into the Impala at the episode 's end was deemed by special effects supervisor Randy <unk> to be , as of the third season 's production , " probably the toughest ' gag ' [ he has ] done " . Many aspects went into creating the crash scene , with filming taking place both in the studio and on location . 
 For the interior scenes used to depict the first moments of the Impala being hit , the actors were required to sit in the car in front of a blue screen ; this allowed for the truck 's headlights to later be added in with visual effects . The car itself was attached to a separate rig that was built to replicate the impact of the crash . As the scene was shot , the rig flipped the car onto its side . The passenger @-@ side window was then shattered , though the actors were protected by a sheet of <unk> that had been placed very close to the window ; at the same time , cannons beneath the frame blew out pieces of rubber glass to give the appearance that the window had exploded onto them . 
 For the filming of the actual crash , the car and truck were cabled together by a winch and driven toward one another . The intention was for a cannon to launch the Impala into the air at the collision point , causing the car to barrel roll as the truck drives away . However , the car became stuck in the truck 's bumper , forcing the cannon to fail and the truck to go out of control . The truck began to jackknife , but the stuntman driving it saved it from flipping . The mistake ended up being beneficial for the scene , as Kripke and director Manners found it to look " pretty real " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 On its initial broadcast , the episode was watched by 3 @.@ 99 million viewers . It received generally positive reviews from critics . Karla Peterson of The San Diego Union @-@ Tribune gave the episode an " A " , deeming it " everything the season @-@ closer needed to be " . She noted that episode reveals why Azazel killed Jessica and Mary Winchester , and enjoyed the " creative way " Meg Masters was killed off , feeling the exorcism to be " amazing " . Peterson also praised the cliffhanger ending , believing it to be " capable of pulling your eyeballs right out of your head " . The acting was also praised , with Jensen Ackles being able to " wring every ounce of blood , sweat and torment out of Dean 's <unk> haunted psyche " , Jared Padalecki making Sam " real and conflicted " , and Jeffrey Dean Morgan giving " his best and most believable performance of the season " . Maureen Ryan of the Chicago Tribune collectively referred to " Devil 's Trap " and its two preceding episodes as a " really strong trilogy " of " must @-@ see episodes " . She found the possessed John to be " Morgan 's finest work on the show to date " , believing that he " was really on fire in that scene " and " brought a whole new intensity to his performance " . She also thought that Bobby Singer 's introduction and Meg Masters ' exorcism were " well done " . 
 Diana Steenbergen of IGN also praised " Devil 's Trap " , deeming it to be the episode that " moved Supernatural from the list of television shows that [ she ] liked to the ' must @-@ see ' list " . Like Peterson , she cheered the twist ending , and was " completely taken by surprise " . Steenbergen also felt that Jim Beaver as hunter Bobby Singer was " an excellent addition to the cast " , and applauded Ackles , Padalecki , and Morgan for their performances in the episode 's climactic confrontation between Azazel and the brothers . She found the possessed Morgan to be " menacing " , and enjoyed his sadistic sense of humor ; Padalecki to have done a " good job embodying the newfound strength " Sam develops in defying his father 's order to kill him in order to stop the demon ; and Ackles ' <unk> to be " affecting " . However , she believed that Azazel 's reference to having a family " [ didn 't ] quite make sense " , and noted that it seemed implausible for Sam and Dean — having been raised as hunters — to not have known that Meg was a demonically @-@ possessed girl . Brian Tallerico of UGO also had issues with the plot , though mainly with the episode 's outcome . He felt that the writers should have followed Buffy the Vampire Slayer 's pattern of killing off the season 's foe , as " fans don 't like villains to be strung out for too long " . He also would have liked for John Winchester to have died in order to " free the brothers up for a little second season revenge and a little less family angst " . 
 = Herbert Hope Risley = 
 Sir Herbert Hope Risley KCIE CSI ( 4 January 1851 – 30 September 1911 ) was a British ethnographer and colonial administrator , a member of the Indian Civil Service who conducted extensive studies on the tribes and castes of the Bengal Presidency . He is notable for the formal application of the caste system to the entire Hindu population of British India in the 1901 census , of which he was in charge . As an exponent of race science , he used the ratio of the width of a nose to its height to divide Indians into Aryan and Dravidian races , as well as seven castes . 
 Risley was born in Buckinghamshire , England , in 1851 and attended New College , Oxford University prior to joining the Indian Civil Service ( ICS ) . He was initially posted to Bengal , where his professional duties engaged him in statistical and ethnographic research , and he soon developed an interest in anthropology . His decision to indulge these interests curtailed his initial rapid advancement through the ranks of the Service , although he was later appointed Census Commissioner and , shortly before his death in 1911 , became Permanent Secretary at the India Office in London . In the intervening years he compiled various studies of Indian communities based on ideas that are now considered to constitute scientific racism . He emphasised the value of fieldwork and <unk> studies , in contrast to the reliance on old texts and folklore that had historically been the methodology of Indologists and which was still a significant approach in his lifetime . 
 Aside from being honoured by his country , including by the award of a knighthood , Risley also became President of the Royal Anthropological Institute . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Herbert Hope Risley was born at Akeley in Buckinghamshire , England , on 4 January 1851 . His father was a rector and his mother the daughter of John Hope , who had served in the Bengal Medical Service at Gwalior . 
 During his schooldays at Winchester College , where many of his relatives had preceded him , he won a scholarship and was also awarded a gold medal for an essay in Latin . Continuing his education with a scholarship at New College , Oxford , he graduated with a second @-@ class Bachelor of Arts degree in law and modern history in 1872 . He had already passed the competitive examination for the Indian Civil Service ( ICS ) in 1871 , entered it on 3 June 1873 and arrived in India on 24 October of that year . 
 = = India : 1873 – 85 = = 
 His initial posting was to <unk> in Bengal as an Assistant Magistrate and Assistant District Collector . The area was inhabited in part by forest tribes . He soon took to studying them and retained an interest in the anthropology of such tribes for the remainder of his life . He also became involved in William Wilson Hunter 's Statistical Survey of India , which began in 1869 , and was to be printed in the first edition of The Imperial Gazetteer of India , published in 1881 . Hunter personally conducted the survey of Bengal , and the anthropological , linguistic and sociological accomplishments of Risley were recognised in February 1875 when he was appointed as one of five Assistant Directors of Statistics for Hunter 's Survey . 
 Risley compiled the Survey 's volume covering the hill districts of Hazaribagh and <unk> , and both the literary style and subject knowledge shown in this work were to prove beneficial to his career . He became Assistant Secretary to the Government of Bengal and then , in 1879 , was appointed as Under Secretary in the Home Department of the Government of India . In 1880 he returned to work at district level , at <unk> , having married Elsie Julie <unk> on 17 June 1879 at Simla . According to Crispin Bates , a historian of modern South Asia , <unk> was an " erudite German " and her linguistic proficiency helped Risley learn more about anthropology and statistics from non @-@ English sources . The couple had a son and a daughter . 
 To return to work in the districts was Risley 's personal preference and was made despite his unusually rapid rise through the ranks . He went from <unk> back to Hazaribagh and then , in 1884 , to <unk> , where he was charged with conducting an enquiry into land tenure arrangements . 
 = = Ethnographic Survey of Bengal : 1885 – 91 = = 
 In 1885 , Risley was appointed to conduct a project titled the Ethnographic Survey of Bengal , which Augustus Rivers Thompson , the Lieutenant @-@ Governor of the Presidency at the time , believed to be a sensible exercise . The Indian Rebellion of 1857 had come close to overturning British rule in India , and the disruption led the British government to take over administrative control from the British East India Company . Members of the ICS such as Richard Carnac Temple thought that if further discontent were to be avoided , it was necessary to obtain a better understanding of the colonial subjects , particularly those from the rural areas . As time went on , the ethnographic studies and their resultant categorisations were embodied in numerous official publications and became an essential part of the British administrative mechanism ; of those categorisations it was caste that was regarded to be , in Risley 's words , " the cement that holds together the myriad units of Indian society " . The desire for ethnographic studies was expressed by another Raj administrator , Denzil Ibbetson , in his 1883 report on the 1881 census of Punjab : 
 Our ignorance of the customs and beliefs of the people among whom we dwell is surely in some respects a reproach to us ; for not only does that ignorance deprive European science of material which it greatly needs , but it also involves a distinct loss of administrative power to ourselves . 
 Risley 's survey task was aided when research papers of a recently deceased Indian Medical Service doctor , James Wise , were given to him by the doctor 's widow . Wise had researched the people of Eastern Bengal and it was agreed that , after ascertaining the accuracy of his work , his research should be incorporated into Risley 's survey results . In return , those volumes of the survey dealing with ethnographic matters would be dedicated to Wise . Further assistance came from the research of Edward Tuite Dalton into the jungle tribes of <unk> and Assam . Dalton , like Wise , had previously published his efforts but now they would be integrated as a part of a larger whole . Risley was able to deal with the remaining areas of Bengal by making use of a large staff of correspondents who came from disparate backgrounds , such as missionaries , native people and Government officials . 
 In 1891 Risley published a paper entitled The Study of Ethnology in India . It was a contribution to what Thomas Trautmann , a historian who has studied Indian society , describes as " the racial theory of Indian civilisation " . Trautmann considers Risley , along with the philologist Max Müller , to have been leading proponents of this idea which 
 by century 's end had become a settled fact , that the constitutive event for Indian civilisation , the Big Bang through which it came into being , was the clash between invading , fair @-@ skinned , civilized Sanskrit @-@ speaking Aryans and dark @-@ skinned , barbarous aborigines . 
 Trautmann notes , however , that the convergence of their theories was not a deliberate collaboration . 
 In the same year , 1891 , the four volumes of The Tribes and Castes of Bengal were published . These contained the results of the Bengal survey , with two volumes comprising an " <unk> Glossary " , and a further two being of " <unk> Data " . Risley took advice from William Henry Flower , Director of the Natural History Museum , and William Turner , an Edinburgh anthropologist , in compiling the anthropometric volumes . The work was well received by the public and government alike . In the same year , he was elected an officier of the Académie Française ; and on 1 January 1892 he was vested as a Companion of the Indian Empire ( CIE ) . In more recent times , his use of contemporary anthropometric methods has led to his career being described by Bates as " the apotheosis of pseudo @-@ scientific racism " , an opinion that is shared by others . The theory now known as scientific racism was prevalent for a century from around the 1840s and had at its heart , says Philip D. Curtin , that " race was one of the principal determinants of attitudes , endowments , capabilities and inherent tendencies among human beings . Race thus seemed to determine the course of human history . " 
 According to Trautmann , Risley believed that ethnologists could benefit from undertaking fieldwork . He quotes Risley saying of ethnologists in India that they had relied too much : 
 on mere literary accounts which give an ideal and misleading picture of caste and its social surroundings . They show us , not things as they are , but things as they ought to be , in the view of a particular school or in the light of a particular tradition ... [ S ] ome slight personal acquaintance with even a single tribe of savage men could hardly fail to be of infinite service to the philosopher who undertakes to trace the process by which civilisation has been gradually evolved out of barbarism . 
 Risley also viewed India as an ethnological laboratory , where the continued practice of endogamy had ensured that , in his opinion , there were strict delineations of the various communities by caste and that consequently caste could be viewed as identical to race . Whereas others , such as Ibbetson , considered caste to be best defined as based on occupation , he believed that changes in occupation within a community led to another instance of endogamy " being held by a sort of unconscious fiction to be equivalent to the difference of race , which is the true basis of the system . " The study was , in the opinion of William Crooke , another ethnographer of the Raj period , " the first attempt to apply , in a systematic way , the methods of anthropometry to the analysis of the people of an Indian Province . " Risley was influenced by the methodology of the French physical anthropologist Paul Topinard , from whose Éléments d <unk> générale he had selected several anthropometric techniques , including the nasal index . Topinard believed that this index – a ratio derived from measuring the breadth and height of the nose – could be combined with other cranial measurements to enable a Linnean classification of humans , for which purpose Trautmann said : 
 [ I ] t is useful both in its exactness of application and in the reassuring way in which it conforms itself to what is already known to be true rather than presenting us with information that requires us to part with existing beliefs . 
 Despite his comments regarding the use of literature by anthropologists , Risley used the ancient Rig Veda text , which he interpreted as speaking of Aryan invaders coming into India from the northwest and meeting with existing peoples . Dalton and J. F. Hewitt had posited that the native people comprised two distinct groups , being the Dravidian and the <unk> , and Risley 's use of the nasal index was in part intended to counter those theories by showing that the two groups were racially identical even if they were linguistically varied . Crooke noted that Risley appeared to succeed in proving a physical similarity between " the so @-@ called Dravidian and <unk> races " and " identified the Austro @-@ Asiatic group of languages , with Munda as one of its sub @-@ branches . " 
 Risley 's interpretation of the nasal index went beyond investigation of the two @-@ race theory . He believed that the variations shown between the extremes of those races of India were indicative of various positions within the caste system , saying that generally " the social position of a caste varies inversely as its nasal index . " Trautmann explains that Risley " found a direct relation between the proportion of Aryan blood and the nasal index , along a gradient from the highest castes to the lowest . This assimilation of caste to race ... proved very influential . " He also saw a linkage between the nasal index and the definition of a community as either a tribe or a Hindu caste and believed that the caste system had its basis in race rather than in occupation , saying " community of race , and not , as has frequently been argued , community of function , is the real determining principle , the true causa <unk> , of the caste system . " 
 The methods of anthropometric data collection , much of which was done by Risley , have been questioned in more recent times . Bates has said : 
 The maximum sample size used in Risley 's enquiry was 100 , and in many cases Risley 's conclusions about the racial origins of particular castes or tribal groups were based on the cranial measurements of as few as 30 individuals . Like Professor Topinard , Paul Broca , Le Bron and Morton before him , Risley had a clear notion of where his results would lead , and he had no difficulty in fitting the fewest observations into a complex typology of racial types . 
 = = India : the 1901 census = = 
 After completing the Bengal survey , Risley 's work consisted of heading an enquiry into policing , and following that more usual administrative tasks for both the Bengal and Imperial governments . In 1899 he was appointed Census Commissioner , tasked with preparing and reporting on the forthcoming decennial census of 1901 . The detailed regulations that he formulated for that exercise were also used for the 1911 census , and the work involved in co @-@ ordinating the various Provincial administrations was considerable and detailed . He succeeded <unk> <unk> Baines , who held the office for the 1891 census , had himself adjusted the classification system and was an influence on Risley . According to political scientist Lloyd Rudolph , Risley believed that varna , however ancient , could be applied to all the modern castes found in India , and " [ he ] meant to identify and place several hundred million Indians within it . " 
 The outcome of the census is described by Crooke as " an exceptionally interesting report " , produced in association with a colleague , Edward Albert Gait . Crooke notes that in the report " he developed his views on the origin and classification of the Indian races largely on the basis of anthropometry . " By now , Risley believed anthropometric measurement enabled the Indian castes to be described as belonging to one of seven racial types , although he accepted that his own work indicated only three such types : the Aryan , Dravidian and Mongoloid . The seven that he believed to be capable of classification were the <unk> @-@ Dravidian , Dravidian , Indo @-@ Aryan , <unk> @-@ Dravidian , Mongoloid , <unk> @-@ Dravidian and the Turko @-@ Iranian . He went further still by holding that there was support for the racial theory in the various linguistic differences between Indian communities , an opinion that frustrated Müller but which was supported by the publication of the Linguistic Survey of India by another officer of ICS , George Abraham Grierson . Bates notes that the correlation in the theories of Risley and Grierson is not surprising because Grierson was 
 armed with the much earlier but as yet unproven hypotheses of Sir William Jones concerning matters of language and race , and was intimately acquainted with Risley 's theories of racial origins . Grierson also followed a similar ex ante deductive methodology in his research . 
 Another event that occurred in 1901 and which related to Risley was the official approval of an India @-@ wide ethnographic survey , intended to be conducted over a period of eight years and using in part the <unk> methodology established for Risley 's survey of Bengal . Superintendents were appointed to each Province and Presidency and grants of £ 5000 per annum were given for the eight @-@ year period . Bates considers that the results of this effort , which included works by Edgar Thurston and Robert Vane Russell , were rarely " quite so thorough , even by Risley 's standards . " 
 Some of the material from the 1901 census was later republished , in amended form , in Risley 's 1908 work , The People of India , which sociologist D. F. Pocock describes as " almost the last production of that great tradition of administrator scholars who had long and extensive experience in the Indian Civil Service and had not found their arduous activity incompatible with scholarship . " Trautmann considers the census report and subsequent book to represent " Risley 's grand syntheses of India ethnology " , while the paper of 1891 had given " an exceptionally clear view of his project at the state of what we might call its early maturity . " 
 The Oxford Dictionary of National Biography ( ODNB ) says : 
 From the date of his report a new chapter was opened in Indian official literature , and the census volumes , until then regarded as dull , were at once read and reviewed in every country . His categorisation of Indian castes and occupations had an enduring social and political effect . 
 According to Susan Bayly , who studies historical anthropology : 
 Those like [ Sir William ] Hunter , as well as the key figures of H. H. Risley ( 1851 – 1911 ) and his protégé Edgar Thurston , who were disciples of the French race theorist Topinard and his European followers , subsumed discussions of caste into theories of biologically determined race essences ... Their great rivals were the material or occupational theorists led by the ethnographer and folklorist William Crooke ( 1848 – 1923 ) , author of one of the most widely read provincial Castes and Tribes surveys , and such other influential scholar @-@ officials as Denzil Ibbetson and E. A. H. Blunt . 
 = = India : later years = = 
 In 1901 Risley was appointed Director of Ethnography . There had been proposals for a wide @-@ ranging survey of the subject – which Risley had himself discussed this in his article , The Study of Ethnology in India – but the implementation of the project had been hampered by economic circumstances related principally to a series of famines , including that of 1899 – 1900 . 
 In the following year he became Home Secretary in India in the administration of Lord Curzon , the Viceroy of India , and in 1909 was temporarily a member of the governing council . His experience of administrative matters , including with regard to policing , proved to be useful to Curzon during the government 's 1905 partition of Bengal along communal lines . So useful was his knowledge and ability that his term in India was extended for two years beyond the usual retirement age . This was to enable him to provide the <unk> , negotiation and drafting skills necessary to ensure success in administrative reform of the Provincial Councils by Curzon 's successor as Viceroy , Lord Minto . 
 Already recognised by the Académie Française and by the award of CIE , Risley was made a Companion of the Order of the Star of India on 24 June 1904 and a Knight of the Order of the Indian Empire in 1907 . 
 The ODNB notes that during his time in India Risley 's work legitimised an inquisitive methodology which had previously been resented by the colonial subjects and that 
 [ Risley ] cultivated an intimate knowledge of the peoples of India . In 1910 he asserted that a knowledge of facts concerning the religions and habits of the peoples of India equipped a civil servant with a passport to popular regard . ... On the processes by which non @-@ Aryan tribes are admitted into Hinduism he was recognized to be the greatest living authority ... His work completely revolutionized the native Indian view of ethnological inquiry . 
 = = England , and death = = 
 Back in England , having left the ICS in February 1910 , Risley was appointed Permanent Secretary of the judicial department of the India Office , succeeding Charles James Lyall . In January of that same year he became President of the Royal Anthropological Institute . 
 According to Crooke , " the strain of [ overseeing the Provincial Council reforms ] on a constitution which at no time was robust doubtless laid the seeds of the fatal disease which was soon to end his life . " Risley died at Wimbledon on 30 September 1911 , continuing his studies to the end despite suffering what the ODNB describes as a " distressing illness " . His widow remarried ; she died in 1934 . 
 = The X Factor ( Australia season 3 ) = 
 The X Factor is an Australian television reality music competition , based on the original UK series , to find new singing talent ; the winner of which receives a management contract and a Sony Music Australia recording contract . The third season premiered on the Seven Network on 29 August 2011 and ended on 22 November 2011 . The winner was Reece Mastin and his debut single " Good Night " was released after the final . Mastin was mentored throughout by Guy Sebastian , who won as mentor for the first time . There was only a one percent difference in the votes between Mastin and runner @-@ up Andrew Wishart . The season was presented by Luke Jacobz . Ronan Keating and Sebastian were the only judges from the previous season who returned , while Natalie Bassingthwaighte and Mel B joined the judging panel as replacements for former judges , Natalie Imbruglia and Kyle Sandilands . 
 The competition was split into several stages : auditions , bootcamp , home visits and live shows . Auditions in front of the show 's producers took place throughout March and April 2011 . The successful auditionees chosen by the producers were then invited back to the last set of auditions that took place in front of the judges and a live studio audience during May and June . After the auditions was bootcamp , where successful acts were split into four categories : Under 25 Boys ( male soloists aged 14 to 24 ) , Under 25 Girls ( female soloists aged 14 to 24 ) , Over 25s ( soloists aged 25 and over ) and Groups . Each judge was given a category to mentor and had to decide on their twelve acts after day two , and their six acts after day three . Special guest judges , including Wynter Gordon , Stephen Belafonte , Darren Hayes and The Veronicas , were brought in to help the judges decide their acts . Following bootcamp was the home visits stage , where each of the judges reduced their six acts to three , with help from more guest judges including Beyoncé , Melanie C , Jason Derulo , Good Charlotte and Leona Lewis . The live shows began on 19 September 2011 . 
 The third season sparked controversy , namely Mel B 's attitude towards the other judges , labeling them dishonest and boring . Controversy also occurred between Sebastian and contestant Mitchell Callaway ; Sebastian took aim at Callaway 's attitude to the competition following his performance on the third live performance show . There were also claims of a clash between Callaway and contestant Declan Sykes . The grand final decider was watched by 1 @.@ 99 million people , making it the highest rated television episode of the season . 
 = = Judges = = 
 On 16 March 2011 , judge Kyle Sandilands announced on his breakfast radio show , Kyle & Jackie O that he would not be returning to the judging panel for the third season . Of his decision , Sandilands said , " Not because I didn 't like it . I thought the show was great and it was great fun to do but it 's just too hectic , it 's too much work . So , I 've told Channel Seven , no . " On 31 March 2011 , it was announced that Natalie Bassingthwaighte would join the judging panel as a replacement for Natalie Imbruglia . When speaking of her role as a judge , Bassingthwaighte said she would focus on bringing an honest critique to the show and would guide " the artists through the competition " . In late April 2011 , it was confirmed that Mel B would be Sandilands ' replacement . Mel B said , " [ The contestants ] are either going to love me or hate me but it 's going to be a fun ride . I 'm really easy to get on with and I 'm a hard worker . I 'm firm but nice . " Guy Sebastian and Ronan Keating were the only judges from the second season who returned . 
 = = Selection process = = 
 = = = Auditions = = = 
 In 2011 , the minimum age for contestants to audition was changed to 14 years old , having previously been 16 years old . Auditions in front of the show 's producers began in March 2011 in five cities : Perth ( <unk> Hilton , 27 March ) , Adelaide ( AAMI Stadium , 29 March ) , Brisbane ( Gold Coast Convention and Exhibition Centre , 2 – 3 April ) , Sydney ( Australian Technology Park , 8 – 10 April ) and Melbourne ( <unk> Valley Racecourse , 15 – 17 April ) . The successful auditionees chosen by the producers were then invited back to the last set of auditions that took place in front of the judges and a live studio audience . These auditions were held in three cities : Brisbane ( Brisbane Entertainment Centre , 21 – 22 May ) , Melbourne ( Hisense Arena , 27 – 29 May ) , and Sydney ( Sydney Entertainment Centre , 2 – 3 June ) . 
 = = = Bootcamp = = = 
 The bootcamp stage was held in Sydney and was first broadcast on 7 September 2011 . On the first day of bootcamp , each judge was given a category to mentor and were joined by a celebrity guest judge to help them decide their top twelve acts . Sebastian was assisted by Wynter Gordon and was given the Under 25 Boys , Mel B was assisted by her husband Stephen Belafonte and was given the Under 25 Girls , Bassingthwaighte teamed up with Darren Hayes and was assigned the Over 25s , and Keating was assisted by The Veronicas and had the Groups . On the second day , the Boys each had to sing a song made famously by a female artist , the Over 25s got styled for a photo shoot and later each had to perform one song , the Girls had to perform choreography to either Adele 's " Rolling in the Deep " or Lady Gaga 's " Born This Way " , and the Groups held recording sessions with vocal producer <unk> Clark . On the third day of bootcamp , the judges along with their celebrity guest judges , narrowed down the contestants to six each . 
 The 24 successful acts were : 
 Under 25 Boys : Rob Baron , Trent Bell , Reece Mastin , Johnny Ruffo , Declan Sykes , Mali <unk> 
 Under 25 Girls : Tyla Bertolli , Sophie Metcalfe ( replaced Tara @-@ Lynn Sharrock due to Visa issues ) , Chantelle Morrell , Jacqui Newland , Christina Parie , Amy Walton 
 Over 25s : Mitchell Callaway , Pamela Cook , Marina Davis , Cleo Howman , Paige Phoenix , Andrew Wishart 
 Groups : Audio Vixen , Femme Da Funk , Hype ( previously known as Lazy J & Big Guy ) , Three Wishez , Up Front , Young Men Society 
 = = = Home visits = = = 
 The final round of the selection process , the home visits ( formerly the " judges ' houses " ) , saw the judges reduce their six acts to three . Each judge took their six acts to exclusive locations around the world . Sebastian and the Under 25 Boys travelled to New York City , where he was assisted by Beyoncé and her A @-@ Team , Mel B and the Under 25 Girls visited Hollywood , where they met up with Melanie C , Bassingthwaighte and the Over 25s travelled to Double Island , Queensland , where she was helped by Jason Derulo , and Keating and the Groups travelled to Los Angeles , California , where they were assisted by Good Charlotte and Leona Lewis , . After , the judges along with their celebrity guest judges , narrowed down the contestants to three each . 
 = = Finalists and categories = = 
 Key : 
 – Winner 
 – Runner @-@ up 
 – Third Place 
 = = Live shows = = 
 = = = Results summary = = = 
 Contestants ' colour key : 
 = = = Live show details = = = 
 = = = = Week 1 ( 19 / 20 September ) = = = = 
 Theme : Judges ' Choice 
 Celebrity performers : Bryan Adams ( " When You 're Gone " ) and Jack <unk> ( Medley : " Who 's Lovin ' You " / " Think " ) 
 Group performance : " Raise Your Glass " 
 Judges ' vote to eliminate 
 Sebastian : Cleo Howman – based on the final showdown performance 
 Mel B : Cleo Howman – backed her own act , Jacqui Newland 
 Bassingthwaighte : Jacqui Newland – backed her own act , Cleo Howman 
 Keating : Cleo Howman – was impressed by Newland 's passion during the final showdown 
 Notes 
 On the live performance show , the judges opened the show to perform their own hits together . Sebastian performed first on the piano , singing " Who 's That Girl " , followed by Bassingthwaighte 's " Someday Soon " . Keating then sang " Lovin ' Each Day " and Mel B took the stage last to perform Spice Girls ' " Who Do You Think You Are " . 
 = = = = Week 2 ( 27 / 28 September ) = = = = 
 Theme : Party Anthems 
 Celebrity performers : Kelly Clarkson ( " Mr. Know It All " ) and Sneaky Sound System ( " Big " ) 
 Group performance : " Party Rock Anthem " with LMFAO 
 Judges ' vote to eliminate 
 Sebastian : Tyla Bertolli – said he went for his guts 
 Bassingthwaighte : Tyla Bertolli – based on the final showdown performance 
 Keating : Jacqui Newland – gave no reason 
 Mel B : Tyla Bertolli – reasoning that Newland was better at controlling her nerves 
 Notes 
 This week 's shows were aired on Tuesday and Wednesday nights due to the Seven Network televising the 2011 Brownlow Medal . 
 The songs that the contestants sang in the live performance show were chosen by the Australian public . 
 Sebastian was absent on the live results show , but present through live telecast , thus eligible to vote . 
 = = = = Week 3 ( 3 / 4 October ) = = = = 
 Theme : Rock 
 Mentor : Alice Cooper 
 Celebrity performers : Natalie Bassingthwaighte ( " All We Have " ) and Simple Plan ( " Can 't Keep My Hands Off You " ) 
 Group performance : " Live and Let Die " 
 Judges ' vote to eliminate 
 Keating : Jacqui Newland – backed his own act , Young Men Society 
 Mel B : Young Men Society – backed her own act , Jacqui Newland 
 Bassingthwaighte : Jacqui Newland – gave no reason 
 Sebastian : Jacqui Newland – said that Young Men Society had to be in the Competition for a lot longer but admired Jacqui 's strength for being in the final showdown 3 weeks in a row . 
 = = = = Week 4 ( 10 / 11 October ) = = = = 
 Theme : The 90s 
 Celebrity performers : Vanessa <unk> ( " Amazing " ) and Chris Isaak ( " Oh , Pretty Woman " ) 
 Group performance : " Hold On " 
 Judges ' vote to eliminate 
 Keating : Johnny Ruffo – backed his own act , Audio Vixen 
 Sebastian : Audio Vixen – backed his own act , Johnny Ruffo 
 Bassingthwaighte : Johnny Ruffo – gave no reason 
 Mel B : Audio Vixen – decided to take it to deadlock and let the public vote reveal their decision 
 With the acts in the bottom two receiving two votes each , the result was deadlock and reverted to the earlier public vote . Audio Vixen received the fewest votes and were eliminated . 
 = = = = Week 5 ( 17 / 18 October ) = = = = 
 Theme : Number @-@ one hits 
 Celebrity performers : <unk> Childs ( " Ordinary Man " ) and Jason Derülo ( Medley : " It Girl " / " Don 't Wanna Go Home " ) 
 Group performance : Michael Jackson medley with Jason Derülo 
 Judges ' vote to eliminate 
 Keating : Declan Sykes – backed his own act , Young Men Society 
 Sebastian : Young Men Society – backed his own act , Declan Sykes 
 Mel B : Declan Sykes – based her decision on who would be more favourably internationally 
 Bassingthwaighte : Young Men Society – thought it would be fair to go to deadlock since its Young Men Society 's second time in the bottom two and Sykes ' first 
 With the acts in the bottom two receiving two votes each , the result was deadlock and reverted to the earlier public vote . Young Men Society received the fewest votes and were eliminated . 
 = = = = Week 6 ( 24 / 25 October ) = = = = 
 Theme : Australian hits 
 Celebrity performers : Aloe <unk> ( " I Need a Dollar " ) and Darren Hayes ( " Bloodstained Heart " ) 
 Group performance : Savage Garden medley with Darren Hayes 
 Judges ' vote to eliminate 
 Sebastian : Mitchell Callaway – backed his own act , Johnny Ruffo 
 Bassingthwaighte : Johnny Ruffo – backed her own act , Mitchell Callaway 
 Mel B : Mitchell Callaway – said Ruffo was the most improved since the first week 
 Keating : Johnny Ruffo – gave no reason 
 With the acts in the bottom two receiving two votes each , the result was deadlock and reverted to the earlier public vote . Callaway received the fewest votes and was eliminated . 
 = = = = Week 7 ( 31 October / 1 November ) = = = = 
 Theme : Dance 
 Celebrity performers : Ronan Keating ( " Arthur 's Theme ( Best That You Can Do ) " ) and Jessica Mauboy featuring Stan Walker ( " Galaxy " ) 
 Group performance : " We Run the Night " / " Get It " with Havana Brown 
 Judges ' vote to eliminate 
 Mel B : Reece Mastin – backed her own act , Christina Parie 
 Sebastian : Christina Parie – backed his own act , Reece Mastin 
 Keating : Christina Parie – gave no reason 
 Bassingthwaighte : Christina Parie – chose to eliminate Parie to " stay true to [ her ] self " 
 = = = = Week 8 ( 7 / 8 November ) = = = = 
 Theme : Legends 
 Celebrity performers : Ricki @-@ Lee ( " Raining Diamonds " ) and Susan Boyle ( " Autumn Leaves " ) 
 Group performance : " How Can We Be Lovers ? " with Michael Bolton 
 Judges ' vote to eliminate 
 Keating : Declan Sykes – backed his own act , Three Wishez 
 Sebastian : Three Wishez – backed his own act , Declan Sykes 
