 Bassingthwaighte : Declan Sykes – gave no reason 
 Mel B : Declan Sykes – gave no reason 
 = = = = Week 9 ( 14 / 15 November ) – Semi @-@ final = = = = 
 Theme : Pleasure and Pain 
 Mentor : Stevie Nicks 
 Celebrity performers : Florence and the Machine ( " Shake It Out " ) , Ed Sheeran ( " The A Team " ) and Stevie Nicks ( " Secret Love " ) 
 Group performance : Fleetwood Mac medley 
 Notes 
 For the first time this season , each act performed two songs – one uplifting and one emotional . 
 Also for the first time , there was no final showdown and the act that received the fewest public votes was immediately eliminated . 
 = = = = Week 10 ( 21 / 22 November ) – Grand Final = = = = 
 21 November 
 Theme : No theme ( songs from the auditions and live shows that the mentor believes will show their true talent ) ; superstar duets 
 Superstar duet performers : 
 The Fray with Andrew Wishart 
 Salt @-@ n @-@ Pepa with Johnny Ruffo 
 Kylie Minogue with Reece Mastin 
 Group performance : " Can 't Get You Out of My Head " / " Better the Devil You Know " / " All the Lovers " with Kylie Minogue 
 22 November 
 Guest performers : The Fray ( " Heartbeat " ) , Luke O 'Dell ( " Introvert <unk> " ) , Guy Sebastian ( " Don 't Worry Be Happy " ) and Kylie Minogue ( " I Should Be So Lucky " ) 
 Group Performances : 
 " I Like How It Feels " ( performed by top three finalists ) 
 " Imagine " with Emmanuel Kelly ( performed with top 12 finalists ) 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Controversy = = = 
 Three days before the season 's premiere , Mel B made comments about the other judges , labelling them dishonest and boring . She said , " I don 't care much for the other judges ... Ronan thinks he knows it all [ and ] Natalie is just too nice and really dishonest . Guy could just be boring , like ' get on with it . Keep it moving , brother . ' " During a radio interview with The Kyle and Jackie O Show on 29 August 2011 , Bassingthwaighte responded to Mel B 's comments saying , " I think it 's in fun – I hope so otherwise she deserves a slap . " Mel B appeared on the same radio show the following day and said , " They 're all scared of me and I love it , there 's got to be one bitch on the show so I might as well take that bloody crown . " 
 More controversy occurred after Sebastian took aim at contestant Mitchell Callaway 's attitude to the competition following his performance of " Run to Paradise " on the third live performance show . Sebastian told Callaway : " You 've got to have the right attitude to this competition , you 've got to be focused and to be honest , not be rude to people and have the work ethic . For you to not learn your lyrics and for you to at times be rude to crew , you really have to pull that in and rein that in because you won 't last long in this competition or this industry if you do that . " The following morning , Callaway 's mentor Bassingthwaighte spoke to radio station <unk> FM about the issue : 
 " It makes me feel sick actually , I feel sick in the stomach ... I feel Mitchell did the best performance that he 's done so far , I think Guy made the mistake of commenting on stuff that didn 't happen on camera . He said he 's rude to crew and needs to check his behaviour ... When he [ Mitchell ] got off stage he said , ' I 'm not coming back ' . " 
 However , later that same day , Callaway tweeted , " I 'm not gunna quit guys ... It 's not the Aussie way . I 'm not gunna let al u beautiful <unk> <unk> . Or Natalie after <unk> she 's done . " On the third live results show , Sebastian apologised to Callaway and said he " chose the wrong time and place to say it " . The Seven Network insiders revealed that a clash between Callaway and another contestant , Declan Sykes , was the real reason behind Sebastian 's on @-@ air rebuke . Sykes , who battles Asperger syndrome , reportedly took offence at being pricked with a pin by Callaway . 
 = = = Contestants = = = 
 Contestant Emmanuel Kelly appeared on the first episode of the season 's audition show on 29 August 2011 , and performed a rendition of John Lennon 's " Imagine " . His performance earned a standing ovation from the judges and the audience . Keating was full of praise for Kelly , who then moved into the next round of competition . Keating told Kelly : " I don 't think I 've ever been moved as I was by that performance . " Kelly and his brother Ahmed were adopted by Children First Foundation boss , Moira Kelly , who is also the guardian of the once @-@ conjoined Bangladesh twins , Krishna and Trishna . Kelly and his brother came from Iraq , where they were abandoned at an orphanage and both suffered limb deficiencies as a result of chemical warfare . During the third day of bootcamp , Sebastian eliminated Kelly from the competition , disappointed that he had forgotten words to his song the day before . 
 Another contestant , Luke O 'Dell , appeared on the third audition show on 31 August . After failing to impress the judges with his rendition of Kelly Clarkson 's " Since U Been Gone " , O 'Dell then sang an original song he wrote titled , " Introvert <unk> " , which made him an overnight internet sensation . The song entered the iTunes ' Top 100 chart overnight and landed O 'Dell thousands of fans on social media and his official YouTube channel . The song title also became a worldwide trending topic on Twitter for more than two hours , following his television performance of the song . Overnight commentary on Twitter and Facebook quickly labelled O 'Dell as the Australian version of Rebecca Black , who found fame with her song , " Friday " . However , O 'Dell failed to move through to the next round of the competition . Both Kelly and O 'Dell returned to perform on the live grand final decider show . 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 The premiere episode on 29 August 2011 topped the night 's overall ratings with 1 @,@ 319 @,@ 000 viewers , compared to the 1 @,@ 186 @,@ 000 viewers who tuned in to watch the premiere episode of the second season . All six of the audition episodes ranked first on their respective nights and peaked the highest the following night with an audience of 1 @,@ 690 @,@ 000 viewers . The first live performance show on 19 September 2011 , gained 1 @,@ 452 @,@ 000 viewers and topped the night 's overall ratings . The live grand final decider show on 22 November 2011 , was the highest rated episode of the third season with 1 @,@ 998 @,@ 000 viewers . 
 Colour key : 
 – Highest rating during the season 
 – Lowest rating during the season 
 = 1985 Giro d 'Italia = 
 The 1985 Giro d 'Italia was the 68th running of the Giro d 'Italia , one of cycling 's Grand Tours races . The Giro started in Palermo , on 16 May , with a 6 @.@ 6 km ( 4 @.@ 1 mi ) prologue and concluded in Lucca , on 9 June , with a 48 km ( 29 @.@ 8 mi ) individual time trial . A total of 180 riders from twenty teams entered the 22 @-@ stage race , that was won by Frenchman Bernard Hinault of the La Vie Claire team . The second and third places were taken by Italian Francesco Moser and American Greg LeMond , respectively . 
 Moser led the race for the first two days after winning the opening prologue . He lost the lead to Giuseppe Saronni after his team won the stage three team time trial . Upon conclusion of the event 's fourth stage , Roberto Visentini won sufficient time to take the race leader 's maglia rosa ( English : pink jersey ) from Saronni . Visentini held the jersey for a total of eight days of racing , during which the race traversed the Dolomites , before losing it to Hinault after the stage 12 time trial . Hinault then successfully defended his lead through the Alps , all the way to the race 's finish . 
 Amongst the other classifications that the race awarded , Johan van der Velde of Vini Ricordi @-@ Pinarello won the points classification , José Luis Navarro of <unk> Cusin @-@ Zor won the mountains classification , and <unk> @-@ Bianchi 's Alberto Volpi completed the Giro as the best neo @-@ professional in the general classification , finishing tenth overall . <unk> @-@ <unk> @-@ Cierre finishing as the winners of the team classification , ranking each of the twenty teams contesting the race by lowest cumulative time . 
 = = Teams = = 
 A total of twenty teams were invited to participate in the 1985 Giro d 'Italia , six of which were based outside of Italy . Each team sent a squad of nine riders , which meant that the race started with a peloton of 180 cyclists . The presentation of the teams – where each team 's roster and manager are introduced in front the media and local dignitaries – took place at the Verona Arena on 15 May . From the riders that began this edition , 135 made it to the finish in Lucca . 
 The teams entering the race were : 
 = = Pre @-@ race favorites = = 
 The starting peloton did include the 1984 winner , Francesco Moser . Spanish rider Marino Lejarreta decided not to race the Vuelta a España in favor of racing the Giro . Luis Gómez , of El Pais , believed Lejarreta to be in top form going into the race and that he could challenge for the overall victory . Author Bill McGann believed that going into the race Hinault was " the world 's most potent racing machine " and that Moser would have to ride very well in order to repeat as champion . Javier Dalmases , an El Mundo sportswriter , believed that there was no clear favorite for the race . Mario Fossati of La Repubblica named Moser , Saronni , Hinault , and Greg LeMond as contenders for the overall crown . Prominent French rider Laurent Fignon did not participate in the race due to an inflamed Achilles tendon . 
 = = Route and stages = = 
 The route for the 1985 edition of the Giro d 'Italia was revealed to the public by head organizer Vincenzo Torriani on 16 February 1985 . Covering a total of 3 @,@ 998 @.@ 6 km ( 2 @,@ 484 @.@ 6 mi ) , it included four time trials ( three individual and one for teams ) , and eleven stages with categorized climbs that awarded mountains classification points . Three of these eleven stages had summit finishes : stage 4 , to Selva di Val Gardena ; stage 14 , to Gran Sasso d 'Italia ; and stage 20 , to <unk> di <unk> . The organizers chose to include two rest days . When compared to the previous year 's race , the race was 190 @.@ 6 km ( 118 mi ) longer and contained the same amount of time trials and rest days . In addition , this race contained the same amount of stages , but one more set of half stages . 
 Luis Gómez , an El Pais writer , believed that the route was designed to benefit the Italian participants , with there being three individual time trials , the team time trial being flat , and most stages being primarily flat . El Mundo writer Javier Dalmases believed that the route was purposefully less mountainous so that an Italian would win the race , citing that this route favored the likes of Giuseppe Saronni or Moreno Argentin . La Stampa 's Gian Paolo Ormezzano thought overall easiness of the course — the few mountains and summit finishes — added some mystery as to who could win . 
 = = Race overview = = 
 The event began with a 6 @.@ 6 km ( 4 @.@ 1 mi ) prologue around the city of Verona . The brief time trial leg was won by Francesco Moser , who finished seven seconds faster than the second placed rider . The following day was the first mass @-@ start stage of the race , which culminated in a bunch sprint that was won by Atala @-@ Ofmega @-@ Campagnolo 's Urs Freuler . The second stage was a team time trial that stretched 38 km ( 23 @.@ 6 mi ) . Del Tongo @-@ Colnago won the leg and their rider , Giuseppe Saronni , earned enough of an advantage to take race lead and don the race leader 's maglia rosa ( English : pink jersey ) . The third stage saw Saronni expand upon his lead by winning the leg after out @-@ sprinting the rest of the leading group . The fourth stage took the race into the Dolomites , as well as featuring a summit finish on Selva di Val Gardena . Spanish rider Marino Lejarreta attacked with around 15 km ( 9 @.@ 3 mi ) to go and only Roberto Visentini , Bernard Hinault , Hubert Saiz , and Gianbattista Baronchelli were able to mark his move . The group of five stayed together to the finish as Saiz took the stage victory by edging out Hinault . Visentini took the race lead after Saronni finished over four minutes behind , while another Italian favorite Francesco Moser finished two minutes behind . 
 The route went through more mountains in the fifth stage . With large amounts of rain , the peloton made a truce and the stage saw few attacks . A three @-@ man breakaway formed with around twelve kilometers to go . The riders stayed together and all sprinted for the stage win , which was originally won by Roberto Pagnin ; however , due to his non @-@ linear sprint line that interfered with the two other riders , he was relegated to second place and the original second @-@ place finisher , Emanuele Bombini , was promoted and declared winner . The next day of racing ended with a bunch sprint won by Frank Hoste , but a crash with two kilometers to go from the finish saw general classification contenders Visentini and Saronni , as well as others , lose twenty seconds . The seventh stage saw a six @-@ man breakaway survive and finish ahead of the peloton by almost two minutes as Orlando <unk> won the day . 
 The twelfth stage of the race was 38 km ( 23 @.@ 6 mi ) individual time trial . Hinault won the stage by fifty @-@ three seconds over Moser . Hinault 's time gains were enough to give him the race lead by a minute and fourteen seconds . The thirteenth stage saw Freuler win his second stage of the race by virtue of a sprint finish . Italian Franco Chioccioli won the mountainous fourteenth leg of the event after attacking on the descent of the third climb of the day . The following day of racing began with a twenty @-@ man breakaway forming off the front of the peloton ; however , all but one rider was caught with ten kilometers remaining . With under five kilometers left , another four @-@ man attack group formed , of which 7 @-@ Eleven 's Ron Kiefel survived . Kiefel caught the lone remaining rider in front and went on to win the stage as the peloton crossed the line three seconds behind . This was the first stage victory by an American in the history of the Giro d 'Italia . The sixteenth stage saw the day of racing end with a field sprint which was won by Saronni . 
 Race leader Hinault and his team , La Vie Claire , allowed a breakaway to get almost a twenty @-@ minute advantage over the peloton during the race 's seventeenth stage , before other general classification contenders ' teams stepped in to help with the chase . The attack group reached the finish line around ten minutes faster than the peloton . Swiss rider Daniel <unk> won the stage ahead of Giovanni Mantovani . Paolo Rosola won his second stage of the event as the eighteenth stage resulted in a bunch sprint . The following day 's race route was altered the night before by Torriani , which removed six kilometers off the climb of Great St Bernard Pass , while it still contained the full climb of the Cima Coppi , the Simplon Pass . The stage saw a large group of fifty @-@ three riders cross the finish line together , with Moser at the head , taking his second stage victory of the event . Former race leader Visentini , after losing a significant amount of time during the stage 16 individual time trial , abandoned the race during the nineteenth stage . 
 Stage 20 was a brief 58 km ( 36 mi ) that featured a seventeen kilometer ascent to finish the leg . La Vie Claire drove a hard pace throughout the stage and fractured the peloton in the process . American Andrew Hampsten attacked with around nineteen kilometers to go and won the stage by a minute over the second @-@ place finisher . The penultimate stage of the race was culminated with a field sprint , which was won by Freuler . The final stage of the race was a 48 km ( 30 mi ) individual time trial that stretched from Lido di Camaiore to Lucca . Moser was able to win the stage by seven seconds on race leader Hinault , which was not enough to overcome Hinault and take first . This meant Hinault won his third Giro d 'Italia . 
 Six riders achieved multiple stage victories : Freuler ( stages 1 , 13 , and 21 ) , Moser ( prologue and stages 19 and 22 ) , da Silva ( stages 8b and 10 ) , <unk> ( stages 8a and 11 ) , Saronni ( stages 3 and 16 ) , and Rosola ( stages 9 and 18 ) . Stage wins were achieved by nine of the twenty competing squads , six of which won multiple stages . Del Tongo @-@ Colnago collected a total of five wins through the team time trial , Saronni , Bombini ( stage 5 ) , and Hoste ( stage 6 ) . Atala @-@ Ofmega @-@ Campagnolo amassed a total of four stage wins through Freuler and <unk> ( stage 17 ) . Malvor @-@ Bottecchia also secured four stage wins through da Silva and <unk> . <unk> @-@ Bianchi obtained two stage victories with Rosola . Gis Gelati @-@ Trentino <unk> collected two stage successes with Moser . 7 @-@ Eleven recorded two stage wins with Kiefel ( stage 15 ) and Hampsten ( stage 20 ) . <unk> @-@ <unk> , <unk> @-@ <unk> @-@ Cierre , and La Vie Claire all won a single stage at the Giro , the first through <unk> ( stage 4 ) , the second through <unk> ( stage 7 ) , and the third by Hinault ( stage 12 ) , and the fourth with Chioccioli ( stage 14 ) . 
 = = Classification leadership = = 
 Four different jerseys were worn during the 1985 Giro d 'Italia . The leader of the general classification – calculated by adding the stage finish times of each rider , and allowing time bonuses for the first four finishers on mass @-@ start stages – wore a pink jersey . This classification is the most important of the race , and its winner is considered as the winner of the Giro . 
 For the points classification , which awarded a purple ( or cyclamen ) jersey to its leader , cyclists were given points for finishing a stage in the top 15 ; additional points could also be won in intermediate sprints . The green jersey was awarded to the mountains classification leader . In this ranking , points were won by reaching the summit of a climb ahead of other cyclists . Each climb was ranked as either first , second or third category , with more points available for higher category climbs . The Cima Coppi , the race 's highest point of elevation , awarded more points than the other first category climbs . The Cima Coppi for this Giro was the Simplon Pass . The first rider to cross the Simplon Pass was Colombian rider <unk> Montoya . The white jersey was worn by the leader of young rider classification , a ranking decided the same way as the general classification , but considering only neo @-@ professional cyclists ( in their first three years of professional racing ) . Although no jersey was awarded , there was also one classification for the teams , in which the stage finish times of the best three cyclists per team were added ; the leading team was the one with the lowest total time . 
 The rows in the following table correspond to the jerseys awarded after that stage was run . 
 = = Final standings = = 
 = = = General classification = = = 
 = Megami Tensei Gaiden : Last Bible = 
 Megami Tensei Gaiden : Last Bible ( <unk> Last Bible , lit . " Goddess Reincarnation Side Story : Last Bible " ) is a role @-@ playing video game series developed by Multimedia Intelligence Transfer , Sega , and <unk> , and published by Atlus and Sega for multiple platforms . The first game of the series , Revelations : The Demon Slayer , was released in 1992 ; this is the only title in the series to have been released in English . After The Demon Slayer , two sequels and two spin @-@ off titles have been released . In the main series titles , players explore the game world and fight monsters in menu @-@ based battles ; players can also attempt to recruit monsters to their party , and can fuse two allied monsters into a single new one to try to get stronger monsters . The spin @-@ off title Another Bible is a turn @-@ based strategy game , while Last Bible Special is a role @-@ playing game controlled from a first person perspective . 
 The series is part of the media franchise Megami Tensei , but as Last Bible was developed for a wider audience , including children , the series is toned down compared to Shin Megami Tensei . For instance , players meet monsters rather than demons , and most of the Last Bible titles take place in a medieval fantasy world . The music for the first two games was composed by Hiroyuki Yanada and Iwao Mitsunaga , while Yanada composed the music for Last Bible III on his own , and Manami Matsumae composed the music for Another Bible . Critics have been mostly positive to the series , but the games ' graphics have received mixed responses . The music , particularly the one in the first two games , has been positively received . Several music albums with the games ' soundtracks have been released by Sweep Records . 
 = = Titles = = 
 Revelations : The Demon Slayer , known in Japan as Megami Tensei Gaiden : Last Bible , is the first game in the series . It was released for Game Boy on December 23 , 1992 , in Japan , for Sega Game Gear on April 22 , 1994 , in Japan , for Game Boy Color on March 19 , 1999 , in Japan and in August , 1999 , in North America , and for mobile phones on January 16 , 2008 , in Japan . The game follows El , a boy who studies magic with his teacher <unk> . 
 Megami Tensei Gaiden : Last Bible II is the second game in the series . It was released for Game Boy on November 19 , 1993 , for Game Boy Color on April 16 , 1999 , and for mobile phones on April 23 , 2009 . The game follows Yuri , a boy who was raised by monsters . 
 Last Bible III is the third numbered game in the series . It was released for Super Famicom on March 4 , 1995 , and for mobile phones on September 17 , 2010 . The game follows Ciel , a boy who leaves his home town to travel to go on a journey . 
 Another Bible is a spin @-@ off game . It was released for Game Boy on March 4 , 1995 , and for mobile phones on June 18 , 2009 . The game follows <unk> , a boy who saves a girl from bandits and goes on adventures with her . 
 Megami Tensei Gaiden : Last Bible Special is the fifth game in the series . It was released for Sega Game Gear on March 24 , 1995 . The game takes place during biblical times , and follows a hero named <unk> . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Revelations : The Demon Slayer , Last Bible II , and Last Bible III are role @-@ playing video games which all have similar gameplay . Players explore the game world and fight various types of monsters . During battles , players choose commands for their characters to do from a menu . Players can attack with both physical attacks and magic spells ; different kinds of magic are effective against different types of monsters . Characters in players ' party learn new spells throughout the course of the game . By defeating monsters , players gain experience points and money . As characters gain more experience points , players get access to points which he or she can add to the characters ' attributes ; for instance , players can add points to a character 's speed attribute , which allows that character to move earlier during battles . Players can use money that they 've earned through battles to buy armor , weapons , and items , in shops found throughout the game world . 
 Players can choose to talk to monsters instead of fighting them , in order to attempt to recruit them to their party . They can choose which of their characters they want to use to recruit monsters ; the different characters vary in how easily they can recruit monsters . Players can also choose from their allied monsters when deciding which character they should use to recruit monsters . Players can use a type of magic called " Combine " to fuse two allied monsters into a single new monster ; by doing this , players can get access to stronger monsters . In Last Bible II , players can increase the strength of their allied monsters by giving them accessories . In Last Bible III , players have access to a gauge that shows how the answers they give during conversations affect the monsters . The Demon Slayer includes an unlockable multiplayer mode in which two players can let their respective parties fight each other . 
 Another Bible is a turn @-@ based strategy game in which players move their characters on tiles and fight enemies . The gameplay loops through three types of segments : preparation for battles , battles , and towns . During the preparation segments , players choose which characters they want to send out , and during the town segments , players buy and sell items and collect information that is required for getting to the next area . Similarly to the numbered Last Bible titles , players can recruit and fuse monsters in Another Bible . Last Bible Special is a role @-@ playing game that is controlled from a first person perspective , and in which players aim to travel through four dungeons . 
 = = Development = = 
 Last Bible is part of the media franchise Megami Tensei , but was made for a wider audience , including children , and is toned down compared to the Shin Megami Tensei games . For instance , players meet monsters rather than demons , and the games take place in a medieval fantasy world . Several companies have been involved in the production of the series : the numbered titles were developed by Multimedia Intelligence Transfer ; the Sega Game Gear version of Revelations : The Demon Slayer was developed by Sega ; and the mobile phone versions of The Demon Slayer , Last Bible II , Last Bible III , and Another Bible were developed by <unk> . Atlus published all the games except Last Bible Special and the Sega Game Gear version of The Demon Slayer , which were published by Sega . Atlus also localized and published the Game Boy Color version of The Demon Slayer in the US ; this is the only game in the series that has been released in English . 
 The music in The Demon Slayer and Last Bible II was composed by Hiroyuki Yanada and Iwao Mitsunaga , and includes progressive rock music . Yanada also composed the music in Last Bible III , but without Mitsunaga ; the music in it includes examples of bossa nova . The music in Another Bible was composed by Manami Matsumae , and includes examples of jazz . Sweep Records has published albums several of the games ' soundtracks as part of their Discovery series , in which they release soundtrack albums for game music that had previously not been released on an album . The album Megami Tensei Gaiden : Last Bible Soundtrack was released on September 15 , 2010 ; Megami Tensei Gaiden : Last Bible II Soundtrack was released on October 7 , 2010 ; Megami Tensei Gaiden : Another Bible Soundtrack was released on January 19 , 2011 ; and Last Bible III Soundtrack was released on October 5 , 2011 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Adam Cleveland at IGN called Revelations : The Demon Slayer a fun but not innovative game . The American game magazine Nintendo Power did however find it innovative ; for instance , they cited the automatic battle option . Cleveland disliked the monster conversation system , which he found irritating ; he said that players never know what answer they should give a monster , and that the questions the monsters ask feel monotone due to how often they are repeated . Writers for the Japanese game magazine Famitsu thought the monster fusion system was fun . In their review of Last Bible III , they commented on how different the game is from the Megami Tensei series , and instead compared it to Final Fantasy . Kurt Kalata and Christopher J. Snelgrove wrote for Hardcore Gaming 101 that while The Demon Slayer was not by any means an outstanding game , it was one of few competent role @-@ playing games on Game Boy . They found Last Bible III to be the best game in the series . 
 Cleveland liked the graphics in the Game Boy Color version of The Demon Slayer , and said that it reminded him of the " 8 @-@ bit wonders of years ago " . Nintendo Power said that the graphics in the Game Boy Color version looked good , but that they lack the richness of most new games on the system . They disliked the backgrounds , which they called " very bland " . Famitsu thought the graphics in Last Bible III were good , but that the graphics in Another Bible looked cheap . Kalata and Snelgrove called the color palette in the Game Boy Color versions of the first two games awful , but said that the Sega Game Gear version of the first game looked much better , and that it was very nice for a handheld game ; they specifically pointed out its cinematic sequences , which they called impressive . They thought the character designs in Another Bible were " overly adorable " , and said that there are graphical issues in the game when players move . They appreciated the backgrounds in Last Bible Special , and commented that some monster designs in Last Bible III were strange . 
 Nintendo Power called the music in The Demon Slayer surprisingly good . Cleveland also liked it , and said that it always fits in with all the situations it is played in . Kalata and Snelgrove called it catchy . Don at Square Enix Music Online said that The Demon Slayer has a solid soundtrack for a Game Boy role @-@ playing game , and specifically highlighted " Opening " as a well @-@ composed piece , with its " exotic and mysterious " atmosphere . Patrick Gann at RPGFan said that The Demon Slayer has fantastic and under @-@ appreciated music , but that the soundtrack is short . Don found the soundtrack of Last Bible II to be better than the first game 's , and said that several pieces , including " Temple " , " Field " , " Boss Battle " , and " Dungeon " , were better than their counterparts in the first game . He said that " Gaia " , the piece that is played during the final boss battle , probably was the best of all pieces in the first two games . Gann did also find Last Bible II 's music to be better than the first game 's . He liked that the soundtrack was longer than the first game 's , and how he could not find any melodies that had been " borrowed " from The Demon Slayer 's soundtrack . Gann found Last Bible III 's sound font to be weak , but liked several of the compositions . Both Don and Gann thought that Another Bible 's music was worse than the music in previous games in the series . Don did however appreciate several pieces , including " Beginning Moment " , which he thought was catchy and had a fantastic melody , and " Hiding All Feeling Inside " , which he found to be the most successful piece in the game 's soundtrack . 
 = English National Opera = 
 English National Opera ( ENO ) is an opera company based in London , resident at the London Coliseum in St. Martin 's Lane . It is one of the two principal opera companies in London , along with The Royal Opera , Covent Garden . ENO 's productions are sung in English . 
 The company 's origins were in the late 19th century , when the philanthropist Emma Cons , later assisted by her niece Lilian Baylis , presented theatrical and operatic performances at the Old Vic in a rough area of London for the benefit of local people . From those beginnings , Baylis built up both the opera and the theatre companies , and later added a ballet company ; these evolved into the ENO , the Royal National Theatre and The Royal Ballet . 
 Baylis acquired and rebuilt Sadler 's Wells theatre in north London , a larger house , better suited to opera than the Old Vic . The opera company grew there into a permanent ensemble in the 1930s . During the Second World War , the theatre was closed and the company toured British towns and cities . After the war , the company returned to its home , but it continued to expand and improve , and by the 1960s a larger theatre was needed . In 1968 , the company moved to the London Coliseum in the heart of London and adopted its present name in 1974 . The company has survived several proposals to merge it with The Royal Opera . 
 Among the conductors associated with the company have been Colin Davis , Reginald Goodall , Charles Mackerras , Mark Elder and Edward Gardner . In 2015 Mark Wigglesworth was appointed music director . ENO is known for its emphasis on the dramatic aspect of opera , with productions , sometimes controversial , by directors including David Pountney , Jonathan Miller , Nicholas Hytner , Phyllida Lloyd and Calixto Bieito . In addition to the core operatic repertoire , the company has presented a wide range of works , from early operas by Monteverdi to new commissions , operetta and Broadway shows . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Foundations = = = 
 In 1889 Emma Cons , a Victorian philanthropist who ran the Old Vic theatre in a working @-@ class area of London , began presenting regular fortnightly performances of opera excerpts . Although the theatre licensing laws of the day prevented full costumed performances , Cons presented her public with condensed versions of well @-@ known operas , always sung in English . Among the performers were well @-@ known singers such as Charles Santley . These operatic evenings quickly became more popular than the drama that Cons had been staging . In 1898 , she recruited her niece Lilian Baylis to help run the theatre . At the same time she appointed Charles Corri as the Old Vic 's musical director . Baylis and Corri , despite many disagreements , shared a passionate belief in popularising opera , hitherto generally the preserve of the rich and fashionable . They worked on a tiny budget , with an amateur chorus and a professional orchestra of only 18 players , for whom Corri rescored the instrumental parts of the operas . By the early years of the 20th century , the Old Vic was able to present semi @-@ staged versions of Wagner operas . 
 Emma Cons died in 1912 , leaving her estate , including the Old Vic , to Baylis , who dreamed of transforming the theatre into a " people 's opera house " . In the same year , Baylis obtained a licence allowing the Old Vic to stage full performances of operas . In the 1914 – 15 season , Baylis staged 16 operas and 16 plays ( 13 of which were by Shakespeare ) . In the years after the First World War Baylis 's Shakespearean productions , which starred some of the leading actors from London 's West End , attracted national attention , as her shoe @-@ string opera productions did not . The opera , however , remained her first priority . The actor @-@ manager Robert Atkins , who worked closely with Baylis on her Shakespearean productions , recalled , " Opera , on Thursday and Saturday nights , played to bulging houses . " 
 = = = Vic @-@ Wells = = = 
 By the 1920s it was clear to Baylis that the Old Vic no longer sufficed to house both her theatre and her opera companies . She noticed the empty and derelict Sadler 's Wells theatre in Rosebery Avenue , Islington , on the other side of London from the Old Vic , and decided to seek to run it in tandem with her existing theatre . 
 Baylis made a public appeal for funds in 1925 , and with the help of the Carnegie Trust and many others acquired the freehold of Sadler 's Wells . Work started on the site in 1926 and by Christmas 1930 a completely new theatre seating 1 @,@ 640 was ready for occupation . The first production there , a fortnight 's run from 6 January 1931 , was Shakespeare 's Twelfth Night . The first opera , given on 20 January , was Carmen . Eighteen operas were staged during the first season . 
 The new theatre was more expensive to run than the Old Vic ; a larger orchestra and more singers were needed , and box office receipts were at first inadequate . In 1932 the Birmingham Post commented that the Vic @-@ Wells opera performances did not reach the standards of the Vic @-@ Wells Shakespeare productions . Baylis strove to improve operatic standards , while at the same time fending off attempts by Sir Thomas Beecham to absorb the opera company into a joint enterprise with Covent Garden , where he was in command . She was at first tempted by the financial security the proposal seemed to offer , but was convinced by her friends and advisers such as Edward J. Dent and Clive Carey that it was not in the interests of her regular audience . This view received strong support from the press ; The Times wrote , " The Old Vic began by offering opera of some sort to people who hardly knew what the word meant ... under a wise , fostering guidance it has gradually worked upwards ... Any kind of amalgamation which made it the poor relation of the ' Grand ' season would be disastrous . " 
 At first Baylis presented both drama and opera at each of her theatres ; the companies were known as the " Vic @-@ Wells " . However , for both aesthetic and financial reasons , by 1934 the Old Vic had become the home of the spoken drama , while Sadler 's Wells housed the opera and ballet company , the latter of which had been founded by Baylis and Ninette de Valois in 1930 . Lawrance Collingwood joined Corri as resident conductor , and with the increased number of productions , guest conductors were recruited , including Geoffrey Toye and Anthony Collins . The increasing success of the new ballet company helped to subsidise the high cost of opera productions , enabling a further increase in the size of the orchestra , to 48 players . Among the singers in the opera company were Joan Cross and Edith Coates . In the 1930s , the company presented standard repertoire works including operas by Mozart , Verdi , Wagner and Puccini , lighter works by Balfe , Donizetti , Offenbach and Johann Strauss , some novelties , among which were operas by Holst , Ethel Smyth and Charles Villiers Stanford , and an unusual attempt at staging an oratorio , Mendelssohn 's Elijah . 
 In November 1937 Baylis died of a heart attack . Her three companies continued under the direction of her appointees , Tyrone Guthrie at the Old Vic , in overall charge of both theatres , with de Valois running the ballet , and Carey and two colleagues running the opera . In the Second World War the government requisitioned Sadler 's Wells as a refuge for those made homeless by air @-@ raids . Guthrie decided to keep the opera going as a small touring ensemble of 20 performers . Between 1942 and the end of the war the company toured continuously , visiting 87 venues . It was led by Joan Cross , who managed the company and when necessary sang leading soprano roles in its productions . The size of the company was increased to 50 and then to 80 . By 1945 its members included singers from a new generation such as Peter Pears and Owen Brannigan , and the conductor Reginald Goodall . 
 = = = Sadler 's Wells Opera = = = 
 As the war drew to an end , the government considered the future of opera in Britain . Like Sadler 's Wells , the Royal Opera House had presented no opera or ballet since 1939 . The Council for the Encouragement of Music and the Arts ( CEMA ) , the official body charged with dispensing the modest public subsidy recently introduced , considered its options and concluded that a new Covent Garden company should be established . It was to be a year @-@ round , permanent ensemble , singing in English , instead of the short , starry international seasons of pre @-@ war years . Many saw this as an opportunity to merge the two companies , as the modus operandi of the new Covent Garden company was now similar to that of Sadler 's Wells . However , David Webster , who was appointed to run Covent Garden , though keen to secure de Valois ' ballet company for Covent Garden , did not want the Sadler 's Wells opera company . To him the old company was worthy but " dowdy " and " stodgy " . Even with a policy of singing in English , he believed he could assemble a better company . The management of Sadler 's Wells was unwilling to lose its company 's name and tradition . It was agreed that the two companies should remain separate . 
 The continued existence of Sadler 's Wells Opera was threatened by divisions within the company . Cross announced her intention to re @-@ open Sadler 's Wells theatre with Peter Grimes , by the young Benjamin Britten , with herself and Pears in the leading roles ; there were many complaints from company members about supposed favouritism and the " cacophony " of Britten 's score . Peter Grimes opened in June 1945 and was hailed by public and critics ; its box @-@ office takings matched or exceeded those for La bohème and Madame Butterfly , which were being staged concurrently by the company . However the rift within the company was irreparable ; Cross , Britten and Pears severed their ties with Sadler 's Wells in December 1945 and founded the English Opera Group . The departure of the ballet company to Covent Garden two months later deprived Sadler 's Wells of an important source of income ; the ballet had been profitable and had since its inception subsidised the opera company . 
 Clive Carey , who had been in Australia during the war , was brought back to replace Joan Cross and rebuild the company after its wartime privations and recent departures . The critic Philip Hope @-@ Wallace wrote in 1946 that Carey had begun to make a difference , but that Sadler 's Wells needed " a big heave to get out of mediocrity " . In the same year The Times Literary Supplement asked whether the Old Vic and Sadler 's Wells companies would stick modestly to their old bases " or shall they boldly embrace the ideal of a National Theatre and a National Opera in English ? " Carey left in 1947 and his place at the head of the company was taken in January 1948 by a triumvirate comprising James Robertson as musical director , Michael Mudie as his assistant conductor and Norman Tucker in charge of administration . From October 1948 , Tucker was given sole control . Mudie became ill , and the young Charles Mackerras was appointed to deputise for him . 
 By 1950 Sadler 's Wells was receiving a public subsidy of £ 40 @,@ 000 a year ; Covent Garden received £ 145 @,@ 000 . Tucker had to give up the option of staging the premiere of Britten 's Billy Budd , lacking the resources to do it justice . He was keen to improve the dramatic aspects of opera production , and eminent theatrical directors including Michel Saint @-@ Denis , George Devine and Glen Byam Shaw worked on Sadler 's Wells productions in the 1950s . New repertoire was explored ; at Mackerras 's urging Janáček 's Káťa Kabanová was presented for the first time in Britain . Standards and company morale were improving ; The Manchester Guardian summed up the 1950 – 51 London opera season as " Excitement at Sadler 's Wells : Lack of Distinction at Covent Garden " and judged Sadler 's Wells to have moved " into the front rank of opera houses " . 
 The company continued to leave Rosebery Avenue for summer tours to British cities and towns . The Arts Council ( successor to CEMA ) was sensitive to the charge that since 1945 far fewer opera performances had been given in the provinces . The small Carl Rosa Opera Company toured constantly , but the Covent Garden company visited only those few cities with theatres big enough to accommodate it . In the mid @-@ 1950s renewed calls were made for a reorganisation of Britain 's opera companies . There were proposals for a new home for Sadler 's Wells on the South Bank of the Thames near the Royal Festival Hall , but these fell through because the government was unwilling to fund the building . Once again there was serious talk of merging Covent Garden and Sadler 's Wells . The Sadler 's Wells board countered by proposing a closer working arrangement with Carl Rosa . When it became clear that this would require the Sadler 's Wells company to tour for 30 weeks every year , and practically destroy its presence on the London opera scene , Tucker , his deputy Stephen Arlen , and his musical director Alexander Gibson resigned . The proposals were modified , and the three withdrew their resignations . In 1960 the Carl Rosa Company was wound up ; Sadler 's Wells took over some of its members and many of its touring dates , setting up " two interchangeable companies of equal standing " , one of which played at Sadler 's Wells theatre while the other was on the road . 
 By the late 1950s Covent Garden was gradually abandoning its policy of productions in the vernacular ; such stars as Maria Callas would not relearn their roles in English . This made it easier for Tucker to point up the difference between the two London opera companies . While Covent Garden engaged international stars , Sadler 's Wells focused on young British and Commonwealth performers . Colin Davis was appointed musical director in succession to Gibson in 1961 . The repertoire continued to mix the staples and the unfamiliar . Novelties in Davis 's time included Pizzetti 's Murder in the Cathedral , Stravinsky 's Oedipus rex , Richard Rodney Bennett 's The Mines of Sulphur and more Janáček . Sadler 's Wells 's traditional policy of giving all operas in English continued , with only two exceptions : Oedipus rex , which was sung in Latin , and Monteverdi 's L 'Orfeo , sung in Italian , for reasons not clear to the press . In January 1962 the company gave its first Gilbert and Sullivan opera , Iolanthe ; it opened on the day on which the Savoy operas came out of copyright and the D 'Oyly Carte monopoly ended . It was well received ( it was successfully revived for many seasons until 1978 ) and was followed by a production of The Mikado in May of the same year . 
 The Islington theatre was by now clearly too small to allow the company to achieve any further growth . A study conducted for the Arts Council reported that in the late 1960s the two Sadler 's Wells companies comprised 278 salaried performers and 62 guest singers . The company had experience of playing in a large West End theatre ; in 1958 its sell @-@ out production of The Merry Widow had transferred to the 2 @,@ 351 @-@ seat London Coliseum for a summer season . Ten years later the lease of the Coliseum became available ; Stephen Arlen , who had succeeded Tucker as managing director , was the driving force behind moving the company . After intense negotiations and fund @-@ raising , a ten @-@ year lease was signed in 1968 . 
 One of the company 's last productions at the Islington theatre was Wagner 's The Mastersingers , conducted by Goodall in 1968 , which 40 years later was described by Gramophone magazine as " legendary " . The company left Sadler 's Wells with a revival of the work with which it had re @-@ opened the theatre in 1945 , Peter Grimes . Its last performance at the Rosebery Avenue theatre was on 15 June 1968 . 
 = = = Coliseum = = = 
 The company , retaining the title " Sadler 's Wells Opera " , opened at the Coliseum on 21 August 1968 , with a new production of Mozart 's Don Giovanni , directed by Sir John Gielgud . This was not well received , but the company rapidly established itself with a succession of highly praised productions . Stephen Arlen died in January 1972 , and was succeeded as managing director by Lord Harewood . 
 The success of the 1968 Mastersingers was followed in the 1970s by the company 's first Ring cycle , conducted by Goodall , with a cast including Norman Bailey , Rita Hunter and Alberto Remedios . The cycle had a new translation by Andrew Porter and designs by Ralph Koltai . In Harewood 's view , among the highlights of the first ten years at the Coliseum were the Ring , Prokofiev 's War and Peace , and Richard Strauss 's Salome and Der Rosenkavalier . 
 The company 's musical director from 1970 to 1977 was Charles Mackerras . Harewood praised his exceptional versatility , with a range " from The House of the Dead to Patience . " The critic Alan Blyth described him as an expert on authenticity in performing Handel , a pioneer of Janáček , " a scholarly Mozartian ... a sure advocate of French opera , a strong , no @-@ nonsense interpreter of the Viennese classics , an expert in early 19th @-@ century operas by Donizetti and others , and an abiding admirer of Gilbert and Sullivan " . Among the operas he conducted for the company were Handel 's Julius Caesar starring Janet Baker and Valerie Masterson ; five Janáček operas ; The Marriage of Figaro with pioneering use of 18th century performing style ; Massenet 's Werther ; Donizetti 's Mary Stuart with Baker ; and Sullivan 's Patience . The company took the production of the last to the Vienna Festival in 1975 , along with Britten 's Gloriana . Mackerras was succeeded as musical director by Sir Charles Groves , who was unwell and unhappy during his brief tenure in 1978 – 79 . Groves was relieved to hand over to Mark Elder , who found him " immensely encouraging and supportive " . 
 From the outset Arlen and then Harewood had wanted to change the company 's name to reflect the fact that it was no longer based at Sadler 's Wells theatre . Byam Shaw commented , " The one major setback the Sadler 's Wells Opera Company suffered from its transplant was that <unk> taxi drivers kept on taking their patrons up to Rosebery Avenue " Harewood considered it an elementary rule that " you must not carry the name of one theatre if you are playing in another one . " Covent Garden , protective of its status , objected to the suggestion that the Sadler 's Wells company should be called " The British National Opera " or " The National Opera " , although neither Scottish Opera nor the Welsh National Opera opposed such a change . Eventually the matter was decided by the British government , and the title " English National Opera " was approved . It was adopted by the company 's board in November 1974 . In 1977 , in response to demand for more opera productions in English provincial cities , a second company was established . It was based at Leeds in northern England , and was known as ENO North . Under Harewood 's guidance it flourished , and in 1981 it became an independent company , Opera North . 
 = = = ENO = = = 
 = = = = 1980 – 99 = = = = 
 In 1982 , at Elder 's instigation , Harewood appointed David Pountney director of productions . In 1985 Harewood retired ( becoming chairman of ENO 's board the following year ) and Peter Jonas succeeded him as managing director . The 1980s triumvirate of Elder , Pountney and Jonas , often called the " Powerhouse " , initiated a new era of " director 's opera " . The triumvirate favoured productions described by Elder as " groundbreaking , risky , probing and theatrically effective " and by the director Nicholas Hytner as " Euro @-@ bollocks that never has to be comprehensible to anybody but the people sitting out there conceiving . " Directors who did not , in Harewood 's phrase , " want to splash paint in the face of the public " were sidelined . A survey in the 1980s showed that the two things that ENO audiences most disliked were poor diction and the extremes of " director 's opera " . 
 In the Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians Barry Millington has described the Powerhouse style as : " arresting images of dislocated reality , an inexhaustible repertory of stage contrivances , a determination to explore the social and psychological issues latent in the works , and above all an abundant sense of theatricality . " As examples Millington mentions " Rusalka ( 1983 ) , with its Edwardian nursery setting and Freudian undertones , and Hansel and Gretel ( 1987 ) , its dream pantomime peopled by fantasy figures from the children 's imagination ... Lady Macbeth of the Mtsensk District ( 1987 ) and Wozzeck ( 1990 ) exemplified an approach to production in which grotesque caricature jostles with forceful emotional engagement " . 
 Poor average box @-@ office sales led to a financial crisis , which was exacerbated by backstage industrial relations problems . After 1983 the company ceased touring to other British venues . Assessing the achievements of the Powerhouse years , Tom Sutcliffe wrote in The Musical Times : 
 ENO is not second best to Covent Garden . It is different , more theatrical , less vocal . ... The ENO now follows a policy like Covent Garden 's in the early years after the war , when Peter Brook was <unk> the bourgeoisie with his opera stagings . The last two seasons at the ENO have been difficult , or at any rate sentiment has turned against the outgoing regime over the last nine months . Audience figures are well down . ... The presiding genius of the Elder years has , of course , been David Pountney . Not because his productions were all marvellous . Perhaps only a few were . But because , like Elder , he enabled so many other talents to thrive . 
 Productions during the 1980s included the company 's first presentations of Pelléas and Mélisande ( 1981 ) , Parsifal ( 1986 ) and Billy Budd ( 1988 ) . 1980s productions that remained in the repertory for many years included Xerxes directed by Hytner , and Rigoletto and The Mikado directed by Jonathan Miller . In 1984 ENO toured the United States ; the travelling company , led by Elder , consisted of 360 people ; they performed Gloriana , War and Peace , The Turn of the Screw , Rigoletto and Patience . This was the first British company to be invited to appear at the Metropolitan Opera in New York , where Patience received a standing ovation and Miller 's production of Rigoletto , depicting the characters as mafiosi , was greeted with a mixture of enthusiasm and booing . In 1990 ENO was the first major foreign opera company to tour the Soviet Union , performing the Miller production of The Turn of the Screw , Pountney 's production of Macbeth , and Hytner 's much @-@ revived Xerxes . 
 The Powerhouse era ended in 1992 , when all three of the triumvirate left at the same time . The new general director was Dennis Marks , formerly head of music programmes at the BBC ; the new music director was Sian Edwards ; Pountney 's post of director of productions was not filled . Marks , inheriting a large financial deficit from his predecessors , worked to restore the company 's finances , concentrating on restoring ticket sales to sustainable levels . A new production by Miller of Der Rosenkavalier was a critical and financial success , as was a staging of Massenet 's Don Quixote , described by the critic Hugh Canning as " the kind of old @-@ fashioned theatre magic which the hair @-@ shirted Powerhouse regime despised " . 
 Marks was obliged to spend much time and effort in securing the funding for an essential restoration of the Coliseum , a condition on which ENO had acquired the freehold of the theatre in 1992 . At the same time the Arts Council was contemplating a cut in the number of opera performances in London , at the expense of ENO , rather than Covent Garden . By increasing ticket sales in successive years , Marks demonstrated that the Arts Council 's proposition was unrealistic . After what The Independent described as " a sustained period of criticism and sniping at the ENO by music critics " , Sian Edwards resigned as music director at the end of 1995 ; she was succeeded by Paul Daniel . In 1997 , Marks resigned . No reason was announced , but it was thought that he and the ENO board had disagreed about his plans to move the company from the Coliseum to a purpose @-@ built new home . Daniel took over the management of the company until a new general director was appointed . 
 Daniel inherited from Marks a company thriving artistically and financially . The 1997 – 98 season played to 75 per cent capacity and made a surplus of £ 150 @,@ 000 . Daniel led the campaign against yet another proposal to merge Covent Garden and ENO , which was rapidly abandoned . In 1998 Nicholas Payne , director of opera at Covent Garden , was appointed to the post of ENO general director . Productions in the 1990s included the company 's first stagings of Beatrice and Benedict ( 1990 ) , Wozzeck ( 1990 ) , Jenůfa ( 1994 ) , A Midsummer Night 's Dream ( 1995 ) , Die Soldaten ( 1996 ) , and Dialogues of the Carmelites ( 1999 ) . Co @-@ productions , enabling opera houses to share the costs of joint enterprises , became important in this decade ; in 1993 ENO and Welsh National Opera collaborated on productions of Don Pasquale , <unk> and The Two Widows . 
 = = = = 2000 – 2009 = = = = 
 Martin Smith , a millionaire with a finance background , was appointed chairman of the ENO board in 2001 . He proved to be an expert fund @-@ raiser , and personally donated a million pounds to the cost of refurbishing the Coliseum . He and Payne came into conflict over the effect on revenue of the " director 's opera " productions that Payne insisted on commissioning . The most extreme case was a production of Don Giovanni directed by Calixto Bieito in 2001 , despised by critics and public alike ; Michael Kennedy described it as " a new nadir in vulgar abuse of a masterpiece , " and other reviewers agreed with him . Payne insisted , " I think it 's one of the best things we 've done . ... It 's exceeded my expectations . " In the arts pages of the Financial Times , Martin Hoyle wrote of Payne 's " exquisite tunnel vision " and expressed " the concern of those of us who value the true people 's opera " . Payne remained adamant that opera lovers who came to the ENO for a " nice , pleasant evening ... had come to the wrong place . " The differences between Smith and Payne were irreconcilable , and Payne was forced to resign in July 2002 . 
 The successor to Payne was <unk> Doran , whose appointment was controversial because he had no experience of running an opera company . He attracted newspaper headlines with unusual operatic events , described by admirers as " unexpected coups " and by detractors as " stunts " ; a performance of the third act of The Valkyrie played to 20 @,@ 000 rock music fans at the Glastonbury Festival . In December 2003 Daniel announced that he would leave at the end of his contract in 2005 . Oleg Caetani was announced as the next music director , from January 2006 . 
 In 2004 the company embarked on its second production of Wagner 's Ring . After concert performances over the previous three seasons , the four operas of the cycle were staged at the Coliseum in 2004 and 2005 in productions by Phyllida Lloyd , with designs by Richard Hudson , in a new translation by Jeremy Sams . The first instalments of the cycle were criticised as poorly sung and conducted , but by the time Twilight of the Gods was staged in 2005 , matters were thought to have improved : " Paul Daniel 's command of the score is more authoritative than could have been predicted from his uneven accounts of the previous operas . " The production attracted generally bad notices . The four operas were given individual runs , but were never played as a complete cycle . 
 During the first decade of the century the company repeated the experiment , previously tried in 1932 , of staging oratorios and other choral works as operatic performances . Bach 's St. John Passion was given in 2000 , followed by Verdi 's Requiem ( 2000 ) , Tippett 's A Child of Our Time ( 2005 ) and Handel 's Jephtha ( 2005 ) and Messiah ( 2009 ) . ENO responded to the increased interest in Handel 's operas , staging <unk> ( 2002 ) , Agrippina ( 2006 ) and Partenope ( 2008 ) . In 2003 the company staged its first production of Berlioz 's massive opera The Trojans , with Sarah Connolly as " a supremely eloquent , genuinely tragic Dido " . 
 In 2005 , after an internal debate that had been going on since 1991 , it was announced that surtitles would be introduced at the Coliseum . Surveys had shown that only a quarter of audience members could hear the words clearly . With a few exceptions , including Lesley Garrett and Andrew Shore , ENO singers of the 21st century were considered to have poorer diction than their predecessors such as Masterson and Derek Hammond @-@ Stroud . Harewood and Pountney had been <unk> opposed to surtitles ; both believed that opera in English was pointless if it could not be understood ; Harewood thought , moreover , that surtitles could undermine the case for a publicly funded opera @-@ in @-@ English company . The editor of Opera magazine , Rodney Milnes , campaigned against surtitles on the grounds that " singers would give up trying to articulate clearly and audiences would cease focusing on the stage " . Despite these objections surtitles were introduced from October 2005 . 
 On 29 November 2005 Doran resigned as artistic director . To replace him , Smith divided the duties between Loretta Tomasi as chief executive and John Berry as artistic director . These elevations from within the organisation were controversial , because they were neither advertised nor cleared at the top level of the Arts Council . Smith received severe press criticism for his action , and in December 2005 he announced his resignation . In the same week , Caetani 's appointment as the next ENO music director was cancelled . Berry was at first criticised in the press for his choice of singers for ENO productions , but the appointment of Edward Gardner as music director from 2007 received considerable praise . The Observer commented that Gardner was " widely credited with breathing fresh life into English National Opera , whose growing reputation under his <unk> innovative hand has seen the house ally itself with outside talent , from Anthony Minghella 's hugely popular Madam Butterfly to Forced Entertainment 's production of Philip Glass 's Satyagraha . " 
 Attendance figures recovered , with younger audiences attracted by ENO 's marketing schemes . The company 's finances improved , with £ 5 million in reserve funds in April 2009 . 
 = = = = 2010 – present = = = = 
 Productions in the 2011 season continued the company 's traditions of engaging directors with no operatic experience ( a well reviewed The Damnation of Faust staged by Terry Gilliam and set in Nazi Germany ) and of drastic reinterpretations ( a version of Britten 's A Midsummer Night 's Dream presented by Christopher Alden as a paedophile parable set in a 1950s boys ' school , which divided critical opinion ) . In the 2012 – 13 season ENO introduced " Opera Undressed " evenings , aimed at attracting new audiences who had thought opera " Too pricey , too pompous , too posh " . Operas advertised under this banner were Don Giovanni , La traviata , Michel van der Aa 's Sunken Garden ( performed at the Barbican ) and Philip Glass 's The Perfect American . 
 In January 2014 the ENO announced that Gardner would leave at the end of the 2014 – 15 season , to be succeeded by Mark Wigglesworth . The Times commented that the incoming music director had a reputation for " steely , even abrasive determination " and that he would need it , with recent productions lambasted by critics and shunned by the public , leading to an £ 800 @,@ 000 deficit made worse by cuts in public subsidy . From late 2014 the company went through a further organisational crisis . The chairman , Martyn Rose , resigned after two years in the post , following irreconcilable differences with Berry . He was followed by Henriette Götz , the company 's executive director , who had a series of public disagreements with Berry . In February 2015 the Arts Council of England announced the unprecedented step of removing ENO from the national portfolio of 670 arts organisations that receive regular funding , and instead offered " special funding arrangements " because of continuing concerns over ENO 's business plan and management . The council recognised that the company was " capable of extraordinary artistic work " , but " we have serious concerns about their governance and business model and we expect them to improve or they could face removal of funding . " In July 2015 Berry resigned . 
 Critical and box @-@ office successes in the company 's 2014 – 15 season included The Mastersingers , which won an Olivier Award for best new opera production , and Sweeney Todd , with Bryn Terfel in the title role . New productions announced for 2015 – 16 were Tristan and Isolde , with sets by Anish Kapoor ; Lady Macbeth of Mtsensk ; the company 's first staging of Norma ; The Force of Destiny directed by Bieito , and the first London performance for 30 years of <unk> . 
 The Huffington Post wrote in March 2016 that the ENO was finding itself " in a predicament that has much in common with the challenges that forced the New York City Opera to file for bankruptcy in 2013 ... There are those who fear that without major changes the company may fold , as was the case with <unk> " , which came out of bankruptcy and began again staging performances in January 2016 . 
 = = Repertoire = = 
 The company has aimed to present the standard operatic repertoire , sung in English , and has staged all the major operas of Mozart , Wagner and Puccini , and a wide range of Verdi 's operas . Under Mackerras and his successors the Czech repertoire has featured strongly , and a broad range of French and Russian operas has been presented . The company has for decades laid stress on opera as drama , and has avoided operas where vocal display takes precedence over musical and dramatic content . In addition to the operatic staples , ENO has a history of presenting new works , and latterly of commissioning them . 
 = = = Commissions and premieres = = = 
 ENO has commissioned more than a dozen operas by composers including Gordon Crosse , Iain Hamilton , Jonathan Harvey , Alfred Schnittke , Gavin Bryars , David <unk> , Asian Dub Foundation and Nico Muhly . The company 's best known world premiere probably remains Peter Grimes in 1945 . Subsequent world premieres have included The Mines of Sulphur ( 1965 ) , The Mask of Orpheus ( 1986 ) , The Silver Tassie ( 1999 ) , and works by Malcolm Williamson , Iain Hamilton , David Blake , Robin Holloway and Stephen Oliver . British stage premieres include operas by Verdi ( Simon Boccanegra , 1948 ) , Janáček ( Káťa Kabanová , 1951 ) , Stravinsky ( Oedipus rex , 1960 ) , Prokofiev ( War and Peace , 1972 ) and Philip Glass ( <unk> , 1985 , among others ) . 
 = = = Operetta and musicals = = = 
 From the beginning , the company interspersed serious opera with lighter works . In the early years the " Irish Ring " ( The Bohemian Girl , The Lily of Killarney and Maritana ) featured in Old Vic and Sadler 's Wells seasons . After the Second World War , the company began to programme operetta , including The Merry Widow ( 1958 ) , Die Fledermaus ( 1958 ) , Orpheus in the Underworld ( 1960 ) , Merrie England ( 1960 ) , La vie parisienne ( 1961 ) , La belle Hélène ( 1963 ) , and The Gipsy Baron ( 1964 ) . 
 The company has produced six of Gilbert and Sullivan 's Savoy operas . After the successful Iolanthe and The Mikado in 1962 and Patience in 1969 , the last much revived in the UK , the U.S. and on the continent , a second production of The Mikado in 1986 starred the comedian Eric Idle in a black @-@ and @-@ white setting moved to a 1920s English seaside hotel . It has been regularly revived over 25 years . A 1992 production of Princess Ida directed by Ken Russell was a critical and box office disaster , ran briefly , and was not revived . The Pirates of Penzance was produced in 2005 . A highly coloured production of The Gondoliers opened in 2006 ; the press pointed out that the company 's diction had declined to the point that the recently introduced surtitles were essential . In 2015 the film director Mike Leigh directed a new production of The Pirates of Penzance ; the critical consensus was disappointment that Leigh had chosen one of the weaker operas in the Savoy canon , but the show provided a box @-@ office hit . The cinema live broadcast of the production broke all previous box @-@ office records for UK opera cinema @-@ event releases . 
 From the 1980s the company has experimented with Broadway shows , including Pacific Overtures ( 1987 ) , Street Scene ( 1898 ) , On the Town ( 2005 ) , Kismet ( 2007 ) , and Candide ( 2008 ) . In many of ENO 's lighter shows , the size of the Coliseum has been a problem , both in putting across pieces written for much more intimate theatres and in selling enough tickets . In 2015 a new business plan for ENO included making money from a West End musical partnership with the impresarios Michael Grade and Michael <unk> . 
 = = Recordings = = 
 Recordings of individual scenes and numbers were made by Sadler 's Wells singers from the company 's earliest days . In 1972 an LP set was issued bringing together many of these recordings , prefaced with a tribute to Lilian Baylis recorded in 1936 . Among the singers in the set are Joan Cross , Heddle Nash , Edith Coates , Joan Hammond , Owen Brannigan , Peter Pears , Peter Glossop and Charles Craig . The conductors include Lawrance Collingwood , Reginald Goodall and Michael Mudie . 
 After the Second World War , the Sadler 's Wells company made a 78 <unk> set of excerpts from Simon Boccanegra ( 1949 ) , but made no more recordings until the stereo LP era . In the 1950s and 1960s , the company recorded a series of abridged sets of operas and operettas for EMI , each occupying two LP sides . All were sung in English . The opera sets were Madame Butterfly ( 1960 ) , Il trovatore ( 1962 ) , and Hansel and Gretel ( 1966 ) . The abridged operetta recordings were Die Fledermaus ( 1959 ) , The Merry Widow ( 1959 ) , The Land of Smiles ( 1960 ) , La vie parisienne ( 1961 ) , Orpheus in the Underworld ( 1960 ) , Iolanthe ( 1962 ) , La belle Hélène ( 1963 ) and The Gypsy Baron ( 1965 ) . A complete recording of The Mikado was released in 1962 . 
 Excerpts from the company 's Twilight of the Gods were recorded in German under Mackerras ( 1972 ) and in English under Goodall ( 1973 ) . The complete Ring cycle was recorded by EMI during public performances at the Coliseum between 1973 and 1977 . The cycle has been reissued on CD by Chandos Records . A live recording of the company 's The Mastersingers was made in 1968 but not released until 2008 . 
 In the CD era , a series of operatic recordings sung in English has been released by Chandos Records . Some are reissues are of Sadler 's Wells Opera or ENO recordings originally issued by EMI : Mary Stuart ( recorded in 1982 ) and Julius Caesar ( 1985 ) , both starring Janet Baker , and La traviata ( 1981 ) , starring Valerie Masterson . The newer recordings , made specifically for the Chandos series , have no official connection with ENO , but feature many past and present members of the company . Conductors include Sir Charles Mackerras , Sir Mark Elder and Paul Daniel . Those in which the chorus and orchestra of ENO appear are Lulu , The Makropoulos Affair , Werther , Dialogues of the Carmelites , The Barber of Seville , Rigoletto , Ernani , Otello and Falstaff , as well as the live recordings of The Ring and The Mastersingers . 
 = = Education = = 
 In 1966 , under the company 's head of design , Margaret Harris , Sadler 's Wells Theatre Design Course was founded ; it later became Motley Theatre Design Course . ENO Baylis , founded in 1985 , is the education department of ENO ; it aims to introduce new audiences to opera and " to deepen and enrich the experience of current audiences in an adventurous , creative and engaging manner . " The programme offers training for students and young professionals , and also workshops , commissions , talks and debates . 
 = = Musical directors = = 
 = = Artistic directors = = 
 = Borley Rectory = 
 Borley Rectory was a Victorian mansion that gained fame as " the most haunted house in England " after being described as such by Harry Price . Built in 1862 to house the rector of the parish of Borley and his family , it was badly damaged by fire in 1939 and demolished in 1944 . 
 The large Gothic @-@ style rectory in the village of Borley had been alleged to be haunted ever since it was built . These reports multiplied suddenly in 1929 , after the Daily Mirror published an account of a visit by paranormal researcher Harry Price , who wrote two books supporting claims of paranormal activity . 
 The uncritical acceptance of Price 's reports prompted a formal study by the Society for Psychical Research ( SPR ) , which rejected most of the sightings as either imagined or fabricated and cast doubt on Price 's credibility . His claims are now generally discredited by ghost historians . Neither the SPR 's report nor the more recent biography of Price has quelled public interest in the stories , and new books and television documentaries continue to satisfy public fascination with the rectory . 
 A short programme commissioned by the BBC about the alleged manifestations , scheduled to be broadcast in September 1956 , was cancelled owing to concerns about a possible legal action by Marianne Foyster , widow of the last rector to live in the house . 
 = = History = = 
 Borley Rectory was constructed near Borley Church by the Reverend Henry Dawson Ellis Bull in 1862 ; he moved in a year after being named rector of the parish . The house replaced an earlier rectory on the site that had been destroyed by fire in 1841 . It was eventually enlarged by the addition of a wing to house Bull 's family of fourteen children . 
 The nearby church , the nave of which may date from the 12th century , serves a scattered rural community of three hamlets that make up the parish . There are several substantial farmhouses and the fragmentary remains of Borley Hall , once the seat of the Waldegrave family . Ghost hunters quote the legend of a Benedictine monastery supposedly built in this area in about 1362 , according to which a monk from the monastery conducted a relationship with a nun from a nearby convent . After their affair was discovered , the monk was executed and the nun bricked up alive in the convent walls . It was confirmed in 1938 that this legend had no historical basis and seemed to have been fabricated by the rector 's children to romanticise their Gothic @-@ style red @-@ brick rectory . The story of the walling @-@ up of the nun may have come from Rider Haggard 's novel Montezuma 's Daughter ( 1893 ) or Walter Scott 's epic poem " Marmion " ( 1808 ) . 
 = = Hauntings = = 
 The first paranormal events reportedly occurred in about 1863 , since a few locals later remembered having heard unexplained footsteps within the house at about that time . On 28 July 1900 , four daughters of the rector , Henry Dawson Ellis Bull , saw what they thought was the ghost of a nun at twilight , about 40 yards ( 37 m ) from the house ; they tried to talk to it , but it disappeared as they got closer . The local organist , Ernest Ambrose later said that the family at the rectory were " very convinced that they had seen an apparition on several occasions " . Various people claimed to have witnessed a variety of puzzling incidents , such as a phantom coach driven by two headless horsemen , during the next four decades . Bull died in 1892 and his son , the Reverend Henry ( " Harry " ) Foyster Bull , took over the living . 
 On 9 June 1928 , Harry Bull died and the rectory again became vacant . In the following year , on 2 October , the Reverend Guy Eric Smith and his wife moved into the house . Soon after moving in , Smith 's wife , while cleaning out a cupboard , came across a brown paper package containing the skull of a young woman . Shortly after , the family reported a variety of incidents including the sounds of servant bells ringing despite their being disconnected , lights appearing in windows and unexplained footsteps . In addition , Smith 's wife believed she saw a horse @-@ drawn carriage at night . The Smiths contacted the Daily Mirror asking to be put in touch with the Society for Psychical Research ( SPR ) . On 10 June 1929 the newspaper sent a reporter , who promptly wrote the first in a series of articles detailing the mysteries of Borley . The paper also arranged for Harry Price , a paranormal researcher , to make his first visit to the house . He arrived on 12 June and immediately phenomena of a new kind appeared , such as the throwing of stones , a vase and other objects . " Spirit messages " were tapped out from the frame of a mirror . As soon as Price left , these ceased . Smith 's wife later maintained that she already suspected Price , an expert conjurer , of falsifying the phenomena . 
 The Smiths left Borley on 14 July 1929 and the parish had some difficulty in finding a replacement . The following year the Reverend Lionel Algernon Foyster ( 1878 – 1945 ) , a first cousin of the Bulls , and his wife Marianne ( née Marianne Emily Rebecca Shaw ) ( 1899 – 1992 ) moved into the rectory with their adopted daughter Adelaide , on 16 October 1930 . Lionel Foyster wrote an account of various strange incidents that occurred between the time the Foysters moved in and October 1935 , which was sent to Harry Price . These included bell @-@ ringing , windows shattering , throwing of stones and bottles , wall @-@ writing and the locking of their daughter in a room with no key . Marianne Foyster reported to her husband a whole range of poltergeist phenomena that included her being thrown from her bed . On one occasion , Adelaide was attacked by " something horrible " . Foyster tried twice to conduct an exorcism , but his efforts were fruitless ; in the middle of the first exorcism , he was struck in the shoulder by a fist @-@ size stone . Because of the publicity in the Daily Mirror , these incidents attracted the attention of several psychic researchers , who after investigation were unanimous in suspecting that they were caused , consciously or unconsciously , by Marianne Foyster . She later said that she felt that some of the incidents were caused by her husband in concert with one of the psychic researchers , but other events appeared to her to be genuine paranormal phenomena . She later admitted that she was having a sexual relationship with the lodger , Frank <unk> , and that she used paranormal explanations to cover up her liaisons . The Foysters left Borley in October 1935 as a result of Lionel Foyster 's ill health . 
 = = Price investigation = = 
 Borley remained vacant for some time after the Foysters ' departure . In May 1937 , Price took out a year @-@ long rental agreement with Queen Anne 's Bounty , the owners of the property . 
 Through an advertisement in The Times on 25 May 1937 and subsequent personal interviews , Price recruited a corps of 48 " official observers " , mostly students , who spent periods , mainly during weekends , at the rectory with instructions to report any phenomena that occurred . In March 1938 Helen Glanville ( the daughter of S. J. Glanville , one of Price 's helpers ) conducted a planchette séance in Streatham in south London . Price reported that she made contact with two spirits , the first of which was that of a young nun who identified herself as Marie <unk> . According to the planchette story Marie was a French nun who left her religious order and travelled to England to marry a member of the Waldegrave family , the owners of Borley 's 17th @-@ century manor house , Borley Hall . She was said to have been murdered in an earlier building on the site of the rectory , and her body either buried in the cellar or thrown into a disused well . The wall writings were alleged to be her pleas for help ; one read " Marianne , please help me get out " . 
 The second spirit to be contacted identified himself as <unk> <unk> , and claimed that he would set fire to the rectory at nine o 'clock that night , 27 March 1938 . He also said that , at that time , the bones of a murdered person would be revealed . 
 = = = Fire = = = 
 On 27 February 1939 the new owner of the rectory , Captain W. H. Gregson , was unpacking boxes and accidentally knocked over an oil lamp in the hallway . The fire quickly spread and the house was severely damaged . After investigating the cause of the blaze the insurance company concluded that the fire had been started deliberately . 
 A Miss Williams from nearby Borley Lodge said she saw the figure of the ghostly nun in the upstairs window and , according to Harry Price , demanded a fee of one guinea for her story . In August 1943 , Price conducted a brief dig in the cellars of the ruined house and discovered two bones thought to be of a young woman . The bones were given a Christian burial in Liston churchyard , after the parish of Borley refused to allow the ceremony to take place on account of the local opinion that the bones found were those of a pig . 
 = = Society for Psychical Research investigation = = 
 After Price 's death in 1948 , Eric Dingwall , K. M. Goldney and Trevor H. Hall , three members of the Society for Psychical Research ( SPR ) , two of whom had been Price 's most loyal associates , investigated his claims about Borley . Their findings were published in a 1956 book , The Haunting of Borley Rectory , which concluded that Price had fraudulently produced some of the phenomena . 
 The " Borley Report " , as the SPR study has become known , stated that many of the phenomena were either faked or due to natural causes such as rats and the strange acoustics attributed to the odd shape of the house . In their conclusion , Dingwall , Goldney , and Hall wrote " when analysed , the evidence for haunting and poltergeist activity for each and every period appears to diminish in force and finally to vanish away . " Terence Hines wrote that " Mrs. Marianne Foyster , wife of the Rev. Lionel Foyster who lived at the rectory from 1930 to 1935 , was actively engaged in fraudulently creating [ haunted ] phenomena . Price himself ' salted the mine ' and faked several phenomena while he was at the rectory . " 
 Marianne Foyster , later in her life , admitted she had seen no apparitions and that the alleged ghostly noises were caused by the wind , friends she invited to the house and in other cases by herself playing practical jokes on her husband . Many of the legends about the rectory had been invented . The children of the Rev. Harry Bull who lived in the house before Lionel Foyster claimed to have seen nothing and were surprised they had been living in what was described as England 's most haunted house . 
 Robert Hastings was one of the few SPR researchers to defend Price . Price 's literary executor Paul Tabori and Peter Underwood have also defended Price against accusations of fraud . A similar approach was made by Ivan Banks in 1996 . Michael Coleman in an SPR report in 1997 wrote Price 's defenders are unable to rebut the criticisms convincingly . 
 = SimTower = 
 SimTower : The Vertical Empire ( known as The Tower ( ザ ・ <unk> , Za <unk> ) in Japan ) is a construction and management simulation video game developed by OpenBook Co . , Ltd. and published by Maxis for the Microsoft Windows and Macintosh System 7 operating systems in November 1994 . In Japan , it was published by OpenBook that same year and was later released for the Sega Saturn and Sony PlayStation in 1996 . The game allows players to build and manage a tower and decide what facilities to place in it , in order to ultimately build a five @-@ star tower . Random events take place during play , such as terrorist acts that the player must respond to immediately . 
 Critical reception towards the game was generally positive . Reviews praised the game 's formula , including its open @-@ ended nature and its ability to immerse the player into the game . Criticism targeted the game 's lack of documentation , which some reviewers found made it harder to learn how to play the game . The in @-@ game speed was also criticized for being too slow , which was a crucial issue in the game because time must pass for the player to earn income to purchase new facilities . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 SimTower allows the player to build and manage the operations of a modern , multi @-@ use skyscraper . They must plan where to place facilities in the tower that include restaurants , condominiums , offices , hotel rooms , retail stores and elevators . To prevent tenants from vacating their properties , the player must keep their stress low by fulfilling their demands for medical centers , parking lots , recycling facilities , clean hotel rooms with the help of housekeepers , and an efficient transportation system , which involves managing elevator traffic . SimTower , which was built around an elevator simulation program , places a strong emphasis on good elevator management . 
 The game begins with a one @-@ star tower with limited building options . To increase the tower 's star rating , it must attract more tenants by providing more living space ( or office space , and later in the game , hotel and various commercial space ) . New facilities are made available while the tower progresses from a one @-@ star rating to a five @-@ star rating . The highest achievable rating is the designation of " Tower " which can only be awarded by building a cathedral at the very top of a five @-@ star building with all possible tower levels above ground developed . The tower is limited to a maximum of 100 floors above ground and nine stories below ground . Standard elevators , which can span a maximum of 30 floors , and express elevators , which can span the entire height of the building , must be used efficiently to decrease tenant stress . 
 Certain events can take place while managing the tower . For example , terrorists may phone the player to let them know that they have hidden a bomb in the building , and that they demand a ransom . If the ransom is not paid , then security services must find the bomb before it detonates , or else the tower will incur significant damages . If the player builds facilities underground , the game may notify them that their workers have discovered gold treasure , which gives the player a significant amount of funds . At random intervals during the game , there are notifications that state that a VIP will be visiting the tower soon , so the player must prepare for their visit . If the VIP enjoys their visit because of variables such as a comfortable hotel suite and efficient navigation , the VIP will give the tower a favorable rating . A favorable rating would then allow the tower to advance to the next star level , assuming the other qualifications are met . Although it does not have any impact on the tower , at the end of the fourth quarter every year in the game , Santa Claus and his reindeer fly across the tower . 
 = = Development = = 
 Developed by Yoot Saito of OpenBook , SimTower was originally titled The Tower . It works on computers that can run the Microsoft Windows or Macintosh System 7 operating systems ; the game will operate on 68k @-@ based Macs at the minimum . It requires 8 @-@ bit colors and four megabytes of random @-@ access memory . Graphics and sounds used in SimTower are similar to previous Sim games , and high resolution graphics are also used . The sound effects are kept to a minimum ; noises that are played in the background include office " buzz " and elevator bells . 
 While attending Waseda University , Saito played SimCity on the Macintosh , which prompted him to pursue video game creation after graduating . His first game was a simulation title that was part of a future media project for a publishing house . When Saito asked to develop a second , the business refused because it was not a video game company . He left the company to personally produce the second game , which built on ideas he conceived while working on his first : elevators and towers . Saito teamed up with freelance programmer Takumi Abe to complete the project . To research the gameplay , Saito contacted an elevator company to learn about elevator scheduling and management . However , the company declined to provide the information . Saito handled the graphic design , and started with a monochromatic scaled tower created in HyperCard . The designer added color to differentiate between <unk> and hotel @-@ type buildings . As development neared completion , Saito noticed that the Mac 's performance had improved and decided to increase the color palette size from 16 to 256 colors . Saito enlisted a second designer to produce animation for the graphics and improve the details for the color increase . 
 = = Sequels = = 
 OpenBook , the developers of the original SimTower , developed and released a sequel under a new name called Yoot Tower for Windows in 1998 . A second sequel was released as The Tower SP for the Game Boy Advance in 2005 ; The Tower DS for Nintendo DS followed in 2008 . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 SimTower was successful in Japan , earning the developers a profit . The Nihon <unk> Shimbun awarded Saito the " Best Young Manager / Venture of the Year " for his work on the game . After the initial Japanese release , Maxis president Jeff Braun contacted Saito regarding a worldwide release ; SimCity creator Will Wright informed Braun of the game . The company localized the game for sale in the United States , and changed the name to capitalize on the popularity of the Sim franchise and increase sales figures . Maxis published SimTower for the Windows and Macintosh System 7 operating systems in November 1994 in the United States . In 1996 , it was ported to the Sega Saturn and 3DO Interactive Multiplayer in Japan . 
 The South China Morning Post praised the game 's formula , noting that it followed in the footsteps of previous open @-@ ended Maxis games . Comparing to SimCity 2000 , the review remarked that it was more interesting to watch people live out their lives in a tower rather than to observe cars moving around . They also appreciated the " homely " feeling of SimTower , in contrast with other Sim games such as <unk> and <unk> , which they felt were too universal to take on a personal identity . Benjamin Svetkey of Entertainment Weekly praised the game and commented that it is " more fun than [ the concept ] sounds " . However , he stated that the gameplay may be too much for fans of the series . A reviewer for Next Generation panned the game , saying it lacks the bustling interactivity of previous games in the Sim franchise : " There are bug infestations and the occasional fire with which to deal , but most of the time , SimTower sees you standing around waiting for cash reserves to grow in order to add more floors . Not much fun at all . " Australia 's The Age found SimTower a pleasing return to form for Maxis , after the release of the disappointing <unk> . Lisa Karen <unk> of Allgame stated that the game had decent graphics and sound . However , she also felt that SimTower had good replay value due to the non @-@ linear gameplay , giving the game 4 stars out of 5 . 
 The game was criticized by the South China Morning Post for lacking documentation , making it more difficult to learn how to play the game . They also predicted that players would be unhappy with the game 's speed , as time plays an important role in earning money from tenants . Before the player can purchase new facilities , a long period of time must pass before income is earned from tenants . The newspaper was also unhappy with complaints from tenants ; specific reasons for their dissatisfaction are never given . The Age was disappointed by the lack of pre @-@ built towers and scenarios , suggesting that one along the lines of The Towering Inferno 's plot could have been included . Game Informer referred to SimTower as a " lesser @-@ known " simulation game , and described it as " fun and addictive " . Writing for the San Diego Union @-@ Tribune , Matt Miller felt that , when compared to SimCity 2000 ( 1993 ) , gameplay in SimTower moved slowly . He also disliked the moments when he had to wait several minutes to pass by before he could make enough money to purchase new additions for his building . Dragon magazine 's reviewers Jay and Dee praised the visuals and gameplay . However , the two commented that the game can feel slow because it lacks gameplay elements and options present in other strategy games . In 1995 , the Software and Information Industry Association listed SimTower as the " Best Simulation Program " in the Consumer software category of their annual <unk> awards . 
 The game was followed by Yoot Tower ( called The Tower II in Japan ) , also designed by Yoot Saito , which was initially released on November 24 , 1998 for the Macintosh . It was later made available for the Windows operating systems in January 1999 . Yoot Tower 's gameplay is similar to that of SimTower — players build hotels , resorts , and office buildings , and work towards building a five @-@ star tower . Sega launched a version of SimTower for the Game Boy Advance , called The Tower SP , in Japan on April 28 , 2005 , and in the United States on March 15 , 2006 . A version of SimTower called The Tower DS was published by <unk> in Japan on June 26 , 2008 . 
 Today , Yoot Tower is in the iTunes iOS App Store for iPad devices . 
 = Marcus Wareing = 
 Marcus Wareing ( born 29 June 1970 ) is an English celebrity chef who is currently Chef Patron of the two @-@ Michelin @-@ starred restaurant Marcus , ( formerly Marcus Wareing at the Berkeley ) in Knightsbridge . As a restaurateur he also runs The Gilbert Scott at the St. Pancras Renaissance Hotel , and his casual West End restaurant , Tredwell 's , in Seven Dials . 
 Wareing succeeds Michel Roux , Jr. as a judge since the seventh series of MasterChef : The Professionals . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Wareing was born in Southport , Merseyside , in 1970 . His father was a fruit and potato merchant who had contracts with schools to provide their produce for school dinners . 
 At the age of 11 his first food @-@ industry related job was with his father , packing potatoes and riding alongside deliveries . He was paid 10p per 5 pounds ( 2 @.@ 3 kg ) bag of potatoes packed , all of which went straight into his Post Office saving account . At a young age , Marcus was informed by his father that the business was no longer viable as schools moved on to using pre @-@ prepared frozen food instead of fresh produce . He would later credit his father 's long hours with inspiring his own work ethic . 
 At Stanley High School , he found he had a natural talent for cooking although he felt embarrassed that he was the only boy in the home economics class . He went on to attend Southport College , where he took a three @-@ year City & Guilds course in catering . While a student he participated in 1985 's Merseyside Junior Masterchef , although he was eliminated in the heats after his self @-@ created dish ' Flap a la <unk> d 'une <unk> ' ( a pilchard @-@ flavoured flapjack ) was described by guest judge Delia Smith as ' tasting like a dog 's naughty bits ' . 
 = = Career = = 
 He first worked at the Savoy Hotel under chef Anton Edelmann in 1988 at the age of 18 where he was employed as a <unk> chef , before leaving in 1993 to join Albert Roux at Michelin starred Le Gavroche where he first met Gordon Ramsay . <unk> at other restaurants in New York City , Amsterdam and at Gravetye Manor in Sussex followed . Wareing joined Gordon Ramsay 's Aubergine when it opened in 1993 , where he became Sous Chef behind Head Chef Ramsay and would go on to work with him over the course of the following 15 years , which led to Wareing being called Ramsay 's protégé . While he was at Aubergine in 1995 , he was awarded the title of Young Chef of the Year by the Restaurant Association . 
 He would later credit Ramsay with teaching him to cook , describing it as " the most important time in my life " . He left Aubergine for a year in 1995 to work with Daniel Boulud in America , and Guy Savoy in France . His return to the UK was also to be his first head chef role , of new restaurant L ’ Oranger , which was owned by A @-@ Z Restaurants , which had also owned Aubergine , with stakes held by both Wareing and Ramsay . At the age of 25 , he earned his first Michelin star as head chef whilst at L ’ Oranger . He gave Angela Hartnett her first job in a restaurant . 
 Following a fall @-@ out between Ramsay and A @-@ Z Restaurants over Wareing 's contract at L 'Oranger , which saw Ramsay quit Aubergine to open Restaurant Gordon Ramsay , Wareing followed suit by leaving L 'Oranger , forcing the restaurant into temporary closure . A @-@ Z Restaurants commenced legal proceedings against the pair , and reopened L ’ Oranger with Wareing 's former sous chef , Kamel <unk> , as the new head chef . The legal case ended in Ramsay and Wareing paying an out @-@ of @-@ court settlement to the Restaurant group . Ramsay and Wareing worked together to open Pétrus in 1999 , with Wareing becoming head chef and operating the restaurant on behalf of Gordon Ramsay Holdings ( GRH ) , at 33 St James 's Street , London . The name came from the French wine Pétrus , which was Ramsay 's and Wareing 's favourite . Wareing promptly regained the Michelin star he had previously held , with Pétrus being named as a one star restaurant seven months after opening . 
 The restaurant was moved into the Berkeley Hotel in 2003 where it replaced Pierre <unk> 's La <unk> Claire , in the same year that Wareing became Chef Patron of the Grill Room at the Savoy Hotel , and he was named Chef of the Year by Caterer and Hotelkeeper 's <unk> Awards . The return to the Savoy meant that he was competing against Anton Edelmann , his former boss from the River Room at the hotel . Rather than serve a menu similar to the French driven Pétrus , Wareing chose to continue to serve the British cuisine that the Grill Room was known for , including his take on previous menu items such as steak and kidney pudding and potted shrimps . Pétrus went on to be awarded two Michelin stars and five AA Rosettes , while the Savoy Grill achieved its first Michelin star in the hotel 's history in 2004 . 
 He also opened his take on an American diner at The Savoy called <unk> , and converted the previous Pétrus location into La Fleur . He was voted Restaurateur of the Year at the Tatler Restaurant Awards in 2004 , and Harden 's restaurant guide selected him as the fourth @-@ best chef in London , although La Fleur closed due to problems with the lease for the site . In 2007 Pétrus was awarded its second Michelin star . 
 Following several months of rumours regarding the restaurant , the Berkeley Hotel confirmed in May 2008 that it was going to work with Wareing to launch his only solo restaurant , and he would take on Pétrus ' lease from 19 September 2008 onwards . Wareing had previously complained of interference in the kitchen by GRH , and wanted to come out from under Ramsay 's shadow , but later admitted that he had engineered the situation so that he could go out on his own . The split with Ramsay and GRH resulted in a public legal battle and feud between the three parties , which when resolved resulted in Wareing stating in an interview for Waitrose Food Illustrated magazine that Ramsay left him bitter and conflicted ; " half of me thinks he ’ s a sad bastard and the other half still adores him . " He went on to describe Ramsay as a celebrity chef who wasn 't involved in the industry anymore . The legal dispute was resolved with Ramsay gaining the rights to the Pétrus name , and Wareing signing a gag order regarding the situation but continuing to open his restaurant Marcus Wareing at The Berkeley . Wareing remarked of the situation , " If I never speak to that guy again for the rest of my life , it wouldn 't bother me one bit . " Ramsay later responded regarding the feud that he wishes Wareing " all the best " . Wareing 's self @-@ named restaurant won the Best Restaurant in London Award by Harden 's guide in 2008 and 2009 , was awarded two Michelin stars in 2009 , and was named Time Out 's restaurant of the year in 2010 . The new Pétrus was opened around the corner from the Berkeley Hotel at 1 Kinnerton Street , Knightsbridge . Ramsay later joked , that with Heston Blumenthal also opening his new restaurant nearby , the three of them could " all have a fight in the street at four in the morning " . 
 In 2009 Wareing was named by magazine GQ as their chef of the year . In 2011 Wareing opened his second restaurant , called The Gilbert Scott , in the St. Pancras Renaissance Hotel . GRH had also made a bid to open a restaurant in the space , but was rejected in favour of Wareing 's proposal . The restaurant was named after the architect of the hotel , Sir George Gilbert Scott . Wareing doesn 't work in the kitchen itself , with the restaurant being run by General Manager , and now Group Operations Director , Chantelle Nicholson , . He believes in promoting seasonal British food in his menus , and using small suppliers . 
 Wareing completely refurbished his Knightsbridge restaurant , Marcus Wareing at the Berkeley in 2014 ; closing for 3 months and reopening a more relaxed dining experience , renaming it simply , Marcus . 
 In September 2014 Wareing opened Tredwell 's in Upper St Martin 's Lane , Seven Dials , London . Offering modern London cooking Tredwell 's is the first casual dining offering from the Group , overseen by Group Operations Director , Chantelle Nicholson . The Evening Standard Magazine 's Grace Dent reviewed the restaurant on 22 October 2014 describing it as " Comfort food heaven " . 
 = = = Television and other media = = = 
 Wareing was first featured on television in the Channel 4 1998 documentary series Boiling Point , documenting his time as Gordon Ramsay 's sous chef , his move to Pétrus and the award of his first Michelin star . He was also selected as one of 13 chefs chosen to recreate Leonardo da Vinci 's The Last Supper in 2003 . The work was photographed by John Reardon , and features Wareing throwing a brie across into the air whilst standing in the place of Simon the Zealot from Leonardo 's work . In 2006 , Marcus Wareing and Simon Rimmer represented the North of England in the BBC television series Great British Menu . Wareing beat the Manchester @-@ based chef to go on to the final round . In the final the public chose for him to cook his dessert of egg custard tart with Garibaldi biscuits for the Queen 's 80th birthday banquet which was on 17 June 2006 . 
 He has continued to be a judge for later seasons for the Great British Menu , something which has occasionally brought him into conflict with other chefs such as Johnnie Mountain . He has criticized some shows in the past such as MasterChef , saying that it has inspired young chefs to chase fame on television and be lazy in the kitchen , although he has appeared on MasterChef , MasterChef : The Professionals and Celebrity MasterChef in the past . 
 Wareing has succeeded Michel Roux , Jr. on the seventh series of Masterchef : The Professionals after Roux , Jr . ' s contract with the BBC was terminated for advertising potatoes . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 He has a brother named Brian , who is a catering teacher . Marcus is married to Jane , with whom he has three children , Jake , Archie and Jessie . He met Jane while he worked at Gravetye Manor , where he was second chef and she worked on reception . After moving to London to work with Ramsay at Aubergine , Wareing kept the relationship going by commuting out to Sussex every Sunday . Ramsay was the best man at his wedding in 2000 , and is godfather to Wareing 's eldest son Jake . 
 He has raised money for the charity Action Against Hunger , whilst working at the Taste of London festival , and is to compete in a charity boxing competition with other chefs and catering staff for the Hilton In The Community Foundation , having been an amateur boxer in his youth from the age of nine until he was 18 . He has lent his name to the Environmental Justice Foundation campaign to promote sustainable fishing . Wareing has said his favourite cookbook is one by chef Daniel <unk> at Eleven Madison Park in New York City . 
 = = Published works = = 
 Wareing , Marcus ; Wright , Jen ( 2007 ) . How to cook the perfect ... London : Dorling Kindersley . ISBN <unk> . 
 Wareing , Marcus ; Hill , Shaun ; Trotter , Charlie ( 2008 ) . Knife Skills . London : Dorling Kindersley . ISBN <unk> . 
 Wareing , Marcus ( 2008 ) . One Perfect Ingredient , three ways to cook it . London : Bantam . ISBN <unk> . 
 Wareing , Marcus ; Nicholson , Chantelle ( 2009 ) . Nutmeg and Custard . London : Bantam . ISBN <unk> . 
 Wareing , Marcus ; Nicholson , Chantelle ( 2013 ) . The Gilbert Scott Book of British Food . London : Bantam . ISBN <unk> . 
 = Hail to the Thief = 
 Hail to the Thief ( also referred to as Hail to the Thief , ( or , The Gloaming . ) by the album 's liner notes ) is the sixth studio album by the English rock band Radiohead , released on 9 June 2003 by Parlophone internationally and by Capitol Records in the United States . It was produced by Radiohead 's longtime producer Nigel Godrich . Following the electronic and jazz styles of Kid A ( 2000 ) and Amnesiac ( 2001 ) , the album returned to the guitar rock of Radiohead 's earlier albums , but retained electronic elements such as drum machines , synthesisers and digital manipulation . To avoid the protracted recording sessions of previous albums , the band recorded it quickly , employing a live , " spontaneous " approach . 
 Many of the album 's lyrics were written in response to the War on Terror and the resurgence of right @-@ wing politics in the Western part of the world after the turn of the millennium . Songwriter and vocalist Thom Yorke said the album expresses " frustration and powerlessness and anger , and the huge gap between the people that put themselves in control and the people that allegedly voted for them . " 
 Despite a high @-@ profile internet leak ten weeks before its release , Hail to the Thief debuted at number one in the United Kingdom and number three in the United States . It produced three charting singles : " There There " , " Go to Sleep " and " 2 + 2 = 5 " . It is certified platinum in the UK , Canada and the US . It received positive reviews and became the fifth consecutive Radiohead album to be nominated for the Grammy Award for Best Alternative Music Album . It was Radiohead 's last studio album released as part of their six @-@ album recording contract with Parlophone and Capitol Records . 
 = = Background = = 
 With their previous albums Kid A ( 2000 ) and Amnesiac ( 2001 ) , Radiohead replaced their earlier guitar @-@ led rock sound with a more electronic style . On tour in 2000 and 2001 , the band learned how to perform the electronic music live , combining synthetic sounds with conventional rock instrumentation . Songwriter Thom Yorke said : " Even with electronics , there is an element of spontaneous performance in using them . It was the tension between what 's human and what 's coming from the machines . That was stuff we were getting into . " He stated that Radiohead did not want to make a " big creative leap or statement " with their next album . 
 In early 2002 , after the Amnesiac tour had finished , Yorke sent his bandmates CDs containing demos of songs he was considering for Radiohead 's sixth album . The three CDs , titled The Gloaming , <unk> and Hold Your Prize , comprised electronic music and piano and guitar sketches . Radiohead had tried to record some of the songs , such as " I Will " and " A Wolf at the Door " , in the joint sessions for Kid A and Amnesiac , but were not satisfied with the results . The band spent May and June 2002 arranging and rehearsing the songs before performing many of them on their tour of Spain and Portugal in July and August . 
 = = Recording = = 
 In September 2002 Radiohead moved to the Ocean Way Recording studios in Hollywood , Los Angeles with producer Nigel Godrich and artist Stanley Donwood , who have both worked with the band since their second album , The Bends ( 1995 ) . The location was suggested by Godrich , who had used the studio to produce records by Travis and Beck and thought it would be a " good change of scenery " for Radiohead . Yorke said : " We were like , ' Do we want to fly halfway around the world to do this ? ' But it was terrific , because we worked really hard . We did a track a day . It was sort of like holiday camp . " 
 Radiohead had created Kid A and Amnesiac through a years @-@ long process of recording and editing that drummer Phil Selway described as " manufacturing music in the studio " . For their next album , the band sought to capture a more immediate , " live " sound . Yorke told MTV : " The last two studio records were a real headache . We had spent so much time looking at computers and grids , we were like , that 's enough , we can 't do that any more . This time , we used computers , but they had to actually be in the room with all the gear . So everything was about performance , like staging a play . " 
 Most electronic elements were not overdubbed but recorded live in the studio . Greenwood used the music programming language Max to sample and manipulate the band 's playing in real time , and continued to use modular synthesisers and the ondes Martenot , an early theremin @-@ like electronic instrument he first used on Kid A. After using effects pedals heavily on previous albums , he mostly used clean guitar sounds to see if he could " come up with interesting things " without them . 
 Radiohead tried to work quickly and spontaneously , avoiding procrastination and over @-@ analysis . Yorke was forced to write lyrics differently , as he did not have time to rewrite them in the studio ; for some songs , he returned to the method of cutting up words and arranging them randomly he had employed for Kid A and Amnesiac . Greenwood said : " We didn 't really have time to be stressed about what we did . We got to the end of the second week before we even heard what we did on the first two days , and didn 't even remember recording it or who was playing things . Which is a magical way of doing things . " The approach protected against the tension of previous sessions ; O 'Brien told Rolling Stone that Hail to the Thief was the first Radiohead album " where , at the end of making it , we haven 't wanted to kill each other . " 
 Inspired by the Beatles , Radiohead tried to keep the songs succinct . The opening track , " 2 + 2 = 5 " , was initially recorded as a studio test , and was finished in two hours . Radiohead struggled to record " There There " ; after rerecording it in their Oxfordshire studio , Yorke was so relieved to have captured the song he wept , feeling it was the band 's best work . Radiohead had attempted to record an electronic version of " I Will " in the Kid A and Amnesiac sessions , but abandoned it as " dodgy Kraftwerk " ; instead they used components of this recording to create " Like Spinning Plates " on Amnesiac . For Hail to the Thief , the band sought to " get to the core of what 's good about the song " and not be distracted by production details or new sounds , settling on a stripped @-@ back arrangement . 
 Radiohead recorded most of Hail to the Thief in two weeks , with additional recording and mixing at Radiohead 's studio in Oxfordshire , England in late 2002 and early 2003 . In contrast to the relaxed Los Angeles sessions , which Godrich described as " very fruitful " , mixing and sequencing the album created conflict . Yorke said : " We had massive arguments about how it was put together and mixed . Making it was a piece of piss , for the first time it was really good fun to make a record ... but we finished it and nobody could let go of it . ' Cause there was a long sustained period during which we lived with it but it wasn 't completely finished , so you get attached to versions and we had big rows about it . " Godrich estimated that rough mixes from the Los Angeles sessions were used for a third of the final album . 
 = = Lyrics and themes = = 
 Hail to the Thief 's lyrics were influenced by what Yorke called " the general sense of ignorance and intolerance and panic and stupidity " following the 2000 election of US President George W. Bush . He took words and phrases from discussion of the unfolding War on Terror and used them in the album 's lyrics and artwork . He denied any intent to make a " political statement " with the songs , and told the Toronto Star : " I desperately tried not to write anything political , anything expressing the deep , profound terror I 'm living with day to day . But it 's just fucking there , and eventually you have to give it up and let it happen . " 
 At the time the father of an infant son , Yorke adopted a strategy of " distilling " the political themes into " childlike simplicity " . He took phrases from fairy tales and folklore , such as the tale of Chicken Little , and children 's literature and television he shared with his son , including the 1970s TV series Bagpuss , whose creator Oliver Postgate is thanked in the liner notes . Parenthood made Yorke concerned about the condition of the world and how it could affect future generations . Jonny Greenwood felt Yorke 's lyrics expressed " confusion and escape , like ' I 'm going to stay at home and look after the people I care about , buy a month 's supply of food ' . " 
 Yorke also took phrases from Dante 's Inferno , the subject of his partner 's PhD thesis . Several songs , such as " 2 + 2 
 = 5 " , " Sit Down Stand Up " , and " Sail to the Moon " , reference Christian versions of good and evil and heaven and hell , a first for Radiohead 's music . Other songs reference science fiction and horror , such as the wolves and vampires of " A Wolf at the Door " and " We Suck Young Blood " , the reference to the 1949 dystopian novel Nineteen Eighty @-@ Four in " 2 + 2 = 
 5 " , and the allusion to the giant of Gulliver 's Travels ( 1726 ) in " Go to Sleep " . 
 Yorke has described Hail to the Thief variously as expressing " a general fear of the future , that it 's being jeopardised , that it 's difficult to do very much about , because things have been set in motion that seem unstoppable " ; " frustration and powerlessness and anger , and the huge gap between the people that put themselves in control and the people that allegedly voted for them " ; and " the conflict between being incredibly angry and being so tired you just want to give up . " 
 = = = Title and subtitles = = = 
 Radiohead struggled to name the album . The band considered naming it The Gloaming ( meaning " twilight " or " dusk " ) , but this was rejected for being too " poetic " and " doomy " and became the album 's subtitle . Other titles considered included Little Man Being Erased , The Boney King of Nowhere and Snakes and Ladders , which became the subtitles for the songs " Go To Sleep " , " There There " and " Sit Down . Stand Up " respectively . The concept of giving the album and each track subtitles came from Victorian playbills showcasing moralistic songs played in music halls . 
 The phrase " hail to the thief " was used by anti @-@ George W. Bush protesters during the controversy surrounding the 2000 US presidential election as a play on " Hail to the Chief " , the American presidential anthem . Yorke described hearing the phrase for the first time as a " formative moment " for the album . The band chose it as the album title partly to " state the bleeding obvious ... that the most powerful country on earth is run by somebody who stole an election " , but also in response to " the rise of doublethink and general intolerance and madness , and feeling very much like individuals were totally out of control of the situation that somehow it was a manifestation of something not really human . " Yorke worried the title might be misconstrued as referring solely to the US election controversy , but his bandmates felt it " conjured up all the nonsense and absurdity and jubilation of the times . " 
 = = Artwork = = 
 Hail to the Thief 's artwork was created by Stanley Donwood , who has created the artwork for every Radiohead release since The Bends . The cover art , titled " Pacific Coast " , is a road map of Hollywood with words and phrases taken from Los Angeles 's roadside advertising , such as " God " , " TV " and " oil " , in place of buildings . Donwood said : " Advertising is designed to be seductive and attractive and , in a lot of ways , it 's very beautiful . But there 's something unsettling about being continually sold something . I liked taking the elements of roadside advertising out of context because it removes the imperative and just goes to the essence of it – the pure heart of advertising . " Other words in the artwork were provided by Yorke , taken from political discussion surrounding the War on Terror . Among them is the phrase " burn the witch " , the title of a song Radiohead worked on during the Hail to the Thief sessions but did not complete until their ninth album , A Moon Shaped Pool ( 2016 ) . 
 Comparing it to the more subdued palettes of his prior Radiohead artworks , Donwood described the cover 's bright , " pleasing " colours as " ominous because all these colours that I 've used are derived from the petrol @-@ chemical industry ... None of it is natural . It essentially comes from black sludge . We 've created this incredibly vibrant society , but we 're going to have to deal with the consequences sooner or later . " Essayist Amy Britton interpreted the artwork as an allusion to the Bush administration 's " road map for peace " plan for the Israeli @-@ Palestinian conflict . Joseph Tate , likening the art to the paintings of French artist Jean Dubuffet , found it depicted a " homogenized and heavily regimented " portrayal of " capitalism 's glaring visual presence : an oppressive sameness of style and color that mirrors globalization 's reduction of difference . " Other artworks included with the album refer to cities including New York , London , Grozny , and Baghdad . Early editions contained a fold @-@ out road map of the cover . 
 = = Composition = = 
 Hail to the Thief features less digital manipulation and more conventional rock instrumentation than Radiohead 's previous two albums , making prominent use of live drums , guitar and piano . Yorke 's voice , heavily manipulated on Kid A and Amnesiac , returned to the front of the music undisguised . Several tracks , such as " 2 + 2 
 = 5 " , " Sit Down Stand Up " and " There There " , use the " Pixies @-@ like " quiet @-@ to @-@ loud building of tension Radiohead had employed on previous albums . 
 Though Yorke described Hail to the Thief as " very acoustic " , he denied that it was a " guitar record " . The album retains electronic elements such as synthesisers , drum machines and sampling , and Jonny Greenwood and Yorke are both credited with playing " laptop " on the album ; some tracks , such as " <unk> " , " The Gloaming " and " <unk> " , are predominantly electronic . Spin reviewer Will Hermes found that Hail to the Thief " seesaws between the chill of sequencers and the warmth of fingers on strings and keys . " Despite its dark themes , Radiohead saw Hail to the Thief as a " sparkly , shiny pop record . Clear and pretty . " O 'Brien felt the album captured a new " swaggering " sound , saying " there 's space and sunshine and energy in the songs . " 
 The album 's opening track , " 2 + 2 = 
 5 ( The <unk> ) " , is a rock song that builds to a loud climax . " Sit Down . Stand Up ( Snakes and Ladders ) " , an electronic song , was influenced by the jazz musician Charles Mingus . " Sail to the Moon ( Brush the Cobwebs Out of the Sky ) " , is a lullaby @-@ like piano ballad with shifting time signatures alluding to the Biblical story of Noah 's Ark , and was written " in five minutes " for Yorke 's infant son Noah . 
 " <unk> ( Honeymoon is Over ) " , is an electronic song about " the slide backwards that 's happening everywhere you look . " " Go to Sleep ( Little Man being Erased ) " , begins with an acoustic guitar riff Colin Greenwood described as " 1960s English sort of folk " . " Where I End and You Begin ( The Sky is Falling In ) " , is a rock song with " walls " of ondes Martenot and rhythm section influenced by 1980s band New Order . Yorke described " We Suck Young Blood ( Your Time is Up ) " , as a " slave ship tune " with a " freeform jazz nightmare " break , and is " not to be taken seriously . " With ill @-@ timed , " zombie @-@ like " handclaps , the song satirises Hollywood culture and its " constant desire to stay young and fleece people , suck their energy . " 
 " The Gloaming ( Softly Open our Mouths in the Cold ) " , is an electronic song with " mechanical rhythms " Jonny Greenwood built from tape loops . Greenwood described it as " very old school electronica : no computers , just analogue synths , tape machines , and <unk> . " Yorke felt the song was " the most explicit protest song on the record ... I feel really strongly that it 's about the rise of fascism , and the rise of intolerance and bigotry and fear , and all the things that keep a population down . " " There There ( The Boney King of Nowhere ) " , is a guitar @-@ led rock song with layered percussion building to a loud climax . It was influenced by krautrock band Can , Siouxsie and the Banshees and the Pixies . 
 Yorke described " I Will ( No Man 's Land ) " as " the angriest song I 've ever written " , with lyrics inspired by news footage of a bomb shelter containing children and families being destroyed in the first Gulf War . " A <unk> at a Wedding ( No No No No No No No No ) " , is a funk @-@ influenced song that expresses the helplessness Yorke felt in the face of chaotic world events : " Like a <unk> at a wedding , nobody knows what 's going on , it 's just a riot . " For " <unk> ( Judge , Jury & Executioner ) " , a song built on a driving fuzz bassline , Radiohead sought to recreate the " frightening " detuned keyboard sounds of 1970s and 80s new wave bands such as Tubeway Army . 
 Jonny Greenwood described " <unk> ( As Dead as Leaves ) " as " very simple and sort of quite pretty , but there 's something about the music for me , the chords for me , where it never quite resolves . " The NME described the album 's final track , " A Wolf at the Door ( It Girl . Rag Doll . ) " , as " a pretty song , with a sinister monologue over the top of it " ; Greenwood likened its lyrics to a Grimms ' fairy tale . Yorke described the song 's placement at the end of the album as " sort of like waking you up at the end ... it 's all been a nightmare and you need to go and get a glass of water now . " 
 = = Promotion and release = = 
 According to critic Alexis Petridis , Hail to the Thief 's marketing campaign was " by [ Radiohead ] standards ... a promotional blitzkrieg " . In April 2003 , promotional posters spoofing talent recruitment posters appeared in Los Angeles and London with slogans taken from the lyrics of " We Suck Young Blood " . The posters included a phone number spelling the <unk> " to thief " , which connected callers to a recording welcoming them to the " Hail to the Thief customer care hotline " . In May , planes flew over the 2003 Coachella Valley Music and Arts Festival in California trailing Hail to the Thief banners . 
 Yorke asked Bagpuss creator Oliver Postgate to create a music video for lead single " There There " , but Postgate , who was retired , declined . Instead , a stop @-@ motion animation video was created by Chris Hopewell . The video debuted on the Times Square Jumbotron in New York on 20 May 2003 , and received hourly play that day on MTV2 . In June , Radiohead relaunched their official site , featuring digital animations on the themes of mass @-@ media culture and 24 @-@ hour cities . In the same month , Radiohead launched <unk> , where short films , music videos and live webcasts from the studio were streamed at scheduled times . Visitors late for streams were shown a test card with " 1970s @-@ style " intermission music . Yorke said Radiohead had planned to broadcast on their own television channel , but this was cancelled due to " money , cutbacks , too weird , might scare the children , staff layoffs , shareholders . " The material was released on the 2004 DVD The Most Gigantic Lying Mouth of All Time . 
 Hail to the Thief was released on 9 June 2003 . The CD was printed with copy protection in some regions ; the Belgian consumer group Test @-@ <unk> received complaints that the album could not be played on some CD players . A compilation of Hail to the Thief B @-@ sides , remixes and live performances , COM LAG ( 2plus2isfive ) , was released in April 2004 . 
 = = = Internet leak = = = 
 On March 30 2003 , ten weeks before release , an unmastered version of Hail to the Thief containing unfinished tracks was leaked online . Jonny Greenwood wrote on Radiohead 's official forum : " We 're kind of pissed off about it , to be honest ... Work we 've not finished , being released in this sloppy way , ten weeks before the real version is even available ... It 's not [ downloaders ] I 'm pissed off about , it 's just the situation I guess . It 's stolen work , fer fuck 's sake . " [ sic ] Colin Greenwood said the leak was " like being photographed with one sock on when you get out of bed in the morning , " but expressed dismay at the cease @-@ and @-@ desist orders sent by label EMI to radio stations and fan sites playing the leaked tracks , saying : " Don 't record companies usually pay thousands of dollars to get stations to play their records ? Now they 're paying money to stations not to play them . " 
 EMI decided against moving the album 's release date earlier to combat the leak . EMI 's vice president of new media Ted Mico said : " The leak did allow us to be in the press continually for the last 10 weeks . We 're confident people will buy this record . " The leak partly influenced Radiohead 's decision to self @-@ release their next album , In Rainbows ( 2007 ) , via a pay @-@ what @-@ you @-@ want model , terming it " their leak date " . 
 = = Reception and legacy = = 
 = = = Commercial = = = 
 Hail to the Thief peaked at number one in the United Kingdom and stayed on the chart for fourteen weeks . In the United States the album entered at number three in the Billboard 200 , selling 300 @,@ 000 copies in its first week , more than any other Radiohead album . By 2008 it had sold over a million copies in the US . The album is certified platinum in the UK , Canada and the US , and gold in Australia and France . 
 = = = Critical = = = 
 Hail to the Thief has a score of 85 out of 100 on review aggregate site Metacritic , indicating " universal acclaim " . Neil McCormick , writing for the Daily Telegraph , called Hail to the Thief " Radiohead firing on all cylinders , a major work by major artists at the height of their powers . " Andy Kellman of AllMusic wrote that Radiohead had " entered a second decade of record @-@ making with a surplus of momentum . " Chris Ott of Pitchfork Media wrote that Radiohead had " largely succeeded in their efforts to shape pop music into as boundless and possible a medium as it should be , " naming the album " best new music " . Writing for New York , Ethan Brown said that Hail to the Thief " isn 't a protest album , and that 's why it works so well . As with great Radiohead records past , such as Kid A , the music – restlessly , freakishly inventive – pushes politics far into the background . " 
 The NME 's James Oldham saw Hail to the Thief as " a good rather than great record ... the impact of the best moments is dulled by the inclusion of some indifferent electronic compositions . " Alexis Petridis of The Guardian wrote that while " you could never describe Hail to the Thief as a bad record " , it was " neither startlingly different and fresh nor packed with the sort of anthemic songs that once made [ Radiohead ] the world 's biggest band . " Robert Christgau of The Village Voice felt that while its melodies and guitar work are " never as elegiac and lyrical " or " articulate and demented " as those of OK Computer , he felt it " flows better " and later awarded it a one @-@ star " honourable mention " . In 2010 , Rolling Stone ranked Hail to the Thief the 89th best album of the 2000s , writing that " the dazzling overabundance of ideas makes Hail to the Thief a triumph . " 
 Hail to the Thief was the fifth consecutive Radiohead album to be nominated for a Grammy Award for Best Alternative Music Album . The album earned producer Nigel Godrich and engineer Darrell Thorp the 2004 Grammy Award for Best Engineered Non @-@ Classical Album . 
 = = = Band opinions = = = 
 Radiohead have been critical of Hail to the Thief . In a 2006 interview with Spin , Yorke said : " I 'd maybe change the playlist . I think we had a meltdown when we put it together ... as Nigel says , I wish I had another go at it . We wanted to do things quickly , and I think the songs suffered . " In 2008 , O 'Brien told Mojo : " We should have pruned it down to 10 songs , then it would have been a really good record . I think we lost people on a couple of tracks and it broke the spell of the record . " In the same interview , Colin Greenwood said : " I didn 't want three or four songs on there , because I thought some of the ideas we were trying out weren 't completely finished ... For me , Hail to the Thief was more of a holding process , really . " In 2013 , Godrich told the NME : " I think there 's some great moments on there - but too many songs . I think that 's kind of agreed amongst the camp these days but at the time it was just what happened ... As a whole I think it 's charming because of the lack of editing . But personally it 's probably my least favourite of all the albums ... It didn 't really have its own direction . It was almost like a <unk> of previous work . Maybe that 's its strength . " 
 = = Reissues = = 
 In 2007 , Radiohead left EMI , parent company of Parlophone , after failed contract negotiations . EMI retained the copyright to Radiohead 's back catalogue . After a period of being out of print on vinyl , EMI reissued a double @-@ LP of Hail to the Thief on 19 August 2008 , along with albums Kid A , Amnesiac and OK Computer as part of the " From the Capitol Vaults " series . On 31 August 2009 Hail to the Thief was reissued on CD in a 2 @-@ CD " Collector 's Edition " and a 2 @-@ CD 1 @-@ DVD " Special Collector 's Edition " . The first CD contains the original studio album ; the second CD collects B @-@ sides and live performances previously compiled on the COM LAG ( 2plus2isfive ) EP ( 2004 ) ; the DVD contains music videos and a live television performance . Radiohead had no input into the reissue and the music was not remastered . 
 Pitchfork named the " Collector 's Edition " " best new reissue " and highlighted " <unk> Order " as the best B @-@ side included in the bonus material . The The A.V. Club wrote that the bonus content was all " worth hearing , though the live tracks stand out . " 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written and composed by Radiohead ( Colin Greenwood , Jonny Greenwood , Ed O 'Brien , Phil Selway and Thom Yorke ) . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Adapted from the Hail to the Thief liner notes . 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = = = Singles = = = 
 " — " denotes releases that did not chart . 
 = Ferruccio Busoni = 
 Ferruccio Busoni ( 1 April 1866 – 27 July 1924 ) ( given names : Ferruccio Dante <unk> Benvenuto ) was an Italian composer , pianist , conductor , editor , writer , and teacher . His international career and reputation meant that he met and had close relations with many of the leading musicians , artists and literary figures of his time , and he was sought @-@ after both as a keyboard instructor and a teacher of composition . 
 Busoni was born in Empoli , just south of Florence ; he was the son of professional musicians . Initially trained by his father , he later studied at the Vienna Conservatory and then with Wilhelm Mayer and Carl Reinecke . In the ensuing years , after brief periods teaching in Helsinki and Moscow , he devoted himself to composing , teaching , and touring as a virtuoso pianist in Europe and the United States . His writings on music were influential ; they covered not only aesthetics but considerations of microtones and other innovative topics . He was based in Berlin from 1894 but spent much of World War I in Switzerland . 
 Busoni was an outstanding ( if sometimes controversial ) pianist from an early age . He began composing in his early years in a late romantic style , but after 1907 , when he published his Sketch of a New Esthetic of Music , he developed a more individual style , often with elements of atonality . His visits to America led to interest in North American indigenous tribal melodies which were reflected in some of his works . His compositions include works for piano , including a monumental Piano Concerto , and transcriptions of the works of others , notably Johann Sebastian Bach which appeared in the Bach @-@ Busoni Edition . His other compositions include chamber music , vocal and orchestral works , and also operas , one of which , Doktor Faust , was left unfinished at the time of his death . Busoni died in Berlin at the age of 58 . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early career = = = 
 Busoni was born in the Tuscan town of Empoli , the only child of two professional musicians , Ferdinando , a clarinettist , and Anna ( née Weiss ) , a pianist . The family shortly afterwards moved to Trieste . A child prodigy , largely taught by his father , he began performing and composing at the age of seven . In an autobiographical note he comments " My father knew little about the pianoforte and was erratic in rhythm , so he made up for these shortcomings with an indescribable combination of energy , severity and pedantry . " Busoni made his public debut as a pianist in a concert with his parents at the Schiller @-@ Verein in Trieste on 24 November 1873 playing the first movement of Mozart 's Sonata in C Major , and pieces by Schumann and Clementi . Commercially promoted by his parents in a series of further concerts , he was later to say " I never had a childhood . " In 1875 he made his concerto début playing Mozart 's Piano Concerto No. 24 . 
 From the ages of nine to eleven , with the help of a patron , Busoni studied at the Vienna Conservatory . His first performances in Vienna were glowingly received by the critic Eduard Hanslick . In 1877 he heard the playing of Franz Liszt , and was introduced to the composer who admired his performance . In the following year he composed a four @-@ movement concerto for piano and string quartet . Leaving Vienna he had a brief period of study in Graz with Wilhelm Mayer , and conducted a performance of his own composition Stabat Mater , Op. 55 in the composer 's initial numbering sequence , ( BV 119 , now lost ) in 1879 . Other early pieces were published at this time , including settings of Ave Maria ( Opp . 1 and 2 , BV 67 ) and some piano pieces . 
 Busoni was elected in 1881 to the Accademia <unk> of Bologna , the youngest person to receive this honour since Mozart . In the mid 1880s he was based in Vienna where he met with Karl Goldmark and helped to prepare the vocal score for the latter 's 1886 opera , Merlin . He also met Johannes Brahms , to whom he dedicated two sets of piano Etudes , and who recommended him to undertake study in Leipzig with Carl Reinecke . During this period he supported himself by giving recitals , and also by the financial support of a patron , the <unk> von Tedesco . He also continued to compose , and made his first attempt at an opera , <unk> , which he worked on from 1886 to 1889 before abandoning the project . In a letter he describes how , finding himself penniless in Leipzig , he appealed to the publisher Schwalm to take his compositions . Schwalm demurred but said he would commission a fantasy on Peter Cornelius 's opera The Barber of Baghdad for fifty marks down , and a hundred on completion . The next morning Busoni turned up at Schwalm 's office , and asked for 150 marks , handing over the completed work : " I worked from nine at night to three thirty , without a piano , and not knowing the opera beforehand . " 
 = = = Helsingfors , Moscow , America 1888 – 1894 = = = 
 In 1888 the musicologist Hugo Riemann recommended Busoni to Martin <unk> , director of the Institute of Music at Helsingfors ( now Helsinki , Finland , then part of the Russian Empire ) , for the vacant position of advanced piano instructor . This was Busoni 's first permanent post . Amongst his close colleagues and associates there were the conductor and composer Armas Järnefelt , the writer Adolf Paul , and the composer Jean Sibelius , with whom he struck up a continuing friendship . Paul described Busoni at this time as " a small , slender Italian with chestnut beard , grey eyes , young and gay , with ... a small round cap perched proudly on his thick artist 's curls " . Between 1888 and 1890 Busoni gave about thirty piano recitals and chamber concerts in Helsingfors ; amongst his compositions at this period were a set of Finnish folksongs for piano duet Op. 27 . In 1889 , visiting Leipzig , he heard a performance on the organ of JS Bach 's Toccata and Fugue in D minor ( BWV 565 ) , and was persuaded by his pupil Kathi Petri ( the mother of his future pupil Egon Petri , then only 5 years old ) , to transcribe it for piano . Busoni 's biographer Edward Dent writes that " This was not only the beginning of [ his ] transcriptions , but ... the beginning of that style of pianoforte touch and technique which was entirely [ Busoni 's ] creation . " Returning to Helsingfors , in March of the same year Busoni met his future wife , Gerda <unk> , the daughter of the Swedish sculptor Carl <unk> <unk> , and proposed to her within a week . For her he composed <unk> ( Finnish : To the beloved ) for cello and piano ( published 1891 without opus number , BV 237 ) . 
 In 1890 Busoni published his first edition of works of JS Bach ( the two- and three @-@ part Inventions ) . In the same year he won the prize for composition , with his <unk> ( " Concert Piece " ) for piano and orchestra Op. <unk> ( BV 236 ) , at the first Anton Rubinstein Competition , initiated by Anton Rubinstein himself at the St. Petersburg Conservatory . As a consequence he was invited to visit and teach at the Moscow Conservatoire . Gerda joined him in Moscow where they promptly married . His first concert in Moscow , when he performed Beethoven 's Emperor Concerto , was warmly received . But living in Moscow did not suit the <unk> for both financial and professional reasons ; he felt excluded by his nationalistically @-@ inclined Russian colleagues . So when he received an approach from William Steinway to teach at the Boston New England Conservatory of Music he was happy to take the opportunity , particularly as the conductor at that time of the Boston Symphony Orchestra was Arthur Nikisch , whom he had known since 1876 , when they performed together at a concert in Vienna . 
 Busoni 's first son , Benvenuto ( known as Benni ) , was born in Boston in 1892 , but Busoni 's experience at the Boston Conservatory proved unsatisfactory . After a year he resigned from the Conservatory and launched himself into a series of recitals across the Eastern USA . 
 = = = Berlin 1893 – 1913 : " A new epoch " = = = 
 In April 1893 Busoni was present at the Berlin premiere of Giuseppe Verdi 's opera Falstaff . The result was to force on him a re @-@ evaluation of the potential of Italian musical traditions which he had so far ignored in favour of the German traditions , and in particular the models of Johannes Brahms and the orchestral techniques of Liszt and Richard Wagner . He immediately began to draft an adulatory letter to Verdi ( which he never summoned the courage to send ) , in which he addressed him as " Italy 's leading composer " and " one of the noblest persons of our time " , and in which he explained that " Falstaff provoked in me such a revolution of spirit that I can ... date the beginning of a new epoch in my artistic life from that time . " 
 In 1894 Busoni settled in Berlin , which he henceforth regarded as his home base , except during the years around World War I. His earlier feelings about the city had been unsympathetic : in an 1889 letter to Gerda he had described it as " this Jewish city that I hate , irritating , idle , arrogant , parvenu " . The city was swiftly growing in population and influence at this period and determined to stake itself as the musical capital of the united Germany ; but as Busoni 's friend the English composer Bernard van Dieren points out " international virtuosi who for practical reasons chose Berlin as their abode were not so much concerned with questions of prestige " , and for Busoni the city 's development as " the centre of the musical industry [ was to ] develop an atmosphere which [ Busoni ] detested more than the deepest pool of stagnant convention " . 
 Berlin proved an excellent base for European tours . As in the previous two years in the USA Busoni had to depend for his living on exhausting but remunerative tours as a piano virtuoso ; in addition at this period he was remitting substantial amounts to his parents , who continued to depend on his income . As a <unk> Busoni 's programming and style initially raised concerns in some of Europe 's musical centres . His first concerts in London , in 1897 , met with mixed comments . The Musical Times reported that he " commenced in a manner to irritate the genuine amateurs [ i.e. music lovers ] by playing a ridiculous travesty of one of Bach 's masterly Organ Preludes and Fugues , but he made amends by an interpretation of Chopin 's Studies ( Op. 25 ) which was of course unequal but , on the whole , interesting " . In Paris the critic Arthur <unk> commented " this artist has certainly great qualities of technique and charm " , but strongly objected to his addition of chromatic passages to parts of Liszt 's St. François de Paule <unk> sur les <unk> . 
 Busoni 's international reputation swiftly rose and he frequently <unk> in Berlin , the other European capitals and in European regional centres ( including Manchester , Birmingham , Marseilles , Florence , and many German and Austrian cities ) throughout this period , as well as returning to America for four visits between 1904 and 1915 : his wandering life led van Dieren to call him " a musical Ishmael " ( after the Biblical wanderer ) . The musicologist Anthony Beaumont considers Busoni 's six Liszt recitals in Berlin of 1911 as " the climax of Busoni 's pre @-@ war career as a pianist " . 
 Busoni 's performing commitments somewhat stifled his creative capacity during this period ; in 1896 he wrote " I have great success as a pianist , the composer I conceal for the present . " His monumental Piano Concerto ( which , in five movements , lasts over an hour and includes in its last movement an offstage male chorus ) was written between 1901 and 1904 . In 1904 and 1905 Busoni wrote his Turandot Suite as incidental music for Carlo <unk> 's play Turandot . A major project undertaken at this time was the opera Die <unk> , based on a tale by E. T. A. Hoffmann , first performed ( to a lukewarm reception ) in Berlin in 1912 . Busoni also began to produce the solo piano works in which his maturer style was clearly revealed , including the Elegies ( BV 249 , 1907 ) , the suite An die Jugend ( BV 252 , 1909 ) and the first two piano sonatinas ( BV 257 , 1910 and BV 259 , 1912 ) . 
 In a series of orchestral concerts in Berlin between 1902 and 1909 , both as pianist and conductor , Busoni particularly promoted contemporary music from outside Germany ( though he avoided contemporary music , except for his own , in his solo recitals ) . The series , which was held at the <unk> ( Beethoven Hall ) , included German premieres of music by Edward Elgar , Sibelius , César Franck , Claude Debussy , Vincent D 'Indy , Carl Nielsen and Béla Bartók . The concerts also included premieres of some of Busoni 's own works of the period , amongst them , in 1904 , the Piano Concerto , in which he was the soloist and the conductor was Karl Muck , in 1905 his Turandot Suite , and in 1907 his Comedy Overture . Music of older masters was included , but sometimes with an unexpected twist – for example Beethoven 's Third Piano Concerto with the eccentric first movement cadenza by Charles @-@ Valentin Alkan ( which includes references to Beethoven 's Fifth Symphony ) . The concerts aroused much publicity but generated aggressive comments from critics . <unk> suggests the programming of the concerts was " generally regarded as a provocation " . 
 During the period Busoni undertook teaching at masterclasses at Weimar , Vienna and Basel . In 1900 he was invited by Duke Karl @-@ Alexander of Weimar to lead a masterclass for fifteen young virtuosi . This concept was more amenable to Busoni than teaching formally in a Conservatory : the twice @-@ weekly seminars were successful and were repeated in the following year . Pupils included Maud Allan , who later became famous as a dancer and remained a friend . His experience in Vienna in 1907 was less satisfactory , although amongst his more rewarding pupils were Ignaz Friedman , Leo Sirota , Louis Gruenberg , Józef <unk> and Louis <unk> ; the latter four were dedicatees of pieces in Busoni 's 1909 piano album An die Jugend . But arguments with the Directorate of the Vienna Conservatoire , under whose auspices the classes were held , soured the atmosphere . In the autumn of 1910 Busoni gave masterclasses and also carried out a series of recitals in Basel . 
 In the years before World War I , Busoni steadily extended his contacts in the art world in general as well as amongst musicians . Arnold Schoenberg , with whom Busoni had been in correspondence since 1903 , settled in Berlin in 1911 partially as a consequence of Busoni lobbying on his behalf . In 1913 Busoni arranged at his own apartment a private performance of Schoenberg 's Pierrot Lunaire which was attended by , amongst others , Willem Mengelberg , Edgard Varèse , and Artur Schnabel . In Paris in 1912 Busoni had meetings with Gabriele D 'Annunzio who proposed collaboration in a ballet or opera . He also met with the Futurist artists Filippo Marinetti and Umberto Boccioni . 
 = = = Before and after World War I ( 1913 – 1920 ) = = = 
 Following a series of concerts in Northern Italy in Spring 1913 , Busoni was offered the directorship of the Liceo Rossini in Bologna . He had recently moved to an apartment in Viktoria @-@ Luise @-@ Platz in Schöneberg , Berlin , but took up the offer , intending to spend his summers in Berlin . The posting proved not to be a success . Bologna was a cultural backwater , despite occasional visits from celebrities such as Isadora Duncan . Busoni 's piano pupils were untalented , and he had constant arguments with the local authorities . After the outbreak of World War I in August 1914 , he asked for a year of absence to play an American tour ; in fact he was never to return . Virtually his sole permanent achievement at the school was to have modernized its sanitary facilities . He had however during this time composed another concertante work for piano and orchestra , the Indian Fantasy . The piece is based on melodies and rhythms from various American Indian tribes ; Busoni derived them from a book he had received from his former pupil , the ethnomusicologist Natalie Curtis <unk> during his 1910 tour of the USA . The work was premiered with Busoni as soloist in March 1914 in Berlin . 
 From June 1914 to January 1915 Busoni was in Berlin : as the native of a neutral country ( Italy ) living in Germany , the outbreak of war did not at first greatly concern him . During this period he began to work seriously on the libretto for his proposed opera Doktor Faust . In January 1915 he left for a concert tour of the USA , which was to be his last visit there . During this time he continued work on his Bach edition , including his version of the Goldberg Variations . On his return to Europe Italy had entered the War , and he therefore chose to base himself from 1915 in Switzerland . Here in Zürich he found local supporters in Volkmar Andreae , conductor of the Tonhalle Orchestra , and Philipp Jarnach . His friend José Vianna da Motta also taught piano at Geneva at this time . Andreae arranged for Busoni to give concerts with his orchestra . Jarnach , who was 23 when he met Busoni in 1915 , became Busoni 's indispensable assistant , among other things preparing piano scores of his operas – Busoni referred to him as his " <unk> " . While in America Busoni had already carried out further work on Doktor Faust and had written the libretto of his one @-@ act opera Arlecchino – He completed Arlecchino in Zürich and , to provide a full evening at the theatre , reworked his earlier Turandot into a one @-@ act piece . The two were premiered together in Zürich in May 1917 . 
 In 1916 whilst visiting Italy , Busoni met again with the artist Boccioni , who painted his portrait ; Busoni was deeply affected when a few months later Boccioni was killed ( in a riding accident ) whilst on military training , and published a strongly anti @-@ war article . An expanded re @-@ issue of Busoni 's 1907 work A New Esthetic of Music let to a virulent counter @-@ attack from the German composer Hans <unk> and an extended war of words . Busoni continued to experiment with microtones ; in America he had obtained some harmonium reeds tuned in third @-@ tones , and he claimed that he " had worked out the theory of a system of thirds of tones in two rows , each separated from each other by a semitone " . 
 Although Busoni met with many other artistic personalities who were also basing themselves in Switzerland during the war ( including Stephan Zweig and James Joyce – the former noting Busoni 's extensive drinking ) he soon found his circumstances limiting . After the end of the war , he again undertook concert tours in England , Paris and Italy . In London he met with the composer Kaikhosru Sorabji who played to him his Second Piano Sonata ( which he dedicated to Busoni ) ; Busoni was sufficiently impressed to write for Sorabji a letter of recommendation . When Busoni 's former pupil Leo <unk> , now an official at the Ministry of Culture in the German Weimar Republic , invited him to return to Germany , with the promise of a teaching post and productions of his operas , he was very glad to take the opportunity . 
 = = = Last years ( 1920 – 1924 ) = = = 
 In 1920 Busoni returned to the Berlin apartment at Viktoria @-@ Luise @-@ Platz 11 , Berlin @-@ Schöneberg , which he had left in 1915 . He was now in a state of declining health . Although he continued to give concerts his main concern was to complete Doktor Faust , the libretto of which had been published in Germany in 1918 . In 1921 he wrote " Like a subterranean river , heard but not seen , the music for Faust roars and flows continually in the depths of my aspirations " . 
 In Berlin Busoni was at the heart of the musical world of the Weimar Republic . His works , including his operas , were regularly programmed . He continued to perform whilst his health allowed it ; problems of hyperinflation in Germany meant that he needed to undertake tours to England . His last appearance as a pianist was in Berlin in May 1922 , playing Beethoven 's Emperor Concerto . Amongst his composition pupils in Berlin were Kurt Weill , Wladimir Vogel and Robert Blum , and he also during these last years had contact with Edgard Varèse , Igor Stravinsky , Hermann <unk> and others . 
 Busoni died in Berlin on 7 July 1924 , officially from heart failure , although inflamed kidneys and overwork also contributed to his death . Doktor Faust remained unfinished at his death and was premiered posthumously in Berlin in 1925 in a completion made by Jarnach . Busoni 's Berlin apartment was destroyed in an air @-@ raid in 1943 , and many of his possessions and papers were lost or looted . A plaque at the site commemorates his residence . Busoni 's wife Gerda died in Sweden in 1956 . Their son Benni , who despite his American nationality had lived in Berlin throughout World War II , died there in 1976 . Their second son <unk> , an illustrator , died in New York in 1962 . 
 = = Music = = 
 = = = Pianist = = = 
 The pianist Alfred Brendel opines that " Busoni 's piano @-@ playing signifies the victory of reflection over bravura " after the more flamboyant era of Liszt . He cites Busoni himself : " Music is so constituted that every context is a new context and should be treated as an ' exception ' . The solution of a problem , once found , cannot be reapplied to a different context . Our art is a theatre of surprise and invention , and of the seemingly unprepared . The spirit of music arises from the depths of our humanity and is returned to the high regions whence it has descended on mankind . " 
 Sir Henry Wood was surprised to hear Busoni playing passages in a Mozart concerto , written as single notes , with two hands in double octaves ; at which Donald Tovey proclaimed Busoni " to be an absolute purist in not confining himself strictly to Mozart 's written text " , that is , that Mozart himself could have taken similar liberties . The musicologist Percy Scholes wrote that " Busoni , from his perfect command over every means of expression and his complete consideration of every phrase in a composition to every other phrase and to the whole , was the truest artist of all the pianists [ I ] had ever heard . " 
 = = = Works = = = 
 Busoni 's works include compositions , adaptations , writings and recordings . 
 = = = = Opus numbers = = = = 
 Busoni gave many ( but not all ) of his works opus numbers ; some numbers apply to more than one work ( after the composer dropped some of his earlier works from his acknowledged corpus ) . Nor are the composer 's numbers all in temporal order . The musicologist Jürgen Kindermann has prepared a thematic catalogue of his works and transcriptions which is also used , in the form of the letters BV ( for Busoni Verzeichnis , German : Busoni Index : sometimes the letters <unk> for Kindermann Verzeichnis are used ) followed by an identifier , to identify his compositions and transcriptions . The identifier B ( for <unk> , German : arrangement ) is used for Busoni 's transcriptions and cadenzas – e.g. BV B 1 refers to Busoni 's cadenzas for Beethoven 's Piano Concerto No. 4 . 
 = = = = Early compositions = = = = 
 In 1917 Hugo Leichtentritt suggested that the Second Violin Sonata Op. 36a ( BV 244 ) , completed in 1900 , " stands on the border @-@ line between the first and second epochs of Busoni " , although Van Dieren asserts that in conversation Busoni " made no such claims for any work written before 1910 . This means that he dated his work as an independent composer from the piano pieces An die Jugend ... and the Berceuse in its original version for piano . " ( These works were actually written in 1909 ) . The Kindermann Busoni Verzeichnis lists over 200 compositions in the period to 1900 , which are met with very rarely in the contemporary repertoire or in recording , mostly featuring piano , either as solo instrument or accompanying others , but also including some works for chamber ensemble and some for orchestra , amongst them two large @-@ scale suites and a violin concerto . 
 Antony Beaumont comments that Busoni wrote virtually no chamber music after 1898 and no songs between 1886 and 1918 , commenting that this was " part of the process of freeing himself from his Leipzig background ... [ evoking ] worlds of middle @-@ class respectability in which he was not at home , and [ in which ] the shadows of Schumann , Brahms and Wolf loomed too large . " The first decade of the 20th century is described by Brendel as being for Busoni " a creative pause " after which he " finally gained an artistic profile of his own " as opposed to the " easy routine which had kept his entire earlier production on the tracks of eclecticism " . During this period appeared his Piano Concerto , Op. 39 , one of the largest such works ever written both in terms of duration and of resources . Dent comments " In construction [ the Concerto ] is difficult to analyse ... on account of the way in which themes are transferred from movement to another . The work has to be considered as a whole , and Busoni always desired it to be played straight through without interruption . " The press reaction to the premiere of the Concerto was largely outraged : the <unk> Rundschau complained of " Noise , more noise , eccentricity and licentiousness " ; another journal opined that " the composer would have done better to stay within more modest boundaries " . The other major work during this " creative pause " was the Turandot Suite . Busoni employed motifs from Chinese and other oriental music in the suite , though , as Leichtentritt points out , the Suite is " in fact the product of an Occidental mind , for whom the exact imitation of the real Chinese model would always be unnatural and unattainable ... the appearance is more artistic than the real thing would be . " The Suite was first performed as a purely musical item in 1905 ; it was used in a production of the play in 1911 , and was eventually transformed into a two @-@ act opera in 1917 . 
 = = = = Busoni and Bach = = = = 
 1894 saw the publication in Berlin of the first part of Busoni 's edition of the music of Johann Sebastian Bach for the piano ; the first book of The Well @-@ Tempered Clavier . This was equipped with substantial appendices , including one " On the Transcription of Bach 's Organ Works for the Pianoforte " . This was eventually to form a volume of the Bach @-@ Busoni Edition , an undertaking which was to extend over thirty years . Seven volumes were edited by Busoni himself ; these included the 1890 edition of the <unk> and Three @-@ Part Inventions . Busoni also began to publish his concert piano transcriptions of Bach 's music , which he often included in his own recitals . These included some of Bach 's chorale preludes for organ , the organ Toccata and Fugue in D minor , and the Chromatic Fantasia and Fugue . These transcriptions go beyond literal reproduction of the music for piano and often involve substantial recreation , although never straying from the original rhythmic outlines , melody notes and harmony . This is in line with Busoni 's own concept that the performing artist should be free to <unk> and communicate his divination of the composer 's intentions . Busoni adds tempo markings , articulation and phrase markings , dynamics and metronome markings to the originals , as well as extensive performance suggestions . In his edition of Bach 's Goldberg Variations ( BV B 35 ) , for example , he suggests cutting eight of the variations for a " concert performance " , as well as substantially rewriting many sections . Kenneth Hamilton comments that " the last four variations are rewritten as a free fantasy in a pianistic style which owes far more to Busoni than to Bach . " 
 On the death of his father in 1909 , Busoni wrote in his memory a Fantasia after J. S. Bach ( BV 253 ) ; and in the following year came his extended fantasy based on Bach , the Fantasia <unk> . 
 = = = = Writings = = = = 
 Busoni wrote a number of essays on music . The Entwurf einer neue <unk> der <unk> ( Sketch of a New Esthetic of Music ) , first published in 1907 , set out the principles underlying his performances and his mature compositions . A collection of reflections which are " the outcome of convictions long held and slowly matured " , the Sketch asserts that " The spirit of an artwork ... remains [ s ] unchanged in value through changing years " but its form , manner of expression , and the conventions of the era when it was created , " are transient and age rapidly " . The Sketch includes the maxim that " Music was born free ; and to win freedom is its destiny " . It therefore takes issue with conventional wisdom on music , caricatured by Busoni as the constricting rules of the " lawgivers " . It praises the music of Beethoven and JS Bach as the essence of the spirit of music ( " Ur @-@ Musik " ) and says that their art should " be conceived as a beginning , and not as an unsurpassable finality . " Busoni asserts the right of the interpreter vis @-@ à @-@ vis the purism of the " lawgivers " . " The performance of music , its emotional interpretation , derives from those free heights whence descended Art itself ... What the composer 's inspiration necessarily loses through notation , his interpreter should restore by his own . " He envisages a future music that will include the division of the octave into more than the traditional 12 semitones . However , he asserted the importance of musical form and structure : His idea of a ' Young Classicism ' " aimed to incorporate experimental features in " firm , rounded forms " ... motivated each time by musical necessity . " ( Brendel ) . 
 Another collection of Busoni 's essays was published in 1922 as Von der Einheit der Musik , later republished as <unk> und Einheit der Musik , and in 1957 translated as The Essence of Music . Busoni also wrote the librettos of his four operas . 
 = = = = Mature compositions = = = = 
 Writing in 1917 , Hugo Leichtentritt described Busoni 's mature style as having elements in common with those of Sibelius , Claude Debussy , Alexander Scriabin , and Arnold Schoenberg , noting in particular his movement away from traditional major and minor scales towards atonality . 
 The first landmarks of this mature style are the group of piano works published in 1907 – 1912 ( the Elegies , the suite An die Jugend and the first two piano sonatinas ) and Busoni 's first completed opera , Die <unk> ; together with the rather different Bach homage , the 1910 Fantasia <unk> , Busoni 's largest work for solo piano . About half an hour in length , it is essentially an extended fantasy on the final incomplete fugue from Bach 's The Art of Fugue . It uses several melodic figures found in Bach 's work , most notably the <unk> motif . Busoni revised the work a number of times and arranged it for two pianos . 
 Busoni also drew inspiration from North American indigenous tribal melodies drawn from the studies of Natalie Curtis , which informed his Indian Fantasy for piano and orchestra of 1913 and two books of solo piano sketches , Indian Diary . 
 In 1917 Busoni wrote the one @-@ act opera Arlecchino ( 1917 ) as a companion piece for his revision of Turandot as an opera . He began serious work on his opera Doktor Faust in 1916 , leaving it incomplete at his death . It was then finished by his student Philipp Jarnach , who worked with Busoni 's sketches as he knew of them . In the 1980s Antony Beaumont created an expanded and improved completion by drawing on material to which Jarnach did not have access ; Joseph Horowitz has described the Beaumont completion as " longer , more adventurous and perhaps less good . " 
 In the last seven years of his life Busoni worked sporadically on his <unk> , a compilation of exercises , transcriptions , and original compositions of his own , with which he hoped to pass on his accumulated knowledge of keyboard technique . It was issued in five parts between 1918 and 1922 
 = = = = Editions , transcriptions and arrangements = = = = 
 Apart from his work on the music of Bach , Busoni edited and transcribed works by other composers . He edited three volumes of the 34 @-@ volume Franz Liszt Foundation 's edition of Liszt 's works , including most of the <unk> , and the Grandes études de Paganini . Other Liszt transcriptions include his piano arrangement of Liszt 's organ Fantasy and Fugue on the chorale " Ad nos , ad <unk> <unk> " ( BV B 59 ) ( based on a theme from Giacomo Meyerbeer 's opera Les Huguenots ) and concert versions of two of the Hungarian Rhapsodies . 
 Busoni also made keyboard transcriptions of works by Mozart , Franz Schubert , Niels Gade and others in the period 1886 – 1891 for the publisher Breitkopf und Härtel . Later , during his earliest contacts with Arnold Schoenberg in 1909 , he made a ' concert interpretation ' of the latter 's atonal Piano Piece , Op. 11 , No. 2 ( BV B 97 ) ( which greatly annoyed Schoenberg himself ) . 
 Busoni 's own works sometimes feature incorporated elements of other composers ' music . The fourth movement of An die Jugend ( 1909 ) , for instance , uses two of Niccolò Paganini 's Caprices for solo violin ( numbers 11 and 15 ) , while the 1920 piece Piano Sonatina No. 6 ( Fantasia da camera super Carmen ) is based on themes from Georges Bizet 's opera Carmen . 
 = = = = Audio recordings = = = = 
 Busoni 's recorded output on gramophone record was very limited , and many of the original recordings were destroyed when the Columbia factory burnt down . Busoni mentions recording the Gounod @-@ Liszt Faust Waltz in a letter to his wife in 1919 . This recording was never released . He never recorded any of his own works . 
 = = = = Piano rolls = = = = 
 Busoni made a considerable number of piano rolls , and a small number of these have been re @-@ recorded onto vinyl record or CD . These include a 1950 recording by Columbia Records sourced from piano rolls made by <unk> @-@ Mignon including music of Chopin and transcriptions by Liszt . The value of these recordings in ascertaining Busoni 's performance style is a matter of some dispute . Many of his colleagues and students expressed disappointment with the recordings and felt they did not truly represent Busoni 's pianism . Egon Petri was horrified by the piano roll recordings when they first appeared on vinyl and said that they were a travesty of Busoni 's playing . Similarly , Petri 's student Gunnar Johansen who had heard Busoni play on several occasions , remarked , " Of Busoni 's piano rolls and recordings , only <unk> <unk> ( no . 5 of Liszt 's Transcendental Études ) is really something unique . The rest is curiously unconvincing . The recordings , especially of Chopin , are a plain <unk> " . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Busoni 's impact on music was perhaps more through those who studied piano and composition with him , and through his writings on music , than through his compositions themselves , of whose style there are no direct successors . Alfred Brendel has opined : " Compositions like the monstrously overwritten Piano Concerto ... obstruct our view of his superlative late piano music . How topical still – and undiscovered – are the first two sonatinas ... and the Toccata of 1921 ... Doktor Faust , now as ever , towers over the musical theatre of its time . " Helmut Wirth has written that Busoni 's " ambivalent nature , striving to reconcile tradition with innovation , his gifts as a composer and the profundity of his theoretical writings make [ him ] one of the most interesting figures in the history of 20th @-@ century music . " 
 The Ferruccio Busoni International Piano Competition was initiated in Busoni 's honour in 1949 , to commemorate the 25th anniversary of his death . 
 = Band Geeks = 
 " Band Geeks " is the second part of the 15th episode of the second season , and the 35th episode overall , of the American animated television series SpongeBob SquarePants . It originally aired on Nickelodeon in the United States on September 7 , 2001 . It was written by C.H. Greenblatt , Aaron Springer , and Merriwether Williams , and was directed by Frank Weiss . Springer served as storyboard director , and Greenblatt served as storyboard artist . The song " Sweet Victory " by David Glen Eisley was featured in the episode and was later released on the album SpongeBob SquarePants : The Yellow Album in 2005 . 
 The series follows the adventures and endeavors of the title character and his various friends in the underwater city of Bikini Bottom . In this episode , Squidward tells a lie , claiming that he has a marching band , after his high school rival Squilliam <unk> brags about being a successful bandleader . Squilliam offers to let Squidward and his band cover for him at the Bubble Bowl . Squidward accepts eagerly , but realizes he does not have a band . He recruits various citizens of Bikini Bottom to play in his band , but they perform terribly in rehearsal , which makes Squidward quit . SpongeBob , disgraced , gets the band together and they give the performance of their lives . At the Bubble Bowl , Squidward is successful in front of his rival . 
 The episode received critical acclaim , with several critics considering it one of the best episodes of the entire series . " Band Geeks " received a nomination and won at the 2002 Golden Reel Awards for Best Sound Editing in Television – Animation . 
 = = Plot summary = = 
 Squidward gets a call from his former high school classmate , Squilliam <unk> , who is very successful and has succeeded in everything in which Squidward has failed , such as music . Squilliam reveals to Squidward that he has become the leader of a band and that they are supposed to play at the Bubble Bowl ; but he will be busy at that time and will not be able to attend so Squilliam asks Squidward to allow his band to substitute for his at the Bubble Bowl , believing that Squidward does not have one . However , Squidward insists that he has a band and accepts the offer . He assembles a large marching band composed of various Bikini Bottom residents . 
 During their one week of training , the band performs consistently badly and fails to improve at all . Patrick and Sandy get into a fight when Patrick kicks Sandy and , as a result , Sandy sticks him up a trombone . On the second day , while practicing a march , two flag <unk> are killed when they spin the flags too fast , causing them to fly into the air and crash into a blimp . On day three , Plankton plays his harmonica , but becomes exhausted and collapses from running back and forth , since he is very tiny . On the last day of practice , Squidward says if everyone plays loud , they will be good . However , they play poorly , and Squidward changes the plan of playing loud to quiet . A fish becomes annoyed , saying " We won 't sound so bad if some of us didn 't play with big , meaty , claws ! " Mr. Krabs is angered by him and attacks , causing everyone to get involved in a huge brawl , smashing the instruments and hurting each other , causing the band to break up . A grieving Squidward expresses his disappointment in all of them and goes home in distress over his failure . 
 However , SpongeBob convinces the other band members to go through with the performance for Squidward 's sake , and he takes command of their training . On the day of the concert , when Squilliam shows up in order to see Squidward fail , Squidward claims that his band died in a marching accident . However , Squidward 's band shows up and he is forced to go through with the performance . They enter a large glass dome complete with human fans . Squidward turns his head away from the band before they begin , assuming that the performance will be a disaster , but the band is tremendously successful , playing a rock ballad titled " Sweet Victory " . Squilliam enters a state of shock and faints , leaving Squidward to celebrate as he leaps into the air . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Band Geeks " was directed by Aaron Springer , and was written by Springer , C.H. Greenblatt , and Merriwether Williams . Frank Weiss served as animation director , and Greenblatt worked as storyboard artist . The episode originally aired on Nickelodeon in the United States on September 7 , 2001 , with a TV @-@ Y7 parental rating . 
 The writers started to work for " Band Geeks " with the idea of a rival . Williams said , " We always wanted to do a rival show , and I think we tried to do a rival show for SpongeBob , and it wasn 't working . So we came up with the idea of a rival for Squidward and , in some ways it 's Squidward 's story , and SpongeBob and Patrick are just kind of around . " The idea of having a band was unspecified . Williams remarked , " I forget who was in band . I was not in a band , but I think maybe Doug [ Lawrence ] was in a band . I think Steve [ Hillenburg ] was in a band , too . " 
 When storyboard artist Greenblatt , with the writers , was storyboarding " Band Geeks " , they thought of " a big number " at the end , where everyone would rally together for Squidward . Greenblatt said , " The story outline called for making it a really great marching band sequence , and it usually helps to have the music ahead of time to board to , so we started searching around . " The writers were able to find music , as Nickelodeon has a library of royalty @-@ free music . The writers listened to various marching band tunes . Greenblatt said , " and the more we heard , it didn 't seem terribly funny that the finale was just them playing marching band music well . " 
 They thought of using David Glen Eisley 's song " Sweet Victory " for the final act . He said " It was different than what we were looking for , but it was so amazing that we knew we had to use it . So we boarded the sequence to the music , and it felt like such a better ending than any song we could have written on our own . " The writers gave it a freeze @-@ frame shot for the ending . Greenblatt 's favorite part was director Springer 's drawings of Patrick on the electric drums and SpongeBob saying , " It 's the thrill of one more kill " ( an excerpt from " Sweet Victory " ) . The live action Bubble Bowl crowd is footage from a United States Football League game featuring the Memphis <unk> and the Tampa Bay Bandits . 
 The music used in the segment of the episode where Squidward 's marching band is playing while coming down the street was from Nick Carr , the series ' music editor . He found a piece of marching band music that was a band intentionally playing poorly , but sound designer Jeff Hutchins said , " You could still discern the tune . " Hutchins thought " Well , let 's take this one step further . What if they couldn 't even play their instruments , let alone a tune ? " He brought his portable DAT recorder to a musical instrument retail store and met two men who worked on its loading dock , packaging and shipping the instruments . Hutchins made the two men play most of the instruments terribly . He said , " I got these two guys to squeak , blast , and squawk on most of the instruments they sold . " 
 Upon returning to the studio with the sound effects , he built a marching band , one instrument at a time . Hutchins said , " They weren 't in any key and had no rhythm whatsoever . When you heard it , you just had to say ' Ouch ! ' " Hutchins played the sound effects for series creator Hillenburg for review . Hillenburg rejected it , saying " it was too far over the edge . " Hutchins said , " a lot of effort for something that lasts only 15 seconds on screen . In this case , the whole thing never made it on the air . " 
 The featured song " Sweet Victory " was later released in the series soundtrack album called SpongeBob SquarePants : The Yellow Album on November 15 , 2005 . The album featured 25 tracks , including the " SpongeBob SquarePants Theme Song " . 
 " Band Geeks " was released on the DVD compilation titled SpongeBob SquarePants : Halloween on August 27 , 2002 , and on SpongeBob SquarePants : Home Sweet Pineapple that was released on January 4 , 2005 . The episode was also included in SpongeBob SquarePants : The Complete 2nd Season DVD released on October 19 , 2004 . On September 22 , 2009 , " Band Geeks " was released on the SpongeBob SquarePants : The First 100 Episodes DVD , alongside all the episodes of seasons one through five . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Band Geeks " received critical acclaim , and is regarded by many as one of the best episodes of the series . Upon release , the episode was awarded and honored at the 2002 Golden Reel Awards for Best Sound Editing in Television – Animation category . Tom Kenny , SpongeBob 's voice actor , considers " Band Geeks " one of his favorite episodes . In a 2009 review , Michael Cavna of The Washington Post ranked the episode at No. 5 in his " The Top Five SpongeBob Episodes : We Pick ' Em " list . He said " Squidward 's mix of artistic aspiration in the face of goading , humiliation and unrelenting sub @-@ mediocrity made this a kids ' episode that adults can experience on a whole ' nother level . " The Guardian ranked " Band Geeks " the second best episode of the show , next to " Krusty Krab Training Video " . 
 Many have such high regard for " Band Geeks " because it portrays Squidward as less of an annoyed neighbor and more of a sympathetic hero . Many say that the reason they like this episode so much is the fact that Squidward is so <unk> in his struggle , in that everyone has a rival who is more successful than them , and we all want a chance to be able to beat them at something . 
 Nancy Basile of About.com ranked " Band Geeks " at No. 1 in her " Best SpongeBob SquarePants Episodes " list , writing " [ The episode ] has so many of the best elements of SpongeBob , crafted into a story whose rhythm flows smoothly and quickly to reach a poignant end . " She praised the entire premise , calling it " funny just to think about . " Basile also lauded the ending " complete with a keytar and freeze @-@ frame jump in the air . " Emily Estep of WeGotThisCovered.com ranked the episode No. 4 in her " Top 10 Episodes of SpongeBob SquarePants " and said , " Most of the gags in ' Band Geeks ' center around Squidward 's bleak existence , but it 's also stuffed with one @-@ liners from and about each of the characters on the show , such as the line ' These claws ain 't just for <unk> ' mates ! ' from an about @-@ to @-@ brawl Mr. Krabs , and when Squidward says , ' No Patrick , mayonnaise is not an instrument , ' in response to an inevitable query from the stupid star . " 
 " Band Geeks " was one of the top episodes as chosen by viewers at Nick.com in the event " The Best Day Ever Marathon " held in 2006 . In November 2007 , as part of the " Top 100 Greatest Moments in <unk> History " during " <unk> Nicktoons Weekend " , it is ranked as the # 1 greatest moment of all time . In 2012 , Nickelodeon in the United Kingdom launched an event called " SpongeBob 's Top 100 " , where viewers can vote at <unk> for their favorite episode . With over 160 @,@ 000 votes cast , " Band Geeks " emerged as the winner . 
 = Solomon Islands at the 2008 Summer Olympics = 
 The Solomon Islands send a team to compete at the 2008 Summer Olympics in Beijing , China . The country 's delegation consisted of three athletes competing in two sports across three distinct events ; Francis Manioru and Pauline Kwalea represented the Solomon Islands in track , while Wendy Hale competed in weightlifting . The arrival of the Solomon Islander delegation in Beijing marked its seventh appearance since its debut at the 1984 Summer Olympics in Los Angeles . The track athletes did not advance past the first rounds in their events . There were no medalists from the Solomon Islander athletes in these Games . Wendy Hale was the Solomon Islands ' flagbearer during the Games ' opening ceremony . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Solomon Islands are a group consisting of approximately a thousand islands that serves as home to almost 600 @,@ 000 people . The island chain was designated a protectorate of the United Kingdom in the 1890s , and remained under British control during World War II , where the island chain was the center of some of the war 's worst fighting . In 1976 , the Solomon Islands won the right to self @-@ government from the British , and declared independence in 1978 . The nation fell into a period of civil instability between then and 2003 , when Australia led a military force to restore law and order in the country . 
 The first Solomon Islander delegation to the Olympics arrived some six years after the nation 's independence for the 1984 Summer Olympics in Los Angeles , California , and was composed of three male athletes competing in two sports . The island nation continued to send delegations to the Olympics throughout its era of civil disorder ; delegations from the Solomon Islands appeared at all seven Summer Olympic games prior to ( and including ) the Beijing games of 2008 . The first women represented the Solomon Islands at the 1996 Summer Olympics in Atlanta , Georgia . The largest delegations from the Solomon Islands included four athletes and appeared in 1988 and 1996 . Up to and including the Beijing games , there had not been a Solomon Islander who had won a medal at the Olympics . 
 During the 2008 Summer Olympics , three athletes ( one male and two female ) participated across two sports in three distinct events . Pauline Kwalea , the year 's female sprinter , was the youngest member of the delegation at 20 years old . Male sprinter Francis Manioru , at 26 years old , was the oldest . <unk> Wendy Hale bore the flag of the Solomon Islands at the ceremonies . 
 = = Athletics = = 
 Sprinter Francis Manioru represented the Solomon Islands at Beijing in the men 's 100 meters dash as its only male track and field athlete . Born in September 1981 , Manioru was 22 years old when he first competed in the men 's 100 meters dash at the 2004 Olympics in Athens . He ranked seventh in his heat and did not advance past the qualification round . However , Manioru returned as a 26 @-@ year @-@ old to participate in the 2008 Olympics . During the qualification round of the event , which took place on 14 August , Manioru was placed in the first heat against seven other athletes . He finished the race in 11 @.@ 09 seconds , placing behind ni @-@ Vanuatu sprinter Moses Kamut ( 10 @.@ 81 seconds ) , who in turn placed behind Surinamese sprinter Jurgen Themen ( 10 @.@ 61 seconds ) . The heat was led by Jamaica 's Usain Bolt ( 10 @.@ 20 seconds ) and Antigua and Barbuda 's Daniel Bailey ( 10 @.@ 24 seconds ) . Manioru ranked 68th out of the 80 athletes participating in the qualification heats . Manioru did not advance to later rounds . 
 Pauline Kwalea represented the Solomon Islands in the women 's 100 meters dash at the Beijing Olympics . She was born in the national capital of Honiara , located on the island of Guadalcanal , and represented the Solomon Islands in Beijing as a 20 @-@ year @-@ old . Kwalea had not previously competed in any Olympic games . During the course of the qualification round of the event , which took place on 15 August , Kwalea was placed in the sixth heat against eight other athletes . She finished last with a time of 13 @.@ 28 seconds . Nicaraguan runner Jessica Aguilera placed ahead of Kwalea ( 13 @.@ 15 seconds ) , while Andorra 's Montserrat Pujol ranked ahead of Aguilera ( 12 @.@ 73 seconds ) . The heat was led by Jamaican sprinter Shelly @-@ Ann Fraser ( 11 @.@ 35 seconds ) and Ghana 's Vida Anim ( 11 @.@ 47 seconds ) . In the qualification heats , there were 85 participants , with Kwalea ranking 75th . She did not advance to later rounds . 
 Key 
 Note – Ranks given for track events are within the athlete 's heat only 
 Q 
 = Qualified for the next round 
 q = 
 Qualified for the next round as a fastest loser or , in field events , by position without achieving the qualifying target 
 NR 
 = National record 
 N / A = 
 Round not applicable for the event 
 Bye = Athlete not required to compete in round 
 Men 
 Women 
 = = Weightlifting = = 
 Wendy Hale represented the Solomon Islands at the Beijing Olympics , participating in the women 's lightweight division of weightlifting which encompasses athletes who weigh under 58 kilograms . Born on Malaita , the most populous of the Solomon Islands , Hale was 20 years old when she participated at the 2008 Olympics . She had not previously competed in any Olympic games . During the course of the event , which took place on 11 August , Hale faced eleven other athletes . She was the only athlete in the event from the entire region of Oceania . 
 During the snatch phase of the event , Hale was given three attempts to lift as much weight as she could in snatches . She successfully lifted 74 kilograms on her first attempt and 78 kilograms on her second , but failed to lift 82 kilograms on her third and final try . The second and last part of the event included lifting weights using the clean and jerk method . Hale successfully lifted 95 kilograms in this manner on her first attempt , but failed to lift 100 kilograms on her second and third tries . Her combined score was 173 kilograms . This placed the Solomon Islander at twelfth place of the twelve athletes in the event , directly behind the Philippines ' eleventh @-@ place finalist <unk> Diaz ( 192 kilograms ) , who in turn ranked behind Poland 's tenth @-@ place finalist <unk> Gotfryd ( 200 kilograms ) . The gold medalist in the event was China 's Chen Yanqing , who set an Olympic record with 244 kilograms . 
 = David Starkey = 
 David Robert Starkey CBE FSA <unk> ( born 3 January 1945 ) is a British constitutional historian and a radio and television presenter . 
 Born the only child of Quaker parents , he attended Kendal Grammar School before studying at Cambridge through a scholarship . There he specialised in Tudor history , writing a thesis on King Henry VIII 's household . From Cambridge he moved to the London School of Economics , where he was a lecturer in history until 1998 . He has written several books on the Tudors . 
 Starkey is a well @-@ known radio and television personality , first appearing on television in 1977 . While a regular contributor to the BBC Radio 4 debate programme The Moral Maze , his acerbic tongue earned him the sobriquet of " rudest man in Britain " ; his frequent appearances on Question Time have been received with criticism and applause . Starkey has presented several history documentaries . In 2002 he signed a £ 2 million contract with Channel 4 for 25 hours of programming , and in 2011 was a contributor on the Channel 4 series Jamie 's Dream School . 
 = = Early years and education = = 
 David Starkey was born on 3 January 1945 in Kendal . He is the only child of Robert Starkey and Elsie Lyon , Quakers who had married 10 years previously in Bolton , at a Friends meeting house . His father , the son of a cotton spinner , was a foreman in a washing @-@ machine factory , while his mother followed in her father 's footsteps and became a cotton weaver and later a cleaner . Starkey is equivocal about his mother , describing her as both " wonderful " , in that she helped develop his ambition , and " monstrous " , intellectually frustrated and living through her son . " She was a wonderful but also very frightening parent . Finally , she was a Pygmalion . She wanted a creature , she wanted something she had made . " Her dominance contrasted sharply to his father , who was " poetic , reflective , rather solitary ... as a father he was weak . " Their relationship was " distant " , but improved after his mother 's death in 1977 . 
 Starkey was born with two club feet . One was fixed early , while the other had to be operated on several times . He also suffered from polio . He suffered a nervous breakdown at secondary school , aged 13 , and was taken by his mother to a boarding house in Southport , where he spent several months recovering . Starkey blamed the episode on the unfamiliar experience of being in a " highly competitive environment " . He ultimately excelled at Kendal Grammar School , winning debating prizes and appearing in school plays . 
 Although he showed an early inclination toward science , he chose instead to study history . A scholarship enabled his entry into Fitzwilliam College , Cambridge , where he gained a first , a PhD and a fellowship . 
 Starkey was fascinated by King Henry VIII , and his thesis focused on the Tudor monarch 's inner household . His doctoral supervisor was Sir Geoffrey Elton , an expert on the Tudor period . Starkey claimed that with age his mentor became " tetchy " and " arrogant " . In 1983 , when Elton was awarded a knighthood , Starkey derided one of his essays , Cromwell <unk> and Elton responded by writing an " absolutely shocking " review of a collection of essays Starkey had edited . Starkey later expressed his remorse over the spat : " I regret that the thing happened at all . " 
 = = Career = = 
 Bored at Cambridge and attracted to London 's gay scene , in 1972 Starkey moved to the London School of Economics . He claimed to be an " excessively enthusiastic advocate of promiscuity " , seeking to liberate himself from his mother : she strongly disapproved of his homosexuality . A 30 @-@ year career as a teacher ended in 1998 when , blaming boredom and modern academic life , he gave it up . 
 Starkey entered a wider public awareness in 1992 on the BBC Radio 4 debate programme The Moral Maze , where he debated morality with his fellow panellists Rabbi Hugo <unk> , Roger Scruton and the journalist Janet Daley . He soon acquired a reputation for abrasiveness ; he explained in 2007 that his personality possesses " a tendency towards showmanship ... towards self @-@ indulgence and explosion and repartee and occasional silliness and going over the top . " The Daily Mail gave him the sobriquet of " the rudest man in Britain " , although Starkey claims that his character was part of a " convenient image " . He once attacked George Austin , the Archdeacon of York , over " his fatness , his smugness , and his pomposity " , but after a nine @-@ year stint on the programme he left , citing his boredom with being " Dr Rude " and its move to an evening slot . 
 From 1995 he also spent three years at Talk Radio UK , presenting Starkey on Saturday , later Starkey on Sunday . An interview with Denis Healey proved to be one of his most embarrassing moments : " I mistakenly thought that he had become an amiable old buffer who would engage in amusing conversation , and he tore me limb from limb . I laugh about it now , but I didn 't feel like laughing about it at the time . " 
 His first television appearance was in 1977 , on Granada Television 's Behave Yourself with Russell Harty . He was a prosecution witness in the 1984 ITV programme The Trial of Richard III , whose jury acquitted the king on the grounds of insufficient evidence . His television documentaries on The Six Wives of Henry VIII and Elizabeth I were ratings successes . 
 In 2002 he signed a £ 2 million contract with Channel 4 to produce 25 hours of television , including Monarchy , a chronicle of the history of English kings and queens from Anglo @-@ Saxon times onward . He presented the 2009 series Henry : Mind of a Tyrant , which Brian Viner , a reviewer for the Independent , called " highly fascinating " , although A. A. Gill was less complimentary , calling it " Hello ! history " . In an interview about the series for the Radio Times , Starkey complained that too many historians had focussed not on Henry , but on his wives . Referring to a " feminised history " , he said : " so many of the writers who write about this are women and so much of their audience is a female audience . " This prompted the historian Lucy Worsley to label his comments as misogynistic . More recently , in 2011 , he taught five history lessons in Channel 4 's Jamie 's Dream School , after which he criticised the state education system . 
 The core of history is narrative and biography . And the way history has been presented in the curriculum for the last 25 years is very different . The importance of knowledge has been downgraded . Instead the argument has been that it 's all about skills . Supposedly , what you are trying to do with children is inculcate them with the analytical skills of the historian . Now this seems to me to be the most goddamn awful way to approach any subject , and also the most dangerous , and one , of course , that panders to all sorts of easy assumptions - ‘ oh we 've got the internet , we don 't need knowledge anymore because it 's so easy to look things up ' . Oh no it isn 't . In order to think , you actually need the information in your mind . 
 In 1984 Starkey was elected a Fellow of the Royal Historical Society and in 1994 a Fellow of the Society of Antiquaries of London . He has worked as curator on several exhibitions , including an exhibit in 2003 on Elizabeth I , following which he had lunch with her namesake , Elizabeth II . Several years later he told a reporter that the monarch had no interest in her predecessors , other than those who followed her great grandfather . " I don 't think she 's at all comfortable with anybody – I would hesitate to use the word intellectual – but it 's useful . I think she 's got elements a bit like Goebbels in her attitude to culture – you remember : ' every time I hear the word culture I reach for my revolver . ' I think the queen reaches for her mask . " His remarks were criticised by Penny <unk> , a royal biographer , and Robert Lacey , a royal historian . 
 = = Politics = = 
 Starkey was raised in an austere and frugal environment of near @-@ poverty , with his parents often unemployed for long periods of time ; an environment which , he later stated , taught him " the value of money " . " I suppose my politics remained essentially in the middle @-@ of @-@ the @-@ road Labour left until the end of the 1970s " . Starkey blames the Callaghan administration for " blow [ ing ] the nation 's finances " . During the 1980s he was an active Conservative Party member , and he was a Conservative candidate for Islington Borough Council in 1986 in Tollington ward , and in 1990 in <unk> ward . 
 He bemoaned the Tories when they were in Opposition , criticising Michael Howard in particular : " I knew Michael Howard was going to be a disaster as soon as he opposed top @-@ up fees , either out of sentimentality or calculated expediency so that it might get him a bit of the student vote ... Instead of backing Tony Blair , causing revolution in the Labour Party , the Conservatives have been whoring after strange gods , coming up with increasingly strange policies . " He likened Gordon Brown to the fictional Kenneth Widmerpool , continuing , " It seems to me that with Brown there is a complete sense of humour and charm bypass . " Of Ed Miliband , in 2015 he said " He is a man of high ambition and low talent – the worst possible combination . His whole language at the moment is soak the rich , hate the rich . " 
 During the 2011 Conservative Party Conference , he spoke at a fringe meeting , declaring Mayor Boris Johnson to be a " jester @-@ despot " , and Prime Minister David Cameron , as having " absolutely no strategy " for running the country . He urged the party to re @-@ engage with the working class rather than the " Guardian @-@ reading middle class " . In 2015 he claimed that while Cameron and his Chancellor , George Osborne , had introduced some meaningful reforms to education and welfare policies , they had not made large enough cuts to the UK 's budget deficit . 
 Starkey prefers radical changes to the UK 's constitution in line with the federal system used by the USA , although in an interview with Iain Dale he expressed his support for the monarchy , the Queen and Prince Charles . In the run @-@ up to the UK Alternative Vote referendum , he was a signatory on a letter to The Times , which urged people to vote against the proposals . 
 Starkey is an honorary associate of the National Secular Society and an ardent supporter of gay equality movements . A supporter of the Tory Campaign for Homosexual Equality ( " <unk> " ) , during one of many appearances on the BBC 's Question Time he attacked Jeffrey Archer over his views on the age of homosexual consent . 
 In 2009 , Mike Russell , then the Scottish Government Minister for Culture and External Affairs , called on him to apologise for his declaration on the programme that Scotland , Ireland and Wales are " feeble little countries " . Starkey responded that it had been a joke regarding the lack of necessity for the English to outwardly celebrate their nationalism , approvingly quoting H. G. Wells 's observation that " the English are the only nation without national dress " . He described Alex Salmond , then Scottish First Minister , as a " Caledonian Hitler " who thinks that " the English , like the Jews , are everywhere " . He is one of 200 signatories of a letter to the Guardian newspaper , opposing Scottish independence . 
 = = Views on multiculturalism = = 
 Starkey 's comments in August 2011 on the BBC 's Newsnight programme alongside Owen Jones and <unk> Say Mitchell , made during a discussion about the 2011 England riots , precipitated support and condemnation from several notable commentators . Starkey claimed that " the whites have become black " , and that " a particular sort of violent , destructive , nihilistic , gangster culture has become the fashion " . The leader of the Labour party , Ed Miliband , spoke about Starkey 's remarks , saying " they are racist comments , frankly " . The author Toby Young , blogging in the Telegraph , defended Starkey by claiming that Starkey had been talking not about black culture in general . Rod Liddle argued in support of the remarks . Fellow panellist Owen Jones described the comments as " one of the ugliest episodes of the backlash " , claiming that " multiculturalism and ethnic groups have nothing to do with what happened " . 
 Writing in The Daily Telegraph , Starkey argued his views had been distorted , he referred only to a " particular sort " of ' Black ' culture , and that the " black educationalists " Tony Sewell and Katharine <unk> supported the substance of his Newsnight comments . The broadcast regulator Ofcom said that Starkey 's comments were part of " a serious and measured discussion " , and took no action . 
 In a June 2012 debate , Starkey stated that a Rochdale sex trafficking gang had values " entrenched in the foothills of the Punjab or wherever it is " , and was accused by his fellow panelist , writer Laurie Penny , of " playing xenophobia and national prejudice for laughs " . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Starkey lived for many years with his partner , James Brown , a publisher and book designer , until the latter 's death in 2015 . The couple had two homes : a house in Highbury and a manor house in Kent . Starkey was appointed Commander of the Order of the British Empire ( CBE ) in the 2007 Birthday Honours for services to history . He is a Visiting Professor of the University of Kent . An Honorary Associate of the National Secular Society , he has described the Catholic Church as being " corrupt and riddled with corruption " . 
 = = Work = = 
 Books 
 This Land of England ( 1985 ) ( with David <unk> ) 
 The Reign of Henry VIII : Personalities and Politics ( 1986 ) 
 Revolution <unk> : Revisions in the History of Tudor Government and Administration ( 1986 ) ( Editor with Christopher Coleman ) 
 The English Court from the Wars of the Roses to the Civil War ( 1987 ) 
 Rivals in Power : the Lives and Letters of the Great Tudor Dynasties ( 1990 ) 
 Henry VIII : A European Court in England ( 1991 ) 
 The Inventory of Henry VIII : The Transcript , Volume 1 ( 1998 ) ( with Philip Ward and Alistair Hawkyard ) 
 Elizabeth : Apprenticeship ( 2000 ) ( published in North America as Elizabeth : The struggle for the throne ) 
 The Stuart Courts - Foreword ( 2000 ) ( Edited by Eveline <unk> ) 
 The Inventory of Henry VIII : Essays and Illustrations , Volume 2 , ( 2002 ) ( with Philip Ward and Alistair Hawkyard ) 
 The Inventory of Henry VIII : Essays and Illustrations , Volume 3 , ( 2002 ) ( with Philip Ward and Alistair Hawkyard ) 
 The Six Wives : The Queens of Henry VIII ( 2003 ) 
 Elizabeth I : The Exhibition Catalogue ( 2003 ) 
 The Books of King Henry VIII and His Wives - Introduction and Preface ( 2004 ) ( James P. Carley ) 
 The Monarchy of England : The Beginnings ( 2004 ) 
 Monarchy : From the Middle Ages to Modernity ( 2006 ) 
 Making History : Antiquaries in Britain , 1707 @-@ 2007 - Introduction ( 2007 ) ( Edited by Sarah McCarthy , Bernard Nurse , and David <unk> ) 
 Henry : Virtuous Prince ( 2008 ) 
 Introduction to Henry VIII ; Man & Monarch ( Susan Doran , ed. published by the British Library , 2009 ) 
 Crown and Country ( Harper Press , 2010 ) ( A compilation of The Monarchy of England : The Beginnings , Monarchy : From the Middle Ages to Modernity and some new material ) 
 Introduction to Fatal Colours : Towton 1461 - England 's Most Brutal Battle by George Goodwin ( 2011 ) 
 Henry : Model of a Tyrant ( September 2016 ) 
 Television 
 Henry VIII ( 1998 , revised 2001 ) 
 Elizabeth ( 2000 ) 
 The Six Wives of Henry VIII ( 2001 ) 
 Edward and Mary : The Unknown Tudors ( 2002 ) 
 David Starkey : Reinventing the Royals ( 2002 ) 
 Monarchy by David Starkey ( 2004 – 2007 ) 
 Henry VIII : The Mind of a Tyrant ( 2009 ) 
 Kate and William : Romance and the Royals ( 2011 ) 
 The Churchills ( 2012 ) 
 David Starkey 's Music and Monarchy ( 2013 ) 
 David Starkey 's Magna Carta ( 2015 ) 
 Applications 
 Kings and Queens by David Starkey for iPhone and iPad ( 2011 ) 
 = Sarah Conlon = 
 Sarah Conlon ( née Maguire ) ( 20 January 1926 – 19 July 2008 ) was an Irish housewife and a prominent campaigner in one of the most high @-@ profile miscarriage of justice cases in British legal history . She spent decades campaigning to have the names of her husband Giuseppe and son Gerry cleared over the Provisional Irish Republican Army ( IRA ) pub bombings at Guildford and Woolwich , and helped secure an apology from former British prime minister Tony Blair in 2005 for their wrongful imprisonment . 
 = = Guildford pub bombings = = 
 The Guildford pub bombings occurred in 1974 , when an IRA unit planted bombs in two pubs in Guildford , Surrey , and the resulting explosions killed four soldiers and one civilian , and injured 50 others . The investigation into the bombings led to the arrest and conviction of Gerard Conlon , Patrick Armstrong , Paul Hill and Carole Richardson , an Englishwoman ; dubbed as " the Guildford Four " . The four were jailed for life in 1975 for the bombings , and each served 15 years in jail before their convictions were quashed by the Court of Appeal . This was due to an extensive inquiry carried out by Avon and Somerset Police into the original police investigation . The inquiry found that the way the confessions of the four were noted were seriously flawed , concluding that the notes taken were not written up immediately and that officers may have colluded in the wording of the statements . 
 Giuseppe Conlon , Sarah 's husband , was convicted in 1976 along with six members of the Maguire family ( the seven being dubbed the Maguire Seven ) of running an IRA bomb factory in North London , on the basis of forensic evidence . Each was sentenced to up to 14 years in jail , served their sentences , and with the exception of Giuseppe Conlon who died in 1980 , were released . The Maguire Seven 's first appeal , in 1977 , was turned down , but a later appeal , prompted by the release of the Guildford Four , found that test kits used to detect traces of explosives had been contaminated . In 1991 , the Court of Appeal quashed their convictions after it was ruled the original evidence against them was unsafe . On 9 February 2005 , then Prime Minister Tony Blair issued a public apology to the Maguire Seven and the Guildford Four for the miscarriages of justice they had suffered , saying that he was " very sorry that they were subject to such an ordeal and such an injustice " , and that " they deserve to be completely and publicly exonerated . " 
 = = Role in the sentences and appeals = = 
 Sarah Conlon won huge admiration in Ireland for her quiet dignity and refusal to feel bitterness . During the years that her husband and son were in jail , she sent weekly parcels of cigarettes , sweets , and Irish newspaper clippings to them , and saved up her prison visits for the two weeks of her annual holiday . Her regular letters to them always ended the same way : " Pray for them ones who told lies against you ... It 's them who needs help as well as yourself . " 
 Father McKinley , a priest who noticed Sarah crying after the 1977 appeal was turned down , and others helped her begin a campaign to free her husband , son and other members of the Guildford Four and Maguire Seven . She took to lobbying dignitaries , church leaders and the media , in addition to writing to numerous Irish politicians , including the Social Democratic and Labour Party ( SDLP ) members of parliament Joe <unk> and John Hume , to ask for their support . At one stage she travelled to London to meet Cardinal Basil Hume to ask for his assistance . Her campaigning led to the start of the aforementioned inquiry , announced in 1989 by the home secretary Douglas Hurd , into the Guildford bomb cases , which led to Gerry 's release . News of her husband 's death reached Sarah just after she received a message from home secretary Willie Whitelaw stating that her husband was about to be released on compassionate grounds . 
 Twenty @-@ five years after her husband 's death , Sarah Conlon and her family decided to fight for a public apology for the miscarriage of justice on her family . Once again she led the campaign , lobbying church leaders and politicians , among them the Irish Taoiseach Bertie Ahern , who pledged his support , which culminated in Tony Blair 's apology to the Conlon family . Ill , she was unable to make the trip to London to hear the apology , but her children spoke to her by telephone from the House of Commons . After securing the apology , she mentioned that she no longer had to worry about dying and what it means . 
 SDLP leader and Foyle member of parliament Mark <unk> described Sarah as " a true heroine of our age " and " shining example to us all " , saying that she had the " patience of a saint " and " huge reserves of faith , fortitude and remarkable forgiveness " , and that " her story is an inspiration of faith , hope and love " . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Conlon was described as a woman of " immense Catholic faith " who was protective of her son Gerry , and who held the family together with her hard work , wanting their life to be respectable , holy , and quiet . She spent years working at a scrapyard sorting old clothes , and later worked long hours for low pay in the kitchens of the Royal Victoria Hospital , serving food to patients and mopping the floors . 
 Conlon 's husband , Patrick " Giuseppe " , was a pacifist who evaded the draft during World War II . He once worked at Harland & Wolf painting the hulls of ships , where the lead in the paint damaged his lungs . His condition was worsened by the humidity and condensation in the house , and he subsequently developed tuberculosis and emphysema . 
 Sarah Conlon died of lung cancer in July 2008 , aged 82 . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 The Hollywood movie In The Name of the Father , starring Daniel Day @-@ Lewis and directed by Jim Sheridan , is based on the Conlon family 's story . Northern Irish actress Marie Jones played Sarah Conlon . The movie was adapted from Gerry Conlon ’ s autobiography <unk> Innocent , later published as In the Name of the Father . 
 The 1990 made @-@ for @-@ television film Dear Sarah is based on the letters Giuseppe Conlon wrote to his wife while in prison . The film was produced by Raidió Teilifís Éireann , directed by Frank <unk> and written by Tom McGurk . It featured Stella McCusker as Sarah Conlon . 
 = Weekend at Burnsie 's = 
 " Weekend at Burnsie 's " is the sixteenth episode of The Simpsons ' thirteenth season . It first aired in the United States on the Fox network on April 7 , 2002 . In the episode , Homer Simpson is prescribed medicinal marijuana after getting pecked in the eyes by a murder of crows . While his family and friends worry about the drug altering his personality , Homer becomes Mr. Burns 's vice president after cracking up at Burns 's antiquated jokes . 
 The episode was directed by Michael Marcantel . The plot idea for the episode was pitched by George Meyer , who wanted to make an episode about Homer getting addicted to medicinal marijuana . Executive producer and current showrunner Al Jean found the idea " very funny " and gave former staff writer Jon Vitti the duty to write the episode 's first draft . Fox was initially very uneasy to pass the episode for broadcast , since they were concerned that it might encourage younger viewers to smoke marijuana . Even though The Simpsons ' staff slightly altered the episode by not actually showing Homer smoke his medicinal marijuana , the network was still worried that it might cause a controversy . 
 The use of medicinal marijuana is prominently featured throughout " Weekend at Burnsie 's " . Because the legislation of medicinal marijuana is a controversial issue , The Simpsons ' staff has stated that they wanted to explore both sides of the argument , showing both the negative and positive effects of marijuana use . The episode does not come to an absolute conclusion about the issue . The episode also criticizes the use of genetically modified foods , and references Citizen Kane , Dragnet , The Birds , and Judy Garland , among other things . It also features the American rock band Phish as themselves . 
 Despite the network 's initial concerns , " Weekend at Burnsie 's " did not attract any controversy . In its original broadcast , the episode was seen by approximately 7 @.@ 2 million viewers , finishing in 46th place in the ratings the week it aired . Following the thirteenth season 's release on DVD and Blu @-@ ray on August 24 , 2010 , the episode received mostly positive reviews from critics . 
 = = Plot = = 
 After a bad experience with genetically modified food , including baby corn the size of ordinary corn and a potato that eats Lisa 's carrots , Marge decides to plant her own garden . Crows arrive on the new garden , so Marge makes a scarecrow , which scares Homer . Homer destroys the scarecrow , and the crows eventually see Homer as their leader , following him everywhere and doing his bidding . But when the crows try to carry Maggie , Homer turns on them and they attack his eyes . He then goes to the hospital , where Dr. Hibbert prescribes him medicinal marijuana . Having had a bad experience with marijuana when he was younger , Homer objects to Hibbert 's suggestion at first , but eventually decides to try it . 
 Homer begins to enjoy smoking marijuana , even asking Flanders to read him the whole Holy Bible , much to Flanders ' excitement . When Flanders offers a petition to have a vote on the ban of medical marijuana in Springfield , Homer unwittingly adds his signature . Homer 's stoned state also sees him promoted to Executive Vice @-@ President at the power plant , because Mr. Burns appreciates how Homer laughs at all of his lame jokes , and so he goes to a rally for the legalization of medical marijuana ( but the rally is actually held a day after the ban was approved by voters ) . Homer 's eyes have healed and agrees to stop smoking pot after Marge tells him he needs to set a good example for his kids . 
 Mr. Burns asks Homer to help him with a speech for a crisis shareholders meeting , where the <unk> must raise millions of dollars or be forced into closure . Homer gives Smithers his last joint , and while Smithers is smoking and dressing in the coat Judy Garland once wore , Burns apparently drowns in his bathtub . Smithers tells Homer they have to cover up his death , telling him " Michael Eisner 's been dead for five years ! Ted Turner is just a hologram ! " . So , for the meeting , Smithers and Homer make Mr. Burns into a marionette , à la Weekend at Bernie 's , and the movement of the marionette inadvertently gets Mr. Burns ' heart working again . The shareholders are mollified and pledge renewed funding , and another financial crisis at the power plant is avoided . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Weekend at Burnsie 's " was written by Jon Vitti and directed by Michael Marcantel . It was first broadcast on the Fox network in the United States on April 7 , 2002 . The idea for the episode was pitched by former staff writer George Meyer , who wanted to make an episode in which Homer becomes addicted to medicinal marijuana . Executive producer and current showrunner Al Jean thought that the premise sounded " very funny " and assigned Vitti to write the episode 's first draft . Vitti wrote the script at his home and did not participate in any rewriting sessions with the other staff writers . " [ ... ] it 's a funny bunch of people " , he said in the episode 's DVD commentary . " You definitely lose touch with what the movies you 're supposed to see , what 's good on TV ... " " Weekend at Burnsie 's " is the second episode Vitti wrote in which a character forgets to vote at an election , and the second episode he wrote in which Homer takes a chemical that causes him to be promoted by Burns and run into conflict with Smithers . " You can 't do anything for the first time at this point " , Vitti quipped . Producer and former showrunner Mike Reiss has stated that he thoroughly enjoyed working on " Weekend at Burnsie 's " . " I gotta say , this was the most fun I ever had working on an episode " , he said in the episode 's DVD commentary . " Everyone but me had stories to tell [ about various things ] . There would be about four hours of recollection before any rewriting happened . " 
 Because the use of medicinal marijuana is prominently featured in the episode , Fox had " incredible fears " about it and were very hesitant to have it broadcast . They especially disapproved of a scene in which Homer smokes marijuana for the first time , since they did not want to instruct children how to smoke . The staff discussed the scene for a long time with the network until they came up with a compromise . Just before the joint touches Homer 's lips , the scene cuts to a psychedelic sequence that transpires from the joint 's tip . Despite their concerns , Jean opined that the network gave the staff a " pretty good amount " of creative freedom with the episode . " [ ... ] obviously , the network didn 't want us glorifying casual marijuana use " , he said in an interview with the music magazine Relix . " [ ... ] like we usually do , we look at everything from two sides and it 's supposed to be a thoughtful look at a serious thing " . Despite the modification of the scene , the network and the series ' staff members were still worried about how the episode would be received . " Weeks before it aired , we were going ' This is really going to kill everything ... ' " , Jean said in the episode 's DVD commentary . 
 After being attacked by the crows , Homer is seen being treated by Dr. Hibbert at the Springfield General Hospital . While there are no visible scars on him , the character instead has a slightly curled hair . During a color screening of the scene , Homer 's body looked " a little too bloody " and damaged , prompting the staff to change it . " One thing I learned a long time ago is , you gotta be careful how you change [ the characters ' ] basic model pack [ s ] " , Jean said in the episode 's DVD commentary . He also said that he was happy that many viewers identify with the characters and don 't want to see them get hurt or injured in any way . " They don 't mind if [ Homer ] falls down a cliff but [ ... ] he should recover . " While working on the episode , the series ' staff debated what size to make Homer 's pupils when he is under the influence of marijuana . Because a common effect of smoking marijuana is to get dilated pupils , the animators initially suggested to widen them , but settled on only dilating Homer 's pupils slightly . 
 " Weekend at Burnsie 's " features the American rock band Phish as themselves . The idea to include the band in the episode was pitched during the episode 's production . " Phish plays at the rally . We thought they 'd be the perfect group to use for the plot . " , Jean said . Meyer , who pitched the episode 's premise , was a fan of the band , but Jean did not know much of them before they appeared in the episode ; " I 've never seen one of their concerts , so I 'm not the most familiar " , he said . He first became aware of the band after reading an article about them in Entertainment Weekly . As they worked on the episode however , Jean became more acquainted with the band members . " They were nice " , he said . " Jon Fishman said to me that the band had talked from time to time about if they were to ever be on The Simpsons , what it would be like . I said , ' Well , how close was it ? ' He said , ' Pretty close to what we expected . ' ( laughs ) That was gratifying . " 
 According to Peter Shapiro of Relix , some fans of Phish debated whether or not there had been any references to the band before " Weekend at Burnsie 's " . While the band was mentioned by name in the season 12 episode " Lisa the Tree Hugger " , there had not been any conscious attempts to reference the band before " Weekend at Burnsie 's " . This includes a scene in the season 11 episode " Saddlesore Galactica " , which shows Duncan the diving horse hanging from a hoist ; some Phish fans argued that the scene was a " blatant " reference to the cover of the band 's seventh studio album , Hoist . " That was a total coincidence " , Jean said . " It reminds me of the whole Wizard of Oz / Pink Floyd ( Dark Side of the Moon ) hook @-@ up . I haven 't done it and I 'm sure it works , but I just keep thinking that it must be a coincidence . Before there was the invention of video , I don 't know how Pink Floyd would have done a whole album to a movie . " 
 = = Themes and cultural references = = 
 On May 17 , 2002 , Robert S. Stephens and Roger A. Roffman of The Seattle Times wrote an analysis of " Weekend at Burnsie 's " in a guest column for the newspaper . The two argued that drugs are almost always shown as having only negative effects , even though 10 million people in the United States use marijuana for recreational purposes . " We believe there are good reasons for a more honest dialogue about the positive and negative effects of marijuana use . A recent episode of the popular TV show The Simpsons highlighted the pros and cons of marijuana use , and Homer Simpson 's experiences with marijuana provide an example of what we mean " , they wrote . For example , when under the influence of marijuana , Homer is relieved from the pain in his eye , and he also finds himself having a variety of sensory experiences and an enhanced appreciation of music and food . " These are real effects reported by many marijuana users , and we would be hard pressed to call them anything other than benefits " , Stephens and Roffman wrote . However , Homer is also depicted spending more time with other drug users than with his family , and his friends find that his personality has changed . Eventually , Homer is shown having problems with memory and attention , losing track of the date on which a pro @-@ marijuana rally takes place . Stephens and Roffman wrote that the side effects shown in the episode are " Perhaps a bit exaggerated , but clearly there are costs of marijuana use similar to these that are experienced by real @-@ life users . " 
 Jean has stated that he " does not know enough " to say whether he approves of the legislation of medicinal marijuana , but none of The Simpsons ' writers use the drug . " It 's one of the most sober writing staffs I 've ever encountered " , staff writer Max Pross said in the episode 's DVD commentary . When asked about what stance the episode holds regarding the legislation of medicinal marijuana , Jean said that series ' staff wanted to explore both sides of the issue , rather than making an absolute statement . He added that the episode is rather a critique of legislations that are immediately criminalized after they are legitimized . " The stance is that it seems ridiculous to legalize something and then criminalize it , which I have seen happen in various states " , Jean said . He continued , " It 's just weird to take away a right or to grant people a liberty and then abandon it . I would say that 's the strongest statement [ the episode ] makes . " The episode also criticizes the use of genetically modified foods . At the beginning of the episode , Marge announces that the family 's dinner includes genetically modified vegetables , to which Lisa replies " American corporations should stop playing god with nature . " She then notices that her potato starts eating her carrot . Even though the episode portrays genetic modifications in a negative light , none of The Simpsons ' writers were actually against the technique . After the scene was written , Reiss asked all the writers if they were against genetic modifications of food , and none of them were . " Very often we take these stands on the show that we do not believe in at all " , Reiss explained in the DVD commentary for the episode . The scene was originally three times longer , and was conceived during a rewrite session with the staff writers . 
 The name of the episode is a reference to the 1989 comedy film Weekend at Bernie 's , in which two young insurance executives try to convince people that their deceased boss is alive . The last part of the episode , in which Homer and Smithers believe that they have killed Burns , is based on the film 's plot . While under the influence of marijuana , Homer shaves his beard , causing blood to pour out from his face . To Homer , the blood looks like psychedelic rainbows , and the song that plays during the scene is " Wear Your Love Like Heaven " by Scottish singer @-@ songwriter Donovan . When speaking at the Phish concert , Homer stands in front of a large picture of himself . The scene is a reference to the 1941 drama film Citizen Kane , in which the main character Charles Foster Kane makes a political speech in front of a large picture of himself . In another scene , Homer and Smithers smoke marijuana in order to find Mr. Burns ' jokes funny . While high , Smithers wears a suit similar to one worn by American actress and singer Judy Garland . While talking to Homer , Smithers forgets to take Mr. Burns out of his bathtub . Horrified , Smithers thinks that the unconscious Mr. Burns has drowned . The scene is a reference to " The Big High " , an episode of the television crime drama Dragnet in which a married couple accidentally drown their baby while they are smoking marijuana . 
 = = Release = = 
 In its original American broadcast on April 7 , 2002 , " Weekend at Burnsie 's " received a 6 @.@ 8 rating , according to Nielsen Media Research , translating to approximately 7 @.@ 2 million viewers . The episode finished in 34th place in the ratings for the week of April 1 @-@ 7 , 2002 , tying with a new episode of the comedy television series Malcolm in the Middle . On August 24 , 2010 , " Weekend at Burnsie 's " was released as part of The Simpsons : The Complete Thirteenth Season DVD and Blu @-@ ray set . Matt Groening , Al Jean , Matt Selman , Don Payne , Jon Vitti , Tom Gammill , Max Pross , Mike Reiss and David Silverman participated in the audio commentary of the episode . 
 Following its home video release , " Weekend at Burnsie 's " received mostly positive reviews from critics . Jennifer Malkowski of DVD Verdict praised the episode 's premise , writing that it " brim [ s ] with potential " even though it is " fairly simple " . She also praised the episode 's setpiece , which she described as " particularly good " , even though she found it to be " super @-@ random " . She gave the episode an A- rating and added that it has " lots of great gags " . Writing for WhatCulture ! , Adam Rayner described " Weekend at Burnsie 's " as " utterly hilarious " and " superbly executed " . He wrote , " Apart from being very funny , the episode also manages to make statements about Marijuana , but never becomes preachy . " He continued that it can be compared to the series ' best episodes , writing that it " resemble [ s ] The Simpsons in its glory years " . Casey Broadwater of Blu @-@ ray.com considers it to be one of the season 's best episodes , and so did High @-@ Def Digest 's Aaron Peck , who described it as one of his personal favorites . James Plath , a reviewer for DVD Town , wrote that the episode is a " classic " . On the other hand , giving the episode a mixed review , Colin Jacobson of DVD Movie Guide wrote that " Weekend at Burnsie 's " " falls into the abyss as a distinctly ordinary episode . " He continued , " Like many other S13 shows , this one feels recycled , as it lacks much to make it stand out as creative or memorable . " He summarized the episode as being " decidedly mediocre " . 
 Since its broadcast , " Weekend at Burnsie 's " garnered little to no scrutiny from viewers . Vitti has never gotten any questions about the episode , except from his sister @-@ in @-@ law who wanted him to explain the episode for his nephews . " [ ... ] My sister @-@ in @-@ law called me up saying that I needed to talk to my nephews about how this was wrong that Homer did " , Vitti said . " They watched it and had lots of questions for her . And she referred them all to me . So there are some people who are still bothered by it . " The little amount of scrutiny that the episode attracted took The Simpsons ' staff by surprise , as they anticipated that the episode would generate a lot of controversy . Instead , " Blame It on Lisa " , an episode which aired the previous week , caused an uproar in Brazil because of its depiction of the country . It became one of the biggest controversies the series has ever faced . " It just goes to show that you never know what 's going to be a problem " , Jean said in the DVD commentary for " Weekend at Burnsie 's " . 
 = No Me Ames = 
 " No Me Ames " ( English : " Don 't Love Me " ) is a Latin pop duet recorded by American singers Jennifer Lopez and Marc Anthony for Lopez 's debut studio album , On the 6 ( 1999 ) . It is a Spanish cover version of the Italian song " Non Amarmi " , written by Giancarlo Bigazzi , Marco Falagiani and Aleandro Baldi and recorded by Baldi and Francesca <unk> for Baldi 's album Il Sole ( 1993 ) . The song was translated into Spanish by Ignacio Ballesteros at Anthony 's request . Two versions of the song were produced for On the 6 ; one as a ballad and the other as a salsa . The ballad version was produced by Dan Shea , while the salsa version was arranged and produced by Juan Vicente Zambrano . The music video was directed by Kevin Bray and received a Latin Grammy nomination for Best Short Form Music Video . It served as the encore during the couple 's co @-@ headlining tour in 2007 . 
 " No Me Ames " speaks of a complicated relationship between two lovers . It was first released by Work Records on May 11 , 1999 , as a B @-@ side to " If You Had My Love " ( 1999 ) . The work received generally positive reviews from critics . The song peaked at number one in the Billboard Hot Latin Songs chart . It received a Latin Grammy nomination for " Best Pop Performance by a Duo / Group with Vocals " . At the Billboard Latin Music Awards of 2000 , the song received an award for Hot Latin Track of the Year by a Vocal Duo and two nominations for Tropical / Salsa Track of the Year and Hot Latin Track of the Year . It also received an award for Salsa Song of the Year at the American Society of Composers , Authors and Publishers Awards of 2000 . 
 = = Background = = 
 " No Me Ames " is a cover of the chart @-@ topping Italian song " Non Amarmi " , originally recorded by Aleandro Baldi and Francesca <unk> for Baldi 's album Il Sole ( 1993 ) . " Non Amarmi " was issued as a single in 1992 . The song speaks of a complicated relationship between two lovers . It was written by Giancarlo Bigazzi , Marco Falagiani and Baldi , and was later adapted into Spanish by Ignacio Ballesteros . The song won the " Newcomers " section of the 1992 Sanremo Music Festival . The first Spanish version of the song was released by Mexican singer Yuri and her husband Rodrigo Espinoza with different lyrics titled " Hoy Que <unk> <unk> " ( " Now That We 're Together " ) on her album Huellas ( 1997 ) . 
 One day , whilst working on On the 6 , Jennifer Lopez " happened to be " recording at the same recording studio where American recording artist Marc Anthony was recording . Anthony , who had become intrigued by Lopez after seeing her in Selena ( 1997 ) , came into her studio and asked her to appear in the music video for his song " No Me Conoces " . She agreed , but only if he recorded a song with her , to which he in turn agreed . Lopez recalled the events on her Feelin ' So Good video album by stating : " So at that time I called Tommy [ Mottola ] and I 'm like ' Look , so Marc Anthony said he would do a song and I really don 't want to do a duet with just anybody , I want to do a duet with him . So can you force him to sign something , so he has to do a record with me ? If I do this video ! ' " . The two first shot the video and then began working on the song . 
 According to Lopez , Anthony had the idea to translate " Non Amarmi " , an " old Italian song " , into Spanish . Two versions of the songs were produced for On the 6 , a ballad and a salsa production . The ballad was produced by Dan Shea , while the other was produced by Juan Vicente Zambrano . Lopez stated : " I don 't want to be straight Latin ! I want it to be more like , y 'know , dance @-@ y music @-@ y " . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 The song was released on May 11 , 1999 , as a b @-@ side to " If You Had My Love " . The song was promoted by Sony Discos , who released both versions of the song in their respective radio formats . " No Me Ames " debuted in the Billboard Hot Latin Songs chart at number 23 in the week of May 15 , 1999 , climbing to the top ten three weeks later . The song peaked atop the chart for the week of June 26 , 1999 , replacing " Livin ' la Vida Loca " by Ricky Martin and was succeeded by " <unk> " , by Spanish singer @-@ songwriter Enrique Iglesias , two weeks later . The song returned to number one on the week of July 3 , 1999 , lasting five weeks until it was displaced by Alejandro Fernández 's " Loco " . " No Me Ames " ended 1999 as the third best performing Latin single of the year in the United States . 
 On the Billboard Latin Pop Songs chart , the song debuted at number seven for the week of June 5 , 1999 . The song peaked at number two four weeks later for the week of June 26 , 1999 where it remained for seven weeks . On the year @-@ end charts , the song was the eighth best @-@ performing Latin pop single of the year . On the Billboard Tropical Songs , " No Me Ames " entered the top ten on the week of May 29 , 1999 . The song peaked at the top of the chart , replacing " <unk> " by Elvis Crespo for the week of July 3 , 1999 and remained on atop the chart for five weeks until it was succeeded by Gilberto Santa Rosa 's " <unk> Querer " for the week of August 14 , 1999 . On the year @-@ end charts , " No Me Ames " was the second best @-@ performing Tropical Song of 1999 after " El <unk> en <unk> " , by Juan Luis Guerra . 
 The salsa version of the song was featured as a bonus track on the European edition of Lopez 's remix album J to tha L – O ! The Remixes ( 2002 ) and on Anthony 's 1999 compilation Desde un Principio : From the Beginning . The ballad version was featured on Anthony 's 2006 compilation album Sigo Siendo Yo : Grandes Exitos . 
 = = Reception and accolades = = 
 In her review of On the 6 , Heather Phares of Allmusic commented that the tropical version of " No Me Ames " was one of the two songs that " emphasize Lopez 's distinctive heritage " . In his review of Desde un Principio : From the Beginning , Jose Promis also from Allmusic praised the song as " <unk> good " . Mario Tarradell of the Dallas Morning News remarked " No Me Ames " as an " island flavored " song . Lauri <unk> of the Sun @-@ Sentinel expressed disappointment over the song and felt that the tropical version did not fit the album . NME listed the ballad version as one of the " potentially offensive slushy ballads " on the album . Baldi cited Lopez and Anthony 's cover as one of the two that encouraged him to come out of retirement to record another album . 
 At the 2000 Billboard Latin Music Awards , " No Me Ames " received an award for Hot Latin Track of the Year by a Vocal Duo and two nominations for Tropical / Salsa Track of the Year and Hot Latin Track of the Year . In the same year , the song led to the duo receiving a nomination for Pop Group or Duo of the Year at the 12th Lo Nuestro Awards . At the 1st Latin Grammy Awards , the song received a nomination for " Best Pop Performance by a Duo / Group with Vocals " . In 2000 , the song received an award for Salsa Song of the Year at the American Society of Composers , Authors and Publishers Awards of 2000 . At the inaugural Juventud Awards in 2004 , " No Me Ames " was nominated in the category for " La Más Pegajosa " ( " Catchiest Tune " ) . 
 = = Promotion = = 
 While Lopez and Anthony were recording the song , Lopez came up with the video concept . Lopez recalled the events by stating : " And I asked him [ Anthony ] if he liked it . And I actually explained it to Tommy and him at the same time another day in the studio after the song was recorded and they both loved it . " The music video for " No Me Ames " was directed by Kevin Bray in Los Angeles , California , the day after she shot the music video for " If You Had My Love " . The video features Lopez and Anthony as two lovers . Anthony dies of an unnamed illness . His spirit watches over a grieving Lopez . Of the video , Lopez stated that it is " like a foreign movie , like ' Life Is Beautiful ' " . The music video received a Latin Grammy nomination for Best Short Form Music Video . The music video was included on the DVD set for Lopez 's compilation album , The Reel Me ( 2003 ) . 
 The song was scheduled to be performed at the first annual Latin Grammy Awards , but Anthony was unable to attend due to complications with his wife 's pregnancy . As part of their 2007 co @-@ headling concert tour , the song was performed as an encore along with " Por <unk> " after each show . Lopez and Anthony performed the song at the final show of Lopez 's Dance Again World Tour . 
 = = Formats and track listings = = 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 The credits are adapted from the On the 6 liner notes . 
 Giancarlo Bigazzi – songwriter 
 Aleandro Baldi – songwriter 
 Marco Falagiani – songwriter 
 Ignacio Ballesteros – songwriter ( Spanish adaption ) 
 Jennifer Lopez – lead vocals 
 Marc Anthony – lead vocals 
 = Can 't Stop the Disco = 
 " Can 't Stop the Disco " ( stylized as " can 't stop the <unk> " ) is a song recorded by Japanese recording artist Ami Suzuki for her seventh studio album , Supreme Show ( 2008 ) . It was written and produced by Japanese producer and Capsule member Yasutaka Nakata . The track is Suzuki 's third single with Nakata after her June 2008 single " One " . " Can 't Stop the Disco " premiered on September 24 , 2008 as the second single from the album . 
 Musically , the track was described as a dance and techno song . The lyrics describes freedom on the dance floor , amongst other themes . Upon its release , " Can 't Stop the Disco " garnered positive reviews from music critics and was praised for its composition and commercial appeal . It also achieved lukewarm success in Japan , peaking at number 17 on the Japanese Oricon Singles Chart and 47 on the Billboard Japan Hot 100 chart . As of March 2016 , " Can 't Stop the Disco " has sold over six thousand units in Japan alone ; this is her only single to reach over the five thousand sales limit . 
 The accompanying music video for " Can 't Stop the Disco " was shot in Tokyo ; it features Suzuki in several different four @-@ by @-@ four rooms , all centering around Suzuki 's fashion and the video props . The music video became notable for displaying another change in Suzuki 's persona and is cited as an example of her numerous " reinventions " . For additional promotion , The song was featured on Suzuki 's One Promotional Tour , and at her 29th birthday event . 
 = = Background and release = = 
 " Can 't Stop the Disco " was written , produced , composed and arranged by Japanese musician and Capsule member Yasutaka Nakata . Nakata was not credited as the single 's featuring artist where it was first introduced on Suzuki 's double a @-@ side single " Free Free " and " Super Music Maker " ( 2007 ) . It is Suzuki 's fourth single to be handled by Nataka , following " Free Free " , " Super Music Maker " , and " One " . It was selected as the second and final single from Supreme Show , and was released on September 24 , 2008 by Avex Trax . 
 The Maxi CD of the single contains the original composition , an album track " Climb to the Top " , and a remixed version of " Super Music Maker " . The DVD format of the single includes the radio edit music video of " Can 't Stop the Disco " ; both CD and DVD formats are mixed in a non @-@ stop format and tracked . The cover sleeve features Suzuki in a purple and pink lit room , posing in the corner with the song 's title on the wall . The CD and DVD formats have different poses of Suzuki . The CD format was used as the digital EP cover for the iTunes Store and Amazon.com. The cover sleeve is placed at the back of the jewel case , with the front cover featuring a booklet with a different photo . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Can 't Stop the Disco " was recorded mid 2008 by Nakata at Avex Studio in Tokyo , Japan , and was co @-@ distributed by Nakata 's label Contemode , owned by Avex and Yamaha in Japan . " Can 't Stop the Disco " was described as a dance @-@ pop song with numerous musical elements , including techno and club music . Throughout the entire song , Suzuki 's vocals are processed with autotune and vocoder post @-@ production work . Tetsuo Hiraga from Billboard 's Hot Express magazine compared the " club " sounds and production to Suzuki 's previous single " Free Free " , feeling that both songs displayed " full energy " and " dynamism " through Suzuki . The lyrics to " Can 't Stop the Disco " describes the freedom on the dance floor , and being able to met a range of different people . 
 = = Critical response = = 
 " Can 't Stop the Disco " received favorable reviews from most music critics . A staff reviewer from CD Journal commended the composition of the track , labeling it " cool " . The reviewer sound that the techno @-@ pop influence " enhanced " the coherency of the sound . An editorial review on the Japanese Amazon.com website was positive in their review , commending the " upper and delicate club sound " . The reviewer concluded that the song was a " welcome " return to dance music . An editorial review on the Japanese HMV website commended Suzuki 's move to dance music , saying that Suzuki has now " challenged the club scene " . Hiraga gave the song a mixed review on Hot Express , stating that while " Can 't Stop the Disco " presented an " outrageous " and " pounding " club sound , he found it inferior to Suzuki 's previous singles with Nakata . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 " Can 't Stop the Disco " debuted at number 17 on the Japanese Oricon Singles Chart , selling over 4 @,@ 600 units in its first week of sales . This became Suzuki 's highest charting single , alongside " One " and her 2006 single " Alright ! " since " Fantastic " ( 2006 ) . The song lasted four weeks on the singles chart , her longest spanning single alongside " One " since " Alright ! " with five . The song remains her only single to reach the top 20 and sold over 6 @,@ 000 units in Japan , her only release to reach that sales limit . " Can 't Stop the Disco " debuted and peaked at 37 , 54 and 47 on the Billboard Japan Hot Singles Chart , Billboard Japan Radio Songs , and the Japan Hot 100 . It dropped to ninety @-@ eight on the Hot Singles Chart , and fell off the following week on the Radio Songs and Japan Hot 100 chart . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The accompanying music video for " Can 't Stop the Disco " was shot in Tokyo . The video opens with several circles moving across the screen , each of the circles featuring images of Suzuki posing . The first verse opens with Suzuki standing inside a large circle , singing the song with close @-@ up and body shots . The outfit Suzuki wears is exactly the same from the CD and DVD cover sleeves of the single . It moves onto Suzuki with a new outfit , dancing inside of four @-@ by @-@ four room with silver silk wallpaper . The pre @-@ chorus has Suzuki in a dark blue room , wearing a black and white hoodie . By the first chorus , several scenes use different transition effects while Suzuki sings in different circles . 
 The second verse has Suzuki in the dark blue room again . By the pre @-@ chorus , It then uses neon effects to immolate white objects ; as a result , Suzuki 's sunglasses and hoodie lights up . The final chorus finishes with transitions of different scenes from the video , including Suzuki in the silver room , standing inside of circles , and inside the dark blue room . The video ends with a close @-@ up of Suzuki standing next to a large circle , and pans out . 
 An editor from Channel @-@ Ai blog was positive towards the video 's visual effects and Suzuki 's fashion , stating " For this reason all her 2008 releases were produced by the electronic producer and capsule leader Yasutaka Nakata , where Suzuki reinvented herself as a disco queen . " The editor concluded that " The media would portray Ami as the new fashion leader portraying the popular ero @-@ <unk> style . " The music video appeared on the DVD release of " Can 't Stop the Disco " , and the bonus DVD format of Supreme Show . 
 = = Promotion and live performances = = 
 " Can 't Stop the Disco " was used for two television commercials in Japan ; a campaign for Mr. Donut and the Japanese television show <unk> , which was used as the ending theme song . " Can 't Stop the Disco " made its first live premiere at Suzuki 's One Party , which consisted live performances in celebration of Suzuki 's 10th Anniversary of her career . The song was performed live at two club party events hosted by Suzuki : the 2008 Cruising Party , and a live performance at Club Asia . The live version was released on the limited edition DVD format for Supreme Show . " Can 't Stop the Disco " was then performed again at Club Asia for a second hosting party by Suzuki ; this live version was released on the bonus DVD format for Supreme Show . " Can 't Stop the Disco " was included on the track list on one of Suzuki 's concert tours ; this being a concert for her 29th birthday , at the Liquidroom event . " Can 't Stop the Disco " was placed in the middle section for both concerts . The Liquidroom live performance appeared on the bonus DVD format of Suzuki 's extended play , Snow Ring ( 2013 ) . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of Supreme Show . 
 Ami Suzuki – vocals , background vocals 
 Yasutaka Nakata – songwriting , composition , production , arrangement , management 
 Avex Trax – Suzuki 's management 
 Contemode – Nataka 's management 
 Recorded by Nakata at Avex Studio , Tokyo , Japan 
 = = Charts and sales = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Aaron Rome = 
 Aaron Rome ( born September 27 , 1983 ) is a Canadian professional ice hockey defenceman . He is currently an unrestricted free agent who most recently played with the Norfolk Admirals in the American Hockey League ( AHL ) . Rome was selected in the 4th round ( 104th overall ) of the 2002 NHL Entry Draft by the Los Angeles Kings . 
 Unsigned by the Kings , he joined the Mighty Ducks of Anaheim organization in 2004 , earning most of his playing time with their American Hockey League ( AHL ) affiliates . In 2007 , he played one game with the Ducks during their Stanley Cup @-@ winning playoff season . The following season , he was traded to the Columbus Blue Jackets , playing two seasons in the organization between the NHL and AHL . Becoming an unrestricted free agent in July 2009 , he signed with the Vancouver Canucks and established himself as a regular in the team 's lineup . After three seasons with the Canucks he signed a three @-@ year contract with the Dallas Stars as a free agent . After two seasons , playing in a combined 52 games , the Stars used a compliance buyout to terminate the final year of his contract . 
 = = Playing career = = 
 = = = Junior = = = 
 Rome played junior hockey in the Western Hockey League ( WHL ) from 1999 – 2004 . After debuting in one game for the Saskatoon Blades in 1998 – 99 , he registered 6 assists over 47 games in the following season . During his rookie WHL season , he played alongside older brother Reagan Rome as defensive partners for a short span ( Reagan played five games for Saskatoon in 1999 – 2000 before moving to the Saskatchewan Junior Hockey League ) . Three games into the 2000 – 01 season , Rome moved from Saskatoon to the Kootenay Ice and finished the season with 2 goals and 10 points . Rome began the 2001 – 02 season with another new WHL team , the Swift Current Broncos . Playing in his third major junior season , he improved to 7 goals and 31 points . In the off @-@ season , Rome was selected by the Los Angeles Kings , 104th overall in the 2002 NHL Entry Draft . He was scouted as a stay @-@ at @-@ home defenceman with strong positioning and some offensive skills . 
 Returning to Swift Current following his draft for the 2002 – 03 season , he recorded a junior career @-@ high 12 goals and 56 points , ranking eighth among league defencemen in scoring . Late in the 2003 – 04 season , he was traded to his fourth WHL team , the Moose Jaw Warriors , where he joined his younger brother , Ashton Rome ( also a defenceman ) . Between Swift Current and Moose Jaw , he scored a combined 10 goals and 52 points over 69 games . Ranking third among WHL defencemen in point @-@ scoring , he was named to the WHL East Second All @-@ Star Team . 
 = = = Anaheim Ducks = = = 
 Unsigned by the Kings two years after his NHL draft , he became a free agent in the 2004 off @-@ season . On June 7 , 2004 , he was signed by the Mighty Ducks of Anaheim . He began his professional career with Anaheim 's minor league affiliate , the Cincinnati Mighty Ducks of the American Hockey League ( AHL ) in 2004 – 05 . During that season , he had a second opportunity to play with his brother , Reagan Rome , as the latter was called up from Cincinnati 's ECHL affiliate , the Reading Royals , for two games . Playing 74 games in his rookie AHL season , he scored 2 goals and 16 points . He helped Cincinnati to the second round of the 2005 playoffs , adding 3 goals and 6 points over 12 post @-@ season games . 
 The following season , Anaheim 's AHL affiliate was changed to the Portland Pirates and Rome began a two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half season stint with his new club . He improved to 24 points over 64 games in his second AHL season . During the 2006 @-@ 07 season , Rome was called up to Anaheim and appeared in his first NHL game on January 2 , 2007 , a 2 – 1 loss against the Detroit Red Wings . Registering 14 minutes of ice time , he had a -1 plus @-@ minus rating and took one shot on goal . Completing the season with Portland , he tallied 25 points , including an AHL career @-@ high 8 goals . He was recalled once more for the Ducks ' 2007 playoff run , appearing in one post @-@ season game . The Ducks went on to win the Stanley Cup that year . As Rome did not play in the Stanley Cup Finals , he did not qualify to have his name engraved on the trophy . Anaheim did , however , award him a Stanley Cup ring , as well as the customary day spent with the trophy in the off @-@ season . 
 = = = Columbus Blue Jackets = = = 
 After beginning the 2007 – 08 season with the Pirates , Rome was traded from the Ducks to the Columbus Blue Jackets , along with Clay Wilson , for Geoff Platt , on November 15 , 2007 . Rome was assigned to the Blue Jackets ' AHL affiliate , the Syracuse Crunch , immediately following the trade . After appearing in 41 games with Syracuse , scoring 3 goals and 24 points , he was called up to Columbus on February 26 , 2008 . He scored his first NHL goal late in the season against goaltender Dominik Hasek , in a 3 – 2 loss against the Red Wings on April 3 , 2008 . After his first Blue Jackets training camp in September 2008 , Rome was placed on waivers . After clearing , he was assigned to start the season with Syracuse . He remained with the Crunch until February 2009 , when he was recalled by the Blue Jackets for the remainder of the 2008 – 09 season . He played eight games with the Blue Jackets , registering one assist . Over 48 games in the AHL , he notched 7 goals and 28 points . Rome remained with the Blue Jackets for the franchise 's first playoff season in 2009 , competing in one game . Columbus was eliminated in the first round by Detroit . 
 = = = Vancouver Canucks = = = 
 Rome became an unrestricted free agent in the subsequent off @-@ season and was signed by the Vancouver Canucks on July 1 , 2009 , to a one @-@ way , one @-@ year contract worth $ 550 @,@ 000 . He played the majority of the season with the Canucks , notching 4 assists in 49 games , while also appearing in 7 games with Vancouver 's affiliate , the Manitoba Moose ; he scored 6 goals and 7 points in the AHL . During a three @-@ game stint with the Canucks that season , he played forward for the first time in his career . He appeared in one playoff game for the Canucks in 2010 , missing nine games due to injury . 
 In the off @-@ season , Rome re @-@ signed with Vancouver to a two @-@ year , $ 1 @.@ 5 million contract . He scored for the first time as a Canuck on March 29 , 2011 , an empty netter in a 3 – 1 win against the Nashville Predators . It was his first goal in 109 games . Rome finished the 2010 – 11 season with an NHL career @-@ high 56 games with a goal and four assists . In the 2011 playoffs , he scored his first NHL post @-@ season goal against Antti Niemi of the San Jose Sharks in Game 2 of the third round – a 7 – 3 win . The following game , he was injured off a boarding hit from Sharks forward Jamie McGinn . Rome was sidelined from the rest of the game ; McGinn received a five @-@ minute penalty on the play , but did not receive further discipline from the league . 
 In game three of the 2011 Stanley Cup Finals , Rome sent Boston forward Nathan Horton to the ice with a late hit . Horton sustained a severe concussion and was taken off the ice on a stretcher . Rome was ejected from the game after being assessed a five @-@ minute major penalty for interference and a game misconduct . After a disciplinary hearing the next morning , Rome was assessed a four @-@ game suspension and missed the remainder of the 2011 playoffs . The NHL determined that Rome hit Horton over a second after Horton gave up the puck . The NHL considered a hit to be late if it takes place more than half a second after a player loses possession . This proved to be a series @-@ changing event , as the Canucks had already won games 1 and 2 at home before the hit took place . The Canucks went on to lose a momentum @-@ swinging Game 3 and ended up losing the series four games to three . The Canucks were outscored 23 @-@ 8 in the 7 @-@ game series by the Boston Bruins . 
 Rome began the 2011 – 12 season sidelined after suffering a broken hand during training camp . He returned to the Canucks lineup in early @-@ November after missing the first 14 games of the campaign . In his first four games back , Rome registered three goals and two assists , matching his points output from entire previous season . Later in the month , he missed three games with a thumb injury . 
 = = = Dallas Stars = = = 
 On July 1 , 2012 , Aaron Rome signed a three @-@ year deal with an annual average salary of $ 1 @.@ 5 million with the Dallas Stars . He played 27 games with Dallas during the shortened 2012 – 13 NHL season , registering 5 assists and 18 penalty minutes . 
 On October 14 , 2013 , Rome was activated from injured reserve and was assigned to the Texas Stars of the AHL for conditioning . During the 2013 – 14 season , Rome played 7 games in the AHL with the Texas Stars , and 25 games with the Dallas Stars , scoring no goals and just one assist with the NHL club . On June 16 , 2014 , Rome was placed on unconditional waivers by the Dallas Stars , and the following day ( after he cleared waivers ) Dallas confirmed their use of a compliance buyout , allowing the team to save salary cap space by removing the final year of his three @-@ year , $ 4 @.@ 5 million contract , from the team 's salary calculations . 
 As a free agent , Rome was unable to secure an NHL contract , and instead accepted an invitation to attend the Detroit Red Wings training camp on a try @-@ out for the 2014 – 15 season . At the completion of the Red Wings pre @-@ season , Rome was released and later signed to a professional try @-@ out contract with the Norfolk Admirals of the AHL on October 22 , 2014 . After two games with the Admirals , Rome was released from his try @-@ out contract . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Rome was born and raised in Nesbitt , Manitoba , a small community of less than 30 people . He was the third of four sons born to Dennis and Karen Rome . All four brothers played hockey and made it to the minor professional level ; Rome is the only one to compete in the NHL . Ashton Rome is the only other brother to be drafted into the NHL , selected 143rd overall in 2006 by the San Jose Sharks , and has played in the ECHL and AHL . Eldest brother Ryan Rome competed in the United ( <unk> ) and Central Hockey Leagues ( CHL ) , while Reagan Rome has played in the ECHL , AHL and in Europe . 
 Rome and his wife Adrianne have a son , Grayson . They spend their off @-@ seasons in Brandon , Manitoba . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 Statistics taken from Aaron Rome 's NHL Profile 
 = = Awards = = 
 = D 'Oliveira affair = 
 The D 'Oliveira affair was a prolonged political and sporting controversy relating to the scheduled 1968 – 69 tour of South Africa by the England cricket team , who were officially representing the Marylebone Cricket Club ( MCC ) . The point of contention was whether or not the England selectors would include Basil D 'Oliveira , a mixed @-@ race South African player who had represented England in Test cricket since 1966 , having moved there six years earlier . With South Africa under apartheid , the potential inclusion by England of a non @-@ white South African in their tour party became a political issue . 
 A Cape Coloured of Indian and Portuguese ancestry , D 'Oliveira left South Africa primarily because the era 's apartheid legislation seriously restricted his career prospects on racial grounds and barred him from the all @-@ white Test team . He qualified for Worcestershire County Cricket Club through residency in 1964 and first played for England two years later . The consequences of D 'Oliveira 's possible inclusion in the 1968 – 69 MCC tour of South Africa were discussed by English and South African cricketing bodies as early as 1966 . Manoeuvring by cricketing and political figures in both countries did little to bring the matter to a head . The MCC 's priority was to maintain traditional links with South Africa and have the series go ahead without incident . South Africa 's Prime Minister B. J. Vorster sought to appease international opinion by publicly indicating that D 'Oliveira 's inclusion would be acceptable , but secretly did all he could to prevent it . 
 D 'Oliveira was omitted from the England team for part of 1968 amid a slump in his batting form , but he marked his return in late August with a score of 158 runs in England 's final Test match of the year , against Australia at The Oval . Days later , the MCC selectors omitted D 'Oliveira from the team to tour South Africa ; they insisted that this was based entirely on cricketing merit , but many in Britain voiced apprehension and there was a public outcry . After Tom Cartwright 's withdrawal because of injury on 16 September , the MCC chose D 'Oliveira as a replacement , prompting accusations from Vorster and other South African politicians that the selection was politically motivated . Attempts to find a compromise followed , but these led nowhere . The MCC announced the tour 's cancellation on 24 September . 
 Sporting boycotts of South Africa were already under way by 1968 , but the D 'Oliveira controversy was the first to have a serious effect on South African cricket . The South African Cricket Board of Control announced its intention to remove racial barriers in South African cricket in 1969 , and formally integrated the sport in 1976 . Meanwhile , the boycott movement escalated sharply , leading to South Africa 's near @-@ complete isolation from international cricket from 1971 , though the country continued to play international rugby into the 1980s , twice allowing mixed @-@ race New Zealand rugby teams into the country during the 1970s . D 'Oliveira played for England until 1972 , and for Worcestershire until 1979 . South Africa returned to international cricket in 1991 , soon after apartheid began to be dismantled . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = South Africa = = = 
 From the time that European settlers first arrived in South Africa in 1652 , the country was divided on racial lines , in common with similar settlements . In contrast to other European colonies , racial distinction and segregation intensified during the early 20th century , and the various ethnic groups became more sharply defined and divided . Following its general election victory in 1948 , the National Party , led by Daniel Malan , formalised this racism under a government policy called apartheid . Under apartheid , different races were kept apart in all aspects of life . This system was thoroughly enforced during the 1950s ; any resistance from non @-@ white races was put down and laws , supposedly to prevent the rise of communism , were passed to prevent political agitation . 
 From a cricketing viewpoint , the apartheid policy made little difference . Although cricket was played widely among the different racial groups in South Africa , the Test team , which represented the country in international matches , had always been all white . Under apartheid , this became official policy as the government reasoned that black , coloured ( mixed race ) and Indian players were inherently inferior and not worthy of selection . Different races were forbidden from competing against each other . South African cricket teams did not compete against India , Pakistan or the West Indies , but teams from England , Australia and New Zealand continued to visit the country . English cricketers particularly enjoyed tours to South Africa owing to the hospitality they received and the quality of living . The political writer and historian Peter Oborne commented : " Relations between the cricket establishments of the two countries were exceptionally warm . Only few visitors noticed , and even fewer cared , that there was something wrong . " 
 During the Marylebone Cricket Club ( MCC ) tour of South Africa during 1948 – 49 , the first under apartheid , the BBC commentator John Arlott was horrified when he saw a black man assaulted for no reason . This prompted him to visit several townships where he found black people living in very poor conditions . He contrasted this unfavourably with the luxury of the homes where he was entertained by white families . Billy Griffith , one of the touring team , accompanied him on one visit to a township , and was similarly appalled , but did not speak out against it . Arlott later condemned apartheid , during a 1950 BBC broadcast , and refused to commentate during future tours to the country . His example was followed by the England batsman and clergyman David Sheppard , who declined to tour South Africa , refused to play the team in 1960 , and spoke out publicly against the policies of the South African government despite efforts by the MCC to silence him . Otherwise , there was little protest in England against South African cricket during the 1950s . 
 = = = England = = = 
 From the mid @-@ 1950s , the United Nations began to express concern over apartheid , and there was a growing general awareness in Britain of its effects . In 1960 the UK Prime Minister Harold Macmillan criticised apartheid in his " Wind of Change " speech to the South African parliament . However , the British government was cautious ; the large number of British passport holders and businesses based in South Africa made them reluctant to force the issue and provoke a confrontation . Additionally , there was support for the policy among some right @-@ wing politicians . When the MCC team toured South Africa in 1956 – 57 , the players observed and were shocked by what they considered to be injustices against the black population . As many players and officials had family and friends in the country , they were disinclined to take a stand , but several condemned the situation in print at the time or later . 
 Overall attitudes in England towards South African cricket began to change in the 1960s . At the time , race was becoming an emotive matter in England and the immigration from Asia and the Caribbean became an issue in general elections . Racial tensions had risen throughout the 1950s , and race riots had occurred . Tim Quelch , in his review of English cricket in the 1950s , suggests that " [ England 's ] record on race relations had hardly been exemplary " . But Jack Williams , in his book Cricket and Race , suggests that cricket was a force for racial harmony in England given the influx of African @-@ Caribbean and Asian overseas players and the mingling of white and African @-@ Caribbean supporters during Test series between England and the West Indies . Against this background , when the South African team toured England in 1960 , there were some protests against apartheid . 
 = = = International sport = = = 
 Within South Africa , there was growing realisation among opponents of apartheid that sport could play a role in pressuring the government . During the 1950s , South Africa competed freely in international competition ; the governing bodies of the major international sports recognised only the official , all @-@ white South African institutions . By the end of the decade , this began to change . Several non @-@ white sporting organisations within South Africa united and began to influence international opinion . The resulting pressure brought about the suspension of the all @-@ white Football Association of South Africa from FIFA — for two years from 1961 , then after a brief reinstatement , again from 1964 — which prevented South Africa from participating in the 1966 World Cup . South Africa was also excluded from international fencing in 1964 . However , because neither fencing nor football was closely followed in white South Africa , the impact was limited . Suspension from the Olympics had a greater effect ; another campaign from within South Africa and the consequent change in international opinion resulted in South Africa being barred from the 1964 Olympics and those that followed . 
 In 1966 , before a tour by the New Zealand rugby team , the South African government asked New Zealand to field an all @-@ white team ( thereby excluding Māori players ) ; the New Zealand Rugby Football Union refused and cancelled the tour . As rugby was very popular among white South Africans , this caused concern in that community . The England cricket team was in New Zealand at the time , and Billy Griffith , by then the secretary of the MCC , when questioned said that the MCC would also cancel in similar circumstances . Despite these events in other world sports , South Africa continued to play international cricket . Efforts to put pressure on the International Cricket Conference ( ICC ) failed , and even when South Africa withdrew from the Commonwealth in 1961 ( theoretically forfeiting the national team 's Test status ) , their traditional opponents continued to play @-@ official Tests against them despite opposition from India , Pakistan and the West Indies . 
 = = = D 'Oliveira = = = 
 Basil D 'Oliveira was born in Cape Town in 1931 and , coming from a mixed Indian @-@ Portuguese background , formed part of the Cape Coloured community . He demonstrated skill in cricket from an early age , but as the apartheid system classified him as non @-@ white , he was barred from playing first @-@ class cricket in South Africa or representing the national team . He represented and captained a " non @-@ white " South African team which played unofficial international matches . He was left distraught by the cancellation in 1959 , at the behest of South African anti @-@ apartheid campaigners , of a proposed visit by a West Indies team which was to compete against non @-@ white sides . Realising that he had achieved all he could as a non @-@ white sportsman in South Africa , he wrote to John Arlott in England to ask for help finding employment as a cricketer . 
 Arlott enlisted the help of John Kay , a cricket journalist with expertise in the Lancashire leagues , to find a job for D 'Oliveira as a club professional . No teams were initially interested , but when Middleton 's professional withdrew at the last minute , the club employed D 'Oliveira for the 1960 season . After a poor start , he prospered for Middleton . He established a wider reputation by playing televised matches for a team called the " Cavaliers " , and took part in overseas tours with some leading cricketers . Several English counties expressed an interest in him , and he eventually joined Worcestershire . Qualifying for the county team through residency , he made his debut in 1964 and scored a century on his first appearance . By the 1966 season , he had progressed to the England Test team . He was successful from the start and by the following year was well @-@ established in the team . 
 = = Build @-@ up = = 
 = = = Anticipation = = = 
 From early in his England career , D 'Oliveira and his supporters saw the MCC tour of South Africa in 1968 – 69 as potentially being a key moment in his career . Guy Fraser @-@ Sampson suggests : " Nobody could be in any doubt that the possibility of D 'Oliveira being chosen as a member of the England touring party would raise massive political complications " . When D 'Oliveira visited South Africa to work as a coach in 1966 , the subject was raised continually . People speculated whether D 'Oliveira would be selected and , if so , whether the South African government would allow him to play . Some of his supporters worried that his acceptance of a place on a tour to South Africa might be interpreted as approval of the political situation there , but D 'Oliveira was determined to play , aware of what it would mean to the non @-@ white people of South Africa . In 1967 , Griffith flew to South Africa to discuss the forthcoming tour and to seek a solution to any potential problems — the MCC wanted the tour to go ahead without any political trouble . Little came of the meetings ; Oborne suggests that both sides simply " agreed to hope that the whole issue went away " . 
 After a successful season for England in 1967 , D 'Oliveira was chosen to tour the West Indies in 1967 – 68 ; this raised awareness in England and South Africa that he was a realistic contender to tour South Africa a year later . However , his opportunities to excel were few in the West Indies ; circumstances were against him in several matches , and he had a statistically poor tour . Any mitigating circumstances were offset by problems off the field . D 'Oliveira took full advantage of the social opportunities available on a tour of the West Indies and frequently disappeared to parties and other events , often not reappearing until after breakfast . Rumours to this effect reached the press and the MCC tour manager spoke to D 'Oliveira about his responsibilities on tour . D 'Oliveira said that his behaviour and poor form were partly a result of the pressure placed on him . He was frequently questioned about the South African tour and about race — some groups in the West Indies accused him of " selling out " by playing for England 's " white " team . 
 = = = South Africa 's position = = = 
 The position of the South African government towards mixed @-@ race teams was well established by 1967 . It was stated explicitly after the visit of Griffith when , in February 1967 , the Interior Minister P. K. Le Roux said in a speech : " We will not allow mixed teams to play against our white teams here . That is our policy . It is well known here and overseas . " These comments caused a public row in Britain , and some commentators wanted the tour to be called off ; the MCC informed the British government that players would be selected on ability alone and that any attempts from within South Africa to interfere would cause the tour to be cancelled . Denis Howell , the Minister for Sport , informed the House of Commons of the MCC position and stated that the government expected that the MCC would cancel the tour if any player were to be rejected . Privately , the MCC committee were unhappy to have been forced into so unequivocal a position . 
 B. J. Vorster , the Prime Minister of South Africa , was embarrassed by Le Roux 's public comments and forced him to deny having made them . However , the British government 's intervention cemented in Vorster 's mind the idea that it and the MCC were closely connected . In April 1967 he gave a speech in which he said that while sport between white and non @-@ white teams could not take place in South Africa , the government would be prepared to send mixed teams to play abroad and to accommodate mixed teams from South Africa 's " traditional " opponents . This change of direction was aimed at entering a team in the 1968 Olympics , to avoid a repeat of the cancelled New Zealand rugby tour and with D 'Oliveira 's selection in mind . The MCC decided later in 1967 to clarify that Vorster 's government would impose no limitations on the players chosen for the tour . In January 1968 , Griffith wrote on behalf of the MCC to the South African Cricket Association ( SACA ) with the implication that the tour would be cancelled if a free selection was not guaranteed . 
 According to Oborne , Vorster was a pragmatic politician who wanted to maintain apartheid and to make it appear acceptable to the outside world . To this end , attempting to broaden South Africa 's international connections , he accepted black foreign diplomats in the country and began to plan a policy to allow mixed @-@ race sport to prevent South Africa 's international isolation . However , such policies were unpopular with his domestic supporters and he was careful not to go too far . Oborne writes : " Vorster knew that there was a limit to how far he could go without imperilling his own position . That limit was Basil D 'Oliveira . " According to Oborne , Vorster never intended to allow D 'Oliveira to play with the MCC team ; his supporters would not have accepted a non @-@ white South African benefiting from this change of policy and demonstrating his ability at a high level . Vorster therefore worked to give the impression overseas that D 'Oliveira would be welcome , while at the same time doing his utmost to stop him from playing . He courted the British ambassador , Sir John Nicholls , and told him that a tour party including D 'Oliveira would be acceptable . Nicholls passed this on to the UK government . Vorster meanwhile monitored D 'Oliveira 's progress closely ; from his debut in 1966 , South Africa kept a security file on him . 
 = = = MCC manoeuvres = = = 
 In March 1968 , having received no response from the SACA to Griffith 's letter , the MCC asked Alec Douglas @-@ Home to intervene . Douglas @-@ Home , a former British Prime Minister and then the Opposition spokesman for foreign affairs , had just finished his term as MCC president and was visiting Rhodesia and South Africa ; he agreed to raise the question of D 'Oliveira during a meeting with Vorster that was part of his itinerary . Douglas @-@ Home believed that the best way to deal with apartheid was through dialogue and that contact between the countries should be increased , not reduced — as he described it , " precept and example must be better than ostracism " . When he met Vorster , Douglas @-@ Home was reluctant to press him for an unequivocal answer , but discussed D 'Oliveira . He also sounded out other figures in South Africa and returned to England to tell the MCC , in the words of the cricket writer E. W. Swanton , that " if D 'Oliveira were to be chosen the odds were 5 / 4 on his being allowed in " . 
 In the view of Fraser @-@ Sampson : " While Douglas @-@ Home 's motives remain obscure , it is clear that he muddied the waters dreadfully . By allowing the MCC to believe they could continue happily fudging the issue , and by misleading them as to Vorster 's true intentions , he delivered the worst of both worlds . " Following Douglas @-@ Home 's advice , the MCC let the matter drift throughout the 1968 season . Conscious of D 'Oliveira 's poor form in the West Indies and continued lack of success during early 1968 , the MCC committee kept in mind that it was far from certain that he would even make the team to tour South Africa . 
 Meanwhile , with the knowledge of Vorster and the South African government , the SACA carefully devised its answer to the MCC letter . The reply , which avoided directly answering the MCC question , was hand @-@ delivered to the MCC secretary George " Gubby " Allen in March 1968 by the former South African Test captain Jack Cheetham , a close associate of several MCC officials . By this point , the MCC had accepted Douglas @-@ Home 's advice and no longer wanted a reply to their letter — Oborne records that when Cheetham " cheerily produced his laboriously produced document , a panic @-@ stricken Gubby Allen waved it away . " The letter was never presented to the full MCC Committee , and Cheetham returned to South Africa with news that a reply was not required — preparations for the tour could proceed as normal . This allowed Vorster to conceal his intentions regarding D 'Oliveira for a further six months . Allen later justified his actions by suggesting that he was concerned that the SACA letter would be leaked to the press if it went any further . Oborne believes that Allen wished to hide from the full committee the MCC hierarchy 's change of mind over the approach to take with the South Africans ; he suggests that Allen and Griffith were effectively acting as a secret MCC subcommittee from this point . 
 = = = South African plan = = = 
 Vorster and the SACA followed D 'Oliveira 's form closely throughout the tour of West Indies and into the 1968 season . D 'Oliveira 's lack of success prompted press speculation that he might lose his England place for entirely non @-@ political reasons , but Vorster was convinced that the MCC were committed to selecting him under any circumstances . He therefore conceived a two @-@ pronged plan to prevent D 'Oliveira 's selection for the 1968 – 69 tour . He and the SACA would attempt to bribe D 'Oliveira to make himself unavailable , while simultaneously persuading the English selectors — or more specifically the MCC , who Vorster believed would determine selection policy — not to choose him . The latter part of the plan depended on the MCC realising that picking D 'Oliveira would mean no tour , but in making such attempts the South Africans risked public discovery , which would cause the tour to be cancelled anyway . 
 The bribery was planned from an early stage , but had to be postponed when D 'Oliveira did not return to South Africa before the 1968 season . The second part of the plan was put into operation in March 1968 . Vorster resolved to send a secret message to the MCC through Lord Cobham , a member and former president of the MCC with close links to D 'Oliveira 's county side Worcestershire . Cobham was visiting South Africa at Griffith 's request to meet Arthur Coy , an official of the SACA . Cobham told Coy that he wanted the tour to go ahead , but agreed with him that D 'Oliveira 's inclusion would be " disastrous " . Cobham seems to have promised Coy that he would attempt to dissuade D 'Oliveira from touring , but never actually did so . Cobham then met Vorster , who told him that if D 'Oliveira were chosen , the tour would be cancelled . 
 On his return to England , Cobham kept this information from the full MCC committee , knowing that they would be forced to cancel the tour if they became aware of it . Instead , he wrote a letter to a committee member , whose identity has never been made public . The letter 's recipient passed it on to Griffith , who in turn showed it to Allen and Arthur Gilligan , at that time the MCC president . These three men chose to hide the information from the full committee , and nobody informed Denis Howell . Allen later defended these actions , setting out his reasoning in his biography , which was written by his close friend Swanton — Allen argued that the advice given by Douglas @-@ Home , an international diplomat , took precedence over Cobham 's information and had already been accepted by the MCC . He further suggested that , as the four England selectors had to choose the team " without any other consideration " , and two of them sat on the MCC committee , it would have been unfair to burden them with Cobham 's information . Oborne dismisses Allen 's reasoning as " disastrously muddled " , pointing out that Cobham 's advice was far more up @-@ to @-@ date than Douglas @-@ Home 's , and that there would have been no burden of conscience for the team selectors as the new information would have caused the tour to be cancelled . 
 By the beginning of the 1968 season , the MCC 's public position followed the advice of Douglas @-@ Home : it was unknown whether or not South Africa would accept D 'Oliveira and it would be better not to press the issue . Even so , three key members of the MCC were aware of the reality of the situation . Vorster had avoided international condemnation as he had not publicly declared D 'Oliveira unacceptable , but his stand had been clearly conveyed to London in private . 
 = = = D 'Oliveira in 1968 = = = 
 D 'Oliveira was aware of the political discussions surrounding him during 1968 , and the pressure on him was intensified by the scrutiny of his supporters and opponents in England and South Africa . Conscious of his failure in the West Indies , he made a concerted effort to improve his batting . He scored runs consistently and was chosen for England 's first Test of 1968 , against Australia in early June . He was very successful , scoring 87 not out and taking two wickets . After England lost , however , D 'Oliveira was blamed in some sections of the press . Wisden Cricketers ' Almanack noted that he failed as a bowler , and his innings was difficult to evaluate as England had effectively lost the match by that stage . Even so , most observers expected him to retain his place , including the watching South Africans . 
 Before the second Test , played at Lord 's , a series of events took place that Fraser @-@ Sampson later described as " so bizarre as to be totally unbelievable , and yet [ they ] happened " . The evening before play began , Griffith suggested to D 'Oliveira that , to save the 1968 – 69 series , he should withdraw himself from consideration for the tour , and announce that he wished in future to play for South Africa rather than England . D 'Oliveira angrily declined . The next day , E. W. Swanton — a journalist technically unconnected with the MCC , but a close friend of Allen and a member of the " Establishment " — approached the player with a similar proposition , which D 'Oliveira again dismissed . Both Griffith and Swanton were opposed to apartheid — Swanton had refused to report on the 1964 – 65 MCC tour of South Africa because of his objections to the system , and he supported D 'Oliveira from a cricketing standpoint . This plan probably originated from one of the several South Africans present at Lord 's with an interest in the D 'Oliveira question , including Coy and the private cricket tour organiser Wilfred Isaacs ; according to Fraser @-@ Sampson , there is evidence to suggest that it first came from the SACA . Oborne writes that Griffith and Swanton were probably well @-@ intentioned , and posits that they might have been caught up in a South African scheme in their search for a solution to the D 'Oliveira problem . Fraser @-@ Sampson suggests that they and other MCC figures may have felt forced into this course of action by the vigour of the South Africans ' protests that they would not tolerate a team including D 'Oliveira . 
 On the morning of the second Test , D 'Oliveira was told by Colin Cowdrey , the England captain , that he had been left out of the team and was instead twelfth man . In his place , England chose a fast bowler to strengthen their bowling attack . While the game was taking place , Doug Insole , the chairman of the England selectors , introduced D 'Oliveira to Isaacs , who offered him warm hospitality if he toured South Africa during the English winter . Deeply upset with his omission , D 'Oliveira returned to play for Worcestershire once his twelfth man duties ended . Oborne suggests that , from a cricketing viewpoint , the decision to drop D 'Oliveira looks odd , and that it may have been connected to the South African presence at Lord 's . The replacement for D 'Oliveira , Barry Knight , performed well in the second Test ; D 'Oliveira , by contrast , lost all batting form . From mid @-@ June until August , bothered by the pressure over South Africa , he struggled to score , managing just 205 runs at an average of 12 @.@ 81 . He maintained his form as a bowler , but critics believed his chance had gone . In July , as part of a standard procedure , the MCC wrote to 30 leading players to ask if they were available to tour South Africa ; D 'Oliveira was not contacted . According to Fraser @-@ Sampson , the idea that D 'Oliveira was not then one of England 's best 30 players was absurd ; he writes that the selectors must therefore have been aware that Vorster would not accept his selection and they had consequently decided not to choose him . 
 During his slump in form , D 'Oliveira was contacted by <unk> Oosthuizen , a director at the tobacco company Carreras , which was , alongside Rothmans , part of the South African Rembrandt Tobacco Corporation . Rembrandt had set up a group known as the South African Sports Foundation ( SASF ) to promote amateur sport . Oosthuizen told D 'Oliveira that he represented Rothmans , who had sponsored matches featuring D 'Oliveira while he was waiting to qualify for Worcestershire . He offered D 'Oliveira work as a coach for the SASF on an annual salary of £ 4 @,@ 000 — a vast sum for a professional cricketer at the time — on the condition that he took up this role immediately at the end of the 1968 season , and thereby made himself unavailable for the MCC tour before selection took place . D 'Oliveira tentatively declined , but Oosthuizen persisted , first offering to find out if he would be included in the MCC team , then telling him that his presence in that side would embarrass Vorster . D 'Oliveira was aware that accepting the offer could cause many to lose respect for him as he would be abandoning the opportunity to play against South Africa , but nevertheless considered it over the following weeks . Oosthuizen repeatedly pressured him to accept . Shortly before the final Test of 1968 , he offered personally to match the money that D 'Oliveira told him he had been offered to make himself available for the MCC team . D 'Oliveira stalled , and involved his agent , Reg Hayter . After further conversations with Oosthuizen , D 'Oliveira decided to try to postpone a decision until after the team to tour South Africa was announced — Hayter had established from a source close to the selectors that D 'Oliveira had a good chance of being picked . 
 During a later press investigation , Oosthuizen claimed to have acted independently . Anton Rupert , the head of Rembrandt , endorsed this version , asserting that Oosthuizen had acted in his capacity as an employee of the SASF . Rupert said this was an autonomous organisation , but according to Oborne the SASF constitution made it totally dependent on Rembrandt . Oborne writes that Oosthuizen 's offers were rooted in the plans made by Vorster and Coy to bribe D 'Oliveira indirectly by offering him work that would prevent him from playing for the MCC . Oborne surmises that the position and salary offered to D 'Oliveira did not come from the SASF , but were actually part of a scheme involving Vorster and Rupert to remove the controversial player from the tour . Williams also concludes that the offer was effectively a bribe to stop D 'Oliveira playing . 
 In early August , D 'Oliveira returned to form with an innings of 89 against Warwickshire . Before the fifth and final England – Australia Test match , played between 22 and 27 August , Cowdrey batted at the Oval , where the match was to be played , and deduced that medium @-@ paced bowlers would be very effective given the condition of the cricket pitch . Consequently , when the England team was chosen , he asked for a medium @-@ paced bowler to be placed in reserve in case conditions warranted their selection . The two first @-@ choice selections , Knight and Tom Cartwright , were unavailable , so D 'Oliveira was called up by Cowdrey as a reserve on account of his bowling . On the day before the game , one of the England batsmen , Roger Prideaux , withdrew from the team , saying he had an infection . The team was duly re @-@ arranged and the new version included D 'Oliveira as a batsman . He heard no more from Oosthuizen , who was transferred from the London office soon after . The intervention of Oosthuizen became public knowledge when it was reported in the press in April 1969 . 
 = = Height of controversy = = 
 = = = Oval Test match = = = 
 Feeling much more confident , D 'Oliveira expected to be successful in the Oval Test match . Before the game , an unnamed MCC official circulated a story that D 'Oliveira had been offered thousands of pounds to keep himself available for the South Africa tour . This was a similar story to that which D 'Oliveira had told Oosthuizen ; it had probably travelled back to the MCC via South Africa , but was not true . When the game began , Australia held a 1 – 0 lead after four Tests ; England needed a win to level the series . England made a reasonable start on the first day , but a late wicket brought D 'Oliveira in to bat with the game delicately poised . Oborne observes that D 'Oliveira was under huge pressure , both for simple cricketing reasons and because the world was watching to see if he would be successful . Wisden reported : " In the last hour D 'Oliveira began his fine effort . He hooked the short ball superbly " . At the end of the first day , he had scored 23 runs . 
 Early on the second day , D 'Oliveira batted with less certainty . He was dropped by the opposition wicket @-@ keeper with his score on 31 , but he was encouraged by the umpire Charlie Elliott and his batting partner John Edrich . As his score reached fifty , Elliott whispered , " Well played — my God you 're going to cause some problems . " D 'Oliveira went on to score 158 runs before he was out , although he was dropped a few more times after passing three figures . He received a prolonged ovation from the crowd when he was out , and congratulations from John Gleeson , one of the opposing Australians . Oborne assesses the innings as one of the best ever : despite the relatively weak attack and easy batting conditions , Oborne believes that no other cricketer had faced so much pressure and so many outside forces conspiring against him . Later in the game , D 'Oliveira also contributed with the ball . After rain had reduced the amount of playing time and caused further delays through the subsequent clean @-@ up , England faced a race against time to win the match . D 'Oliveira took a crucial wicket with his 12th ball to break a long partnership and open the way for Derek Underwood to bowl England to victory in the game and a share in the series . 
 Off the field , manoeuvres started immediately . Vorster followed the innings closely , with Oosthuizen in attendance . On the second day of the match , Geoffrey Howard , the secretary of Surrey County Cricket Club ( who played at the Oval ) , received a call from Oosthuizen , who informed Howard that he had been trying without success to contact Billy Griffith . He told Howard to pass along to Griffith the message that if " today 's centurion is picked , the tour will be off " . Meanwhile , Insole asked D 'Oliveira if he was available to tour South Africa , and Cowdrey questioned him about how he would handle the inevitably tense situations . Cowdrey also said that he wanted him in the team . D 'Oliveira was left in little doubt that he would be selected to tour South Africa . 
 = = = Selection meeting = = = 
 The selectors , after a six @-@ hour meeting , chose the team to tour South Africa on 27 August 1968 . The official records of the meeting are incomplete and of those present , no one left an account of what happened . Oborne believes that at least ten men were present — the four selectors , Insole , Peter May , Don Kenyon and Alec Bedser ; the England captain Colin Cowdrey ; Gubby Allen , Billy Griffith , Arthur Gilligan and Donald Carr for the MCC ; and possibly Maurice Allom , another MCC member . Oborne suggests that one of those present might have been acting for the South African government , as Vorster was well @-@ informed about what happened at the meeting and followed events closely . He also observes that , of those present , Allen , Griffith and Gilligan knew from the Cobham letter what would happen if D 'Oliveira were selected ; he argues that they may have passed the information on to other selectors . Coy , who had been at the Lord 's Test , may also have made the South African position clear at the meeting . According to Oborne , " Everyone in the room , with the possible exception of the Worcestershire skipper Don Kenyon , would have been aware that the selection of D 'Oliveira could at best cause difficulties and at worst cause the tour to be cancelled . " Fraser @-@ Sampson goes further , suggesting that Insole , and possibly also May , knew the whole story from an early stage . 
 From a cricketing viewpoint , most critics agreed that D 'Oliveira should probably have been selected based on his score at the Oval , his past record , and the usefulness of his bowling . The selectors left him out , however , deciding that his bowling was not strong enough to classify him as an all @-@ rounder . Oborne points out that , judged in cricketing terms , this was " not an outrage " . D 'Oliveira had several rivals as a batsman , and of the places available , one went to Ken Barrington , who had a good Test record , and the other to Keith Fletcher , who was much younger than D 'Oliveira . Oborne judges both of these decisions fair . Nobody at the selection meeting supported including D 'Oliveira . Some of those present said later that , despite his prior assurances to D 'Oliveira , Cowdrey opposed his selection at the meeting , which influenced others there . Fraser @-@ Sampson suggests that Cowdrey , who later tried to justify his role in events , may have inwardly supported D 'Oliveira 's inclusion , but spoken against it out of a lack of confidence and decisiveness . It is also possible , argues Fraser @-@ Sampson , that if May had been aware of the true state of affairs , he may have confided in Cowdrey , a close friend ; this would have left Cowdrey , who was very keen to lead a team to South Africa , in a difficult and conflicted position . Fraser @-@ Sampson concludes : " Far from being the villain of the piece , Cowdrey may simply have been an honourable man pushed beyond the limits of his character and overwhelmed by events . " 
 As is customary at such selection meetings , there was no vote . Insole recalled that there was no hostility towards D 'Oliveira at the meeting , and pointed out that although he was not chosen in the main team , he was made a reserve . Williams , while acknowledging that there were several worthy batsmen as candidates for places in the team , asserts that even if those at the meeting had only discussed the players ' respective cricketing abilities , " every selector must have known that by not selecting D 'Oliveira they would improve the prospects of the tour going ahead . " The full MCC Committee met to formally approve the selected team on the afternoon of 28 August . Nobody voiced opposition . 
 D 'Oliveira , who learned of his omission over the radio in the Worcestershire dressing room having just scored 128 runs against Sussex , was deeply upset and faced intense press attention . Insole and Griffith defended the decision to omit D 'Oliveira to the press , saying that there had been no pressure from South Africa and that the chosen team simply included better players than D 'Oliveira . Oborne writes that Insole considered the events surrounding the selection meeting as among the worst of his life , but that " he and the other selectors were victims of the decision , reached on the advice of Alec Douglas @-@ Home early in 1968 , not to press for an answer to the MCC demand there should be ' no preconditions ' for the tour . Once that decision had been made , everything else followed : the bribery attempt , the secret pressure and the <unk> of the MCC . Had the matter been dealt with ... Insole would never have been subject to the innuendo and accusations of racism and betrayal that have haunted him ever since . " 
 = = = Reaction = = = 
 While the general public were baffled that a man who just scored a century against Australia could be left out of the team , the English cricketing press were divided on the decision . Some journalists supported the MCC on cricketing grounds , including the cricket correspondents of The Times and The Daily Telegraph . Others , prominently the former England captain Ted Dexter , the former Test player Trevor Bailey and E. W. Swanton , all of whom generally sided with the cricket establishment , contended that D 'Oliveira deserved to be in the team on merit . Swanton said he had received no letters which actually agreed with the omission . Other commentators , such as the Worcestershire club secretary and the former West Indies Test player Learie Constantine , openly stated that D 'Oliveira was omitted either because of his race or because the MCC supported apartheid . Some Labour politicians also expressed concern . John Arlott , while asserting that D 'Oliveira deserved to be included , suggested that to demonstrate opposition to apartheid , the MCC should perhaps have selected him even if this were not the case . The general press took a wider view , with several newspaper columns reporting that the decision appeared to have been made to avoid offending the South African government . According to Williams , the public positions held by much of the MCC committee towards South Africa led to suspicions that D 'Oliveira may have been left out simply to save the tour . 
 More recent commentators suggest that the MCC members were not directly motivated by support of apartheid . Oborne argues that the MCC establishment , without favouring apartheid , wished to maintain traditional links with white South Africa . Williams suggests that the committee were politically naive , and that they ignored the political dimensions of D 'Oliveira 's non @-@ selection . Williams writes that the committee seemed unaware that its decision made it appear to support apartheid . Fraser @-@ Sampson believes that those involved " acted for what they thought were the best of motives , namely what they saw as the good of the game . " Regarding the right @-@ wing links of some individuals — Gilligan had been a member of the British Fascists during the 1920s , and Bedser later became a member of the Freedom Association , which Fraser @-@ Sampson classifies as " far @-@ right " — neither Oborne nor Fraser @-@ Sampson suggests that the two men were racist , or that any of the selectors ' actions regarding D 'Oliveira were tainted by prejudice or support for apartheid . Fraser @-@ Sampson does comment , however , that some individuals were " apologists " for Vorster , and that many of them firmly believed in the separation of politics and sport . 
 Not all MCC members supported the selectors . Around 70 members met , including the clergyman and former England captain David Sheppard , and called for the tour to be abandoned . Sheppard 's intervention shook Cowdrey , a religious man . Within weeks , several MCC members had resigned in protest at the decision , and the MCC had received nearly 1 @,@ 000 letters about it , mainly complaints . In South Africa , whites received the news happily — one nationalist rally broke into cheers upon hearing the news — while the black community viewed the omission as a betrayal . The British Anti @-@ Apartheid Movement sent telegrams to the Prime Minister Harold Wilson , asking him to intervene , and to Gilligan , asking for the tour to be cancelled on the grounds that by playing in South Africa the England team would be " condoning apartheid " . D 'Oliveira received many letters of support from the public . He also received sympathetic letters from Cowdrey , Insole , Griffith and Cobham . He responded with a burst of good form , and was not drawn into publicly criticising the MCC , even offering the team his support . He signed a contract to cover the tour for the News of the World newspaper , which drew criticism from other newspapers and shook Vorster . At the time , non @-@ whites were not allowed into South African press boxes other than " in a menial capacity " — Vorster suggested that D 'Oliveira may not even be allowed on the tour as a journalist . 
 = = = Cancellation = = = 
 One of the MCC team , Tom Cartwright , had been struggling with an injury . He had considered withdrawing from the tour on moral grounds , owing to his reservations about involvement with the apartheid government . There are different versions of what actually happened . According to Cowdrey , Cartwright played without discomfort on 14 September , passed a fitness test the following day , and suddenly withdrew after an overnight reaction to his exertions , prompting the selectors to take only ten minutes to choose D 'Oliveira as a replacement . Fraser @-@ Sampson records that Cartwright actually had two fitness tests , owing to pre @-@ existing concerns over his health ; the selectors tried to persuade him not to pull out , with Cowdrey particularly insistent , but Cartwright was adamant . On 16 September , he withdrew from the MCC team , citing his injury . D 'Oliveira was duly called up , a decision announced the following day . Despite having been rejected as a bowler at the earlier meeting , he was now replacing a bowler in the team ; the selectors stated that D 'Oliveira 's bowling might prove useful . Oborne 's assessment of the decision is that " they had had enough and were bowing to public opinion . " Williams comments that the belated addition of D 'Oliveira in the wake of outcry at his exclusion confirmed in the minds of many that politics had been involved in the team selection . Denis Howell felt the need to state publicly that the decision was the MCC 's alone , and that there had been no pressure from the UK government . D 'Oliveira was pleased but suspected that the tour would no longer go ahead . 
 In South Africa , Vorster heard that D 'Oliveira had been added to the team shortly before addressing the Orange Free State National Party congress at Bloemfontein on 17 September . He immediately announced that English team would not be allowed into South Africa if it included D 'Oliveira . He told the gathering that while " we are and always have been prepared to play host to the MCC ... [ we ] are not prepared to receive a team thrust upon us by people whose interests are not the game , but to gain certain political objectives which they do not even attempt to hide " . To loud applause , he went on to describe the revised MCC team as " not the team of the MCC but the team of the Anti @-@ Apartheid Movement , the team of <unk> [ the South African Non @-@ Racial Olympic Committee ] and the team of Bishop Reeves [ a critic of apartheid ] . " Vorster expressed similar sentiments elsewhere , accusing the MCC of making a purely political decision . He insisted that he " had taken a decision for South Africa " . The South African press was mostly critical , warning that Vorster 's stand might lead to the country being excluded from international sport , but Professor Bruce Murray comments that the MCC 's initial exclusion of D 'Oliveira , only to then include him instead of a bowler , had given Vorster some ammunition to claim that the MCC selection was politically charged . Including D 'Oliveira from the start would , by contrast , have forced Vorster to reveal that his plan to allow mixed teams was false . 
 In England , Griffith responded that the tour would be cancelled were D 'Oliveira not allowed to play , and that he was in the team on merit having missed selection first time around by " a bee 's whisker " . Cowdrey , meanwhile , proposed flying to South Africa himself to safeguard the tour but the South African minister Ben Schoeman said that D 'Oliveira had been chosen because of politics and that South Africa would make no deal to let him play . Coy and Cheetham flew secretly to London to try to find a compromise . They held a four @-@ hour meeting with the MCC committee on 24 September , directly after which the committee announced that " the side selected to represent MCC in South Africa is not acceptable for reasons beyond the control of the SACA . The MCC committee therefore decided unanimously that the tour will not take place . " Williams argues that the delay in cancelling the tour suggests that some in the MCC might still have hoped to find common ground with the South Africans . D 'Oliveira briefly considered withdrawing from the team to save the series , but decided not to . 
 Sheppard and other MCC rebels called a Special General Meeting of the MCC ; they wanted the MCC to state publicly that the team selection had been mishandled and that no further cricket should take place with South Africa until cricket there had been made non @-@ racial . Before the meeting took place , the General Committee met the rebels and initially claimed that it would have been inappropriate to ask South Africa about D 'Oliveira before the tour — although they had done so . The committee then admitted writing a letter but said that they had never received a reply . The Special General Meeting took place in December 1968 , but the rebels were outvoted by the other members ; Sheppard was criticised by members at the meeting , and his former friend Peter May refused to talk to him afterwards . Those opposing Sheppard suggested that he opposed apartheid whereas the committee wanted to advance cricket . It was also suggested that the MCC should not act as the conscience of Great Britain . Williams suggests that the vote indicated that a high proportion of the MCC favoured maintaining cricketing links with South Africa despite knowing that South African cricket operated racial segregation . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Coming just after New Zealand abandoned their 1967 rugby tour over South Africa 's refusal to accommodate a mixed team , the cancellation of the 1968 – 69 MCC series over D 'Oliveira marked the second such incident in two years . According to Oborne , the affair forced upon South African cricket a realisation that it had to change . In 1969 , the South African Cricket Board of Control ( <unk> ) announced that future teams would be racially integrated and selected purely on merit ; efforts duly began to allow all races to compete against each other and share facilities . This led to some disagreement among non @-@ white sports organisations between those who supported these incremental changes and those who wanted immediate disbanding of the old system . D 'Oliveira , a member of the first group , was partly drawn into this conflict . He also faced criticism from those in South Africa and England who believed that , to oppose apartheid , he should have declared himself unavailable to tour in the first place . With the tour to South Africa cancelled , the MCC hastily arranged for its team to play a Test series in Pakistan instead . D 'Oliveira played and was very successful . He remained an England regular for four more years and played for Worcestershire until 1979 . 
 In 1969 , many of the events from the previous year became public knowledge , including the deceptions of Allen , Griffith and Gilligan . The MCC committee met and granted retrospective approval to the actions of the four men . Griffith 's offer to resign was declined . The press outcry of 1968 was not repeated ; Fraser @-@ Sampson speculates that the MCC may have applied pressure to journalists . Griffith and Allen later received honours from the British government . 
 Controversy continued to flare in Britain and other countries regarding sporting links with South Africa . The South Africa rugby team 's 1969 – 70 tour of Britain and Ireland was accompanied by mass demonstrations against apartheid , including an attempt by a protester in London to hijack the South African team bus , and a demonstration in Dublin where people tried to stop the South Africans from reaching the match venue by lying down in the middle of the street . The South Africa cricket team was due to tour England shortly afterwards , and the MCC remained keen for the series to go ahead . They cancelled the tour a week before the South Africans were due to arrive , following public protests and pressure from the UK government . Virulent anti @-@ apartheid demonstrations in Australia during the South Africa rugby team 's 1971 tour led to soaring police costs , matches played behind fences and barbed wire , and a state of emergency in Queensland , all of which prompted the Australian Cricket Board to cancel the tour by the South Africa cricket team that had been scheduled to follow . 
 South Africa was thereafter almost totally isolated from international cricket , but not from rugby . The Australian Rugby Union severed ties with South Africa after the turbulent 1971 series , but its counterparts in New Zealand , France and the Home Nations retained links into the 1980s . With Māori and Samoan players officially designated " honorary whites " by the South African government , mixed @-@ race New Zealand rugby teams toured South Africa in 1970 and 1976 . The <unk> formally integrated South African cricket in 1976 , but enduring overseas opposition to South Africa 's internal governance meant that the country did not play @-@ official international cricket again until 1991 , after the start of the process to dismantle apartheid . 
 = All Souls ( The X @-@ Files ) = 
