 " All Souls " is the seventeenth episode of the fifth season of the American science fiction television series The X @-@ Files . The episode originally aired on the Fox network on April 26 , 1998 . The episode 's teleplay was written by Frank Spotnitz and John Shiban , from a story by Dan Angel and Billy Brown ; it was directed by Allen Coulter . The episode is a " Monster @-@ of @-@ the @-@ Week " story , a stand @-@ alone plot which is unconnected to the mythology , or overarching fictional history , of The X @-@ Files . " All Souls " received a Nielsen household rating of 8 @.@ 5 and was watched by 13 @.@ 44 million viewers in its initial broadcast . It received mixed reviews from television critics . 
 The show centers on FBI special agents Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) who work on cases linked to the paranormal , called X @-@ Files . In this episode , the unexplained death of a young girl with polydactyly ( among other health problems ) prompts Father McCue ( Arnie Walters ) to ask Scully for her help , but her investigation leads her to a mystery involving Nephilim — children of mortal women and angels . Scully soon learns that Aaron Starkey ( Glenn Morshower ) , a department of social services worker and demon in disguise , is after the girls , in order that the Devil may control their power . 
 The original version of " All Souls " was a simple story about Mulder , Scully , and angels . Shiban and Spotnitz , however , overhauled the idea and added elements of the earlier " Christmas Carol " and " Emily " story arc , making " All Souls " the unofficial third part . The entry also contained several elaborate effects , which were achieved via makeup and CGI . After they viewed the final cut of the installment , Shiban and Spotnitz decided to frame the action around Scully confessing her story to a priest in a confessional . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In Alexandria , Virginia , sixteen @-@ year @-@ old Dara <unk> ( Emily Perkins ) , a severely mentally and physically challenged girl confined to a wheelchair , somehow manages to leave her house in the middle of the night , soon after her baptism . Her father , Lance ( Eric Keenleyside ) , finds her in the middle of the street , with her arms raised upward , kneeling before a Dark Figure . Suddenly , lightning flashes and the Dark Figure disappears . When Lance reaches Dara , he realizes she is dead and that her eyes are gone , as if having been burned out of their sockets . 
 Father McCue ( Arnie Walters ) contacts Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) and asks for her help in the case . Scully visits the <unk> , and learns that Dara was adopted six years earlier . Due to her severe spinal deformities , there is no explanation as to how Dara walked out of the house . Lance is convinced that it was the Devil that stood over her in the street . Scully examines Dara 's body with a pathologist Vicki Belon ( Lorraine Landry ) , who notes her surgically removed extra fingers . Belon reluctantly proposes that the girl was struck down by God , as if she was a mistake . 
 Meanwhile , a man named Father Gregory ( Jody Racicot ) visits a psychiatric hospital attempting to visit a girl named Paula <unk> ( Perkins ) , Dara 's twin sister . However , he is blocked by Aaron Starkey ( Glenn Morshower ) , a social worker . That night , Paula dies when a man enters her room . Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) , locates Dara 's birth records and reveals that she was a <unk> . Shortly thereafter , Starkey reveals that Paula was about to be adopted by Father Gregory . When the agents visit the priest , he insists he was trying to protect Paula from harm . Later , while examining Paula 's body , Scully experiences a vision of her daughter Emily ( Lauren Diewold ) . 
 Mulder performs further research on the adoption records and uncovers information on a third sister ( Perkins ) , who is apparently troubled and homeless . With Starkey 's help , Mulder canvases abandoned buildings in a desolate part of town . However , the Dark Figure finds and kills the girl . After finding Father Gregory at the scene , Mulder believes that he is responsible for the murders . Under questioning by Mulder and Scully , Father Gregory insists that he tried to protect the girls ' souls from the Devil , and that the fourth girl must be located . While the agents step out of the interrogation room , Starkey enters and demands to know the location of the fourth girl . When Gregory does not answer , he is burned alive by Starkey , who is revealed to be the Devil . 
 Scully is approached by the Dark Figure , who is revealed to be a Seraph , an angel who descended from the heavens and fathered four children with a mortal woman . God sent the Seraph to return the girls to Heaven in order to keep the Devil from claiming them as his own . Scully and Starkey find the fourth girl , Roberta Dyer ( Perkins ) at Gregory 's church . However , Scully sees Starkey 's horned shadow , revealing his true origins . Scully tries to help Roberta escape , but the women are confronted by the Seraph . She reluctantly lets go of Roberta 's hand , after seeing Emily in place of Roberta , and lets her enter Heaven . Later , Scully tells Mulder they should have been protecting the girls from Starkey , not Gregory . She also believes that they are now in a place where they were meant to be . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 The script for " All Souls " was written by John Shiban and Frank Spotnitz , and directed by Allen Coulter . The original genesis for the episode was an idea developed by Dan Angel and Billy Brown , two story board editors for the series that had left after Christmas of 1997 . In this incarnation , the plot was radically different ; according to Shiban , the story was " about Mulder and Scully and angels , but it never quite worked the way it was originally conceived . " Shiban and Spotnitz decided to over @-@ haul the script and feature elements of the earlier " Christmas Carol " and " Emily " story arc . The episode , according to Andy Meisler , thus became the unofficial third part in the story . Shiban and Spotnitz wanted to include the " very universal " idea of Scully exploring feelings for her deceased daughter . In addition , by making Scully the believer and Mulder the skeptic , the writers added " the Mulder @-@ Scully criss @-@ cross " that was a major theme for the fifth season . 
 In order to counter some of the darker aspects of the script , Shiban and Spotnitz — on the behest of co @-@ star David Duchovny — added several bits of comic relief to be offered by Mulder . According to <unk> , " It was in the more straight ahead investigative shows , the creepier , scarier shows , that I would try to make sure that we kept this kind of humanity alive through humor of it . " 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Scenes at " St. John 's Church " — the church featured in the episode — were shot in the actual St. Augustine Church in Vancouver , British Columbia . In order to secure permission for filming , the script was sent to the church 's local Archdiocese for approval by a Monseigneur . Eventually , the script was approved and filming commenced . The production crew , however , scouted several other churches in case permission to film at St. Augustine fell through , although none of them had " the ornate physical presence " of the chosen church . Special stain @-@ glass windows were created that featured an angel ascending into Heaven , to go along with the themes of the episode . Father McCue 's book about the Nephilim was created by assistant art director Vivien Nishi with guidance from Spotnitz . Scenes at Father Gregory 's church were filmed in an older boiler room at George Pearson Hospital . This location had previously been used in the earlier fifth season entry " Kitsunegari " as a cafeteria . The production crew initially worried that the high windows in the building would not allow the cameras enough time to film , as the light coming through would dramatically shift as the day wore on . A solution was devised in which some of the windows were lit up via artificial means . 
 The episode also contained several elaborate effects , which were achieved via makeup and CGI . Makeup artist Laverne Basham and hairstylist Anji <unk> were given the task of creating four distinct looks for the quadruplets , all played by Emily Perkins . In addition , they were also responsible for making Jody Racicot appear older . This task proved particularly difficult because Racicot did not have any hair to dye grey and had " the tightest skin of any thirtysomething guy [ they 'd ] ever seen . " The visual effects to create the shifting heads of the Seraphim were created by means of CGI and took visual effects supervisor Lauri <unk> @-@ George a long time to complete ; she did not finish until " hours before airtime . " The scene was created by having actor Tracy <unk> wear a lion mask to track the scene . Then , the different heads were filmed against a green screen and added in . Various light effects were then <unk> to " make it look scary " and more " angelic " . 
 After they viewed the final cut of the episode , Shiban and Spotnitz decided that they were " far from the end " . Feeling that something was missing , the two decided to frame the happenings of the episode with two scenes featuring Scully in a church confessional . Vancouver producer J.P. Finn was chosen to play the role of the priest in the scene , due to his " hushed delivery and map @-@ of @-@ Ireland features " . Initially , Gillian Anderson was sent the script for the last @-@ minute shot — which comprised two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half pages — well in advance . On the night before the reshoot , however , the crew sent her the further rewrites , which were much greater . Anderson refused to rush her performance , noting that , not only would it be difficult for her to memorize her lines , it would also undermine the emotion she was supposed to put into the scene . The crew ended up shooting a day later . Due to this , Finn never actually filmed with Anderson . In order to make up for the added scenes — a total of seven pages worth — the first cut of the episode had to be trimmed " scene by scene and line by line " . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 " All Souls " premiered on the Fox network in the United States on April 26 , 1998 , and was first broadcast in the United Kingdom on BBC One on February 24 , 1999 . It earned a Nielsen household rating of 8 @.@ 5 , with a 12 share , meaning that roughly 8 @.@ 5 percent of all television @-@ equipped households , and 12 percent of households watching television , were tuned in to the episode . It was viewed by 13 @.@ 44 million viewers . 
 " All Souls " received mixed reviews from television critics . Dave Golder from SFX magazine named the episode 's Nephilim as among of the top " 10 TV Angels " . He applauded the episode 's role @-@ switching , allowing Scully to be the believer and Mulder to be the skeptic . John Keegan from Critical Myth awarded the episode an 8 out of 10 and called it " [ a ] nother gem of the fifth season " . He cited that the episode was " the last strong Scully @-@ centric episodes for quite some time " and was a " stunning exploration of her questions of faith . " Furthermore he wrote that " a number of important psychological questions are addressed , and the stage is set for her decisions in Fight the Future . " Todd VanDerWerff of The A.V. Club wrote positively of the episode and awarded it a " B + " . Despite calling the entry " an occasionally too @-@ slow episode " , VanDerWerff praised Anderson , lauding her performance as " another [ … ] potential Emmy tape in a season full of them " . Furthermore , he enjoyed the juxtaposition of Scully 's skepticism and her religious beliefs , noting that the series could have taken the idea into the realm of irony , but instead played it " with a deathly seriousness " that allowed it to work . 
 Other reviews were more negative . Paula Vitaris from Cinefantastique gave the episode a largely critical review and awarded it one star out of four . Vitaris wrote " with its trip into blatant religiosity , ' All Souls ' comes off like a bad episode of Millennium " . Furthermore , she was critical of the scenes wherein the <unk> ' souls were taken , noting the excessive religious imagery : " as [ Dara 's ] soul is taken , the camera pans to the right and stops to linger on a telephone pole that forms a cross . " Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson , in their book Wanting to Believe : A Critical Guide to The X @-@ Files , Millennium & The Lone Gunmen , rated the episode one star out of five . The two derided the fact that the episode 's killer appears to either be God or an angel commanded by God , along with the fact that the four girls are destined to die because they are disabled and " have no right to live " . Furthermore , Shearman and Pearson concluded that , while religious worship is not a passive act , it is treated so in the episode . Ultimately , they concluded that while " looking at death from a different angle is fascinating " it would be explored better " in ' Closure ' . " 
 = Paul Collingwood = 
 Paul David Collingwood MBE ( born 26 May 1976 ) is an English cricketer . He was a regular member of the England Test side , and captain of the One Day International ( ODI ) team ( 2007 – 2008 ) . He is also captain of his county , Durham County Cricket Club . Collingwood is a batting all @-@ rounder , whose batting combines natural strokeplay with great tenacity . He also bowls reliable medium pace . Described as a " natural athlete " , he is also regarded as one of the finest fielders of his time ; usually fielding at backward point or in the slips , he has also deputised as wicket @-@ keeper for England . 
 His first class debut was in 1996 , and he made his first appearance for England in One Day International cricket in 2001 and made his Test match debut in 2003 . For two years he remained an occasional Test player , but after selection for the final Test of the 2005 Ashes , he secured a regular place . His 206 during the 2006 – 07 Ashes was the first double century by an England batsman in Australia for 78 years and in a match that England lost . A series of three consecutive match @-@ winning performances by Collingwood at the end of the 2006 – 07 Commonwealth Bank Series in Australia brought him enthusiastic approval in the British media . His " allround display of incredible nerve and tenacity " helped to secure the trophy for England . In 2010 he led the England team to their first ICC trophy , the 2010 World Twenty20 . He is England 's most capped ODI cricketer and was , until passed by Ian Bell in 2015 , the leading ODI run scorer . He announced his retirement from Test cricket in January 2011 , during the 5th Test of the 2010 – 11 Ashes series . He finished on a high , becoming a three @-@ times Ashes winner as England won a series in Australia for the first time in 24 years , with three innings victories contributing to a 3 – 1 win . 
 = = Early and personal life = = 
 Collingwood was born and brought up in Shotley Bridge , near Consett , County Durham , by parents David and Janet , along with his elder brother Peter , and was educated at <unk> Comprehensive School , now known as Consett Academy . Introduced to cricket " on the playing fields of <unk> Comprehensive School " , Paul was able to " force his way into Shotley Bridge 's Under – 13s team at the age of just nine " . 
 As a teenager , his father , who still remains a member of the Shotley Bridge Cricket Club , persuaded him to give up football and concentrate on cricket . Collingwood still makes regular visits to his old cricket club , " ... he is a brilliant role model for the kids and his success is an aspiration to follow ... " . 
 He currently lives in Northumberland with wife Vicky , whom he married in February 2005 in Cape Town , South Africa , and their three daughters Shannon ( born September 2006 ) , Keira ( born 24 February 2008 ) , and Hannah Mae ( born 9 February 2011 ) . He is a big fan of Sunderland AFC . His nicknames are Colly , Weed and Shep ; the latter is an apparent homage to the famous Blue Peter Collie dog , Shep . 
 = = Domestic career = = 
 = = = County cricket = = = 
 Paul Collingwood signed for Durham , his local county cricket side , in 1995 , playing first in List A one @-@ day cricket . When he first came to Durham 's attention , Collingwood was regarded " as a bowler who batted a bit " . According to coach Geoff Cook 's 2006 assessment it was Collingwood 's determination , rather than his talent , that shone through . 
 Collingwood made his first – class debut against Northamptonshire in 1996 , at Durham 's Riverside Ground . He made an immediate impression by taking the wicket of former England all @-@ rounder David Capel with his first ball , and scoring 91 in his first innings . However , his early years as a first @-@ class player were characterised by steady and relatively modest performances with bat and ball : in each season from 1996 to 2000 , his batting average was between 20 and 30 and his bowling average was between 30 and 60 . 
 His breakthrough began in 2000 , when he was voted Player of the Year by the Durham members , particularly for his one @-@ day efforts . His form varied following a back injury , but he hit his stride in 2001 , when he excelled both in the County Championship and in the one @-@ day game . In the six English seasons from 2001 , Collingwood has exceeded a batting average of 40 four times and achieved a bowling average of less than 40 on three occasions . 
 Recognising his need to improve his all @-@ round game Collingwood took himself off to Australia for their 2000 – 01 season where he played for the long @-@ established Richmond Cricket Club in the tough Melbourne Premier League . At the end of the season Collingwood was awarded the prestigious Jack Ryder Medal for the best player in the league ( an award he shared ) , and was the first – and so far only – Richmond player to ever receive it . 
 Durham only achieved first @-@ class status in 1992 . In the 15 years since then , their best performances in the two league championships ( the first @-@ class County Championship and the List @-@ A ( One @-@ Day ) National League ) both came in 2006 ( finishing sixth and eighth respectively ) . Following in 2007 with the Friends Provident Trophy , beating Hampshire by 125 runs , Collingwood picking up 22 runs and bowling figures of 3 / 33 . However , Collingwood 's involvement was severely limited by his England commitments and he made no appearances at all in either competition . 
 This stood in marked contrast to the previous season , when Collingwood was available to Durham for four of the five Tests , before his England recall for the final Ashes Test ; he " pushed his claims for a Test recall with three centuries in four innings in the Frizzell County Championship . " In just 13 appearances in the County Championship in that 2005 season , Collingwood scored 1103 runs and took 21 wickets , averaging 55 @.@ 15 and 31 @.@ 90 respectively . 
 In the traditional reward for services to a county , Durham awarded Collingwood a benefit year for 2007 . He chose to support two charities through his benefit , Marie Curie Cancer Care and the Cricket Foundation 's " Chance to Shine " project , which encourages cricket coaching in state schools . In that same year , two days after achieving his fifth Test century at Riverside in an England victory , he joined Liam Plunkett in helping the county enter its first Friends Provident Trophy final , which they would also go on to win . 
 = = = Indian Premier League = = = 
 With England players free to participate in the second season of the Indian Premier League , Collingwood was signed by the Delhi Daredevils for $ 275 @,@ 000 during their second player auction . In the 2011 auction , he was signed up by Rajasthan Royals for US $ 250 @,@ 000 , but could not take part in <unk> due to a knee injury that he picked up during the World Cup . 
 = = International career = = 
 = = = England debut = = = 
 Collingwood 's form for Durham in 2001 earned him a call @-@ up to the England One Day International ( ODI ) squad , selected for the NatWest Series against Pakistan and Australia that summer , becoming the 162nd to play for England in ODI cricket . He was not particularly successful on his ODI debut in June 2001 , scoring only two runs and taking no wickets against Pakistan at Edgbaston , and doing poorly ( 20 runs in four innings and no wickets ) in the rest of the series . Despite this , the selectors showed confidence in him by choosing him for the 2001 – 02 one @-@ day tour of Zimbabwe , where he took his first ODI wicket , that of Dion Ebrahim in the Third ODI at Harare Sports Club . He starred with the bat in the Fourth ODI at Queens Sports Club , Bulawayo , with a match @-@ winning 77 , and made an unbeaten 56 in the final ODI , also in Bulawayo , helping England secure a 5 – 0 whitewash . 
 Collingwood played in all seven matches of the 2002 NatWest Series against India and Sri Lanka , ending on the losing side in the final to India . Neither his batting nor bowling during this series were particularly impressive , averaging less than 24 with the bat and taking only five wickets in the series , but he went on to make his first ODI century in the 2002 / 2003 VB Series victory against Sri Lanka at the WACA . While this performance cemented his position in the England one – day setup , he dislocated his right shoulder while fielding in a pre – season county friendly against Lancashire and was forced to miss most of the 2003 season . Nevertheless , he was awarded a 12 @-@ month ECB contract when the winter touring squads were announced for Bangladesh and Sri Lanka . With Nasser Hussain suffering from a bout of ' flu , Collingwood made his Test debut against the Sri Lankans in the First Test at Galle in December 2003 , becoming the 622nd Englishman to play Test cricket . It was during this game that he established his position as one of the best English fielders , with five catches and a run @-@ out in the drawn match . Since then his performances in the field have drawn comparisons with South African specialist fielder , Jonty Rhodes . 
 With the selection of pace bowler James Anderson for the Third Test , Collingwood was dropped . Although unable to establish a regular place in the 11 @-@ man team , his all – round ability and fielding strengths made him a regular on England 's overseas Test tours as 12th Man . 
 He retained his place in England 's one @-@ day side throughout the summer of 2004 despite a knee injury , and scored an unbeaten 79 in the second match of the NatWest Challenge against India at The Oval , with England winning the series 2 – 1 . Collingwood was also England 's second highest run @-@ scorer in the 2004 ICC Champions Trophy , scoring 141 runs at an average of 70 @.@ 5 , which included an unbeaten 80 in the opening game against Zimbabwe . He played in all 11 ODIs against Zimbabwe and South Africa , and was then named in the England Development Squad in May 2005 , and the 14 @-@ man squad for the NatWest Series against Bangladesh and Australia and the NatWest International Twenty20 against Australia that summer . 
 = = = Ashes 2005 = = = 
 On 21 June 2005 , playing for England against Bangladesh at Trent Bridge , Collingwood scored 112 not out from 86 balls and then took six wickets for 31 runs . These were the best – ever bowling figures by an Englishman in an ODI , and made Collingwood the first player to score a century and take six wickets in an ODI . This performance surpassed the previous best all – round ODI performance , that of Viv Richards , who scored a hundred and took five wickets against New Zealand in Dunedin in the 1986 / 1987 season . Another highlight that was produced that same series was a stunning mid @-@ air catch off the bowling of Steve Harmison to dismiss Matthew Hayden during the Natwest Series ODI at Bristol . This catch has subsequently been included by Canada 's The Score television network as a part of their " Score 64 " greatest @-@ highlight contest . Pitted against Tiger Woods ' chip at the Canadian Open in the first round , the catch squeezed out a slim victory . 
 Collingwood also played in England 's inaugural Twenty20 International match , held at the Rose Bowl , where a useful contribution of 49 and the wickets of Brett Lee and Jason Gillespie helped jump @-@ start England on its pursuit of the Ashes , with 100 @-@ run defeat of Australia . 
 Collingwood was selected for the Test squad at the outset of the series but was not called into action until bowler Simon Jones was ruled out due to injury during the Fourth Test at Trent Bridge . Collingwood therefore played only the Fifth Test . Although he only scored 7 and 10 with the bat that match , his " blocking " alongside Kevin Pietersen in a 60 @-@ run sixth wicket stand on the final day helped England draw the match , and clinch the series to take the Ashes for the first time since 1987 . In the 2006 New Year 's Honours List , Collingwood was awarded the MBE , together with other members of the England team , for his role in the successful Ashes victory . There was some critical comment that his limited role did not warrant the honour as he had played only in the Fifth Test and scored just 17 runs in 2 innings . 
 = = = Success in Pakistan and India = = = 
 Following the successful Ashes campaign in 2005 , Collingwood was selected to tour with England to Pakistan and India in 2005 – 06 . He played in the First Test in against Pakistan in Multan in 2005 , but scored only 13 runs in his two innings and took no wickets . He was dropped for the Second Test as Michael Vaughan returned , but came back into the team for the Third Test against Pakistan when the top – order was reshuffled after Andrew Strauss returned to England for the birth of his first child . Despite Collingwood making his maiden Test 50 and following it with another in the second innings , England lost the match and consequently the three @-@ match series 2 – 0 . In the ODI series , he and Durham teammates Liam Plunkett and Steve Harmison accounted for the majority of the wickets taken by England , through a combination of their bowling and fielding . 
 Following his performance in Pakistan , Collingwood was called into the England team for the First Test against India in March 2006 after injury and illness respectively to Vaughan and Marcus Trescothick . Collingwood justified his position in the team with a magnificent 134 not out in the first innings on 2 March 2006 , his first Test century . Collingwood thus became the first Durham player to make a Test century for England . Following this innings , The Times , which had been among the critics of Collingwood 's MBE , ran the headline , " MBE ? Give this man a knighthood ! " 
 = = = Sri Lanka and Pakistan in 2006 = = = 
 Collingwood kept his place for the first three Tests against Sri Lanka in the summer of 2006 . Uncharacteristically , he dropped two catches during the First Test at Lord 's , but he scored an unbeaten half @-@ century . He went on to make up for the dropped catches in the Second Test at Edgbaston , where he took five catches in two innings while playing his usual batting style as foil ( with Andrew Flintoff ) to Kevin Pietersen 's 142 in the first innings . In the subsequent Twenty20 International match against Sri Lanka , he took 4 – 22 , the best bowling record in Twenty20 Internationals , but still ended on the losing side . 
 He then followed this up with an important innings in the First Test against Pakistan later that summer , scoring his second Test century . On this occasion he was the dominant partner , batting for most of his innings with rookie Alastair Cook . When Cook departed , he continued with Ian Bell to complete his 150 before at last being removed by Danish <unk> for 186 . This score proved to be England 's highest of the series . 
 Collingwood took his first Test wicket on 6 August 2006 , trapping Faisal Iqbal leg before wicket for a golden duck in the Third Test at Headingley . During this series he also bowled a couple of overs of off @-@ spin , to the surprise of many , including the commentary team on Test Match Special . Later that summer , he reached his 100th ODI cap and 50 ODI wickets in the same match by claiming the wickets of Inzamam @-@ ul @-@ Haq and Abdul Razzaq during the Fifth ODI against Pakistan in Birmingham on 10 September . 
 = = = Ashes 2006 / 07 = = = 
 Following a successful summer , Collingwood was selected later in 2006 for both the 2006 ICC Champions Trophy squad and Ashes touring party . However , after two lacklustre defeats to India and Australia , critics such as Geoffrey Boycott and some fans began to question the coaching staff 's placement of him in the batting order . 
 The return of Andrew Flintoff following an injury would reignite the ongoing debate about which two of Cook , Bell and Collingwood should be included in the team , with many speculating that Collingwood would be the man to miss out . With the sudden departure of Marcus Trescothick from the tour just over a week before the First Test , the debate was settled for the time being . 
 The first ball of the First Test , at the Gabba in Brisbane , bowled wildly wide by Steve Harmison set the tone for the series . However , on the fourth day , England seemed to be batting towards a draw , when Collingwood , who had worked his way to a hard – earned 96 was stumped " ... skipping miles down the pitch and trying to smack Warne over his head to reach a hundred " . This was a pivotal moment : England went on to lose the next six wickets for 126 runs , and so lost the Test match . In the Second Test at Adelaide , Collingwood made a career @-@ best 206 in England 's first innings , sharing in a 310 – run fourth – wicket stand with Pietersen ; he became only the eighth English double centurion against Australia in Ashes history , and the first in Australia since Wally Hammond scored 251 and 200 in consecutive innings during the 1928 – 29 Ashes . In the second innings he added an unbeaten 22 from 119 balls over nearly 3 hours , while England collapsed to 129 all out and so went 2 – 0 down . Collingwood received some praise but mostly criticism from commentators on the manner in which he batted with the tail @-@ enders . 
 England fared no better in the Third and Fourth Tests , losing them both , with Collingwood picking up only 60 with the bat in his four innings . During the Fifth Test at the Sydney Cricket Ground in January 2007 , Australia 's Shane Warne revived the controversy of Collingwood 's MBE with clearly audible " sledging " at Collingwood 's expense . Collingwood 's performance during this Test was mediocre , scoring 27 and 17 with the bat and not being called upon to bowl a single ball , as Australia won comfortably by ten wickets . 
 Despite the series ending with a 5 – 0 whitewash by Australia , Collingwood finished the series ranked 14th in the LG ICC World Rankings for Test batsmen . 
 The Commonwealth Bank One @-@ Day International Series began on a low note for Collingwood , with a loss in the opening game against Australia at the Melbourne Cricket Ground . Despite the defeat being followed by a narrow win over New Zealand in Hobart , the team and Collingwood went into a rapid decline , losing a string of four matches . He missed England 's 92 – run victory over Australia due to food poisoning , but returned to make 106 and capture two wickets in the decisive 14 – run victory over New Zealand in the final group stage match . He then hit a century and scored the winning runs as England won the first of three finals in Melbourne , against Australia , becoming the eighth Englishman to hit centuries in consecutive ODIs . His innings of 120 not out was the highest ever by an English ODI player against Australia in Australia . In the second of the finals , he was Man of the Match for the third consecutive game , top – scoring for England with 70 and taking two wickets , as well another difficult catch off the bowling of Sajid Mahmood to once again dismiss Matthew Hayden . 
 = = = World Cup 2007 = = = 
 Flush with confidence and in form from the tri @-@ series victory , Collingwood and the English arrived in the Caribbean with high hopes . However , two unimpressive performances by the team during the warm @-@ up matches against Bermuda and Australia , followed by defeat to New Zealand in the first Group match dampened expectations . This was coupled with the removal of Andrew Flintoff from the vice @-@ captaincy due to an incident of unruly behaviour , which led to speculation that Collingwood would be in line for the captaincy should either Michael Vaughan or Andrew Strauss be unavailable . However , all such discussion came to nought as Vaughan remained in charge , despite the reprimanding of Flintoff . 
 The tournament was uneventful for Collingwood and the English , as he and the team were soon left by the wayside after qualification into the Super Eight round . <unk> victories over Ireland followed by a nervy 37 @-@ run seventh wicket stand with Paul Nixon to victory over Bangladesh along with a close 2 @-@ run loss to Sri Lanka and heavy losses to Australia and South Africa meant elimination from the knockout stages , as Collingwood was only able to manage lower scores with limited successes with the white ball . He did , however , end up as the tournament 's joint top fielder , grabbing eight catches along with Graeme Smith , and took what is arguably his most stunning catch , to dismiss Devon Smith off the bowling of Andrew Flintoff during the final Super Eight match versus the West Indies . 
 = = = 2007 season = = = 
 Collingwood and the team opened their first home Test at Lord 's with a dominant first innings against the West Indies , as Collingwood 's score of 111 joined Alastair Cook , Ian Bell , Matt Prior and Kevin Pietersen in becoming the first ever group of five Englishmen to score centuries at Lord 's in the same match . This was followed up during the opposition innings with his second Test wicket , that of Dwayne Bravo . He then added his second century of the series at Durham 's home ground at Chester @-@ le @-@ Street during the fourth Test , hitting 128 from 188 balls as part of a 169 @-@ run seventh @-@ wicket stand with Prior before being bowled by Corey Collymore . Following his good form in the Test series , Collingwood was named as captain of the England team for the two Twenty20 Internationals and three One @-@ Day International games against the West Indies , following previous captain Michael Vaughan 's resignation of the position of captain in the format four days before . Of the <unk> , England lost the first but won the second to draw Collingwood 's first Twenty20 International series as a captain . While only contributing 27 from 24 balls in the second match , Collingwood outshone the other English batsmen with his individual effort during the first , hitting 79 runs from just 41 deliveries . The England team continued into the 50 @-@ over ODI matches , winning the first by a comfortable 79 under Collingwood 's captaincy , though the man himself hit only 5 runs . He went on to captain the one @-@ day side against India , where they won the 1st ODI but lost an entertaining 2nd ODI at Bristol by 9 runs . After the 2nd ODI Collingwood was fined half of his match fee for a slow over rate . England eventually won the closely fought series 4 – 3 . 
 Collingwood was fined £ 1000 during the 2007 Twenty20 World Championship when he visited a lap @-@ dancing club prior to England 's match with New Zealand . Collingwood led the team to victory over Zimbabwe in the group stages of the tournament , but England , under his leadership , were later defeated by Australia , New Zealand , South Africa and India to go out of the competition before the final stages . During England 's subsequent tour of Sri Lanka Collingwood led the team to victory in the ODI Series . In the later Test series , he became the 709th Test wicket of Muttiah Muralitharan , who thus overtook Shane Warne as the highest Test wicket taker . 
 = = = 2008 = = = 
 Collingwood enjoyed a successful Test series away in New Zealand in early 2008 , scoring 244 runs from three matches at 40 @.@ 66 , passing 50 three times . His ODI game also enjoyed success – 151 runs at 50 @.@ 33 with two half @-@ centuries from his four ODI matches . Collingwood had a less successful home series , however , scoring only 32 runs in three matches , 24 of these in one innings , and ended the series with an average of just 10 @.@ 66 . His home ODI series was one of great controversy . While playing in the fourth match , he appealed controversially for the run @-@ out of Grant Elliott after Elliott had collided with Ryan Sidebottom and injured himself . While this action drew criticism from the New Zealand dressing room , there was separate incident in this match ( relating to an inadequate England over @-@ rate ) , for which the ICC banned Collingwood for four limited @-@ overs internationals . This was for a second offence in twelve months relating to England , with Collingwood as captain , completing its overs outside of the time limit . Pietersen was called upon to take over as captain . 
 Collingwood 's poor form continued into the first Test of South Africa 's tour of England in July 2008 , as he scored only seven runs in his first innings at Lord 's , although replays suggested an umpiring error , the ball hitting not his bat but only his pad . He was left out of the side for the following Test at Headingley , making way for Andrew Flintoff , but was recalled for the third Test at Edgbaston , scoring a century and giving England a chance of beating South Africa and levelling the series . 
 Half an hour after Michael Vaughan resigned from the Test captaincy , Collingwood relinquished charge of the ODI squad because it was affecting his ability to enjoy the game . Collingwood told his wife on the night before his century against South Africa that it was time to go . He later explained , " I 've found the extra workload to be very difficult [ ... ] . It 's mentally tiring , and that 's the top and bottom of it . I want to have a smile on my face when I 'm playing cricket , and , if I 'd have kept going , I 'm not sure that would have been the case . " 
 = = = 2009 = = = 
 Collingwood deputised as England wicket @-@ keeper for an injured Matt Prior in the second home Test against the West Indies in May 2009 ; he enjoyed the experience and was generally successful , including effecting a catch from an edge by <unk> Chanderpaul . 
 Collingwood 's form in the 2009 World Twenty20 tournament wasn 't good : in five innings , managing just 63 runs . More important , however , was his form in the longest version of the game , in which he had attained something like a peak . Going into the 2009 Ashes , indeed , he was relishing his best @-@ ever run in the Test side , having hoarded three centuries in his last twelve innings . 
 In the first Test of the 2009 Ashes at the <unk> Stadium in Cardiff , Collingwood scored 64 in the first innings as England totalled 435 . On a flat wicket , however , this was put into context by the Australians , who amassed 674 for 6 declared , with four centurions ; Collingwood bowled nine overs , and claimed the wicket of Brad Haddin caught at deep midwicket . In reply , England slid to 70 for 5 and seemed certain to succumb to an innings defeat . In response , Collingwood stayed at the crease for 5 ¾ hours ( nearly the whole of the final day ) and top @-@ scored for England with 74 runs from 245 balls . He was ninth man out , edging Peter Siddle to gully , but final pair James Anderson and Monty Panesar blocked out the final 11 ½ overs of the match to secure an improbable draw . 
 In the second Test at Lord 's Collingwood succumbed to a loose first @-@ innings dismissal , chipping part @-@ time spinner Michael Clarke to mid @-@ on for 16 ( and earning the ire of his captain Andrew Strauss , who went on to score 161 ) ; England , poised at 302 for 3 before Collingwood 's dismissal , subsided to 425 all out . Nonetheless , England 's seamers bowled Australia out for 215 , and in the second innings Collingwood scored a measured 54 , acting as foil to the aggressive strokeplay of Matt Prior ( their partnership adding 86 in twelve overs ) and Andrew Flintoff ( 51 in eight overs ) . As Flintoff and Graeme Swann combined to bowl England to victory , Collingwood contributed two fine slip catches . 
 After Lord 's , however , his form tailed away considerably : tormented by Australia 's seam @-@ bowling attack , his scores for the rest of the series were 13 , 0 and 4 , and 24 and 1 , bringing his batting average for the five @-@ match series down to 27 @.@ 78 . Collingwood 's difficulties with the bat seemed to affect his usually high @-@ class catching , and he dropped three chances of varying degrees of difficulty on the final day of the series at the Oval , though he did take a sharp catch to dismiss Mitchell Johnson for a duck off Steve Harmison as part of England 's surge to a 197 @-@ run victory in the match , and a 2 – 1 victory in the series . 
 Against South Africa in November 2009 , Collingwood surpassed Alec Stewart 's record of 170 ODIs to become England 's most capped player . 
 = = = 2010 World Twenty20 and Australia = = = 
 In early 2010 , Collingwood led the England Twenty20 team to the 2010 World Twenty20 championship . Collingwood appeared in all seven games , struggling with the bat as he scored only 61 runs at 10 @.@ 16 , with the ball he only bowled one over for ten runs , however his prowess in the field continued – his four catches the joint highest with the wicket keeper , Craig Kieswetter , for the England team . It was Collingwood 's captaincy that was most praised , as he led England to their first ever ICC trophy , hitting the winning runs in their seven @-@ wicket victory over Australia in the final . 
 Collingwood was then rested for the home Test series against Bangladesh , however returned for the five @-@ match ODI series against Australia in June . During the second match , he overtook Alec Stewart 's record to become England 's all @-@ time leading runscorer in the format . Following poor batting performances in the 2010 – 11 Ashes series , he announced his retirement from Test cricket . 
 In July 2014 , he played for the Rest of the World side in the Bicentenary Celebration match at Lord 's . 
 = = = Coaching = = = 
 After retiring from international cricket , Collingwood associated with England and Scotland cricket teams as coach and supporting staff . In November 2014 , Paul agreed to return in Scotland 's coaching staff for 2015 Cricket World Cup . He then became the captain / assistant coach of Durham , which led them to win the 2013 LV County Championship , the inaugural 2014 Royal London One @-@ Day Cup . Collingwood has been named as Limited Overs Consultant for England in September 2015 . 
 = = Achievements = = 
 = = = Test matches = = = 
 Records : 
 1 @,@ 000 + Test runs in a calendar year in 2006 . 
 England fourth wicket partnership record against Australia – 206 in a partnership of 310 with Kevin Pietersen in 2006 . 
 Double century against Australia in 2007 – only the third English batsman to score a double century in Australia , and the first since Wally Hammond in 1936 . 
 First Durham player to score a Test century for England , and first to hit one at Riverside Ground . 
 Test Centuries : 
 Career performance : 
 = = = One @-@ Day Internationals = = = 
 Records : 
 Most capped ODI player for England 
 Best bowling figures in an ODI by an England player – 6 / 31 against Bangladesh in 2005 . 
 Best ODI all @-@ round performance – 6 / 31 and 112 * against Bangladesh in 2005 . 
 Fastest half century by an England player , 50 off 24 deliveries . 
 The second most career runs in ODI matches for England . 
 Man of the match awards : 
 Career performance : 
 = = = Twenty20 Internationals = = = 
 Records : 
 Best bowling figures by an Englishman in a Twenty20 International ; 4 / 22 against Sri Lanka in 2006 . 
 Highest wicket partnership for England in Twenty20 Internationals ; 54 in a partnership of 102 with Owais Shah against New Zealand in 2008 . 
 First English cricket captain to lead a major ICC tournament winning side . 
 Man of the match awards : 
 Career performance : 
 = = = Wisden Cricketer of the Year = = = 
 He was chosen as one of the five Wisden Cricketer of the Year in 2007 , alongside England teammate Monty Panesar . In their rationale , Wisden describes him as having become the embodiment of " the sort of cricketer who not only made the most of his ability but was also determined to keep getting better . " 
 = Vision of Love = 
 " Vision of Love " is a song by American singer and songwriter Mariah Carey . It served as Carey 's debut single , the first from her self @-@ titled debut album . Written by Carey and Ben Margulies , " Vision of Love " was released on May 15 , 1990 , by Columbia Records . After being featured on Carey 's demo tape for Columbia , the song was re @-@ sung and produced by Rhett Lawrence and Narada Michael Walden . " Vision of Love " features a slow @-@ dance theme tempo and backing vocals sung by Carey herself , and introduces her usage of the whistle register . Lyrically , the song describes a past and present relationship with a lover . Carey describes the " vision of love " she dreamed of , as well as the present love she feels for him . 
 The song 's music video was filmed in April 1990 . It features Carey in a large cathedral , where she meditates and sings by a large carved window . " Vision of Love " was performed on several television and award show ceremonies , such as The Oprah Winfrey Show , The Arsenio Hall Show and the 33rd Annual Grammy Awards . It has been performed at almost every one of Carey 's concerts and tours , and is featured on Carey 's live album MTV Unplugged ( 1992 ) and on many of her compilation albums , Number 1 's ( 1998 ) , Greatest Hits ( 2001 ) and The Ballads ( 2008 ) . 
 " Vision of Love " was lauded by contemporary music critics . While the production of the song was typical of late 1980s pop , the vocals were not , being much more showy and expressing a wider range than artists popular at the time such as Paula Abdul and Debbie Gibson . It has been credited with popularizing the use of melisma in modern popular music and for inspiring several artists to pursue a career in music . The New Yorker named " Vision of Love " the " Magna Carta of melisma " for its and Carey 's influence on pop and R & B singers and American Idol contestants . Additionally , Rolling Stone said that " the fluttering strings of notes that decorate songs like " Vision of Love , " inspired the entire American Idol vocal school , for better or worse , and virtually every other female R & B singer since the nineties . " The song topped the singles charts in Canada , New Zealand and the United States , where it spent four weeks atop the chart . 
 = = Background and recording = = 
 Throughout 1986 , Carey had already begun writing music while in high school . After composing a song with her friend , Gavin Christopher ( of " Once You Get Started " fame ) , Carey met a young drummer and songwriter , Ben Margulies . After initially meeting and becoming friends , the pair began spending time in his father 's old studio , writing material and composing new songs . Together , the first song they compiled was titled " Here We Go Around Again . " Although the song was Carey 's first composition ; it was never recorded . As the year wore on , they had composed seven songs for Carey 's demo tape ; of them was the rough and unfinished version of " Vision of Love " . In an interview with Fred Bronson , Carey described how she met and came to work with Margulies . 
 " We needed someone to play keyboards for a song I did with Gavin Christopher . We called someone and he couldn 't come , so by accident we stumbled on Ben . Ben came to the session , and he can 't really play keyboards very well @-@ he 's really more of a drummer @-@ but after that day , we kept in touch , and we just sort of clicked as writers . 
 After meeting Brenda K. Starr and being introduced to Tommy Mottola , the future head of Sony Music Entertainment , the song was re @-@ done in a professional studio , with the assistance of two producers . Carey flew to Los Angeles to work with Rhett Lawrence , one of the album 's main producers . After hearing the original version of the song , Lawrence described it as having a " ' 50s sort of shuffle . " After Carey agreed to alter the song , Lawrence contemporized its tempo . " Vision of Love " was recorded at the Skyline Studios in New York , and featured Lawrence behind the keyboard , Margulies on the drums , bassist Marcus Miller , drum programmer Ren Klyce and guitarist Jimmy Ripp . Lawrence took Carey 's vocals from the original demo version , and used them as background vocals for the song 's final version . After adding different instrumentation to the song , Lawrence and Narada Michael Walden produced " Vision of Love . " 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Vision of Love " is a love song with pop and R & B influences . It incorporates heavy backup vocals during the song 's bridge and features usage of Carey 's whistle register and melisma . Author Chris Nickson described the song and its vocals : 
 " [ ' Vision of Love ' ] was the perfect introduction to her voice . With an ideal slow @-@ dancing tempo , it still managed to swing , with Mariah 's background vocals ( herself multi @-@ tracked ) answering her lead . On the final chorus , her voice flew towards those trademark high notes before the instruments drop out , leaving Mariah to sing her way out to the tune 's climax alone . " 
 According to the sheet music published at Musicnotes.com by Sony / ATV Music Publishing , " Vision of Love " is set in common time and in the key of C major . Carey 's vocal range spans from the low note of Eb3 to the high whistle note of C7 . The song 's lyrics and melody were written and composed by Carey , with Margulies , Miller , Klyce and Rip on the instrumentals . Lawrence and Walden produced the song , which heavily deviated from its original version on Carey 's demo . Michael Slezak from Entertainment Weekly wrote regarding the song 's instrumentation and vocals " From those opening sci @-@ fi @-@ esque synths to that signature dog @-@ whistle high note , Mariah 's very first single is inspired : Even folks who object to her trademark vocal excesses are hard @-@ pressed to fault this rousing , gospel @-@ tinged song about finding ' the one that I needed . ' " 
 = = Lyrical content = = 
 The song 's lyrics have been subject to various interpretations and suggested relationships by critics . Some have noted the relationship between Carey and God , while others point out one with a lover . Carey has yielded to both , while claiming them to have a connection to her childhood and obstacles growing up . Michael Slezak wrote " Though it 's not clear if she 's celebrating a secular love or her relationship with a higher power , this exuberant ballad is a near @-@ religious listening experience . " In an interview with Ebony in 1991 , Carey spoke of the song 's lyrics and success . 
 " Consider the lyrics : <unk> through the nights / Felt so alone / <unk> from alienation / Carried the weight on my own / Had to be strong / So I believed / And now I know I 've succeeded / In finding the place I conceived . Well , just because you are young doesn 't mean that you haven 't had a hard life . It 's been difficult for me , moving around so much , having to grow up by myself , basically on my own , my parents divorced . And I always felt kind of different from everyone else in my neighborhoods . I was a different person – ethnically . And sometimes that can be a problem . If you look a certain way everybody goes , ' White girl , ' and I 'd go , ' No , that 's not what I am . ' " 
 According to Nickson , Carey chose to express her innermost feelings in her songs rather than becoming depressed and bitter throughout the hardships in her life . " You really have to look inside yourself and find your own inner strength , and say , <unk> 'm proud of what I am and who I am , and I 'm just going to be myself . " 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " Vision of Love " has been lauded by contemporary music critics for its lyrical content , vocals , and use of melisma . In a retrospective review on the album in 2005 , Entertainment Weekly called the song " inspired " and complimented Carey 's use of the whistle register in the song . In 2006 , Sasha Frere @-@ Jones from The New Yorker named the song " the Magna Carta of melisma " for it and Carey 's influence on pop and R & B singers and American Idol contestants . Additionally , Rolling Stone said that " the fluttering strings of notes that decorate songs like " Vision of Love , " inspired the entire American Idol vocal school , for better or worse , and virtually every other female R & B singer since the nineties . " Slant Magazine critic Rich Juzwiak , wrote " I think [ " Vision of Love " ] was a vision of the future world of American Idol . " In a separate review from Slant , RJ wrote " The last half of " Vision Of Love " ( starting with the belted bridge ) is a series of crescendos that get so intense that another Mariah has to step in to keep up the momentum . " Additionally , RJ complimented the usage of the whistle register in the song " And then there 's the whistle note . And then there 's the final vocal run that 's more like a roller @-@ coaster track . If you think these aren 't climaxes , she proves you wrong with her denouement , the way the last word , " be , " sort of wanes into an " mm hmm hmm . " Bill Lamb from About.com said that " ' Vision of Love ' is one of the best songs of Mariah 's recording career [ ... ] It is simply one of the most stunning debut releases ever by a pop recording artist . " 
 = = = Legacy = = = 
 " Vision of Love " was nominated for three Grammy Awards at the 33rd annual ceremony , held on February 20 , 1991 : Record of the Year , Song of the Year and Best Female Pop Vocal Performance , winning the latter . Additionally , the song received the Soul Train Music Award for Best R & B / Soul Single , Female and a Song of the Year Award at the BMI Pop Awards . Devon Powers from Popmatters has stated during the release of Carey 's Greatest Hits album that " Mariah 's Greatest Hits moves chronologically through that remarkable career , beginning with “ Vision of Love ” , the 1990 single that introduced the singer to instant stardom . Still , after so many years and songs , it ’ s by far among her best , if not the best — a simple testament to the incredible pipes that gave her a permanent place in pop cultural memory . Powers added that " From its first moments , the song demands to be legendary — a gong crash smolders low as Mariah ’ s gospel @-@ inspired vocals hum confidently , grandly . " 
 VH1 named " Vision of Love " the 14th greatest song of the 1990s . About.com ranked it fourth on its top ten pop hits of 1990 list and 28th on its top 100 pop songs of the 1990s list . Entertainment Weekly included it on their " 10 Great ( and 10 <unk> ) Karaoke Songs " list as a grating karaoke song , saying : " You cannot do this song . Seriously . Tackling this lung @-@ crusher might seem like a fun challenge , but three minutes , five octaves , and one 10 @-@ second note later , you will realize that you did not conquer ' Vision of Love . ' ' Vision of Love ' conquered you . " USA Today critic Elysa Gardner picked " Vision of Love " as one of the most intriguing tracks , saying that it is still Mariah 's best song . T. Field and a research team discovered that " Vision of Love " is one of the songs that has physiological and biochemical effects on depressed female adolescents . R & B singer Beyoncé Knowles said that she began doing vocal " runs " after listening to " Vision of Love " for the first time . Similarly , pop singers Rihanna and Christina Aguilera cited the song and Carey as big influences in her career as a singer . In an interview during the early stages of her career , Aguilera said " I 've totally looked up to Mariah since ' Vision of Love ' came out . " 
 The song was featured in a late 1990 episode of the daytime soap opera All My Children as well as 1991 episodes of Santa Barbara and The Young and the Restless . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 In the United States , " Vision of Love " entered the Billboard Hot 100 at number 73 during the week of June 2 , 1990 , and reached the chart 's summit nine weeks later . The song remained atop the chart for four consecutive weeks , and was ranked sixth on the Hot 100 year @-@ end chart . After four weeks at number one , it fell to number eight , and spent seven weeks lingering in the top ten . It also topped the Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs for two weeks and Hot Adult Contemporary Tracks for three weeks . In August 1990 , the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) certified the song gold , denoting shipments of over 500 @,@ 000 units . In Canada , " Vision of Love " entered the Canadian RPM Singles Chart at number 75 , during the week of July 7 , 1990 . In its eighth week on the chart , the song reached number one and remained on the chart a total of 17 weeks . " Vision of Love " finished eighth on the Top 100 Hit Tracks of 1990 . " Vision of Love " entered the Australian Singles Chart at number 67 during the week of August 5 , 1990 . It peaked at number nine , and spent a total of 19 weeks in the top 100 . The Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) certified the song gold , denoting shipments of over 35 @,@ 000 units . 
 In the Netherlands , the song entered the singles chart at number 99 , during the week of July 14 . It spent a total of 17 weeks in the chart , spending two weeks at its peak position of number eight . " Vision of Love " entered the French Singles Chart at number 39 on November 11 , 1990 . It peaked at number 25 , spending two weeks at the position and a total of 14 on the chart . In Ireland , the song peaked at number ten , and spent six weeks in the singles chart . " Vision of Love " topped the chart in New Zealand , spending two consecutive weeks atop the singles chart . After fluctuating for 24 weeks in the chart , the song was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of New Zealand ( RIANZ ) , denoting shipments of over 7 @,@ 500 units . In the United Kingdom , the song entered the UK Singles Chart at number 74 , during the week of August 4 , 1990 . " Vision of Love " peaked at number nine in its seventh week , and spent a total of 12 weeks in the chart . According to MTV , sales in the UK are estimated at 170 @,@ 000 units . 
 = = Music video = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 After completing the album , Sony hired Bojan <unk> to direct the song 's music video . After filming the video 's first version , record label executives felt the result was sub @-@ par in comparison to the quality of the music . They scrapped the first video and re @-@ filmed it with director Andy Morahan , changing the plot , scenery and imagery . After word got out of the two videos , a Sony employee spoke to the press about Carey , saying how " the special treatment really upset " him . He felt they treated Carey differently from how they would another artist signed to the label , and that they viewed her as a higher priority . He also claimed that Carey was the reason they re @-@ filmed , " they spend $ 200 @,@ 000 on a video and Mariah doesn 't like it . No big deal . " Another employee estimated the figure of both videos at over $ 450 @,@ 000 . After the reports were made , Don Ienner , the president of Sony , refuted the claims , calling them " total bullshit " although admitting , " If we 're going to take the time and effort that we did with Mariah , on every level , then we 're going to image her the right way . If it costs a few extra dollars to make a splash in terms of the right imaging , you go ahead and do it . " 
 = = = Synopsis = = = 
 The video takes place in a large cathedral @-@ like room , with large winding staircases on each side . Throughout the video , the scenery changes several times from a cloudy and sunny day , to a glowing sunset . These time shifts are seen through a large carved window in the cathedral . The video begins with Carey 's hair in long golden curls , and her wearing a skin @-@ tight black jumper . She sits on the large ledge by the window , staring into the different colors in the sky . As the video progresses , Carey is joined by a small black dog , which accompanies her as she meditates on the large stairwell . After the song 's second verse , a large microphone is seen in the middle of the room , where scenes of Carey singing and standing on the window 's ledge interchange . The last scenes show Carey staring out into the meadow , smiling . According to author Chris Nickson , during the scenes of Carey by the large window , it is " obvious " that she is praying to God and connecting to her creator . He felt that alongside the song 's lyrics of faith and prayer , the video 's moments of meditation truly went " hand in hand . " 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Serving as her debut single , Carey performed " Vision of Love " on several live television and award show appearances , both stateside and throughout Europe . Carey 's first live performance of the song was on The Arsenio Hall Show , where she was joined on stage by the Billie T. Scott Ensemble , a trio of male background vocalists . Additionally , she sang it during a televised appearance at New York City 's <unk> Club , where she also gave a live rendition of Ben E. King 's " Don 't Play That Song ( You Lied ) " . As part of a live segment and interview , Carey appeared on Good Morning America in July 1990 , where she gave a live performance of the song . In the further months , Carey performed the song live on The Tonight Show Starring Johnny Carson , The Oprah Winfrey Show and the 33rd Annual Grammy Awards . In Europe , Carey performed " Vision of Love " on Wogan in the United Kingdom , and Avis de Recherche and Le Monde Est A Vous in France . In 1992 , Carey performed the song on MTV Unplugged . It was released on her EP and home video that same year , as MTV Unplugged and MTV Unplugged + 3 respectively . In July 1993 , Carey recorded a live concert performance at Proctor 's Theatre which included " Vision of Love " . It was taped and released as Here Is Mariah Carey in December 1993 . Additionally , the song was part of a four @-@ song set @-@ list on BET 's Blueprint , where Carey performed in July 2005 . 
 " Vision of Love " was performed on several of Carey 's tours and concert shows . It was first featured on her Music Box Tour , her first full @-@ length stateside tour . For the song 's performances , Carey donned a large black trench coat , with matching pants and leather boots . She featured her signature curly locks , and was joined by Trey Lorenz , Melonie Daniels and Kelly Price . On her 1996 Daydream World Tour , Carey once again included the song on the tour 's set @-@ list . During her shows at the Tokyo Dome in Tokyo , Japan , Carey donned a long black gown , with teased up straightened hair and a matching head @-@ band . For the European leg on the tour , Carey wore a long white gown , and was joined by additional background vocalists . Carey included the song on her set @-@ list for her Butterfly World Tour ( 1998 ) , where she once again featured the same trio of supporting singers . For the show 's performances , she donned a sheer and beige mini @-@ dress , with long and wavy golden hair . Additionally , she wore a cream @-@ colored long @-@ sleeve sheer sweater with matching high @-@ heeled sandals . " Vision of Love " was included on Carey 's Rainbow World Tour in 2000 , as well as the Charmbracelet World Tour : An Intimate Evening with Mariah Carey ( 2002 – 03 , and The Elusive Chanteuse Show ( 2014 ) . During The Adventures of Mimi Tour in 2006 , Carey performed the song at select shows . For the performances of the song , she donned a long yellow cocktail gown and black Christian Louboutin pumps . Once again Lorenz was featured on stage , however with the addition of two different female back @-@ up singers , MaryAnn and Sherry Tatum . Carey also performed the song at the 2015 Billboard Music Awards along with Infinity to promote her number 1 To Infinity album . Carey also included the song in her Las Vegas residency , Mariah Carey Number 1 's , a chronicle of her 18 US number 1 hits . The song was first in the chronological setlist , and for the performance Carey donned a black sequined gown , and her signature curls . 
 = = Formats and track listings = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from the Mariah Carey linear notes . 
 Songwriting – Mariah Carey , Ben Margulies 
 Production – Rhett Lawrence , Narada Michael Walden 
 Instruments and programming – Rhett Lawrence , Jimmy Ripp 
 Recording – Rhett Lawrence 
 Audio engineering – Narada Michael Walden 
 Background vocals – Mariah Carey 
 Programming – Ben Margulies , Marcus Miller , Ren Klyce 
 Mixing – Rhett Lawrence , Narada Michael Walden 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = 16 Vayathinile = 
 16 Vayathinile ( English : At Age 16 ; read as <unk> Vayathinile ) is a 1977 Indian Tamil language drama film written and directed by P. Bharathiraja in his directorial debut . The film features Kamal Haasan , Sridevi , and Rajinikanth in the lead roles , with Ganthimathi , Sathyajith and Goundamani in supporting roles . 16 Vayathinile 's soundtrack album and background score were composed by Ilaiyaraaja , with cinematography by P. S. <unk> . P. Kalaimani wrote the film 's dialogue . 
 The film focuses on the strengths and vulnerabilities of Mayil ( Sridevi ) , a 16 @-@ year @-@ old schoolgirl , and the challenges she faces and overcomes . The film , originally titled Mayil , is set in rural Tamil Nadu and is Rajinikanth 's first colour film . 16 Vayathinile is the first Tamil film to be shot completely outdoors ; Tamil films were primarily filmed in Chennai studios . 
 The first Tamil film distributed by a producer across Tamil Nadu , 16 Vayathinile was released on 15 September 1977 to critical praise for Bharathiraja 's script , Ilaiyaraaja 's music and the performances of Kamal , Sridevi and Rajinikanth . It was commercially successful , with a 175 @-@ day theatrical run . 
 16 Vayathinile , considered a Tamil cult film , is the bellwether of films featuring realistic portrayals of rural life . Making stars of its director and lead actors , the film won the National Film Award for Best Female Playback Singer for S. Janaki , the Filmfare Award for Best Actor ( Tamil ) for Kamal and five State Awards , including Best Film ( First prize ) , Best Director and Best Actor for Kamal . It was remade in Telugu by K. Raghavendra Rao as <unk> Vayasu ( 1978 ) and in Hindi by Bharathiraja as Solva Sawan ( 1979 ) , with Sridevi reprising her role in both versions . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Mayil ( Sridevi ) is a 16 @-@ year @-@ old schoolgirl who lives in a village with her mother , Guruvammal ( Ganthimathi ) . Guruvammal also takes care of the limping orphan Gopalakrishnan ( Kamal Haasan ) , who is called " Chappani " ( " Lame " ) by the villagers and does whatever he can to earn a living . Mayil 's ambition is to become a teacher , and she hopes to marry a sophisticated , educated man ; although Chappani is in love with her , she ignores him . 
 An urban veterinarian named Sathyajith arrives in the village to work and falls in love with Mayil . Mayil , believing that Sathyajith is the man for her , falls in love with him , to the point of refusing an opportunity to attend a teacher @-@ training course in Madras to remain with him . Despite loving Sathyajith , she does not allow him to exploit her sexually , which disappoints him . Never intending a serious relationship with Mayil , he proceeds to his native place to get married to another woman . When Mayil begs Sathyajith not to leave her , he says he befriended her for pleasure — not marriage . 
 A dejected Mayil confesses this to Guruvammal , who quickly plans to betroth her to someone else . The village ruffian Parattaiyan , alias Parattai ( Rajinikanth ) — who lusts for Mayil — spreads rumours about her relationship with Sathyajith . Because of this , Mayil 's engagement plans are halted and the village becomes hostile to her . Unable to bear the shame , Guruvammal commits suicide and leaves Chappani to take care of Mayil . 
 Chappani takes good care of Mayil , cheering her up when she needs it . She warms to Chappani , making him more confident and assertive and grooming him and his manners , to the surprise of many in the village . Mayil tells him to slap anyone who calls him " Chappani " and to respond only to those who address him by his name , Gopalakrishnan . When Sathyajith and Parattai call him " Chappani " despite his request to use his real name , Gopalakrishnan slaps them . Mayil and Gopalakrishnan celebrate his newfound courage . An insulted Parattai later beats Gopalakrishnan badly . Mayil saves him , spitting on Parattai for the brutal attack . 
 Mayil decides to marry Gopalakrishnan , and sends him to the nearby town for buying wedding supplies . Learning of Gopalakrishnan 's absence , Parattai goes to Mayil 's house and tries to rape her . Gopalakrishnan returns to Mayil 's house and pleads with Parattai to leave her . When Parattai refuses , Gopalakrishnan kills him with a rock and is arrested . He promises Mayil that he will return , and she waits everyday for him . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Kamal Haasan as Gopalakrishnan ( Chappani ) 
 Sridevi as Mayil 
 Rajinikanth as Parattaiyan ( Parattai ) 
 Ganthimathi as Guruvammal 
 Sathyajith as Sathyajith 
 Goundamani as Koothu , a friend of Parattaiyan 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 16 Vayathinile was P. Bharathiraja 's directorial debut and his first screenplay . He originally planned to make a film funded by the National Film Development Corporation of India under the title Mayil , with Nagesh and Roja Ramani in mind for the lead roles , but the <unk> rejected his script . In an October 2013 interview , Bharathiraja said that the script was rejected at the last minute without a reason . 
 When singer S. P. Balasubrahmanyam heard about the rejection he introduced Bharathiraja to S. A. Rajkannu , and Bharathiraja told Rajkannu about his ideas for Sigappu Rojakkal ( 1978 ) and Mayil . Although Rajkannu was uninterested in the first , he agreed to produce Mayil . Feeling that 16 Vayathinile sounded more artistic than Mayil , Rajkannu asked Bharathiraja to change the film 's title . A few alterations were made to the screenplay , and the dialogue was written by P. Kalaimani . 
 Although Bharathiraja was initially hesitant to direct the film , Rajkannu insisted and he received an advance of ₹ 500 . 16 Vayathinile was initially made on a low budget of ₹ 425 @,@ 000 . P. S. <unk> was signed as cinematographer , Somnath @-@ <unk> as art director and R. Bhaskaran as editor . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Bharathiraja wanted Chithra Lakshmanan ( assistant director with K. Bhagyaraj ) to sign Kamal Haasan for the role of Chappani , expecting to pay Kamal ₹ 15 @,@ 000 since the actor had received ₹ 17 @,@ 000 for Aayirathil <unk> ( 1975 ) . When Kamal asked for ₹ 30 @,@ 000 , Lakshmanan suggested that Bharathiraja offer the role to Sivakumar since the production unit could not afford Kamal 's request ; however , Bharathiraja saw Kamal as the ideal choice and agreed to pay him ₹ 27 @,@ 000 . For his character , the actor grew his curly hair long and wore <unk> and khadi high @-@ buttoned shirts . Dhananjayan states in his 2011 book The Best of Tamil Cinema that Sridevi received ₹ 9 @,@ 000 for her role as Mayil . 
 Bharathiraja , who had been an assistant director to Puttanna Kanagal , included Rajinikanth in the film after seeing his performance in Katha Sangama ( 1976 ) . Although he had finalised ₹ 3 @,@ 000 as the salary for Rajinikanth after the latter initially charged ₹ 5 @,@ 000 , he had paid ₹ 2 @,@ 500 to Rajinikanth . 16 Vayathinile marked Rajinikanth 's first appearance in a colour film . Since the actor was not fluent in Tamil at the time , Bhagyaraj read him his lines and Rajinikanth repeated them until he mastered them . For Mayil 's mother Guruvammal , Bharathiraja wanted someone who could speak the village dialect fluently and chose Ganthimathi for her acting style . Receiving a salary of ₹ 150 , Bhagyaraj was initially considered for the veterinarian 's role but wanted to concentrate on directing ; that role finally went to Sathyajith . Although comedian Goundamani made his major film debut with Annakili ( 1976 ) , it was 16 Vayathinile which made him popular . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Shot in 25 days in Mysore , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> and Kollegal , 16 Vayathinile was the first Tamil film made completely outdoors and no sets were used . The actors wore normal village clothing and wore no make @-@ up . According to Kamal , due to budgetary constraints the technical crew could not afford a camera which could film slow motion and Sridevi had to run in slow motion for the song " Chendoora Poove " . Kamal 's salary helped increase the budget from ₹ 425 @,@ 000 to ₹ 500 @,@ 000 . 
 The scene in which Mayil spits on Parattai required several takes before Rajinikanth insisted that Sridevi actually spit on him for realism . Rajinikanth finished his part of the film in five or six days . While Bharathiraja wanted the film to follow a linear narration , it was Bhagyaraj 's idea to begin the film with a flashback sequence . After the film completed its shoot , it was screened at least 20 times for the distributors and the narrative switched every time between the linear and non @-@ linear versions . Eventually , the producer himself released the film , with the flashback narrative . A total of 8 @,@ 534 metres ( 27 @,@ 999 ft ) of film negative was used , and its final length was 3 @,@ 822 m ( 12 @,@ 539 ft ) . 
 = = Themes = = 
 16 Vayathinile focuses on rural Tamil Nadu , and the vulnerabilities of Mayil . Film critic Naman Ramachandran compared Parattai to Rajinikanth 's character <unk> from Katha Sangama ( 1975 ) , stating " Like in that film , Rajinikanth is a card @-@ playing wastrel with henchmen in tow . Just like the <unk> character in Katha Sangama runs errands for <unk> , here Chappani / Gopalakrishnan performs services for Parattai , but the similarity ends there because <unk> is evil and Chappani is good . " He also described the film as the first instance when a villainous character played by Rajinikanth does not have a change of heart or get away without getting his just deserts : " Here he pays for his deeds with his life . " According to film scholar Swarnavel Eswaran Pillai , the film is marked by " ambiguous and dark protagonists , new subjectivity , [ and ] avoidance of clichéd and cathartic closures " . 
 = = Music = = 
 The soundtrack album and background score for 16 Vayathinile were composed by Ilaiyaraaja with lyrics by Kannadasan , Gangai Amaran and <unk> <unk> . Ilaiyaraaja , in an April 2015 interview with Maalai Malar , stated that Kannadasan accepted salaries ranging from ₹ 1 @,@ 000 to ₹ 1 @,@ 500 . Ilaiyaraaja requested Kannadasan to accept ₹ 750 citing the film 's budget constraints , to which Kannadasan agreed . The album was released on EMI Records . The album cover shows a scene from the film where Mayil ( Sridevi ) pours water on Gopalakrishnan ( Kamal ) , with several other women from the village awaiting to do the same to him . 
 16 Vayathinile was Ilaiyaraaja 's first collaboration with Kamal . Bharathiraja insisted that the director and Rajkannu meet Ilaiyaraaja , although Rajkannu doubted if Ilaiyaraaja would sign on since he had become well @-@ known after his debut film Annakili ( 1976 ) . Ilaiyaraaja initially refused because of an earlier bet with Bharathiraja that <unk> 's mentor , G. K. Venkatesh , would compose the music for Bharathiraja 's first film . Venkatesh later insisted that Ilaiyaraaja compose the music . 
 Although Ilaiyaraaja wanted S. P. Balasubrahmanyam to sing " <unk> Poo " and " <unk> " , the singer had pharyngitis at that time and was replaced by Malaysia Vasudevan . " <unk> Poo " , the first song recorded , was the first written by Kannadasan for the film , and Gangai Amaran 's debut as lyricist . Ilaiyaraaja also debuted as a singer with this film , singing the number " <unk> <unk> " , although it does not appear on the soundtrack . According to film critic Baradwaj Rangan , " Chendoora Poove " used Viennese musical tropes . B. Kolappan of The Hindu wrote that the song " employs a rush of violins to set up the intro for the folk melody that follows . " 
 The album , a blend of folk and Western classical music , was praised by critics and " Chendoora Poove " remains popular among the Tamil diaspora . Film producer and writer G. Dhananjayan wrote that Ilaiyaraaja " achieved great heights with the music and background score " of the film . About " Chendoora Poove " , B. Kolappan of The Hindu wrote , " The maestro ’ s genius is most evident in his ability to combine forms seamlessly . " Tribune described " Chendoora Poove " as a " silver lined melody that paced the film and added to its brilliance . Do not miss it at any cost . " The song inspired the title of a 1988 film starring <unk> , and a television serial of the same name . The film 's songs were remastered in DTS 5 @.@ 1 six @-@ channel audio by A. <unk> of Honey Bee Music in June 2013 . 
 = = Release = = 
 16 Vayathinile was released on 15 September 1977 . During its early theatrical run , the audience could not understand the film and there were catcalls outside theatres . Within a week its box office improved due to positive reviews and word of mouth , and it became commercially successful . 16 Vayathinile completed a theatrical run of 175 days , making it a silver jubilee film . 
 The film earned $ 1 million at the box office according to a 2010 estimate by South Scope , and the producer went into hiding to avoid income @-@ tax raids . It was the first Tamil film released by a producer across Tamil Nadu without distributors . When 16 Vayathinile became successful , distributors bought the theatrical rights for a number of areas across the state . The film was remade in Telugu by <unk> Raghavendra Rao as <unk> Vayasu ( 1978 ) and in Hindi by Bharathiraja as Solva Sawan ( 1979 ) , with Sridevi reprising her role in both . In October 2009 , Kannada actor Ganesh revealed that he and his wife bought the remake rights of 16 Vayathinile for Kannada . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 The film received critical acclaim , with praise for Bharathiraja 's script , Ilaiyaraaja 's music and the performances of Kamal , Sridevi and Rajinikanth . According to the Tamil magazine Ananda Vikatan 's original review , " If four more films come with the quality of this film , Tamil cinema will achieve greater heights " . The magazine gave the film 62 @.@ 5 marks out of 100 , their highest rating for a Tamil film . G. Dhananjayan wrote that 16 Vayathinile was " truly a marvellous film which has an universal appeal even today for the way it was made " . Rediff called 16 Vayathinile a " new genre of pastoral film , which was true to village life in characterisation , costumes and dialect " . The Times of India stated that it " showcase [ s ] the best of the superstar [ Rajinikanth ] and the universal hero [ Kamal Haasan ] " . 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 In addition to the National Film Award for Best Female Playback Singer for S. Janaki , 16 Vayathinile won Kamal the Filmfare Award in the Best Tamil Actor category . The film won five Tamil Nadu State Film Awards , and Rajinikanth won the Arima Sangam Award for Best Actor for his role as Parattai . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 I am [ Bharathiraja 's ] very first fan ... These are not empty words . Before 16 Vayathinile 's release , when he showed me the film , I wrote him a letter of appreciation . That 's why I say that I 'm his first fan and proud to be so . 
 16 Vayathinile is considered a cult film and a landmark in Tamil cinema , diverging from traditional Tamil films of the time . With Annakili , the film was a bellwether for realistic portrayals of rural life and made stars of Bharathiraja , Kamal , Sridevi and Rajinikanth . According to Naman Ramachandran and S. Shiva Kumar of The Hindu , Kamal 's performance was considered a tour de force by critics since he was typecast as a romantic hero at that time . The dialogue " Idhu <unk> <unk> ? " ( " How 's this ? " ) , the first catchphrase of Rajinikanth 's career , became very popular ; IANS and Rediff included it on their lists of lines popularised by Rajinikanth . Manisha <unk> , writing for Forbes India , noted that 16 Vayathinile " paved the way for unkempt villains who had a singularly disgusting laugh . " A digitally remastered version of the film was being planned for a late 2013 release ; although its trailer was released in October that year , the film has yet to see a theatrical release as of 2016 . 
 In July 2007 , S. R. Ashok Kumar of The Hindu asked eight Tamil directors to list their all @-@ time favourite Tamil films ; seven – C. V. Sridhar , K. Balachander , J. Mahendran , K. Bhagyaraj , Mani Ratnam , K. S. Ravikumar and Ameer – named 16 Vayathinile . According to Ratnam , the film was " memorable for its script , high standard and realism . " The magazine South Scope included Kamal 's performance on its list of " Kamal 's best performances " in July 2010 . S. Shiva Kumar of The Hindu included the film on his December 2010 list of " Electrifying Rajinikanth @-@ Kamal Haasan films " with Moondru Mudichu ( 1976 ) , Avargal ( 1977 ) and Aval Appadithan ( 1978 ) . In April 2013 CNN @-@ IBN included the film on its list of " 100 greatest Indian films of all time " , saying that it was a " decisive move away from the studio @-@ bound productions and paved the way for successful integration of subaltern themes and folk arts into mainstream commercial cinema . " In December 2014 , The Times of India included 16 Vayathinile on its list of " Top 12 Rajinikanth movies " . In August 2015 , CNN @-@ IBN included the film in its list of " 10 performances that make [ Sridevi ] the ' Last Empress ' of Indian cinema " . In November the same year , Daily News and Analysis included the film in its list of " Films you must watch to grasp the breadth of Kamal Haasan 's repertoire " . Actors Vijay Sethupathi and Vikram included 16 Vayathinile among their favourite films . After seeing the film , director K. Balachander wrote in a letter of appreciation to Bharathiraja , " You have hit the bull 's eye " . 
 16 Vayathinile was spoofed in Murattu Kaalai ( 2012 ) by Vivek , whose character Saroja is called " Mayil " by Cell Murugan 's character ( a veterinarian similar to Sathyajith 's character in the film ) . Sridevi 's line , " <unk> Naan <unk> " ( " Mother , I 've passed the exam " ) , was the title of a 1990 film starring Arjun Sarja . In Sivaji ( 2007 ) , Vivek 's character delivers one of Rajinikanth 's catchphrases and finishes by saying : " Idhu <unk> <unk> ? " . The film 's title and characters have inspired other film titles : Parattai Engira Azhagu Sundaram ( 2007 ) , <unk> ( 2012 ) and 36 <unk> ( 2015 ) . In 2000 Bharathiraja 's son , Manoj , and the actress Meena released a low @-@ profile pop album entitled <unk> Vayathinile . 
 = = Explanatory notes = = 
 = Singapura cat = 
 The Singapura is one of the smallest breeds of cats , noted for its large eyes and ears , brown ticked coat and blunt tail . Reportedly established from three " drain cats " imported from Singapore in the 1970s , it was later revealed that the cats were originally sent to Singapore from the US before they were exported back to the US . Investigations by the Cat Fanciers ' Association ( CFA ) concluded no wrongdoing and the Singapura kept its status as a natural breed . 
 = = History = = 
 They were originally from Singapore . 
 = = = Foundation = = = 
 In 1975 , after working in Singapore , Tommy and Hal Meadow returned to the US with what they say were three local brown @-@ ticked cats . These three cats , a pair of male and female kittens from the same litter and another young female , were the foundation used to establish the Singapura . The breed takes its name from the Malay name for Singapore . In 1981 a breeder visited Singapore and chanced upon a cat fitting the profile of the Singapura ( with the exception of the tail ) in the local Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals . The cat was imported to the US and adopted into the breeding program . 
 The Singapura was accepted for registration by the CFA in 1982 and granted championship status in 1988 . In between this period , breeders found that the occasional litter would have a solid colored kitten , caused by the recessive gene for solid color . In a desire for the Singapura to breed true , many breeders chose to do test matings to pinpoint and remove from their breeding programs individuals with the recessive gene . It was discovered that two of the three foundation cats carried this gene . 
 = = = Controversy = = = 
 In 1987 , while on a cat finding trip to Singapore , American breeder Jerry Mayes discovered importation papers which revealed that the three foundation cats were actually taken into Singapore from the US in 1974 . Lucy Koh , a friend of Mayes , made efforts to correct the history of the Singapura presented by the Meadows but that went relatively unnoticed until 1990 , when the Singapore Tourist and Promotion Board ( now Singapore Tourism Board ) started a campaign to use the Singapura as a national mascot . Reporter Sandra Davie was informed of the discrepancy and published an article about it in the national broadsheet The Straits Times . 
 Because the cats were registered as Abyssinians in the import certificates , and because the Meadows had been breeders of Abyssinian , Burmese , and Siamese , some have speculated that the Singapura is a Burmese / Abyssinian cross and it has even been described as such by CFA Judges . The resemblance of some Burmese / Abyssinian cross to the Singapura , as well as the Singapura 's small litter size , which is uncommon in natural breeds , added more doubts to the Meadows ' story . 
 The CFA investigated the incident at the request of a Singapura breed club . In the investigation , Hal Meadow told the investigation board that the three cats were grandchildren of four local cats he sent back to the US during a previous sensitive business trip to Singapore in 1971 , contradicting the Meadows ' earlier claim of the foundation cats ' origin . Apparently Tommy Meadow lied about it to conceal the secret trip . The CFA found no wrongdoing and kept the Singapura 's status as a natural breed . CFA 's Joan Miller said that " Whether they mated on the streets of Singapore or whether they mated in Michigan , it doesn 't really matter . " Referring to the cat picked up from the SPCA in 1981 , she said that " In addition , there is at least one documented cat that is behind many Singapura pedigrees and it was picked up at the pound . Even with none of the cats the Meadows brought in we still have a legitimate cat from Singapore behind our Singapuras . " 
 Recent studies in 2007 based on feline DNA showed that there are very few genetic differences between the Singapura and Burmese , adding support to the claim that the Singapura is not a natural breed . 
 = = = Singapuras in Singapore = = = 
 The Singapore Tourist and Promotion Board ( STPB ) proceeded with the decision to use the breed ( advertised under the name Kucinta ) as a tourism mascot after CFA concluded its investigation . The name Kucinta is an amalgamation of the Malay words kucing ( cat ) and cinta ( love ) and taken from the winning entry in a naming competition . Incidentally , Kucinta also means " The one I love " in Malay . Sculptures of the Singapura can be found by the Singapore River . 
 While brown cats with ticked coats can occasionally be seen , few if any resembles the Singapura , with the majority of cats being <unk> <unk> , <unk> or bicolor , and the move by the STPB is seen by locals to be an advertising move based on the popularity of the breed among tourists at that time . 
 In 2004 , the Singapore Zoo hosted a temporary exhibit of Singapura cats in celebration of the nation 's 39th National Day . Four Singapura cats were loaned by their owners for the event . 
 = = Description = = 
 The Singapura is a moderately stocky and muscular and is one of the world 's smallest cats , with a very short and fine coat . A full grown female usually weighs 5 – 6 pounds ( 2 @.@ 3 – 2 @.@ 7 kg ) while the male weighs 6 – 8 pounds ( 2 @.@ 7 – 3 @.@ 6 kg ) . The large , slightly pointed and deep cupped ears together with the large almond @-@ shaped eyes are characteristics of the breed . The tail is slender , slightly shorter than the length of the body and has a blunt tip . 
 The breed 's coat pattern is that of a ticked tabby . That is , individual hair strands have alternating sections of dark and light color , typically two dark bands separated by two light bands , with a dark color at the tip . The underside , including the chest , muzzle and chin , takes the color of the light bands . The Singapura is recognized by cat registries in only one color , the sepia agouti , described as " dark brown ticking on a warm old ivory ground color " . 
 The Singapura is described by the CFA as active , curious and playful . They are affectionate and desire human interaction . They have a tendency to perch on high places , to allow them a better view of their surrounding . 
 In 2006 , a pet @-@ quality Singapura in the UK cost £ 300 @-@ 400 ( US $ 500 @-@ 600 USD ) while a show specimen can cost upwards of £ 600 . At present pet @-@ quality Singapuras can cost £ 800 @-@ 900 ( US $ 1 @,@ 300 @-@ 1 @,@ 500 USD ) while show specimens go for upwards of £ 1 @,@ 000 . 
 = = = Health = = = 
 Of concern to breeders is the condition known as uterine inertia , an inability to expel the foetus due to weak muscles . This condition was present in one of the foundation cats and appears in some Singapura females today . Individuals with uterine inertia may require deliveries to be made by Caesarean section . Another issue that affects the breed is Pyruvate kinase deficiency , which leads to hemolytic anemia . Typical symptoms includes lethargy , diarrhea , lack of appetite , poor coat quality , weight loss and jaundice . 
 Some breeders have shown concern regarding the lack of genetic diversity in the breed due to inbreeding caused by a small gene pool . Researchers who completed the 2007 DNA study found that the Singapura ( along with the Burmese ) have the least genetic diversity among the 22 breeds studied . The possibility of outcrossing with another breed to increase the genetic diversity had been raised among CFA breeders , but not many were receptive to the idea , preferring to use Singapuras from around the world that are not so closely related to the CFA line . In April 2013 , UK 's Governing Council of the Cat Fancy started allowing outcrossing for the breed . Individuals chosen have to meet certain health and appearance requirements . 
 = Hengistbury Head = 
 Hengistbury Head / <unk> / is a headland jutting into the English Channel between Bournemouth and Mudeford in the English county of Dorset . It is a site of international importance in terms of its archaeology and is scheduled as an Ancient Monument . Declared a Local Nature Reserve in 1990 , the head and its surroundings form part of the Christchurch Harbour Site of Special Scientific Interest . It is also a Special Area of Conservation , Special Protection Area , an Environmentally Sensitive Area and a Site of Nature Conservation Interest . The name " Hengistbury Head " refers to the immediate area ; the elevated portion is called Warren Hill . 
 There has been human activity on the site since the Upper Palaeolithic ; during the Victorian era , it was heavily quarried , and in recent years tourism has become significant – it receives over a million visitors annually . The various habitats on the Head provide a home for many plants , birds and insects , some of them rare and critically endangered . Erosion remains a threat to the site , although long @-@ term projects are intended to secure it for the future . 
 = = Location = = 
 Hengistbury Head is a sandstone headland forming part of Southbourne , which is a suburb of the town of Bournemouth to the west ; the nearest major settlement is Christchurch to the north . It is the most easterly part of the Borough of Bournemouth , and marks the most easterly point of Poole Bay . Historically part of Hampshire , the Local Government Act 1972 designated the area a part of Dorset . The northern slope of the hill tailing off towards the sea forms Mudeford spit , the sand bar closing Christchurch Harbour from the south . 
 = = Buildings = = 
 The spit is home to more 300 privately owned beach @-@ huts which are some of the UK 's most expensive . In 2015 five of the huts were put on the market for a combined asking price of £ 1 million . On average the huts measure around five by three metres , have no running water , and the occupants may only stay overnight from March to October . Despite the relative lack of amenities , the area has become one of the UK 's most desirable ; huts are rented out for up to £ 600 a week . 
 The Black House , a local landmark , stands at the end of the spit , opposite Mudeford Quay , site of the Battle of Mudeford in 1784 . Built in 1848 , it was once a boat @-@ builders ' house , but is now rented out to holidaymakers . It has served a variety of functions over the years , and is commonly associated with the area 's smuggling past . 
 = = Toponymy = = 
 Mentioned as <unk> in a church deed of the early 12th century , and referred to as <unk> Head in the 17th , Hengistbury only took on its current spelling in the 19th century , during a period of what archaeologist Barry Cunliffe calls " antiquarian romanticism " . Many prehistoric sites around this time were renamed to link them with historical figures . It was thought at the time that the legendary Anglo @-@ Saxon leader Hengist could be buried here , as he was said to have been laid to rest in an unlocated mound . Twentieth @-@ century excavations have established that the tumuli at Hengistbury Head date to the Bronze Age however . 
 = = History = = 
 Hengistbury Head is home to a plethora of nationally and internationally significant archaeological sites , with features dating from the Late Upper Palaeolithic to the Roman settlement of Britain , earning the site Scheduled Ancient Monument status . Interest in the site declined throughout the Dark Ages , until extensive development took place in Christchurch around 890 AD , when the Head may have been used as a lookout post . The area was heavily quarried during the Victorian period and nowadays receives over a million visitors annually . 
 = = = Stone Age = = = 
 Several archaeological digs have revealed that the site was occupied during the Upper Palaeolithic . There is evidence of an open settlement of the <unk> culture on the hill in the middle of the headland dating to around 14 @,@ 100 years ago . With over 13 @,@ 000 lithic artefacts it is probably the largest site of the period . Most interesting were several blades typically found at Upper Paleolithic sites across Europe , but rarely seen outside of caves in the UK , where open air sites of this age are extremely rare . People at the Head were heavily involved with the production of blades , further excavations identified 649 tools , dominated by backed blades , <unk> and burins . 
 At the time the Warren Hill would have overlooked a large river valley that was to become the English Channel . Once the sea had inundated the surrounding valley , Mesolithic hunter gatherers exploited the site . Pollen analysis of peat from the Solent bed suggest a lightly wooded headland free of close @-@ knit undergrowth during this period , an ideal habitat for game . 
 = = = Bronze Age = = = 
 In Bronze Age Britain this was an important seaport . Eleven Bronze Age Britain round barrows sit on the promontory with two more a little further inland . Eleven of the round barrows were excavated ; three by Bushe Fox in 1911 – 12 and eight by Harold St George Gray in 1919 and 1922 . Two appear to be undisturbed . Numerous finds including Early Bronze Age axes and cremation urns were recovered from these tumuli , which have been consistently found to be between 3500 and 4000 years old . 
 One of the barrows ( south of where the thatched barn now stands ) contained a high status cremation of a woman of about twenty years in age , accompanied by an incense cup , a halberd @-@ style pendant made from amber and copper alloy , and two gold cones that would have covered buttons of an organic material . The burial @-@ goods recovered are similar to those of the Wessex culture , the <unk> and Dorset Ridgeway series in particular . An urn from one of the barrows likely to have been made between 1700 and 1500 B.C. , has been identified as <unk> ware , a type widely found throughout Devon and Cornwall which was transported east in lesser amounts , this find being one of the easternmost discovered . 
 = = = Iron Age = = = 
 In Iron Age Britain around 700 BC , a settlement on the Head was established ; also around this time , the headland was cut off from the mainland by the construction of two banks and ditches called the Double Dykes , similar to those found at Maiden Castle . The earthworks consisted of an inner bank three metres high , with a ditch three and a half metres deep . An outer ditch six metres wide and two metres in depth is now obscured due to wind @-@ blown deposits of sand and a gradual silting process . These defences turned Hengistbury Head into a fortified settlement area which seems to have grown over succeeding centuries until it became an important port . The Iron Age port at Hengistbury Head forms a final site in a small chain of fortified earthworks , starting from Hambledon Hill , and also including Hod Hill , <unk> Rings , <unk> Rings , Badbury Rings and <unk> Camp . 
 John Lavender of the local Red House Museum noted evidence of small iron @-@ ore smelting hearths on Warren Hill , while green vitreous slag has been also found on the Head . In his 1911 to 1912 excavations , Bushe @-@ Fox found evidence for working of lead , copper and silver ; two ingots discovered at this time revealed that raw materials would have been imported to the area . One ingot was of nearly pure copper , while the other , which weighed 8 @.@ 6 kg , was roughly 50 / 50 copper @-@ silver alloy with around one percent gold . <unk> ( i.e. silver @-@ bearing ) copper was refined to produce silver at the Head . There are also indications that gold was worked at Hengistbury . One excavation produced part of a torc , twisted together with a small gold bracelet and another fragment in a manner suggesting it was scrap ; a different site produced a streaked touchstone indicating use in gold testing . 
 Thousands of bronze coins have been found from the pre @-@ Roman period , the vast majority having been struck by the Durotriges . The abundance of coins , together with various hearths and smelting artefacts found within a close proximity suggest that the <unk> finds were minted here . 
 = = = = International trade centre = = = = 
 The advanced level of metallurgy in the area , coupled with its ease of access from the Continent , meant that Hengistbury Head became a significant Late @-@ Iron Age port ; trading worked metal of iron , silver , and bronze in return for figs , glass , tools and other goods . <unk> coins and pottery uncovered here show links to the Brittany peninsula . Amphorae used for the transportation of North Italian wine have been found in such quantities ( more than all other sites in the south of England put together ) , that it is clear that the Head was a main port of entry into the country . However , no similar amphorae have been unearthed in Armorica , hinting at a more direct trade route between Hengistbury Head and Italy . Most of these vessels date from before 50 B.C. , while later styles are absent despite being common in other parts of Britain , indicating the wine trade seems to have declined at about the time Caesar began his Gaulish campaigns . 
 = = = Roman occupation to Medieval period = = = 
 After the Roman conquest , the south @-@ east of England started to develop into a more urban economy , while the socio @-@ economic system of the south @-@ west remained little changed . Hengistbury would still have served as an important hub for the Dumnonii of Cornwall and Devon , and the Durotriges of Wiltshire and Dorset ; since transport by water was more efficient at the time , and the Head offered both a coastal route , and freshwater options via the Stour and Avon rivers . 
 No evidence of Saxon use has been found at the Head . The area was not substantially reoccupied until Alfred the Great decided to rebuild the harbour as a defence against raiders . He built the town that later became Christchurch , on the north side of the harbour . Access to Salisbury up the River Avon made this a more strategic place . The Head may have been used for harbour defence at this time . In the 11th century , some of the iron @-@ ore rich stones found at the Head were used in the construction of Christchurch Castle . These reddish @-@ coloured stones can still be seen in the base of the now ruined castle . 
 = = = 17th , 18th and 19th centuries = = = 
 In the late 1600s , Andrew <unk> ( with backing from the Earl of Clarendon ) commenced a scheme to improve the harbour . In 1693 a channel was cut out to sea , whilst ironstone boulders from the head were used to create a pier . The plans proved ineffective ; the pier was poorly positioned and subsequent storms ( including the Great Storm of 1703 ) soon undid most of the work although parts of the pier known as " Clarendon 's Jetty " or the " Long Rocks " are still visible today . Many tons may have been removed from the beach and the head itself to make the jetty . 
 In 1733 a new Excise and Customs Bill was introduced , restricting imports and raising taxes on many luxury items . Christchurch rapidly became a hot @-@ bed for smugglers , where they were known as " <unk> " , and much of the town was involved in the trade . The " Double Dykes " are said to have been used to hide contraband , while Mudeford spit is rumoured to have been used in the construction of " Guinea boats " ( cheaply built galleys sometimes capable of outrunning the day 's steamships ) . One apocryphal story is that the black house acquired its distinctive black colour when customs officers tried to smoke out some holed @-@ up smugglers by lighting fires around the base . The house was constructed in 1848 and used by shipwrights as a dwelling and workshop , smuggling was in decline with the introduction of a free trade policy and more effective measures being implemented by the Coast Guard by this time , so the house may not in fact have had much involvement in smuggling . The spit has a long association with shipbuilding with two large ships being built in the mid 19th century , the Viscountess Canning of 193 tons and the Enterprise 253 tons . 
 From 1848 to 1872 , the Hengistbury Mining Company – formed by a Christchurch @-@ based merchant , John E. Holloway – extracted many more ironstone boulders through quarrying . Holloway brought coal from Southampton , and took the ironstone as ballast for the return journey . These boulders , known as Iron <unk> , were prized for their high quantity of iron ore ( up to 30 % ) . They form the base of Hengistbury Head , and the removal of a substantial amount of doggers over the years has weakened the headland . These and earlier excavations resulted in a loss of up to a third of the Head , caused mainly by erosion after the quarry 's closure . The silt being washed down also threatened the ecology of the saltmarsh below . This has been reduced by the building of a dam , in 1976 , to create a pool . Many " doggers " can still be seen lining the route of the land @-@ train and at the quarry . 
 = = = UK 's first airshow = = = 
 In 1910 the first international aviation meeting ever held in Britain took place on a specially laid out aerodrome consisting of a mile of grassland between the " Double Dykes " and the nearby village of Tuckton . About twenty pioneer aviators from around the world participated in various competitions including spot landing , altitude tests and speed trials ( both for the fastest and slowest circuit ) . 
 On the second day of the meeting , co @-@ founder of Rolls @-@ Royce and pioneer aviator Charles Rolls was thrown from his plane , which disintegrated beneath him . Despite the fact that the first @-@ ever powered flight had occurred only seven years previously , Rolls had been attempting a precision landing . He died from his injuries shortly after his fall . The event was Britain 's earliest fatal flying accident involving a powered aircraft . 
 = = = 20th century = = = 
 There were a number of development schemes for the head including a major railway and docks scheme proposed in 1885 , proposals for housing and a golf course were also put forward before World War I , though none of these schemes came to fruition . In 1919 the head was sold by Sir George Meyrick to Harry Gordon Selfridge with plans to construct a grand house . These plans also came to nothing , apart from the establishment of a nursery garden . Bournemouth Borough Council purchased the head in 1930 for £ 25 @,@ 200 ; although plans for housing existed west of double dykes , the head itself was to be kept as public open space . During World War II the head was closed to the public and was occupied by the army , becoming home to a number of installations including a radar station . The area was also extensively mined . The Head was finally cleared of the military defences by the 1950s . 
 = = Present day = = 
 Hengistbury Head Local Nature Reserve is currently owned and managed by Bournemouth Borough Council . In 1990 , the land was declared a Local Nature Reserve , as a commitment by the town of Bournemouth to conserve and enhance the environment . The heathland forms part of the Dorset Heaths and is internationally protected as a Special Area of Conservation and Special Protection Area . Nearby , the upper reaches of Christchurch Harbour ( including the meadows at Wick ) are recognised as an Environmentally Sensitive Area . 
 The head today is used for a variety of reasons . Firstly it is a tourist spot where country walks can be taken all over the head due to the well defined gravel paths , some of which form part of the Bournemouth Coast Path . In 2008 , many paths were resurfaced , making more ( though not all ) parts of the Head wheelchair accessible . For example , it is now possible to gain wheelchair access to Quarry Pool . Regular field trips to the site are made by students of all ages and there are occasional guided tours or meetings around the Head covering a wide variety of subjects . 
 There is a cafe at the bottom of the Head on the Bournemouth side . Hengistbury Head Outdoor Education centre is located near here on the south shore of the harbour . Run by Brockenhurst College , the centre offers a variety of water and outdoor activities . A scenic land train ( known as " the Noddy train " ) makes regular journeys from the cafe to the end of the spit , a journey of ten or so minutes . On the head itself is a H. M. Coastguard radio relay station , a nature reserve and a triangulation pillar , shown on Ordnance Survey maps as 36 metres above sea level . Ample parking ( subject to charges ) can be found near the cafe , but the Head is also within walking distance of Southbourne and parts of Christchurch . 
 The Quarry Pool is now a significant part of the nature reserve features of the Head . While it was very acidic in the early years , since 1990 it has allowed the growth of a significant number of plant and insect species , as well as mallard and little grebe . The insects provide valuable food for migrating sand martins and swallows . 
 = = = Visitor centre = = = 
 A new visitor centre for Hengistbury Head was opened in December 2013 . The extant thatched barn was upgraded in an eco @-@ friendly way and the new addition cost over a million pounds . Funds were provided by developer contributions , the Heritage Lottery Fund and £ 300 @,@ 000 from landfill tax . 
 The centre houses a display area which documents the site 's archaeology , ecology and geology , while work space has been created for volunteers and other community groups such as the Hengistbury Head Supporters Group , Residents ' Association and Christchurch Harbour Ornithological Group . The public now have the chance to scrutinise a selection of the finds discovered at Hengistbury Head in the last century , and to interact with experienced staff , as well as providing them with the opportunity to become actively involved in the administration of the nature reserve . 
 The surrounding area has been extensively landscaped to create outdoor learning areas and a wildlife garden . Energy @-@ saving features include photovoltaic panels for electricity and ground source heat pump for heating . A green roof ( a living roof that is partially or completely covered with vegetation and a growing medium ) , is used to absorb rainfall and provide insulation . The centre is constructed using timber @-@ frame walls insulated with straw bales . 
 = = Geography = = 
 According to Ian West of Southampton University , " Hengistbury Head is the best part of the Bournemouth coast for geology and geomorphology .... [ and ] is geologically important for the unusual nodules of <unk> ironstone [ found ] in Middle Eocene strata . " The exposed and relatively untouched cliff face at the Head perfectly lends itself to students of stratigraphy . Warren Hill itself is composed of Tertiary <unk> Beds , a mixture of clays and marls with overlying sandy and <unk> beds . 
 = = = Erosion = = = 
 One serious threat to the future of the Head is erosion of the exposed southern cliff face from wind and rain , as well as erosion caused by the sea primarily through the process of Longshore drift . A comparison of Ordnance Survey maps reveals that 25 metres of cliff was washed away from 1915 to 1962 , a process accelerated by the Bournemouth cliff 's concreted promenade and groynes , construction of which started in the early 20th century . It is thought that in the last 200 years around 150 metres of land has been lost from the Head . The first attempt to counteract erosion came in the 1930s when Bournemouth Council constructed a breakwater now known as " the Long <unk> " . Since then , a gabion revetment has been constructed to secure the weakest point at the eastern end of the Head . In a long @-@ term project to secure the Head 's future , from 2005 to 2008 Poole Bay was replenished with 1 @.@ 8 million cubic metres of beach material , drawing ire from some surfers and beach lovers owing to the increase in sharp stones on Southbourne beach in particular . The project 's organizers , the Poole Bay Partnership , state that : " The resulting wide beaches have been a success in terms of their function as a coast protection structure and for the enjoyment they provide to the area 's residents and visitors . " 
 = = Flora and fauna = = 
 Hengistbury Head forms part of the Christchurch Harbour Site of Special Scientific Interest ( SSSI ) , and in May 1990 was declared a Local Nature Reserve . The Head supports 500 plant species ( a quarter of the national flora ) , including eight red data book species , 14 nationally scarce , and 39 locally rare species . The main nature reserve area faces Christchurch Harbour , and is contiguous with the reed beds of Wick Fields . The Head contains a large variety of habitats from the heathland on Warren Hill to freshwater ponds , sand dunes , and salt marshes . The woodland ( known as <unk> Wood ) is home to English oak and silver birch amongst many other trees , and is of particular interest , as it is the only such area to be shown on an 1811 Ordnance Survey map of the Bournemouth / Christchurch area . In 2002 , cattle @-@ grazing commenced in a field near the new visitor centre known as " Barn Field " . This , combined with gorse eradication , has assisted in the restoration of this habitat to its ancient character . 
 Present on the site is sea <unk> ( Polygonum <unk> ) , the rarest of the <unk> in Britain , and currently listed as a " schedule 8 species " under the Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981 . Such plants are afforded greater than usual protection against damaging activities – such as " cutting , picking , destroying or selling . " The heathland is both a Special Area of Conservation and a Special Protection Area , part of a network of the best wildlife sites in Europe . 
 The various habitats provide homes to numerous species of insects . There are 700 moth species recorded in the nature reserve , again a quarter of the national total . At different spots across the site butterflies ( including the green hairstreak ) , damselflies ( like the large red ) , and dragonflies ( such as the hairy dragonfly ) can be observed . According to a 2005 report , the exceedingly rare thirteen @-@ spotted ladybird ( Hippodamia 13 @-@ punctata ) was recently observed at the Head , the first sighting in the UK since 1952 . 
 Over 300 bird species have been recorded in the area , making Hengistbury Head an important migratory point . The Balearic shearwater , considered critically endangered with extinction by the IUCN and seldom sighted in the UK , has been seen in the area . Other rare birds spotted here include the purple heron , the pink @-@ footed goose , the European honey buzzard and the melodious warbler . The fields and reserved areas near the car park provide an ideal spot to watch and listen to a significant population of skylarks during the summer months . 
 In 1989 a project commenced to re @-@ introduce the country 's rarest amphibian , the natterjack toad , to Hengistbury Head . The natterjack was last recorded on the headland in the 1950s before its extinction , probably as the result of a lack of suitable ponds . The project has been a great success and today there are thriving populations at various locations . The ideal time to witness their mating rituals is in May as dusk approaches , when the distinctive call of the natterjack can be heard for miles around . 
 = Battle of Waddams Grove = 
 The Battle of Waddams Grove , also known as the Battle of Yellow Creek was part of the Black Hawk War . It took place in present @-@ day Stephenson County , Illinois on June 18 , 1832 . After several incidents of Sauk Indian raids on settlers along the Apple River , Captain James W. Stephenson left Galena with a group of volunteer militia in pursuit of the Native party . The group clashed on June 18 , 1832 near Yellow Creek and the ensuing battle descended into a bayonet and knife fight in which several Sauk and three militia men were killed . Stephenson was severely wounded by a musketball to the chest during the fighting . The dead were eventually interred in a memorial cemetery in Kellogg 's Grove , Illinois where a stone monument was erected in memory of those killed during the war . 
 = = Background = = 
 Angered by the loss of his birthplace , in prior disputed treaties , Black Hawk led a number of incursions across the Mississippi River beginning in 1830 . Each time , he was persuaded to return west without bloodshed . In April 1832 , encouraged by promises of alliances with other tribes and the British , he again moved his " British Band , " of around 1 @,@ 000 warriors and civilians , into Illinois . Finding no allies , he attempted to return to Iowa , but ensuing events led to the Battle of Stillman 's Run . A number of other engagements followed , and the state militias of Wisconsin and Illinois were mobilized to hunt down Black Hawk 's band . The conflict became known as the Black Hawk War . 
 Following the first confrontation of the war Stillman 's Run , the exaggerated claim that 2 @,@ 000 " bloodthirsty warriors were sweeping all northern Illinois with the bosom of destruction " sent shock waves of terror through the region . Several small massacres and skirmishes ensued and until the Battle of Horseshoe Bend , fought two days before the clash at Waddams Grove , public confidence in the militia was low . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 On June 9 , 1832 , between two attacks that occurred at Fort Blue Mounds , a party of Native Americans crossed over from the west side of the Mississippi River near Galena . The group continued up the Apple River , looting and stealing horses along the way , including an incident about ¾ of the way up the Apple River in which about a dozen horses were stolen from a small stockade . The Sauk raiding parties were mostly stealing food and supplies for Black Hawk 's band of 1 @,@ 000 men , women and children which were camped in the marshes of southwestern Wisconsin . A similar incident a few days later , though without injury or death , prompted a reaction from the white militia in the area . 
 Rising anxiety levels in the white settlers caused Captain James W. Stephenson to gather 12 volunteers and move toward the area of the disturbances from Galena . Stephenson recruited more men at Apple River Fort and then traveled eastward . Stephenson and his men rose before dawn on June 18 and started following the trail of the band of Sauk who had stolen the horses . The militia marched through pounding rain before they finally caught up with the Sauk . 
 = = Battle = = 
 Stephenson caught up with the band of Native Americans on June 18 , 1832 in an open area near Yellow Creek , about 12 miles ( 19 km ) east of Kellogg 's Grove , Illinois . Initially , the militia could not get a clear shot at the Sauk as they rushed for cover in a wooded area near the creek . The militia men observed from what was likely to be West Point Hill . 
 Shots rang out from Stephenson 's men but the Sauk did not immediately return fire and the fight eventually descended into a bayonet and knife battle . The militia charged into the thicket and the Sauk returned fire , killing Stephen P. Howard . The militia force made two more charges into the woods . During one of these , Thomas Sublette stabbed a Sauk in the neck and George Eames was killed in action . The third charge resulted in severe wounds for Stephenson , who was shot in the chest with a musketball , and the death of militia man Michael Lovell . According to Stephenson 's account of the battle , five or six Native American warriors were killed and the militia lost three men . 
 The Sauk forces outnumbered Stephenson 's militiamen and the group was forced to withdraw and retreat . When they left they took with them most of the horses that the Sauk had stolen in their journey up the Apple River . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Although it allowed the militia men to draw Native American blood in revenge , the result of the battle was inconclusive with respect to its original purpose of stopping the Native American raids in the area . The men of the militia returned triumphantly to Galena , Illinois bearing the scalps of two Sauk warriors they had slain . The battle helped raise public opinion towards the militia . After the disastrous defeat at Stillman 's Run in May , the battle at Yellow Creek coupled with the Battle of Horseshoe Bend , helped to demonstrate that the militia could stand up to and defeat Black Hawk 's warriors . 
 The militiamen killed in the Battle of Waddams Grove were eventually interred in a memorial cemetery in Kellogg 's Grove . The graves are located beneath a large stone monument dedicated to those militia men killed during the Black Hawk War . The battlefield itself is believed to be located along the Yellow Creek northwest of William Waddams ' original land claims north of the present day unincorporated town of Waddams Grove , Illinois . 
 = Ahmose I = 
 Ahmose I ( Egyptian : <unk> ms ( <unk> ) , sometimes written <unk> I , " <unk> " and " Aahmes " and meaning Born of <unk> ) was a pharaoh of ancient Egypt and the founder of the Eighteenth dynasty . He was a member of the Theban royal house , the son of pharaoh Seqenenre Tao and brother of the last pharaoh of the Seventeenth dynasty , King Kamose . During the reign of his father or grandfather , Thebes rebelled against the Hyksos , the rulers of Lower Egypt . When he was seven his father was killed , and he was about ten when his brother died of unknown causes , after reigning only three years . Ahmose I assumed the throne after the death of his brother , and upon coronation became known as Neb @-@ <unk> @-@ Re ( The Lord of Strength is Re ) . The name Ahmose is a combination of the divine name ' Ah ' ( see <unk> ) and the combining form ' <unk> ' . 
 During his reign , he completed the conquest and expulsion of the Hyksos from the delta region , restored Theban rule over the whole of Egypt and successfully reasserted Egyptian power in its formerly subject territories of Nubia and Canaan . He then reorganized the administration of the country , reopened quarries , mines and trade routes and began massive construction projects of a type that had not been undertaken since the time of the Middle Kingdom . This building program culminated in the construction of the last pyramid built by native Egyptian rulers . Ahmose 's reign laid the foundations for the New Kingdom , under which Egyptian power reached its peak . His reign is usually dated to the mid @-@ 16th century BC . 
 = = Family = = 
 Ahmose descended from the Theban Seventeenth Dynasty . His grandfather and grandmother , <unk> Ahmose and Tetisheri , had at least twelve children , including Seqenenre Tao and Ahhotep . The brother and sister , according to the tradition of Egyptian queens , married ; their children were Kamose , Ahmose I and several daughters . Ahmose I followed in the tradition of his father and married several of his sisters , making Ahmose @-@ Nefertari his chief wife . They had several children including daughters <unk> B , <unk> A and sons Siamun A , Ahmose @-@ ankh , Amenhotep I and <unk> A ( the " A " and " B " designations after the names are a convention used by Egyptologists to distinguish between royal children and wives that otherwise have the same name ) . They may also have been the parents of <unk> , who would become the wife of later successor Thutmose I. Ahmose @-@ ankh was Ahmose 's heir apparent , but he preceded his father in death sometime between Ahmose 's 17th and 22nd regnal year . Ahmose was succeeded instead by his eldest surviving son , Amenhotep I , with whom he might have shared a short coregency . 
 There was no distinct break in the line of the royal family between the 17th and 18th dynasties . The historian Manetho , writing much later during the Ptolemaic dynasty , considered the final expulsion of the Hyksos after nearly a century and the restoration of native Egyptian rule over the whole country a significant enough event to warrant the start of a new dynasty . 
 = = Dates and length of reign = = 
 Ahmose 's reign can be fairly accurately dated using the Heliacal rise of Sirius in his successor 's reign , but because of disputes over from where the observation was made , he has been assigned a reign from 1570 – 1546 , 1560 – 1537 and 1551 – 1527 by various sources . Manetho supposedly gives Ahmose a reign of 25 years and 4 months ( but , as Manetho called the first ruler of his dynasty " <unk> " , he probably intended someone else ) . This figure is seemingly supported by a ' Year 22 ' inscription from his reign at the stone quarries of Tura . A medical examination of his mummy indicates that he died when he was about thirty @-@ five , supporting a 25 @-@ year reign if he came to the throne at the age of 10 . The radiocarbon date range for the start of his reign is 1570 – 1544 BC , the mean point of which is 1557 BC . 
 Alternative dates for his reign ( 1194 to 1170 BC ) were suggested by David Rohl , but these were rejected by the majority of Egyptologists even before the radiocarbon date was published in 2010 . 
 = = Campaigns = = 
 The conflict between the local kings of Thebes and the Hyksos king Apepi had started during the reign of Seqenenre Tao and would be concluded , after almost 30 years of intermittent conflict and war , under the reign of Ahmose I. Seqenenre Tao was possibly killed in a battle against the Hyksos , as his much @-@ wounded mummy gruesomely suggests , and his successor Kamose ( likely Ahmose 's elder brother ) is known to have attacked and raided the lands around the Hyksos capital , Avaris ( modern Tell el @-@ <unk> 'a ) . Kamose evidently had a short reign , as his highest attested regnal year is year 3 , and was succeeded by Ahmose I. Apepi may have died near the same time . The two royal names — <unk> and <unk> — known for Apepi attested in the historical record were for the same Hyksos king that were used by Ahmose 's opponent at different times during the latter king 's reign . 
 Ahmose ascended the throne when he was still a child , so his mother , Ahhotep , reigned as regent until he was of age . Judging by some of the descriptions of her regal roles while in power , including the general honorific " carer for Egypt " , she effectively consolidated the Theban power base in the years before Ahmose assumed full control . If in fact Apepi II was a successor to Apepi I , then he is thought to have remained bottled up in the delta during Ahhotep 's regency , because his name does not appear on any monuments or objects south of Bubastis . 
 = = = Conquest of the Hyksos = = = 
 Ahmose began the conquest of Lower Egypt held by the Hyksos starting around the 11th year of Khamudi 's reign , but the sequence of events is not universally agreed upon . 
 Analyzing the events of the conquest prior to the siege of the Hyksos capital of Avaris is extremely difficult . Almost everything known comes from a brief but invaluable military commentary on the back of the Rhind Mathematical Papyrus , consisting of brief diary entries , one of which reads 
 Regnal year 11 , second month of <unk> , Heliopolis was entered . First month of <unk> , day 23 , this southern prince broke into Tjaru . 
 While in the past this regnal year date was assumed to refer to Ahmose , it is today believed instead to refer to Ahmose 's Hyksos opponent Khamudi since the Rhind papyrus document refers to Ahmose by the inferior title of ' Prince of the South ' rather than king or pharaoh , as a Theban supporter of Ahmose surely would have called him . Anthony Spalinger , in a <unk> 60 ( 2001 ) book review of Kim Ryholt 's 1997 book , The Political Situation in Egypt during the Second Intermediate Period , c.1800 – 1550 BC , notes that Ryholt 's translation of the middle portion of the Rhind text chronicling Ahmose 's invasion of the Delta reads instead as the " 1st month of Akhet , 23rd day . He @-@ of @-@ the @-@ South ( i.e. Ahmose ) strikes against Sile . " Spalinger stresses in his review that he does not question Ryholt 's translation of the Rhind text but instead asks whether : 
 " it is reasonable to expect a Theban @-@ oriented text to describe its Pharaoh in this manner ? For if the date refers to Ahmose , then the scribe must have been an adherent of that ruler . To me , the very indirect reference to Ahmose — it must be Ahmose — ought to indicate a supporter of the Hyksos dynasty ; hence , the regnal years should refer to this monarch and not the Theban [ king ] . " 
 The Rhind Papyrus illustrates some of Ahmose 's military strategy when attacking the Delta . Entering Heliopolis in July , he moved down the eastern delta to take Tjaru , the major border fortification on the Horus Road , the road from Egypt to Canaan , in October , totally avoiding Avaris . In taking Tjaru he cut off all traffic between Canaan and Avaris . This indicates he was planning a blockade of Avaris , isolating the Hyksos capital from help or supplies coming from Canaan . 
 Records of the latter part of the campaign were discovered on the tomb walls of a participating soldier , Ahmose , son of Ebana . These records indicate that Ahmose I led three attacks against Avaris , the Hyksos capital , but also had to quell a small rebellion further south in Egypt . After this , in the fourth attack , he conquered the city . He completed his victory over the Hyksos by conquering their stronghold <unk> near Gaza after a three @-@ year siege . Ahmose would have conquered Avaris by the 18th or 19th year of his reign at the very latest . This is suggested by " a graffito in the quarry at Tura whereby ' oxen from Canaan ' were used at the opening of the quarry in Ahmose 's regnal year 22 . " Since the cattle would probably have been imported after Ahmose 's siege of the town of <unk> which followed the fall of Avaris , this means that the reign of Khamudi must have terminated by Year 18 or 19 of Ahmose 's 25 @-@ year reign at the very latest . 
 = = = Foreign campaigns = = = 
 After defeating the Hyksos , Ahmose began campaigning in Syria and Nubia . A campaign during his 22nd year reached <unk> in the Levant and perhaps as far as the Euphrates , although the later Pharaoh Thutmose I is usually credited with being the first to campaign that far . Ahmose did , however , reach at least as far as <unk> ( thought to be near Byblos ) , according to an ostracon in the tomb of his wife , Ahmose @-@ Nefertari . Details on this particular campaign are scarce , as the source of most of the information , Ahmose , son of Ebana , served in the Egyptian navy and did not take part in this land expedition . However , it can be inferred from archaeological surveys of southern Canaan that during the late 16th century BC Ahmose and his immediate successors intended only to break the power of the Hyksos by destroying their cities and not to conquer Canaan . Many sites there were completely laid waste and not rebuilt during this period — something a Pharaoh bent on conquest and tribute would not be likely to do . 
 Ahmose I 's campaigns in Nubia are better documented . Soon after the first Nubian campaign , a Nubian named Aata rebelled against Ahmose , but was crushed . After this attempt , an anti @-@ Theban Egyptian named <unk> gathered many rebels in Nubia , but he too was defeated . Ahmose restored Egyptian rule over Nubia , which was controlled from a new administrative center established at Buhen . When re @-@ establishing the national government , Ahmose appears to have rewarded various local princes who supported his cause and that of his dynastic predecessors . 
 = = Art and monumental constructions = = 
 With the re @-@ unification of Upper and Lower Egypt under Ahmose , a renewal of royal support for the arts and monumental construction occurred . Ahmose reportedly devoted a tenth of all the productive output towards the service of the traditional gods , reviving massive monumental constructions as well as the arts . However , as the defeat of the Hyksos occurred relatively late in Ahmose 's reign , his subsequent building program likely lasted no more than seven years , and much of what was started was probably finished by his son and successor Amenhotep I. 
 Work from Ahmose 's reign is made of much finer material than anything from the Second Intermediate Period , though the craftsmanship from his reign does not always match the best work from either the Old or Middle Kingdoms . With the Delta and Nubia under Egyptian control once more , access was gained to resources not available in Upper Egypt . Gold and silver were received from Nubia , Lapis Lazuli from distant parts of central Asia , cedar from Byblos , and in the Sinai the Serabit el @-@ Khadim turquoise mines were reopened . Although the exact nature of the relationship between Egypt and Crete is uncertain , at least some Minoan designs have been found on objects from this period , and Egypt considered the Aegean to be part of its empire . Ahmose reopened the Tura limestone quarries to provide stone for monuments and used Asiatic cattle from Phoenicia to haul the stone , according to his quarry inscription . 
 The art during Ahmose I 's reign was similar to the Middle Kingdom royal Theban style , and stelae from this period were once more of the same quality . This reflects a possibly natural conservative tendency to revive fashions from the pre @-@ Hyksos era . Despite this , only three positively identified statuary images of Ahmose I survive : a single shabti kept at the British Museum , presumably from his tomb ( which has never been positively located ) , and two life @-@ size statues ; one of which resides in the New York Metropolitan Museum , the other in the Khartoum Museum . All display slightly bulging eyes , a feature also present on selected stelae depicting the pharaoh . Based on style , a small limestone sphinx that resides at the National Museum of Scotland , Edinburgh , has also been tentatively identified as representing Ahmose I. 
 The art of glass making is thought to have developed during Ahmose 's reign . The oldest samples of glass appear to have been defective pieces of faience , but intentional crafting of glass did not occur until the beginning of the 18th dynasty . One of the earliest glass beads found contains the names of both Ahmose and Amenhotep I , written in a style dated to about the time of their reigns . If glassmaking was developed no earlier than Ahmose 's reign and the first objects are dated to no later than his successor 's reign , it is quite likely that it was one of his subjects who developed the craft . 
 Ahmose resumed large construction projects like those before the second intermediate period . In the south of the country he began constructing temples mostly built of brick , one of them in the Nubian town of Buhen . In Upper Egypt he made additions to the existing temple of Amun at Karnak and to the temple of Montu at Armant . According to an inscription at Tura , he used white limestone to build a temple to Ptah and the southern harem of Amun , but did not finish either project . He built a cenotaph for his grandmother , Queen Tetisheri , at Abydos . 
 Excavations at the site of Avaris by Manfred Bietak have shown that Ahmose had a palace constructed on the site of the former Hyksos capital city 's fortifications . Bietak found fragmentary Minoan @-@ style remains of the frescoes that once covered the walls of the palace ; there has subsequently been much speculation as to what role this Aegean civilization may have played in terms of trade and in the arts . 
 Under Ahmose 's reign , the city of Thebes became the capital for the whole of Egypt , as it had been under the 11th Dynasty in the early Middle Kingdom . It also became the center for a newly established professional civil service , where there was a greater demand for scribes and the literate as the royal archives began to fill with accounts and reports . Having Thebes as the capital was probably a strategic choice as it was located at the center of the country , the logical conclusion from having had to fight the Hyksos in the north as well as the Nubians to the south . Any future opposition at either border could be met easily . 
 Perhaps the most important shift was a religious one : Thebes effectively became the religious as well as the political center of the country , its local god Amun credited with inspiring Ahmose in his victories over the Hyksos . The importance of the temple complex at Karnak ( on the east bank of the Nile north of Thebes ) grew and the importance of the previous cult of Ra based in Heliopolis diminished . 
 Several stelae detailing the work done by Ahmose were found at Karnak , two of which depict him as a benefactor to the temple . In one of these stelae , known as the " Tempest Stele " , he claims to have rebuilt the pyramids of his predecessors at Thebes that had been destroyed by a major storm . The Thera eruption in the Aegean has been implicated by some scholars as the source of the damages described in the Tempest Stele . 
 = = = Pyramid = = = 
 The remains of Ahmose 's pyramid in Abydos were discovered in 1899 and identified as his in 1902 . Most of its outer casing stones had been robbed for use in other building projects over the years , and the mound of rubble upon which it was built has collapsed . However , two rows of intact casing stones were found by Arthur Mace , who estimated its steep slope as about 60 degrees , based on the evidence of the limestone casing ( compare to the less acute 51 degrees of the Great Pyramid of Giza ) . Adjacent to the main pyramid temple and to its east , Harvey has identified two temples constructed by Ahmose 's queen , Ahmose @-@ <unk> . One of these structures also bears bricks stamped with the name of Chief Treasurer <unk> , the official responsible for re @-@ opening the stone quarries at el @-@ Ma <unk> ( Tura ) in Ahmose 's year 22 . A third , larger temple ( Temple C ) is similar to the pyramid temple in form and scale , but its stamped bricks and details of decoration reinforce that it was a cult place for Ahmose @-@ <unk> . 
 The axis of the pyramid complex may be associated with a series of monuments strung out along a kilometer of desert . Along this axis are several key structures : 1 ) a large pyramid dedicated to his grandmother Tetisheri which contained a stele depicting Ahmose providing offerings to her ; 2 ) a <unk> underground complex which may either have served as a token representation of an <unk> underworld or as an actual royal tomb ; and 3 ) a terraced temple built against the high cliffs , featuring massive stone and brick terraces . These elements reflect in general a similar plan undertaken for the cenotaph of <unk> III and in general its construction contains elements which reflect the style of both Old and Middle Kingdom pyramid complexes . 
 There is some dispute as to if this pyramid was Ahmose 's burial place , or if it was a cenotaph . Although earlier explorers Mace and <unk> were unable to locate any internal chambers , it is unlikely that a burial chamber would have been located in the midst of the pyramid 's rubble core . In the absence of any mention of a tomb of King Ahmose in the tomb robbery accounts of the Abbott Papyrus , and in the absence of any likely candidate for the king 's tomb at Thebes , it is possible that the king was interred at Abydos , as suggested by Harvey . Certainly the great number of cult structures located at the base of the pyramid located in recent years , as well as the presence at the base of the pyramid of a cemetery used by priests of Ahmose 's cult , argue for the importance of the king 's Abydos cult . However , other Egyptologists believe that the pyramid was constructed ( like Tetisheri 's pyramid at Abydos ) as a cenotaph and that Ahmose may have originally been buried in the southern part of Dra ' Abu el @-@ Naga ' with the rest of the late 17th and early 18th Dynasties . 
 This pyramid was the last pyramid ever built as part of a mortuary complex in Egypt . The pyramid would be abandoned by subsequent pharaohs of the New Kingdom , for both practical and religious reasons . The Giza plateau offered plenty of room for building pyramids ; but this was not the case with the confined , cliff @-@ bound geography of Thebes and any burials in the surrounding desert were vulnerable to flooding . The pyramid form was associated with the sun god Re , who had been overshadowed by Amun in importance . One of the meanings of Amun 's name was the hidden one , which meant that it was now theologically permissible to hide the Pharaoh 's tomb by fully separating the mortuary template from the actual burial place . This provided the added advantage that the resting place of the pharaoh could be kept hidden from necropolis robbers . All subsequent pharaohs of the New Kingdom would be buried in rock @-@ cut shaft tombs in the Valley of the Kings . 
 = = Mummy = = 
 Ahmose I 's mummy was discovered in 1881 within the Deir el @-@ Bahri Cache , located in the hills directly above the Mortuary Temple of Hatshepsut . He was interred along with the mummies of other 18th and 19th dynasty leaders Amenhotep I , Thutmose I , Thutmose II , Thutmose III , Ramesses I , Seti I , Ramesses II and Ramesses IX , as well as the 21st dynasty pharaohs Pinedjem I , Pinedjem II and Siamun . 
 Ahmose I 's mummy was unwrapped by Gaston Maspero on June 9 , 1886 . It was found within a coffin that bore his name in hieroglyphs , and on his bandages his name was again written in hieratic script . While the <unk> coffin 's style dates it squarely to the time of the 18th dynasty , it was neither of royal style nor craftsmanship , and any gilding or inlays may have been stripped in antiquity . He had evidently been moved from his original burial place , re @-@ wrapped and placed within the cache at Deir el @-@ Bahri during the reign of the 21st dynasty priest @-@ king Pinedjem II , whose name also appeared on the mummy 's wrappings . Around his neck a garland of <unk> flowers had been placed . The body bore signs of having been plundered by ancient grave @-@ robbers , his head having been broken off from his body and his nose smashed . 
 The body was 1 @.@ 63 m in height . The mummy had a small face with no defining features , though he had slightly prominent front teeth ; this may have been an inherited family trait , as this feature can be seen in some female mummies of the same family , as well as the mummy of his descendant , Thutmose II . 
 A short description of the mummy by Gaston Maspero sheds further light on familial resemblances : 
 ... he was of medium height , as his body when mummified measured only 5 feet 6 inches ( 1 @.@ 68 m ) in length , but the development of the neck and chest indicates extraordinary strength . The head is small in proportion to the bust , the forehead low and narrow , the cheek @-@ bones project and the hair is thick and wavy . The face exactly resembles that of <unk> [ Seqenenre Tao ] and the likeness alone would proclaim the affinity , even if we were ignorant of the close relationship which united these two Pharaohs . 
 Initial studies of the mummy were first thought to reveal a man in his 50s , but subsequent examinations have shown that he was instead likely to have been in his mid @-@ 30s when he died . The identity of this mummy ( Cairo Museum catalog n ° <unk> ) was called into question in 1980 by the published results of Dr. James Harris , a professor of orthodontics , and Egyptologist Edward Wente . Harris had been allowed to take x @-@ rays of all of the supposed royal mummies at the Cairo Museum . While history records Ahmose I as being the son or possibly the grandson of Seqenenre Tao , the craniofacial morphology of the two mummies are quite different . It is also different from that of the female mummy identified as <unk> @-@ Nefertari , thought to be his sister . These inconsistencies , and the fact that this mummy was not posed with arms crossed over chest , as was the fashion of the period for male royal mummies , led them to conclude that this was likely not a royal mummy , leaving the identity of Ahmose I unknown . 
 The mummy is now in the Luxor Museum alongside the purported one of Ramesses I , as part of a permanent exhibition called " The Golden Age of the Egyptian Military " . 
 = = Succession = = 
 Ahmose I was succeeded by his son , Amenhotep I. A minority of scholars have argued that Ahmose had a short co @-@ regency with Amenhotep , potentially lasting up to six years . If there was a co @-@ regency , Amenhotep could not have been made king before Ahmose 's 18th regnal year , the earliest year in which Ahmose @-@ ankh , the heir apparent , could have died . There is circumstantial evidence indicating a co @-@ regency may have occurred , although definitive evidence is lacking . 
 The first piece of evidence consists of three small objects which contain both of their praenomen next to one another : the aforementioned small glass bead , a small feldspar amulet and a broken stele , all of which are written in the proper style for the early 18th dynasty . The last stele said that Amenhotep was " given life eternally " , which is an Egyptian idiom meaning that a king is alive , but the name of Ahmose does not have the usual epithet " true of voice " which is given to dead kings . Since praenomen are only assumed upon taking the throne , and assuming that both were in fact alive at the same time , it is indicated that both were reigning at the same time . There is , however , the possibility that Amenhotep I merely wished to associate himself with his beloved father , who reunited Egypt . 
 Second , Amenhotep I appears to have nearly finished preparations for a sed festival , or even begun celebrating it ; but Amenhotep I 's reign is usually given only 21 years and a sed festival traditionally cannot be celebrated any earlier than a ruler 's 30th year . If Amenhotep I had a significant co @-@ regency with his father , some have argued that he planned to celebrate his Sed Festival on the date he was first crowned instead of the date that he began ruling alone . This would better explain the degree of completion of his Sed Festival preparations at Karnak . There are two contemporary New Kingdom examples of the breaking of this tradition ; Hatshepsut celebrated her Heb Sed Festival in her 16th year and Akhenaten celebrated a Sed Festival near the beginning of his 17 @-@ year reign . 
 Third , Ahmose 's wife , Ahmose Nefertari , was called both " King 's Great Wife " and " King 's Mother " in two stelae which were set up at the limestone quarries of <unk> in Ahmose 's 22nd year . For her to literally be a " King 's Mother , " Amenhotep would already have to be a king . It is possible that the title was only honorific , as Ahhotep II assumed the title without being the mother of any known king ; though there is a possibility that her son Amenemhat was made Amenhotep I 's co @-@ regent , but preceded him in death . 
 Because of this uncertainty , a co @-@ regency is currently impossible to prove or disprove . Both Redford 's and <unk> 's works on the subject are undecided on the grounds that there is too little conclusive evidence either for or against a coregency . Even if there was one , it would have made no difference to the chronology of the period because in this kind of institution Amenhotep would have begun counting his regnal dates from his first year as sole ruler . However , co @-@ regency supporters note that since at least one rebellion had been led against Ahmose during his reign , it would certainly have been logical to crown a successor before one 's death to prevent a struggle for the crown . 
 = Congress Hall = 
 Congress Hall is a building near the intersection of Chestnut and 6th Streets in Philadelphia , Pennsylvania that served as the seat of the United States Congress from December 6 , 1790 to May 14 , 1800 . During Congress Hall 's duration as the capitol of the United States , the country admitted three new states , Vermont , Kentucky , and Tennessee ; ratified the Bill of Rights of the United States Constitution ; and oversaw the Presidential inaugurations of both George Washington ( his second ) and John Adams . 
 Congress Hall was restored throughout the 20th century to its original appearance in 1796 . The building is now managed by the National Park Service within the Independence National Historical Park and is open for tours by the public . Congress Hall should not be confused with Independence Hall , which is located next door . 
 = = Background = = 
 Philadelphia served as the capital of the United States both during and immediately after the American Revolutionary War . Independence Hall , located next door , served as the meeting place of the Continental Congress until the Pennsylvania Mutiny in June 1783 . The failure of the Pennsylvania government to protect Congress from a mob of angry mutineers caused the representatives to withdraw to Princeton , New Jersey . The national capital then moved to Annapolis , Maryland in November 1783 , then to Trenton , New Jersey in November 1784 before finally moving to New York City in January 1785 . State delegates did not return to Independence Hall in Philadelphia until the United States Constitutional Convention in 1787 ; however , New York City remained the official capital even during the convention . Designed by architect Samuel Lewis , Congress Hall was originally built to serve as the Philadelphia County Courthouse ; construction began in 1787 and was completed two years later . 
 = = Temporary capitol = = 
 Article One , Section Eight , of the United States Constitution granted Congress the authority to create a federal district to serve as the national capital . Following the ratification of the Constitution , the Congress , while meeting in New York , passed the Residence Act on July 9 , 1790 . The Act established the District of Columbia on the banks of the Potomac River between the states of Maryland and Virginia to serve as the new federal capital . However , Robert Morris , a Senator from Pennsylvania , convinced Congress to return to Philadelphia while the new permanent capital was being built . As a result , the Residence Act also declared Philadelphia to be the temporary capital for a period of ten years . 
 In an attempt to convince Congress to keep the capital in Philadelphia , the city began construction on a massive new Presidential palace on 9th Street as well as an expansion to the County Courthouse into what would become Congress Hall . Upon the return of Congress to Philadelphia on December 6 , 1790 , the first level of Congress Hall had been transformed into the chamber for the House of Representatives and the second floor had been converted into a chamber for the United States Senate . Despite their efforts to construct new buildings for use by the federal government , the city 's residents failed to convince Congress to modify the Residence Act and make Philadelphia the permanent capital . Congress Hall served as the capitol building until May 14 , 1800 , when the offices of the national government moved to Washington , D.C. 
 = = Interior = = 
 The House chamber on the first floor is rather simple and featured mahogany desks and leather chairs . The room eventually accommodated 106 representatives from 16 states : the 13 original states as well as the representatives from the new states of Vermont in 1791 , Kentucky in 1792 , and Tennessee in 1796 . The room has been restored to its original appearance in 1796 . 
 The second floor , reserved as the chamber for the Senate , was more ornate and adorned with heavy red drapes . By 1796 , the room featured 32 secretary desks very similar to the desks that are still used in the current Senate chamber in the United States Capitol ; 28 of the desks at Congress Hall are original . Portraits of Louis XVI and Marie Antoinette , presented as gifts from the French monarch following the American Revolution , hang in adjoining committee rooms . A fresco of an American bald eagle is painted on the ceiling , holding the traditional olive branch to symbolize peace . Also on the ceiling , a plaster medallion in the form of a sunburst features 13 stars to represent the original colonies . The design mirrors a similar pattern on the floor , where a carpet made by William Sprague , a local weaver , features the shields of each of the 13 original states . The carpet seen today is a reproduction of the original . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 During the almost ten years it served as the capitol , Congress Hall witnessed many historic events including the admittance of three new states . The United States Bill of Rights was ratified at Congress Hall in 1791 . The second Presidential inauguration of George Washington took place in the House chamber in 1793 , as did inauguration of John Adams in 1797 . Congress also used the time to establish the First Bank of the United States , the Federal Mint , and the United States Department of the Navy . The Jay Treaty , which secured a temporary peace with Great Britain , was also ratified at Congress Hall in 1796 . After the capital moved to Washington , Congress Hall returned to its original function as the Philadelphia County Courthouse and served as the location of both state and federal courts during the early 19th century . Also designed by Samuel Lewis , the Burlington County Courthouse in Mount Holly Township , New Jersey was built in 1796 and modeled after Congress Hall . 
 = = Restoration and present status = = 
 After its use as a courthouse in the early 19th century , Congress Hall , like other buildings in the area , had fallen into disrepair . In 1870 , the Pennsylvania General Assembly ordered the demolition of all the buildings surrounding Independence Hall . However , the law was never enforced and was officially repealed in 1895 . Under the leadership of a civic organization known as The Colonial Dames of America , the architect George Champlin Mason , Jr. began restoring Congress Hall in 1895 @-@ 96 , though this work was mostly limited to the Senate chamber . In 1900 , the Philadelphia chapter of the American Institute of Architects ( AIA ) began a study of Congress Hall and initiated a funding drive for the building 's complete restoration . After funds were secured , the City of Philadelphia approved the restoration project in 1912 under the supervision of the AIA . Work on Congress Hall was completed the following year when President Woodrow Wilson rededicated the building . Additional work to refurbish the House chamber was completed in 1934 . In 1942 , over 50 civic and patriotic groups met at the American Philosophical Society and joined to create the Independence Hall Association . The association lobbied for the creation of Independence National Historical Park , which was initially approved by Congress in 1948 and formally established on July 4 , 1956 . 
 Congress Hall is now maintained by the National Park Service , which operates guided tours of the building throughout the year on a first @-@ come , first @-@ served basis . 
 On December 2 , 2008 , the building hosted President @-@ elect Barack Obama 's meeting with the National Governors Association where they discussed the economic crisis then facing the country . 
 = Reinhard Heydrich = 
 Reinhard Tristan Eugen Heydrich ( German : [ <unk> <unk> <unk> ̩ <unk> ] ) ( 7 March 1904 – 4 June 1942 ) was a high @-@ ranking German Nazi official during World War II , and one of the main architects of the Holocaust . He was SS @-@ Obergruppenführer und General der Polizei ( Senior Group Leader and Chief of Police ) as well as chief of the Reich Main Security Office ( including the Gestapo , Kripo , and SD ) . He was also <unk> <unk> ( Deputy / Acting Reich @-@ Protector ) of Bohemia and Moravia , in what is now the Czech Republic . Heydrich served as president of the International Criminal Police Commission ( <unk> ; later known as Interpol ) and chaired the January 1942 Wannsee Conference , which formalised plans for the Final Solution to the Jewish Question — the deportation and genocide of all Jews in German @-@ occupied Europe . 
 Many historians regard him as the darkest figure within the Nazi elite ; Adolf Hitler described him as " the man with the iron heart " . He was the founding head of the Sicherheitsdienst ( SD ) , an intelligence organisation charged with seeking out and neutralising resistance to the Nazi Party via arrests , deportations , and murders . He helped organise Kristallnacht , a series of co @-@ ordinated attacks against Jews throughout Nazi Germany and parts of Austria on 9 – 10 November 1938 . The attacks , carried out by SA stormtroopers and civilians , presaged the Holocaust . Upon his arrival in Prague , Heydrich sought to eliminate opposition to the Nazi occupation by suppressing Czech culture and deporting and executing members of the Czech resistance . He was directly responsible for the Einsatzgruppen , the special task forces which travelled in the wake of the German armies and murdered over two million people , including 1 @.@ 3 million Jews , by mass shooting and gassing . 
 Heydrich was attacked in Prague on 27 May 1942 by a British @-@ trained team of Czech and Slovak soldiers who had been sent by the Czechoslovak government @-@ in @-@ exile to kill him in Operation Anthropoid . He died from his injuries a week later . Intelligence falsely linked the assassins to the villages of Lidice and Ležáky . Lidice was razed to the ground ; all men and boys over the age of 16 were shot , and all but a handful of its women and children were deported and killed in Nazi concentration camps . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Heydrich was born in 1904 in Halle an der Saale to composer and opera singer Richard Bruno Heydrich and his wife Elisabeth Anna Maria Amalia Krantz . His mother was Roman Catholic . His two forenames were patriotic musical tributes : " Reinhard " referred to the tragic hero from his father 's opera Amen , and " Tristan " stems from Richard Wagner 's Tristan und Isolde . Heydrich 's third name , " Eugen " , was his late maternal grandfather 's forename ( Professor Eugen Krantz had been the director of the Dresden Royal Conservatory ) . 
 Heydrich was born into a family of social standing and substantial financial means . Music was a part of Heydrich 's everyday life ; his father founded the Halle Conservatory of Music , Theatre and Teaching and his mother taught piano there . Heydrich developed a passion for the violin and carried that interest into adulthood ; he impressed listeners with his musical talent . 
 His father was a German nationalist who instilled patriotic ideas in his three children , but was not affiliated with any political party until after World War I. The Heydrich household was strict . As a youth , he engaged his younger brother , Heinz , in mock fencing duels . Heydrich was very intelligent and excelled in his schoolwork — especially in science — at the " <unk> " . A talented athlete , he became an expert swimmer and fencer . He was shy , insecure , and was frequently bullied for his high @-@ pitched voice and rumoured Jewish ancestry . The latter claim earned him the nickname " Moses Handel " . 
 In 1918 , World War I ended with Germany 's defeat . In late February 1919 , civil unrest — including strikes and clashes between communist and anti @-@ communist groups — took place in Heydrich 's home town of Halle . Under Defence Minister Gustav Noske 's directives , a right @-@ wing paramilitary unit was formed and ordered to " recapture " Halle . Heydrich , then 15 years old , joined <unk> 's Volunteer Rifles ( the first Freikorps unit ) . When the skirmishes ended , Heydrich was part of the force assigned to protect private property . Little is known about his role , but the events left a strong impression ; it was a " political awakening " for him . He joined the <unk> Schutz und <unk> ( National German Protection and Shelter League ) , an anti @-@ Semitic organisation . 
 As a result of the conditions of the Treaty of Versailles , hyperinflation spread across Germany and many lost their life savings . Halle was not spared . By 1921 , few townspeople there could afford a musical education at Bruno Heydrich 's conservatory . This led to a financial crisis for the Heydrich family . 
 = = Naval career = = 
 In 1922 Heydrich joined the German Navy ( Reichsmarine ) , taking advantage of the security , structure , and pension it offered . He became a naval cadet at Kiel , Germany 's primary naval base . On 1 April 1924 he was promoted to senior midshipman ( Oberfähnrich zur See ) and sent to officer training at the Naval Academy Mürwik . In 1926 he advanced to the rank of ensign ( Leutnant zur See ) and was assigned as a signals officer on the battleship Schleswig @-@ Holstein , the flagship of Germany 's North Sea Fleet . With the promotion came greater recognition . He received good evaluations from his superiors and had few problems with other crewmen . He was promoted on 1 July 1928 to the rank of sub @-@ lieutenant ( Oberleutnant zur See ) . The increased rank fuelled his ambition and arrogance . 
 Heydrich became notorious for his countless affairs . In December 1930 he attended a rowing @-@ club ball and met Lina von Osten . They became romantically involved and soon announced their engagement . Lina was already a Nazi Party follower ; she had attended her first rally in 1929 . In 1931 Heydrich was charged with " conduct unbecoming to an officer and gentleman " for breaking an engagement promise to a woman he had known for six months before the von Osten engagement . Admiral Erich Raeder dismissed Heydrich from the navy that April . The dismissal devastated Heydrich , who found himself without career prospects . He kept the engagement and married Lina in December 1931 . 
 = = Career in the SS and military = = 
 In 1931 , Heinrich Himmler began setting up a counterintelligence division of the SS . Acting on the advice of his associate Karl von Eberstein , who was von Osten 's friend , Himmler agreed to interview Heydrich , but cancelled their appointment at the last minute . Lina ignored this message , packed Heydrich 's suitcase , and sent him to Munich . Eberstein met Heydrich at the train station and took him to see Himmler . Himmler asked Heydrich to convey his ideas for developing an SS intelligence service . Himmler was so impressed that he hired Heydrich immediately . Although the starting salary of 180 Reichsmarks ( the equivalent of 40 USD ) was low , Heydrich decided to take the job because Lina 's family supported the Nazi movement , and the quasi @-@ military and revolutionary nature of the post appealed to him . At first he had to share an office and typewriter with a colleague , but by 1932 Heydrich was earning 290 Reichsmarks a month , a salary he described as " comfortable " . As his power and influence grew throughout the 1930s , his salary grew <unk> ; by 1938 his income increased to 17 @,@ 371 @.@ 53 Reichsmarks annually ( the equivalent of 78 @,@ 000 USD ) . His NSDAP number was 544 @,@ 916 and his SS number was 10 @,@ 120 . Heydrich later received a <unk> from Himmler for his service . 
 On 1 August 1931 Heydrich began his job as chief of the new ' Ic Service ' ( intelligence service ) . He set up office at the Brown House , the Nazi Party headquarters in Munich . By October he had created a network of spies and informers for intelligence @-@ gathering purposes and to obtain information to be used as blackmail to further political aims . Information on thousands of people was recorded on index cards and stored at the Brown House . To mark the occasion of Heydrich 's December wedding , Himmler promoted him to the rank of SS @-@ Sturmbannführer ( major ) . 
 In 1932 Heydrich 's enemies began to spread rumours of his alleged Jewish ancestry . Wilhelm Canaris said he had obtained photocopies proving Heydrich 's Jewish ancestry , but these photocopies never surfaced . Nazi Gauleiter Rudolf Jordan also claimed that Heydrich was not a pure Aryan . Within the Nazi organisation such innuendo could be damning , even for the head of the Reich 's counterintelligence service . Gregor Strasser passed the allegations on to the Nazi Party 's racial expert Dr. Achim <unk> who investigated Heydrich 's genealogy . <unk> reported that Heydrich was " ... of German origin and free from any coloured and Jewish blood " . He insisted that the rumours were baseless . Even with this report , Heydrich privately engaged SD member Ernst Hoffman to further investigate and dispel the rumours . 
 = = = Gestapo and SD = = = 
 In mid @-@ 1932 , Himmler appointed Heydrich chief of the renamed security service — the Sicherheitsdienst ( SD ) . Heydrich 's counterintelligence service grew into an effective machine of terror and intimidation . With Hitler striving for absolute power in Germany , Himmler and Heydrich wished to control the political police forces of all 17 German states . They began with Bavaria . In 1933 , Heydrich gathered some of his men from the SD and together they stormed police headquarters in Munich and took over the police using intimidation tactics . Himmler became the Munich police chief and Heydrich became the commander of Department IV , the political police . 
 In 1933 , Hitler became Chancellor of Germany , and through a series of decrees became Germany 's Führer und Reichskanzler ( leader and chancellor ) . The first concentration camps , which were originally intended to house political opponents , were established in early 1933 . By year 's end there were over fifty camps . 
 Hermann Göring founded the Gestapo in 1933 as a Prussian police force . When Göring transferred full authority over the Gestapo to Himmler in April 1934 , it immediately became an instrument of terror under the SS 's purview . Himmler named Heydrich to head the Gestapo on 22 April 1934 . On 9 June 1934 , Rudolph Hess declared the SD the official Nazi intelligence service . 
 = = = Crushing the SA = = = 
 Beginning in April 1934 , and at Hitler 's request , Heydrich and Himmler began building a dossier on Sturmabteilung ( SA ) leader Ernst Röhm in an effort to remove him as a rival for party leadership . At this point , the SS was still part of the SA , the early Nazi paramilitary organisation which now numbered over 3 million men . At Hitler 's direction , Heydrich , Himmler , Göring , and Viktor Lutze drew up lists of those who should be liquidated , starting with seven top SA officials and including many more . On 30 June 1934 the SS and Gestapo acted in coordinated mass arrests that continued for two days . Röhm was shot without trial , along with the leadership of the SA . The purge became known as the Night of the Long Knives . Up to 200 people were killed in the action . Lutze was appointed SA 's new head and it was converted into a sports and training organisation . 
 With the SA out of the way , Heydrich began building the Gestapo into an instrument of fear . He improved his index @-@ card system , creating categories of offenders with colour @-@ coded cards . The Gestapo had the authority to arrest citizens on the suspicion that they might commit a crime , and the definition of a crime was at their discretion . The Gestapo Law , passed in 1936 , gave police the right to act extra @-@ legally . This led to the sweeping use of <unk> — " protective custody " , a euphemism for the power to imprison people without judicial proceedings . The courts were not allowed to investigate or interfere . The Gestapo was considered to be acting legally as long as it was carrying out the leadership 's will . People were arrested arbitrarily , sent to concentration camps , or killed . 
 Himmler began developing the notion of a Germanic religion and wanted SS members to leave the church . In early 1936 , Heydrich left the Catholic Church . His wife , Lina , had already done so the year before . Heydrich not only felt he could no longer be a member , but came to consider the church 's political power and influence a danger to the state . 
 = = = Consolidating the police forces = = = 
 On 17 June 1936 all police forces throughout Germany were united , following Hitler 's appointment of Himmler as Chief of German Police . With this appointment by the Führer , Himmler and his deputy , Heydrich , became two of the most powerful men in the internal administration of Germany . Himmler immediately reorganised the police into two groups : the Ordnungspolizei ( Order Police ; Orpo ) , consisting of both the national uniformed police and the municipal police , and the Sicherheitspolizei ( Security Police ; SiPo ) , consisting of the Geheime <unk> ( Secret State Police ; Gestapo ) and Kriminalpolizei ( Criminal Police ; Kripo ) . At that point , Heydrich was head of the SiPo and SD . Heinrich Müller was the Gestapo 's operations chief . 
 Heydrich was assigned to help organise the 1936 Summer Olympics in Berlin . The games were used to promote the propaganda aims of the Nazi regime . Goodwill ambassadors were sent to countries that were considering a boycott . Anti @-@ Jewish violence was forbidden for the duration , and news stands were required to stop displaying copies of Der Stürmer . For his part in the games ' success , Heydrich was awarded the Deutsches <unk> or German Olympic Games Decoration ( First Class ) . 
 In January 1937 Heydrich directed the SD to secretly begin collecting and analysing public opinion and report back their findings . He then had the Gestapo carry out house searches , arrests , and interrogations , thus in effect exercising control over public opinion . In February 1938 when the Austrian Chancellor Kurt Schuschnigg resisted Hitler 's proposed merger with Germany , Heydrich intensified the pressure on Austria by organising Nazi demonstrations and distributing propaganda in Vienna stressing the common Germanic blood of the two countries . In the Anschluss on 12 March , Hitler declared the unification of Austria with Nazi Germany . 
 In mid @-@ 1939 Heydrich created the Stiftung Nordhav Foundation to obtain real estate for the SS and Security Police to use as guest houses and vacation spots . The Wannsee Villa , which the Stiftung Nordhav acquired in November 1940 , was the site of the Wannsee Conference ( 20 January 1942 ) . At the conference , senior Nazi officials formalised plans to deport and exterminate all Jews in German @-@ occupied territory and those countries not yet conquered . This action was to be coordinated among the representatives from the Nazi state agencies present at the meeting . 
 On 27 September 1939 the SD and SiPo ( made up of the Gestapo and the Kripo ) were folded into the new Reich Main Security Office or Reichssicherheitshauptamt ( RSHA ) , which was placed under Heydrich 's control . The title of Chef der Sicherheitspolizei und des SD ( Chief of Security Police and SD ) or CSSD was conferred on Heydrich on 1 October . Heydrich became the president of the <unk> ( later known as Interpol ) on 24 August 1940 , and its headquarters were transferred to Berlin . He was promoted to SS @-@ Obergruppenführer und General der Polizei on 24 September 1941 . 
 = = = Red Army purges = = = 
 In 1936 , Heydrich learned that a top @-@ ranking Soviet officer was plotting to overthrow Joseph Stalin . Sensing an opportunity to strike a blow at both the Soviet Army and Admiral Canaris of Germany 's Abwehr , Heydrich decided that the Russian officers should be " unmasked " . He discussed the matter with Himmler and both in turn brought it to Hitler 's attention . But the " information " Heydrich had received was actually misinformation planted by Stalin himself in an attempt to legitimise his planned purges of the Red Army 's high command . Stalin ordered one of his best NKVD agents , General Nikolai <unk> , to pass Heydrich false information suggesting that Marshal Mikhail Tukhachevsky and other Soviet generals were plotting against Stalin . Hitler approved Heydrich 's plan to act on the information immediately . Heydrich 's SD forged documents and letters implicated Tukhachevsky and other Red Army commanders . The material was delivered to the NKVD . The Great Purge of the Red Army followed on Stalin 's orders . While Heydrich believed they had successfully deluded Stalin into executing or dismissing 35 @,@ 000 of his officer corps , the importance of Heydrich 's part is a matter of speculation and conjecture . Soviet military prosecutors did not use the forged documents against the generals in their secret trial ; they instead relied on false confessions extorted or beaten out of the defendants . 
 = = = Night @-@ and @-@ Fog decree = = = 
 By late 1940 , German armies had swept through most of Western Europe . The following year , Heydrich 's SD was given responsibility for carrying out the Nacht und Nebel ( Night @-@ and @-@ Fog ) decree . According to the decree , " persons endangering German security " were to be arrested in a maximally discreet way : " under the cover of night and fog " . People disappeared without a trace and none told of their whereabouts or fate . For each prisoner , the SD had to fill in a questionnaire that listed personal information , country of origin , and the details of their crimes against the Reich . This questionnaire was placed in an envelope inscribed with a seal reading " Nacht und Nebel " and submitted to the Reich Main Security Office ( RSHA ) . In the WVHA " Central Inmate File " , as in many camp files , these prisoners would be given a special " covert prisoner " code , as opposed to the code for POW , Felon , Jew , Gypsy , etc . The decree remained in effect after Heydrich 's death . The exact number of people who vanished under it has never been positively established , but it is estimated to be 7 @,@ 000 . 
 = = = Acting Reich Protector of Bohemia and Moravia = = = 
 On 27 September 1941 , Heydrich was appointed Deputy Reich Protector of the Protectorate of Bohemia and Moravia ( the part of Czechoslovakia incorporated into the Reich on 15 March 1939 ) and assumed control of the territory . The Reich Protector , Konstantin von Neurath , remained the territory 's titular head , but was sent on " leave " because Hitler , Himmler , and Heydrich felt his " soft approach " to the Czechs had promoted anti @-@ German sentiment and encouraged anti @-@ German resistance via strikes and sabotage . Upon his appointment , Heydrich told his aides : " We will Germanize the Czech vermin . " 
 Heydrich came to Prague to enforce policy , fight resistance to the Nazi regime , and keep up production quotas of Czech motors and arms that were " extremely important to the German war effort " . He viewed the area as a bulwark of <unk> and condemned the Czech resistance 's " stabs in the back " . To realise his goals Heydrich demanded racial classification of those who could and could not be Germanized . He explained , " Making this Czech garbage into Germans must give way to methods based on racist thought . " Heydrich started his rule by terrorising the population : 92 people were executed within three days of his arrival in Prague . Their names appeared on posters throughout the occupied region . Almost all avenues by which Czechs could express the Czech culture in public were closed . According to Heydrich 's estimate , between 4 @,@ 000 and 5 @,@ 000 people were arrested by February 1942 . Those who were not executed were sent to Mauthausen @-@ Gusen concentration camp , where only four per cent of Czech prisoners survived the war . In March 1942 , further sweeps against Czech cultural and patriotic organisations , military , and intelligentsia resulted in the practical paralysis of Czech resistance . Although small disorganised cells of Central Leadership of Home Resistance ( <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> , <unk> ) survived , only the communist resistance was able to function in a coordinated manner ( although it also suffered arrests ) . The terror also served to paralyse resistance in society , with public and widespread reprisals against any action resisting the German rule . Heydrich 's brutal policies during that time quickly earned him the nickname " the Butcher of Prague " . 
 As Acting Reich Protector of Bohemia and Moravia , Heydrich applied carrot @-@ and @-@ stick methods . Labour was reorganised on the basis of the German Labour Front . Heydrich used equipment confiscated from the Czech organisation Sokol to organise events for workers . Food rations and free shoes were distributed , pensions were increased , and ( for a time ) free Saturdays were introduced . Unemployment insurance was established for the first time . The black market was suppressed . Those associated with it or the resistance movement were tortured or executed . Heydrich labelled them " economic criminals " and " enemies of the people " , which helped gain him support . Conditions in Prague and the rest of the Czech lands were relatively peaceful under Heydrich , and industrial output increased . Still , those measures could not hide shortages and increasing inflation ; reports of growing discontent multiplied . 
 Despite public displays of goodwill towards the populace , privately Heydrich left no illusions about his eventual goal : " This entire area will one day be definitely German , and the Czechs have nothing to expect here . " Eventually up to two @-@ thirds of the populace were to be either removed to regions of Russia or exterminated after Nazi Germany won the war . Bohemia and Moravia faced annexation directly into the German Reich . 
 The Czech workforce was exploited as Nazi @-@ conscripted labour . More than 100 @,@ 000 workers were removed from " unsuitable " jobs and conscripted by the Ministry of Labour . By December 1941 , Czechs could be called to work anywhere within the Reich . Between April and November 1942 , 79 @,@ 000 Czech workers were taken in this manner for work within Nazi Germany . Also , in February 1942 , the work day was increased from eight to twelve hours . 
 Heydrich was , for all intents and purposes , military dictator of Bohemia and Moravia . His changes to the government 's structure left President Emil Hacha and his cabinet virtually powerless . He often drove alone in a car with an open roof — a show of his confidence in the occupation forces and in his government 's effectiveness . 
 = = Role in the Holocaust = = 
 Historians regard Heydrich as the most fearsome member of the Nazi elite . Hitler called him " the man with the iron heart " . He was one of the main architects of the Holocaust during the early war years , answering only to , and taking orders from , Hitler , Göring , and Himmler in all matters pertaining to the deportation , imprisonment , and extermination of Jews . 
 Heydrich was one of the organisers of Kristallnacht , a pogrom against Jews throughout Germany on the night of 9 – 10 November 1938 . Heydrich sent a telegram that night to various SD and Gestapo offices , helping to co @-@ ordinate the pogrom with the SS , SD , Gestapo , uniformed police ( Orpo ) , SA , Nazi party officials , and even the fire departments . It talks about permitting arson and destroying Jewish businesses and synagogues , and orders the confiscation of all " archival material " out of Jewish community centres and synagogues . The telegram ordered that " as many Jews – particularly affluent Jews – are to be arrested in all districts as can be accommodated in existing detention facilities ... Immediately after the arrests have been carried out , the appropriate concentration camps should be contacted to place the Jews into camps as quickly as possible . " Twenty thousand Jews were sent to concentration camps in the days immediately following ; historians consider Kristallnacht the beginning of the Holocaust . 
 When Hitler asked for a pretext for the invasion of Poland in 1939 , Himmler , Heydrich , and Heinrich Müller masterminded a false flag plan code @-@ named Operation Himmler . It involved a fake attack on the German radio station at Gleiwitz on 31 August 1939 . Heydrich masterminded the plan and toured the site , which was about four miles from the Polish border . Wearing Polish uniforms , 150 German troops carried out several attacks along the border . Hitler used the ruse as an excuse to launch his invasion . 
 On Himmler 's instructions , Heydrich formed the Einsatzgruppen ( task forces ) to travel in the wake of the German armies at the start of World War II . On 21 September 1939 , Heydrich sent out a teleprinter message on the " Jewish question in the occupied territory " to the chiefs of all Einsatzgruppen with instructions to round up Jewish people for placement into ghettos , called for the formation of <unk> ( Jewish councils ) , ordered a census , and promoted Aryanization plans for Jewish @-@ owned businesses and farms , among other measures . The Einsatzgruppen units followed the army into Poland to implement the plans . Later , in the Soviet Union , they were charged with rounding up and killing Jews via firing squad and gas vans . Historian Raul Hilberg estimates that between 1941 and 1945 the Einsatzgruppen and related auxiliary troops killed more than two million people , including 1 @.@ 3 million Jews . Heydrich , however , moved to ensure the safety and well @-@ being of certain Jews , such as Paul Sommer , the former German champion fencer he knew from his pre @-@ SS days . He also protected the Polish Olympic fencing team that competed at the 1936 Summer Olympics . 
 On 29 November 1939 , Heydrich issued a cable about the " Evacuation of New Eastern Provinces " , detailing the deportation of people by railway to concentration camps , and giving guidance surrounding the December 1939 census , which would be the basis on which those deportations were performed . In May 1941 Heydrich drew up regulations with Quartermaster general Eduard Wagner for the upcoming invasion of the Soviet Union , which ensured that the Einsatzgruppen and army would co @-@ operate in murdering Soviet Jews . 
 On 10 October 1941 , Heydrich was the senior officer at a " Final Solution " meeting of the RSHA in Prague that discussed deporting 50 @,@ 000 Jews from the Protectorate of Bohemia and Moravia to ghettos in Minsk and Riga . Given his position , Heydrich was instrumental in carrying out these plans since his Gestapo was ready to organize deportations in the West and his Einsatzgruppen were already conducting extensive killing operations in the East . The officers attending also discussed taking 5 @,@ 000 Jews from Prague " in the next few weeks " and handing them over to the Einsatzgruppen commanders Arthur Nebe and Otto Rasch . Establishing ghettos in the Protectorate was also planned , resulting in the construction of Theresienstadt , where 33 @,@ 000 people would eventually die . Tens of thousands more passed through the camp on their way to their deaths in the East . In 1941 Himmler named Heydrich as " responsible for implementing " the forced movement of 60 @,@ 000 Jews from Germany and Czechoslovakia to the Lodz ( <unk> ) Ghetto in Poland . 
 Earlier on 31 July 1941 , Hermann Göring gave written authorisation to Heydrich to ensure the cooperation of administrative leaders of various government departments in the implementation of a Endlösung der Judenfrage ( Final Solution to the Jewish question ) in territories under German control . On 20 January 1942 , Heydrich chaired a meeting , now called the Wannsee Conference , to discuss the implementation of the plan . Historian Donald Bloxham avows that for all the discussion over perpetrators in the Final Solution , Heydrich " barely spared a hateful thought for the Jews " and instead concentrated his efforts on the scale of his " supranational task " . 
 = = Assassination = = 
 = = = Death in Prague = = = 
 In London , the Czechoslovak government @-@ in @-@ exile resolved to kill Heydrich . Jan Kubiš and Jozef Gabčík headed the team chosen for the operation . Trained by the British Special Operations Executive ( SOE ) , the pair returned to the Protectorate , parachuting from a Handley Page Halifax , on 28 December 1941 . They lived in hiding , preparing for the assassination attempt . 
 On 27 May 1942 , Heydrich planned to meet Hitler in Berlin . German documents suggest that Hitler intended to transfer Heydrich to German @-@ occupied France , where the French resistance was gaining ground . Heydrich would have to pass a section where the Dresden @-@ Prague road merged with a road to the <unk> Bridge . The junction , in the Prague suburb of <unk> , was well @-@ suited for the attack because motorists have to slow for a hairpin bend . As Heydrich 's car slowed , Gabčík took aim with a Sten sub @-@ machine gun , but it jammed and failed to fire . Instead of ordering his driver to speed away , Heydrich called his car to halt and attempted to confront the attackers . Kubiš then threw a bomb ( a converted anti @-@ tank mine ) at the rear of the car as it stopped . The explosion wounded Heydrich and Kubiš . 
 When the smoke cleared , Heydrich emerged from the wreckage with his gun in his hand ; he chased Kubiš and tried to return fire . Kubiš jumped on his bicycle and <unk> away . Heydrich ran after him for half a block but became weak from shock and collapsed . He sent his driver , Klein , to chase Gabčík on foot . In the ensuing firefight , Gabčík shot Klein in the leg and escaped to a local safe house . Heydrich , still with pistol in hand , gripped his left flank , which was bleeding profusely . 
 A Czech woman went to Heydrich 's aid and flagged down a delivery van . Heydrich was first placed in the driver 's cab , but complained that the van 's movement was causing him pain . He was placed in the back of the van , on his stomach , and taken to the emergency room at Na <unk> Hospital . Heydrich had suffered severe injuries to his left side , with major damage to his diaphragm , spleen , and lung . He had also fractured a rib . A physician , Slanina , packed the chest wound , while another doctor , Walter <unk> , tried unsuccessfully to remove the splinters . He immediately decided to operate . This was carried out by <unk> , Slanina , and <unk> . Heydrich was given several blood transfusions . A splenectomy was performed . The chest wound , left lung , and diaphragm were all <unk> and the wounds closed . Himmler ordered another physician , Karl Gebhardt , to fly to Prague to assume care . Despite a fever , Heydrich 's recovery appeared to progress well . Theodor Morell , Hitler 's personal physician , suggested the use of sulfonamide ( a new antibacterial drug ) , but Gebhardt , thinking Heydrich would recover , refused . On 2 June , during a visit by Himmler , Heydrich reconciled himself to his fate by reciting a part of one of his father 's operas : 
 Heydrich slipped into a coma after Himmler 's visit and never regained consciousness . He died on 4 June , probably around 04 : 30 . He was 38 . The autopsy concluded that he died of sepsis . Heydrich 's facial expression as he died betrayed an " uncanny spirituality and entirely perverted beauty , like a renaissance Cardinal , " according to Bernhard Wehner , a Kripo police official who investigated the assassination . 
 = = = Funeral = = = 
 After an elaborate funeral held in Prague on 7 June 1942 , Heydrich 's coffin was placed on a train to Berlin , where a second ceremony was held in the new Reich Chancellery on 9 June . Himmler gave the eulogy . Hitler attended and placed Heydrich 's decorations — including the highest grade of the German Order , the Blood Order Medal , the Wound Badge in Gold and the War Merit Cross 1st Class with Swords — on his funeral pillow . Although Heydrich 's death was employed for pro @-@ Reich propaganda , Hitler privately blamed Heydrich for his own death , through carelessness : 
 Since it is opportunity which makes not only the thief but also the assassin , such heroic gestures as driving in an open , unarmoured vehicle or walking about the streets unguarded are just damned stupidity , which serves the Fatherland not one whit . That a man as irreplaceable as Heydrich should expose himself to unnecessary danger , I can only condemn as stupid and idiotic . 
 Heydrich was interred in Berlin 's Invalidenfriedhof , a military cemetery . The exact burial spot is not known — a temporary wooden marker that disappeared when the Red Army overran the city in 1945 was never replaced , so that Heydrich 's grave could not become a rallying point for Neo @-@ Nazis . A photograph of Heydrich 's burial shows the wreaths and mourners to be in section A , which abuts the north wall of the Invalidenfriedhof and <unk> , at the front of the cemetery . A recent biography of Heydrich also places the grave in Section A. Hitler planned for Heydrich to have a monumental tomb ( designed by sculptor Arno <unk> and architect Wilhelm Kreis ) , but due to Germany 's declining fortunes , it was never built . 
 Heydrich 's widow won the right to receive a pension as the result of a series of court cases against the West German government in 1956 and 1959 . She was entitled to a substantial pension because her husband was a German general killed in action . The government had previously declined to pay because of Heydrich 's role in the Holocaust . The couple had four children : Klaus , born in 1933 , killed in a traffic accident in 1943 ; Heider , born in 1934 ; Silke , born in 1939 ; and Marte , born shortly after her father 's death in 1942 . Lina wrote a memoir , Leben mit einem <unk> ( Living With a War Criminal ) , which was published in 1976 . She remarried once and died in 1985 . 
 = = = Aftermath = = = 
 Heydrich 's assailants hid in safe houses and eventually took refuge in Ss . Cyril and Methodius Cathedral , an Orthodox church in Prague . After a traitor in the Czech resistance betrayed their location , the church was surrounded by 800 members of the SS and Gestapo . Several Czechs were killed , and the remainder hid in the church 's crypt . The Germans attempted to flush the men out with gunfire , tear gas , and by flooding the crypt . Eventually an entrance was made using explosives . Rather than surrender , the soldiers killed themselves . Supporters of the assassins who were killed in the wake of these events included the church 's leader , Bishop <unk> , who is now revered as a martyr of the Orthodox Church . 
 Infuriated by Heydrich 's death , Hitler ordered the arrest and execution of 10 @,@ 000 randomly selected Czechs . But after consultations with Karl Hermann Frank , he tempered his response . The Czech lands were an important industrial zone for the German military , and indiscriminate killing could reduce the region 's productivity . Hitler ordered a quick investigation . Intelligence falsely linked the assassins to the towns of Lidice and Ležáky . A Gestapo report stated that Lidice , 22 kilometres ( 14 mi ) north @-@ west of Prague , was suspected as the assailants ' hiding place because several Czech army officers , then in England , had come from there and the Gestapo found a resistance radio transmitter in Ležáky . On 9 June , after discussions with Himmler and Karl Hermann Frank , Hitler ordered brutal reprisals . Over 13 @,@ 000 people were arrested , deported , and imprisoned . Beginning on 10 June , all males over the age of 16 in the villages of Lidice and Ležáky were murdered . All the women in Ležáky were also murdered . All but four of the women from Lidice were deported immediately to Ravensbrück concentration camp ( four were pregnant – their unborn babies were forcibly aborted at the same hospital where Heydrich had died and the women were then sent to the concentration camp ) . Some children were chosen for Germanization , and 81 were killed in gas vans at the Chełmno extermination camp . Both towns were burned and Lidice 's ruins were levelled . At least 1 @,@ 300 people were massacred after Heydrich 's death . 
 Heydrich 's replacements were Ernst Kaltenbrunner as the chief of RSHA , and Karl Hermann Frank ( 27 – 28 May 1942 ) and Kurt Daluege ( 28 May 1942 – 14 October 1943 ) as the new acting <unk> . 
 After Heydrich 's death , implementation of the policies formalised at the Wannsee conference he chaired was accelerated . The first three true death camps , designed for mass killing with no legal process or pretext , were built and operated at Treblinka , Sobibór , and Bełżec . The project was named Operation Reinhard after Heydrich . 
 = = Summary of career = = 
 Reinhard Heydrich 's career in the SS has been among one of the most extensively studied of any SS general , with several dramatic portrayals depicting Heydrich at various stages during his ascent to power in the SS . 
 Heydrich 's leadership style was to use fear to extract obedience and respect . He was a serious person , never friendly or jovial , who cultivated a soldierly demeanor . He exercised daily and took meticulous care of his appearance , and expected his subordinates to do the same . He had few close friends , and was highly suspicious , distrusting most of the other senior SS officers . Himmler was an exception ; to him Heydrich offered blind obedience and was seen as a " true SS man " for his devotion . Himmler 's own motivations for trusting Heydrich lay partly in Heydrich 's lack of interest in taking Himmler 's place ( a view Heydrich told Himmler and others on several occasions ) . 
 Heydrich developed close professional relationships only within the circle of the SS security forces . Heinrich Müller was one such example , and Heydrich appears to have trusted him . Adolf Eichmann 's straightforward loyalty impressed Heydrich , and was one reason why he appointed him as secretary for the Wannsee Conference . Herbert Kappler , who was appointed as commander of all SS security forces in Rome , was said to have been a protege of Heydrich . SS personnel favoured by Heydrich , especially those who attended the Wannsee conference , possessed similar traits of devotion to SS , lack of remorse regarding brutal or genocidal orders , and above all personal loyalty to Heydrich in his capacity as commander of the security forces . On the other hand , Heydrich 's dislike and distrust of Arthur Nebe and Walter Schellenberg may have stemmed from their independence and ambition . 
 Heydrich was said to despise the Concentration Camp service and held a particular derision for Theodor Eicke , whom he referred to as an " ambitious dwarf " . Heydrich had little to do with and did not trust Oswald Pohl . He characterized Rudolf Höss , commander of Auschwitz , as an uneducated thug . Within upper SS administration , Heydrich was friendly towards Karl Wolff . In later years , Wolff said he was always wary of Heydrich , who seemed to be waiting for an opportunity to move against him and disgrace him with Himmler . Within the Allgemeine @-@ SS , Heydrich forged relationships with some of the more powerful SS and Police Leaders such as Friedrich <unk> . Heydrich maintained a dialogue with him , but cautiously , especially after <unk> ran afoul of Himmler in the late 1930s and early 1940s . 
 The security and police officials selected to run the camps of Operation Reinhard were among Heydrich 's closest professional contacts . Heydrich was said to be on particularly good terms with Odilo Globocnik and Christian Wirth . In his other realm of responsibility , that of governor of the Czech Protectorate , Heydrich behaved coldly towards Karl Hermann Frank , whom he did not know well or trust . 
 = = = SS record = = = 
 Heydrich 's time in the SS was a mixture of rapid promotions , reserve commissions in the regular armed forces , and front @-@ line combat service . During his 11 years with the SS Heydrich " rose from the ranks " and was appointed to every rank from private to full general . He was also a major in the Luftwaffe , flying nearly 100 combat missions until 22 July 1941 , when his plane was hit by Soviet anti @-@ aircraft fire . Heydrich made an emergency landing behind enemy lines . He evaded a Soviet patrol and contacted a forward German patrol . After this Hitler personally ordered Heydrich to return to Berlin to resume his SS duties . His service record also gives him credit as a Navy Reserve Lieutenant , although during World War II Heydrich had no contact with this military branch . 
 Heydrich received several Nazi and military awards , including the German Order , Blood Order , Golden Party Badge , Luftwaffe Pilot 's Badge , bronze and silver combat mission bars , and the Iron Cross First and Second Classes . 
 = Gumbo = 
 Gumbo is a stew that originated in southern Louisiana during the 18th century . It consists primarily of a strongly @-@ flavored stock , meat or shellfish , a thickener , and the Cajun holy trinity of vegetables , namely celery , bell peppers , and onions . Gumbo is often categorized by the type of thickener used , the vegetable okra , the Choctaw spice filé powder ( dried and ground sassafras leaves ) , or roux , the French base made of flour and fat . The dish likely derived its name from either a word from a Bantu language for okra ( ki <unk> ) or the Choctaw word for filé ( kombo ) . 
 Several different varieties exist . Creole gumbo generally contains shellfish , tomatoes , and a thickener . Cajun gumbo is generally based on a dark roux and is spicier , with either shellfish or fowl . Sausage or ham is often added to gumbos of either variety . After the base is prepared , vegetables are cooked down , and then meat is added . The dish simmers for a minimum of three hours , with shellfish and some spices added near the end . If desired , filé powder is added after the pot is removed from heat . Gumbo is traditionally served over rice . A third , lesser @-@ known variety , the meatless gumbo z 'herbes , is essentially a gumbo of slow @-@ cooked greens sometimes thickened with roux , with rice served on the side . 
 The dish combines ingredients and culinary practices of several cultures , including French , Spanish , German , West African , and Choctaw . Gumbo may have been based on traditional West African or native dishes , or may be a derivation of the French dish bouillabaisse . It was first described in 1802 , and was listed in various cookbooks in the latter half of the 19th century . The dish gained more widespread popularity in the 1970s , after the United States Senate cafeteria added it to the menu in honor of Louisiana Senator Allen Ellender . The popularity of chef Paul Prudhomme in the 1980s spurred further interest in gumbo . The dish is the official cuisine of the state of Louisiana . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 Scholars and chefs have offered various explanations for the etymology of the word " gumbo " . The dish was likely named after one of its two main ingredients , okra or filé . In the Bantu languages spoken by many slaves from West Africa , the vegetable okra was known as ki <unk> or <unk> ; the word is akin to the <unk> <unk> and the <unk> <unk> " okra " . In the language of the native Choctaw people , filé , or ground sassafras leaves , was called kombo . 
 = = Variations = = 
 Gumbo is a heavily seasoned soup or stew that combines several varieties of meat or seafood with a sauce or gravy . Any combination of meat or seafood can be used . Meat @-@ based gumbo may consist of chicken , duck , squirrel , or rabbit , with oysters occasionally added . Seafood @-@ based gumbo generally has shrimp , crabmeat , and sometimes oysters . <unk> sausage is often added to both meat and seafood gumbos to provide " piquancy , substance , and an additional layer of flavor " to the dish . With the exception of sausage and ham , beef and pork are almost never used . Most varieties of gumbo are seasoned with onions , parsley , bell pepper , and celery . Tomatoes are sometimes used in seafood gumbo , but traditionally few other vegetables are included . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Gumbo sauce or gravy derives from three primary <unk> : okra , filé powder , and roux . Traditionally , okra and filé powder are not used in the same dish , although this rule is sometimes broken . Roux can be used alone or in conjunction with either of the other <unk> . 
 Okra is more often used as a thickener in seafood gumbos than those with meat . This mucilaginous vegetable is usually cooked first , and other ingredients added once the desired consistency is reached . According to The Oxford Companion to Food , okra @-@ based gumbos are becoming less popular , as changing tastes have made the okra texture less palatable . 
 Ground sassafras leaf , known as filé , is generally not added to the gravy until after the vegetables and meats or seafood have finished cooking and have been removed from the heat source . If added during the boiling process , filé makes the gumbo too ropey ; when added at the end , the gumbo gains a slightly stringy texture . 
 Roux has become the most popular thickener , made from cooking together a roughly equal proportion of flour and fat ( traditionally hog lard , although increasingly made with butter since the mid @-@ 20th century ) . The length of cooking time determines the final flavor and texture , since the longer the roux is cooked before being added to the gumbo , the darker it becomes and the less thickening power it retains . A very dark roux provides a much thinner sauce with a more intense flavor than a light roux . 
 = = = Cajun vs. Creole gumbo = = = 
 Gumbo is typically divided into two varieties . Combinations traditionally common in New Orleans and southeastern Louisiana are known as " Creole " after the Louisiana Creole people , descendants of French and Spanish settlers , who lived in those areas . " Cajun " combinations were common in southwestern Louisiana , which was populated primarily by Cajuns , descendants of the French @-@ speaking settlers expelled from Acadia ( in northeastern North America ) in the mid @-@ 18th century . 
 Cajun gumbo is usually identified by its dark roux , cooked until it is a color " a few shades from burning " . The roux is used with okra or filé powder . Seafood is popular in Cajun gumbo , but the southwestern areas of Louisiana often use fowl , such as chicken or duck , and sausage . The fowl is generally not deboned , and onions , celery , and bell pepper are not strained out of the dish . Cajun gumbo is usually topped with parsley and green onions . 
 Creole gumbo most often consists of seafood , tomatoes , and a thickener . This variety is generally not as spicy as Cajun gumbo , as cayenne pepper is used much more sparingly . Before the latter half of the 20th century , celery was rarely used in Creole gumbo . 
 = = = Gumbo z 'herbes = = = 
 When Catholics were expected to abstain from eating meat during Lent , a meatless variety of gumbo , known as gumbo z 'herbes ( literally " gumbo with herbs " ) , was often served . This variety combined a large number of greens – typically including turnips , mustard greens , and spinach . The greens were cooked to mush and strained through a sieve to produce a thick green liquid . Preparation for this variety of gumbo was time @-@ consuming , and as Lenten restrictions have relaxed , the dish has become less popular . It is very rarely served in restaurants . In modern times , ham or crabmeat is occasionally added to this type of gumbo . 
 Gumbo z 'herbes may have originated with the French , Germans , or West Africans . It has similarities to the French dish potage aux <unk> ( " soup with herbs " ) , as well as to the African <unk> . The meatless dish also bears striking resemblance to a dish often eaten in Germany on Maundy Thursday . German Catholics , obeying the Lenten rules , often served a stew made of seven different greens on this date . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Gumbo is often used as a metaphor for the mix of cultures that exist in southern Louisiana . The dish combines the culinary practices of French , Spanish , indigenous tribes , and Africans , as well as Italians and Germans . In the 18th and 19th centuries , people from these cultures lived together within a fairly small area with minimal mobility . This fostered an environment in which cultures could influence each other and meld to create new traditions and cuisine . 
 The establishment of New Orleans in 1718 marked the beginning of the French colony of Louisiana . French settlers allied with various native tribes including the Choctaw , Alabama , and Cherokee , from whom they learned new methods of cooking and ways to identify edible indigenous plants . 
 Slave ships began arriving in Louisiana in 1719 . The first ships carried rice and men who were experienced in its cultivation . The grain adapted well to its new environment , and within a few years , rice was commonly grown along the Mississippi River . 
 In 1721 , 125 Germans settled 40 miles ( 64 km ) from New Orleans , and introduced the art of making sausage . By 1746 , the white population of Louisiana was estimated to be 3 @,@ 200 , with an estimated 4 @,@ 730 black people . Slaves outnumbered whites in most areas of Louisiana for at least the next 40 years . 
 The colony was transferred from French to Spanish control in 1762 . The Spanish government actively recruited settlers for Spanish Louisiana . About 2 @,@ 000 people from the Canary Islands moved to the area south of New Orleans . These settlers were primarily fishermen who soon began supplying large amounts of shrimp , crab , and oysters to the food markets in New Orleans . The Canary Islanders also brought " a love for well @-@ seasoned food " , including use of ground cayenne pepper , a spicy hot red chili pepper . Spanish authorities also granted permission for a large number of French @-@ speaking Acadian exiles to relocate from northeastern North America to Louisiana . From 1755 through 1795 , almost 3 @,@ 000 of these settlers , soon known as Cajuns , moved to the areas south and west of New Orleans . Louisiana was secretly returned to France in 1800 , then purchased by the United States in 1803 . The southernmost part of territorial Louisiana , including New Orleans , became the state of Louisiana in 1812 . 
 By 1800 , most Cajun families in Louisiana had purchased slaves . The new laborers introduced new foods , including the African vegetable okra , and hot pepper plants which likely came from Haiti . Onions and bell peppers were long part of cooking in both the Spanish and African traditions . Tomatoes were introduced to the region shortly thereafter . 
 = = = Origin = = = 
 Scholars agree that gumbo originated in Louisiana in the early 18th century , but its uncertain etymology makes it difficult to pinpoint the origins of the food . Although no conclusive evidence exists , cultural markers indicate several plausible scenarios . 
 According to one suggestion , gumbo is a reinterpretation of traditional African cooking . West Africans used the vegetable okra as a base for many dishes , including soups , often pairing okra with meat and shrimp , with salt and pepper as seasonings . In Louisiana , the dish was modified to include ingredients introduced by other cultural groups . Surviving records indicate that by 1764 African slaves in New Orleans mixed cooked okra with rice to make a meal . 
 Gumbo could instead be a derivation of traditional French soups , particularly the fish stew bouillabaisse . During the cold winters , Acadians generally cooked soups , using whatever ingredients were readily available . When the Acadians moved to Louisiana in the mid @-@ 18th century , they were unable to find many of their traditional ingredients , including turnips and cabbage . In this scenario , Acadian colonists substituted local ingredients for those commonly included in the original stew . Instead of the fish , settlers used shellfish . The dish was later modified to include ingredients common in other cultures . 
 Some culinary experts in the early 20th century , including Celestine Eustis , maintained that gumbo was an early special occasion dish for native tribes . This is further implied by a late 18th @-@ century Cajun practice . At that time , rice was a luxury for many Cajuns . They served gumbo over corn grits , a pairing common in the stews of native tribes . The use of corn and filé powder may imply that the dish was derived from native cuisine . 
 These theories are intermixed in the local legend of the Frying Pan Revolt , or Petticoat Insurrection . According to legend , in 1722 , female French colonists gathered in New Orleans at the home of Governor Jean @-@ Baptiste Le Moyne , Sieur de Bienville , to protest the lack of familiar ingredients . Bienville 's housekeeper , Madame Langlois , taught the women how to improve the basic gumbo . Langlois used okra , an ingredient to which the women had previously been introduced by their slaves . Langlois introduced ingredients common in Choctaw cuisine – rice , shrimp , crawfish , and filé powder . 
 = = = Development = = = 
 The first written references to gumbo appear in the early 19th century . In 1802 , John Sibley described " the dish they call gumbo which is made principally of the ochre into a thick kind of <unk> [ sic ] & eat with rice , it is the food of every body for dinner and supper . " The following year , French governor Pierre Clement de <unk> hosted a soirée in which 24 different gumbos were prepared . According to author Cynthia Lejeune Nobles , these two events " give clues to gumbo 's Spanish colonial popularity and illustrate that the dish could be both humble and refined " . 
 An 1824 cookbook , Mary Randolph 's The Virginia House @-@ Wife , was the first to include a recipe for gumbo . Called " Gumbo – A West India Dish " , the simple recipe described how to boil okra and bore little resemblance to the stew commonly known as gumbo . The same book contained a recipe for " <unk> Soup " made with okra , onions , fowl , bacon , tomatoes , and lima beans thickened with flour . Although this recipe bore similarities to gumbo , it more closely resembled the Caribbean dish <unk> . 
 A more familiar version of the dish was described in an 1879 cookbook by Marion Cabell Tyree . Her Housekeeping in Old Virginia described " Gumbo <unk> A La Creole " , a filé @-@ based gumbo with chicken and oysters and spiced with allspice , cloves , red and black pepper , parsley , and thyme . The 1881 cookbook What Mrs. Fisher Knows About Old Southern Cooking , dictated by former slave Abby Fisher , contained three gumbo recipes . " Oyster Gumbo Soup " used a filé base , while " <unk> Gumbo " and " Chicken Gumbo " used okra as a base . Four years later , the cookbook La Cuisine Creole documented eight varieties of gumbo . None used sausage , but almost all of them contained ham . 
 Until the 1970s , gumbo was primarily popular on the Gulf Coast of the United States . It gained a broader profile after the death of United States Senator Allen Ellender . A native of Terrebonne Parish , Louisiana , Ellender had often cooked gumbo for his colleagues , including five American presidents . After Ellender died in 1972 , the Senate directed that their cafeteria add Louisiana Creole Gumbo , made with seafood , to its menu in his honor . The dish became more widely popular in the 1980s , when chef Paul Prudhomme 's popularity spurred interest in Creole and Cajun cooking . 
 = = Preparation and serving = = 
 Gumbo is cooked for a minimum of three hours , and often simmers all day . Meat ( but not seafood ) is often browned beforehand and removed from the heat . Okra and roux are cooked before other vegetables and seafood . Okra is removed from heat when it reaches the desired consistency , while roux remains in the pot . Seasoning vegetables are then added to the sauce . When these have turned to mush ( more commonly called cooked down ) , the meat and okra are added to the pot along with water and / or stock , then boiled uncovered until the desired tenderness of the meat is reached . Seasonings , including red , black , and white pepper , bay leaves , thyme , hot sauce , and salt , are added to taste . According to Nobles , " proper seasoning of gumbo is essential , and in Louisiana adding just the right zing is considered an art " . Because seafood cooks fairly quickly , it is not added to the pot until the end of the process . As the gumbo finishes cooking , green onions and parsley are sometimes sprinkled on it . When desired , filé powder is added last . 
 Creole and Cajun gumbos are served over hot rice , which helps the dish to feed a larger number of people . Gumbo z 'herbes is served with rice on the side . Gumbo is almost always served directly from the pot on the stove , although in wealthier or fancier homes the dish might be transferred to a <unk> on the table . Often , gumbo and bread are the sole courses in a meal , although many Cajun families provide a side dish of potato salad . Occasionally , gumbo is served as part of a larger menu . 
 <unk> gives examples of the main types of creole gumbos , along with descriptions of family traditions about them . 
 = = Social aspects = = 
 In Cajun <unk> , C. Paige Gutierrez describes gumbo as " an economical dish " useful for " feed [ ing ] a large number of people with a small amount of meat or seafood " . Nobles concurs that " one of the hallmarks of gumbo is that , with a big enough pot , it can easily be doubled or tripled and is always a good choice to feed a crowd " . With this dish , cooks can use up small portions of various ingredients that were not sufficient for an individual meal . The dish is an efficient way to use up leftover perishable meats and seafood . 
 Since the 19th century , gumbo has often been served at social gatherings or other special occasions in Louisiana . Local <unk> do @-@ do ( dance parties ) usually provided gumbo beginning at midnight . Many families " have a gumbo " , or host a casual social gathering where friends and family chat and enjoy alcoholic beverages and gumbo . 
 In rural Acadiana in southern Louisiana , gumbo is a central feature of Mardi Gras celebrations . On Mardi Gras , local men wander from house to house and beg for gumbo ingredients in an event known as <unk> de Mardi Gras . Members of the local community then gather in a central location while the men cook the gumbo . When it is ready , the group eats and dances until midnight , when Lent begins . 
 Gumbo is the official cuisine of the state of Louisiana . Many southern Louisiana cooking competitions center around gumbo , and it is a central feature of many local festivals . The self @-@ described " Gumbo Capital of the World " , Bridge City , Louisiana , holds an annual Gumbo Festival . The festival features gumbo cooked in a cast @-@ iron pot 3 ft ( 0 @.@ 9 m ) deep and 5 feet ( 1 @.@ 5 m ) in diameter . More commonly , festival gumbo pots measure 2 ft ( 0 @.@ 6 m ) in depth and diameter . 
 = Astrophysics Data System = 
 The Astrophysics Data System ( ADS ) , developed by the National Aeronautics and Space Administration ( NASA ) , is an online database of over eight million astronomy and physics papers from both peer reviewed and non @-@ peer reviewed sources . Abstracts are available free online for almost all articles , and full scanned articles are available in Graphics Interchange Format ( GIF ) and Portable Document Format ( PDF ) for older articles . New articles have links to electronic versions hosted at the journal 's webpage , and these are typically available only by subscription ( which most astronomy research facilities have ) . It is managed by the Harvard – Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics . 
 ADS is a powerful research tool and has had a significant impact on the efficiency of astronomical research since it was launched in 1992 . Literature searches that previously would have taken days or weeks can now be carried out in seconds via the ADS search engine , custom @-@ built for astronomical needs . Studies have found that the benefit to astronomy of the ADS is equivalent to several hundred million US dollars annually , and the system is estimated to have tripled the readership of astronomical journals . 
 Use of ADS is almost universal among astronomers worldwide , and therefore ADS usage statistics can be used to analyze global trends in astronomical research . These studies have revealed that the amount of research an astronomer carries out is related to the per capita gross domestic product ( GDP ) of the country in which he / she is based , and that the number of astronomers in a country is proportional to the GDP of that country , so the total amount of research done in a country is proportional to the square of its GDP divided by its population . 
 = = History = = 
 For many years , a growing problem in astronomical research ( as in other academic disciplines ) was that the number of papers published in the major astronomical journals was increasing steadily , meaning astronomers were able to read less and less of the latest research findings . During the 1980s , astronomers saw that the nascent technologies which formed the basis of the Internet could eventually be used to build an electronic indexing system of astronomical research papers which would allow astronomers to keep abreast of a much greater range of research . 
 The first suggestion of a database of journal paper abstracts was made at a conference on Astronomy from Large Data @-@ bases held in <unk> bei München in 1987 . Initial development of an electronic system for accessing astrophysical abstracts took place during the following two years ; in 1991 discussions took place on how to integrate ADS with the SIMBAD database , containing all available catalog designations for objects outside the solar system , to create a system where astronomers could search for all the papers written about a given object . 
 An initial version of ADS , with a database consisting of 40 papers , was created as a proof of concept in 1988 , and the ADS database was successfully connected with the SIMBAD database in the summer of 1993 . The creators believed this was the first use of the Internet to allow simultaneous querying of transatlantic scientific databases . Until 1994 , the service was available via proprietary network software , but it was transferred to the nascent World Wide Web early that year . The number of users of the service quadrupled in the five weeks following the introduction of the ADS web @-@ based service . 
 At first , the journal articles available via ADS were scanned bitmaps created from the paper journals , but from 1995 onwards , the Astrophysical Journal began to publish an on @-@ line edition , soon followed by the other main journals such as Astronomy and Astrophysics and the Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society . ADS provided links to these electronic editions from their first appearance . Since about 1995 , the number of ADS users has doubled roughly every two years . ADS now has agreements with almost all astronomical journals , who supply abstracts . Scanned articles from as far back as the early 19th century are available via the service , which now contains over eight million documents . The service is distributed worldwide , with twelve mirror sites in twelve countries on five continents , with the database synchronized by means of weekly updates using <unk> , a mirroring utility which allows updates to only the portions of the database which have changed . All updates are triggered centrally , but they initiate scripts at the mirror sites which " pull " updated data from the main ADS servers . 
 = = Data in the system = = 
 Papers are indexed within the database by their bibliographic record , containing the details of the journal they were published in and various associated metadata , such as author lists , references and citations . Originally this data was stored in ASCII format , but eventually the limitations of this encouraged the database maintainers to migrate all records to an XML ( Extensible <unk> Language ) format in 2000 . Bibliographic records are now stored as an XML element , with sub @-@ elements for the various metadata . 
 Since the advent of online editions of journals , abstracts are loaded into the ADS on or before the publication date of articles , with the full journal text available to subscribers . Older articles have been scanned , and an abstract is created using optical character recognition software . Scanned articles from before about 1995 are usually available free , by agreement with the journal publishers . 
 Scanned articles are stored in TIFF format , at both medium and high resolution . The TIFF files are converted on demand into GIF files for on @-@ screen viewing , and PDF or PostScript files for printing . The generated files are then cached to eliminate needlessly frequent regenerations for popular articles . As of 2000 , ADS contained 250 GB of scans , which consisted of 1 @,@ 128 @,@ 955 article pages comprising 138 @,@ 789 articles . By 2005 this had grown to 650 GB , and is expected to grow further , to about 900 GB by 2007 . No further information has been published . 
 The database initially contained only astronomical references , but has now grown to incorporate three databases , covering astronomy ( including planetary sciences and solar physics ) references , physics ( including instrumentation and geosciences ) references , as well as preprints of scientific papers from arXiv . The astronomy database is by far the most advanced and its use accounts for about 85 % of the total ADS usage . Articles are assigned to the different databases according to the subject rather than the journal they are published in , so that articles from any one journal might appear in all three subject databases . The separation of the databases allows searching in each discipline to be tailored , so that words can automatically be given different weight functions in different database searches , depending on how common they are in the relevant field . 
 Data in the preprint archive is updated daily from the arXiv , the main repository of physics and astronomy preprints . The advent of preprint servers has , like ADS , had a significant impact on the rate of astronomical research , as papers are often made available from preprint servers weeks or months before they are published in the journals . The incorporation of preprints from the arXiv into ADS means that the search engine can return the most current research available , with the caveat that preprints may not have been peer reviewed or proofread to the required standard for publication in the main journals . ADS 's database links preprints with subsequently published articles wherever possible , so that citation and reference searches will return links to the journal article where the preprint was cited . 
 = = Software and hardware = = 
 The software runs on a system that was written specifically for it , allowing for extensive customization for astronomical needs that would not have been possible with general purpose database software . The scripts are designed to be as platform independent as possible , given the need to facilitate mirroring on different systems around the world , although the growing use of Linux as the operating system of choice within astronomy has led to increasing optimization of the scripts for installation on that platform . 
 The main ADS server is located at the Harvard @-@ Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics in Cambridge , Massachusetts , and is a dual 64 @-@ bit <unk> Intel server with two quad @-@ core 3 @.@ 0 GHz CPUs and 32 GB of RAM , running the CentOS 5 @.@ 4 Linux distribution . Mirrors are located in Brazil , China , Chile , France , Germany , India , Indonesia , Japan , Russia , South Korea , United Kingdom , and the Ukraine . 
 = = Indexing = = 
 ADS currently receives abstracts or tables of contents from almost two hundred journal sources . The service may receive data referring to the same article from multiple sources , and creates one bibliographic reference based on the most accurate data from each source . The common use of TeX and <unk> by almost all scientific journals greatly facilitates the incorporation of bibliographic data into the system in a standardized format , and importing HTML @-@ coded web @-@ based articles is also simple . ADS utilizes Perl scripts for importing , processing and standardizing bibliographic data . 
 The apparently mundane task of converting author names into a standard Surname , Initial format is actually one of the more difficult to automate , due to the wide variety of naming conventions around the world and the possibility that a given name such as Davis could be a first name , middle name or surname . The accurate conversion of names requires a detailed knowledge of the names of authors active in astronomy , and ADS maintains an extensive database of author names , which is also used in searching the database ( see below ) . 
 For electronic articles , a list of the references given at the end of the article is easily extracted . For scanned articles , reference extraction relies on OCR . The reference database can then be " inverted " to list the citations for each paper in the database . Citation lists have been used in the past to identify popular articles missing from the database ; mostly these were from before 1975 and have now been added to the system . 
 = = Coverage = = 
 The database now contains over eight million articles . In the cases of the major journals of astronomy ( Astrophysical Journal , Astronomical Journal , Astronomy and Astrophysics , Publications of the Astronomical Society of the Pacific and the Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society ) , coverage is complete , with all issues indexed from number 1 to the present . These journals account for about two @-@ thirds of the papers in the database , with the rest consisting of papers published in over 100 other journals from around the world , as well as in conference proceedings . 
 While the database contains the complete contents of all the major journals and many minor ones as well , its coverage of references and citations is much less complete . References in and citations of articles in the major journals are fairly complete , but references such as " private communication " , " in press " or " in preparation " cannot be matched , and author errors in reference listings also introduce potential errors . Astronomical papers may cite and be cited by articles in journals which fall outside the scope of ADS , such as chemistry , mathematics or biology journals . 
 = = Search engine = = 
 Since its inception , the ADS has developed a highly complex search engine to query the abstract and object databases . The search engine is tailor @-@ made for searching astronomical abstracts , and the engine and its user interface assume that the user is well @-@ versed in astronomy and able to interpret search results which are designed to return more than just the most relevant papers . The database can be queried for author names , astronomical object names , title words , and words in the abstract text , and results can be filtered according to a number of criteria . It works by first gathering synonyms and simplifying search terms as described above , and then generating an " inverted file " , which is a list of all the documents matching each search term . The user @-@ selected logic and filters are then applied to this inverted list to generate the final search results . 
 = = = Author name queries = = = 
 The system indexes author names by surname and initials , and accounts for the possible variations in spelling of names using a list of variations . This is common in the case of names including accents such as umlauts and transliterations from Arabic or Cyrillic script . An example of an entry in the author synonym list is : 
 <unk> , V 
 <unk> ’ EV , V 
 <unk> ’ <unk> , V 
 <unk> , V 
 <unk> , V 
 <unk> ’ <unk> , V 
 <unk> , V 
 = = = Object name searches = = = 
 The capability to search for papers on specific astronomical objects is one of ADS 's most powerful tools . The system uses data from the SIMBAD , the NASA / <unk> Extragalactic Database , the International Astronomical Union Circulars and the Lunar and Planetary Institute to identify papers referring to a given object , and can also search by object position , listing papers which concern objects within a 10 arcminute radius of a given Right Ascension and Declination . These databases combine the many catalogue designations an object might have , so that a search for the Pleiades will also find papers which list the famous open cluster in Taurus under any of its other catalog designations or popular names , such as M45 , the Seven Sisters or <unk> 22 . 
 = = = Title and abstract searches = = = 
 The search engine first filters search terms in several ways . An M followed by a space or hyphen has the space or hyphen removed , so that searching for Messier catalogue objects is simplified and a user input of M45 , M 45 or M @-@ 45 all result in the same query being executed ; similarly , NGC designations and common search terms such as Shoemaker Levy and T Tauri are stripped of spaces . Unimportant words such as AT , OR and TO are stripped out , although in some cases case sensitivity is maintained , so that while and is ignored , And is converted to " Andromedae " , and Her is converted to " Herculis " , but her is ignored . 
 = = = <unk> replacement = = = 
 Once search terms have been pre @-@ processed , the database is queried with the revised search term , as well as synonyms for it . As well as simple synonym replacement such as searching for both plural and singular forms , ADS also searches for a large number of specifically astronomical synonyms . For example , spectrograph and spectroscope have basically the same meaning , and in an astronomical context metallicity and abundance are also synonymous . ADS 's synonym list was created manually , by grouping the list of words in the database according to similar meanings . 
 As well as English language synonyms , ADS also searches for English translations of foreign search terms and vice versa , so that a search for the French word soleil retrieves references to Sun , and papers in languages other than English can be returned by English search terms . 
 <unk> replacement can be disabled if required , so that a rare term which is a synonym of a much more common term ( such as ' dateline ' rather than ' date ' ) can be searched for specifically . 
 = = = Selection logic = = = 
 The search engine allows selection logic both within fields and between fields . Search terms in each field can be combined with OR , AND , simple logic or Boolean logic , and the user can specify which fields must be matched in the search results . This allows complex searches to be built ; for example , the user could search for papers concerning NGC 6543 OR NGC <unk> , with the paper titles containing ( radius OR velocity ) AND NOT ( abundance OR temperature ) . 
 = = = Result filtering = = = 
 Search results can be filtered according to a number of criteria , including specifying a range of years such as ' 1945 to 1975 ' , ' 2000 to the present day ' or ' before 1900 ' , and what type of journal the article appears in – non @-@ peer reviewed articles such as conference proceedings can be excluded or specifically searched for , or specific journals can be included in or excluded from the search . 
 = = Search results = = 
 Although it was conceived as a means of accessing abstracts and papers , ADS provides a substantial amount of ancillary information along with search results . For each abstract returned , links are provided to other papers in the database which are referenced , and which cite the paper , and a link is provided to a preprint , where one exists . The system also generates a link to ' also @-@ read ' articles – that is , those which have been most commonly accessed by those reading the article . In this way , an ADS user can determine which papers are of most interest to astronomers who are interested in the subject of a given paper . 
 Also returned are links to the SIMBAD and / or NASA Extragalactic Database object name databases , via which a user can quickly find out basic observational data about the objects analyzed in a paper , and find further papers on those objects . 
 = = Impact on astronomy = = 
 ADS is almost universally used as a research tool among astronomers , and there are several studies that have estimated quantitatively how much more efficient ADS has made astronomy ; one estimated that ADS increased the efficiency of astronomical research by 333 full @-@ time equivalent research years per year , and another found that in 2002 its effect was equivalent to 736 full @-@ time researchers , or all the astronomical research done in France . ADS has allowed literature searches that would previously have taken days or weeks to carry out to be completed in seconds , and it is estimated that ADS has increased the readership and use of the astronomical literature by a factor of about three since its inception . 
 In monetary terms , this increase in efficiency represents a considerable amount . There are about 12 @,@ 000 active astronomical researchers worldwide , so ADS is the equivalent of about 5 % of the working population of astronomers . The global astronomical research budget is estimated at between 4 @,@ 000 and 5 @,@ 000 million USD , so the value of ADS to astronomy would be about 200 – 250 million USD annually . Its operating budget is a small fraction of this amount . 
 The great importance of ADS to astronomers has been recognized by the United Nations , the General Assembly of which has commended ADS on its work and success , particularly noting its importance to astronomers in the developing world , in reports of the United Nations Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space . A 2002 report by a visiting committee to the Center for Astrophysics , meanwhile , said that the service had " revolutionized the use of the astronomical literature " , and was " probably the most valuable single contribution to astronomy research that the CfA has made in its lifetime " . 
 = = Sociological studies using ADS = = 
 Because it is used almost universally by astronomers , ADS can reveal much about how astronomical research is distributed around the world . Most users access the system from institutes of higher education , whose IP address can easily be used to determine the user 's geographical location . Studies reveal that the highest per @-@ capita users of ADS are France and Netherlands @-@ based astronomers , and while more developed countries ( measured by GDP per capita ) use the system more than less developed countries ; the relationship between GDP per capita and ADS use is not linear . The range of ADS usage per capita far exceeds the range of GDPs per capita , and basic research carried out in a country , as measured by ADS usage , has been found to be proportional to the square of the country 's GDP divided by its population . 
 ADS usage statistics also suggest that astronomers in more developed countries tend to be more productive than those in less developed countries . The amount of basic research carried out is proportional to the number of astronomers in a country multiplied by the GDP per capita . Statistics also imply that astronomers in European cultures carry out about three times as much research as those in Asian cultures , perhaps suggesting cultural differences in the importance attached to astronomical research . 
 ADS has also been used to show that the fraction of single @-@ author astronomy papers has decreased substantially since 1975 and that astronomical papers with more than 50 authors have become more common since 1990 . 
 = HMS Unrivalled ( P45 ) = 
 HMS Unrivalled ( P45 ) was a U @-@ class submarine built for the Royal Navy during World War II . So far she has been the only ship of the Royal Navy to bear the name Unrivalled . Completed in 1942 , the boat spent most of the war in the Mediterranean . She sank a number of small merchant ships and naval auxiliaries , but major success eluded her during the war . Too small and slow for the post @-@ war environment , Unrivalled was scrapped in 1946 . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 HMS Unrivalled was one of the second group of U @-@ class submarines ordered on 23 August 1940 . These submarines differed from their predecessors in that they were lengthened by 5 feet ( 1 @.@ 5 m ) " to give a more streamlined shape aft and to improve the flow of water over the propellers . " 
 The submarine was 195 feet 6 inches ( 59 @.@ 6 m ) long and 15 feet 9 inches ( 4 @.@ 80 m ) abeam . Unrivalled had a single hull with internal ballast tanks and had a draft of 15 feet 19 inches ( 5 @.@ 05 m ) when surfaced . She displaced 735 long tons ( 747 t ) while submerged , but only 648 long tons ( 658 t ) on the surface . The submarine was equipped with two diesel engines and twin General Electric electric motors — for surfaced and submerged running , respectively . They were coupled together with a diesel @-@ electric transmission . Unrivalled had a surface speed of up to 11 @.@ 25 knots ( 20 @.@ 84 km / h ; 12 @.@ 95 mph ) and could go as fast as 9 knots ( 17 km / h ; 10 mph ) while underwater . The boat could carry up to 55 long tons ( 56 t ) of diesel fuel , giving her a range of 5 @,@ 000 nautical miles ( 9 @,@ 300 km ; 5 @,@ 800 mi ) at 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . Her electric motors and batteries provided a range of 120 nautical miles ( 220 km ; 140 mi ) at 2 knots ( 3 @.@ 7 km / h ; 2 @.@ 3 mph ) while submerged . 
 HMS Unrivalled was equipped with four 21 @-@ inch ( 533 mm ) bow torpedo tubes and could carry eight torpedoes . The submarine was also armed with a 3 @-@ inch ( 76 mm ) QF Mk I gun deck gun . She had a crew of 33 men . 
 = = Career = = 
 HMS Unrivalled was ordered on 23 August 1940 as part of the 1940 naval construction programme from Vickers @-@ Armstrong at Barrow @-@ in @-@ Furness . She was laid down on 12 May 1941 , launched on 16 February 1942 and commissioned on 3 May 1942 . 
 Apart from a work @-@ up patrol in the Norwegian Sea , she spent the bulk of the war in the Mediterranean . While working up , Unrivalled fired a torpedo at what was thought to be a submerged enemy submarine . Only the periscope was sighted , and the torpedo was fired in the direction detected by the hydrophones , but no German submarine was in the area . Whilst in service in the Mediterranean , she sank a number of small merchantmen and small naval auxiliary vessels with both torpedoes and gunfire . These included the Italian auxiliary submarine chaser O 97 / Margherita , the Italian merchants Maddalena , <unk> and <unk> , the Italian tugs Genova and <unk> , the Italian sailing vessels Triglav , Albina , Margherita , <unk> and Ardito , the German auxiliary submarine chasers UJ 2201 / Bois Rose and UJ 2204 / Boréal , the Italian tanker Bivona , the small Italian merchant Santa Mariana Salina , the Italian auxiliary minesweeper R 172 / Impero and the small Italian vessel San Francisco di Paola A. 
 Unrivalled also damaged the Italian torpedo boat Antonio <unk> on 3 December 1942 , but neither sank or damaged any Axis ships after 28 July 1943 . During Operation Husky in July 1943 , she was stationed offshore to mark the landing beaches for the 1st Canadian Infantry Division . The boat survived the war , but was too slow for requirements and was not retained after the war . She was scrapped at Briton Ferry , Wales , beginning on 22 January 1946 . 
 = Photograph ( Ed Sheeran song ) = 
 " Photograph " is a song recorded by the English singer @-@ songwriter , Ed Sheeran , for his second studio album , × ( 2014 ) . Sheeran wrote the song with Snow Patrol member , Johnny McDaid , who had a piano loop from which the composition developed . After recording several versions with other producers , Sheeran eventually solicited help from Jeff Bhasker ; the collaboration generated a version that Bhasker further enhanced for months . The ballad derives its music primarily from an acoustic guitar , piano and programmed drums . With visually descriptive lyrics , it discusses a long @-@ distance relationship inspired by Sheeran 's own experience of being away from his then @-@ girlfriend while he was on tour . 
 The song received generally positive commentary from critics , who noted the lyrics and Sheeran 's use of imagery . " Photograph " served as the fifth and final single from the album . It reached the top five on the main singles charts in more than five countries . In the US , where it peaked at No. 10 , " Photograph " became the third single from the album to have reached within the top ten . In the UK , it reached No. 15 and has since been certified platinum for sales of 600 @,@ 000 units . The single has also been certified double platinum in Australia and Canada , and platinum in New Zealand and Italy . 
 The single 's release on 11 May 2015 followed the premiere of the music video on 9 May 2015 . The video is a montage of real home footage of Sheeran 's infancy , childhood and adolescence , providing insight on his private early life such as his inclination to playing music instruments and fondness of Lego . The video was nominated for Best Video at the 2016 Brit Awards . Sheeran performed the song on television shows and on his x Tour , which ran from 2014 to 2015 . 
 On 9 June 2016 , it was revealed that Sheeran was being sued by songwriters Martin Harrington and Thomas Leonard , writers of Matt Cardle 's 2011 single " Amazing " , for $ 20 million for copyright infringement . 
 = = Background and composition = = 
 Ed Sheeran wrote " Photograph " in May 2012 with Johnny McDaid , instrumentalist and background vocalist of the British band , Snow Patrol . Sheeran toured with the band , for whom he provided opening performances in select North American dates . McDaid had a three @-@ note piano loop that became the basis of " Photograph " . The song 's development began when Sheeran , while in a hotel room in Kansas City , was humming " loving can hurt , loving can hurt " to the loop that was playing on McDaid 's laptop . Sheeran recalled : " I started humming , and then [ McDaid ] put a beat behind it . " 
 They developed ideas for the song while Sheeran was building a Lego and McDaid was working on his laptop . After four hours , Sheeran picked up a guitar and they began properly structuring the composition . According to Sheeran , they ended up composing the song " within about half an hour " . Both realized what had transpired only after listening back to the song the following day ; they then decided on recording it . Sheeran completed writing the song while in Denver , Colorado . 
 Sheeran credited " Photograph " as the first record " properly " completed for his second studio album . According to him , he had " probably " recorded 60 to 70 versions of the song ; these varied from live to that with piano accompaniment . Aside from the earlier versions he made with McDaid , Sheeran had recordings with songwriter @-@ producer , Jake Gosling , who produced much of Sheeran 's debut album , and producer , Rick Rubin , who was involved in other tracks from the follow @-@ up album . However , Sheeran thought these versions " never fit " and he eventually solicited help from producer , Jeff Bhasker . This particular collaboration generated a version that Bhasker continued to enhance for several months . Emile Haynie was credited on the album 's liner notes for his additional production . On 24 January 2015 , Sheeran recalled the backstory of " Photograph " for the VH1 Storytellers . 
 = = Music , lyrics and inspiration = = 
 An acoustic pop ballad , " Photograph " derives its music from an acoustic guitar , piano , strings , organ , electric and bass guitar , and programmed drums . The melody builds up with the guitar strums and piano keys ; the drums , strings , organ etc then follow . It has a tempo of 108 beats per minute and the originally published key is in E major . " Photograph " features a chord progression that is common in popular music . 
 The lyrics to the song chronicle a long @-@ distance relationship . It contains detailed imagery such as the protagonist remembering his girlfriend kissing him " under the lamppost , back on 6th street " , and keeping a picture of him " in the pocket of [ her ] ripped jeans " . These lyrics were inspired by Sheeran 's own experience on a long @-@ distance relationship . He dated Nina Nesbitt , a Scottish singer @-@ songwriter , for more than a year . While on this relationship , Sheeran spent five months away from Nesbitt : three months while on a concert tour with Snow Patrol and further two months on his own tour . 
 = = Release = = 
 In February 2013 , Sheeran played a demo version of " Photograph " to a German radio station . This performance was not recorded in film or audio , and was the only play Sheeran made prior to the song 's release as part of an album . Sheeran favoured the song as one of the best in the album and claimed : " I think [ " Photograph " ] will be the one that will change my , kind of , career path . " He also asserted that " Photograph " would serve as the " collateral " song that could " sell [ the album ] " even if the rest of the tracks would not prove appealing . 
 The song was released as an " instant grat " digital download to the iTunes Store on 20 June 2014 ; it served as the final of seven promotional singles from his second studio album , × ( 2014 ) . On 22 April 2015 , through his Twitter account , Sheeran announced that " Photograph " would be the next single off × . It was released on 11 May 2015 to hot adult contemporary format , and the following day to contemporary hit radio in the US . On 12 June 2015 , " Photograph " was released to the German market in CD format with the B @-@ side , " I Will Take You Home " . The latter track was featured in the American television sitcom , Cougar Town . 
 " Photograph " served as the fifth and last single released from the album . Of the five singles , preceded by two upbeat songs such as the lead single , " Sing " , " Photograph " was the second mellow track released from × . The first was " Thinking Out Loud " , the third single , which is a blue @-@ eyed soul record produced by Gosling . According to Sheeran , no one from his label wanted " Thinking Out Loud " as a single release ; they favoured " Photograph " as the " big song " . " Photograph " was supposed to be the main single , but when " Thinking Out Loud " spent several weeks within the top 20 on the UK Singles Chart albeit not in radio rotation , the latter song was kept as the third single . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Upon the album 's release , critical response to " Photograph " was generally positive . In his track @-@ by @-@ track review of x for Billboard magazine , Jason Lipshutz suggested that the line " Loving can hurt sometimes / But it 's the only thing that I know " in " Photograph " was the " lynchpin line of the whole album " . Sarah Rodman of The Boston Globe had the same sentiment ; she called the song " haunting " and felt it " [ crept ] up on you with [ its ] tunefulness " . Jamieson Cox of Time described Sheeran 's use of " detail and powerful imagery " in the lyrics as " smart " ; Cox opined that it " [ brought the song ] to life " . 
 Neil McCormick of The Daily Telegraph deemed the track " soulful balladry " and felt it showcased that Sheeran " can slip smoothly through the gears " on the album . Lipshutz described his singing as being " restrained " over " hesitant " acoustic guitar strum before the " arena drums kick in " . Paul Cantor of Vibe picked " Photograph " as one of the standouts from the album , and noted that the song 's " brooding arrangement is an emotional roller coaster " . Kitty Empire of The Observer called " Photograph " a " swelling ballad " , and suggested that Sheeran 's writing was " particularly calculated " . In his review for MusicOMH , John Murphy also felt that " Photograph " was " calculated and a bit cynical , almost as if it 's been written specifically as a soundtrack to a particularly emotional scene in a US television series " . 
 On her analysis of the lyrical content of the album , Annie Zaleski of The A.V. Club expressed that Sheeran 's " self @-@ awareness extends to the rest " of the album by tackling homesickness in " Photograph " , for instance . Meanwhile , Carolyn Menyes of the Music Times wrote in her review of the song that " in the grander scheme of x , ' Photograph ' doesn 't quite seem to line up lyrically " , and noted that most of the album 's songs explored " the feelings of a lover scorned , cheating exes and a little bit of the excess life " . She also said : " Simply put : ' Photograph ' is one of Sheeran 's more simplistically beautiful songs . " 
 McDaid 's involvement in the song was noted by a few critics . Kevin <unk> of The Independent wrote : " If you didn ’ t know Snow Patrol 's Johnny McDaid produced the ballad ' Photograph ' , its stolid plod through clichés about how lovin ' ' can hurt ' and ' heal ' should tell you " . Meanwhile , Dave Hanratty of Drowned in Sound remarked : " ... the cloying ' Photograph ' ... is co @-@ written and produced by a member of Snow Patrol should surprise nobody , given that it follows their heartstring @-@ tugging script so resolutely . At least it moves . " The Herald 's Alan Morrison felt that " Photograph " was " identikit Snow Patrol " . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 " Photograph " and the rest of the album 's tracks entered the UK Singles Chart due to high streaming rates . The single debuted at number 44 on the chart week ending 5 July 2014 , ten months prior to the single 's release . It peaked at number 15 , and has spent 50 weeks on the chart as of the week ending 5 November 2015 . On 25 September 2015 , the British Phonographic Industry certified the single platinum for sales of 600 @,@ 000 units . 
 In the US , the single reached number 10 on the Billboard Hot 100 and marked the third top 10 from the album . With " Photograph " , Sheeran also became the ninth male solo artist since 2010 to spawn four top 20 hits from a single album , excluding deluxe editions . In specific formats such as the Mainstream Top 40 , the single reached the top 10 on the week ending 29 August 2015 ; it gave the album four that have achieved the threshold . On 21 July 2015 , the Recording Industry Association of America certified the single gold for sales of over 500 @,@ 000 units . Elsewhere , the single reached top five in Austria , Canada , Germany , Ireland , Slovakia , and South Africa . 
 In April 2015 , commercial streaming company Spotify released a report of the most streamed tracks worldwide under the category sleep . " Photograph " placed at number 18 ; it joined Sheeran 's other six songs ranked in the top 20 . Sleep is one of the company 's most popular categories that , according to Spotify , " people also use for general relaxation and to help themselves unwind " . The Guardian columnist Tim Dowling suggested that the report was an indication of " very popular , slightly mellow songs that keep cropping up on sleep playlists " but not a list of a " carefully curated journey to unconsciousness " . 
 = = Lawsuit = = 
 On 9 June 2016 , it was revealed that Sheeran was being sued by songwriters Martin Harrington and Thomas Leonard , writers of Matt Cardle 's 2011 single " Amazing " , for $ 20 million for copyright infringement . The lawsuit says : " Given the striking similarity between the chorus of Amazing and Photograph , ( the ) defendants knew when writing , publishing , recording , releasing , and distributing Photograph that they were infringing on a pre @-@ existing musical composition . " 
 = = Music video = = 
 An accompanying music video for " Photograph " was released on 9 May 2015 . The video is a montage of real home footage . Sheeran sourced the clips from his father , who was then compiling it into DVDs for their family Christmas present . He initially intended the clips for inclusion in a documentary that was being produced around that time ; but looking through the collection , he thought it might work for a music video . Sheeran also admitted he could not attend to an actual video shoot , hence he opted for the montage . Emil Nava , who had previously worked with Sheeran on his other promotional music videos , directed " Photograph " . Editor Ellie Johnson worked with Sheeran 's father while in central London . According to Johnson , they spent a weekend gathering the clips used in the montage . 
 The montage chronicles Sheeran 's infancy , childhood and adolescence ( 1990s and 2000s ) . It features Sheeran playing various music instruments ( including piano , cello , bass guitar , acoustic and drums ) , suggesting that he was musically inclined at a young age . He is also shown displaying his skill in <unk> , an Irish frame drum . Other footage depicts a teen Sheeran busking in Galway , Ireland . In another clip before the final , Sheeran is shown performing to a crowd at a festival . Daniel Kreps of Rolling Stone noted that the clips also revealed Sheeran 's " lifelong obsession with Legos " , an object the latter referenced on his 2011 single " Lego House " . 
 According to Ryan Book of the Music Times , the media form utilized in the montage contradicted the song 's title . Kreps stated that the video was reminiscent of Kurt Cobain : Montage of Heck , a documentary film about Nirvana front man and 1990s rock icon Kurt Cobain . According to Kreps , the private life of both artists in their youth were revealed through real home videos . 
 = = Live performances and usage in media = = 
 " Photograph " was performed on television prior to its commercial release . On 13 December 2014 , Sheeran appeared on The X Factor UK , where he gave his first televised performance of the song . This performance contributed to the song 's first ascent inside the top 40 on the UK Singles Chart . Sheeran also performed the song for various US television shows such as on Good Morning America , The Tonight Show Starring Jimmy Fallon , and <unk> , at Canada 's Much Music Video Awards , and at the 2015 Global Citizen Festival . The song was part of the setlist in Sheeran 's x Tour ; the concert tour ran from 2014 to 2015 . 
 In other usages , English singer Foxes covered the song for the BBC Radio 1 Live Lounge . The song was used , free of charge , in a video campaign that was launched on 2 March 2015 . According to Same Dimmer of the Coventry Telegraph , the video " [ highlighted ] the issue of child sexual exploitation " in Warwickshire , a non @-@ metropolitan county in England . The song is also used in the trailer and soundtrack for the movie Me Before You . 
 = = Other recordings = = 
 The song was recorded by Jordan Feliz , for his debut studio album , Beloved , released by <unk> Music . A critic says the acoustic rendition shows , " his falsetto shining " , while another writes it is an " incredible " cover song , on a track meant to convey the temporal nature with which worldly mortal relationships have compared to one with God 's son Jesus Christ . 
 = = Formats and track listings = = 
 CD single 
 " Photograph " – 4 : 19 
 " I Will Take You Home " – 3 : 59 
 Digital download ( Remixes ) 
 " Photograph " ( Felix <unk> Remix ) – 3 : 22 
 " Photograph " ( Parvin <unk> Remix ) – 3 : 05 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Ed Sheeran – vocals , writer , acoustic guitar 
 Johnny McDaid – writer 
 Jeff Bhasker – producer , piano , keys , electric bass 
 Emile Haynie – additional producer , drum programming 
 Tyler Sam Johnson – engineering , electric guitar , drum programming 
 Mark " Spike " Stent – mixing 
 Geoff Swan – engineering 
 Davide Rossi – string arrangement 
 Stuart Hawkes – mastering 
 Credits adapted from the album liner notes . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Radio and release history = = 
 = William Wurtenburg = 
 William Charles " Bill " Wurtenburg ( December 24 , 1863 – March 26 , 1957 ) was an American college football player and coach . Born and raised in Western New York to German parents , Wurtenburg attended the prestigious Phillips Exeter Academy , where he played football . He enrolled in classes at Yale University in 1886 and soon earned a spot on the school 's football team . He played for Yale from 1886 through 1889 , and again in 1891 ; two of those teams were later recognized as national champions . His 35 @-@ yard run in a close game in 1887 against rival Harvard earned him some fame . Wurtenburg received his medical degree from Yale 's Sheffield Scientific School in 1893 . 
 The following year , the United States Naval Academy hired him to coach their football team . He led the squad to a 4 – 1 – 2 record for the season , including a 1 – 1 – 1 record against rival schools . He then accepted a coaching job at Dartmouth College , where for the next four years he led them to perfect records against both of their Triangular Football League opponents . They had a winning record the first year and a 5 – 2 – 1 record the second year . In 1899 , his fifth season as coach , his team went 2 – 7 and lost both of its conference games . 
 After ending his coaching career , Wurtenburg spent several years acting as a referee for Yale 's football team . His final contribution to football was publishing a book about Yale football in the early 20th century . Around 1904 , Wurtenburg began pursuing a career as a physician . He set up a medical office near his house in New Haven , Connecticut , and became an ear , nose and throat specialist . Wurtenburg maintained his medical office until at least 1920 . He died in 1957 at the age of 93 , in New Haven . 
 = = Early life and college = = 
 William Wurtenburg was born on December 24 , 1863 , in Clarksburg , a hamlet in Erie County , New York . He was the son of George M. Wurtenburg and Elizabeth Hochschild , who immigrated from Germany in 1848 . William attended primary school in the Clarksville public school system . For secondary schooling he attended the Griffith Institute in Springville , New York and then Forestville Academy before gaining admittance to Phillips Exeter Academy in Exeter , New Hampshire . At Phillips Exeter , Wurtenburg competed in field events at the school 's spring athletic events . In 1884 , he was a well @-@ recognized member of the school 's competitive football team . He served as quarterback and team captain in 1885 , leading the team to a 29 – 11 victory over rival Phillips Academy . In his senior year , 1886 , he placed first in standing broad jump with weights and running broad jump , with jumps of about 12 and 18 feet ( 3 @.@ 7 and 5 @.@ 5 m ) , respectively . Upon graduation from Phillips Exeter , Wurtenburg entered Yale University . 
 Wurtenburg began taking medical classes on his arrival at Yale , and joined the football team partway through his freshman year . By the following season , he was playing backup halfback to freshman Harmon S. Graves , although he occasionally filled in as a fullback . The 1887 squad , later recognized as the national champion , went 9 – 0 and outscored their opponents 515 – 12 ; this included a 106 – 0 shutout of Wesleyan . During this season Wurtenburg made his most famous play : with Yale leading rival Harvard by a score of 11 – 8 late in the season 's final contest , Wurtenburg made " a brilliant run " of 35 yards and scored a touchdown , which secured the game for Yale . He was credited as one of the people who made the game " undoubtedly the finest ever played in America " , according to writer Richard <unk> Hurd . 
 The following year Wurtenburg shifted into his former position at quarterback . He took the starting spot and became a leader of the team . Wurtenburg developed his own unique style at quarterback , regularly attempting " long , low , underhand passes " to his teammates to help set up scoring plays . That year , the Yale team shut out every single one of its opponents and was later recognized as a national champion . At the same time , Wurtenburg played on the school 's baseball team , where he would regularly score three or four runs a game . In September of his graduating year , 1889 , Wurtenburg announced that he would be entering the Sheffield Scientific School . At the Exeter Club 's first annual banquet , held that year , Wurtenburg was asked to present a toast to represent the club 's athletics . In 1890 , he served as the co @-@ editor of The Yale Banner , one of the school 's yearbooks . Wurtenburg played his final season of football at the university in 1891 , after apparently giving up his spot on the team following the 1889 season . However , he was thrown out of the final game of the season , against Princeton , and Frank Barbour was given a guaranteed starting @-@ quarterback slot for the rest of the time Wurtenburg was at Yale . Wurtenburg graduated in 1893 , when he received his Doctorate in Medicine ( M.D. ) . 
 = = Career and later life = = 
 = = = 1890s = = = 
 In 1894 , Wurtenburg was hired to replace former Yale teammate John A. Hartwell as the head coach of the US Naval Academy football team . Hartwell 's 1893 team had amassed a record of 5 – 3 , including a win over rival Army and a loss to rival Penn . Wurtenburg began his coaching career on October 6 , leading his team to a 6 – 6 tie with the Elizabeth Athletic Club of New Jersey at Worden Field on the Naval Academy campus in Annapolis . His first win as a coach came over two weeks later , on October 21 , in a 12 – 0 shutout of rival Georgetown ; it was followed by a defeat of the Carlisle Indian School . His first and only loss of the season came on October 27 , at the hands of rival Penn in a 12 – 0 shutout . At about that time , Wurtenburg left the country and traveled to Germany to complete his medical studies . The team recovered and defeated Lehigh on November 3 , then tied rival Penn State . The season ended two weeks after that match with a 30 – 6 defeat of Baltimore City College . The team did not compete against their major rival Army that year , after violent fights between fans the previous year ; President Grover Cleveland banned the game , which would not be played again until it was reinstated in 1899 by Theodore Roosevelt . Sometime during November , Wurtenburg returned from Germany along with fellow Yale medical graduate A.S. Cheney , and announced his intention to practice medicine in New Haven . That year he received certification , and he expressed interest in eye , throat , and ear treatment . 
 Wurtenburg did not remain at the Naval Academy the following year and was replaced as head coach by Matthew McClung . He instead accepted a position as the head coach of the Dartmouth team , starting in the fall of 1895 . The season began with a 50 – 0 shutout of his former school , Phillips Exeter . This was followed by a loss and a tie , which were succeeded by back @-@ to @-@ back wins . His team dropped two games to Yale and one to Army , but managed to defeat former Triangular Football League opponent MIT . After that , Wurtenburg led his team to three straight victories , including wins over both Triangular Football League opponents . Although the season ended with a loss to Brown , Dartmouth was awarded the Triangular Football League championship . On November 20 of that year , Wurtenburg married Anna Phillips , daughter of Jason W. Phillips , whom he met while at Chautauqua in 1893 . The wedding took place at Springfield , in Phillips ' home state of Ohio ; it was called " a brilliant event " by the Boston Daily Globe and was attended by Ohio 's governor @-@ elect Asa S. Bushnell and his wife . After the wedding , they moved to a permanent residence in New Haven . 
 He returned to coach Dartmouth the following year . He began by leading his team to a 30 – 0 shutout of the Worcester Athletic Club on October 3 . His team dropped the next two games , both scoreless losses to Penn and Yale , but finished the month with a win . The second half of the season went much better , with Wurtenburg leading his squad to a 3 – 1 record , including a 42 – 0 total score against conference opponents . The team ended the season with a 5 – 2 – 1 record and a second consecutive conference championship . Wurtenburg retained his coaching position the next season , beginning the year with a blowout of Phillips Exeter , which was followed by three consecutive shutout losses . The team turned the season around in November , defeating Amherst and Williams by a combined score of 106 – 0 for a third consecutive championship . He ended the season with a 4 – 3 record and a secure position as the coach for the next year . 
 In 1898 , Wurtenburg 's Dartmouth squad went 5 – 6 , but outscored their opponents 205 – 137 . Beginning the season with a win over Phillips Exeter , the team went 4 – 1 in October . Wurtenburg 's team began the month with a shutout loss to Harvard , but recovered to win four straight games , defeating their conference opponents by a combined score of 74 – 12 . In November and December , however , his team lost all five matches , managing only 28 points . In his final year as a coach , Wurtenburg suffered the worst record of his career . After winning the first two games of the season , his team dropped the remaining seven , only able to put up 12 points . He also suffered his first conference losses , falling to opponents Williams and Wesleyan by a combined score of 23 – 10 . Wurtenburg was replaced as coach the following year by one of his former players , Frederick E. Jennings . After the conclusion of his coaching career , Wurtenburg opened up his first medical office , operating a short distance from his New Haven home . 
 = = = 1900s and death = = = 
 Even after the turn of the century , Wurtenburg remained involved with the Yale football program . In 1900 , he participated in the annual football team 's spring scrimmage , playing on the school 's " varsity " team . He was repeatedly selected by the university to act as an official in their home games ; he was the school 's referee in 1900 and 1901 , and returned to the position two years later , in 1903 . He expanded his officiating role in 1904 , when he served in three games . For one of those matches , Wurtenburg moved to the position of umpire . Sometime between 1915 and 1925 , Wurtenburg collected a series of newspaper articles and self @-@ published them in a book titled Scrapbook of Newspaper Clippings about Yale Football . At some point around 1904 , Wurtenburg began to dedicate himself to a career as a physician . He received official membership in the American Medical Association and the New Haven Medical Society as a physician specializing in <unk> , specifically in ear and nose treatment . By 1909 , he had shifted his focus to the treatment of ear ailments , and occasionally served well @-@ known locals . He retained his membership with the Connecticut State Medical Society until at least 1920 , maintaining his Elm Street office the entire time . Wurtenburg died on March 26 , 1957 , in New Haven , at the age of 93 . A year after his death , Yale established the William G. Wurtenberg Scholarship from his bequest . The scholarship " is to be awarded to a member of the senior class who demonstrates character , leadership qualities , and promise of future usefulness " . Although rarely acknowledged for his influence on Dartmouth football , Wurtenburg is considered by his Dartmouth peers as having brought the program to prominence . Fred <unk> , captain of Wurtenburg 's 1898 team , would later state that : 
 One man , whose influence more than any other one thing , succeeded in laying a foundation for Dartmouth 's wonderful results , but whose name is seldom mentioned in that connection is Doctor Wurtenberg , who was brought up in the early Yale football school . He had the keenest sense of fundamental football and the greatest intensity of spirit in transmitting his hard earned knowledge . Four critical years he worked with us filling every one with his enthusiasm and those four years Dartmouth football gained such headway that nothing could stop its growth . 
 = = Head coaching record = = 
 = Get the Girl = 
 " Get the Girl " is the nineteenth episode of the eighth season of the American comedy television series The Office , and the show 's 171st episode overall . The episode originally aired on NBC in the United States on March 15 , 2012 . " Get the Girl " was written by Charlie Grandy and directed by series regular Rainn Wilson , who portrays Dwight Schrute . 
 The series — presented as if it were a real documentary — depicts the everyday lives of office employees in the Scranton , Pennsylvania , branch of the fictional Dunder Mifflin Paper Company . In the episode , Andy Bernard ( Ed Helms ) drives across the country to get Erin Hannon ( Ellie Kemper ) , who has taken up caring for an elderly woman . Meanwhile , in the Scranton branch , Nellie ( Catherine Tate ) shows up and tries to claim the manager position . 
 " Get the Girl " received mixed reviews by television commentators , with multiple critics criticizing Andy and Erin 's romance . According to Nielsen ratings , " Get the Girl " was viewed by an estimated 4 @.@ 88 million viewers and received a 2 @.@ 3 rating / 6 % share among adults between the ages of 18 and 49 . The episode ranked second in its timeslot and was also the highest @-@ rated NBC series of the night . 
