 Filming began in Rome in 1956 . The film was a low budget production as Lombardo did not care for horror films . Freda and his crew utilized mostly existing sets with only a single scene at the <unk> river filmed outside the studio . The film was shot in black and white by cinematographer Mario Bava , who felt that that style would better suit the special effects in the film and keep the budget down . Bava worked on the special effects on the film without credit . One of his effects involved Gianna Maria Canale aging make @-@ up that would only be revealed when certain coloured lights were revealed on her . This effect had been done previously in older films such as Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde ( 1931 ) and contemporary films including The Man Who Turned to Stone ( 1957 ) . 
 Freda 's deal with his producers failed when he left the set on the twelfth day of production . After an argument with the producers , Freda left the production allowing Mario Bava to step in to finish the film in the next two days . Reasons for Freda leaving production differ , and range from Freda having a misunderstanding with the producers , to Bava stating that Freda was taking too long to make the film . Bava 's ending was different than Freda 's initial ending which involved finding the heroine hanged . Among the changes Bava made to finish the film , included changing the supporting character of the journalist becoming the lead and removing a sub @-@ plot about a dismembered criminal who returns to life on being reassembled . Bava also extended other portions of the film with stock footage and montages of newspaper presses . 
 = = Release = = 
 I Vampiri was released in Italy on 5 April 1957 in San Remo . It grossed a total of 125 @.@ 3 million Italian lire on its initial theatrical run . The film was not a box office success in either Italy or France . It was released in the United States in 1960 in a heavily altered version under the title The Devil 's Commandment . This version of the film featured new scenes written by J. V. <unk> and filmed by Ronald <unk> in New York . In the United Kingdom , the film was released under the title Lust of the Vampire . Mario Bava biographer Tim Lucas wrote in 1992 that a version of the film also titled Lust of the Vampire was assembled in the United States which incorporates scenes of nudity . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 A <unk> version of I Vampiri was released in Italy . Photo novels were similar to comic strips in that they use a succession of panels and speech captions . The main difference is that they rely on photographs of films opposed to illustrations . I Vampiri 's <unk> was titled <unk> che <unk> <unk> ( English : The One Who Wanted to Be Loved ) which appeared in I <unk> Film in August 1958 . 
 I Vampiri was released uncut for the first time on DVD in the United States in 2001 by Image Entertainment . IGN gave a positive review of the DVD , referring to the image quality as " stunning " and that the film was the original cut , " not the butchered Devil 's Commandment version aired on late night television over the years . " It was also released on DVD as a bonus feature from Arrow Films on their Black Sunday blu @-@ ray on February 4 , 2013 . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 In a contemporary review , The Monthly Film Bulletin described the film as a " bizarre and grisly Italian effort " that " drags in everything from drug addiction to perpetual youth , crypts to skeletons , but has only a few moments which can claim to be genuinely macabre . " The review praised the special effects involving a transition between a young to aged woman and back again , and concluded that " if only story , treatment and performance ... had been comparable , the film might have been really high in its class . " Variety described the film as an " attempt at a horror film which doesn 't quite come off with only a few moments in succeeding in being chilling . " The review concluded that the film was " strictly for devotees of the genre " In Italy , La Stampa noted the surprise that the film avoided being banned by Italian censors and that when the film takes on thriller motives , it achieves some effective moments . 
 In their retrospective review , AllMovie wrote " While I Vampiri is more important for its place in history than for it ultimate effectiveness as a film , it is nevertheless an entertaining horror flick . " Danny Shipka , who discussed this film in his book on European exploitation films , noted that the film " set the standard for visual style that would be the foundation for most Italian Gothic films of this nature . " He also described the film as " a little ponderous and talky " while praising Canale 's transformation scenes and the " masterful filming of cobwebs , creaking doors , and decay , along with great lighting " . IGN wrote that " anyone interested in the history of [ Italian horror cinema ] should see the film " and that the film was " showing its age and is incredibly tame compared with the gore <unk> that Italy would eventually become famous for " . Martyn <unk> , in his book on Black Sunday stated that it would be " pushing it to declare I Vampiri as a neglected masterpiece , but it is a hugely underrated work and very cleverly sets out what a horror film with a modern edge and sensibility could achieve . " Louis Paul wrote a negative review of the film in his book Italian Horror Film Directors , opining that the film suffered some damaging influences from <unk> cinema , which turned on very static scenes . He also opined that the film spends too much time with Dario Michaelis character , and the " mind @-@ numbingly dull and endless police procedural scenes " 
 = = Aftermath and influence = = 
 Freda felt that I Vampiri did not succeed financially in Italy due to the country 's audience reluctance to an Italian interpretation of the horror genre . For Freda 's next film , <unk> – The Immortal Monster , he used an English pseudonym of Robert Hampton to give the impression that the film was not Italian . Freda attempted a gothic horror film again five years later with his film The Horrible Dr. <unk> . Other crew members would go on to direct horror films following I Vampiri , such as screenwriter Piero Regnoli who directed The <unk> and the Vampire ( 1960 ) and Bava who became the cinematographer on Freda 's <unk> as well as directing Black Sunday ( 1960 ) . 
 I Vampiri was the first Italian horror film of the sound era , following the lone silent horror film Il <unk> di Frankenstein ( 1920 ) Despite the film being the first Italian film of the sound era , it did not start a new wave of Italian horror productions . The British Film Institute stated that it required the international success of Mario Bava 's Black Sunday to initiate the start of horror films in Italy . Italian screenwriter Ernesto Gastaldi suggested that it was when Terence Fisher 's film Dracula ( 1958 ) was released in Italy that a " hailstorm of vampire movies flooded the screens " . 
 = Pitot @-@ static system = 
 A pitot @-@ static system is a system of pressure @-@ sensitive instruments that is most often used in aviation to determine an aircraft 's airspeed , Mach number , altitude , and altitude trend . A pitot @-@ static system generally consists of a pitot tube , a static port , and the pitot @-@ static instruments . This equipment is used to measure the forces acting on a vehicle as a function of the temperature , density , pressure and viscosity of the fluid in which it is operating . Other instruments that might be connected are air data computers , flight data recorders , altitude encoders , cabin pressurization controllers , and various airspeed switches . Errors in pitot @-@ static system readings can be extremely dangerous as the information obtained from the pitot static system , such as altitude , is potentially safety @-@ critical . Several commercial airline disasters have been traced to a failure of the pitot @-@ static system . 
 = = Pitot @-@ static pressure = = 
 The pitot @-@ static system of instruments uses the principle of air pressure gradient . It works by measuring pressures or pressure differences and using these values to assess the speed and altitude . These pressures can be measured either from the static port ( static pressure ) or the pitot tube ( pitot pressure ) . The static pressure is used in all measurements , while the pitot pressure is used only to determine airspeed . 
 = = = Pitot pressure = = = 
 The pitot pressure is obtained from the pitot tube . The pitot pressure is a measure of ram air pressure ( the air pressure created by vehicle motion or the air ramming into the tube ) , which , under ideal conditions , is equal to stagnation pressure , also called total pressure . The pitot tube is most often located on the wing or front section of an aircraft , facing forward , where its opening is exposed to the relative wind . By situating the pitot tube in such a location , the ram air pressure is more accurately measured since it will be less distorted by the aircraft 's structure . When airspeed increases , the ram air pressure is increased , which can be translated by the airspeed indicator . 
 = = = Static pressure = = = 
 The static pressure is obtained through a static port . The static port is most often a flush @-@ mounted hole on the fuselage of an aircraft , and is located where it can access the air flow in a relatively undisturbed area . Some aircraft may have a single static port , while others may have more than one . In situations where an aircraft has more than one static port , there is usually one located on each side of the fuselage . With this positioning , an average pressure can be taken , which allows for more accurate readings in specific flight situations . An alternative static port may be located inside the cabin of the aircraft as a backup for when the external static port ( s ) are blocked . A pitot @-@ static tube effectively integrates the static ports into the pitot probe . It incorporates a second coaxial tube ( or tubes ) with pressure sampling holes on the sides of the probe , outside the direct airflow , to measure the static pressure . When aircraft climbs , static pressure will decrease . 
 = = = Multiple pressure = = = 
 Some pitot @-@ static systems incorporate single probes that contain multiple pressure @-@ transmitting ports that allow for the sensing of air pressure , angle of attack , and angle of sideslip data . Depending on the design , such air data probes may be referred to as 5 @-@ hole or 7 @-@ hole air data probes . Differential pressure sensing techniques can be used to produce angle of attack and angle of sideslip indications . 
 = = Pitot @-@ static instrument = = 
 The pitot @-@ static system obtains pressures for interpretation by the pitot @-@ static instruments . While the explanations below explain traditional , mechanical instruments , many modern aircraft use an air data computer ( ADC ) to calculate airspeed , rate of climb , altitude and Mach number . In some aircraft , two <unk> receive total and static pressure from independent pitot tubes and static ports , and the aircraft 's flight data computer compares the information from both computers and checks one against the other . There are also " standby instruments " , which are back @-@ up pneumatic instruments employed in the case of problems with the primary instruments . 
 = = = Airspeed indicator = = = 
 The airspeed indicator is connected to both the pitot and static pressure sources . The difference between the pitot pressure and the static pressure is called dynamic pressure . The greater the dynamic pressure , the higher the airspeed reported . A traditional mechanical airspeed indicator contains a pressure diaphragm that is connected to the pitot tube . The case around the diaphragm is airtight and is vented to the static port . The higher the speed , the higher the ram pressure , the more pressure exerted on the diaphragm , and the larger the needle movement through the mechanical linkage . 
 = = = Altimeter = = = 
 The pressure altimeter , also known as the barometric altimeter , is used to determine changes in air pressure that occur as the aircraft 's altitude changes . Pressure altimeters must be calibrated prior to flight to register the pressure as an altitude above sea level . The instrument case of the altimeter is airtight and has a vent to the static port . Inside the instrument , there is a sealed aneroid barometer . As pressure in the case decreases , the internal barometer expands , which is mechanically translated into a determination of altitude . The reverse is true when descending from higher to lower altitudes . 
 Main errors produced in altimeter ! ! 1 ) <unk> error 2 ) Lag error 3 ) Instruments error 4 ) Position error 5 ) Temperature error 6 ) Barometric error 7 ) <unk> Jump 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Aircraft designed to operate at transonic or supersonic speeds will incorporate a machmeter . The machmeter is used to show the ratio of true airspeed in relation to the speed of sound . Most supersonic aircraft are limited as to the maximum Mach number they can fly , which is known as the " Mach limit " . The Mach number is displayed on a machmeter as a decimal fraction . 
 = = = Vertical speed indicator = = = 
 The variometer , also known as the vertical speed indicator ( VSI ) or the vertical velocity indicator ( <unk> ) , is the pitot @-@ static instrument used to determine whether or not an aircraft is flying in level flight . The vertical speed specifically shows the rate of climb or the rate of descent , which is measured in feet per minute or meters per second . The vertical speed is measured through a mechanical linkage to a diaphragm located within the instrument . The area surrounding the diaphragm is vented to the static port through a calibrated leak ( which also may be known as a " restricted diffuser " ) . When the aircraft begins to increase altitude , the diaphragm will begin to contract at a rate faster than that of the calibrated leak , causing the needle to show a positive vertical speed . The reverse of this situation is true when an aircraft is descending . The calibrated leak varies from model to model , but the average time for the diaphragm to equalize pressure is between 6 and 9 seconds . 
 = = Pitot @-@ static errors = = 
 There are several situations that can affect the accuracy of the pitot @-@ static instruments . Some of these involve failures of the pitot @-@ static system itself — which may be classified as " system malfunctions " — while others are the result of faulty instrument placement or other environmental factors — which may be classified as " inherent errors " . 
 = = = System malfunctions = = = 
 = = = = Blocked pitot tube = = = = 
 A blocked pitot tube is a pitot @-@ static problem that will only affect airspeed indicators . A blocked pitot tube will cause the airspeed indicator to register an increase in airspeed when the aircraft climbs , even though actual airspeed is constant . This is caused by the pressure in the pitot system remaining constant when the atmospheric pressure ( and static pressure ) are decreasing . In reverse , the airspeed indicator will show a decrease in airspeed when the aircraft descends . The pitot tube is susceptible to becoming clogged by ice , water , insects or some other obstruction . For this reason , aviation regulatory agencies such as the U.S. Federal Aviation Administration ( FAA ) recommend that the pitot tube be checked for obstructions prior to any flight . To prevent icing , many pitot tubes are equipped with a heating element . A heated pitot tube is required in all aircraft certificated for instrument flight except aircraft certificated as Experimental Amateur @-@ Built . 
 = = = = Blocked static port = = = = 
 A blocked static port is a more serious situation because it affects all pitot @-@ static instruments . One of the most common causes of a blocked static port is airframe icing . A blocked static port will cause the altimeter to freeze at a constant value , the altitude at which the static port became blocked . The vertical speed indicator will become frozen at zero and will not change at all , even if vertical speed increases or decreases . The airspeed indicator will reverse the error that occurs with a clogged pitot tube and cause the airspeed to be read less than it actually is as the aircraft climbs . When the aircraft is descending , the airspeed will be over @-@ reported . In most aircraft with unpressurized cabins , an alternative static source is available and can be selected from within the cockpit . 
 = = = Inherent errors = = = 
 Inherent errors may fall into several categories , each affecting different instruments . Density errors affect instruments metering airspeed and altitude . This type of error is caused by variations of pressure and temperature in the atmosphere . A compressibility error can arise because the impact pressure will cause the air to compress in the pitot tube . At standard sea level pressure altitude the calibration equation ( see calibrated airspeed ) correctly accounts for the compression so there is no compressibility error at sea level . At higher altitudes the compression is not correctly accounted for and will cause the instrument to read greater than equivalent airspeed . A correction may be obtained from a chart . <unk> error becomes significant at altitudes above 10 @,@ 000 feet ( 3 @,@ 000 m ) and at airspeeds greater than 200 knots ( 370 km / h ) . Hysteresis is an error that is caused by mechanical properties of the aneroid capsules located within the instruments . These capsules , used to determine pressure differences , have physical properties that resist change by retaining a given shape , even though the external forces may have changed . Reversal errors are caused by a false static pressure reading . This false reading may be caused by abnormally large changes in an aircraft 's pitch . A large change in pitch will cause a momentary showing of movement in the opposite direction . Reversal errors primarily affect altimeters and vertical speed indicators . 
 = = = = Position errors = = = = 
 Another class of inherent errors is that of position error . A position error is produced by the aircraft 's static pressure being different from the air pressure remote from the aircraft . This error is caused by the air flowing past the static port at a speed different from the aircraft 's true airspeed . Position errors may provide positive or negative errors , depending on one of several factors . These factors include airspeed , angle of attack , aircraft weight , acceleration , aircraft configuration , and in the case of helicopters , rotor downwash . There are two categories of position errors , which are " fixed errors " and " variable errors " . Fixed errors are defined as errors which are specific to a particular model of aircraft . Variable errors are caused by external factors such as deformed panels obstructing the flow of air , or particular situations which may <unk> the aircraft . 
 = = = = Lag errors = = = = 
 Lag errors are caused by the fact that any changes in the static or dynamic pressure outside the aircraft require a finite amount of time to make their way down the tubing and affect the gauges . This type of error depends on the length and diameter of the tubing as well as the volume inside the gauges . Lag error is only significant around the time when the airspeed or altitude are changing . It is not a concern for steady level flight . 
 = = Pitot @-@ static related disasters = = 
 1 December 1974 — Northwest Airlines Flight 6231 , a Boeing 727 , crashed northwest of John F. Kennedy International Airport during climb en route to Buffalo Niagara International Airport because of blockage of the pitot tubes by atmospheric icing . 
 6 February 1996 — Birgenair Flight 301 crashed into the sea shortly after takeoff due to incorrect readings from the airspeed indicator . The suspected cause is a blocked pitot tube ( this was never confirmed , as the airplane wreck was not recovered ) . 
 2 October 1996 — Aeroperú Flight 603 crashed because of blockage of the static ports . The static ports on the left side of the aircraft had been taped over while the aircraft was being waxed and cleaned . After the job was done , the tape was not removed . 
 February 23 , 2008 — B @-@ 2 bomber crash in Guam caused by moisture on sensors . 
 1 June 2009 — The French air safety authority BEA said that pitot tube icing was a contributing factor in the crash of Air France Flight 447 . 
 = The Boat Race 1878 = 
 The 35th Boat Race took place on 13 April 1878 . The Boat Race is an annual side @-@ by @-@ side rowing race between crews from the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge along the River Thames . In total , ten former Blues took part in the contest . The race was umpired by former rower Joseph William Chitty and Oxford won by a margin of 10 lengths in a time of 22 minutes 15 seconds . The victory took the overall record to 18 – 16 in Oxford 's favour . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing competition between the University of Oxford ( sometimes referred to as the " Dark Blues " ) and the University of Cambridge ( sometimes referred to as the " Light Blues " ) . First held in 1829 , the race takes place on the 4 @.@ 2 miles ( 6 @.@ 8 km ) Championship Course on the River Thames in southwest London . The rivalry is a major point of honour between the two universities ; it is followed throughout the United Kingdom and as of 2014 , broadcast worldwide . Neither crew went into the race as reigning champions – the previous year 's race had been declared a " dead heat " . However Oxford held the overall lead , with 17 victories to Cambridge 's 16 . 
 Cambridge 's coach was James Brooks Close ( who rowed for the Light Blues in the 1872 , 1873 and 1874 races ) . Oxford were coached by William Grenfell ( who had rowed for the Dark Blues the previous year and was rowing at number four in 1878 ) , A. J. Mulholland ( who rowed in 1877 ) and Edmund Warre ( who represented the Oxford in the 1857 and the 1858 races ) . 
 The race was umpired by Joseph William Chitty who had rowed for Oxford twice in 1849 ( in the March and December races ) and the 1852 race , while the starter was Edward Searle and the finishing judge was E. H. <unk> . 
 = = Crews = = 
 The Oxford crew weighed an average of 12 st 3 @.@ 675 lb ( 77 @.@ 7 kg ) , 6 @.@ 875 pounds ( 3 @.@ 1 kg ) more than their opponents . Cambridge saw four former Blues return , including the cox George Latham Davies who was taking part in his fourth consecutive Boat Race . Oxford 's crew included six individuals with experience of the race , with boat club president Tom Cottingham Edwards @-@ Moss making his fourth appearance in the event . Drinkwater suggested that the Oxford crew was the " best ... up to that date " . 
 = = Race = = 
 Oxford won the toss and elected to start from the Surrey station , handing the Middlesex side of the river to Cambridge . The race commenced at <unk> Out @-@ rating Oxford by four strokes per minute , Cambridge took an early lead and were half a length ahead after the first minute . They held the lead round the bend which favoured them but as the river curved to favour Oxford , the Dark Blues quickly overtook , even with the slower stroke rate . They were at least half @-@ a @-@ length clear at the Crab Tree pub which they had extended to four lengths by Hammersmith Bridge . Oxford won by 40 seconds ( approximately 10 lengths ) in a time of 22 minutes and 15 seconds , their second victory in nine years , which took the overall record to 18 – 16 in their favour . 
 = Star Trek ( film ) = 
 Star Trek is a 2009 American science fiction adventure film directed by J. J. Abrams , written by Roberto Orci and Alex Kurtzman and distributed by Paramount Pictures . It is the 11th film of the Star Trek film franchise and is also a reboot that features the main characters of the original Star Trek television series , portrayed by a new cast and the first in the reboot series . The film follows James T. Kirk ( Chris Pine ) and Spock ( Zachary Quinto ) aboard the USS Enterprise as they combat Nero ( Eric Bana ) , a Romulan from their future who threatens the United Federation of Planets . The story takes place in an alternate reality because of time travel by both Nero and the original Spock ( Leonard Nimoy ) . The alternate timeline was created in an attempt to free the film and the franchise from established continuity constraints while simultaneously preserving original story elements . 
 Development for Star Trek originated in 1968 , when creator Gene Roddenberry announced plans to produce a prequel modeled after the television series . The concept resurfaced temporarily in the late 1980s , when it was postulated by Harve Bennett as a possible plotline for the movie that would become Star Trek VI : The Undiscovered Country , but was rejected in lieu of other projects by Roddenberry . Following the critical and commercial failure of Star Trek : Nemesis and the cancellation of the television series Star Trek : Enterprise , franchise executive producer Rick Berman and screenwriter Erik <unk> wrote an unproduced film , titled Star Trek : The Beginning , which would take place after Enterprise . After the separation between Viacom and CBS Corporation , former Paramount president Gail Berman convinced CBS to produce a feature film . Orci and Kurtzman , both fans of the Star Trek series , were approached to write the film and Abrams was approached to direct it . Kurtzman and Orci used inspiration from novels and graduate school dissertations as well as the series itself . 
 Principal photography commenced on November 7 , 2007 and ended on March 27 , 2008 . The film was shot in various locations around California and Utah . Abrams wanted to avoid using bluescreen and greenscreen , opting to use sets and locations instead . Heavy secrecy surrounded the film 's production and was under the fake working title Corporate Headquarters . Industrial Light & Magic used digital ships for the film , as opposed to the previous films in the franchise . Production for the film concluded by the end of 2008 . 
 Star Trek was heavily promoted the months preceding its release ; pre @-@ release screenings for the film premiered in select cities around the world including Austin , Texas ; Sydney , Australia ; and Calgary , Alberta . It was released in the United States and Canada on May 8 , 2009 , to positive reviews . Critics praised the character development as well as the storyline in the film . Star Trek became a box office success , grossing over $ 385 @.@ 7 million worldwide . It was nominated for several awards , including four Academy Awards at the 82nd Academy Awards , ultimately winning in the category for Best Makeup , making it the first Star Trek film to win an Academy Award . The DVD and Blu @-@ ray for the film were released on November 17 , 2009 . 
 The film is followed by two sequels , Star Trek Into Darkness ( 2013 ) and Star Trek Beyond ( 2016 ) with a fourth being announced . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In the 23rd century , the Federation starship USS Kelvin is investigating a " lightning storm " in space . A Romulan ship , the Narada , emerges from the storm and attacks the Kelvin . Narada 's first officer , Ayel , demands that the Kelvin 's Captain Robau come aboard to negotiate a truce . Robau is questioned about the current stardate and an " Ambassador Spock " , whom he does not recognize . Narada 's commander , Nero , kills him , and resumes attacking the Kelvin . George Kirk , the Kelvin 's first officer , orders the ship 's personnel , including his pregnant wife Winona , to abandon ship while he pilots the Kelvin on a collision course with the Narada . Kirk sacrifices his life to ensure Winona 's survival as she gives birth to James T. Kirk . 
 Seventeen years later , on the planet Vulcan , a young Spock is accepted to join the Vulcan Science Academy . Realizing the Academy views his human mother Amanda as a " disadvantage " , he joins Starfleet instead . On Earth , Kirk becomes a reckless but intelligent young adult . Following a bar fight with Starfleet cadets accompanying Nyota Uhura , Kirk meets Captain Christopher Pike , who encourages him to enlist in Starfleet Academy , where Kirk meets and befriends doctor Leonard McCoy . 
 Three years later , Commander Spock accuses Kirk of cheating during the Kobayashi Maru simulation . Kirk argues that cheating was acceptable because the simulation was designed to be unbeatable . The disciplinary hearing is interrupted by a distress signal from Vulcan . With the primary fleet out of range , the cadets are mobilized . McCoy and Kirk board Pike 's ship , the Enterprise . Realizing that the " lightning storm " observed near Vulcan is similar to the one that occurred when he was born , Kirk breaks protocol to convince Pike that the distress signal is a trap . 
 Enterprise finds the fleet destroyed and the Narada drilling into Vulcan 's core . The Narada attacks the Enterprise and Pike surrenders , delegating command of the ship to Spock and promoting Kirk to first officer . Kirk , Hikaru Sulu and Chief Engineer Olson perform a space jump onto the drilling platform . Olson is killed but Kirk and Sulu disable the drill . Despite their efforts , Nero launches " red matter " into Vulcan 's core , forming an artificial black hole that destroys Vulcan . Spock rescues the high council and his father Sarek , but Amanda dies . 
 As the Narada moves toward Earth , Nero tortures Pike to gain access to Earth 's defense codes . Spock maroons Kirk on Delta Vega after Kirk attempts mutiny . Kirk encounters an older Spock , who explains that he and Nero are from 129 years in the future . In that future , Romulus was threatened by a supernova . Spock 's attempt to use " red matter " to create an artificial black hole and consume the supernova failed , and Nero 's family perished along with Romulus . The Narada and Spock 's vessel were caught in the black hole , sending them back in time . Nero stranded Spock on Delta Vega to watch Vulcan 's destruction . 
 Reaching a Starfleet outpost , Kirk and the elder Spock meet Montgomery Scott . With the elder Spock 's help , Kirk and Scott beam onto the Enterprise . Following the elder Spock 's advice , Kirk provokes younger Spock into attacking him , forcing Spock to recognize he is emotionally compromised and relinquish command to Kirk . After talking with Sarek , Spock decides to help Kirk . While the Enterprise hides itself within the gas clouds of Titan , Kirk and Spock beam aboard the Narada . Kirk fights with Nero and Ayel , killing the latter and rescuing Pike while Spock uses the elder Spock 's ship to destroy the drill . Spock leads the Narada away from Earth and sets his ship to collide with Nero 's ship . Enterprise beams Kirk , Pike and Spock aboard . The older Spock 's ship and the Narada collide , igniting the " red matter " . Kirk offers Nero help to escape , but Nero refuses , prompting Kirk to give the order to fire , dooming the Narada to be consumed in a black hole . 
 Kirk is promoted to Captain and given command of the Enterprise while Pike is promoted to Rear Admiral . Spock encounters his older self , who persuades his younger self to continue serving in Starfleet , encouraging him to do what feels right instead of what is logical . Spock remains in Starfleet , becoming first officer under Kirk 's command . The Enterprise goes to warp as the elder Spock speaks the " where no one has gone before " monologue . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Chris Pine as James T. Kirk 
 Pine described his first audition as " awful " , because he could not take himself seriously as a leader . Abrams did not see Pine 's first audition , and it was only after Pine 's agent met Abrams ' wife that the director decided to give him another audition opposite Quinto . Quinto was supportive of Pine 's casting because they knew each other as they worked out at the same gym . After getting the part , Pine sent William Shatner a letter and received a reply containing Shatner 's approval . Pine watched classic episodes and read encyclopedias about the Star Trek universe , but stopped as he felt weighed down by the feeling he had to copy Shatner . Pine felt he had to show Kirk 's " humor , arrogance and decisiveness , " but not Shatner 's speech pattern , which would have bordered on imitation . Pine said when watching the original series , he was also struck by how Shatner 's performance was characterized by humor . Instead , Pine chose to incorporate elements of Tom Cruise from Top Gun and Harrison Ford 's portrayals of Indiana Jones and Han Solo . Chris Pratt also auditioned for the <unk> Bennett portrays a younger Kirk . 
 Zachary Quinto as Spock 
 The younger alternate timeline Spock . Quinto expressed interest in the role because of the duality of Spock 's half @-@ human , half @-@ Vulcan heritage , and how " he is constantly exploring that notion of how to evolve in a responsible way and how to evolve in a respectful way . I think those are all things that we as a society , and certainly the world , could implement . " He mentioned he heard about the new film and revealed his interest in the role in a December 2006 interview with the Pittsburgh Post @-@ Gazette : the article was widely circulated and he attracted Abrams ' interest . For the audition , Quinto wore a blue shirt and flattened his hair down to feel more like Spock . He bound his fingers to practice the Vulcan salute , shaved his eyebrows and grew and dyed his hair for the role . He conveyed many of Spock 's attributes , such as his stillness and the way Nimoy would hold his hands behind his back . Quinto commented the physical transformation aided in portraying an alien , joking " I just felt like a nerd . I felt like I was 12 again . You look back at those pictures and you see the bowl cut . There 's no question I was born to play the Spock role . I was sporting that look for a good four or five years . The film officially establishes ( to Kirk 's surprise ) that Uhura and Spock are lovers and have been romantically linked for some time , a point which had never been previously explored on TV or in film . " Adrien Brody had discussed playing the role with the director before Quinto was <unk> Kogan portrays a younger Spock . 
 Eric Bana as Captain Nero 
 The film 's time @-@ traveling Romulan villain . Bana shot his scenes toward the end of filming . He wasn 't " a huge Trekkie when [ he ] was a kid " , and he had not seen the films . Even though he was " crazy about the original series , " he would not have accepted the role unless he liked the script , which he deemed " awesome " once he read it . Bana knew Abrams because they coincidentally shared the same agent . Bana improvised the character 's speech patterns . 
 Leonard Nimoy as Spock Prime : Nimoy reprises the role of the older Spock from the original Star Trek timeline , credited as " Spock Prime " . He is a longtime friend of Abrams ' parents , but became better acquainted with Abrams during filming . Although Quinto watched some episodes of the show during breaks in filming , Nimoy was his main resource in playing Spock . Abrams and the writers met Nimoy at his house ; writer Roberto Orci recalled the actor gave a " ' Who are you guys and what are you up to ? ' vibe " before being told how important he was to them . He was silent , and Nimoy 's wife Susan Bay told the creative team he had remained in his chair after their conversation , emotionally overwhelmed by his decision after turning down many opportunities to revisit the role . Had Nimoy disliked the script , production would have been delayed for it to be rewritten . Nimoy later said , " This is the first and only time I ever had a filmmaker say , ' We cannot make this film without you and we won 't make it without you ' " . He was " genuinely excited " by the script 's scope and its detailing of the characters ' backstories , saying , " We have dealt with [ Spock being half @-@ human , half @-@ Vulcan ] , but never with quite the overview that this script has of the entire history of the character , the growth of the character , the beginnings of the character and the arrival of the character into the Enterprise crew . " Abrams said " it was surreal to direct him as Spock , because what the hell am I doing there ? This guy has been doing it for forty years . It 's like ' I think Spock would ... ' " 
 Zoe Saldana as Nyota Uhura 
 Abrams asked her to play the role because he had seen her previous work and liked it . Saldana had never seen the original series , though she had played a Trekkie in The Terminal ( 2004 ) , but agreed to play the role after Abrams complimented her . " For an actor , that 's all you need , that 's all you want . To get the acknowledgment and respect from your peers , " she said . She met with Nichelle Nichols , who explained to her how she had created Uhura 's background and had named the character . Saldana 's mother was a Star Trek fan and sent her voice mails during filming , giving advice on the part . Sydney Tamiia Poitier also auditioned for the part . The film officially establishes the character 's first name , which had never been previously uttered on TV or in film . It also establishes ( in an officially discreet manner ) that Uhura and Spock are , in fact , lovers and had been romantically linked for some time during the film . 
 Karl Urban as Dr. Leonard " Bones " McCoy 
 Like Pine , Urban said of taking on the role that " it is a case of not doing some sort of facsimile or carbon copy , but really taking the very essence of what DeForest Kelley has done and honoring that and bringing something new to the table " . Urban has been a fan of the show since he was seven years old and actively pursued the role after rediscovering the series on DVD with his son . Urban was cast at his first audition , which was two months after his initial meeting with Abrams . He said he was happy to play a role with lots of comedy , something he had not done since The Price of Milk , because he was tired of action @-@ oriented roles . When asked why McCoy is so cantankerous , Urban joked the character might be a " little bipolar actually ! " Orci and Kurtzman had collaborated with Urban on Xena : Warrior Princess , in which he played Cupid and Caesar . 
 Simon Pegg as Montgomery " Scotty " Scott 
 Abrams contacted Pegg by e @-@ mail , offering him the part . To achieve Scotty 's accent , Pegg was assisted by his wife Maureen , who is from Glasgow , although Pegg said that Scotty was from Linlithgow and that he therefore wanted his accent to sound more East Coast Scottish . As a result , the accent he used is a mixture of both , although it leans more towards the West sound . He was also aided by James Doohan 's son , Chris , and Tommy Gormley , the film 's Glaswegian first assistant director . Pegg described Scotty as a positive Scottish stereotype , noting " Scots are the first people to laugh at the fact that they drink and fight a bit " , and that Scotty comes from a long line of Scots with technical expertise , such as John Logie Baird and Alexander Graham Bell . Years before , Pegg 's character in Spaced joked that every odd @-@ numbered Star Trek film being " shit " was a fact of life . Pegg noted " Fate put me in the movie to show me I was talking out of my ass . " 
 John Cho as Hikaru Sulu 
 Abrams had at first been concerned about casting a Korean @-@ American as a Japanese character , but George Takei reassured him that Sulu had been meant to represent all of Asia on the Enterprise , so Abrams went ahead with Cho . Cho acknowledged that being an Asian @-@ American , " there are certain acting roles that you are never going to get , and one of them is playing a cowboy . [ Playing Sulu ] is a realization of that dream – going into space . " He cited the masculinity of the character as being important to him , and spent two weeks fight training . Although Cho suffered an injury to his wrist during filming , a representative reassured the public that the injury was " no big deal " . James <unk> Lee had originally been interested in playing the part of Sulu , but both he and Quinto , who had already been cast as Spock , were at the time members of the cast of the television series Heroes , and its producers told Lee they did not want to lose another cast member for three months . 
 Anton Yelchin as Pavel Chekov 
 As with the rest of the cast , Yelchin was allowed to choose what elements there were from their predecessor 's performances . Yelchin decided to carry on Walter Koenig 's speech patterns of replacing " v " s with " w " s , although he and Abrams felt this was a trait more common of Polish accents than Russian ones . He described Chekov as an odd character , being a Russian who was brought on to the show " in the middle of the Cold War . " He recalled a " scene where they 're talking to Apollo [ who says ] , ' I am Apollo . ' And Chekov is like , ' And I am the czar of all the Russias . ' [ ... ] They gave him these lines . I mean he really is the weirdest , weirdest character . " 
 Bruce Greenwood as Christopher Pike , the captain of the Enterprise . 
 Ben Cross as Sarek , Spock 's father . 
 Winona Ryder as Amanda Grayson , Spock 's mother . 
 Clifton Collins , Jr. as Ayel , Nero 's first officer . 
 Chris Hemsworth plays George Kirk , James Tiberius Kirk 's father , who dies aboard the USS Kelvin while battling Nero , Mark Wahlberg was also approached for the role . Faran Tahir plays Kelvin captain Richard Robau . Winona Kirk , Kirk 's mother , is played by Jennifer Morrison . Greg Ellis plays Chief Engineer Olson , the redshirt who is killed during the space jump . 
 Additional minor roles include Rachel Nichols as <unk> , an Orion Starfleet cadet ; Deep Roy as Scotty 's alien ( <unk> ) assistant <unk> ; and Paul McGillion as a Starfleet barracks leader . Chris Doohan , the son of the original Scotty , James Doohan , makes a cameo appearance in the transporter room as Lt. Kyle . Some characters had their scenes substantially or entirely cut from the film , including Brad William Henke as Kirk 's stepfather ( the character 's lines in the film were spoken by Greg Grunberg ) . Spencer Daniels originally played Kirk 's older brother , George Samuel " Sam " Kirk , Jr . , but the majority of his scenes were cut and the opening car chase scene where Kirk can be heard calling out to him was overdubbed . Victor Garber plays a Klingon interrogator who tortures Nero during his time on Rura Penthe . 
 Tyler Perry appears as the head of Starfleet Academy , Admiral Richard Barnett . James Cawley , producer and star of the web series Star Trek : New Voyages , appears as a Starfleet officer , while Pasha Lychnikoff and Lucia <unk> play Romulans , Lychnikoff a Commander and <unk> a Communications Officer . W. Morgan Sheppard , who played a Klingon in Star Trek VI : The Undiscovered Country , as well as Data 's allegorical grandfather in the TNG episode " The Schizoid Man " , appears in this film as the head of the Vulcan Science Council . Wil Wheaton , known for portraying Wesley Crusher on Star Trek : The Next Generation , was brought in , through urging by Greg Grunberg , to voice several of the other Romulans in the film . Star Trek fan and Carnegie Mellon University professor Randy Pausch cameoed as a Kelvin crew member , and has a line of dialogue . Majel Barrett , the widow of Star Trek creator Gene Roddenberry , reprised her role as the voice of the Enterprise 's computer , which she completed two weeks before her death on December 18 , 2008 . 
 Orci and Kurtzman wrote a scene for Shatner , in which old Spock gives his younger self a recorded message by Kirk from the previous timeline . " It was basically a Happy Birthday wish knowing that Spock was going to go off to Romulus , and Kirk would probably be dead by the time , " and it would have shifted into Shatner reciting " Where no man has gone before " . However , Shatner wanted to share Nimoy 's major role , and did not want a cameo , despite his character 's death in Star Trek Generations . He suggested the film canonize his novels where Kirk is resurrected , but Abrams decided if his character was accompanying Nimoy 's , it would have become a film about the resurrection of Kirk , and not about introducing the new versions of the characters . Nimoy disliked the character 's death in Generations , but also felt resurrecting Kirk would be detrimental to this film , and his friendship with Shatner caused them to avoid discussing the film . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 As early as the 1968 World Science Fiction Convention , Star Trek creator Roddenberry had said he was going to make a film prequel to the television series . But the prequel concept did not resurface until the late 1980s , when Ralph Winter and Harve Bennett submitted a proposal for a prequel during development of the fourth film . Roddenberry rejected Bennett 's prequel proposal in 1991 , after the completion of Star Trek V : The Final Frontier . Then David Loughery wrote a script entitled The Academy Years , but it was shelved in light of objections from Roddenberry and the fanbase . The film that was commissioned instead ended up being Star Trek VI : The Undiscovered Country . In February 2005 , after the financial failure of the tenth film , Star Trek : Nemesis ( 2002 ) , and the cancellation of the television series Star Trek : Enterprise , the franchise 's executive producer Rick Berman and screenwriter Erik <unk> began developing a new film entitled Star Trek : The Beginning . It was to revolve around a new set of characters , led by Kirk 's ancestor Tiberius Chase , and be set during the Earth @-@ Romulan War — after the events of Enterprise but before the events of the original series . 
 In 2005 , Viacom , which owned Paramount Pictures , separated from CBS Corporation , which retained Paramount 's television properties , including ownership of the Star Trek brand . Gail Berman , then president of Paramount , convinced CBS ' chief executive , Leslie Moonves , to allow them eighteen months to develop a new Star Trek film before CBS would re @-@ earn the rights to develop a new television series ( in return , CBS would keep merchandising rights ) . Berman approached Mission : Impossible III writers Orci and Kurtzman for ideas on the new film , and after the film had completed shooting she asked their director , Abrams , to produce it . Abrams , Orci and Kurtzman , plus producers Damon Lindelof and Bryan Burk , felt the franchise had explored enough of what took place after the series , Orci and Lindelof consider themselves trekkies , and feel some of the Star Trek novels have canonical value , although Roddenberry never considered the novels to be canon . Kurtzman is a casual fan , while Burk was not . Abrams ' company , Bad Robot Productions produced the film with Paramount , marking the first time another company had financed a Star Trek film . Bill Todman , Jr . ' s Level 1 Entertainment also co @-@ produced the film , but , during 2008 , Spyglass Entertainment replaced them as financial partner . 
 In an interview , Abrams said that he had never seen Star Trek : Nemesis because he felt the franchise had " disconnected " from the original series . For him , he said , Star Trek was about Kirk and Spock , and the other series were like " separate space adventure [ s ] with the name Star Trek " . He also acknowledged that as a child he had actually preferred the Star Wars movies . He noted that his general knowledge of Star Trek made him well suited to introduce the franchise to newcomers , and that , being an optimistic person , he would make Star Trek an optimistic film , which would be a refreshing contrast to the likes of The Dark Knight . He added that he loved the focus on exploration in Star Trek and the idea of the Prime Directive , which forbids Starfleet to interfere in the development of primitive worlds , but that , because of the budgetary limitations of the original series , it had " never had the resources to actually show the adventure " . He noted he only became involved with the project as producer initially because he wanted to help Orci , Kurtzman and Lindelof . 
 On February 23 , 2007 , Abrams accepted Paramount 's offer to direct the film , after having initially been attached to it solely as a producer . He explained that he had decided to direct the film because , after reading the script , he realized that he " would be so agonizingly envious of whoever stepped in and directed the movie . " Orci and Kurtzman said that their aim had been to impress a casual fan like Abrams with their story . Abrams noted that , during filming , he had been nervous " with all these tattooed faces and pointy ears , bizarre weaponry and Romulan linguists , with dialogue about ' Neutral Zones ' and ' Starfleet ' [ but ] I knew this would work , because the script Alex and Bob wrote was so emotional and so relatable . I didn 't love Kirk and Spock when I began this journey – but I love them now . " 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 Orci said getting Nimoy in the film was important . " Having him sitting around a camp fire sharing his memories was never gonna cut it " though , and time travel was going to be included in the film from the beginning . Kurtzman added , saying the time travel creates jeopardy , unlike other prequels where viewers " know how they all died " . The writers acknowledged time travel had been overused in the other series , but it served a good purpose in creating a new set of adventures for the original characters before they could completely do away with it in other films . Abrams selected the Romulans as the villains because they had been featured less than the Klingons in the series , and thought it was " fun " to have them meet Kirk before they do in the series . Orci and Kurtzman noted it would feel backward to demonize the Klingons again after they had become heroes in later Star Trek series , and the Romulan presence continues Spock 's story from his last chronological appearance in " Unification " , an episode of Star Trek : The Next Generation set in 2368 . The episode of the original continuity in which Kirk becomes the first human to ever see a Romulan , " Balance of Terror " , served as one of the influences for the film . Orci said it was difficult giving a good explanation for the time travel without being gimmicky , like having Nero specifically seeking to assassinate Kirk . 
 Orci noted while the time travel story allowed them to alter some backstory elements such as Kirk 's first encounter with the Romulans , they could not use it as a crutch to change everything and they tried to approach the film as a prequel as much as possible . Kirk 's service on the Farragut , a major backstory point to the original episode " Obsession " , was left out because it was deemed irrelevant to the story of Kirk meeting Spock , although Orci felt nothing in his script precluded it from the new film 's backstory . There was a scene involving Kirk meeting Carol Marcus ( who is revealed as the mother of his son in Star Trek II : The Wrath of Khan ) as a child , but it was dropped because the film needed more time to introduce the core characters . Figuring out ways to get the crew together required some contrivances , which Orci and Kurtzman wanted to explain from old Spock as a way of the timeline mending itself , highlighting the theme of destiny . The line was difficult to write and was ultimately cut out . 
 The filmmakers sought inspiration from novels such as Prime Directive , Spock 's World and Best Destiny to fill in gaps unexplained by canon ; Best Destiny particularly explores Kirk 's childhood and names his parents . One idea that was justified through information from the novels was having the Enterprise built on Earth , which was inspired by a piece of fan art of the Enterprise being built in a shipyard . Orci had sent the fan art to Abrams to show how realistic the film could be . Orci explained parts of the ship would have to be constructed on Earth because of the artificial gravity employed on the ship and its requirement for sustaining warp speed , and therefore the calibration of the ship 's machinery would be best done in the exact gravity well which is to be simulated . They felt free to have the ship built in Iowa because canon is ambiguous as to whether it was built in San Francisco , but this is a result of the time travel rather than something intended to overlap with the original timeline . Abrams noted the continuity of the original series itself was inconsistent at times . 
 Orci and Kurtzman said they wanted the general audience to like the film as much as the fans , by stripping away " <unk> " , making it action @-@ packed and giving it the simple title of Star Trek to indicate to newcomers they would not need to watch any of the other films . Abrams saw humor and sex appeal as two integral and popular elements of the show that needed to be maintained . Orci stated being realistic and being serious were not the same thing . Abrams , Burk , Lindelof , Orci and Kurtzman were fans of The Wrath of Khan , and also cited The Next Generation episode " Yesterday 's Enterprise " as an influence . Abrams ' wife Katie was regularly consulted on the script , as were Orci , Kurtzman and Lindelof 's wives , to make the female characters as strong as possible . Katie Abrams ' approval of the strong female characters was partly why Abrams signed on to direct . 
 Orci and Kurtzman read graduate school dissertations on the series for inspiration ; they noted comparisons of Kirk , Spock and McCoy to Shakespearian archetypes , and Kirk and Spock 's friendship echoing that of John Lennon and Paul McCartney . They also noted that , in the creation of this film , they were influenced by Star Wars , particularly in pacing . " I want to feel the space , I want to feel speed and I want to feel all the things that can become a little bit lost when Star Trek becomes very stately " said Orci . Star Wars permeated in the way they wrote the action sequences , while Burk noted Kirk and Spock 's initially cold relationship mirrors how " Han Solo wasn 't friends with anyone when they started on their journey . " Spock and Uhura were put in an actual relationship as a nod to early episodes highlighting her interest in him . Orci wanted to introduce strong Starfleet captains , concurring with an interviewer that most captains in other films were " <unk> " included to make Kirk look greater by comparison . 
 The USS Kelvin , the ship Kirk 's father serves on , is named after J.J. Abrams ' grandfather , as well as the physicist and engineer Lord Kelvin ( William Thomson ) . The Kelvin 's captain , Richard Robau ( Faran Tahir ) , is named after Orci 's Cuban uncle : Orci theorized the fictional character was born in Cuba and grew up in the Middle East . Another reference to Abrams ' previous works is Slusho , which Uhura orders at the bar where she meets Kirk . Abrams created the fictitious drink for Alias and it reappeared in viral marketing for Cloverfield . Its owner , Tagruato , is also from Cloverfield and appears on a building in San Francisco . The red matter in the film is in the shape of a red ball , an Abrams motif dating back to the pilot of Alias . 
 = = = Design = = = 
 The film 's production designer was Scott Chambliss , a longtime collaborator with Abrams . Chambliss worked with a large group of concept illustrators , including James Clyne , Ryan Church , creature designer Neville Page , and Star Trek veteran John Eaves . Abrams stated the difficulty of depicting the future was that much of modern technology was inspired by the original show , and made it seem outdated . Thus the production design had to be consistent with the television series but also feel more advanced than the real world technology developed after it . " We all have the iPhone that does more than the communicator , " said Abrams . " I feel like there 's a certain thing that you can 't really hold onto , which is kind of the kitschy quality . That must go if it 's going to be something that you believe is real . " Prop master Russell Bobbitt collaborated with Nokia on recreating the original communicator , creating a $ 50 @,@ 000 prototype . Another prop recreated for the film was the tricorder . Bobbitt brought the original prop to the set , but the actors found it too large to carry when filming action scenes , so technical advisor Doug Brody redesigned it to be smaller . The phaser props were designed as spring @-@ triggered barrels that revolve and glow as the setting switches from " stun " to " kill " . An <unk> <unk> @-@ 1 prototype car was used on location . 
 Production designer Scott Chambliss maintained the layout of the original bridge , but aesthetically altered it with brighter colors to reflect the optimism of Star Trek . The viewscreen was made into a window that could have images projected on it to make the space environment palpable . Abrams compared the redesign to the sleek modernist work of Pierre Cardin and the sets from 2001 : A Space Odyssey , which were from the 1960s . He joked the redesigned bridge made the Apple Store look " uncool " . At the director 's behest , more railings were added to the bridge to make it look safer , and the set was built on gimbals so its rocking motions when the ship accelerates and is attacked was more realistic . To emphasize the size of the ship , Abrams chose to give the engine room a highly industrial appearance : he explained to Pegg that he was inspired by RMS Titanic , a sleek ship in which there was an " incredible gut " . 
 Abrams selected Michael Kaplan to design the costumes because he had not seen any of the films , meaning he would approach the costumes with a new angle . For the Starfleet uniforms , Kaplan followed the show 's original color @-@ coding , with dark gray ( almost black ) undershirts and pants and colored overshirts showing each crew member 's position . Command officers wear gold shirts , science and medical officers wear blue , and operations ( technicians , engineers , and security personnel ) wear red . Kaplan wanted the shirts to be more sophisticated than the originals and selected to have the Starfleet symbol patterned on them . Kirk wears only the undershirt because he is a cadet . Kaplan modelled the uniforms on the Kelvin on science fiction films of the 1940s and 1950s , to contrast with the Enterprise @-@ era uniforms based on the ones created in the 1960s . For Abrams , " The costumes were a microcosm of the entire project , which was how to take something that 's kind of silly and make it feel real . But how do you make legitimate those near @-@ primary color costumes ? " 
 Lindelof compared the film 's Romulan faction to pirates with their bald , tattooed heads and disorganized costuming . Their ship , the Narada , is purely practical with visible mechanics as it is a " working ship " , unlike the Enterprise crew who give a respectable presentation on behalf of the Federation . Chambliss was heavily influenced by the architecture of Antoni Gaudí for the Narada , who created buildings that appeared to be inside out : by making the ship 's exposed wires appear like bones or ligaments , it would create a foreboding atmosphere . The ship 's interior was made of six pieces that could be rearranged to create a different room . The Romulan actors had three prosthetics applied to their ears and foreheads , while Bana had a fourth prosthetic for the <unk> on his ear that extends to the back of his character 's head . The film 's Romulans lacked the ' V ' -shaped ridges on the foreheads , which had been present in all of their depictions outside the original series . Neville Page wanted to honor that by having Nero 's crew ritually scar themselves too , forming keloids reminiscent of the ' V ' <unk> . It was abandoned as they did not pursue the idea enough . Kaplan wanted aged , worn and rugged clothes for the Romulans because of their mining backgrounds , and found some greasy looking fabrics at a flea market . Kaplan tracked down the makers of those clothes , who were discovered to be based in Bali , and commissioned them to create his designs . 
 Barney Burman supervised the makeup for the other aliens : his team had to rush the creation of many of the aliens , because originally the majority of them were to feature in one scene towards the end of filming . Abrams deemed the scene too similar to the cantina sequence in Star Wars and decided to dot the designs around the film . A tribble was placed in the background of Scotty 's introduction . Both digital and physical makeup was used for aliens . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Principal photography for the film began on November 7 , 2007 and culminated on March 27 , 2008 ; however second unit filming occurred in Bakersfield , California in April 2008 , which stood in for Kirk 's childhood home in Iowa . Filming was also done at the City Hall of Long Beach , California ; the San Rafael Swell in Utah ; and the California State University , Northridge in Los Angeles ( which was used for establishing shots of students at Starfleet Academy ) . A parking lot outside Dodger Stadium was used for the ice planet of Delta Vega and the Romulan drilling rig on Vulcan . The filmmakers expressed an interest in Iceland for scenes on Delta Vega , but decided against it : Chambliss enjoyed the challenge of filming scenes with snow in southern California . Other Vulcan exteriors were shot at Vasquez Rocks , a location that was used in various episodes of the original series . A Budweiser plant in Van Nuys was used for the Enterprise 's engine room , while a Long Beach power plant was used for the Kelvin 's engine room . 
 Following the initiation of the 2007 – 2008 Writers Guild of America strike on November 5 , 2007 , Abrams , himself a WGA member , told Variety that while he would not render writing services for the film and intended to walk the picket line , he did not expect the strike to impact his directing of the production . In the final few weeks before the strike and start of production , Abrams and Lindelof polished the script for a final time . Abrams was frustrated that he was unable to alter lines during the strike , whereas normally they would have been able to improvise new ideas during rehearsal , although Lindelof acknowledged they could dub some lines in post @-@ production . Orci and Kurtzman were able to stay on set without <unk> because they were also executive producers on the film ; they could " make funny eyes and faces at the actors whenever they had a problem with the line and sort of nod when they had something better " . Abrams was able to alter a scene where Spock combats six Romulans from a fistfight to a gunfight , having decided there were too many physical brawls in the film . 
 The production team maintained heavily enforced security around the film . Karl Urban revealed , " [ There is a ] level of security and secrecy that we have all been forced to adopt . I mean , it 's really kind of paranoid crazy , but sort of justified . We 're not allowed to walk around in public in our costumes and we have to be herded around everywhere in these golf carts that are completely concealed and covered in black canvas . The security of it is immense . You feel your freedom is a big challenge . " Actors like Jennifer Morrison were only given the scripts of their scenes . The film 's shooting script was fiercely protected even with the main cast . Simon Pegg said , " I read [ the script ] with a security guard near me – it 's that secretive . " The film used the fake working title of Corporate Headquarters . Some of the few outside of the production allowed to visit the set included Rod Roddenberry , Ronald D. Moore , Jonathan Frakes , Walter Koenig , Nichelle Nichols , Ben Stiller , Tom Cruise and Steven Spielberg ( who had partially convinced Abrams to direct because he liked the script , and he even advised the action scenes during his visit ) . 
 When the shoot ended , Abrams gave the cast small boxes containing little telescopes , which allowed them to read the name of each constellation it was pointed at . " I think he just wanted each of us to look at the stars a little differently , " said John Cho . After the shoot , Abrams cut out some scenes of Kirk and Spock as children , including seeing the latter as a baby , as well as a subplot involving Nero being imprisoned by the Klingons and his escape : this explanation for his absence during Kirk 's life confused many to whom Abrams screened the film . Other scenes cut out explained that the teenage Kirk stole his stepfather 's antique car because he had forced him to clean it before an auction ; and that the Orion he seduced at the Academy worked in the operations division . Afterwards , she agrees to open the e @-@ mail containing his patch that allows him to pass the Kobayashi Maru test . 
 Abrams chose to shoot the film in the anamorphic format on 35 mm film after discussions about whether the film should be shot in high @-@ definition digital video . Cinematographer Dan Mindel and Abrams agreed the choice gave the film a big @-@ screen feel and the realistic , organic look they wanted for the film setting . Abrams and Mindel used lens flares throughout filming to create an optimistic atmosphere and a feeling that activity was taking place off @-@ camera , making the Star Trek universe feel more real . " There 's something about those flares , especially in a movie that potentially could be incredibly sterile and CG and overly controlled . There 's just something incredibly unpredictable and gorgeous about them . " Mindel would create more flares by shining a flashlight or pointing a mirror at the camera lens , or using two cameras simultaneously and therefore two lighting set @-@ ups . Editor Mary Jo Markey later said in interview that he had not told her ( or fellow editor Maryann Brandon ) this , and initially contacted the film developers asking why the film seemed overexposed . 
 = = = Effects = = = 
 Industrial Light & Magic and Digital Domain were among several companies that created over 1 @,@ 000 special effect shots . The visual effects supervisors were Roger Guyett , who collaborated with Abrams on Mission : Impossible III and also served as second unit director , and Russell Earl . Abrams avoided shooting only against bluescreen and greenscreen , because it " makes me insane " , using them instead to extend the scale of sets and locations . The Delta Vega sequence required the mixing of digital snow with real snow . 
 Star Trek was the first film ILM worked on using entirely digital ships . The Enterprise was intended by Abrams to be a merging of its design in the series and the refitted version from the original film . Abrams had fond memories of the revelation of the Enterprise 's refit in Star Trek : The Motion Picture , because it was the first time the ship felt tangible and real to him . The iridescent pattern on the ship from The Motion Picture was maintained to give the ship depth , while model maker Roger Goodson also applied the " Aztec " pattern from The Next Generation . Goodson recalled Abrams also wanted to bring a " hot rod " aesthetic to the ship . Effects supervisor Roger Guyett wanted the ship to have more moving parts , which stemmed from his childhood dissatisfaction with the ship 's design : The new Enterprise 's dish can expand and move , while the fins on its engines split slightly when they begin warping . The Enterprise was originally redesigned by Ryan Church using features of the original , at 1 @,@ 200 feet ( 370 m ) long , but was doubled in size to 2 @,@ 357 feet ( 718 m ) long to make it seem " grander " , while the Romulan Narada is five miles long and several miles wide . The filmmakers had to simulate lens flares on the ships in keeping with the film 's cinematography . 
 Carolyn Porco of NASA was consulted on the planetary science and imagery . The animators realistically recreated what an explosion would look like in space : short blasts , which suck inward and leave debris from a ship floating . For shots of an imploding planet , the same explosion program was used to simulate it breaking up , while the animators could manually composite multiple layers of rocks and wind sucking into the planet . Unlike other Star Trek films and series , the transporter beam effects swirl rather than speckle . Abrams conceived the redesign to emphasize the notion of transporters as beams that can pick up and move people , rather than a signal composed of scrambled atoms . 
 Lola Visual Effects worked on 48 shots , including some animation to Bana and Nimoy . Bana required extensive damage to his teeth , which was significant enough to completely replace his mouth in some shots . Nimoy 's mouth was reanimated in his first scene with Kirk following a rerecording session . The filmmakers had filmed Nimoy when he rerecorded his lines so they could rotoscope his mouth into the film , even recreating the lighting conditions , but they realized they had to digitally recreate his lips because of the bouncing light created by the camp fire . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 Michael Giacchino , Abrams ' most frequent collaborator , composed the music for Star Trek . He kept the original theme by Alexander Courage for the end credits , which Abrams said symbolized the momentum of the crew coming together . Giacchino admitted personal pressure in scoring the film , as " I grew up listening to all of that great [ Trek ] music , and that 's part of what inspired me to do what I 'm doing [ ... ] You just go in scared . You just hope you do your best . It 's one of those things where the film will tell me what to do . " Scoring took place at the Sony Scoring Stage with a 107 @-@ piece orchestra and 40 @-@ person choir . An <unk> , performed by Karen Han , was used for the Vulcan themes . A distorted recording was used for the Romulans . Varèse Sarabande , the record label responsible for releasing albums of Giacchino 's previous scores for Alias , Lost , Mission : Impossible III , and Speed Racer , released the soundtrack for the film on May 5 . The music for the theatrical trailers were composed by Two Steps from Hell . 
 = = = Sound effects = = = 
 The sound effects were designed by Star Wars veteran Ben Burtt . Whereas the phaser blast noises from the television series were derived from The War of the Worlds ( 1953 ) , Burtt made his phaser sounds more like his blasters from Star Wars , because Abrams ' depiction of phasers were closer to the blasters ' bullet @-@ like fire , rather than the steady beams of energy in previous Star Trek films . Burtt reproduced the classic photon torpedo and warp drive sounds : he tapped a long spring against a contact microphone , and combined that with cannon fire . Burtt used a 1960s oscillator to create a musical and emotional hum to the warping and transporting sounds . 
 = = Release = = 
 In February 2008 , Paramount announced they would move Star Trek from its December 25 , 2008 release date to May 8 , 2009 , as the studio felt more people would see the film during summer than winter . The film was practically finished by the end of 2008 . Paramount 's decision came about after visiting the set and watching dailies , as they realized the film could appeal to a much broader audience . Even though the filmmakers liked the Christmas release date , Damon Lindelof acknowledged it would allow more time to perfect the visual effects . The months @-@ long gap between the completion of the production and release meant Alan Dean Foster was allowed to watch the whole film before writing the novelization , although the novel would contain scenes absent from the final edit . Quinto narrated the audiobook . 
 A surprise public screening was held on April 6 , 2009 , at the Alamo Drafthouse theater in Austin , Texas , hosted by writers Robert Orci , Alex Kurtzman , and producer Damon Lindelof . The showing was publicized as a screening of Star Trek II : The Wrath of Khan , followed by a ten @-@ minute preview of the new Star Trek film . A few minutes into Khan , the film appeared to melt and Nimoy appeared on stage with Orci , Kurtzman and Lindelof , asking the audience , " wouldn 't you rather see the new movie ? " Following the surprise screening in Texas , the first of many premieres across the world was held at the Sydney Opera House in Sydney on April 7 , 2009 . For almost two years , the town of Vulcan , Alberta had campaigned to have the film premiere there , but because it had no theater , Paramount arranged instead a lottery where 300 winning residents would be taken to a prerelease screening in Calgary . 
 = = = Marketing = = = 
 The first teaser trailer debuted in theaters with Cloverfield on January 18 , 2008 , which showed the Enterprise under construction . Abrams himself directed the first part of the trailer , where a welder removes his goggles . Professional welders were hired for the teaser . The voices of the 1960s played over the trailer were intended to link the film to the present day ; John F. Kennedy in particular was chosen because of similarities with the character of James T. Kirk and because he is seen to have " kicked off " the Space Race . Orci explained that : " If we do indeed have a Federation , I think Kennedy ’ s words will be inscribed in there someplace . " Star Trek 's later trailers would win four awards , including Best in Show , in the tenth annual Golden Trailer Awards . 
 Paramount faced two obstacles in promoting the film : the unfamiliarity of the " MySpace generation " with the franchise and the relatively weak international performance of the previous films . Six months before the film 's release , Abrams toured Europe and North America with 25 minutes of footage . Abrams noted the large @-@ scale campaign started unusually early , but this was because the release delay allowed him to show more completed scenes than normal . The director preferred promoting his projects quietly , but concurred Paramount needed to remove Star Trek 's stigma . Abrams would exaggerate his preference for other shows to Star Trek as a child to the press , with statements like " I 'm not a Star Trek fan " and " this movie is not made for Star Trek fans necessarily " . Orci compared Abrams ' approach to The Next Generation episode " A Matter of Honor " , where William Riker is stationed aboard a Klingon vessel . " On that ship when someone talks back to you , you would have to beat them down or you lose the respect of your crew , which is protocol , whereas on a Federation ship that would be a crime . So we have to give [ J. J. Abrams ] a little bit of leeway , when he is traveling the ' galaxy ' over there where they don 't know Trek , to say the things that need to be said in order to get people onto our side . " 
 Promotional partners on the film include Nokia , Verizon Wireless , <unk> , Kellogg 's , Burger King and Intel Corporation , as well as various companies specializing in home decorating , apparel , jewelry , gift items and " Tiberius " , " Pon Farr " and " Red Shirt " fragrances . Playmates Toys , who owned the Star Trek toy license until 2000 , also held the merchandise rights for the new film . The first wave was released in March and April 2009 . Playmates hope to continue their toy line into 2010 . The first wave consists of 3 @.@ 75 " , 6 " and 12 " action figures , an Enterprise replica , prop toys and play <unk> to recreate the whole bridge , one would have to buy more 3 @.@ 75 " figures , which come with chairs and consoles to add to the main set consisting of Kirk 's chair , the floor , the main console and the viewscreen . Master Replicas , Mattel , Hasbro and <unk> Games will promote the film via playing cards , Monopoly , UNO , Scrabble , Magic 8 @-@ Ball , Hot Wheels , Tyco R / C , <unk> , Scene It ? and Barbie lines . Some of these are based on previous Star Trek iterations rather than the film . CBS also created a merchandising line based around Star Trek caricatures named " <unk> " . 
 = = = Home release = = = 
 The film was released on DVD and Blu @-@ ray on November 17 , 2009 in North America , November 16 in the United Kingdom and October 26 in Australia and New Zealand . In Sweden and Germany , it was released on November 4 . First week sales stood at 5 @.@ 7 million DVDs along with 1 @.@ 1 million Blu @-@ ray Discs , giving Paramount Pictures their third chart topping release in five weeks following Transformers : Revenge of the Fallen and G.I. Joe : The Rise of Cobra . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 Official screenings in the United States started at 7 pm on May 7 , 2009 , grossing $ 4 million on its opening day . By the end of the weekend , Star Trek had opened with $ 79 @,@ 204 @,@ 300 , as well as $ 35 @,@ 500 @,@ 000 from other countries . Adjusted and unadjusted for inflation , it beat Star Trek : First Contact for the largest American opening for a Star Trek film . The film made US $ 8 @.@ 5 million from its IMAX screenings , breaking The Dark Knight 's $ 6 @.@ 3 million IMAX opening record . The film is the highest @-@ grossing in the United States and Canada from the entire Star Trek film franchise , eclipsing The Voyage Home and Star Trek : The Motion Picture . Its opening weekend numbers alone outgross the entire individual runs of The Undiscovered Country , The Final Frontier , Insurrection and Nemesis . Star Trek ended its United States theatrical run on October 1 , 2009 , with a box office total of $ 257 @,@ 730 @,@ 019 , which places it as the seventh highest @-@ grossing film for 2009 behind The Hangover . The film grossed $ 127 @,@ 764 @,@ 536 in international markets , for a total worldwide gross of $ 385 @,@ 494 @,@ 555 . While foreign grosses represent only 31 % of the total box office receipts , executives of Paramount were happy with the international sales , as Star Trek historically was a movie franchise that never has been a big draw overseas . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Star Trek was acclaimed by film critics . On the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes , it received 95 % approval with an average rating of 8 @.@ 2 / 10 ( the highest scored Star Trek film ) , based on 333 reviews , with the consensus : " Star Trek reignites a classic franchise with action , humor , a strong story , and brilliant visuals , and will please traditional Trekkies and new fans alike . " Metacritic , which assigns a weighted average score , gave the film an 83 out of 100 based on 37 reviews from critics . 
 Ty Burr of the Boston Globe gave the film a perfect four star rating , describing it as " ridiculously satisfying " , and the " best prequel ever " . Burr praised the character development in the film , opining that " emotionally , Star Trek hits every one of its marks , functioning as a family reunion that extends across decades , entertainment mediums , even blurring the line between audience and show . " He continued : " Trading on affections sustained over 40 years of popular culture , Star Trek does what a franchise reboot rarely does . It reminds us why we loved these characters in the first place . " Owen Gleiberman from Entertainment Weekly gave the film an ' A- ' grade , commenting that director Abrams " crafts an origin story that avoids any hint of the origin doldrums . " Similar sentiments were expressed by Rolling Stone journalist Peter Travers , who gave the film a 3 @.@ 5 out of 4 stars . He felt that the acting from the cast was the highlight of the filming , asserting that the performance of Pine radiated star quality . Likewise , Travers called Quinto 's performance " sharp " and " intuitive " , and felt that Quinto " gave the film a soul " . Manohla Dargis of the New York Times wrote , " Star Trek [ ... ] isn ’ t just a pleasurable rethink of your geek uncle 's favorite science @-@ fiction series . It 's also a testament to television 's power as <unk> , as a source for some of the fundamental stories we tell about ourselves , who we are and where we came from . Slate 's Dana Stevens felt that the film was " a gift to those of us who loved the original series , that brainy , wonky , idealistic body of work that aired to almost no commercial success between 1966 – 69 and has since become a science fiction archetype and object of cult adoration . " Time Out London 's Tom Huddleston praised the aesthetic qualities of the film , such as the design of the Enterprise , and praised the performances of the cast . He wrote , " The cast are equally strong : Quinto brings wry charm to an otherwise calculating character , while Pine powers through his performance in bullish , if not quite Shatner @-@ esque fashion . " 
 The chemistry between Pine and Quinto was well received by critics . Gleiberman felt that as the film progressed to the conclusion , Pine and Quinto emulated the same connection as Kirk and Spock . Tim Robey of The Telegraph echoed similar attitudes ; " The movie charts their relationship [ ... ] in a nicely oblique way . " Robey resumed : " It 's the main event , dramatically speaking , but there 's always something more <unk> urgent to command their attention , whether it 's a Vulcan distress signal or the continuing rampages of those pesky Romulans . " Burr opined that Abrams had an accurate understanding of the relationship between Kirk and Spock , and wrote , " Pine makes a fine , brash boy Kirk , but Quinto 's Spock is something special – an eerily calm figure freighted with a heavier sadness than Roddenberry 's original . The two ground each other and point toward all the stories yet to come . " Similarly , The Guardian writer Peter Bradshaw expressed : " The story of Kirk and Spock is brought thrillingly back to life by a new first generation : Chris Pine and Zachary Quinto , who give inspired , utterly unselfconscious and lovable performances , with power , passion and some cracking comic timing . " 
 Some film critics were polarized with Star Trek . Keith Phipps of The A.V. Club gave the film a ' B + ' grade , and asserted that it was " a reconsideration of what constitutes Star Trek , one that deemphasizes heady concepts and plainly stated humanist virtues in favor of breathless action punctuated by bursts of emotion . It might not even be immediately recognizable to veteran fans . " In concurrence , Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun @-@ Times stated that " the Gene Roddenberry years , when stories might play with questions of science , ideals or philosophy , have been replaced by stories reduced to loud and colorful action . " Ebert ultimately gave it a 2 @.@ 5 out of 4 stars . Similarly , Marc Bain of Newsweek opined : " The latest film version of Star Trek [ ... ] is more brawn than brain , and it largely jettisons complicated ethical conundrums in favor of action sequences and special effects . Slate journalist Juliet <unk> argued that the new film , with its " standard Hollywood torture scene " , failed to live up to the intellectual standard set by the 1992 Next Generation episode " Chain of Command " , whose treatment of the issue she found both more sophisticated and pertinent to the ongoing debate over the United States ' use of enhanced interrogation techniques . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 The film garnered numerous accolades after its release . In 2010 , it was nominated for four Academy Awards at the 82nd Academy Awards , for Best Sound Editing , Best Sound Mixing , Best Visual Effects , and Best Makeup . Star Trek won in the category for Best Makeup , making it the first Star Trek film to receive an Academy Award . The film was nominated for three Empire Awards , to which it won for Best Sci @-@ Fi / Fantasy . In October 2009 , Star Trek won the Hollywood Award for Best Movie , and attained six Scream Awards and the 2009 Scream Awards Ceremony . The film attained a Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by a Stunt Ensemble in a Motion Picture at the 16th Screen Actors Guild Awards . 
 Star Trek received several nominations . The film was nominated for a Grammy Award for Best Score Soundtrack Album for a Motion Picture , Television or Other Visual Media , but was beaten out by Up , also composed by Michael Giacchino . At the 36th People 's Choice Awards , the film received four nominations : the film was a contender for Favorite Movie , Zoe Saldana was nominated for Favorite Breakout Movie Actress , and both Pine and Quinto were nominated for Favorite Breakout Movie Actor . On June 15 , 2009 , the film was nominated for five Teen Choice Awards . In addition , Star Trek was nominated for five Broadcast Film Critics Association Awards and was named one of the top @-@ ten films of 2009 by the National Board of Review of Motion Pictures . 
 = = Sequels = = 
 The film 's major cast members signed on for two sequels as part of their original deals . Abrams and Bryan Burk signed to produce and Abrams signed to direct the first sequel . The sequel , Star Trek Into Darkness , starring Benedict Cumberbatch as Khan Noonien Singh , was released on May 16 , 2013 . 
 The film was released on July 22 , 2016 , but Abrams will return only as producer ( due to him directing Star Wars : The Force Awakens ) and Kurtzman is no longer writing . On May 13 , 2014 , it was announced that Roberto Orci , the writer of the first and second film , would direct the third film , but in December 2014 , it was reported that Roberto Orci would no longer direct . Edgar Wright , Rupert Wyatt , Morten Tyldum , Justin Lin , Daniel Espinosa , and Duncan Jones were being looked at as a potential replacement , though Jones indicated that he would not be directing the film . A week later , it was announced that Lin will direct the film . 
 = Elephant & Castle tube station = 
 Elephant & Castle is a London Underground station in the London Borough of Southwark in central London . It is on the Bank branch of the Northern line between Kennington and Borough stations , and is the southern terminus of the Bakerloo line , the next station being Lambeth North . The station is in both Travelcard Zones 1 and 2 . The Northern line station was opened in 1890 by the City and South London Railway ( C & SLR ) while the Bakerloo line station was opened sixteen years later by the Baker Street and Waterloo Railway ( BS & WR ) . There is out @-@ of @-@ station interchange with the nearby Elephant & Castle National Rail station . 
 A girl born at the station in 1924 was the first baby to be born on the Underground network . The Bakerloo line building remains much as originally constructed and is a typical Leslie Green structure . The Northern line building was designed by Thomas Phillips Figgis , and was rebuilt several times until the current structure opened in 2003 . Transport for London ( TfL ) is currently planning a major upgrade to the station . A Bakerloo line extension south to Camberwell was planned and approved in 1931 but construction never started . Similar proposals have been revived on several occasions ; in 2014 TfL ran a consultation on an extension to Hayes and Beckenham Junction , which is still under consideration . 
 = = The station today = = 
 = = = Geography = = = 
 Elephant & Castle is located in the Elephant and Castle area of Newington in the London Borough of Southwark in Central London . The station is in both Travelcard Zones 1 and 2 and is on the Bank branch of the Northern line between Kennington and Borough stations , and is the southern terminus of the Bakerloo line , the next station being Lambeth North . The station has two surface buildings , separated by a large traffic intersection . The northern building provides the most direct access to the Bakerloo line , while the southern one is linked more directly to the Northern line . 
 = = = Station building = = = 
 Access to the more northerly ( Bakerloo ) part of the station is via the original building , while the exit is via a new extension next to Skipton House . Between the entrance and two shops is the entrance to South London House , an office block above the station . The BS & WR station building remains much as originally constructed and is a typical Leslie Green structure . The main alteration is a modern glass @-@ sided and glass @-@ topped flat @-@ roofed extension abutting the original western elevation , giving access to three of the six arches . These arches , in a classic deep @-@ red faience style , formed the original perimeter : two are infilled with street @-@ facing shops . As the station also functions as a drivers ' depot , London Underground uses the offices above the station for administration and drivers ' accommodation . 
 The C & SLR station was designed by Thomas Phillips Figgis in a similar style to Kennington station . It was partially rebuilt in the 1920s when the C & SLR tunnels were modernised , and was rebuilt during the construction of the Elephant & Castle shopping centre and roundabout in the 1960s . It was rebuilt at the start of the 21st century , reopening on 12 December 2003 . Neither building has escalators . To get from either ticket hall to the platforms it is necessary to use the lifts or spiral stairs . The southern building has lifts from street level down to the level of the southbound Northern line platform , the only step @-@ free platform at the station . From inside the station , the northern exit is labelled " London South Bank University " and emerges at the southern tip of the triangular campus . The southern exit is labelled " Shopping Centre " and also leads to the National Rail station where there is an out @-@ of @-@ station interchange , allowing Oyster card and contactless payment card users to interchange while paying a single fare for their journey . 
 = = = Heritage feature and refurbishment = = = 
 The multi @-@ coloured platform tiles on the Northern line were reconstructed in the 1920s in conjunction with an extension to Morden station . The tiles were carefully replicated in 2006 to replace the originals , which were in poor condition . The original C & SLR tiles dating from 1890 remain on the tunnel roofs of the Northern line platforms , albeit now covered over by the new cable @-@ management system . The station was refurbished in 2007 . The original maroon and cream tiling on the Bakerloo line platforms has been covered over . Because of the arrangement of the lighting , cabling and public address loudspeakers , it was not possible to arrange the new roundels at alternate ‘ low ’ and ‘ high ’ positions , all being at the lower level . 
 = = Services and connections = = 
 = = = Bakerloo line = = = 
 The station is currently the southern terminus of the Bakerloo line , running north via Lambeth North and Waterloo towards Queen 's Park , Stonebridge Park or Harrow & Wealdstone . Train frequencies vary throughout the day , but generally trains operate every 4 – 9 minutes between 05 : 37 and 00 : 06 northbound ( as of 2015 ) , a little less frequently than the Northern line . 
 = = = Northern line = = = 
 On this line , the station is on the Bank branch ; the next stations are Borough to the north and Kennington to the south . The typical off @-@ peak service ( as of January 2015 ) in trains per hour ( tph ) is <unk> northbound to each of High Barnet and Edgware and <unk> southbound to Morden . 
 = = = Connections = = = 
 London Bus routes 1 , 12 , 35 , 40 , 45 , 53 , 63 , 68 , 100 , 133 , 136 , 148 , 155 , 168 , 171 , 172 , 176 , 188 , 196 , 333 , 343 , 344 , 360 , 363 , 415 , 453 , 468 , C10 and P5 , and night routes N1 , <unk> , <unk> , N68 , <unk> , <unk> , N155 , <unk> and <unk> serve the station . In addition , bus routes 12 , 53 , 148 , 176 , 188 , 344 and 453 provide a 24 @-@ hour bus service . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Northern line = = = 
 Between 1883 – 86 , a route was planned by the City and South London Railway ( C & SLR ) , then known as the City of London & Southwark Subway ( CL & SS ) , from King William Street via Elephant & Castle to Stockwell and Clapham Common . The entire route was approved on 25 July 1890 and the station opened on 18 December 1890 as part of the first deep @-@ level tube between King William Street and Stockwell . 
 In November 1891 , the C & SLR recognised the deficiencies of the section between Borough station and King William Street . A new route was chosen with a different pair of tunnels , avoiding this section . Near Borough , the new tunnels would branch off to London Bridge to form an interchange with the mainline station and then north through the City of London to Angel . The plan was approved on 24 August 1893 following a delay . The Act also incorporated another bill of 1893 to grant more time to build the southern extension to Clapham . The new route and the first section of the northern extension from Borough to Moorgate opened on 25 February 1900 , and the King William Street diversion was closed . The southern extension to Clapham Common opened on 3 June 1900 . Work continued on the rest of the northern extension and it opened on 17 November 1901 . 
 In 1912 , the C & SLR submitted another bill to increase its capacity by enlarging its tunnels to the larger diameter used for the tunnels of the more recently built railways to allow larger , more modern rolling stock to be used . Together , the works proposed in these bills would enable the Charing Cross , Euston and Hampstead Railway ( CCE & HR ) ' s trains to run over the C & SLR 's route and vice versa , effectively combining the two separate railways . Tunnel enlargement works only restarted after World War I when an extension of time was granted in February 1919 . The Moorgate to Clapham Common section reopened on 1 December 1924 , approximately eight months after the rest of the line . 
 = = = Bakerloo line = = = 
 In November 1891 , a private bill was presented to Parliament for the construction of the Baker Street and Waterloo Railway ( BS & WR ) . The railway was planned to run entirely underground from Marylebone to Elephant & Castle via Baker Street and Waterloo and was approved in 1900 . Construction commenced in August 1898 under the direction of Sir Benjamin Baker , W.R. Galbraith and R.F. Church with building work by Perry & Company of Tredegar Works , Bow . Test trains began running in 1905 . The first section of the BS & WR was between Baker Street and Lambeth North . The BS & WR station opened on 5 August 1906 , almost five months after the rest of the line . 
 = = = Incidents = = = 
 On the morning of 27 November 1923 , a slight misjudgement at the end of the tunnel enlargement work left the tunnel unstable near Borough . A collapse on the same day , caused when a train hit temporary shoring near Elephant & Castle , filled the tunnel with wet gravel . Later a gas main exploded , causing a water main to break and leaving a water @-@ filled crater in the middle of the street . The line was briefly split in two , but was completely closed on 28 November 1923 . 
 A girl born at the station on 13 May 1924 was the first baby to be born on the Underground network . According to initial press reports , she had been named Thelma Ursula Beatrice Eleanor ( so that her initials would be <unk> ) but this later proved false : her actual name was Mary Ashfield Eleanor Hammond . Her second name Ashfield was from Lord Ashfield , chairman of the railway , who agreed to be the baby 's godfather , but said that , " it would not do to encourage this sort of thing as I am a busy man . " 
 = = Proposals for the future = = 
 = = = Station upgrade = = = 
 A major upgrade is being planned by Transport for London to bring improvements to the station ; these include a new Northern line ticket hall , three new escalators and additional lifts to provide step @-@ free access to the Northern line platforms . This will be done in conjunction with the major transformation in the Elephant & Castle area to create thousands of new homes and potential for new retail development to provide growth in the area . 
 = = = Bakerloo line extension to southeast London = = = 
 An extension to Camberwell from Elephant & Castle was planned and approved in 1931 . Elephant & Castle was also to be reconstructed with a third platform to provide the additional reversing capacity , along with a new ticket hall and escalators . Due to the need to prioritise the extension from Baker Street to Finchley Road , to relieve congestion on the Metropolitan line , as well as financial constraints and the outbreak of the Second World War , no work was carried out on the extension . In the 1950s there was a brief revival of the plan , in which it was proposed that Elephant & Castle would not be altered and the additional turn @-@ round capacity would be provided by making Camberwell a three @-@ platform terminus . The project was ultimately unaffordable owing to post @-@ war austerity , reduced demand , and the disproportionately high cost of the project with a three @-@ platform deep @-@ level terminus and the requirement for new trains and a depot . 
 During 2005 – 06 , a Bakerloo extension was proposed with three route options . The options were extensions to Hayes via Peckham Rye , Beckenham Junction via Camberwell , or Hayes via New Cross . In July 2011 , Network Rail recommended an extension of the Bakerloo line from Elephant & Castle to Lewisham , where it would take over the line to Hayes . In September 2014 , Transport for London ran a consultation on the Bakerloo extension to Hayes and Beckenham Junction with options via Lewisham and Camberwell or Old Kent Road , taking over Network Rail 's Hayes line . The cost of the extension is estimated at around £ 2 – 3 billion with construction expected to take place between the mid @-@ 2020s and early 2030s . 
 = Breaking Point ( Keri Hilson song ) = 
 " Breaking Point " is a song performed by American recording artist Keri Hilson from her second studio album , No Boys Allowed ( 2010 ) . Mosley Music Group and Interscope Records released it as the album 's lead single on September 7 , 2010 . The song was written by Timbaland , Jerome " J @-@ Roc " Harmon , Hilson and Timothy " Attitude " Clayton , and produced by Timbaland with assistance from Harmon . According to Hilson , " Breaking Point " was inspired by women 's experiences of tolerating too much from their partner and enduring their lies . The song is about a breaking point when a woman is tired of being neglected and exploited by her partner , whose many excuses are no longer accepted . 
 " Breaking Point " is a mid @-@ tempo R & B ballad that incorporates elements of pop and soul music . It features guitar , kick drum , organ , percussion and piano instrumentation . The song received generally positive reviews from music critics , who commended its empowering message and Timbaland 's production . In the United States , " Breaking Point " peaked at number 44 on the Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart and bubbled under the Billboard Hot 100 at number 17 . Bryan Barber directed the ballad 's accompanying music video , which is primarily set at a beauty salon with Hilson and her girlfriends . 
 = = Writing and inspiration = = 
 " Breaking Point " was written by Timbaland , Jerome " J @-@ Roc " Harmon , Keri Hilson and Timothy " Attitude " Clayton . In an interview with Ian Drew of <unk> , Hilson explained that inspiration for writing the song came from women 's experiences , including " being lied to and tolerating too much " from their partner . She elaborated on its theme during a radio interview , stating : " The song is about that breaking point that every woman gets to when the excuses given by boys are no longer accepted . If you 're not man enough to step to the plate , then keep it moving . " The song shares its theme with " The Way You Love Me " as both songs are about " women coming to terms with what they need from a relationship " . The " powerful " meaning of the two songs was personal to Hilson and she hoped that it would have the same effect on listeners . In an interview for <unk> , Hilson elaborated on " Breaking Point " and its theme : 
 I 'm a loyal woman , and a lot of girls are . That causes us sometimes to take [ bullshit ] a little more than we should . I think women needed to hear – obviously I 'm speaking from personal experience and that of my close friends as well – but I think other women needed to hear that you can only take so much . Eventually you 're gonna reach your breaking point . 
 Timbaland produced " Breaking Point " with assistance from Harmon . Chris Godbey mixed the track and recorded Hilson 's vocals together with Bryan " The Beard " Jones , with assistance from Ghazi Hourani ; both these tasks were done at The Record Plant in Hollywood , California . Hilson arranged the recorded vocals and produced them with Veronika " V " Bozeman , who also performed background vocals . Chris <unk> mastered the song at Sterling Sound in New York City . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Breaking Point " is a mid @-@ tempo R & B ballad that features elements of pop and soul music . Instrumentation is provided by a guitar , kick drums , an organ , percussion and a piano . It is also backed by doo @-@ wop beats , finger snaps and cooing backup vocals . Lyrically , the song speaks of a woman 's breaking point and Hilson " voices the frustration " of women who are being neglected and exploited by men . In the chorus , she sings : " Every woman has a breaking point , y 'all / Hey , I know you know , some women can be lied to , cheated on and beat on / Somebody know , hey , every woman has a breaking point , y 'all . " According to Sara D. Anderson of AOL Radio , Hilson vocally incorporates an " improvisational gospel style . MTV Buzzworthy writer Chris Ryan compared Hilson 's vocals with Mary J. Blige 's , particularly in Blige 's cover of " I 'm Going Down " ( 1995 ) . Halfway through " Breaking Point " , Hilson talks about " the need for each woman to reclaim her life " in a spoken @-@ word interlude , during which she mimics Blige , according to Ken Capobianco of The Boston Globe . Hilson phrases : " Now ladies , we really should be mad at ourselves , cause see , some women just tolerate too damn much . Huh ! " 
 = = Release = = 
 " Breaking Point " premiered on August 18 , 2010 , on the urban radio station V @-@ 103 in Atlanta . It was selected as the album 's lead single to showcase Hilson sans featured acts . In an interview , Hilson elaborated on the decision : " Timbaland and Polow [ da Don ] knew that even though I 've been known for club records , guest features and collaborations , I am a true R & B lover ... [ We chose the song ] for many reasons ... We knew it wouldn 't grow as fast or even be as big a record as some of my past [ singles ] ... We wanted to showcase me by myself , feature @-@ less , and we wanted to reveal that I can sing , and really connect with my music and my message . We felt that was the best introduction to No Boys Allowed . " Mosley Music Group and Interscope Records released the single via digital distribution in the United States on September 7 , 2010 . It was later sent to urban adult contemporary radio on October 25 , 2010 , while the album 's second single , " Pretty Girl Rock " , was classified for contemporary hit radio the same week . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 " Breaking Point " received generally a positive response from music critics . Newsday 's Glenn Gamboa described it as a " gorgeous girl @-@ group @-@ influenced " song and commended Timbaland 's " remarkably non @-@ bleepy @-@ <unk> production " . Mariel Concepcion of Billboard observed that the song is a release for women who are " being mistreated and unappreciated " by their men , but are unable to " speak up for themselves " . She viewed the single as an " empowering wake @-@ up call [ that ] encourag [ es ] women to stop putting up with the abuse " . Concepcion likened the lyrics to Melanie Fiona 's " Give It to Me Right " ( 2009 ) and Beyoncé Knowles ' " Why Don 't You Love Me " ( 2010 ) . In his review of No Boys Allowed , Matthew Horton of BBC Music remarked that the slower songs " house some of the nicer touches " . Horton praised Timbaland 's production throughout the album , particularly on " Breaking Point " due to its " En Vogue @-@ y harmonies [ and ] oriental music box refrain " . Ben Ratliff of The New York Times regarded the song as " far better " than " Pretty Girl Rock " , and Los Angeles Times critic Margaret Wappler deemed it as " sticky and finessed " . 
 Lauren Carter of Boston Herald recommended " Breaking Point " as downloadable , and Neil Miller , Jr. of UR Chicago called it one of " the finest cuts of genuine R & B out there right now " . Chris Ryan of MTV Buzzworthy called the song " beautiful " and wrote , " While the music has all the squiggly , burping and buzzing percussion sound effects of your typical [ Timbaland ] track , it also has a lovely Prince @-@ like melody . " The Guardian 's Caroline Sullivan regarded it as " deceptively sugary [ and ] trilling " and commented that it " does observe that some women ' tolerate too damn much ' , but it 's easily missed " . Karen Tye of The Advertiser was mixed and felt that Hilson " invokes " Knowles on " Breaking Point " , writing that she " needs to work on establishing her own distinct voice " . Negative reviews came from Rob Sheffield of Rolling Stone , who named it as one of the album 's " failed attempts at pop crossover " , and IGN 's Chad Grischow , who viewed the ballad as " fed @-@ up " . Grischow criticized the production for " clumsily " attempting to mix Motown vocals with voice @-@ box guitars and organs . 
 = = = Chart performance = = = 
 In the United States , " Breaking Point " debuted at number 87 on the Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart in the issue dated September 25 , 2010 . The following week , it rose 15 positions to number 72 , and ultimately peaked at number 44 in the issue dated November 20 , 2010 . The song remained on the chart for a total of 18 weeks ; its last appearance was in the issue dated January 22 , 2011 . " Breaking Point " did not enter the Billboard Hot 100 , but reached number 17 on the Bubbling Under Hot 100 Singles chart in the issue dated November 27 , 2010 . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The accompanying music video for " Breaking Point " was directed by Bryan Barber and shot on location in Atlanta , Georgia , in early @-@ September 2010 . Some scenes were shot on Auburn Avenue , a street in Atlanta . Director Barber noted the " Southern harmony " of the song , which he wanted to capture in the video . According to Hilson , her character in the clip realizes that she has reached her breaking point and attempts to get over what happened the night before by spending the day with her girlfriends . An unofficial version of the video originally leaked online on September 23 , 2010 , before the official edit premiered on October 4 on BET 's 106 & Park . It was later made available for download on the iTunes Store on October 6 , 2010 , in the United States . 
 The video begins with Hilson lounging in her bed . Upset by her partner , she walks over to the closet and rips down all of his clothes . The video then cuts to Hilson sitting in a chair at a beauty salon , where she gets a new haircut and dyes her hair from black to blonde . She later begins a choreographed routine with her girlfriends , who appear to also have been mistreated by their men . The women then march down Auburn Avenue before they head home to throw their men 's clothes off the balcony . The video received mixed to positive reviews . Chris Ryan of MTV Buzzworthy was positive and called it a " beautifully shot portrait of a woman on the edge of a nervous breakdown " , and The Fader writer Julianne Escobedo Shepherd regarded it as an accurate representation of how women act when they are " wronged by dudes " . On the other hand , Robbie Daw of Idolator deemed it tiresome , calling it a " visual snoozefest " . He wrote , " [ Hilson ] goes to a salon , orders up Rihanna 's Rated R haircut and <unk> men who are <unk> ' the ladies . Hey , girls — her love has a limit ! But so does our patience for this [ video ] . " 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Digital single 
 " Breaking Point " – 4 : 15 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Recording 
 Recorded at The Record Plant , Hollywood , California 
 Personnel 
 Credits are adapted from the No Boys Allowed booklet . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Fortezza of Rethymno = 
 The Fortezza ( Greek : <unk> , from Italian for " fortress " ) is the citadel of the city of Rethymno in Crete , Greece . It was built by the Venetians in the 16th century , and was captured by the Ottomans in 1646 . By the early 20th century , many houses were built within the citadel . These were demolished after World War II , leaving only a few historic buildings within the Fortezza . Today , the citadel is in good condition and is open to the public . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 The Fortezza is built on a hill called <unk> ( meaning " Old Castle " ) , which was the site of ancient <unk> 's acropolis . Between the 10th and 13th centuries , the Byzantines established a fortified settlement to the east of the hill . It was called Castrum <unk> , and it had square towers and two gates . The fortifications were repaired by Enrico <unk> in the beginning of the 13th century . After Crete fell to the Republic of Venice , the settlement became known as the Castel Vecchio or <unk> Castello , which both mean " old castle . " 
 Under Venetian rule , a small harbour was built in Rethymno , which became the third most important city on Crete after Heraklion and Chania . On 8 April 1540 , a line of fortifications began to be built around the city . The walls were designed by the architect Michele <unk> , and were completed in around 1570 . These fortifications were not strong enough to withstand a large assault , and when <unk> Ali Reis attacked in 1571 , the Ottomans captured and sacked the city . 
 = = = Construction and later Venetian rule = = = 
 Following the fall of Cyprus to the Ottomans in 1571 , Crete became the largest remaining Venetian overseas possession . Since Rethymno had been sacked , it was decided that new fortifications needed to be built to protect the city and its harbour . The new fortress , which was built on the <unk> hill , was designed by the military engineer Sforza Pallavicini according to the Italian bastioned system . 
 Construction began on 13 September 1573 , and it was complete by 1580 . The fortress was built under the master builder Giannis <unk> , and a total of 107 @,@ 142 Cretans and 40 @,@ 205 animals took part in its construction . 
 Although the original plan had been to demolish the old fortifications of Rethymno and move the inhabitants into the Fortezza , it was too small to house the entire city . The walls along the landward approach to the city were left intact , and the Fortezza became a citadel housing the Venetian administration of the city . It was only to be used by the inhabitants of the city in the case of an Ottoman invasion . Over the years , a number of modifications were made to the fortress . Nonetheless , it was never truly secure as it lacked a ditch and outworks , and the ramparts were rather low . 
 = = = Ottoman rule and recent history = = = 
 On 29 September 1646 , during the Fifth Ottoman – Venetian War , an Ottoman force besieged Rethymno , and the city 's population took refuge in the Fortezza . Conditions within the citadel deteriorated , due to disease and a lack of food and ammunition . The Venetians surrendered under favourable terms on 13 November . 
 The Ottomans did not make any major changes to the Fortezza , except the construction of a ravelin outside the main gate . They also built some houses for the garrison and the city 's administration , and they converted the cathedral into a mosque . The fort remained in use until the early 20th century . 
 By the early 20th century , many residential buildings were located in the Fortezza . Following the end of World War II , the city began to expand and many of the inhabitants moved elsewhere in the city . Rethymno 's landward fortifications and many houses within the Fortezza were demolished at this point , but the walls of the Fortezza were left intact . At one point , the local prison was housed within the Fortezza . 
 Large @-@ scale restoration work has been under way since the early 1990s . The Fortezza is managed by the Ministry of Culture and Sports , and it is open to the public . The Ottoman ravelin now houses the Archaeological Museum of Rethymno . 
 = = Layout = = 
 The Fortezza of Rethymno has an irregular plan , and its walls have a total length of 1 @,@ 307 m ( 4 @,@ 288 ft ) . The walls contain the following demi @-@ bastions : 
 St Nicolas Bastion – the demi @-@ bastion at the east end of the fortress . It contains a Venetian @-@ era building which was possibly originally a storehouse or laboratory . 
 St Paul Bastion – the demi @-@ bastion at the southeast end of the fortress . It is also known as Santa Maria Bastion . 
 St Elias Bastion – the demi @-@ bastion at the south end of the fortress . It contains the <unk> open @-@ air theatre , which was opened in 1993 . 
 St Lucas Bastion – the demi @-@ bastion at the southwest end of the fortress . 
 The fort 's main gate is located on the east side , between St Nicolas and St Paul Bastions . It is protected by an Ottoman @-@ era ravelin , which now serves as the Archaeological Museum of Rethymno . Two smaller gates are located in the west and north sides of the fortress . 
 A number of buildings are located within the Fortezza , including : 
 the Mosque of Sultan Ibrahim , which was formerly the Cathedral of St Nicolas . 
 a building near the mosque , which was possibly the Bishop 's residence . 
 the House of the Rector , which was the residence of the governor of the province of Rethymno . Only its prisons have survived . 
 the Council Building , which housed part of the Venetian administration of Rethymno . 
 the churches of St Theodore and St Catherine , which were both built in the late 19th century . 
 The fortress also contains an armoury , two gunpowder magazines , storage rooms and several cisterns . 
 = Quién Dijo Ayer = 
 Quién Dijo Ayer ( English : Who Said Yesterday ) is a compilation album released by Guatemalan singer @-@ songwriter Ricardo Arjona on 21 August 2007 . Dan Warner and Lee Levin co @-@ produced the album with Arjona and Puerto Rican singer @-@ songwriter Tommy Torres . It was recorded in the United States , Mexico , Italy and Argentina , and is the last album Arjona released under the Sony Music Entertainment label before signing with Warner Music Group . It is Arjona 's first compilation to include new material in the form of re @-@ recorded versions of past hits in different musical genres from the original recordings , featuring guest artists such as Marc Anthony , Marta Sánchez and Mexican ska band Panteón Rococó , among others . 
 Critically and commercially successful , Quién Dijo Ayer topped the US Billboard Latin Pop Albums chart and reached number two on the Top Latin Albums chart . The album became a hit in Latin America , topping the Mexican albums chart and receiving gold and Platinum certifications in several countries including the United States . The album spawned two commercially successful singles , " Quién " , which reached number four on the Billboard Latin Pop Songs chart , and " Quiero " , which reached number eight . Quién Dijo Ayer received in 2008 a nomination for the Latin Grammy Award for Best Male Pop Vocal Album and the Best Male Pop Vocal Album award at the Billboard Latin Music Awards . 
 = = Background = = 
 In a press conference , Arjona stated that " yesterday is the cumulus of this that put us here , which raised us and made us what we are , for good or bad . " He also said that Quién Dijo Ayer was more than a compilation , and that " it 's an album with all the features of the typical greatest hits disc . Several songs are the most popular , but others are the most important on other topics . We 've dressed them different . " Se Nos <unk> El Amor " is now with piano and <unk> , as an example . " He further stated that it was " an album that begun as an experiment , with a dose of informality , and suddenly , when I realized of what the producers were achieving with the songs I worked many years ago , the album finished as being very complicated . " 
 After spending the majority of his career signed to Sony , and later , Sony BMG , Arjona signed a long @-@ term recording deal with Warner Music Latina in September 2008 . Iñigo Zabala , chairman of Warner Music Latin America commented that " He 's an artist that fits perfectly with our company , " and that " We are a label that has a major catalog of songwriters and quality pop and rock from the likes of Maná , Alejandro Sanz , Laura Pausini , and now , Arjona . " This departure made Quien Dijo Ayer the last album the artist directly released on his former label , although Sony later released another album named Simplemente Lo Mejor . 
 = = Composition = = 
 For this compilation album , Arjona re @-@ recorded some of his older songs in a different style from the original versions , and remastered others . " Si El Norte Fuera El Sur " was transformed into a ska @-@ style song , which he performed with Panteón Rococó . Argentinian jazz musician Fernando Otero was featured on the new version of " Jesús , Verbo No <unk> " . " Historia De Taxi " was transformed into a salsa song , which Arjona performed with American singer Marc Anthony and pianist Sergio George ; George said , " It 's been interesting to work with two figures from different music worlds on the interest of making good music . " , and that " every time a reunion of this kind happens , it [ is ] a reason to celebrate . " 
 Arjona also re @-@ recorded " Realmente No Estoy Tan Solo " with singer Sandro ; it was last song recorded by Sandro , who died on 4 January 2010 . Arjona 's manager told Argentinian newspaper Clarín that " [ the singer ] had the idea of inviting Roberto [ Sandro ] for his album , he [ Sandro ] showed enthusiasm and manifested the same degree of appreciation to Arjona . It seemed to him that he [ Arjona ] was an artist who proclaims the same values he proclaimed . " 
 This album included three new songs . " Quién " was written by Arjona , who co @-@ produced it with Tommy Torres . It was released as the lead single from the album on 19 June 2007 . Arjona commented that " ' Quién ' is the world out of the window and the prison built by ourselves . It 's the freedom to choose the path or to prefer loneliness as an argument of nostalgia . ' Quién ' is a story with the hurry of the desperate , is the flashback of those who end up loving alone . " " Quiero " , also written by Arjona , was released as the second single in November 2007 . Website ADN Mundo called the song bohemian and hippie , and that it was " a love story that doesn 't speak about love , but instead about the recent events on the world we live [ in ] and finally comes to the search of an individual who challenges nostalgia finding entertainment on the impossible . " In 2009 , " Quiero " was awarded the Pop / Ballad Songs of the Year award by the American Society of Composers , Authors and Publishers . The third new song on the album was " Espantapájaros " , which was written by Arjona and Miguel Luna . 
 = = Release and promotion = = 
 Quién Dijo Ayer was released in most markets as a two @-@ disc compilation album . The first disc contains sixteen songs , of which thirteen are new versions of Arjona 's past hits . On this disc appears the duets with Panteón Rococó on " Si El Norte Fuera El Sur " ; Marc Anthony on " Historia de Taxi " ; Marta Sanchez on " Tarde ( Sin Daños A Terceros ) " ; Eros <unk> on " A Ti " and Sandro de América on " Realmente No Estoy Tan Solo " . This disc also contains the new songs " Quién " , " Quiero " and " Espantapájaros " . The second disc contains the same songs as the first disc but in their original versions , remastered . In Canada , Germany , Brazil and Mexico , a digital special edition was released that features only six songs on the second digital disc instead of 13 . The songs included on the second disc on this version were " Se Nos <unk> El Amor " , " Dime Que No " , " Si El Norte Fuera El Sur " , " A Ti " , " Tu <unk> " and " Cuando " . This Brazilian version featured a different cover art . The album was also released as a single disc version with only the new versions and songs . Also , in Mexico , two physical single @-@ disc versions of the album were released . The first includes the first single from Quinto Piso , " Como Duele " as a bonus track . This version was also released in Spain . The second version does not include " Espantapájaros " or " Realmente No Estoy Tan Solo " ; it also includes " Como Duele " as a bonus track . 
 = = = Singles = = = 
 The first single released from the album was " Quién " , a Latin pop song written by Arjona and produced by Tommy Torres and Los Gringos . The song charted on the Billboard Latin Songs at number twenty @-@ one , and reached its peak the week ending 25 August 2007 . The song was more successful on the Latin Pop Songs chart , where it reached number four . The music video for " Quién " was filmed in Las Vegas , Nevada . The second single released was " Quiero " , which reached number twelve on the Billboard Latin Songs chart , and number eight on the Latin Pop Songs component chart . " Quiero " was very popular in Central American countries like Honduras , Nicaragua and Panamá . The music video for " Quiero " was filmed in the Dominican Republic and premiered in November 2007 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Jason Birchmeier from Allmusic gave a positive review of the album , and commented that , " while only a couple of the new versions depart stylistically from the originals , the contemporary productions breathe new life into these songs , which should be well known by longtime fans . " Quién Dijo Ayer was Arjona 's second album after Galería Caribe to reach number one on the Latin Pop Albums chart ; it reached its peak in the week ending 8 September 2007 . On the Latin Albums chart , Quién Dijo Ayer debuted at number two . The album was commercially successful in Latin America , and was certified Gold in Venezuela , Uruguay , Colombia , Chile , and Peru ; and Platinum in Argentina , Mexico and the United States . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = = Digital Edition = = = 
 All songs written and composed by Ricardo Arjona . 
 = = = Standard Edition = = = 
 The standard physical release of the album contains 2 discs with the following tracklist . 
 = = = Special Edition = = = 
 The Special Edition does not include " La Novia Que Nunca Tuve " , which is at No.9 on the Digital Edition . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Romances ( Luis Miguel album ) = 
 Romances is the twelfth studio album by Mexican singer Luis Miguel , released on 12 August 1997 , by Warner Music Latina . It is the third album of the Romance series , in which Miguel covers Latin songs from 1940 to 1978 . Aside from Miguel , the production also involved arranger Bebu Silvetti , and Armando Manzanero , who directed all of Miguel 's Romance albums . Romances consists of twelve cover versions and two new compositions by Manzanero and Silvetti . Recording took place in early 1997 at the Ocean Way recording studio in Los Angeles , California . 
 Romances has sold over 4 @.@ 5 million copies and received platinum certifications in several Latin American countries , the United States and Spain . Miguel promoted the album by touring the United States , Latin America and Spain . The album was generally well received by critics , who praised Miguel 's vocals as well as the song selection . The album earned Miguel several awards , including a Grammy Award in the United States . Six singles were released : " Por Debajo de la Mesa " , " El <unk> " , " Contigo ( Estar Contigo ) " , " De Quererte Así ( De T 'Avoir Aimee ) " , " Bésame Mucho " , and " Sabor a Mí " . 
 = = Background = = 
 In 1991 Miguel released Romance , a collection of classic Latin ballads , the oldest of which dates back to the 1940s . The album was produced by Armando Manzanero and arranged by Bebu Silvetti , and was credited for revitalizing the bolero genre . It also made history as the first Spanish @-@ language album to be certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) in the United States . A follow @-@ up to Romance was released in 1994 under the title Segundo Romance ( Second Romance ) , which was produced by Miguel , Juan Carlos Calderón and Kiko Cibrian . Both albums received a platinum certification by the RIAA in the United States and also became successful in countries outside of Latin America and the United States , such as Finland and Saudi Arabia , selling over twelve million copies combined . 
 In December 1996 Miguel held a press conference in Buenos Aires , Argentina , where he announced his desire to record a third Romance album and mentioned the possibility of working with Manzanero and Juan Gabriel . He also expressed an interest in singing in Italian and Portuguese , although the album 's songs are originally all in Spanish . Two months later Manzanero confirmed that he was working with Miguel on another bolero @-@ inspired ballads album , under the tentative title Tercer Romance ( " Third Romance " ) . Miguel 's record label confirmed that fourteen tracks would be included on the album under the title Romances . 
 = = Recording and production = = 
 Miguel collaborated with Silvetti for the arrangement of Romances , while Manzanero was in charge of direction . Recording began on 18 March 1997 , at Ocean Way Recording in Hollywood and at The Hit Factory in New York City . During the recording of Romances , as in Romance , Silvetti employed his signature style of arrangements known as the " Silvetti Sound " , which Leila Cobo of Billboard describes as " anchored in sweeping melodies , lush string arrangements , acoustic instrumentation , and above all , unabashed romanticism " . Silvetti has stated that when he produces an album he does not simply copy his own arrangements , because he feels that would be " ridiculous " , and prefers to be creative within his own style . About the selection of songs for the album , Manzanero stated that " I give [ Miguel ] the songs , and he chooses what he wants to record . " Participants in the recording sessions included sixty @-@ one musicians from the Los Angeles Philharmonic . 
 Miguel covers twelve Latin ballads in Romances , including songs by José Antonio Méndez , Carlos Arturo Briz , Consuelo Velázquez Álvaro Carrillo , Roberto <unk> , María <unk> , Enrique Santos Discépolo , Agustín Lara , and Luiz Bonfá . The latter composer wrote the song " Manhã de Carnaval " ( " Morning of Carnival " ) in Portuguese , later translated into Spanish by Jesus Maria <unk> <unk> as " Canción de Orfeo " ( " Orpheus ' Song " ) . " De Quererte Así " ( " If I Love You Like This " ) is a French song ( " De T 'Avoir Aimée " ) , originally performed and written by Charles Aznavour , which was translated into Spanish by Alex <unk> . Miguel had covered some of the aforementioned composers ' songs on his previous Romance albums . Miguel covers <unk> 's songs " Voy a <unk> la Luz / Contigo <unk> " ( " I Am Going To Turn Off The Lights / With You I Learned " ) and " <unk> " ( " To Be Awake " ) . The two original compositions were " Por Debajo de la Mesa " ( " Underneath the Table " ) by Manzanero and " Contigo ( Estar Contigo ) " ( " To Be With You " ) by Bebu Silvetti and Sylvia <unk> Ibáñez . 
 = = Commercial reception = = 
 = = = Album = = = 
 The album was released on 12 August 1997 , in the United States and , by the week of 23 August 1997 , it debuted at number two on the Billboard Top Latin Albums chart . A week later it became number one , which it has been for a total of eleven non @-@ consecutive weeks . Romances was even more successful in the Billboard Latin Pop Albums chart , having been number one for 13 weeks . On the Billboard 200 chart it peaked at number fourteen , with sales of over 57 @,@ 000 units within the first week — a record at that time for a Spanish @-@ language album . It was also Miguel 's highest @-@ peaking album in the Billboard 200 until the release of <unk> in 2008 , which peaked at number ten . It was the second best @-@ selling Latin album in the United States during 1997 , after Tango by Julio Iglesias . By October 1997 it had sold over a million copies in Mexico and was certified quadruple platinum in the country , as well as across Central America . A year after release it received a platinum certification in the United States by the RIAA . In Argentina it reached number one on the CAPIF albums chart and was the best @-@ selling album of 1997 in the country , with sales of approximately 781 @,@ 000 copies . In Spain the album reached number one on the PROMUSICAE chart and was certified octuple platinum , selling over 800 @,@ 000 copies . In South America the album was certified gold in Brazil , Platinum in Ecuador and Peru , double platinum in Colombia and Paraguay , sextuple platinum in Venezuela , octuple platinum in Chile , and diamond in Argentina . According to the Guinness World Records Romances was the best @-@ selling Spanish @-@ language album of 1997 . A DVD @-@ Audio for the album was released in 2001 . Over 4 @.@ 5 million copies of the album were sold , as of 1999 . 
 = = = Singles = = = 
 " Por Debajo de la Mesa " was released as the lead single from the album . The single was released for radio airplay on 15 July 1997 , and reached number one on the Billboard Hot Latin Songs chart two months later ; it would spend twenty @-@ six weeks on the chart . A music video was made for the song . The second single released , " El <unk> " ( " The Clock " ) , reached number two on the Hot Latin Songs chart , as did the third single , " Contigo ( Estar Contigo " ) . " De Quererte Así ( De T 'Avoir Aimee ) " peaked at number twenty @-@ three on the Hot Latin Songs chart , while " Sabor a Mí " ( " Taste From Me " ) peaked at number six after its release . " Bésame Mucho " ( " Kiss Me More " ) reached number one on the Mexican singles chart and was the among top ten best @-@ performing songs of 1998 in Venezuela according to Record Report . 
 = = Promotion = = 
 Miguel launched his Romances Tour , consisting of 84 concerts , in Las Vegas , Nevada , on 12 September 1997 . The performances featured Miguel performing dance @-@ pop and bolero arrangements for two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half hours . Adam Sandler of Variety expressed a mixed reaction to the concert in the Universal Amphitheatre in Los Angeles . He noted that Miguel rarely acknowledged his audience or ventured out from center stage . Robert Hilburn of the Los Angeles Times had a more positive reaction , which he described as a " marvelously designed and wonderfully executed blend of Latin music tradition " . Another Times contributor , Ernesto Lechner , wrote that Miguel 's bolero performance at the Arrowhead Pond arena in California " brought the house down " and stated that the experience at the concert was " pretty close " to Beatlemania . In New York City , Miguel performed five consecutive shows in the Radio City Music Hall . In Mexico City he performed seventeen consecutive concerts in the National Auditorium , where it was the highest @-@ grossing concert by a Latin artist that year . The tour also traveled to South America ; including Chile , and Argentina ; and continued until May 1998 , when Miguel performed throughout Spain . Miguel was the first Latin artist to be inducted to the Pollstar " Top 20 All @-@ Time Grossing Tours " for most tickets sold for consecutive concerts at one venue in 1997 . 
 = = Critical reception and awards = = 
 Romances was generally well received by critics , who praised Miguel 's tenor voice and the album 's selection of songs . Terry Jenkins of AllMusic praised the collaborative work of Silvetti and Manzanero and called Romances " a sensuous , enchanting album " . Achy Obejas of the Chicago Tribune called Miguel 's voice the album 's strong point and noted the " presence of electronic instruments and the darker , more somber mood " . On the other hand , she felt that Miguel was beginning " to slip " , citing the tracks " <unk> " and " Por Debajo de la Mesa " as examples . Los Angeles Times editor Ernesto <unk> gave the album one @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half out of four stars and claimed that Romances " sinks under its own weight , delivering mostly bloated versions of timeless material " . Fellow Los Angeles Times contributor Ed Morales disagreed with his review and wrote that " Lechner needs to go into his music room , turn down the lights , snuggle up with his significant other and really listen to ' Romances . ' I give his review * and ' Romances ' * * * * " . Anne <unk> of the Los Angeles Daily News praised the selection of songs and Miguel 's performance , calling the performer a " class act " . 
 At the 40th Grammy Awards , Miguel received the award for Best Latin Pop Performance . Miguel also received a Billboard Latin Music Award for " Male Pop Album of the Year " and a World Music Award for " Best Selling Latin Artist " . Miguel received a Premio Amigo and Premio Onda for " Best Latin Singer of the Year " in Spain , and the album was nominated for a Premio Amigo for " Best Latin Album " . Armando Manzanero received a Broadcast Music Incorporated award for his work on " Por Debajo de la Mesa " . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Warner Music released a three @-@ disc compilation album titled Todos Los Romances ( " All The Romances " ) in 1998 , which contains all the tracks from Miguel 's Romance albums . The album peaked at number twelve in the Billboard Top Latin Albums chart and at number six in the Billboard Latin Pop Albums chart . It was certified gold in Argentina . Romances was followed by one more bolero album , Mis Romances ( 2001 ) which was produced by Miguel . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 The following credits are from AllMusic and from the Romances liner notes : 
 = = = Performance credits = = = 
 = = = Technical credits = = = 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = Deddington Castle = 
 Deddington Castle was a medieval fortification in the village of Deddington , Oxfordshire . It was built on a wealthy former Anglo @-@ Saxon estate by Bishop Odo of Bayeux following the Norman conquest of England in 1066 . Odo constructed a large castle with two earthwork baileys and a central motte , intending that the castle administer his property in the region and provide a substantial military base in the event of an Anglo @-@ Saxon revolt . Odo 's estates in England were seized following a failed rebellion against William II in 1088 , and Deddington Castle was taken back into royal control . The Anglo @-@ Norman lord William de Chesney acquired the castle in the 12th century and rebuilt it in stone , raising a stone curtain wall around a new inner bailey , complete with a defensive tower , gatehouse and domestic buildings . 
 After de Chesney 's death , his descendants fought for control of the castle in the royal courts , and it was temporarily seized several times by King John at the start of the 13th century . Deddington Castle was confirmed in the ownership of the de Dive family , who held it for the next century and a half . In 1281 , the castle was stormed by a group of men who broke down the doors , and in 1312 the royal favourite Piers Gaveston may have been captured at the castle by his enemies , shortly before his execution . From the 13th century onward , Deddington Castle fell into disrepair , and contemporaries soon described it as " demolished " and " weak " . It was bought by the Canons of Windsor in 1364 , who began to sell off its stonework . The remains of the castle were reportedly used by both Royalist and Parliamentary forces during the English Civil War in the 17th century . 
 In the 19th century Deddington Castle was adapted for use as a sporting facility by the local gentry . It was sold to Deddington 's parish council , who attempted to build tennis courts in the inner bailey in 1947 . Following the discovery of medieval remains and a subsequent archaeological investigation , these plans were abandoned and the western half of the castle became a local park . In the 21st century , English Heritage manage the inner bailey , the eastern half remaining in use for farming , and the site as a whole is protected under UK law as a scheduled monument . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = 11th century = = = 
 Deddington Castle was built by Bishop Odo of Bayeux in the village of Deddington , shortly after the Norman conquest of England in 1066 . Deddington was then one of the largest settlements in the county of Oxfordshire , and the site of the castle had been previously occupied by the Anglo @-@ Saxons , who may have used the location to administer one of their landed estates . Odo was the half @-@ brother of William the Conqueror , who granted the bishop vast lands in England after the invasion , spread across 22 different counties . Deddington was one of the richest of Odo 's new manors and was at the centre of his Oxfordshire and Buckinghamshire estates . The castle was probably built to act as the caput , or administrative centre , of his lands in the region , and may have also been intended to quarter a large military force in the event of an Anglo @-@ Saxon revolt . 
 The castle was positioned on the east side of the main part of the settlement at the time , at the opposite end of the village to the church , on a spur overlooking a nearby stream . Odo erected earthworks to enclose two large baileys of around 3 @.@ 4 hectares ( 8 @.@ 4 acres ) each , with a large raised motte positioned in between . The western bailey was around 170 metres ( 560 ft ) by 240 metres ( 790 ft ) , protected by a bank of earth 5 metres ( 16 ft ) tall from the base of the 15 metres ( 49 ft ) wide ditch . The top of the earthworks formed a rampart 2 @.@ 5 metres ( 8 ft 2 in ) across . The western bailey had an entrance on the west side and in the north @-@ east corner . The eastern bailey stretched down the hill to the stream , and may have held two fishponds . Another fishpond called " the Fishers " , further along the stream to the south @-@ east of the castle , was also probably linked to the castle site . Around this time , an " L " -shaped stone hall was constructed near the motte , in the western bailey . 
 The castle 's layout was unusual for the region during this period , where the fortifications built by the Normans were typically smaller ringwork designs , and it highlighted both the strategic importance of the location and the power of its builder . In scale and design it was similar to the initial version of Rochester Castle , another major fortification built by Odo in England . 
 Odo unsuccessfully rebelled against William II in 1088 and in the aftermath was stripped of his lands . His manors across Oxfordshire were taken back into royal control and broken up to be granted to sub @-@ tenants , although it is unclear who was initially granted Deddington Castle ; it is possible that the powerful Anglo @-@ Norman baron Robert de Beaumont , the Earl of Leicester , controlled it in 1130 . 
 = = = 1100 – 1215 = = = 
 In the early 12th century , additional earthworks were thrown up to divide the western half of the castle into an outer bailey of around 3 hectares ( 7 @.@ 4 acres ) and an inner bailey on the east end , comprising around 0 @.@ 4 hectares ( 0 @.@ 99 acres ) . The earthworks pushed up against the older hall , and partially buried its western walls . It is uncertain exactly why the new earthworks were constructed , but it may have been to strengthen the fortification in response to either the threatened invasion of Duke Robert of Normandy in 1101 , or alternatively to the sinking of the White Ship and the subsequent dynastic crisis in 1120 . 
 By 1157 , the castle was owned by William de Chesney , an Anglo @-@ Norman lord who had supported King Stephen in the region during the civil war of the Anarchy , and then Henry II after the peace in 1154 . William rebuilt much of the castle , constructing a strong stone curtain wall around the inner bailey , 2 metres ( 6 ft 7 in ) thick and made from mortared ironstone rubble . The wall was cut through the motte , the inner part of the mound being dug away to make room for the wall . 
 William also began to reconstruct the inside of the inner bailey , a programme of work that was continued by his descendants over the next few decades . The work included a chapel , a hall and solar , and various service buildings . An open @-@ backed square tower was built in stone along the wall on top of the motte ; this tower was later rebuilt , possibly because of pressure on it from the motte earthworks , and the top of the motte was relaid with flagstones to form pathways around the top . A stone gatehouse was built on the west side of the wall , leading from the outer bailey . 
 William died between 1172 and 1176 , and the castle was then granted the Crown to Ralph Murdac , William 's nephew and a favoured supporter of Henry II . Ralph was unpopular , however , with Henry 's successor , Richard I , and Ralph 's relatives Guy de Dive and Matilda de Chesney took the opportunity to sue him in the royal courts , each claiming a third of William 's estate . The lands around the castle were granted to Guy and , renamed the " Castle Manor " , remained in his family line until the mid @-@ 14th century . When King John took the throne , however , he seems to have seized Deddington . The manor was not returned to Guy until 1204 ; furthermore , Deddington Castle was excluded from this agreement and retained in royal control until the following year . On Guy 's death in 1214 , John again took the castle back into royal control , where it remained until the King 's own death the following year . 
 = = = 1215 – 18th century = = = 
 Both the village and the castle of Deddington fell into decline during the 13th century . Although the village had grown to become a borough , with new , planned streets spreading westwards away from the castle , it was eclipsed economically by the nearby , newer centre of Banbury . The castles in the Thames Valley region that lacked substantial defences were mostly abandoned during this period and Deddington Castle was no exception . By 1277 contemporaries described it as " an old demolished castle " . In 1281 , Robert of Aston and a group of men were able to break down the doors to the castle and enter it . The castle was considered to be " weak " in a report of 1310 and no further repairs were carried out on the property after this time . 
 In 1312 , the royal favourite Piers Gaveston , may have been captured at Deddington Castle . Gaveston was a close friend of Edward II but he had many enemies among the major barons , and had surrendered to them on the promise that he would be unharmed . He was taken south by Aymer de Valence , the Earl of Pembroke , who imprisoned Gaveston at Deddington on 9 June while he left to visit his wife . Gaveston is often stated to have been kept in Deddington Castle , although he may have alternatively been lodged in the rectory house in the village . Guy de Beauchamp , the Earl of Warwick , had a particular dislike of Gaveston and the next morning took the opportunity to seize him and take him back to Warwick Castle , where Gaveston was subsequently tried and killed by his enemies . 
 During the 14th century the interior of the castle continued to be inhabited , but in a manner that archaeologist Richard Ivens likens to " squatting " : the upper levels of the tower were abandoned and wood burnt along the inside of the walls in a crude fireplace . In 1364 , the Canons of Windsor bought the castle , park and former fishponds from Thomas de Dive ; the Canons rented the farmlands out , but retained the right to operate and profit from the castle 's manorial court . The tower was demolished around this time , possibly linked to the sale of stonework from the castle walls in 1377 to the Canons of Bicester . By the 16th century , the visiting antiquarian John Leland only noted that " there hath bene a castle at <unk> " . 
 The village of Deddington was extensively involved in the English Civil War between 1641 and 1645 , owing to its location on the route between Banbury and Oxford . The late 19th @-@ century historian James Mackenzie recorded that the castle was used as a temporary fortress by both Royalist and Parliamentary forces during the conflict and that a Royalist garrison was besieged there by Parliamentary troops in 1644 . During the 17th and 18th centuries , the castle site was used for grazing animals and timber farming . 
 = = = 19th - 21st centuries = = = 
 In the 19th century , the castle site was used as club by the local gentry for recreation , including cricket and archery . A small lodge was built at the entrance to house a professional coach , and a " pavilion building " - a combination of a ballroom and a cafe - was built within the grounds . In 1886 , the ownership of the site passed from the Canons of Windsor to the Ecclesiastical Commissioners of the Church of England . The pavilion was demolished at the start of the 20th century . <unk> continued to be taken from the remains of the castle up until the 1940s , for use in local buildings . 
 The castle site was then sold by the Commissioners to Deddington 's parish council . The parish council intended to build tennis courts in the inner bailey of the castle in 1947 but , when work began , medieval pottery and roof tiles began to be unearthed by the builders . Construction work was halted and the Ashmolean Museum in Oxford sponsored an archaeological investigation by Edward <unk> and Richard Threlfall that continued until 1953 . The plans for the tennis courts were dropped in light of the findings , and the site was instead used as a park . A further phase of archaeological investigation of the castle was carried out between 1977 and 1979 , sponsored by the Queen 's University Belfast and led by Richard Ivens . 
 In the 21st century , only the earthworks of the castle remain . The western bailey is managed by the parish council and the inner bailey by English Heritage , while the eastern bailey remains under cultivation . The site is protected under UK law as a scheduled monument . 
 = 2 / 2nd Machine Gun Battalion ( Australia ) = 
 The 2 / 2nd Machine Gun Battalion was an infantry support unit of the all @-@ volunteer Second Australian Imperial Force that was raised for service overseas during the Second World War . Formed in mid @-@ 1940 in Sydney , from personnel drawn from the states of Queensland and New South Wales , the battalion was allocated to the Australian 9th Division . After completing training in Australia , the battalion operated in the Middle East between early 1941 and early 1943 , seeing action against German and Italian forces at the First and Second Battles of El Alamein , and undertaking garrison duties in Syria as part of the Allied garrison that was established there after the Syria – Lebanon campaign . 
 In early 1943 , the 2 / 2nd was brought back to Australia to fight several campaigns against the Japanese . The first of these came in September 1943 when the battalion landed east of Lae in New Guinea and then took part in the advance to secure the town , which fell within a fortnight . This was followed by fighting on the Huon Peninsula , which saw the battalion undertake an amphibious landing at Scarlet Beach and then take part in actions around Finschhafen , Sattelberg and Sio until it was withdrawn back to Australia in early 1944 . In mid @-@ 1945 , the machine gunners from the 2 / 2nd supported landings on Tarakan , Labuan and Brunei Bay as part of Allied efforts to recapture Borneo . After the war , the battalion was disbanded in February 1946 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Formation and training = = = 
 The 2 / 2nd Machine Gun Battalion was one of four machine gun battalions that were raised as part of the all @-@ volunteer Second Australian Imperial Force ( 2nd AIF ) for service overseas during the Second World War . Motorised infantry units , equipped with wheeled motor vehicles , motor cycles and sometimes tracked carriers , the machine gun battalions were formed to provide a greater level of support by fire than that which was organically available within ordinary infantry battalions . 
 Developed by the British Army , the concept within the Australian Army had its genesis during the Gallipoli Campaign in 1915 , when the machine guns assigned to the infantry battalions – initially two and then , later , four – had been grouped together and co @-@ ordinated at brigade level to help compensate for the lack of artillery support . Over the course of the war , on the Western Front the concept had evolved through the establishment of machine gun companies in 1916 and machine gun battalions in 1918 . Similar formations had also been established amongst the Australian Light Horse units serving in the Sinai and Palestine Campaign . During the inter @-@ war years , the machine gun battalions had been deemed unnecessary . When the Army was reorganised in 1921 , they were not re @-@ raised , but in 1937 , as the Army looked to expand as fears of war in Europe loomed , four such units were raised within the part @-@ time Militia , by converting light horse units and motorising them . When the Second World War broke out , the decision was made to raise several machine gun battalions within the 2nd AIF , allocated at a rate of one per division . 
 The 2 / 2nd Machine Gun Battalion was formed on 2 May 1940 , in Sydney , New South Wales . Upon formation , the battalion was assigned to the 7th Division , the 2nd AIF 's second division – there were also five infantry divisions as part of the Militia at this time – and its personnel were recruited from two Australian states : Queensland and New South Wales , with many having served previously in the Militia with various light horse regiments and infantry battalions . The battalion 's first commanding officer was Lieutenant Colonel David Whitehead , who had previously commanded the 1st Light Horse ( Machine Gun ) Regiment ( Royal New South Wales Lancers ) . The nucleus of its trained personnel were also drawn from this regiment , as well as several Queensland @-@ based Militia units . The colours chosen for the battalion 's Unit Colour Patch ( UCP ) were gold and black , in a triangular shape with a border of grey ; this was later changed , though , following the unit 's involvement in the fighting at Tobruk , when it adopted a ' T ' -shaped UCP . 
 Because of the geographic dislocation of its recruits , basic training was undertaken separately with Queenslanders completing their induction at Redbank in the Greater Brisbane area and New South Welshmen undertaking theirs at Ingleburn and then Cowra in the New South Wales Central Tablelands , before the battalion finally concentrated at Pyrmont in New South Wales , in late 1940 . At this point , the unit 's establishment was completed , as the battalion structure was finalised . It was structured along the same lines as the other 2nd AIF machine gun battalions , which consisted of between 800 and 900 personnel organised into a headquarters element consisting of three platoons – signals , anti @-@ aircraft and administration – and four machine gun companies , each equipped with 12 Vickers machine guns , to make a total of 48 across the entire battalion . Within the machine gun companies there were three platoons ; normally these were numbered sequentially starting from 1 to 3 in Headquarters Company through to 13 to 15 in ' D ' Company ; however , the 2 / 2nd differed from other Australian machine gun battalions , designating its platoons <unk> : A1 , A2 , A3 through to D1 , D2 , and D3 . A Light Aid Detachment of electrical and mechanical engineers was also attached . After a period of further training , the battalion was ready to deploy overseas , and in February 1941 , the unit embarked for the Middle East , departing from Sydney aboard the transport Aquitania . 
 = = = Service in the Middle East = = = 
 After arriving in the Middle East , the 2 / 2nd Machine Gun Battalion conducted more training in Palestine until April 1941 when it was transported to Mersa Matruh , where the battalion began a year @-@ long period serving in the garrison role . Towards the end of this period – January 1942 – the battalion was reassigned to the 9th Division and moved to Syria where it undertook further garrison duty as part of the Allied occupation force that had been established after the Syria – Lebanon campaign to defend against a possible German attack across the Caucasus Mountains . This came to an end in late June 1942 when the 9th was rushed to El Alamein to help establish a hasty defence line . 
 Throughout July , the battalion 's companies were detached to support individual Australian brigades during the First Battle of El Alamein as the Allied forces – which had , since the beginning of the year , been steadily pushed back by the German and Italian forces – fought desperately to stop the German advance east towards Cairo . Supporting the infantry battalions fighting around Tel el Eisa in early July , several of the battalion 's crews played significant roles in turning back attacks on the Australian positions , and in concert with divisional artillery were reported to have inflicted heavy casualties upon the German and Italian soldiers . Later , in the middle of the month , they supported an attack by the 2 / 32nd Infantry Battalion , now commanded by the 2 / 2nd 's old commander , Whitehead , around <unk> Khad Ridge to the right of the Qattara Track . By the end of the month the offensive had come to a halt and during the lull that followed the battalion provided defensive fire from depth positions . In October , it joined the second Allied counter @-@ attack that was launched during the Second Battle of El Alamein . During these battles , the battalion was heavily engaged , with a company supporting a composite force under Whitehead , and another operating in support of the 24th Brigade . Its casualties amounted to 21 killed , 128 wounded and 26 captured . 
 At the conclusion of the El Alamein fighting , the 2 / 2nd Machine Gun Battalion was withdrawn to Gaza in early December , remaining there with the rest of the 9th Division until embarking on the Queen Mary for Australia in late January 1943 , as part of the final withdrawal of Australian ground units from the Middle East to the Pacific to fight the Japanese . 
 = = = Fighting in New Guinea and Borneo = = = 
 Upon their return , a period of leave followed after which the battalion was re @-@ constituted on the Atherton Tablelands in Queensland in April 1943 . The battalion was subsequently retrained , re @-@ equipped and reorganised to prepare it for the rigours of jungle warfare and throughout this time several drafts of reinforcements were received . These were mainly drawn from the states of South Australia and Western Australia , which changed the demographics of the battalion 's personnel . Some personnel were also drawn from Europeans who had been living in New Guinea . Finally , the battalion received orders to deploy to the territory of Papua , and in August 1943 the 2 / 2nd arrived at Milne Bay , which had been developed into a large Allied base after the fighting there the previous year . After a month of garrison duties and work parties , the battalion was committed to the final actions of the Salamaua – Lae campaign . In early September 1943 , it took part in the landing at Lae , as the 9th and 7th Divisions rushed to secure the town . During the 9th 's landing east of the town , the battalion suffered 29 casualties in a single Japanese air attack , but overall the battalion 's involvement in the advance resulted in only limited casualties as its personnel were mainly used to unload stores and equipment , as well providing local defence . 
 Lae fell sooner than anticipated and the Allies moved quickly to consolidate , dispatching the 9th Division to secure the Huon Peninsula in late September . During the initial landing at Scarlet Beach , only one company from the 2 / 2nd was deployed – ' C ' Company – in support of the 20th Brigade . Initially , the company was responsible for defending the beachhead around Scarlet Beach , but as the Australians fanned out and advanced south where Japanese resistance intensified , the machine gunners began patrolling operations further afield to the north and west . Once Finschhafen had been secured in early October , the Australians increased the size of their force ashore , landing the 24th Brigade , and along with it , the rest of the 2 / 2nd Machine Gun Battalion . After this , the battalion formed the main part of the divisional reserve , carrying out labouring tasks and maintaining a mobile reserve to counter @-@ attack if necessary . In November , as the 26th Brigade attacked Sattelberg , the machine guns of ' B ' Company were used in an offensive role for the first time during the campaign . Following the fall of Sattelberg , elements of the battalion supported the advance to Wareo before supporting the subsequent advance to Sio as the Australians followed up the retreating Japanese . During December , ' A ' Company was detached in support of the Militia 4th Brigade , before the 20th Brigade resumed the lead , marching on to Sio in mid @-@ January 1944 . The battalion remained in New Guinea until late February , unloading ships , before embarking upon the transport <unk> on 25 February as the 9th Division were relieved by the 5th and withdrawn to Australia for rest and reorganisation . After a short voyage , the 2 / 2nd disembarked in Brisbane in early March 1944 . Total casualties sustained by the battalion in New Guinea were 12 dead and 53 wounded . 
 A long period of relative inactivity subsequently followed as a result of inter @-@ Allied service politics which saw the US Army assume primacy of operations in the Pacific , and indecision about the future role of Australian forces in the Pacific campaign . During this time , the battalion was based around Ravenshoe in Queensland , and was virtually rebuilt , having fallen to a strength of just over 250 personnel due to the effects of tropical diseases and losses suffered during the previous campaign . The battalion was transferred to the " tropical war establishment " during this period as part of an Army @-@ wide reorganisation intended to optimise units for jungle warfare . As a result of this change , the battalion was no longer considered a motorised unit with its guns largely being carried across the battlefield by soldiers moving on foot . It was mostly a notional change as the battalion had lost the majority of its vehicles when the machine gunners had embarked from the Middle East earlier the previous year when the 9th Division had returned most of its equipment to the British . A small number of vehicles had been allocated to the battalion for its previous campaign in New Guinea , amounting to just six jeeps and two five @-@ tonne 6 x 6 GMC tractors . This had proven insufficient to maintain supplies , though , and so with the re @-@ organisation this was increased so that each company headquarters had two jeeps , with another four equipped with trailers being provided to each machine gun company for resupply . This represented a total of 19 jeeps and trailers across the whole battalion . 
 After over a year , the battalion was committed to its final campaign of the war , transiting through Morotai Island as it joined the fighting on Borneo . ' D ' Company supported the 26th Brigade during its assault on Tarakan Island in May , while the rest of the battalion supported the landings on Labuan Island and around Brunei Bay during the Battle of North Borneo . It was a short , but sharp campaign . During this time , in addition to their normal close support role , the machine gunners were often used as infantry , conducting extensive patrolling in search of Japanese stragglers which resulted in a number of clashes , as well as conducting defensive tasks against infiltrators and raiding parties . In North Borneo , a number of members of the battalion were also used to assist with the operation of a narrow gauge railway which had been brought back into service to maintain the Australian supply line . In early August , the dropping of the atomic bombs on Hiroshima and <unk> brought the war to an end . The battalion 's casualties during the campaign in Borneo totaled five dead and six wounded , while casualties on Tarakan amounted to five soldiers killed or wounded . 
 = = = Disbandment = = = 
 In late August the 2 / 2nd was concentrated on the island of Labuan where it was tasked with setting up and running a reception camp for released Allied prisoners of war and internees prior to their repatriation , doing so until late December when the camp was finally closed . Meanwhile , following the conclusion of hostilities , the battalion 's personnel were slowly transferred to other units or repatriated back to Australia for demobilisation . In January 1946 , the 2 / 2nd 's remaining personnel returned to Australia and the following month , on 26 February , the unit was disbanded . Throughout the course of the war , a total of 1 @,@ 824 personnel served within the unit . One member , the author Eric Lambert , based some of the content in his works , including The Twenty Thousand Thieves , on the events he witnessed while serving with the battalion . The battalion lost 67 men killed or died on active service , while a further 193 were wounded and 28 were captured . Members of the battalion received the following decorations : two Distinguished Service Orders , one Military Cross , one Distinguished Conduct Medal , five Military Medals and 20 Mentions in Despatches . 
 After the war , the Australian Army moved away from the machine gun battalion construct and consequently no similar units have been raised since , with the role being subsumed into the support companies of individual infantry battalions . The concept was arguably misunderstood by Australian commanders throughout the war , and this may have influenced the decision to move away from the concept . When the units had been established , the intent had been that the machine gun battalions would provide highly mobile fire support ; however , this was largely only applicable in theatres where principles of open warfare could be applied . Once the focus of Australian Army combat operations shifted to the Pacific , the machine gun battalions were largely misused , being employed in a static defensive capacity against short and medium range targets , or for menial tasks , rather than as offensive fire support weapons that could have been employed to provide long range fire support . The medium machine guns were also largely utilised in the same manner as light machine guns , such as the Bren . Other reasons identified for the concept 's limited use include distrust of overhead fire by some commanders , a preference for organic fire support over attached sub @-@ units , over @-@ estimating the difficulty of transporting Vickers guns in the jungle , and a tendency to ignore targets that could not be seen . The difficulties of target acquisition in dense jungle also contributed . 
 = = Commanding officers = = 
 The 2 / 2nd Machine Gun Battalion was commanded by the following officers : 
 Lieutenant Colonel David Whitehead ( 1940 – 42 ) 
 Lieutenant Colonel Edward Macarthur @-@ Onslow ( 1942 – 45 ) ; 
 Lieutenant Colonel Arthur Searle ( 1945 ) . 
 = = Battle honours = = 
 The 2 / 2nd Machine Gun Battalion was awarded the following battle honours : 
 North Africa 1941 – 42 ; Defence of Alamein Line ; Ruweisat Ridge ; <unk> el Miteirya ; El Alamein ; South @-@ West Pacific 1943 – 45 ; Lae – Nadzab ; Finschhafen ; Sattelberg ; Borneo ; Brunei and Labuan . 
 = German submarine U @-@ 853 = 
 German submarine U @-@ 853 was a Type IXC / 40 U @-@ boat of Nazi Germany 's Kriegsmarine during World War II . Her keel was laid down on 21 August 1942 by DeSchiMAG AG Weser of Bremen . She was commissioned on 25 June 1943 with Kapitänleutnant Helmut Sommer in command . U @-@ 853 saw action during the Battle of the Atlantic in World War II . She conducted three patrols , sinking two ships totalling 5 @,@ 783 tons . 
 On her final patrol , U @-@ 853 was sent to harass United States coastal shipping . She destroyed USS Eagle Boat 56 near Portland , Maine . Just days before Germany 's surrender , U @-@ 853 torpedoed and sank the collier Black Point during the Battle of Point Judith . American warships quickly found U @-@ 853 and sank her 7 nmi ( 13 km ; 8 @.@ 1 mi ) east of Block Island , Rhode Island , resulting in the loss of her entire crew . 
 U @-@ 853 is a popular deep sea diving site . She rests in 121 feet ( 37 m ) of water . Holes in the hull permit access to the interior of the submarine , though it is a war grave with most of the 55 crew bodies remaining inside . 
 = = Design = = 
 German Type IXC / 40 submarines were slightly larger than the original Type <unk> . U @-@ 853 had a displacement of 1 @,@ 144 tonnes ( 1 @,@ 126 long tons ) when at the surface and 1 @,@ 257 tonnes ( 1 @,@ 237 long tons ) while submerged . The U @-@ boat had a total length of 76 @.@ 76 m ( 251 ft 10 in ) , a pressure hull length of 58 @.@ 75 m ( 192 ft 9 in ) , a beam of 6 @.@ 86 m ( 22 ft 6 in ) , a height of 9 @.@ 60 m ( 31 ft 6 in ) , and a draught of 4 @.@ 67 m ( 15 ft 4 in ) . The submarine was powered by two MAN M 9 V 40 / 46 supercharged four @-@ stroke , nine @-@ cylinder diesel engines producing a total of 4 @,@ 400 metric horsepower ( 3 @,@ 240 kW ; 4 @,@ 340 shp ) for use while surfaced , two Siemens @-@ Schuckert 2 GU 345 / 34 double @-@ acting electric motors producing a total of 1 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 1 @,@ 010 PS ; 750 kW ) for use while submerged . She had two shafts and two 1 @.@ 92 m ( 6 ft ) propellers . The boat was capable of operating at depths of up to 230 metres ( 750 ft ) . 
 The submarine had a maximum surface speed of 18 @.@ 3 knots ( 33 @.@ 9 km / h ; 21 @.@ 1 mph ) and a maximum submerged speed of 7 @.@ 3 knots ( 13 @.@ 5 km / h ; 8 @.@ 4 mph ) . When submerged , the boat could operate for 63 nautical miles ( 117 km ; 72 mi ) at 4 knots ( 7 @.@ 4 km / h ; 4 @.@ 6 mph ) ; when surfaced , she could travel 13 @,@ 850 nautical miles ( 25 @,@ 650 km ; 15 @,@ 940 mi ) at 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . U @-@ 853 was fitted with six 53 @.@ 3 cm ( 21 in ) torpedo tubes ( four fitted at the bow and two at the stern ) , 22 torpedoes , one 10 @.@ 5 cm ( 4 @.@ 13 in ) SK C / 32 naval gun , 180 rounds , and a 3 @.@ 7 cm ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) as well as a 2 cm ( 0 @.@ 79 in ) anti @-@ aircraft gun . The boat had a complement of forty @-@ eight . 
 = = Service history = = 
 U @-@ 853 was built by DeSchiMAG AG Weser of Bremen . Ordered on 5 June 1941 , her keel was laid on 21 August 1942 and she was commissioned on 25 June 1943 . 
 The Germans nicknamed the U @-@ boat der <unk> ( " the Tightrope Walker " ) , and her crew painted an emblem of a yellow shield with a red horse on her sail . 
 = = First patrol = = 
 On her first patrol from May to June 1944 , U @-@ 853 was assigned to weather @-@ watching duty under the command of Kapitänleutnant Helmut Sommer . This was its first war patrol . German intelligence believed that weather conditions in the Atlantic could be used to help predict the timing of an Allied invasion of Europe . On 25 May 1944 U @-@ 853 spotted RMS Queen Mary , loaded with American troops and supplies . The U @-@ boat submerged to attack , but was outrun by the much larger and faster ship . As she surfaced in Queen Mary 's wake U @-@ 853 was attacked by Fairey Swordfish aircraft from British merchant aircraft carriers MV <unk> and MV Empire MacKendrick . The U @-@ boat took no significant damage and returned fire , hitting all three aircraft . The planes were able to return to their carrier , but after recovery one was deemed a total loss and jettisoned . 
 The escort carrier USS Croatan ( CVE @-@ 14 ) had been hunting weather boats for nearly a month and had already sunk U @-@ 488 and U @-@ 490 . Intercepted radio transmissions led Croatan and six destroyers to search for U @-@ 853 . The U @-@ 853 proved so elusive that Croatan 's crew nicknamed their prey " Moby Dick . " After ten days of hunting , on 17 June Huff @-@ Duff ( HF / DF , high frequency direction finding ) picked up a weather report from U @-@ 853 only 30 nautical miles ( 56 km ; 35 mi ) away . Within minutes two FM @-@ 1 Wildcat fighters strafed the submarine , killing 2 men and wounding 12 others . Sommer suffered 28 shrapnel and bullet wounds yet still managed to give the order to submerge . In all likelihood Sommer saved his submarine from being destroyed by allied bombers . 
 Three weeks of pursuit from 25 May until 17 June placed an enormous strain on U @-@ 853 's crew . Twenty @-@ three @-@ year @-@ old Oberleutnant zur See Helmut Frömsdorf took command of the boat on 18 June ( his first command ) and returned to Lorient . Sommer and a large number of the crew was declared unfit for duty . On 10 July Sommer was formally relieved by Oberleutnant zur See Otto Wermuth . 
 = = Second patrol = = 
 The boat remained in port until 27 August . Decorated veteran Korvettenkapitän Günter Kuhnke , Commander of the 10th U @-@ boat Flotilla , took command for her second patrol . U @-@ 853 operated this time in the Western Approaches off the British Isles , but in a period of seven weeks scored no successes . On completion she did not return to Lorient , but continued to Flensburg , arriving 14 October . Kuhnke assumed command of the 33rd U @-@ boat Flotilla upon arriving at Flensburg . He relinquished command of U @-@ 853 back to Frömsdorf , who took the U @-@ boat on her third and final patrol . Before departure U @-@ 853 was fitted with a Schnorchel , a retractable air intake and exhaust that allowed the ship to remain submerged while running her diesel engines . The Schnorchel reduced the need to spend dangerous periods on the surface recharging batteries . 
 = = Last patrol = = 
 On 23 February 1945 Germany sent U @-@ 853 on her third war patrol to harass US coastal shipping . Under the command of Oberleutnant zur See Helmut Frömsdorf , U @-@ 853 did not sink any targets during the first weeks of her patrol . Her crossing of the Atlantic was slow because she used her Schnorchel to remain submerged to avoid being spotted by Allied aircraft . On 1 April 1945 U @-@ 853 was ordered to the Gulf of Maine . On 23 April she fatally torpedoed USS Eagle Boat 56 near Portland , Maine . The next day USS Muskegon made sonar contact and attacked U @-@ 853 , but failed to destroy her . 
 Eagle Boat 56 , a World War I @-@ era patrol boat , was towing targets for a United States Navy dive @-@ bomber training exercise 3 nautical miles ( 5 @.@ 6 km ; 3 @.@ 5 mi ) off Cape Elizabeth when she exploded amidships and sank . Only 13 of the 67 crew survived . Although several survivors claimed to have seen a submarine sail with yellow and red insignia , a Navy inquiry attributed the sinking to a boiler explosion . The Navy reversed its findings in 2001 to acknowledge that the sinking was due to hostile fire and awarded Purple Hearts to the survivors and next @-@ of @-@ kin of the deceased . 
 = = Battle of Point Judith = = 
 On 5 May 1945 , President ( Reichspräsident ) of Nazi Germany Karl Dönitz ordered all U @-@ boats to cease offensive operations and return to their bases . U @-@ 853 was lying in wait off Point Judith , Rhode Island at the time . According to the US Coast Guard , U @-@ 853 did not receive that order , or less likely , ignored it . Soon after , her torpedo blew off the stern of SS Black Point , a 368 @-@ foot ( 112 m ) collier underway from New York to Boston . Within 15 minutes Black Point had sunk in 100 feet ( 30 m ) of water less than 4 nautical miles ( 7 @.@ 4 km ; 4 @.@ 6 mi ) south of Point Judith . She was the last US @-@ flagged merchant ship lost in World War II . Twelve men died , while 34 crew members were rescued . One of the rescuing ships , Yugoslav freighter SS Kamen , sent a report of the torpedoing to authorities . The US Navy organized a " hunter @-@ killer " group that included four American warships : Ericsson ( DD @-@ 440 ) , Amick ( DE @-@ 168 ) , Atherton ( DE @-@ 169 ) , and Moberly ( PF @-@ 63 ) . 
 The group discovered U @-@ 853 bottomed in 18 fathoms ( 108 ft ; 33 m ) , and dropped depth charges and hedgehogs during a 16 @-@ hour attack . At first the U @-@ boat attempted to flee , and then tried to hide by lying still . Both times it was found by sonar . The morning of 6 May 1945 two K @-@ Class blimps from Lakehurst , New Jersey , K @-@ 16 and K @-@ 58 , joined the attack , locating oil slicks and marking suspected locations with smoke and dye markers . K @-@ 16 also attacked with 7 @.@ 2 @-@ inch rocket bombs . Numerous depth charge and hedgehog attacks from Atherton and Moberly resulted in planking , life rafts , a chart tabletop , clothing , and an officer 's cap floating to the surface . With the loss of all 55 officers and men , U @-@ 853 was one of the last U @-@ boats sunk during World War II. and , with U @-@ 881 , the last to be sunk in US waters . Atherton and Moberly received credit for the kill . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The body of one of U @-@ 853 's crewmembers was recovered in 1960 and was interred in the Island Cemetery Annex on Van Zandt Avenue in Newport , Rhode Island . The submarine 's two propellers were on display for many years at the Inn at Castle Hill in Newport and are now in the custody of the United States Naval War College Museum at the Newport Naval Station . 
 The USS Atherton was transferred to Japan and served as part of the Japanese Maritime Self Defense Force until 1975 when she was returned to the United States . She was given to the Philippines in 1978 and served with the Philippine Navy as recently as 2011 . Interest has been expressed in returning Atherton to the United States so she can be restored to her World War II appearance and be opened to the public . 
 = = Wreck = = 
 U @-@ 853 lies 7 nautical miles ( 13 km ; 8 @.@ 1 mi ) east of Block Island in 130 feet ( 40 m ) of water . The US Coast Guard pinpoints the location of the wreck at 41 ° 13 ′ N 71 ° 27 ′ W. U @-@ 853 sits upright with her periscope rising to a depth of 100 feet ( 30 m ) . Most of the 55 crew member bodies remain within the hull , which is a war grave . It is one of the more popular dive sites in Southern New England . The hull has depth charge blast holes : one forward of the conning tower at the radio room and another in the starboard side of the engine room . Entering the wreck is dangerous due to debris , sharp metal edges , and confined spaces . 
 On 6 and 7 May 1945 , Navy divers attempted to enter the wreck to recover the captain 's safe and the papers within , but failed . Recreational divers first visited the site in 1953 . In 1960 a recreational diver brought up a body from the wreck . This provoked former navy admirals and clergy to petition the US government for restrictions on disturbing the dead . The German crewman was buried with full military honors in Newport , Rhode Island . At least two recreational divers have died from exploring the wreckage . Renowned deep sea diver Stephen <unk> perished in 2005 while filming the U @-@ boat . He surfaced unconscious and could not be revived . <unk> , age 60 , died as the result of saltwater drowning associated with poor health according to the Rhode Island Medical Examiner 's office . 
 An AP report on the Boston Globe news site cites diver Bill Palmer having retrieved numerous items from the wreck , as well as including accounts 853 from USS Atherton personnel Kenneth Homberger and the ship commander Lewis Iselin of the US naval action that led to sinking of U @-@ 853 from USS Atherton personnel Kenneth Homberger and the ship commander Lewis Iselin . 
 = = Summary of raiding history = = 
 = = Armament = = 
 = = = FLAK weaponry = = = 
 U @-@ 853 was mounted with a single 3 @.@ 7 cm <unk> <unk> gun on the LM <unk> mount . The LM <unk> mount was the most common mount used with the 3 @.@ 7 cm Flak <unk> . The 3 @.@ 7 cm Flak <unk> was the marine version of the 3 @.@ 7 cm Flak used by the Kriegsmarine on Type VII and Type IX U @-@ boats . U @-@ 853 was mounted with two <unk> Flak <unk> in a M <unk> <unk> mount with short folding shield on the upper <unk> . The M <unk> mount was used on a number of U @-@ boats ( U @-@ 190 , U @-@ 249 , U @-@ 250 , U @-@ 278 , U @-@ 337 , U @-@ 475 , U @-@ 1058 , U @-@ 1109 , U @-@ 1023 , U @-@ 1105 , U @-@ 1165 and U @-@ 1306 ) . 
 = Abu Ali Iyad = 
 Walid Ahmad <unk> al @-@ Naser ( Arabic : <unk> أحمد <unk> <unk> ) ( 1934 – July 23 , 1971 ) better known by his nom de guerre Abu Ali Iyad ( Arabic : أبو علي <unk> ) was a senior Palestinian field commander based in Syria and Jordan during the 1960s and early 1970s . 
 After a career of teaching in the West Bank , Iraq , Saudi Arabia and Algeria , Abu Ali Iyad was recruited into the paramilitary group , Fatah , by Khalil al @-@ Wazir in 1964 after graduating from an Algerian military training course . A year later , he became one of Fatah 's first leaders in Syria along with al @-@ Wazir and Yasser Arafat . During his time there , Abu Ali Iyad gained a position on the group 's top political body , supervised its main guerrilla training camp in Daraa and set up a military intelligence headquarters . 
 As a Fatah field commander , he fought Israeli forces at the Battle of Karameh , gaining a reputation as an unyielding commander . Abu Ali Iyad was also a leading organizer and participant in guerrilla raids against Israeli localities . He was one of the last Palestinian commanders to fight the Jordanian Army in the aftermath of the Black September conflict . He was killed in the countryside around Ajlun and Jerash by Jordanian forces in July 1971 . His partisans claimed that he was executed , and as retaliation , they assassinated Jordanian prime minister Wasfi al @-@ Tal four months after Abu Ali Iyad 's death . 
 = = Early life = = 
 In 1934 , Abu Ali Iyad was born in <unk> in the modern @-@ day West Bank when Palestine was under the British Mandate . He was educated there , graduating from high school in 1953 and taught at schools in the city and nearby Azzun . A year later , he moved to <unk> , Iraq where he enrolled in a teacher training program . He left Iraq the same year , moving to Saudi Arabia to teach there afterward . In 1962 , he had a job as a teacher in Algeria . However , he soon sought and received training by the Algerian Army , graduating from its training course in the summer of 1964 . 
 = = Fatah command = = 
 While in Algeria , Abu Ali Iyad was recruited into the Palestinian nationalist paramilitary organization Fatah by the leader of its armed wing Khalil al @-@ Wazir . He adopted his nom de guerre after joining . Fatah at the time was divided politically with the more non @-@ violent leadership based in Kuwait and those supporting attacks against Israel based in Syria . Abu Ali Iyad , along with al @-@ Wazir , Yasser Arafat , and three others in the Syrian camp , formed the organization 's " emergency " field command in Damascus in 1965 . 
 A year later al @-@ Wazir , Arafat , and much of the Fatah military leadership were arrested by Syrian authorities loyal to Hafez al @-@ Assad ( who was Defense Minister at the time ) as suspects in the murder of a pro @-@ Assad paramilitary leader , Yusef Urabi . As a result , Abu Ali Iyad , al @-@ Wazir 's wife Intissar al @-@ Wazir and fellow Fatah commander Ahmad <unk> were put in charge of Fatah 's leadership in Syria . They formed a secret committee whose purpose was maintaining the military operations of Fatah 's armed wing , al @-@ Assifa , against Israel , launching attacks from Lebanon and Jordan and thus co @-@ opting al @-@ Assad 's efforts to circumvent their activity . Abu Ali Iyad himself was arrested later by the Syrian authorities . He was released along with Arafat and two other Fatah leaders in August . Abu Ali Iyad then met al @-@ Assad in person to sign an agreement on the terms of Fatah 's presence and activities in Syria . 
 Following the release of the rest of Fatah 's leadership , the Central Committee of Fatah — the organization 's highest decision @-@ making body , was reformed . Two of Arafat 's rivals lost their positions in the new central committee and were replaced by his allies , Abu Ali Iyad and Salah Khalaf , tilting the balance of power within Fatah towards Syria instead of Kuwait . Abu Ali Iyad 's position gave him responsibility for al @-@ Assifa 's operations against Israel from Syria and Lebanon . By the end of the year , he had personally led raids against a number of villages in northeastern Israel , including Kfar Giladi , Manara , <unk> , and Beit Yosef . In the latter village , his unit was responsible for wounding two civilians and destroying three houses by explosives . 
 Also after his release , in 1966 , Abu Ali Iyad became the chief military instructor of a training camp for Fatah recruits in the city of Hama in central Syria . He modeled it based on the Algerian training camp he graduated from . Most of his pupils were university students who would soon form Fatah 's new guerrilla force . Abu Ali Iyad 's course was the only one of its kind run by Fatah itself ( often commanders would train in Algeria ) and it provided the bulk of commanders for the group 's guerrilla units for the next decade . These mostly young recruits became known as " Tiger Cubs . " Among their ranks , Abu Ali Iyad gained a reputation for enforcing strict discipline . According to British Middle East expert , Patrick Seale , he also had a " fierce appearance " that left his soldiers in " awe " ; after a malfunction while he was experimenting with explosives , he lost an eye and damaged one of his legs . In 1968 , Abu Ali Iyad set up a Fatah headquarters for military intelligence in Dera 'a , southern Syria . Its principal task was to penetrate the Jordanian Army and security agencies . 
 = = = Commander in Jordan = = = 
 He moved to Jordan in 1968 where he trained Fatah forces in Ajlun . Palestinian fedayeen activity persisted following the collective Arab defeat in the 1967 Six @-@ Day War and Israel sought to end guerrilla attacks on its territory by launching an offensive against the Palestinian Liberation Organization 's ( PLO ) bases in Jordan . A major confrontation ensued between the Israeli Army and Fatah which came to be known as the Battle of Karameh . Abu Ali Iyad was a senior commander during the battle , gaining prominence and respect among the Palestinians for his performance as an unyielding military officer . Although Fatah took heavy losses , Israel eventually withdrew after the Jordanian Army entered the fray on Fatah 's side . He continued to organize raids against Israeli army camps and towns in Israel and the West Bank while he was based in Jordan . 
 Relations between the PLO and King Hussein of Jordan began to deteriorate after Karameh , climaxing in September 1970 when armed conflict ensued between Palestinian and Jordanian forces . Prior to Jordanian military action , Abu Ali Iyad lobbied his colleagues in Fatah , who supported the forced ousting of the king , to withdraw from Amman and return to the countryside closer to the border with Israel . Palestinian factions did not heed his calls and their military bases in Amman were shelled by Jordanian forces . On September 17 , an emergency meeting of PLO factions was held with the majority of those attending favoring confrontation with King Hussein 's troops . Supporting al @-@ Wazir , who was one of the few delegates to have reservations , Abu Ali Iyad argued against confrontation and warned that expectations of Syrian intervention on the side of the Palestinians was improbable . The Jordanians succeeded in defeating PLO forces in Amman and about 2 @,@ 000 Palestinian guerrillas under al @-@ Wazir 's leadership evacuated the city northward to Ajlun . 
 Abu Ali Iyad was part of the field command there along with al @-@ Wazir . They headed a force of roughly 2 @,@ 500 guerrillas in the hilly terrain around Ajlun and Jerash . Their position was vulnerable due to the ineffectiveness of Palestinian guerrilla warfare against Jordanian armor in open areas versus urban warfare in the cities and Palestinian refugee camps . Most of the PLO leadership , including Arafat and al @-@ Wazir , and hundreds of guerrillas escaped Jordan in April 1971 following pressure from Arab states , confiscation of weapons by the Jordanian Army and the closing of PLO offices in Amman . Abu Ali Iyad refused to do so , however , and he and his Tiger Cubs stayed put in their Ajlun base where they continued to fight the Jordanian Army . 
 On July 12 , King Hussein ordered the evacuation of all guerrilla forces from the strategic mountain in the center of their stronghold in Ajlun . Hussein personally offered to allow Abu Ali Iyad to depart unharmed if he abandoned his fighters . He refused and Hussein ordered his troops to track down and kill him within the framework of routing out remaining PLO forces in northern Jordan . A Jordanian infantry division and armored brigade backed by 10 @,@ 000 Bedouin foot soldiers immediately launched an offensive afterward . By July 16 , Palestinian positions had been secured by the Jordanian Army . During the Jordanian offensive , 200 @-@ 250 guerrillas had been killed and 70 @-@ 100 of Abu Ali 's troops fled , crossing the Jordan River to the Israeli @-@ occupied West Bank . 
 = = Death and aftermath = = 
 In early July , prior to the offensive , Abu Ali sent letters to Fatah leaders chastising them for surrendering to King Hussein 's forces , stating in defiance " We will die on our feet rather than kneel . " On July 23 , he was reported killed by the Jordanian Army . According to <unk> Sayigh who documented the history of Palestinian guerrilla warfare , Abu Ali was " executed " during mop @-@ up operations by the Jordanian Army sometime on July 17 – 18 . Jordanian Bedouin troops tied his corpse to a tank and dragged it through several northern villages that had large Palestinian populations . The PLO claimed he was captured and tortured to death by Jordanian forces prior . Another version of events by Abu Ali 's partisans was that the Jordanian prime minister at the time , Wasfi al @-@ Tal , was personally responsible for his torture . 
 His partisans sought vengeance for his killing and a splinter group developed within Fatah consisting of men from the Tiger Cubs and other Fatah dissidents . It came to be known as the Black September Organization ( BSO ) and Abu Ali 's men provided its initial membership . On November 28 , one of his former Tiger Cubs , <unk> al @-@ Khalifa , assassinated al @-@ Tal in Cairo . According to Seale , this was the first attack carried out by the BSO . 
 Palestinian poet Mahmoud Darwish dedicated the poem " Returning to Jaffa " to Abu Ali Iyad . 
 = Pilot ( Community ) = 
 The pilot episode of the NBC sitcom Community aired on Thursday , September 17 , 2009 . Written by Dan Harmon , the show 's creator , the episode was directed by Anthony Russo and Joe Russo . The episode introduces Jeff Winger ( Joel McHale ) , a debarred lawyer who is forced to attend community college to get his license back . He tries to exploit his friendship with one of the faculty members for easy credits , but fails , and is forced to join a Spanish study group . The members of this study group make up the main cast of the series , which includes Chevy Chase as retired entrepreneur Pierce Hawthorne . 
 The show takes place at the fictional Greendale Community College in Greendale , Colorado . Harmon based the show on his own experiences in community college , and partly modeled the character of Jeff Winger on himself . He emphasized the cast 's importance to the show , and also credited some of the actors for their improvisational skills . The episode attracted generally favorable reviews from critics , who praised both the actors and the comedy writing . The show received good viewership , and stood out in NBC 's Thursday lineup , where the network 's other shows suffered declines in ratings . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Jeff Winger , a disbarred lawyer , has enrolled at Greendale Community College as a condition for getting his license back . His plan is to use his friendship with Dr. Ian Duncan to obtain test answers . In the cafeteria Jeff meets the attractive Britta , and ( in an attempt to get closer to her ) convinces her to join his non @-@ existent Spanish study group . As the study group convenes , Jeff pretends the other members simply did not show up . Britta , however , has invited Abed to join them . Jeff unsuccessfully tries to make him leave , and then gets called to the football field by Dr. Duncan . The professor makes a futile attempt to appeal to Jeff 's conscience , and eventually agrees to provide the answers . Jeff returns to the study group , discovering that Abed has also invited Troy , Shirley , Pierce and Annie . Finding Britta smoking outside , he suggests the two study alone , but she persuades him to return . 
 Jeff , eager to get away , deliberately stirs a fight among the group , then leaves once more to get the test answers . Dr. Duncan hands him a sealed envelope , but only in return for Jeff 's Lexus . When Jeff returns , the group is in turmoil , and Britta promises to go out with him if he can restore order . He does this through an inspirational speech , but Britta sees through his vacuous rhetoric and asks him to leave . Jeff then comes clean about everything , adding that since he now has the test answers he does not need the study group . As the group turns against him he takes off . 
 Leaving the building , Jeff finds all the pages in the envelope to be blank . He returns to the office of Dr. Duncan who tells him that he wanted to teach him a lesson although Jeff gets his car keys back . As he is about to leave campus , Jeff runs into Pierce and Troy , and shows his ability to make people feel better about themselves through advice and encouragement . The others join , and Jeff admits to being a fraud . He says that he does not have the test answers , and that he will probably <unk> next day 's test . The group has now taken a liking to him , and they invite him back in . The episode ends with a dedication to the recently deceased John Hughes , whose film The Breakfast Club has been repeatedly referenced throughout the episode . 
 = = Cast and characters = = 
 The pilot emphasizes character introduction , and a great deal of biographical information about the various main characters is revealed in the episode . 
 Joel McHale as Jeff Winger – Jeff is a smooth talking lawyer who was debarred once it was revealed that his college degree was " less than legitimate " . The condition of his reinstatement is that he finishes a college degree . 
 Chevy Chase as Pierce Hawthorne – Pierce is implicitly described by the college dean as one of the school 's " old people keeping their minds active as they circle the drains of eternity " . He is a retired entrepreneur who made a fortune on moist <unk> . He has been married seven times , and has now decided to go back to college . 
 Gillian Jacobs as Britta Perry – Britta dropped out of high school because she thought it would impress Radiohead . She then joined a group of anarchists who vandalized billboards . She has been in the Peace Corps , and done foot modeling before she enrolled at Greendale . She is strongly concerned with honesty , and does not take lightly to anyone lying to her . 
 Danny Pudi as Abed Nadir – Abed is a Palestinian / Polish boy who – according to Jeff – has Asperger syndrome . He proves helpful to Jeff with his ability to obtain quick and detailed knowledge of everyone he meets . 
 Yvette Nicole Brown as Shirley Bennett – Shirley is a " middle @-@ aged divorcee " who " has made some bad life choices " . 
 Alison Brie as Annie Edison – Annie got addicted to pills and had to drop out of high school . 
 Donald Glover as Troy Barnes – Troy was a high school football star who got injured and failed to get a scholarship . 
 John Oliver as Professor Ian Duncan , psychology teacher at Greendale . – Professor Duncan once faced a DUI charge , but was acquitted thanks to Jeff 's help . 
 Jim Rash as Dean Pelton – Dean Pelton is first introduced while giving his introductory speech to the new students , a speech that ends up being unintentionally offensive . 
 = = Casting = = 
 Harmon has emphasized the importance of the cast to making the premise of the comedy work . " Casting was 95 percent of putting the show together , " he said in an interview . He had worked with several of the cast members earlier ; Joel McHale , John Oliver and Chevy Chase all had cameo roles in episode 9 of Water and Power , the short film series produced by Harmon for Channel 101 . Actor Chevy Chase had long been a favorite of Harmon . Though principally not very partial to sitcoms , Chase was persuaded to take the job by the quality of the show 's writing . Harmon saw similarities between Chase and the character he plays on the show . Though Chase has often been ridiculed for his career choices , Harmon believed this role could be redeeming : " What makes Chevy and Pierce heroic is this refusal to stop . " Harmon had to warn Chase against playing a " wise @-@ ass " the way he often does in his roles , since the character of Pierce is a rather pathetic figure who is normally the butt of the joke himself . 
 McHale – known from the E ! comedy The Soup – was also , like Chase , impressed by Harmon 's writing . He commented that " after reading Dan 's script it was so head and shoulders above everything else that I was reading . " McHale appealed to Harmon because of his likable quality , which allowed the character to possess certain unsympathetic traits without turning the viewer against him . For the role of Annie , Harmon wanted someone who would resemble Tracy Flick , Reese Witherspoon 's character from the 1999 movie Election . Originally the producers were looking for a Latina or Asian Tracy Flick , for greater diversity , but could not find any . Instead they ended up casting Alison Brie , known from her role as Trudy Campbell on Mad Men . 
 = = Production = = 
 The premise of Community was based on Harmon 's real @-@ life experiences . In an attempt to save his relationship with his then @-@ girlfriend , he once enrolled in Glendale Community College , north of Los Angeles , where they would take Spanish together . Harmon got involved in a study group and – somewhat against his own instincts – became closely connected to the group of people with whom he had very little in common . " ... I was in this group with these knuckleheads and I started really liking them , " he explained , " even though they had nothing to do with the film industry and I had nothing to gain from them and nothing to offer them . " With this as the background , Harmon wrote the show with a main character largely based on himself . He had , like Jeff , been self @-@ centered and independent to the extreme before he realised the value of connecting with other people . 
 About the creative process behind the writing , Harmon says that he had to write the show as if it were a movie , not a sitcom . Essentially , he says , the process was no different from the earlier work he had done , except for the length and the target demographic . Filming the show involved a lot of improvisation , particularly from Chevy Chase . Harmon said about Chase that he " tends to come up with lines that you can actually end scenes with sometimes . " He also mentioned Joel McHale and Donald Glover , the actor who portrays Troy , as adept improvisers . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Premiering in the 9 : 30 pm time slot on September 17 , 2009 , the pilot episode had a viewership of 7 @.@ 680 million . In the 18 – 49 audience , it had a rating of 3 @.@ 7 . As such , it held 93 % of this audience from The Office , which had been in the previous time slot . The show was called the " bright spot for the night " for NBC , considering that The Office was down 18 % from the previous year 's premiere , while Parks and Recreation , in the preceding time slot , was down 30 % . 
 The pilot episode of Community received generally favorable reviews from critics . The aggregate review website Metacritic gives the show a score of 69 out of 100 , based on 23 reviews . Entertainment Weekly 's Ken Tucker called it " One of the new season 's best sitcoms " , and gave it a grade B + . Heather Havrilesky , writing for Salon.com , agreed with this assessment , and commended the " alarmingly smart writing " . Alan Sepinwall at The Star @-@ Ledger similarly called it " the best , and funniest , new show of the season " , and said he laughed just as much after seeing the pilot four times . Others were less impressed ; Variety 's Brian Lowry found the satire wanting , and did not much appreciate McHale 's performance . The Miami Herald 's Glenn Garvin found that , though particularly McHale was capable of generating " sporadic laughter " , the show was just not very amusing . 
 = Hurst Castle = 
 Not to be confused with Hearst Castle , a resort built in the US by wealthy newspaper magnate , William Randolph Hearst . 
 Hurst Castle is an artillery fort established by Henry VIII on the Hurst Spit in Hampshire , between 1541 and 1544 . It formed part of the King 's Device programme to protect against invasion from France and the Holy Roman Empire , and defended the western entrance to the Solent waterway . The early castle had a central keep and three bastions , and in 1547 was equipped with 26 guns . It was expensive to operate due to its size , but it formed one of the most powerful forts along the coast . During the English Civil War of the 1640s , Hurst was held by Parliament and was used briefly to detain King Charles I before his execution in 1648 . It continued in use during the 18th century but fell into disrepair , the spit being frequented by smugglers . 
 Repairs were made during the Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars with France , and the castle was modernised to enable it hold 24 @-@ pounder ( 10 @.@ 8 kg ) guns . Fresh fears of invasion followed in the 1850s , leading to heavier , 32 @-@ pounder ( 14 @.@ 5 kg ) armament being installed and new gun batteries being laid out on both sides of the castle . Technological developments rapidly made these defences obsolete , however , and a fresh phase of work between 1861 and 1874 created sixty @-@ one gun positions in two long , granite @-@ faced batteries alongside the older castle . These held very heavy weapons , including massive 12 @.@ 5 inch , 38 ton ( 317 mm , 39 @,@ 000 kg ) rifled muzzle @-@ loading guns . As the century progressed , these too became outdated and lighter , quick @-@ firing guns were installed at the castle to replace them . 
 The castle formed part of a network of defences around the entrance to the Solent during the First World War , and was re @-@ armed again during the Second World War . The military decommissioned the fort in 1956 and it passed into the control of the Ministry of Works . In the 21st century , it is run jointly by English Heritage and the Friends of Hurst Castle as a tourist attraction , receiving around 40 @,@ 000 visitors during 2015 . Coastal erosion has become a growing problem despite government intervention to protecting the spit . Four lighthouses have been built at Hurst from the 18th century onwards , one of which , a high lighthouse first opened in 1867 , remains in active service . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = 16th century = = = 
 Hurst Castle was built as a consequence of international tensions between England , France and the Holy Roman Empire in the final years of the reign of King Henry VIII . Traditionally the Crown had left coastal defences to local lords and communities , only taking a modest role in building and maintaining fortifications , and while France and the Empire remained in conflict , maritime raids were common but an actual invasion of England seemed unlikely . Modest defences based around simple blockhouses and towers existed in the south @-@ west and along the Sussex coast , with a few more impressive works in the north of England , but in general the fortifications were limited in scale . Worsley 's Tower , for example , built opposite the future site of Hurst Castle in the 1520s , was too small to hold powerful artillery and considered by surveyors in 1539 to be " one of the worst devised things " they had seen . 
 In 1533 , Henry broke with Pope Paul III over the annulment of his long @-@ standing marriage to Catherine of Aragon . Catherine was the aunt of Charles V , the Holy Roman Emperor , who took the annulment as a personal insult . This resulted in France and the Empire declaring an alliance against Henry in 1538 , and the Pope encouraging the two countries to attack England . An invasion of England appeared certain . In response , Henry issued an order , called a " device " , in 1539 , giving instructions for the " defence of the realm in time of invasion " and the construction of forts along the English coastline . 
 Hurst Castle was designed to protect the western entrance to the Solent , a body of water that led from the English Channel to the naval base at Portsmouth and , through Southampton Water , to the important port of Southampton . The castle was one of four fortifications that William Fitzwilliam , the Lord Admiral , and William Paulet recommended building to strengthen the defences along the Solent ; the others were at East and West Cowes , and Calshot . It was positioned on the Hurst Spit , a strip of shingle sheltering saltmarsh and mud flats , only 0 @.@ 75 miles ( 1 @.@ 21 km ) across the water from the Isle of Wight . Temporary earthwork fortifications were erected on the site and , after the other three castles had been completed , work then began on Hurst in 1541 under the direction of John Mille , the financial controller , and probably Thomas Bertie , a master mason . Bertie was appointed as the castle 's captain in 1542 and the work was completed by January 1544 , at a cost of over £ 3 @,@ 200 . 
 The result was a stone artillery fort with a central keep and three bastions , surrounded by a moat , capable of holding up to 71 guns . In 1547 , however , Hurst was equipped with 26 artillery pieces – four made of brass and the remainder iron – comprising a two sakers , a culverin , a demi @-@ cannon , a <unk> cannon , two demi @-@ culverins , six portpieces , four slings , two quarter @-@ slings , and seven bases , three of them inoperable . A 1559 survey commented that Hurst Castle was essential for sending reinforcements from the mainland to the island , and noted that it was equipped with eleven brass and iron guns , with nine further broken guns , along with handguns , bows and arrows , pikes and bills . The survey observed that the castle was vulnerable to attack because it lacked flanking protection and had rounded walls , and that it was expensive to garrison because of its size , requiring a captain , his deputy , twelve gunners , nine soldiers and a porter . The historian John Kenyon notes , however , that its considerable armament made it one of the most powerful forts in the south , even if it was equipped with lighter guns than would have been ideal for its " ship @-@ killing " role . 
 Meanwhile , the invasion threat from France had passed and a lasting peace was made in 1558 ; government concerns shifted away from the south coast towards the Spanish threat to the south @-@ west of England . By 1569 , when Thomas Carew was serving as Hurst 's captain , there were less than ten guns but the same size of garrison to that seven years before . His son , Sir Thomas Gorges , became captain in turn , and in 1593 he reported that the castle 's gun platforms were in serious need of repair . 
 = = = 17th century = = = 
 In the early 1600s , England was at peace with France and Spain , and the country 's coastal defences received little attention . The Gorges family continued as captains at Hurst , with Sir Edward Gorges taking up the post in 1610 , but the castle was neglected . In 1628 , the castle was unable to prevent Flemish ships from passing along the Solent , as only four or five of the castle 's twenty @-@ seven guns were functional , and the fort had no ammunition or powder for them . The government replaced all the brass ordnance in the castle , which were preferred , particularly on ships , as they could fire faster and more safely , with iron guns in 1635 . 
 At the beginning of the English Civil War in 1642 between the supporters of Charles I and Parliament , the castle was occupied by Captain Richard Swanley , a supporter of Parliament . In December 1648 it was briefly used to detain the King before his trial and execution . During the <unk> , it remained in use under the command of Colonel Thomas Eyre and was reinforced in 1650 to deal with the threat of a Royalist invasion . 
 After Charles II was restored to the throne in 1660 , Eyre was dismissed and replaced by Edward Strange . The future of the castle was uncertain ; Charles gave orders to demobilise the garrison and briefly considered having the fortress demolished altogether . Instead of maintaining a regular garrison , in 1666 it was decided to staff the castle using soldiers deployed from the Isle of Wight instead , from a unit belonging to Sir Robert Holmes , the island 's governor . Hurst had meanwhile fallen into disrepair , delaying the plans to deploy Holmes ' men until 1671 . Repairs were carried out and , by 1675 , a conventional garrison and almost thirty guns were stationed at Hurst . 
 = = = 18th century = = = 
 Hurst Castle continued to be used as a military base in the 18th century , but was also used to hold a Franciscan confessor , Father Paul Atkinson . Amid concerns over the moral condition of England and a perceived threat to the established Church , an act for " further preventing the growth of popery " was passed in 1700 ; Hurst was chosen by the Privy Council to house any priests convicted under this law . Atkinson was probably the only person detained in this way , and he was held for 29 years from 1700 onwards , before finally dying at the castle . 
 There had been reported problems with smuggling around Hurst Castle since the 1670s , and these continued into the 18th century . In 1729 , the Revenue service hired the Hurst , a wide , heavy yacht , to assist in anti @-@ smuggling operations out of Southampton , arming its crew with muskets , pistols and swords . The problems persisted and , later in the century , the site was used as a rendezvous for smugglers led by a notorious criminal called John Streeter . 
 The castle fell into neglect , and reports from the 1770s through into the early 1790s noted extensive problems , complaining that the fort 's guns could no longer be mounted on the dilapidated bastions and that water was seeping through the decaying walls . By 1793 , the castle was considered to be " in the worst condition " of all the forts along the coast , and all its guns were unusable . Repairs were authorised , but little was actually done . The spit around the castle began to be used by civilians , including fishermen and gardeners ; a lighthouse , called the Hurst Tower , was built there in 1786 , and the Shipwright 's Arms inn was established alongside the castle . 
 The Revolutionary War with France broke out in 1793 , leading to the extensive modernisation of the castle . Repairs were carried out in 1794 at a cost of £ 647 , followed by a review of the defences the next year by the Master @-@ General of the Ordnance . The 16th @-@ century castle was still strongly fortified by the standards of the time , but it could not support the heavier guns or batteries of artillery required to tackle enemy warships . Instead , two new gun batteries , each armed with five 36 @-@ pounder ( 16 @.@ 3 kg ) guns , were built alongside the castle in 1795 , with a further eighteen 9 @-@ pounder ( 4 kg ) guns mounted in the old fort ; the guns concerned had all been captured from the French . 
 = = = 19th century = = = 
 = = = = 1800 – 58 = = = = 
 In 1803 , war with France appeared imminent once again . After some discussions , it was agreed to adapt the 16th @-@ century keep to enable it to hold six 24 @-@ pounder ( 10 @.@ 8 kg ) guns ; the roof was vaulted and a central stone pillar was installed to run up through the building , work estimated at the time to be likely to cost cost £ 4 @,@ 122 . The historian Andrew Saunders likens the resulting building to the various Martello towers being constructed along the south coast at this time . It was proposed to build two temporary gun batteries to replace the 1795 emplacements , which had suffered from the salt air and decayed , but the plan was turned down in order to focus attention on the redevelopment of the keep . The work was carried out by a mixture of soldiers and civilian contractors and was completed by the end of 1806 . 
 The remodelled castle did not play an active part in the Napoleonic Wars , although it was used in 1809 as a hospital for injured soldiers returning from the Peninsula Campaign in Spain . A second lighthouse , known as the High Lighthouse , was constructed alongside the castle in 1812 . 
 Official interest in Hurst Castle increased again in the 1840s , as the introduction of shell guns and steam ships created a new risk that the French might successfully attack along the south coast . Previously , sailing ships had been only able to pass the castle slowly when moving against the tide , making them vulnerable to its guns ; steam ships threatened to cruise past at speed . Military estimates and surveys in 1850 and 1851 suggested that the armament should therefore be significantly increased , to include more and much heavier guns . 
 Improvements were carried out between 1852 and 1856 at a cost of over £ 6 @,@ 725 . The keep was adapted to support 32 @-@ pounder ( 14 @.@ 5 kg ) guns , the seaward @-@ facing bastions and curtain walls were reinforced with brick casemates and new gun positions , and the moat was deepened to protect against any surprise attack . Two batteries were built to the west and east of the castle , protected by shingle and earth and linked to the old castle by covered passageways called caponiers ; a defensible barrack block was built beside the western battery , to provide further protection against any attack from the land . The result was that Hurst was re @-@ established as a powerful fortification , equipped with fourteen 32 @-@ pounder guns , fifteen 8 @-@ inch ( 203 mm ) shell guns and two 32 @-@ pounder carronades ; in wartime , these required a team of 440 men , with a peacetime garrison of 105 soldiers . Fort Albert was built across the water on the Isle of Wight to provide supporting fire . The old inn was first reused as the garrison canteen and then demolished . 
 The 1852 , the Isle of Wight Electric Company laid a specially @-@ armoured telegraph cable to link the castle with <unk> on the mainland and Sconce Point on the island ; two years later , the Electric Telegraph Company linked the castle to Southampton . Hurst used flags to pass on telegraphic messages to and from shipping entering the Solent . 
 = = = = 1859 – 99 = = = = 
 Rapid advances in military technology made the new defences became obsolete before the end of the decade . The introduction of rifled breech @-@ loading guns , capable of firing explosive shells , and the construction of armour @-@ plated warships left Hurst 's guns and fortifications inadequate . Fears grew in 1859 that France might invade England , potentially in a surprise attack . A 1859 Royal Commission recommended that Hurst , as one of the key forts protecting Portsmouth , should be upgraded as a matter of priority . 
 Hurst was equipped with new heavy , RML guns in heavily protected casemated positions . These weapons were slow to reload , so to ensure that the castle would have a good chance of hitting enemy ships passing at speed , two long batteries of weapons were built onto either side of the old castle , a west wing with 37 gun positions and an east wing with 24 positions . These were built on top of the two gun batteries constructed there a few years before and also required the castle 's moat to be filled in . As work progressed , the decision was taken to reinforce the batteries with additional iron shields . 
 The work eventually cost £ 211 @,@ 000 ; it began in 1861 , with the majority of the work being completed by 1870 and the additional iron shielding by 1874 . In peacetime , the castle held around 131 officers and men but it would have needed to be substantially reinforced during wartime if all the weapons were to be manned . Although the fort never received its full complement of guns , by 1881 it had ten 12 @.@ 5 inch , 38 ton ( 317 mm , 39 @,@ 000 kg ) rifled muzzle @-@ loading ( RML ) guns , fifteen 10 inch , 18 ton ( 254 mm , 18 @,@ 000 kg ) RML guns , five 9 inch , 12 ton ( 228 mm , 12 @,@ 000 kg ) RML guns , and 3 64 @-@ pounders ( 29 kg ) , together forming a powerful arsenal . 
 Two new lighthouses were constructed in the 1860s . The first was the " Low Light " built into the rear wall of the west wing of the castle . The second lighthouse was the " High Light " – the free standing Hurst Point Lighthouse built on the end of Hurst Spit between 1865 and 1867 . A new public house , the Castle Inn , was established on the north end of the spit . A narrow @-@ gauge railway was constructed in the 1880s to move supplies into the castle . 
 By the 1880s and 1890s , both the power of naval artillery and the speed of warships had further increased , leading to further investment in the castle between 1888 and 1893 . The keep 's magazine , which could hold up to 2 @,@ 250 shells , was reinforced with concrete and the south bastion of the old castle was filled in with shingle and concrete for additional protection . New 6 @-@ pounder ( 2 @.@ 7 kg ) quick @-@ firing guns were installed in a battery on the end of the east wing , supported by machine guns , to enable them to target fast moving vessels , particularly the new torpedo boats . Further emplacements for 12 @-@ pounder ( 5 @.@ 4 kg ) guns followed , including one on the top of the keep . 
 = = = 20th @-@ 21st centuries = = = 
 By the First World War , the guns installed at Hurst Castle in the 1870s were obsolete . The castle retained seventeen of them , as historian Coad states , wired up together " like a collection of elderly blunderbusses " , but the fort depended on its newer quick @-@ firing weapons . During the war , Hurst 's armament was controlled from Needles Battery , where a Fire Command Post , equipped with telegraphy , had been established . After the war , the guns were removed from the 16th @-@ century part of the castle , which was passed into the national collection of the Ministry of Works in 1933 , although some modernisation of the rest of the fortification took place in the 1930s . The " low light " was replaced by a new iron lighthouse in 1911 . 
 During the Second World War , Hurst was re @-@ armed in 1940 with two 12 @-@ pounder ( 5 @.@ 4 kg ) guns and a unit of the Isle of Wight Rifles was stationed there , controlled from the Fire Control Needles . Searchlights and two more 6 @-@ pounder ( 5 @.@ 4 kg ) guns followed the next year , when the 37 @-@ strong detachment was retitled the 129 Coastal Battery Royal Artillery , followed by the installation of Bofors anti @-@ aircraft guns . A tower , called the Director Tower , was built along the west wing . As the war progressed , the weapons were stood down and the battery finally closed in July 1945 , with most of the weapons being removed after the war . 
 In 1956 the whole of Hurst Castle was transferred to the guardianship of the Ministry of Works . During the 1970s , the additional concrete protection added to the south bastion in the 1880s was removed . When the government agency English Heritage was formed in 1983 , it took over the control of the castle . In 1996 the Friends of Hurst Castle took on the day @-@ to @-@ day management of the castle , with English Heritage continuing to run other aspects of the site . As of 2015 , the castle received around 40 @,@ 000 visitors a year . The castle is protected under UK law as an ancient monument . The High Lighthouse built in 1867 continues in use , and is protected as a grade II listed building . 
 The spit is subject to coastal erosion which has gradually pushed the spit towards the shore , a process which has eaten away at the remnants of the 1852 west wing battery and barracks , and has exposed the foundations of the later fortress on occasions . This erosion has increased significantly since the 1940s , due to the construction of groyne barriers at nearby Bournemouth and Christchurch which prevented the natural renewing of the spit with pebbles washed from local cliffs . Erosion caused fresh damage to the eastern end of the castle in early 2013 , leading to renewed concerns . Government efforts began in the 1960s to try to stabilise the spit in its current position , both to protect the castle and neighbouring towns , with over 900 @,@ 000 tonnes ( 990 @,@ 000 tons ) of gravel being laid down in the 1990s , and is continuing in the 21st century . The spit and the adjoining coastline is protected as an SSSI . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 = = = Central castle = = = 
 The central castle was originally constructed in the 16th century , but heavily redeveloped in the early and middle years of the 19th century . It comprises a central tower with three bastions to its north @-@ west , north @-@ east and south , approximately 52 metres ( 171 ft ) across . A curtain wall with gun positions originally linked the three bastions , but this was substantially altered with the addition of walls and chambers to produce a deeper structure . The central castle forms the entrance to the rest of the fortification and is accessed through a gateway dating from 1873 . The 16th @-@ century moat that protected the castle was filled in during the 1860s . 
 The twelve @-@ sided central tower , or keep , is approximately 20 metres ( 66 ft ) across ; it has two storeys and a basement . The inside of the tower is circular , with a spiral staircase running up through a central pillar . The ground floor and first floor rooms would have originally been sub @-@ divided to form living quarters for the garrison , but are now open spaces . Both have eight embrasure windows , suitable for holding lighter weaponry ; the first floor room was sufficiently elevated to have potentially fired out over the external walls . The roof has the remains of gun positions dating from the 1850s , and was originally topped by a look @-@ out tower , removed in 1805 . When first built , the keep was linked by three bridges to the outer bastions . 
 The two @-@ storied north @-@ west bastion protected the castle against attack along the spit from the mainland , and housed the castle 's original portcullis as well as providing accommodation for the garrison . It had three levels of gun positions on its ground floor , first floor and roof , which were adapted in the 19th century to house heavier weapons and shelter riflemen . The bastion links to an external caponier , a covered walkway with rifle loops for close defence , built in 1852 . The north @-@ east and south @-@ east bastions are only one storey tall , originally holding two levels of gun positions on the ground floor and roofs , again both adapted to support heavier guns in the 19th century . 
 = = = West and East Wings = = = 
 The West and East Wing date from the 1860s and are built from brick and stone . They had a lines of gun positions , each designed to hold a heavy gun and a crew of up to 12 men . The positions were protected by granite @-@ fronted casemates and wrought @-@ iron shields , and , with removable window screens , doubled as living accommodation for the crews . Small magazines were positioned behind the lines of casemates . 
 The West Wing is approximately 215 metres ( 705 ft ) long , and has 37 heavy gun positions and two main magazines , along with various auxiliary buildings , including canteens , stores and detention facilities . It also has two of the castle 's lighthouses , an 1865 tower , now disused , and an iron , gas @-@ lit tower , still in use . The garden is a recreation of the garden in the Second World War . The late @-@ 19th century and early @-@ 20th guns at the castle were predominantly added to the West Wing , and it roof supports emplacements for 12- and 6 @-@ pounder ( 5 @.@ 4 and 2 @.@ 7 kg ) quick @-@ firing guns , a Bofors gun and associated directing positions . A small theatrical theatre , built by gunners in the Second World War , survives in one of the gun positions , along with various wall paintings , possibly used in performances . 
 The East Wing is relatively unaltered since its construction . It is approximately 150 metres ( 490 ft ) long , with 24 heavy gun positions and two main magazines ; on the roof is the original gun directing position and a Bofors gun position added during the Second World War . It is reached through a gateway in the north @-@ east bastion . Just beyond the East Wing are three 6 @-@ pounder quick @-@ firing gun emplacements from 1893 , which were fed ammunition from the wing through a hole in the outer wall . 
 = Kepler @-@ 11c = 
 Kepler @-@ 11c is an exoplanet discovered in the orbit of the sun @-@ like star Kepler @-@ 11 by the Kepler spacecraft , a NASA telescope aiming to discover Earth @-@ like planets . It is the second planet from its star , and is most likely a water planet with a thin hydrogen – helium atmosphere . Kepler @-@ 11c orbits Kepler @-@ 11 every 10 days , and has an estimated density twice that of pure water . It is estimated to have a mass thirteen times that of Earth and a radius three times that of Earth . Kepler @-@ 11c and its five sister planets form the first discovered system with more than three transiting planets . The Kepler @-@ 11 system also holds the record of being the most compact and the flattest system discovered . Kepler @-@ 11c and the other Kepler @-@ 11 planets were announced to the public on February 2 , 2011 , and was published in Nature a day later . 
 = = Name and discovery = = 
 Kepler @-@ 11c 's name is divided into two parts : it is named for Kepler @-@ 11 , the star around which it orbits . As planets with discoveries that are announced at the same time are sorted by distance , Kepler @-@ 11c 's " c " is because it was the second closest planet from its host star at the time of discovery ( Kepler @-@ 11b is the closest ) . Kepler @-@ 11 , the host star , was named for the Kepler satellite , a NASA telescope that searches for terrestrial planets by measuring small fluctuations in the light of stars that occurs when celestial bodies transit , or cross in front of , the star with respect to Earth . Kepler @-@ 11 was flagged as home to a potential transit event by the satellite , and was given the designation KOI @-@ 157 . After further observations , Kepler @-@ 11c 's existence was confirmed by the observation of an orbital resonance effect between Kepler @-@ 11b and Kepler @-@ 11c . Along with the other five planets in orbit around Kepler @-@ 11 , Kepler @-@ 11c was announced on February 2 , 2011 at a press conference . Its findings were published on February 3 in the journal Nature . The Kepler @-@ 11 system is the first known to host more than three transiting planets . 
 Follow @-@ up observations were conducted by the Hale and the C. Donald Shane telescopes in California ; MMT , WIYN , and Tillinghast telescopes in Arizona ; the Keck I telescope in Hawaii ; the Hobby @-@ Eberly and Smith telescopes in Texas ; and the Nordic Optical Telescope in the Canary Islands . 
 = = Host star = = 
 Kepler @-@ 11c 's host star , Kepler @-@ 11 , is a G @-@ type star 2 @,@ 000 light years away in the Cygnus constellation . With a mass of .95 Msun , a radius of 1 @.@ 1 Rsun , a metallicity of [ Fe / H ] = 0 , and an effective temperature of 5680 ( ± 100 ) K , Kepler @-@ 11 is almost identical to the Sun in terms of radius , mass , and temperature . However , Kepler @-@ 11 is much older than the Sun , with an estimated age of 8 ( ± 2 ) billion years ( the Sun is approximately 4 @.@ 6 billion years old ) . Along with Kepler @-@ 11c , Kepler @-@ 11 is host to the planets Kepler @-@ 11b , Kepler @-@ 11d , Kepler @-@ 11e , Kepler @-@ 11f , and Kepler @-@ 11g . The inner five planets ' orbits would fit within the orbit of planet Mercury , while Kepler @-@ 11g orbits Kepler @-@ 11 at a much further distance in comparison to the inner components . 
 With an apparent magnitude of 14 @.@ 2 , Kepler @-@ 11 cannot be seen from Earth with the naked eye . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 Kepler @-@ 11c has a mass of 13 @.@ 5 ME and a radius of 3 @.@ 15 RE , making it over 13 @.@ 5 times the mass of earth , but approximately 3 @.@ 15 times its radius . Neptune , in comparison , has a radius approximately 3 @.@ 9 times that of Earth . With a density of 2 @.@ 3 grams / cm3 , Kepler @-@ 11c has a mass over double of that of pure water at 0 ° C ; it is also denser than all the Sun 's gas giants , but less dense than any of its rocky planets . Its density is closest to the dwarf planet Pluto . Due in part to its proximity to its star , the planet 's equilibrium temperature is 833 K , about three times hotter than Earth 's average temperature . It orbits Kepler @-@ 11 every 13 @.@ <unk> days at a distance of <unk> AU ; it is Kepler @-@ 11 's second closest planet . Mercury , in comparison , orbits every 87 @.@ 97 days at a distance of .387 AU . The orbit 's inclination of Kepler @-@ 11c is 89 ° , and is thus almost edge @-@ on as seen from Earth . 
 The Kepler team has said that Kepler @-@ 11b and Kepler @-@ 11c are probably composed mostly of water with a thin hydrogen and helium atmosphere . In comparison to the outer planets of the system , which probably have large hydrogen and helium atmospheres , Kepler @-@ 11c 's proximity to its star has blown off most of its atmosphere . Kepler @-@ 11 and its six @-@ planet system form what NASA considers to be the most compact and flattest planetary system yet discovered . Kepler @-@ 11b and Kepler @-@ 11c orbit Kepler @-@ 11 with a phenomenon called orbital resonance , a gravitational tugging that keeps their orbit stable at a 5 @.@ 4 ratio . 
 = Neutopia = 
 Neutopia ( <unk> , <unk> ) is an overhead action @-@ adventure video game developed by Hudson Soft . It was released by Hudson for the PC Engine in Japan on November 17 , 1989 ( 1989 @-@ 11 @-@ 17 ) . It was then released by NEC for the TurboGrafx @-@ 16 in North America in 1990 . It was re @-@ released for the Virtual Console service worldwide for the Wii in 2007 and in Japan for the Wii U on April 16 , 2014 ; it was re @-@ released for the PlayStation Network in Japan in 2010 and in North America in 2011 . The game takes place in the land of Neutopia , where the evil demon Dirth has captured Princess Aurora and has stolen the eight ancient medallions which contain the wisdom and power necessary to maintain peace and prosperity throughout the land . It is up to the protagonist Jazeta to retrieve the eight medallions , defeat Dirth , rescue Princess Aurora , and save the land and its people . 
 Neutopia is widely regarded as a clone of the popular Nintendo game The Legend of Zelda in nearly every aspect . Many reviewers have praised the game for making noticeable improvements over Zelda , but various shortcomings – which include long passwords , repetitive gameplay , and poor collision detection – prevent the game from being superior over the 1987 Nintendo title . But overall , reviewers have called Neutopia one of the better video games of its type and one of the better titles in the TurboGrafx @-@ 16 library . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Neutopia takes place in the distant past in the land of Neutopia – a prosperous and peaceful land in which the people worshipped at a Sacred Shrine and were watched over by Princess Aurora . The land was divided into four contiguous areas called spheres : land , <unk> , sea , and sky . The people lived in prosperity and happiness with the help of eight spiritual medallions which were controlled by the Princess and were used for good ; a " Climactic Castle " was built as a <unk> of their prosperity . Each of the medallions represented powers of an ancestor whom Neutopia 's nemesis , the evil demon Dirth , turned to stone but whose spirit remains . 
 Then , one night , Dirth appears and invades the land . He sends his army of demons to ravage the land , and he captures Princess Aurora and holds her captive in the Climactic Castle , where he would rule over the invading demons . He also steals the eight medallions , which he now controls for evil purposes ; he scatters the eight medallions across the four spheres and places them in crypts . A young warrior named Jazeta arrives at the Sacred Shine , where he is given a " charmed compass " which " has the force of the medallions " and can guide him to them . He is also told that he would inherit the wisdom of his ancestors and win the Princess ' love if victorious . Jazeta then ventures out to defeat Dirth and rescue Princess Aurora , so that she can free Dirth 's spell over the ancient ancestors ' spirits and use the medallions to restore peace to Neutopia . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Neutopia is an action adventure game which features a top @-@ down perspective and labyrinthine exploration similar to that of The Legend of Zelda . The player controls Jazeta as he sets out to rescue Princess Aurora from Dirth . The game has four levels called spheres which Jazeta must explore and recover the two medallions from each . The medallions are hidden in crypts , where each medallion is guarded by a boss . After collecting all eight of them , Jazeta gains access to the North Pole , where Dirth resides . The player controls Jazeta by moving in any direction with the control pad . Jazeta can also attack with his weapons or use items , scroll through messages , or access the " status screen " with the controller . Jazeta 's life meter , the weapons he is currently holding , and the amount of gold and bombs remaining are displayed during gameplay on the top of the screen . On the status screen , players can choose an item to use , see which direction they must travel as indicated by the charmed compass ( which also sounds an alarm when Jazeta is near a crypt or a medallion ) , and view the map of the crypt Jazeta is in , provided they have collected the Crystal Ball inside . 
 Throughout the game , players can collect information from other non @-@ player characters , many of whom are located in caves throughout the overworld , in which some can be uncovered only by burning objects with fire , blowing up walls with bombs , or by pushing certain rocks . While Jazeta 's main weapon is a sword , he can also use other items scattered throughout the game . The " fire rod " unleashes fireballs whose strength and range depend on Jazeta 's health level ; Other items include the " <unk> moss " which can illuminate dark rooms ; the " rainbow drop " which allows Jazeta to cross small gaps ; " falcon shoes " which give him extra speed ; medicine which refills his life meter ; magic rings which can transform tough enemies into weaker ones ; hourglasses which temporarily stop enemies ; and wings which can warp him back to the place where he last received a password . Jazeta can also obtain sword , shield , and armor upgrades throughout the game which can increase attack power , increase defense against projectiles , and decrease enemy damage , respectively ; each type of sword , shield , and armor ranges from bronze to silver to " strongest " . Enemies in the game include spear @-@ throwing goblins , fireball @-@ throwing fish , fake rocks , ghosts , and charging knights . 
 Jazeta has a life meter , which increases by one unit every time the player collects a medallion or finds a monk throughout the spheres ; it decreases whenever he gets hit , and the game ends when it runs out . However , provided players have collected the " Book of Revival " , they can continue and restart the game wherever they have last obtained a password , even after the console has been shut off ; passwords also allow players to resume play at a later time . In addition , for users with a TurboGrafx @-@ CD or a <unk> @-@ Plus , they can save their progress in the systems ' RAM via a " File Cabinet " feature ; in the same places where passwords are distributed , players have the option to save the game in one of four available file slots , each of which can be overwritten at any time with a new file . 
 = = Development = = 
 Neutopia was developed by Hudson Soft and was released on November 17 , 1989 ( 1989 @-@ 11 @-@ 17 ) in Japan for the PC Engine and in 1990 in North America for NEC 's TurboGrafx @-@ 16 console . It received preview coverage in video game magazines Electronic Gaming Monthly and GamePro , which it was described in the latter as " a magic and monsters type role play " . The game received a brief description in GamePro 's May 1990 issue and a full walkthrough in the premiere issue of <unk> in June that year . It would later be released for the Wii 's Virtual Console service in Japan on May 1 , 2007 ( 2007 @-@ 05 @-@ 01 ) , in North America on August 20 , 2007 ( 2007 @-@ 08 @-@ 20 ) , and in Europe on August 24 , 2007 ( 2007 @-@ 08 @-@ 24 ) ; it was released alongside Super Metroid and Shinobi III : Return of the Ninja Master . It was released for the PlayStation Network along with a series of other TurboGrafx @-@ 16 titles that were published by Hudson Soft ; it was released in Japan on June 16 , 2010 ( 2010 @-@ 06 @-@ 16 ) , and in North America on April 19 , 2011 ( 2011 @-@ 04 @-@ 19 ) . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Since its release , people have widely regarded Neutopia as a clone of Nintendo 's The Legend of Zelda . The PC Engine version of the game was reviewed in the February 1990 issue of German magazine Power Play , where reviewer Martin <unk> called the game " Zelda on the PC @-@ Engine " and said that the " differences between Zelda and Neutopia must be found with an electron microscope " . They said that the graphics , music , and gameplay were good , and that the only thing that kept Neutopia from being superior to Zelda was the 24 @-@ character password system and that the text was in Japanese . There would eventually be a sequel to the game Neutopia II , in which Jazeta disappears and his son sets out to find him . 
 Neutopia received much coverage from various video gaming websites after its release on the Virtual Console , and each drew similar similarities to Zelda . Adam Romano from Defunct Games noted that Neutopia was released two years before The Legend of Zelda : A Link to the Past and said that Neutopia " kept pace with or were actually ahead of the Nintendo curve " . He said that gameplay and backgrounds remain varied and that " the fire rod weapon is especially fun to wield " , but he noted that the things that keep the game from being better than Zelda were repetitive and frustrating dungeon exploring , boring boss battles , long passwords ( for those who do not own a TurboGrafx @-@ CD ) , and several " head @-@ scratching moments " which include references to Judaism and Islam as well as quotes from Star Wars . Marcel van Duyn from Nintendo Life noted many similarities to Zelda , including the existence of 8 dungeons and medallions , the need to blow up walls or burn bushes to uncover secrets , the dungeon designs , and the need to push blocks to uncover staircases . However , he noted that what sets it apart from Zelda are the fire rod , the ability to warp with wings , and a lower difficulty level . He concluded that the game , while copying Zelda , might be better as it added additional features that set it apart . Destructoid 's Tony Ponce compared the game 's copying of Zelda to China Warrior 's copying of Kung @-@ Fu Master , and he pointed out what are also considered Zelda clones such as Crusader of <unk> and Alundra for the Sega Genesis and PlayStation , respectively . 
 GameSpot 's Austin Shau reviewed Neutopia in November 2007 and said progression through the game was " quick and direct " but was also more linear , unlike with Zelda . He praised the game for its variety of environments , which he said " helps to combat monotony " , but he noted the lack of detail in the graphics itself . He also criticized the game 's sound , in which he said the background music was a series of " grating instrumentations " while also pointing out the low @-@ quality TurboGrafx @-@ 16 sound chip . IGN 's Lucas Thomas called Neutopia " one of the most shameless Legend of Zelda clones ever created " in nearly every aspect . He praised one of the differences in the presence of the fire rod , which he said " is unlike any weapon the 8 @-@ bit Link ever wielded " ; he also noted the clean , crisp graphics and a good quality soundtrack . However , he criticized another difference from Zelda , that Neutopia had poor collision detection , saying that it can lead to additional damage to Jazeta , which causes the power of the fire rod to decrease and lead to the annoying " beeping sound " just as in Zelda . In general , Thomas said that , despite its lack of originality , Neutopia is a good TurboGrafx @-@ 16 game which has deserved all the praise it has received . 
 = Partenope @-@ class cruiser = 
 The Partenope class was a group of eight torpedo cruisers built for the Italian Regia Marina ( Royal Navy ) in the 1880s and 1890s . The class comprised Partenope , Minerva , Euridice , Urania , Iride , Aretusa , Caprera , and Calatafimi . Based on the earlier cruiser Tripoli , the Partenope class represented a temporary embrace of the Jeune École , which emphasized the use of cheap torpedo @-@ armed vessels as a means to defeat the much more expensive ironclad battleships of the day . To fulfill their intended role , the vessels were armed with five or six 450 mm ( 17 @.@ 7 in ) torpedo tubes . 
 The ships of the class primarily served in the main Italian fleet throughout their careers . Their time with the fleet was spent conducting training exercises , along with occasional travels to foreign countries . In late 1900s , Partenope and Minerva were converted into minelayers and Euridice and Calatafimi were sold for scrap . Several of the vessels saw action during the Italo @-@ Turkish War of 1911 – 12 , primarily conducting shore bombardments in North Africa and the Arabian Peninsula . Three more vessels — Urania , Aretusa , and Caprera — were sold in the later stages of the war or shortly thereafter . Partenope laid minefields in the Adriatic Sea after Italy entered World War I in 1915 , and was later sunk by a German U @-@ boat in March 1918 . Minerva and Iride survived the war and were sold for scrap in 1921 and 1920 , respectively . 
 = = Design = = 
 The design for the Partenope class was prepared by Engineering Inspector Carlo Vigna , and was based on the earlier torpedo cruiser Tripoli , the first modern vessel of the type built by Italy . The development of torpedo cruisers in Italy in the mid @-@ 1880s represented a shift away from the emphasis on large capital ships that had been built for the previous decade and toward the ideas of the Jeune École , which emphasized small , fast , torpedo @-@ armed vessels that could damage or destroy the much larger battleships at a fraction of the cost . The Partenope class were followed by the Agordat class , the last class of torpedo cruisers built by Italy . 
 = = = General characteristics and machinery = = = 
 The ships of the Partenope class were 70 meters ( 230 ft ) long between perpendiculars and 73 @.@ 1 m ( 239 ft 10 in ) long overall . They had a beam of 8 @.@ 22 m ( 27 ft 0 in ) and an average draft of 3 @.@ 48 m ( 11 ft 5 in ) . They displaced from 821 to 931 metric tons ( 808 to 916 long tons ; 905 to 1 @,@ 026 short tons ) normally . Their hulls were steel @-@ built . The ships had a crew of between 96 – 121 . They were initially fitted with a fore and aft sailing rig with two masts , but the rigging was later removed . The ships were protected by an armored deck that was up to 1 @.@ 6 in ( 41 mm ) thick ; their conning tower was armored with the same thickness of steel plate . 
 Their propulsion system consisted of a pair of horizontal triple @-@ expansion steam engines , each driving a single screw propeller . Steam was supplied by four coal @-@ fired locomotive boilers that were trunked into two widely spaced funnels . Specific figures for each ship 's engine performance have not survived , but the ships of the class had top speeds of 18 @.@ 1 to 20 @.@ 8 knots ( 33 @.@ 5 to 38 @.@ 5 km / h ; 20 @.@ 8 to 23 @.@ 9 mph ) from 3 @,@ 884 to 4 @,@ 422 indicated horsepower ( 2 @,@ 896 to 3 @,@ 297 kW ) . The ships had a cruising radius of about 1 @,@ 800 nautical miles ( 3 @,@ 300 km ; 2 @,@ 100 mi ) at a speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . 
 Partenope and Minerva were reboilered in 1906 – 08 and 1909 – 10 , respectively , with new oil @-@ fired models . Partenope 's performance after the refit was 17 @.@ 05 knots ( 31 @.@ 58 km / h ; 19 @.@ 62 mph ) from 2 @,@ 481 ihp ( 1 @,@ 850 kW ) , while Minerva was faster , at 18 @.@ 28 knots ( 33 @.@ 85 km / h ; 21 @.@ 04 mph ) from 3 @,@ 524 ihp ( 2 @,@ 628 kW ) . 
 = = = Armament = = = 
 The Partenope @-@ class cruisers , with the exception of Caprera , were armed with a main battery of one 120 mm ( 4 @.@ 7 in ) 40 @-@ caliber ( cal . ) gun and six 57 mm ( 2 @.@ 2 in ) 43 @-@ cal. guns mounted singly . They were also equipped with three 37 mm ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) 20 @-@ cal. guns in single mounts . Caprera instead had two 120 mm guns , four 57 mm guns , and two of the 37 mm weapons . The ships ' primary offensive weapon was their 450 mm ( 17 @.@ 7 in ) torpedo tubes ; Partenope and Caprera had five tubes , while the rest of the class had six . 
 During their refits in the late 1900s , Partenope and Minerva were converted into minelayers . Their armament was revised significantly , and now consisted of a pair of 3 in ( 76 mm ) guns , four 57 mm guns , and two 37 mm guns . Partenope was equipped to carry sixty naval mines , with a bank of thirty mines on a platform on each side of the ship ; the details of Minerva 's mine handling equipment and storage are unknown . 
 = = Ships = = 
 = = Service history = = 
 For much of the ships ' careers , they were assigned to the main Italian fleet , where they were frequently occupied with conducting training exercises . These exercises frequently gamed attacks by the French fleet , such as the maneuvers conducted in 1893 , which simulated a French attack on Naples . In 1895 , Partenope joined a squadron that visited Great Britain , and later that year took part in an international naval demonstration off Crete in an attempt to defuse tensions between Greece and the Ottoman Empire . Euridice took part in a similar demonstration , again off Crete , in 1897 ; this was a reaction to the Greco @-@ Turkish War that had broken out that year . Between 1906 and 1908 , Partenope was converted into a minelayer , and Minerva underwent a similar conversion in 1909 – 1910 . Two ships , Calatafimi and Euridice , were discarded in early 1907 . 
 During the Italo @-@ Turkish War , Partenope operated off Libya , bombarding Ottoman troops and supporting Italian forces . Iride escorted a troopship convoy to North Africa and then conducted shore bombardments . Aretusa was stationed in the Red Sea at the outbreak of the war , and she briefly engaged the Ottoman cruiser ' . Aretusa , joined by Caprera in early 1912 , thereafter participated in bombardment and blockade operations against Ottoman ports in the area . Minerva was assigned to the 4th Division at the time , but did not see action during the war . Three more members of the class were sold for scrap after the end of the war , with Urania and Aretusa being stricken in 1912 and Caprera being discarded in early 1913 . 
 Partenope and Minerva laid a series of defensive minefields in the Adriatic Sea after Italy entered World War I in 1915 . They did not see action for much of the rest of the war , owing to the cautious strategies adopted by Italy and its enemy across the Adriatic , Austria @-@ Hungary . On 24 March 1918 , the German U @-@ boat UC @-@ 67 torpedoed and sank Partenope north of Bizerte , Tunisia . Iride and Minerva survived the war and were discarded in December 1920 and May 1921 , respectively . 
 = House of Plantagenet = 
 The House of Plantagenet ( / <unk> / ) was a royal house which originated from the lands of Anjou in France . The name Plantagenet is used by modern historians to identify four distinct royal houses – the Angevins who were also Counts of Anjou , the main body of the Plantagenets following the loss of Anjou , and the houses of Lancaster and York , the Plantagenets ' two cadet branches . The family held the English throne from 1154 , with the accession of Henry II , until 1485 , when Richard III died . 
 Under the Plantagenets , England was transformed , although this was only partly intentional . The Plantagenet kings were often forced to negotiate compromises such as Magna Carta . These constrained royal power in return for financial and military support . The king was no longer just the most powerful man in the nation , holding the prerogative of judgement , feudal tribute and warfare . He now had defined duties to the realm , underpinned by a sophisticated justice system . A distinct national identity was shaped by conflict with the French , Scots , Welsh and Irish , and the establishment of English as the primary language . 
 In the 15th century , the Plantagenets were defeated in the Hundred Years ' War and beset with social , political and economic problems . Popular revolts were commonplace , triggered by the denial of numerous freedoms . English nobles raised private armies , engaged in private feuds and openly defied Henry VI . 
 The rivalry between the House of Plantagenet 's two cadet branches of York and Lancaster brought about the Wars of the Roses , a decades @-@ long fight for the English succession , culminating in the Battle of Bosworth Field in 1485 , when the reign of the Plantagenets and the English Middle Ages both met their end with the death of King Richard III . Henry VII , a Lancastrian , became king of England ; two years later , he married Elizabeth of York , thus ending the Wars of the Roses , and giving rise to the Tudor dynasty . The Tudors worked to centralise English royal power , which allowed them to avoid some of the problems that had plagued the last Plantagenet rulers . The resulting stability allowed for the English Renaissance , and the advent of early modern Britain . 
 = = Terminology = = 
 = = = Plantagenet = = = 
 Richard of York , 3rd Duke of York , adopted Plantagenet as his family name in the 15th century . " Plantegenest " ( or " Plante Genest " ) had been a 12th @-@ century nickname for his ancestor Geoffrey , count of Anjou and duke of Normandy . One of many popular theories suggests the common broom , planta genista in medieval Latin , as the source of the nickname . It is uncertain why Richard chose this specific name , although during the Wars of the Roses it emphasised Richard 's status as Geoffrey 's patrilineal descendant . The retrospective usage of the name for all of Geoffrey 's male descendants was popular during the subsequent Tudor dynasty , perhaps encouraged by the further legitimacy it gave to Richard 's great @-@ grandson , Henry VIII . It was only in the late 17th century that it passed into common usage among historians . 
 = = = Angevins = = = 
 The three Angevin kings ( French for " from Anjou " ) were Henry II , Richard I and John ; " Angevin " can also refer to the period of history in which they reigned . Many historians identify the Angevins as a distinct English royal house . " Angevin " is also used in reference to any sovereign or government derived from Anjou . As a noun , it refers to any native of Anjou or an Angevin ruler , and specifically to : other counts and dukes of Anjou , including the ancestors of the three kings that formed the English royal house ; their cousins , who held the crown of Jerusalem ; and to unrelated members of the French royal family who were later granted the titles and formed different dynasties , such as the Capetian House of Anjou and the Valois House of Anjou . Consequently , there is disagreement between those who consider Henry III to be the first Plantagenet monarch and those who do not distinguish between Angevins and Plantagenets and therefore consider the first Plantagenet to be Henry II . 
 The term " Angevin Empire " was coined by Kate Norgate in 1887 . There was no known contemporary collective name for the territories to which circumlocutions such as " our kingdom and everything subject to our rule whatever it may be " or " the whole of the kingdom which had belonged to his father " may have referred . The " Empire " portion of " Angevin Empire " has been controversial . In 1986 a convention of historians concluded that there had not been an Angevin state , and therefore no " Angevin Empire " , but that the term " espace Plantagenet " , Plantagenet space in English , was acceptable . Nonetheless , historians have continued to use " Angevin Empire " . 
 = = Origin = = 
 The later counts of Anjou , including the Plantagenets , descended from Geoffrey II , Count of Gâtinais , and his wife Ermengarde of Anjou . In 1060 the couple inherited the title via cognatic kinship from an Angevin family that was descended from a noble named Ingelger , whose recorded history dates from 870 . 
 During the 10th and 11th centuries , power struggles occurred between rulers in northern and western France including those of Anjou , Normandy , Brittany , Poitou , Blois , Maine , and the kings of France . In the early 12th century Geoffrey of Anjou married Empress Matilda , King Henry I 's only surviving legitimate child and heir to the English throne . As a result of this marriage , Geoffrey 's son Henry II inherited the English throne as well as Norman and Angevin titles , thus marking the beginning of the Angevin and Plantagenet dynasties . 
 The marriage was the third attempt of Geoffrey 's father , Fulk V , Count of Anjou , to build a political alliance with Normandy . He first espoused his daughter , Alice , to William Adelin , Henry I 's heir . After William drowned in the wreck of the White Ship Fulk married another of his daughters , Sibylla , to William Clito , son of Henry I 's older brother , Robert Curthose . Henry I had the marriage annulled to avoid strengthening William 's rival claim to Normandy . Finally Fulk achieved his goal through the marriage of Geoffrey and Matilda . Fulk then passed his titles to Geoffrey and became king of Jerusalem . 
 = = Angevin kings = = 
 = = = Arrival in England = = = 
 When Henry II was born in 1133 , his grandfather , Henry I , was reportedly delighted , saying that the boy was " the heir to the kingdom " . The birth reduced the risk that the King 's realm would pass to his son @-@ in @-@ law 's family , which might have occurred if the marriage of Matilda and Count Geoffrey had proved childless . The birth of a second son , also named Geoffrey , increased the likelihood that , in accordance with French custom , Henry would receive the English maternal inheritance and Geoffrey the Angevin paternal inheritance . This would separate the realms of England and Anjou . In order to secure an orderly succession , Geoffrey and Matilda sought more power from Henry I , but quarrelled with him after the King refused to give them power that might be used against him . When he died in November 1135 , the couple were in Anjou , allowing Matilda 's cousin Stephen to seize the crown of England . Stephen 's contested accession initiated the widespread civil unrest later called the Anarchy . 
 Count Geoffrey had little interest in England . Instead he commenced a ten @-@ year war for the duchy of Normandy , but it became clear that to bring this conflict to a successful conclusion Stephen would need to be challenged in England so in 1139 Matilda and her half @-@ brother , Robert invaded England . From the age of nine , Henry was repeatedly sent to England to be the male figurehead of the campaigns , since it became apparent that he would become king if England was conquered . In 1141 Stephen was captured at the Battle of Lincoln and later exchanged for Robert who had also been captured . Geoffrey continued the conquest of Normandy and in 1150 transferred the duchy to Henry while retaining the primary role in the duchy 's government . 
 Three events allowed the Angevins ' successful termination of the conflict : 
 Count Geoffrey died in 1151 before finalizing the division of his realm between Henry and Henry 's younger brother Geoffrey , who would have inherited Anjou . According to William of Newburgh , who wrote in the 1190s , Count Geoffrey decided that Henry would receive England and Anjou for as long as he needed the resources for the conflict against Stephen . Count Geoffrey instructed that his body should not be buried until Henry swore an oath that the young Geoffrey would receive Anjou when England and Normandy were secured . W. L. Warren cast doubt on this account on the grounds that it was written later based on a single contemporary source , it would be questionable that either Geoffrey or Henry would consider such an oath binding and it would break the inheritance practice of the time . The young Geoffrey died in 1158 , before receiving Anjou , but he had become count of Nantes when the citizens of Nantes rebelled against their ruler . Henry had supported the rebellion . 
 Louis VII of France was granted an annulment of his marriage to Eleanor of Aquitaine on 18 March 1152 , and she married Henry ( who would become Henry II ) on 18 May 1152 . Consequently , the Angevins acquired the Duchy of Aquitaine . 
 Stephen 's wife and elder son , Eustace , died in 1153 leading to the Treaty of Wallingford . The treaty agreed the peace offer that Matilda had rejected in 1142 , recognised Henry as Stephen 's heir , guaranteed Stephen 's second son William his father 's estates and allowed Stephen to be king for life . Stephen died soon afterwards , and Henry acceded to the throne in late 1154 . 
 = = = Angevin zenith = = = 
 Of Henry 's siblings , William and Geoffrey died unmarried and childless , but the tempestuous marriage of Henry and Eleanor , who already had two daughters ( Marie and Alix ) through her first marriage to King Louis , produced eight children in thirteen years : 
 William , Count of Poitiers ( 1153 – 1156 ) 
 Henry the Young King ( 1155 – 1183 ) 
 Matilda , Duchess of Saxony ( 1156 – 1189 ) — married Henry the Lion , Duke of Bavaria . The eldest amongst the couple 's children , <unk> , is probably the daughter English chroniclers call Matilda , who was left in Normandy with her grandparents in 1185 and married firstly to Geoffrey , count of Perche , and secondly to Enguerrand de Coucy . The eldest son , Henry , became duke of Saxony and count palatine of the Rhine . His brother Otto was nominated by his uncle Richard I as earl of York and count of Poitiers before being elected emperor in opposition to the Hohenstaufen candidate . Otto was crowned in Rome but he was later excommunicated and declared deposed . Childless , Otto lost power following the defeat of the Welf and Angevin forces at the Battle of Bouvines . The youngest child , William of Winchester married Helena daughter of Valdemar I of Denmark . Their only son , also called Otto , was the sole male heir of his uncle Henry . The ducal house of Brunswick @-@ Lüneburg and the British royal house of Windsor both descend from him . 
 King Richard the Lionheart ( 1157 – 1199 ) . He had no legitimate offspring , but is thought to have had two illegitimate sons , of whom little is known , called Fulk and Phillip , Lord of Cognac . 
 Geoffrey , Duke of Brittany ( 1158 – 1186 ) — married Constance daughter of Duke Conan of Brittany and became duke of Brittany by right of his wife . The couple 's son Arthur was a competitor to John for the Angevin succession . 
 Eleanor , Queen of Castile ( 1161 – 1214 ) — married King Alfonso VIII of Castile . The couple 's children included King Henry of Castile and four queen consorts , Berengaria of Leon , <unk> of Portugal , Blanche of France and Eleanor of Aragon . 
 Joan , Queen of Sicily ( 1165 – 1199 ) — married firstly King William II of Sicily and secondly Count Raymond VI of Toulouse . Her children included Raymond VII of Toulouse . 
 King John Lackland ( 1166 – 1216 ) 
 Henry also had illegitimate children with several mistresses , possibly as many as twelve . These children included Geoffrey , William , Peter and four children who died young by Alice , the daughter of Louis VII , while she was betrothed to his son Richard . William ’ s many competencies and importance as a royal bastard led to a long and illustrious career . 
 Henry reasserted and extended previous suzerainties to secure possession of his inherited realm . In 1162 he attempted to re @-@ establish what he saw as his authority over the English Church by appointing his friend Thomas Becket as Archbishop of Canterbury upon the death of the incumbent archbishop , Theobald . Becket 's defiance as Archbishop alienated the king and his counsellors . Henry and Becket had repeated disputes over issues such as church tenures , the marriage of Henry 's brother , and taxation . Henry reacted by getting Becket and other English bishops to recognise sixteen ancient customs in writing for the first time in the Constitutions of Clarendon , governing relations between the king , his courts and the church . When Becket tried to leave the country without permission , Henry tried to ruin him by filing legal cases relating to Becket 's previous tenure as chancellor . Becket fled and remained in exile for five years . Relations later improved , and Becket returned , but they declined again when Henry 's son was crowned as coregent by the Archbishop of York , which Becket perceived as a challenge to his authority . Becket later excommunicated those who had offended him . When he received this news , Henry said : " What miserable drones and traitors have I nurtured and promoted in my household who let their lord be treated with such shameful contempt by a low @-@ born clerk . " Four of Henry 's knights killed Becket in Canterbury Cathedral after Becket resisted a failed arrest attempt . Henry was widely considered complicit in Becket 's death throughout Christian Europe . This made Henry a pariah ; in penance , he walked barefoot into Canterbury Cathedral , where he was severely whipped by monks . 
 From 1155 Henry claimed that Pope Adrian IV had given him authorisation to reform the Irish church by assuming control of Ireland , but Professor Anne Duggan 's research indicates that the Laudabiliter is a falsification of an existing letter and that was not in fact Adrian 's intention . It originally allowed Henry 's brother William some territory . Henry did not personally act on this until 1171 by which time William was already dead . He invaded Ireland to assert his authority over knights who had accrued autonomous power after they recruited soldiers in England and Wales and colonised Ireland with his permission . Henry later gave Ireland to his youngest son , John . In 1172 Henry gave John the castles of Chinon , Loudun and Mirebeau as a wedding gift . This angered Henry 's eighteen @-@ year @-@ old son , Henry the Young King , who believed these were his . A rebellion by Henry II 's wife and three eldest sons ensued . Louis VII of France supported the rebellion . William the Lion , king of the Scots , and others joined the revolt . After eighteen months , Henry subdued the rebels . 
 In Le Mans in 1182 , Henry II gathered his children to plan a partible inheritance : his eldest surviving son , Henry , would inherit England , Normandy and Anjou ; Richard ( his mother 's favourite ) would inherit the Duchy of Aquitaine ; Geoffrey would inherit Brittany ; and John would inherit Ireland . This resulted in further conflict . The younger Henry rebelled again , but died of dysentery . Geoffrey died in 1186 after an accident in a tournament . In 1189 , Richard and Philip II of France reasserted their various claims exploiting the aging Henry 's failing health . Henry was forced to accept humiliating peace terms , including naming Richard his sole heir . The old King died two days later , defeated and miserable . French and English contemporary moralists viewed this fate as retribution for the murder of Becket ; even his favourite legitimate son , John , had rebelled although the constantly loyal illegitimate son Geoffrey remained with Henry until the end . 
 Following Richard 's coronation he quickly put the kingdom 's affairs in order and departed on a Crusade for the Middle East . Opinion of Richard has fluctuated . Although he was respected for his military leadership and courtly manners , he had rejected and humiliated the sister of the king of France , deposed the king of Cyprus and later sold the island , he made enemies on the Third Crusade such as Leopold V , Duke of Austria by showing disrespect to his banners as well as refusing to share the spoils of war , and was rumoured to have arranged the assassination of Conrad of Montferrat . His ruthlessness was demonstrated by his massacre of 2 @,@ 600 prisoners in Acre . He obtained victories during the Third Crusade , but failed to capture Jerusalem . According to Steven Runciman Richard was " a bad son , a bad husband and a bad king " . Jonathan Riley @-@ Smith described him as " vain ... devious and self @-@ centred " . In an alternate view John Gillingham points out that for centuries Richard was considered a model king . 
 Returning from the crusade with a small band of followers , Richard was captured by Leopold and was passed to Emperor Henry VI . Henry held Richard captive for eighteen months ( 1192 – 1194 ) for a ransom valued at 100 @,@ 000 marks . In Richard 's absence , Philip II overran large portions of Normandy and John acquired control of Richard 's English lands . After returning to England , Richard forgave John and re @-@ established his authority in England . He left again in 1194 and battled Philip for five years , attempting to regain the lands seized during his captivity . When close to complete victory , he was injured by an arrow during a siege and died ten days later . 
 = = = Decline and the loss of Anjou = = = 
 Richard 's failure to provide an heir caused a succession crisis and conflict between supporters of the claim of his nephew , Arthur , and John . Guillaume des Roches led the magnates of Anjou , Maine , and Touraine declaring for Arthur . Once again Philip II of France attempted to disturb the Plantagenet territories on the European mainland by supporting his vassal Arthur 's claim to the English crown . John won a significant victory while preventing Arthur 's forces from capturing his mother , seizing the entire rebel leadership at the Battle of Mirebeau . Foolishly John disregarded his allies ' opinions on the fate of the prisoners , many of them their neighbours and kinsmen . Instead ' he kept his prisoners so <unk> and in such evil distress that it seemed shameful and ugly to all those who were with him and who saw this cruelty ' according to the L 'Histoire de Guillaume le Marechal . As a result of John 's behaviour the powerful Thouars , Lusignan , and des Roches families rebelled and John lost control of Anjou , Maine , Touraine , and northern Poitou . His son , King Henry III , maintained the claim to the Angevin territories until December 1259 when he formally surrendered them and in return was granted Gascony as duke of Aquitaine and a vassal of the king of France . John ’ s reputation was further damaged by the rumour , described in the Margam annals , that while drunk he himself had murdered Arthur and if not true it is almost certain John ordered the killing . There are two contrasting schools of thought explaining the sudden collapse of John 's position . Sir James Holt suggests this was the inevitable result of superior French resources . John Gillingham identifies diplomatic and military mismanagement and points out that Richard managed to hold the Angevin territory with comparable finances . Nick Barratt has calculated that Angevin resources available for use in the war were 22 per cent less than those of Phillip , putting the Angevins at a disadvantage . 
 By 1214 John had re @-@ established his authority in England and planned what Gillingham has called a grand strategy to recapture Normandy and Anjou . The plan was that John would draw the French from Paris , while another army , under his nephew Otto IV , the Holy Roman Emperor , and his half @-@ brother William attacked from the north . The plan failed when John 's allies were defeated at the Battle of Bouvines . Otto retreated and was soon overthrown , William was captured by the French and John agreed to a five @-@ year truce . John 's defeat weakened his authority in England , and his barons forced him to agree to the Magna Carta , which limited royal power . Both sides failed to abide by the terms of the Magna Carta , leading to the First Barons ' War , in which rebellious barons invited Prince Louis , the husband of Blanche , Henry II 's granddaughter , to invade England . Louis did so but in October 1216 , before the conflict was conclusively ended , John died . The official website of the British Monarchy presents John 's death as the end of the Angevin dynasty and the beginning of the Plantagenet dynasty . 
 = = Main line = = 
 = = = Baronial conflict and the establishment of Parliament = = = 
 All subsequent English monarchs were descendants of the Angevin line via John , who had five legitimate children with Isabella : 
 Henry III – king of England for most of the 13th @-@ century 
 Richard – king of the Romans in the Holy Roman Empire 
 Joan – queen consort of Alexander II of Scotland 
 Isabella – wife of the Holy Roman Emperor , Frederick II 
 Eleanor – wife of William Marshal 's son ( also named William ) , and later the English rebel Simon de Montfort . 
 John also had illegitimate children with several mistresses . These children probably included nine sons called Richard , Oliver , Henry , Osbert Gifford , Geoffrey , John FitzJohn or Courcy , Odo or Eudes FitzRoy , Ivo , Henry , Richard the constable of Wallingford Castle and three daughters called Joan , Matilda the abbess of Barking and Isabella la Blanche . Joan was the best known of these , since she married Prince Llewelyn the Great of Wales . 
 William Marshal , 1st Earl of Pembroke , was appointed regent for the nine @-@ year @-@ old King Henry on King John 's death . Thereafter , support for Louis declined , and he renounced his claims in the Treaty of Lambeth after Marshal 's victories at the battles of Lincoln and Sandwich in 1217 . The Marshal regime issued an amended Magna Carta as a basis for future government . Despite the Treaty of Lambeth , hostilities continued and Henry was forced to compromise with the newly crowned Louis VIII of France and Henry 's stepfather , Hugh X of Lusignan . They both overran much of Henry 's remaining continental lands , further eroding the Angevins ' power on the continent . In his political struggles , Henry perceived many similarities between himself and England 's patron saint , Edward the Confessor . Consequently , he named his first son Edward and built the existing magnificent shrine for the Confessor . 
 In early 1225 a great council approved a tax of £ 40 @,@ 000 to dispatch an army , which quickly retook Gascony . During an assembly feudal prerogatives of the king were challenged by the barons , bishops and magnates who demanded that the King reissue the Magna Carta and the Charter of the Forest in exchange for support . Henry declared that the charters were issued of his own " spontaneous and free will " and confirmed them with the royal seal , giving the new Great Charter and the Charter of the Forest of 1225 much more authority than any previous versions . 
 Henry III had nine children : 
 Edward ( 1239 – 1307 ) 
 Margaret of England ( 1240 – 1275 ) . Her three children predeceased her husband , Alexander III of Scotland ; consequently , the crown of Scotland became vacant on the death of their only grandchild , Margaret , Maid of Norway in 1290 . 
 Beatrice , Countess of Richmond ( 1242 – 1275 ) . She initially married John de Montfort of Dreux , and later married John II , Duke of Brittany . 
 Edmund Crouchback ( 1245 – 1296 ) , who was granted the titles and estates of Simon de Montfort , 6th Earl of Leicester and the earldom of Leicester after Henry defeated Montfort in the Second Barons ' War . Henry later granted Edmund the earldoms of Lancaster and Ferrers . From 1276 , through his wife , Edmund was Count of Champagne and Brie . Later Lancastrians would attempt to use Henry IV 's maternal descent from Edmund to legitimise his claim to the throne , spuriously claiming that Edmund was the eldest son of Henry III but had not become king due to deformity . Through his second marriage to Blanche , the widow of Henry I of Navarre , Edmund was at the centre of European aristocracy . Blanche 's daughter , Joan , was queen regnant of Navarre and queen consort of France through her marriage to Philip IV . Edmund 's son Thomas became the most powerful nobleman in England , adding to his inheritance the earldoms of Lincoln and Salisbury through his marriage to the heiress of Henry de Lacy , 3rd Earl of Lincoln . 
 Four others who died as children : Richard ( 1247 – 1256 ) , John ( 1250 – 1256 ) , William ( c . 1251 / 1252 – 1256 ) , Katherine ( c . 1252 / 3 – 1257 ) and Henry ( no recorded dates ) . 
 Henry was bankrupted by his military expenditure and general extravagance . The pope offered Henry 's brother Richard the Kingdom of Sicily , but the military cost of displacing the incumbent Emperor Frederick was prohibitive . Matthew Paris wrote that Richard stated : " You might as well say , ' I make you a present of the moon — step up to the sky and take it down ' . " Instead , Henry purchased the kingdom for his son Edmund , which angered many powerful barons . The barons led by Henry 's brother @-@ in @-@ law Simon de Montfort forced him to agree to the Provisions of Oxford , under which his debts were paid in exchange for substantial reforms . In France , with the Treaty of Paris , Henry formally surrendered the territory of his Angevin ancestors to Louis IX of France , receiving in return the title duke of Aquitaine and the territory of Gascony as a vassal of the French king . 
 Disagreements between the barons and the king intensified . The barons , under Simon de Montfort , 6th Earl of Leicester , captured most of southeast England in the Second Barons ' War . At the Battle of Lewes in 1264 , Henry and Prince Edward were defeated and taken prisoner . De Montfort assembled the Great Parliament , recognized as the first Parliament because it was the first time the cities and boroughs had sent representatives . Edward escaped , raised an army and defeated and killed de Montfort at the Battle of Evesham in 1265 . Savage retribution was inflicted upon the rebels , and authority restored to Henry . With the realm now peaceful , Edward left England to join Louis IX on the Ninth Crusade ; he was one of the last crusaders . Louis died before Edward 's arrival , but Edward decided to continue . The result was disappointing ; Edward 's small force only enabled him to capture Acre and launch a handful of raids . After surviving an assassination attempt , Edward left for Sicily later in the year , never to participate in a crusade again . When Henry III died , Edward acceded to the throne ; the barons swore allegiance to him even though he did not return for two years . 
 = = = Constitutional change and the reform of feudalism = = = 
 Edward married Eleanor of Castile , daughter of King Ferdinand of Castile , a great grandson of Henry II through his second daughter Eleanor in 1254 . Edward and Eleanor had sixteen children ; five daughters survived to adulthood , but only one son survived Edward : 
 Eleanor , Countess of Bar ( 1264 / 69 − 1298 ) 
 Three daughters ( Joan , Alice , and Juliana / Katherine ) and two sons ( John and Henry ) born between 1265 and 1271 . They died between 1265 and 1274 with little historical trace . 
 Joan , Countess of Gloucester ( 1272 – 1307 ) 
 Alphonso , Earl of Chester ( 1273 – 1284 ) 
 Margaret , Duchess of Brabant ( 1275 – 1333 ) 
 Mary of Woodstock ( 1278 – 1332 ) , who became a nun 
 Isabella ( 1279 – 1279 ) 
 Elizabeth , firstly Countess of Holland and on widowhood , secondly Countess of Hereford ( 1282 – 1316 ) . Among her eleven children were the earls of Hereford , Essex , and Northampton , and the countesses of Ormond and Devon . 
 King Edward II 
 Two other daughters ( Beatrice and Blanche ) , who died as children . 
 Following Eleanor 's death in 1290 , Edward married Margaret of France , daughter of Philip III of France , in 1299 . Edward and Margaret had two sons , who both lived to adulthood , and a daughter who died as a child : 
 Thomas ( 1300 – 1338 ) , whose daughter Margaret inherited his estates . Margaret 's grandson , Thomas Mowbray , was the first duke of Norfolk , but Henry IV exiled him and stripped him of his titles . 
 Edmund , Earl of Kent ( 1301 to 1330 ) . Edmund 's loyalty to his half @-@ brother , Edward II , resulted in his execution by order of the rebel Mortimer and his lover , Edward 's queen , Isabella . His daughter , Joan , inherited his estates and married her own cousin , Edward the Black Prince ; together , they had Richard , who later became the English king . 
 Eleanor ( 1306 – 1311 ) . 
 Evidence for Edward 's involvement in legal reform is hard to find but his reign saw a major programme of legal change . Much of the drive and determination is likely to have come from the king and his experience of the baronial reform movement of the late 1250s and early 1260s . With the Statutes of Mortmain , Edward imposed his authority over the Church ; the statutes prohibited land donation to the Church , asserted the rights of the Crown at the expense of traditional feudal privileges , promoted the uniform administration of justice , raised income and codified the legal system . His military campaigns left him in heavy debt and when Philip IV of France confiscated the Duchy of Gascony in 1294 , Edward needed funds to wage war in France . When Edward summoned a precedent @-@ setting assembly in order to raise more taxes for military finance , he included lesser landowners and merchants . The resulting parliament included barons , clergy , knights , and burgesses for the first time . 
 = = = Expansion in Britain = = = 
 On his accession , Edward I sought to organise his realm , enforcing his claims to primacy in the British Isles . Llywelyn ap Gruffudd claimed to rule North Wales " entirely separate from " England but Edward viewed him to be " a rebel and disturber of the peace " . Edward 's determination , military experience and skilful naval manoeuvres ended what was to him rebellion . The invasion was executed by one of the largest armies ever assembled by an English king , comprising Anglo @-@ Norman cavalry and Welsh archers and laying the foundation for future victories in France . Llywelyn was driven into the mountains , later dying in battle . The Statute of Rhuddlan established England 's authority over Wales , and Edward 's son was proclaimed the first English Prince of Wales upon his birth . Edward spent vast sums on his two Welsh campaigns with a large portion of it spent on a network of castles . 
 Edward asserted that the king of Scotland owed him feudal allegiance , and intended to unite the two nations by marrying his son Edward to Margaret , the sole heir of King Alexander III . When Margaret died in 1290 , competition for the Scottish crown ensued . By invitation of Scottish magnates , Edward I resolved the dispute , ruling in favour of John Balliol , who duly swore loyalty to him and became king . Edward insisted that he was Scotland 's sovereign and possessed the right to hear appeals against Balliol 's judgements , undermining Balliol 's authority . Balliol allied with France in 1295 ; Edward invaded Scotland the following year , deposing and exiling Balliol . 
 Edward was less successful in Gascony , which was overrun by the French . With his resources depleting , Edward was forced to reconfirm the Charters , including Magna Carta , to obtain the necessary funds . In 1303 the French king restored Gascony to Edward by signing the Treaty of Paris . Meanwhile , William Wallace rose in Balliol 's name and recovered most of Scotland . Wallace was defeated at the Battle of Falkirk , after which Robert the Bruce rebelled and was crowned king of Scotland . Edward died while travelling to Scotland for another campaign . 
 King Edward II 's coronation oath on his succession in 1307 was the first to reflect the king 's responsibility to maintain the laws that the community " shall have chosen " ( " aura eslu " ) . He was not unpopular initially but faced three challenges : discontent over the financing of wars ; his household spending ; and the role of his favourite Piers Gaveston . When Parliament decided that Gaveston should be exiled the king was left with no choice but to comply . Edward engineered Gaveston 's return , but was forced to agree to the appointment of Ordainers , led by his cousin Thomas , 2nd Earl of Lancaster , to reform the royal household with Piers Gaveston exiled again . When Gaveston returned again to England , he was abducted and executed after a mock trial . The ramifications of this drove Thomas and his adherents from power . Edward 's humiliating defeat by Bruce at the Battle of Bannockburn , confirming Bruce 's position as an independent king of Scots , leading to Lancaster being appointed head of the king 's council . Edward finally repealed the Ordinances after defeating and executing Lancaster at the Battle of Boroughbridge in 1322 . 
 The French monarchy asserted its rights to encroach on Edward 's legal rights in Gascony . Resistance to one judgement in Saint @-@ Sardos resulted in Charles IV declaring the duchy forfeit . Charles 's sister , Queen Isabella , was sent to negotiate and agreed a treaty that required Edward to pay homage in France to Charles . Edward resigned Aquitaine and Ponthieu to his son Edward , who travelled to France to give homage in his stead . With the English heir in her power , Isabella refused to return to England unless Edward II dismissed his favourites , and she became the mistress of Roger Mortimer . The couple invaded England and , with Henry , 3rd Earl of Lancaster , captured the king . Edward II abdicated on condition that his son would inherit the throne rather than Mortimer . Although there is no historical record of the cause of death , he is popularly believed to have been murdered at Berkeley Castle by having a red @-@ hot poker thrust into his bowels . A coup by Edward III ended four years of control by Isabella and Mortimer . Mortimer was executed . Though removed from power , Isabella was treated well , and lived in luxury for the next 27 years . 
