 The attacks followed an increase in tension after the Hall sisters were released at Fort Blue Mounds on June 1 . The sisters had been kidnapped during the Indian Creek massacre in May and were brought to Blue Mounds by a party of Ho @-@ Chunk . Militia leader Henry Dodge became suspicious of the Ho @-@ Chunk and took them prisoner , though they were later released as tension between the Ho @-@ Chunk and white settlers increased . The attacks also lent credence to the belief that more Ho @-@ Chunk were set to join Black Hawk 's war against white settlers in Illinois and Michigan Territory . Though other attacks on the fort were expected they never happened and Fort Blue Mounds served as a supply center for the remaining days of the war . 
 = = Background = = 
 As a consequence of an 1804 treaty between the Governor of Indiana Territory and a group of Sauk and Fox leaders regarding land settlement the Sauk and Fox tribes vacated their lands in Illinois in 1828 and moved west of the Mississippi River . However , Sauk Chief Black Hawk and others disputed the treaty , claiming that the full tribal councils had not been consulted , nor did those representing the tribes have authorization to cede lands . Angered by the loss of his birthplace , Black Hawk led a number of incursions across the Mississippi River beginning in 1830 , but each time was persuaded , without bloodshed , to return west . In April 1832 , encouraged by promises of alliance with other tribes and the British , he again moved his so @-@ called " British Band " of around 1 @,@ 000 warriors and civilians into Illinois . A number of other engagements followed , and the state militias of Wisconsin and Illinois were mobilized to hunt down Black Hawk 's band , the conflict that ensued became known as the Black Hawk War . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 Upon hearing of Black Hawk 's return , settlers throughout northern Illinois and southern Wisconsin hastily constructed forts . Construction on a fort began at Ebeneezer Brigham 's <unk> settlement ( now Blue Mounds , Wisconsin ) on May 10 . As construction of the fort commenced Black Hawk found no allies so he attempted to return to Iowa , but events overtook him and led to the Battle of Stillman 's Run . The battle likely caused the builders of Fort Blue Mounds to accelerate the pace of construction . 
 One week after the clash at Stillman 's Run , on May 21 , 1832 , the Indian Creek massacre occurred well south of Fort Blue Mounds , near present @-@ day Ottawa , Illinois . During the attack , two teenage girls were kidnapped by a raiding band of Potawatomi . The girls , Sylvia and Rachel Hall , were released on June 1 at Fort Blue Mounds by the party of Ho @-@ Chunk who had helped secure their release ; the party included several important chiefs . Commander of the Michigan Territory militia Henry Dodge arrived with a company to retrieve the girls but became suspicious of the Ho @-@ Chunk and took them prisoner in an attempt to secure the alliance and good behavior of other Ho @-@ Chunk in the vicinity of Blue Mounds . The chiefs were soon released but friction between white settlers at <unk> and the Ho @-@ Chunk residing in the area increased . Indian Agent Henry Gratiot tried to calm the situation by appeasing the Ho @-@ Chunk through gifts . Despite Gratiot 's attempts , the tension exploded into violence a few days later . 
 = = Attacks = = 
 The first incident near Fort Blue Mounds occurred when William Griffith Aubrey was attacked and killed by Native American warriors on June 6 , 1832 . According to one witness statement , directly preceding the first attack at Fort Blue Mounds on June 6 , there was an argument between William Aubrey 's wife and a Ho @-@ Chunk man . During the exchange the Ho @-@ Chunk man threatened to kill her husband . Aubrey was a miner who was working for Brigham about 1 ½ miles away from Fort Blue Mounds when he was attacked . He and Jefferson Smith were detailed to retrieve water from a spring near the fort when they were ambushed by a small party of warriors . Aubrey was shot twice and stabbed through the neck with a spear . His companion , though shot three times , managed to escape with his life . Smith fled back to the fort , leaving his gun and horse behind . At the fort , the settlers correctly guessed that the attackers were Ho @-@ Chunk and not the warriors of Black Hawk 's " British Band , " which was 40 miles ( 64 km ) away at Lake <unk> . 
 The second attack occurred on June 20 , 1832 , two weeks after the first incident . In the attack , a large Sauk war party attacked Blue Mounds and two members of the militia , Emerson Green and George Force , were killed . Eyewitness accounts estimated the size of the group between 50 @-@ 100 warriors . The night before the second attack of June 20 strange noises were heard in the vicinity of the fort . Force and Green had left the fort , on horseback , to investigate the previous night 's disturbances and were several miles east of Fort Blue Mounds when they came across Black Hawk 's band , guided to the fort by sympathetic Ho @-@ Chunk . Force was killed immediately but Green broke for the fort and almost made it back to safety when , in view of the fort 's occupants , his horse was shot out from underneath him . Green was surrounded by the war party and killed , eyewitness accounts indicate that his body was badly mutilated . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Following the murder of Aubrey , people in the area quickly suspected that the Ho @-@ Chunk were involved which exacerbated the fear that more from the Ho @-@ Chunk Nation were set to join Chief Black Hawk 's band against the white settlers in Michigan Territory and Illinois . With the loyalty of the Ho @-@ Chunk in question the possibility of a two @-@ front war emerged . After the deaths of Green and Force , U.S. interrogators questioned two Ho @-@ Chunk warriors they had captured . The braves , members of the Prophet 's Band , took credit for the killings , even boasting of them . 
 The location of Aubrey 's death was in Michigan Territory near present @-@ day Blue Mounds , Wisconsin . Following his death , mounted troops and riders from the fort traced the band responsible for the attack to a recently abandoned camp , and then to the Wisconsin River , where the search ended . Aubrey was buried on a high piece of land overlooking the fort from the northeast . 
 Green 's body was buried at the fort but Force 's remains laid on the prairie for four days before they were retrieved ; the fort 's residents were too frightened to venture far from the building . On June 24 General Henry Dodge and Captain James H. Gentry arrived at Fort Blue Mounds with part of Gentry 's company . Their purpose was to conduct reconnaissance operations but they ended up finding the body of Lieutenant Force beneath a tree about two miles ( 3 km ) east of the fort . Early histories indicate Force 's body was badly mutilated and missing a " part . " Force was buried near the fort , along the main trail about two miles ( 3 km ) east of the fort . 
 Though Brigham fully expected an all @-@ out attack on Fort Blue Mounds following the incidents , it never came . The only violence that befell the occupants of the fort was that perpetrated on those who left its confines on June 6 and June 20 . Dodge left a detachment at the fort for a time but after the June 20 attack the fort was never again a target during the Black Hawk War . Until the end of the war , Fort Blue Mounds served primarily as a supply center for the militia as they continued their pursuit of Black Hawk across Wisconsin . 
 = Kenneth MacMillan = 
 Sir Kenneth MacMillan ( 11 December 1929 – 29 October 1992 ) was a British ballet dancer and choreographer who was artistic director of the Royal Ballet in London between 1970 and 1977 , and its principal choreographer from 1977 until his death . Earlier he had served as director of ballet for the Deutsche Oper in Berlin . He was also associate director of the American Ballet Theatre from 1984 to 1989 , and artistic associate of the Houston Ballet from 1989 to 1992 . 
 From a family with no background of ballet or music , MacMillan was determined from an early age to become a dancer . The director of Sadler 's Wells Ballet , Ninette de Valois , accepted him as a student and then a member of her company . In the late 1940s , MacMillan built a successful career as a dancer , but , plagued by stage fright , he abandoned it while still in his twenties . After this he worked entirely as a choreographer ; he created ten full @-@ length ballets and more than fifty one @-@ act pieces . In addition to his work for ballet companies he was active in television , musicals , non @-@ musical drama , and opera . 
 Although he is mainly associated with the Royal Ballet , MacMillan frequently considered himself an outsider there and felt driven to work with other companies throughout his career as choreographer . His creations for the Stuttgart Ballet and the Deutsche Opera ballet include some of his most frequently revived works . 
 = = Life and career = = 
 = = = Early years = = = 
 MacMillan was born in Dunfermline , Scotland , the youngest of four surviving children of William MacMillan ( 1891 – 1946 ) , who was a labourer and , from time to time , cook , and his wife , Edith ( 1888 – 1942 ) née <unk> . His father had served in the army in the First World War , and suffered permanent physical and mental damage . In search of work he moved with his family to his wife 's home town , Great Yarmouth in Norfolk . After attending a local primary school , Kenneth studied from 1940 at Great Yarmouth Grammar School , to which he won a scholarship . As Great Yarmouth was a target for German air raids in the Second World War , the school was evacuated to Retford in Nottinghamshire . 
 In Retford , MacMillan was introduced to ballet by a local dance teacher , Jean Thomas . He had already had lessons in Scottish dancing in Dunfermline and tap dancing in Great Yarmouth , and he took to ballet immediately . In 1942 his mother died , which caused him acute and lasting distress . His father was a distant figure , and the boy 's only close family relationship was with an elder sister . His obituarist in The Times suggests that the feeling of being an outsider , displayed in many of MacMillan 's ballets , had its roots in his childhood . 
 When the grammar school returned to Great Yarmouth in 1944 MacMillan found a new ballet teacher , Phyllis Adams . With her help , MacMillan , aged fifteen , secured admission to the Sadler 's Wells Ballet School ( later the Royal Ballet School ) . He saw his first performances of ballets , given by Ninette de Valois ' Sadler 's Wells company , at the New Theatre in London . 
 = = = Dancer = = = 
 When David Webster was appointed chief executive of the Royal Opera House , Covent Garden at the end of the war , his assignment was to establish permanent opera and ballet companies for the house . He set about building the opera company from scratch but persuaded de Valois to make Covent Garden the main base for her ballet company . In 1946 , while still a student , MacMillan appeared in the production of The Sleeping Beauty with which Webster and de Valois reopened the opera house . At first he was a non @-@ dancing extra , and later he was promoted to a small dancing role . With the main company now resident at Covent Garden , de Valois established a smaller ensemble to perform at Sadler 's Wells and act as a training ground for young dancers and choreographers . In April 1946 MacMillan was a founder member , and quickly made progress . He was cast by Frederick Ashton , de Valois ' principal choreographer , in a leading role in a new ballet , Valses nobles et sentimentales , in October 1946 . The success of the piece encouraged Ashton to revive his 1933 Les Rendezvous . Although initially only in the corps de ballet for this work , MacMillan was unexpectedly promoted to the male lead because of injuries to all the eligible company principals . His biographer Jann Parry comments that he was able to take over without notice because he had a rare ability to remember and reproduce the steps of every dancer in any piece in which he appeared . He was promoted to the senior Covent Garden company at the start of the 1948 – 49 season , touring in Europe and dancing Florestan in the third act pas de trois of The Sleeping Beauty in the company 's opening gala in New York in October 1949 . The first new role he created was The Great Admirer of Mademoiselle <unk> in John Cranko 's ballet Children 's Corner ( 1948 ) , followed by both Sherlock Holmes and Professor Moriarty in Margaret Dale 's The Great Detective ( 1953 ) , and Moondog in Cranko 's The Lady and the Fool ( 1954 ) . 
 Despite his rise within the company , MacMillan became unhappy as a performer . He suffered from severe stage fright , and his leading roles became an ordeal for him . De Valois gave him three months ' leave of absence , during which he spent some time dancing with his friend John Cranko 's small group in the little Kenton Theatre , away from the spotlight , in Henley @-@ on @-@ Thames . Cranko , himself a former dancer who had moved to choreography , concluded that MacMillan might well follow the same course . When MacMillan returned to work , his confidence as a dancer somewhat restored , he took part in de Valois ' new Choreographers Group , set up in response to Marie Rambert 's " Ballet Workshops " . For this group , MacMillan choreographed his first ballet , <unk> , which was first given on 1 February 1953 . It was well received , and the next year he followed with another small @-@ scale work , <unk> . This introduced the " outsider " character that became a hallmark of his ballets , in this case a female clown who attends a ball at which her host falls in love with her until she loses the mask that has made her attractive . MacMillan 's eclectic choice of music was evidenced in these two early works ; the first was danced to jazz composed by Stan Kenton , and the second was to the harpsichord music of Frank Martin . 
 On the strength of the workshop successes , de Valois commissioned the 25 @-@ year @-@ old MacMillan to create a ballet for performance at Sadler 's Wells . Danses concertantes , to music by Stravinsky , was first produced in January 1955 , with designs by Nicholas <unk> , with whom MacMillan collaborated extensively over the next years . Parry counts among MacMillan 's early influences the modernism of choreographers such as Roland Petit , Jerome Robbins and Antony Tudor , and the craftsmanship of Ashton , from whom MacMillan said he learned how a ballet was made . The Times commented that with this piece it was clear that a powerful choreographic talent had arrived . The critic Clement Crisp has described the piece as " a bravura display using a witty , allusive classical vocabulary , remade by a creator who knew the cinema and spoke the movement language of his generation " . With the success of Danses concertantes MacMillan concluded that his future lay in choreography rather than dancing . After a fierce argument with de Valois , who wanted him to continue in both capacities , he got his way , and from 1955 his contract with the company ( on a slightly reduced salary ) was purely as a choreographer . His only Covent Garden appearances as a dancer after that were two performances as an Ugly Step @-@ sister in Cinderella alongside Ashton in 1956 . 
 = = = Choreographer = = = 
 MacMillan next produced a series of one @-@ act ballets . For the junior company he choreographed House of Birds ( 1955 ) , based on the Grimm brothers ' <unk> and <unk> , and for Covent Garden he created <unk> ( 1956 ) about a Svengali @-@ like hypnotist . He also worked in television , with Punch and the Child ( 1954 ) , The Dreamers , a television adaptation of <unk> , and Turned Out Proud ( 1955 ) . In 1956 he took leave of absence to spend five months in New York , working with American Ballet Theatre , choreographing Winter 's Eve and Journey for the dramatic ballerina Nora Kaye . For the Covent Garden opera company he staged the <unk> ballet in Tannhäuser , regarded by some critics as the best part of a disappointing production . 
 MacMillan was the first of his generation of choreographers to have an entire evening of his works presented by the Sadler 's Wells Ballet . In June 1956 his new " divertissement ballet " Solitaire was given in a quadruple bill with <unk> , House of Birds and Danses concertantes . His 1958 work , The Burrow , with its menacing echoes of war , oppression and concealment , won praise for venturing into territory seldom explored in ballet . The critic in The Times admitted that its dramatic impact was strong enough " to make one glad when it ends " . The work marked the beginning of MacMillan 's association with Lynn Seymour , who was his muse for many subsequent ballets . The company had by now been granted a royal charter and was known as the Royal Ballet , with the smaller company based at Sadler 's Wells called the Royal Ballet Touring Company . 
 In the late 1950s MacMillan choreographed two musicals : one for the stage ( The World of Paul <unk> , 1958 ) and one for the cinema ( Expresso Bongo , 1959 ) . The Invitation , first shown at the Royal Opera House on 30 December 1960 , is probably MacMillan ’ s most controversial ballet . This one @-@ act work about rape was interpreted by Lynn Seymour and Desmond Doyle and provoked , at the time , mixed reactions in the press and the audience . Among MacMillan ’ s works for the Royal Ballet in the early 1960s was The Rite of Spring ( 1962 ) ; he selected an unknown junior dancer , Monica Mason , to dance the lead role of the chosen maiden who dances herself to death in a primitive ritual . Dance and Dancers described it as " a singular and signal triumph " ; Mason ’ s performance was judged " brilliantly done ... one of British ballet 's most memorable performances " . In The Times John Percival commented that ever since Nijinsky 's original attempt in 1913 The Rite had been waiting for a choreographer who could make it work on stage , and MacMillan 's was the most successful version to date . 
 In the mid @-@ 1960s two of his ballets , though both immensely successful , strained relations between MacMillan and the Royal Opera House management . In 1964 Webster and the Covent Garden board turned down MacMillan 's proposal to create a ballet using the music of Mahler 's Das Lied von der Erde English : The Song of the Earth ; the decision was made on the grounds that the score was unsuitable for use as a ballet . Cranko , by now in charge of the Stuttgart Ballet , invited MacMillan to create the work there in 1965 . It was a huge success , and within six months the Royal Ballet had taken the piece up . MacMillan 's first full @-@ length , three @-@ act ballet , Romeo and Juliet ( 1965 ) , to Prokofiev 's score , was choreographed for Seymour and Christopher Gable , but at Webster 's insistence the gala premiere was danced by Margot Fonteyn and Rudolf Nureyev . The decision was made for commercial rather than artistic reasons : Fonteyn and Nureyev were internationally known stars and guaranteed a full house at premium prices , as well as huge publicity . In Parry 's words , MacMillan and his two chosen dancers felt betrayed . 
 = = = Berlin , 1966 – 69 = = = 
 Disillusioned with Covent Garden , MacMillan accepted an invitation from the Deutsche Oper in Berlin to run its ballet company . Parry describes this as an unhappy experience . Though at Covent Garden Webster may sometimes have been suspected of favouring the opera at the expense of the ballet , MacMillan discovered that at the Berlin house there was no doubt that the ballet was given distinctly lower priority . He did not speak German , which reduced his enjoyment from watching films ( of which he was a great devotee ) and theatre and limited him generally in everyday life . Although he had taken several colleagues with him , including Seymour , many moved away over the course of his nearly four years in charge , and MacMillan became increasingly isolated . It was the first time he had been in a managerial as well as a creative role , and the strain affected his physical and mental health . He smoked and drank heavily and suffered a minor stroke . 
 For the Berlin company , MacMillan created seven ballets : Valses nobles et sentimentales , Concerto , Anastasia ( one act version ) , The Sleeping Beauty , Olympiad , Cain and Abel and Swan Lake . The critic Jane Simpson considers that some of MacMillan 's finest work was done for Berlin and Stuttgart . 
 = = = Royal Ballet : director 1970 – 77 = = = 
 In 1970 Ashton , who had been artistic director of the Royal Ballet since de Valois stepped down in 1963 , retired , somewhat reluctantly . Webster retired in the same year and wanted a wholesale change of management to coincide with his own departure . For the opera he arranged the joint directorship of Colin Davis and Peter Hall , and for the ballet he secured MacMillan and John Field as co @-@ directors . Neither of the joint directorships succeeded . Hall did not take up his post , instead moving to run the National Theatre , and Field , who had run the junior Royal Ballet company under de Valois and Ashton , found the split directorship untenable and left within months to become director of ballet at La Scala , Milan . 
 MacMillan was in an awkward position . It was widely known that Ashton had been forced out , and many resented it . Company morale was lowered by an announcement , to which MacMillan and Field were party , that the two ballet companies would merge , with numerous job losses . The managerial side of the post was no more congenial to MacMillan than it had been in Berlin , and some felt that his creative work suffered during his seven @-@ year term . His expansion of Anastasia into a three @-@ act version ( 1971 ) and the other full @-@ length work from this period , Manon ( 1974 ) , divided opinion , receiving fiercely adverse reviews as well as laudatory ones . His Joplin ballet Elite <unk> ( 1974 ) and Requiem ( 1976 ) were immediately successful and have been regularly revived . The latter was dedicated to the memory of Cranko , who had died suddenly in 1973 . It was premiered at Stuttgart , because as with Song of the Earth the Royal Opera House board thought the chosen music – Fauré 's Requiem – inappropriate for a ballet . The work was not given at Covent Garden until 1983 . 
 At the age of 42 MacMillan , hitherto unmarried and enigmatic about his personal life , married the 26 @-@ year @-@ old Australian painter Deborah Williams . The writer John Percival comments that MacMillan 's marriage " saved him , both physically and mentally [ and ] gave him stability in his private life and seems to have resolved his confused sexuality " . There was one daughter of the marriage . 
 = = = Royal Ballet : principal choreographer 1977 – 92 = = = 
 After seven years as director of the Royal Ballet , MacMillan resigned in 1977 , wishing to concentrate on choreography . He was succeeded as artistic director by Norman Morrice , whose background was the more avant garde Ballet Rambert . MacMillan took up the post of principal choreographer . His fourth full @-@ length ballet , Mayerling ( 1978 ) , was a dark work , portraying the suicides of the Austrian Crown Prince Rudolf and his young mistress . Parry comments that some scenarios for his new one @-@ act ballets featured similarly dark themes : " a disturbed family in My Brother , My Sisters , a lunatic asylum in Playground ; Valley of Shadows ... included scenes in a Nazi concentration camp . " Different Drummer ( 1984 ) was a balletic version of Georg Büchner 's <unk> , familiar to Covent Garden audiences from Berg 's 1925 opera Wozzeck : all three depict the brutal fate of the downtrodden . Even the lighter of MacMillan 's ballets could have their serious side : La fin du jour ( 1979 ) , to Ravel 's Piano Concerto in G , depicts a way of life of the 1930s soon to be shattered by the Second World War , and is described by Crisp as " a requiem for the <unk> de vivre of an era " . 
 In the 1980s MacMillan ventured into non @-@ balletic theatre , directing productions of Strindberg 's The Dance of Death ( Royal Exchange Theatre , Manchester , 1983 ) and Tennessee Williams 's Kingdom of Earth ( Hampstead Theatre , 1984 ) . Parry , writing in The Observer , thought that the drama in the first play failed to spring fully to life ; Michael Billington of The Guardian praised MacMillan 's " immensely detailed , atmospheric production " of the second piece . From 1984 to 1989 , while remaining chief choreographer of the Royal Ballet , MacMillan was associate director of the American Ballet Theatre . For that company he staged new works , Wild Boy and Requiem ( this time to Andrew Lloyd Webber 's music rather than Fauré 's ) , restaged his Romeo and Juliet , and created a new production of The Sleeping Beauty . 
 Despite a serious heart attack in 1988 MacMillan continued to work intensely . In 1989 he made his first new ballet for Covent Garden for five years , a new version of Britten 's The Prince of the Pagodas . The company had never found the original 1956 Cranko version satisfactory , and it was neglected during the composer 's lifetime . MacMillan thought the piece could be successfully reworked with some cuts to the score , but the Britten estate refused to allow any alterations . MacMillan reverted to classical ballet for the piece , creating a fairy @-@ tale work far from his accustomed style . The result was not judged among his best works , but it marked the emergence of the 19 @-@ year @-@ old Darcey Bussell , whom he picked to dance the young heroine . Along with the former Bolshoi principal dancer Irek <unk> , who joined the Royal Ballet in 1991 , Bussell was MacMillan 's final important muse . For the two of them he created Winter Dreams ( 1991 ) , inspired by Chekhov 's Three Sisters . <unk> was the brutish male leading character in MacMillan 's last ballet , The Judas Tree ( 1992 ) . 
 MacMillan died from a heart attack backstage at the Royal Opera House during a performance of Mayerling . Jeremy Isaacs , the general director of the Royal Opera House , announced the death from the stage after the performance and asked the audience to rise and bow their heads and leave the theatre in silence . On the same night the junior company was presenting MacMillan 's Romeo and Juliet in Birmingham . MacMillan had nearly finished work on the dances for a new production of Carousel by the National Theatre , which opened at the Lyttelton Theatre six weeks later , with his family and many of his friends in the audience . 
 = = Honours and awards = = 
 MacMillan was knighted in 1983 , and he received honorary degrees from the University of Edinburgh ( 1976 ) and the Royal College of Art ( 1992 ) . His awards include the Evening Standard Ballet Award ( 1979 ) ; Society of West End Theatre Managers Ballet Award , 1980 and 1983 ; and , posthumously , the Laurence Olivier Award for Best New Dance Production in 1993 for The Judas Tree ; the Society of London Theatre Special Award in 1993 ; and the Tony Award for Best Choreography in 1994 for Carousel . 
 = = Choreography = = 
 = = = Full @-@ length ballets = = = 
 = = = Shorter works = = = 
 Sources : Royal Opera House performance database , Parry , and Kenneth MacMillan website . 
 = Keyser Söze = 
 Keyser Söze ( / <unk> <unk> / KY @-@ <unk> <unk> @-@ <unk> ) is a fictional character and the main antagonist in the 1995 film The Usual Suspects , written by Christopher McQuarrie and directed by Bryan Singer . According to petty con artist Roger " Verbal " Kint ( Kevin Spacey ) , Söze is a crime lord whose ruthlessness and influence have acquired a legendary , even mythical , status among police and criminals alike . Further events in the story make these accounts unreliable , and , in a twist ending , a police sketch identifies Kint 's face as Söze . The character was inspired by real life murderer John List and the spy thriller No Way Out , which featured a shadowy KGB mole . 
 The character has placed in numerous " best villain " lists over the years , including AFI 's 100 Years ... 100 Heroes & Villains . Spacey won the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor , turning him from a character actor into a star . Since the release of the film , the character has become synonymous with infamous criminals . Analysis of the character has focused on the ambiguity of his true identity and whether he even exists inside the story 's reality . Though the filmmakers have preferred to leave the character 's nature to viewer interpretation , Singer has said he believes Kint and Söze are the same person . 
 = = Concept and creation = = 
 Director Bryan Singer and writer Christopher McQuarrie originally conceived of The Usual Suspects as five felons meeting in a police line @-@ up . Eventually , a powerful underworld figure responsible for their meeting was added to the plot . McQuarrie combined this plot with another idea of his based on the true story of John List , who murdered his family and started a new life . The name was based on one of McQuarrie 's supervisors , though the last name was changed . McQuarrie settled on Söze after finding it in a Turkish dictionary ; it comes from the idiom " <unk> <unk> " , which means " to talk unnecessarily too much and cause confusion " ( literally : to drown in words ) . 
 Keyser Söze 's semi @-@ mythical nature was inspired by Yuri , a rumored KGB mole whose existence nobody can confirm , from the spy thriller No Way Out . Kint was not originally written to be as obviously intelligent ; in the script , he was , according to McQuarrie , " presented as a dummy " . Spacey and Singer had previously met at a screening for Public Access . Spacey requested a role in Singer 's next film , and McQuarrie wrote the role of Kint specifically for him . McQuarrie said he wanted audiences to dismiss Kint as a minor character , as Spacey was not yet well @-@ known . Spacey made it more obvious that the character is holding back information , though the depth of his involvement and nature of his secrets remain unrevealed . McQuarrie said that he approved of the changes , as it makes the character " more fascinating " . 
 = = Fictional history = = 
 The Usual Suspects consists mostly of flashbacks narrated by Roger " Verbal " Kint ( Kevin Spacey ) , a disabled con artist . Verbal has been granted immunity from prosecution provided he assists investigators , including Customs Agent David Kujan ( Chazz Palminteri ) and reveals all details of his involvement with a group of career criminals who are assumed to be responsible for the destruction of a freighter ship and the murder of nearly everyone on board . While Kint is telling his story , Kujan learns the name Keyser Söze from FBI agent Jack Baer ( Giancarlo Esposito ) and demands Kint tell him what he knows . 
 According to Kint , Söze began his criminal career as a petty drug dealer in his native Turkey . His legendary persona is born when rival Hungarian smugglers invade his house while he is away , rape his wife , and hold his children hostage ; when Söze arrives , they kill one of his children and demand he surrender his business . Instead , Söze kills his own family and all but one of the Hungarians , who he knows will tell the Mafia what has happened . Once his family is buried , Söze targets the Hungarian Mafia , their families , friends , and people who owe them money . He goes underground , never again doing business in person . 
 Söze 's ruthlessness is legendary ; Kint describes him as having had enemies and disloyal henchmen brutally murdered , along with everyone they hold dear , for the slightest infractions , and he personally murders anyone who can identify him . Even his own henchmen often do not know for whom they work . Over the years , his criminal empire flourishes , as does his legend ; remarking on Söze 's mythical nature , Kint says , " The greatest trick the Devil ever pulled was convincing the world he didn 't exist " , a line borrowed from Charles Baudelaire . 
 Kint describes how he and his cohorts are blackmailed by Söze , through Söze 's lawyer Kobayashi ( Pete Postlethwaite ) , into destroying a large drug shipment belonging to Söze 's Argentinian rivals . All but Kint and a Hungarian are killed in the attack . Baer believes there were no drugs and the true purpose of the attack was to eliminate a passenger who could identify Söze . Kujan confronts Kint with the theory that Söze is one of the four other criminals with whom Verbal had worked : a corrupt former police officer and professional thief named Dean Keaton ( Gabriel Byrne ) . Kujan 's investigation of Keaton is what involved him in the case . 
 In the final sequence , it is revealed that the story that Kint had told Kujan is a fabrication , made up of strung @-@ together details culled from a crowded bulletin board in a messy office . The surviving Hungarian describes Söze to a sketch artist : the drawing faxed in to the police station closely resembles Kint . Kujan realizes the fabrication and pursues Kint , who has already been released , his limp gone . He enters a car , driven by " Kobayashi " . As the two drive away , Kujan desperately looks around the crowded streets for him . 
 = = Reception and legacy = = 
 A. O. Scott of The New York Times called him the " perfect postmodern sociopath " , and Quentin Curtis of The Independent described him as " the most compelling creation in recent American film " . Jason Bailey of The Atlantic identified the role as turning Kevin Spacey from a character actor to a star . Kevin Spacey received the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor for his performance . 
 The character placed 48th in the American Film Institute 's " AFI 's 100 Years ... 100 Heroes & Villains " in June 2003 . Time placed him at # 10 on their list of most memorably named film characters and # 5 in best pop culture gangsters . Entertainment Weekly ranked the character # 37 in their list of the 100 greatest characters of the past twenty years , # 6 in most vile villains , and # 12 in the best heroes and villains . Ask Men ranked him # 6 in their list of top ten film villains . Total Film ranked him # 37 in their best villains and # 40 in best characters overall . MSN ranked him # 4 in their list of the 13 most menacing villains . Empire ranked him # 41 in their " 100 Greatest Movie Characters " poll . 
 = = = Analysis = = = 
 In an interview with Metro Silicon Valley , Pete Postlethwaite quoted Bryan Singer as saying that all the characters are Söze . When asked point blank whether his character is Söze , Postlethwaite said , " Who knows ? Nobody knows . That 's what 's good about The Usual Suspects . " Spacey has also been evasive about his character 's true identity . In an interview with Total Film , he said , " That 's for the audience to decide . My job is to show up and do a part – I don 't own the audience 's imagination . " Singer said the film is ambiguous about most of the character 's details , but the fax sent at the end of the film proves in his mind that Kint is Söze . 
 Bryan <unk> , writing for UGO , states that the myth @-@ making story of Söze 's origins is a classic ghost story that would be right at home in horror fiction . Writing about psychopaths in film , academic Wayne Wilson explicitly compares Söze to Satan and assigns to him demonic motives . Wilson states that Söze allows himself to be caught just to prove his superiority over the police ; this compromises his ultimate goal of anonymity , but Söze can not resist the urge to show off and create mischief . In The Journal of Nietzsche Studies , Lewis Call states that Söze 's mythological status draws the ire of the authoritarian government agents because he " represents a terrifying truth : that power is ephemeral , and has no basis in reality . " According to Call , Söze 's intermediaries – the " usual suspects " themselves – are more useful to the police , as they represent an easily controlled and intimidated criminal underworld , in direct contrast to Söze himself . 
 Hanna M. Roisman compares Kint to Odysseus , capable of adapting both his personality and his tales to his current audience . Throughout his tale , Kint adapts his confession to Kujan 's revealed biases . Roisman draws direct parallels to Odysseus ' tales to the <unk> : like Odysseus , Kint allows his audience to define him and his narrative . Appealing to Kujan 's arrogance , Kint allows himself to be outwitted , humiliated , and broken by his interrogator ; Kint further invents a mythical villain that he <unk> believes in and gives Kujan the privileged perspective of the skeptic . Kint thus creates a neo @-@ noir thriller inside of a neo @-@ noir thriller and demonstrates the artificiality of storytelling . Benjamin <unk> identifies post @-@ structural elements to the film , such as the lack of a clear protagonist throughout much of the film . This extends to ambiguity over Kint 's role as author or reader , and whether he is Kint pretending to be Söze or the reverse . 
 Söze was also subject to detailed fan analysis and debate . Fans contacted Singer personally and quizzed him on explanations for the film 's complicated plot . Fan theories about Söze 's identity became a popular topic on internet forums . After the film 's festival premiere , the ambiguity of Söze 's identity and how to pronounce his name were used in the film 's marketing . Pronunciation had previously been an issue for distributor Gramercy Pictures , who used , " Who is Keyser Söze ? " to demonstrate both proper pronunciation and stoke speculation . The ad campaign was later highlighted by Entertainment Weekly as " question of the year " for 1995 . 
 = = = In popular culture = = = 
 Since the release of the film , the name " Keyser Söze " has become synonymous with a feared , elusive person nobody has met . Television series Buffy the Vampire Slayer used the character 's name as part of a slang phrase that means to " definitively manipulate , outmaneuver " . In June 2001 , Time referred to Osama bin Laden as " a geopolitical Keyser Söze , an omnipresent menace whose very name invokes perils far beyond his capability " . 
 In his 1999 review of Fight Club , which was generally negative , film critic Roger Ebert commented , " A lot of recent films seem unsatisfied unless they can add final scenes that redefine the reality of everything that has gone before ; call it the Keyser Söze syndrome . " 
 Forbes used the character in a study of what it takes to succeed in business . After positing different hypothetical situations , writer Russ Alan Prince concludes that a number of the " self @-@ made super @-@ rich " would respond to these situations in the same manner as Söze . 
 = The Abbot 's Fish House , Meare = 
 The Abbot 's Fish House in Meare , Somerset , England , was built in the 14th century and has been designated as a Grade I listed building and Scheduled Ancient Monument . It is the only surviving monastic fishery building in England . 
 Fishing was an important source of food for the monks of Glastonbury Abbey . Fishing was carried out in artificial ponds , which were mentioned at Meare in the Domesday Book and from the River Brue and Meare Pool . The present rectangular stone building was constructed by the abbot between 1322 and 1335 for the storage and processing of the fish and as a residence for the chief fisherman . After the Dissolution of the Monasteries the building fell into disrepair and it was seriously damaged by fire in the 1880s . Some restoration has been undertaken during the 20th century , including the replacement of the roof in the 1920s . 
 = = History = = 
 The fish ponds surrounding the Fish House were recorded in the Domesday Book of 1086 when they were tended by ten fishermen . The fishponds , which were connected with drains and gullies were up to 30 metres ( 98 ft ) long and 5 metres ( 16 ft ) wide . These were connected to the Meare Pool and the River Brue . At one point 5 @,@ 000 eels were caught each year . Pike , Bream and " white fish " were also caught . Meare Pool was formed by water ponding @-@ up behind the raised peat bogs between the Wedmore and the Polden Hills , and coring has shown that it is filled with at least 2 metres ( 6 @.@ 6 ft ) of detritus mud , especially in the Subatlantic climatic period ( 1st millennium BC ) . Early drainage work was carried out in the later years of the 12th century , with the responsibility for maintaining all the watercourses between Glastonbury and the sea being placed on named individuals among whom were Ralph de Sancta Barbara of Brentmarsh . Its precise boundaries varied according to season , and , over the longer term , as efforts were made to drain the area . The south end was bordered by the high ground that the village of Meare is built upon . The pond would have extended no further west than the current Westhay to Wedmore road , where a shelf of rock formed a natural boundary . To the north lies the Godney ridge . The eastern extent is harder to determine , and it may have gone as far as the site of the Glastonbury Lake Village . The importance of this industry is illustrated by a series of acrimonious disputes between Glastonbury and the Dean and Chapter of Wells Cathedral . The Abbey required fish on Fridays , fast days and during Lent . Drainage of the surrounding area by monks of Glastonbury Abbey had reduced the size of the lake to 500 acres ( 200 ha ) at the time of the Dissolution of the Monasteries . Meare Pool had disappeared from maps by 1749 . 
 The current fish house was built between 1322 and 1335 when Adam of Sodbury was the Abbot of Glastonbury who also built the Church of St Mary in the village and the Manor House as his summer residence . It may have replaced a previous abbey building . The upper floor was the abode of the chief fisherman when he visited intermittently and the ground floor was used for storing nets and the salting and preparing fish . Some alterations were made , probably in the 15th century . 
 Meare Pool was drained after the Dissolution of the Monasteries and the fish house fell into disrepair . It suffered a fire in the 1880s , which destroyed the roof and gutted the interior . In 1893 some repairs were made to the walls , although the roof was not replaced until work was undertaken by the Ministry of Works in the 1920s , with further conservation being carried out in the 1960s . A piece of timber from the building was subject to dendrochronology testing in an attempt to provide a more specific date for the buildings construction , but the results proved inconclusive . 
 In 1910 the building was inspected by Charles Reed Peers under the Ancient Monuments Protection Act 1900 and taken into state guardianship . The fish house is now in the care of English Heritage . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 The rectangular Blue Lias stone building has a stone tiled roof . It is 12 @.@ 4 metres ( 41 ft ) long and 6 @.@ 6 metres ( 22 ft ) wide . The ground floor had three rooms , one larger than the others which had a fireplace , and a door in the southern wall . The larger room was the hall and linked by arched doorways to the smaller rooms . There were two rooms on the first floor , which were damaged in the fire of 1884 , which also has a small entrance door which was accessed via exterior stone steps which no longer exist . There was also a latrine in a turret which no longer exists . There are small traceried arched windows . 
 = One Foot in the Grave = 
 One Foot in the Grave is a British BBC television sitcom series written by David Renwick . There were six series and seven Christmas specials over an eleven @-@ year period , from early 1990 to late 2000 . The first five series were broadcast between January 1990 and January 1995 . For the next five years , the show appeared only as Christmas specials , followed by one final series in 2000 . 
 The series features the exploits of Victor Meldrew , played by Richard Wilson , and his long @-@ suffering wife , Margaret , played by Annette Crosbie . Wilson initially turned down the part of Meldrew and David Renwick considered Les Dawson for the role , until Wilson changed his mind . The programmes invariably deal with Meldrew 's battle against the problems he creates for himself . Set in a typical suburb in southern England , Victor takes involuntary early retirement . His various efforts to keep himself busy , while encountering various misfortunes and misunderstandings are the themes of the sitcom . Indoor scenes were filmed at BBC Television Centre with most exterior scenes filmed on Tresillian Way in Walkford on the Dorset / Hampshire border . Despite its traditional production , the series subverts its domestic sitcom setting with elements of black humour and surrealism . 
 The series was occasionally the subject of controversy for some of its darker story elements , but nevertheless received a number of awards , including the 1992 BAFTA for Best Comedy . The programme came 80th in the British Film Institute 's 100 Greatest British Television Programmes . The series , originally shown on BBC One , is now available on DVD and is regularly repeated in the United Kingdom on Gold . Four episodes were remade for BBC Radio 2 The series inspired a novel published in 1992 featuring the most memorable moments from the first two series and the first Christmas special . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The series features the exploits and mishaps of irascible pensioner Victor Meldrew , who after being forced to retire from his job as a security guard , finds himself at war with the world and everything in it . Meldrew , cursed with misfortune and always complaining , is married to long @-@ suffering wife Margaret , who is often left exasperated by his many misfortunes . 
 Amongst other witnesses to Victor 's wrath are tactless family friend Jean Warboys , and next @-@ door couple Patrick ( Victor 's nemesis ) and Pippa Trench . Patrick often discovers Victor in inexplicably bizarre or compromising situations , leading him to believe that he is insane . The Meldrews ' neighbour on the other side , overly cheery charity worker Nick Swainey , also adds to Victor 's frustration . 
 Although set in a traditional suburban setting , the show subverts this genre with a strong overtone of black comedy . Series One 's " The Valley of Fear " is an episode which caused controversy , when Victor finds a frozen cat in his freezer . Writer David Renwick also combined farce with elements of tragedy . For example , in the final episode , Victor is killed by a hit @-@ and @-@ run driver , and although there is no explicit reference that Victor and Margaret had children , the episode " Timeless Time " contained a reference to someone named Stuart ; the strong implication being that they once had a son who had died as a child . 
 A number of episodes were also experimental in that they took place entirely in one setting . Such episodes include : Victor , Margaret and Mrs Warboys stuck in a traffic jam ; Victor and Margaret in bed suffering insomnia ; Victor left alone in the house waiting to see if he has to take part in jury service ; Victor and Margaret having a long wait in their solicitor 's waiting room ; and Victor and Margaret trying to cope during a power cut on the hottest night of the year . 
 Despite Margaret 's frequent exasperation with her husband 's antics , the series shows that the couple have a deep affection for one another . This is demonstrated several times throughout the series . 
 = = Characters = = 
 = = = Main characters = = = 
 Victor Meldrew ( Richard Wilson ) – Victor is the main protagonist of the sitcom and finds himself constantly battling against all that life throws at him as he becomes entangled , like the pawn he is , in <unk> plots . Renwick once pointed out in an interview that the name " Victor " was ironic , since he almost always ends up a loser . From being buried alive to being prosecuted for attacking a feisty pit bull terrier with a collection of coconut <unk> , Victor tries to adjust to life after his infamous replacement by a " box " at his place of employment , but to no avail . He believes that everything is going wrong for him all the time , and he has the right to be upset because it is always someone else 's fault . Victor is a tragic comedy character and sympathy is directed towards him as he becomes embroiled in complex misunderstandings , bureaucratic vanity and , at times , sheer bad luck . The audience sees a philosophical ebb to his character , however , along with a degree of optimism . Yet his polite façade collapses when events get the better of him , and a full verbal onslaught is forthcoming . " Victor @-@ isms " include " I do not believe it ! " , " I don 't believe it ! " , " Un @-@ be @-@ <unk> ! " , " What in the name of bloody hell ? " , " In the name of sanity ! " . Despite his grumpy demeanor Victor isn 't totally devoid of compassion — in " Hearts of Darkness " he liberates elderly nursing home residents that were being mistreated by the staff and in " Descent Into The Maelstrom " he calls the incident room number and gives the location of an emotionally disturbed girl that abducted a baby and stole Margaret 's pearl earrings , which resulted in the girl getting picked up by the police . However , because the girl was a friend of Margaret 's and knowing she meant a lot to her , Victor never said anything . Victor has also shown a vast amount of loyalty to Margaret as , throughout their entire 38 years of lifelong marriage together , not once has the thought of infidelity ever occurred to him . In " Rearranging the Dust " , Victor and Margaret recollect the days of their courtship at a party after which Victor says " You were always my first choice " , which leaves Margaret stunned . In another episode , Margaret recounts the time Victor took her to the funfair and they ended up getting stuck in the hall of mirrors for over an hour . Victor had said he didn 't mind as he was happy to stay there and look at all the reflections of her . Victor 's very best act of compassion came in the episode " The Wisdom of the Witch " in which he ends up saving Patrick 's life from his new secretary 's psychopathic boyfriend by forcing Patrick 's would @-@ be murderer , with himself along with him as well , out the window of the house in which they were trapped during a snowstorm . 
 Margaret Meldrew ( née Pellow ) ( Annette Crosbie ) – Victor 's long @-@ suffering , tolerant and kind @-@ hearted wife . Margaret tries to maintain a degree of calmness and to rise above her husband 's antics . However , she is often engulfed in these follies , mishaps and confusion and often vents her anger at Victor . In early episodes , her character acts more as a comic foil to Victor 's misfortunes . Examples include fearfully asking if a cat found frozen in their freezer is definitely dead and mentioning a friend who died of a terminal illness . When Victor reminds her that the woman actually fell from a cliff , Margaret retorts she only did so because " she went to the seaside to convalesce " . 
 In later episodes , Margaret develops into a more complex character . She is shown to be fiercely protective of her marriage to Victor by becoming easily suspicious and jealous . For example , of a Dutch marionette that Victor becomes occupied with repairing in the episode " Hole in the Sky " , eventually leading her to destroy it . In " The Affair of the Hollow Lady " , a greengrocer ( played by Barbara Windsor ) develops a soft spot for Victor and tries to convince Margaret that he has been unfaithful to her . In revenge , Margaret assaults her with a pair of boxing gloves . However , Margaret herself is shown to have contemplated infidelity with a man called Ben whom she met on holiday in the episode " Warm Champagne " . She decides against cheating on Victor . In this episode , she sums up her relationship with Victor by telling Ben , " He 's the most sensitive person I 've ever met , and that 's why I love him and why I constantly want to ram his head through a television screen . " She also began to develop a sense of cynicism , slowly beginning to see the world the way her husband Victor sees it . This is especially evident in " Things aren 't simple anymore " where she voices that the world is " all speed and greed " and that " nobody does anything about anything " . In " Rearranging the Dust " , Margaret recounts the time she first chose Victor at a party and , during a power cut , " shared their bodies " in the garden . After this moment of passion , they went back inside and when the lights came back on Margaret realised that she had " grabbed hold of the wrong person " . Margaret 's demeanor seemed to stem from an incident she had at school when she was a child . When she was five , she had two <unk> and one day when she opened the door to their cage one flew straight out and hit the window killing itself while the other stayed in the cage despite her best efforts to get it to come out . The next day at school her teacher asked the class to write a story about something that had happened to them so Margaret wrote her story about about the <unk> . Her teacher made Margaret read it out loud in front of the whole class which resulted in everyone laughing at her . She then realized that the teacher had done it deliberately just to be cruel to her and knew why the other budgie never wanted to leave its cage . 
 Margaret could be said to have a catchphrase - typically a long , exasperated use of the word " God " , usually when making a realisation about the reasons behind one of Victor 's mishaps . These are occasionally inadvertently aided by herself in some way , such as leaving the phone off the hook or giving permission to someone to enter the Meldrews ' house when she isn 't there . 
 Jean Warboys ( Doreen Mantle ) – Mrs Warboys is a friend of Margaret ( and a rather annoying one in Victor 's eyes ) who attached herself to the Meldrews , accompanying them on many of their exploits . In the early series she was married to ( never seen ) Chris , but eventually he left her for the private detective she had hired when she suspected him of having an affair , and they divorced . 
 She often bears the brunt of Victor 's temper due to muddled misunderstandings and in part due to her aloof nature . One such occasion saw Victor asking her to pick up a suit of his from the dry @-@ cleaners , only for her to return with a gorilla costume . Another occasion saw her persuading Victor to take on a dog whose owner had just died . Victor spent time building a kennel in the garden and when Mrs Warboys arrives with the dog , she forgets to mention that the dog is stuffed - much to Victor and Margaret 's consternation . On another occasion she won a competition where the prize was either to earn £ 500 or to have a life @-@ size waxwork model made of herself , which had to be delivered to the Meldrews ' house ; she chose the waxwork . As it turned out , she hated it as much as Victor and Margaret did , and the waxwork ended up in the dustbin . 
 Despite being friends , she has driven Margaret to distraction on several occasions . Most notably in " Only a Story " , when she stayed with the Meldrews after her flat had been flooded and drove Margaret to the point of distraction with her complaining and laziness . Jean was also shown as a somewhat absent @-@ minded character , as she has a pet cockatiel despite having a lifelong allergy to feathers . She would often bore the Meldrews by showing them her complete collection of holiday pictures at the most unwelcome times . A running joke is her beating Victor at board @-@ games , including Trivial Pursuit and chess , while having a conversation with someone else . Doreen Mantle described her character as " wanting to do the right thing but always finding out that it was the wrong thing " . 
 Patrick Trench ( Angus Deayton ) – Patrick and his wife Pippa live next door to Victor , and often catches Victor engrossed in seemingly preposterous situations , all of which in context are perfectly innocuous . The couple 's relationship with their neighbours begins badly after Victor mistakes Patrick and Pippa for distant relations when they arrive outside with three suitcases – not realising that they are his next @-@ door neighbours , having been on a lengthy holiday from the day Victor and Margaret moved in . Victor subsequently invites the bemused pair to stay ; this and later incidents cause Patrick to suspect that Victor is quite insane , possibly bordering on malicious . 
 However , Patrick 's rift with Victor eventually transforms him into a rather cynical character ( much like Victor ) , and he often responds to him in similarly vindictive ways as a means of trying to settle the score . For example , writing complaints and grievances on post @-@ it notes . This aspect of Patrick 's character came to a head in the episode " The Executioner 's Song " where his face temporarily morphs into that of Victor 's as he looks into a mirror . 
 It is mentioned several times that Patrick would like to have children . After Pippa miscarries and Patrick is , so he claims , rendered infertile by a freak accident ( for which he unfairly blames Victor ) , he adopts a dachshund called Denzil , which Pippa describes as his " baby substitute " . Denzil frequently appears with Patrick through series 3 @-@ 5 . Despite their animosity towards each other , Victor ends up saving Patrick 's life in " The Wisdom of the Witch " . 
 Pippa Trench ( née Croker ) ( Janine <unk> ) – Patrick 's wife sought friendly relations with the Meldrews and , after a while , became good friends with Margaret . The two women usually attempt to get the men to make peace with each other at least once per series . Eventually Patrick proposes that the Trenches move house , but they soon realise that the Meldrew curse has followed them : Victor sent workmen to their home , thinking they were removal men who had initially come to the wrong house . They were in fact from a house clearance firm Margaret had employed to clear her late cousin Ursula 's country mansion . The workmen consequently cleared Patrick and Pippa 's house of their entire furniture and sold it for a mere four hundred and seventy five pounds . Pippa is slightly dim @-@ witted ( once described by Victor as a " gormless twerp " on an answering machine message , unaware she was listening ) – for example , believing Victor had murdered an elderly blind man simply because the victim had been found clutching a double @-@ one domino in his hand , and Victor had two pimples on his nose . 
 New neighbours Derek and Betty McVitie replaced the Trenches for the 1997 special " Endgame " , however this turned out to be their only appearances in the series and they were said to have emigrated by the penultimate episode which caused Nick Swainey to leap straight in with the offer for their old house . Series six saw the Trenches return as prominent characters , albeit living in a house some distance from the Meldrews . Despite appearing in five out of six series and three Christmas specials , neither of the Trenches ever share a scene with Mrs Warboys . 
 Nick Swainey ( Owen Brenman ) – The excessively cheerful and often oblivious Mr Swainey appeared in the first episode , encouraging Victor to join his <unk> ' trip to Eastbourne , and being greeted with Victor 's trademark abuse . When the Meldrews move house , they discover he is their neighbour , living on the other side of the Meldrews from the Trenches . He remains continuously optimistic ; even his being told to " piss off " by Victor is laughed off . Despite this run @-@ in he later befriends Victor , and they frequently chat in their gardens , where Victor is often surprised by Mr Swainey 's activities , ranging from archery and preparing amateur dramatics props , to bizarre games he arranges for his bedridden senile mother , whom the audience never actually see . Despite his cheery demeanour , he does occasionally drop his guard , once displaying apparent depression at being nothing more than " an overgrown boy @-@ scout " . Following his mother 's death , he moved house near the end of the series , but only went as far as the Trenches ' / McVitie 's old house , claiming he 'd always wanted to live in an " end house , without leaving the area " . This took Victor by surprise ; he did not learn where Mr Swainey was moving to until , while reminiscing in the garden about his departure , Mr Swainey suddenly appeared from the other side . 
 = = = Other characters = = = 
 Ronnie and Mildred ( Gordon Peters and Barbara Ashcroft ) – Ronnie and Mildred were a constantly cheerful , but incredibly boring , couple who provided yet another annoyance to the Meldrews , who dreaded any upcoming visits to them ; Victor once said that he had hoped they were both dead . In " The Worst Horror of All " , when the couple attempted a surprise visit , the Meldrews hid in their house to give the impression they were away on holiday , and then took the phone off the hook for several days afterwards , though these efforts to avoid them were in vain . They are referenced a number of times in the series for giving the Meldrews bizarre and always unwanted presents that are seldom opened , usually involving a garish photograph of themselves . In the final series , however it was clear that their cheerfulness was a façade and , in a particularly dark scene , Mildred hanged herself " during a game of Happy Families " . The shot of Mildred 's feet dangling outside the window is usually cut from pre @-@ watershed screenings . 
 Alfred Meldrew ( Richard Pearson ) - Victor 's absent @-@ minded brother , who lives in New Zealand . During the episode " The Broken Reflection " , he comes to visit after 25 years , to the disdain of Victor . Alfred is an eccentric character , often walking around with his hat on fire , and bringing over his and Victor 's great @-@ grandfather 's skull . He is a clumsy character too , mistaking the table @-@ cloth for a napkin and dropping the contents over the floor when he stands up , and breaking a mirror in the middle of the night after mistaking his own reflection for a burglar . Victor starts to warm to Alfred towards the end of his visit , but Alfred leaves early the next day after finding an unpleasant message about him that Victor had accidentally recorded on a dictaphone . He is not seen again , but keeps in touch with the Meldrews , as Victor is seen looking at some photographs Alfred had sent over in " The Trial " . 
 Cousin Wilfred ( John Rutland ) – Mrs. Warboys ' cousin , Wilfred , appeared twice in the series , and was considered to be a fairly boring middle @-@ aged man . In the final series , the effects of a stroke rendered him mute , and forced him to " speak " with the aid of an electronic voice generator . His poor typing on the generator led to several misunderstandings , such as asking Victor for a " bra of soup " ( as opposed to a " bar of soap " ) and describing a visit to his " brothel " ( as opposed to " brother " ) . 
 Great Aunt Joyce and Uncle Dick - Unseen characters , they are often mentioned by Victor and Margaret , as an aging and grim couple and Victor and Margaret dread having anything to do with them . Great Aunt Joyce is mentioned as having a glass eye and has the habit of knitting bizarre items ( such as six @-@ fingered gloves ) for Victor . Uncle Dick has a wooden arm ; in the final Comic Relief ( 2001 ) episode , it transpires that a nurse had mistakenly placed a drip in the false arm for 18 hours after a trip to hospital after trying to remove a kidney stone with a wire coat hanger . 
 Mimsy <unk> - Another unseen character , she is the local agony aunt , whom many of the characters turn to for advice . In the episode " The Secret of the Seven Sorcerers " , Patrick is heard talking to her on the radio , seeking her advice on how to cope when Victor and Margaret invite him and Pippa around to dinner . 
 Martin Trout ( Peter Cook ) - A paparazzo in " One Foot in the Algarve " . He manages to take a number of compromising photographs , involving a high @-@ ranking politician . Trout compares the potential impact of the photos to the Profumo <unk> his way to sell the images , he loses the roll of film whilst arguing at a phone box with the Meldrews and subsequently pursues them across the Algarve to retrieve it . He suffers a number of disasters both related and unrelated to Victor and Margaret 's own misfortunes , only to find that the film had actually fallen into the lining of his jacket and had been with him for much of his journey . He lost it in the door of the Meldrews ' car . Retrieving the roll after a brief spell in hospital , Trout attempts to leave the Algarve in a taxi but is involved in a car crash . 
 = = Production = = 
 The production of the show was in a conventional sitcom format , with episodes taped live in front of a studio audience , interposed with pre @-@ filmed location material . 
 Most of the first five series of One Foot in the Grave were produced and directed by Susan Belbin , the exceptions being " Love and Death , " which was partly directed by veteran sitcom director Sydney Lotterby , and " <unk> , " for which Gareth Gwenlan ( who in fact had originally commissioned the series in 1989 ) stepped in to direct some sequences after Belbin was taken ill . Belbin retired due to ill health afterwards , and the final series was produced by Jonathan P. Llewellyn and directed by Christine Gernon . Wilson and Renwick felt that Gernon 's experience of working with Belbin on earlier series of One Foot as a production secretary and assistant , as well as other shows , meant that her style was similar to Belbin 's , aiding the transition between directors . 
 One Foot used Bournemouth to film some exterior sequences because of its favourable climate , easy access to London , and economical benefits relative to filming in the capital . After the first series was filmed , the house — near Pokesdown , Bournemouth — which had been used for the Meldrews ' house in location sequences , changed hands and the new owners demanded nearly treble the usage fees that the previous owners had asked for . Rather than agree to this , the production team decided to find a new house , and the first episode of the second series was rewritten to have the Meldrews ' house destroyed in a fire ( Filmed on waste ground in Northcote Road , <unk> ) . This also gave the opportunity for a new interior set to be designed , as Belbin had been unhappy with the original set designed for the series , which she felt was too restrictive to shoot in . 
 Since series two , the exterior scenes of the Meldrew 's home were filmed at Tresillian Way , Walkford , near New Milton in Hampshire . These later series make extensive use of specific street and garden locations in most episodes , particularly for scenes involving the Meldrew 's neighbours . Most outside locations were filmed in and around Bournemouth and Christchurch . These include Richmond Hill , Undercliff Drive and Boscombe Pier , Bournemouth Town Hall , Lansdowne College , Christchurch Hospital and the former Royal Victoria Hospital ( Boscombe ) . Later episodes , such as " Hearts of Darkness " , were filmed entirely on location . Victor 's death by a hit and run driver in the final episode was filmed at Shawford railway station , Hampshire . Fans left floral tributes at the site . 
 Over the show 's history , it featured a number of notable comic actors in one @-@ off roles . These included Susie Blake , John Bird , Tim Brooke @-@ Taylor , Peter Cook , Diana Coupland , Phil Daniels , Edward de Souza , Hannah Gordon , Georgina Hale , Jimmy Jewel , Rula Lenska , Stephen Lewis , Brian Murphy , Christopher Ryan , Barbara Windsor and Ray Winstone . Two of Angus Deayton 's former Radio Active and <unk> co @-@ stars , Geoffrey Perkins and Michael Fenton Stevens were cast , in separate episodes , as respectively the brother and brother @-@ in @-@ law of Deayton 's character . A few then little @-@ known actors also appeared in one @-@ off roles before going on to greater fame , including Lucy Davis , Joanna Scanlan , Eamonn Walker and Arabella Weir . 
 The show was produced with an aspect ratio of 4 : 3 from 1990 @-@ 1997 . Three years later , the show returned to television for its final series , which was produced with an aspect ratio of 16 : 9 . All episodes are of Standard Definition 576i . 
 = = Music = = 
 The One Foot in the Grave theme song was written , composed and sung by Eric Idle . A longer version was produced for the special " One Foot in the Algarve " , released as a single with five remixes and a karaoke version in November 1994 . Idle included a live version of the song on his album Eric Idle Sings Monty Python . It is <unk> by a similar adaptation of " Bread of Heaven " to that used in the episode " The Beast in the Cage " by disgruntled car mechanics . The music on the TV series is accompanied at the beginning and end of each episode by a tortoise . The series also made extensive use of incidental music , composed by Ed Welch , which often hinted at a particular genre to fit the mood of the scenes , frequently incorporating well @-@ known pieces of music such as " God Rest You Merry , Gentlemen " or Intermezzo from Jean Sibelius ' Karelia Suite . In the Christmas special " Endgame " during Margaret 's alleged death scene , a compilation of clips from past episodes are accompanied by the song " River Runs Deep " performed by J. J. Cale . The final episode ended with a montage of some of the mishaps Victor encountered , which were mentioned in the episode – backed by " End of the Line " by the Traveling Wilburys . 
 = = Awards = = 
 The programme received a number of prestigious awards . In 1992 , it won a BAFTA as Best Comedy ( Programme or Series ) . During its ten @-@ year run , the series was nominated a further six times . Richard Wilson also won Best Light Entertainment Performance in 1992 and 1994 , and Annette Crosbie was nominated for the same award in 1994 . 
 The series also won the Best Television Sitcom in 1992 from the Royal Television Society and the British Comedy Award for Best Sitcom in 1992 , 1995 and 2001 . 
 In 2004 , One Foot in the Grave came tenth in a BBC poll to find " Britain 's Best Sitcom " with 31 @,@ 410 votes . The programme also came 80th in the British Film Institute 's 100 Greatest British Television Programmes 
 = = Controversies = = 
 A number of complaints were made during the series ' run for its depiction of animal deaths . For example , in the episode " The Valley of Fear " , a dead cat is found in the Meldrews ' freezer ; in another , a tortoise is roasted in a brazier . However , this was later cited as a positive feature of the programme 's daring scripts in Britain 's Best Sitcom by its advocate Rowland <unk> . The programme was censured , however , for a scene in the episode " Hearts of Darkness " in which an elderly resident is abused in an old people 's home , and following complaints , the scene was slightly cut when the episode was repeated . In the DVD commentary for the episode , David Renwick stated his continued opposition to the cuts . Another controversial scene in the episode " Tales of Terror " saw the Meldrews visit Ronnie and Mildred on the understanding that Mildred had gone upstairs during a game of Happy Families and not returned ; Ronnie then shows her feet hanging outside of the window , revealing that she has committed suicide . The Broadcasting Standards Commission received complaints about this scene . 
 When the final episode , " Things Aren 't Simple Any More " originally aired on 20 November 2000 at 9pm , it coincided with the broadcast of the first jackpot winner in the UK version of Who Wants to Be a Millionaire ? , which had been filmed the Sunday before the broadcast . ITV was accused of engineering this in order to damage the final episode 's expected high ratings , but was later cleared by the Independent Television Commission . 
 = = Cultural impact = = 
 Due to the series ' popularity , people who constantly complain and are irritated by minor things are often compared to Victor Meldrew by the British media . Renwick disputes this usage however , claiming that Victor 's reactions are entirely in proportion to the things that happen to him . 
 Renwick integrated some of the plots and dialogue from the series into a novel , which was first published by BBC Books in 1992 . Renwick also adapted four episodes for BBC Radio 2 , which first aired between 21 January 1995 and 11 February 1995 . The episodes are " Alive and Buried " , " In Luton Airport , No One Can Hear You Scream " , " Timeless Time " and " The Beast in the Cage " . They are regularly repeated on the digital speech station BBC Radio 4 Extra and are available on audio CD . 
 Wilson dislikes saying his character 's catchphrase ( " I don 't believe it ! " ) and only performs the line for charity events for a small fee . This became a joke in the actor 's guest appearance as himself in the Father Ted episode " The Mainland " , where Ted annoys him by constantly repeating his catchphrase . The situation was conceived when Father Ted writers Graham Linehan and Arthur Mathews sat behind Wilson at a performance of Le Cirque du Soleil at the Royal Albert Hall . They considered how " tasteless and wrong " it would be to lean forward to him every time that an acrobat did a stunt and yell the catchphrase , and then they realised that that 's exactly what their fictional priests would do . This was also played upon when Wilson made a guest appearance on the comedy TV quiz show Shooting Stars , in which Vic Reeves and Bob Mortimer purposefully misquoted his catchphrase by referring to him as " Richard ' I don 't believe you ' Wilson " . 
 = = VHS and DVD releases = = 
 All six series and specials were initially available on BBC Worldwide VHS video tapes during the late 1990s and early 2000s . The Comic Relief Shorts from 1993 and 2001 have not been released on DVD . A One Foot in the Grave Very Best Of DVD featuring five of the greatest episodes was released on 22 October 2001 in Region 2 . Then on 8 July 2004 , a One Foot in the Grave Very Best Of was also released in Region 4 . Each series was gradually released on DVD in Region 2 between 2004 and 2006 , with a complete series 1 @-@ 6 box set towards the end of 2006 . A slimmer series 1 @-@ 6 box set was released in 2010 in Region 2 . 
 = = Foreign versions = = 
 German version was made of the series in 1996 @-@ 97 , Mit einem Bein im Grab , directed by Thomas <unk> and Frank Strecker . It starred Heinz Schubert as " Viktor <unk> " , Brigitte <unk> as " Margret <unk> " and <unk> Hermann as " Lisbeth <unk> " . 
 Swedish version , En fot i graven was made in 2001 . Produced by commercial television channel TV4 , it starred Gösta Ekman as " Victor <unk> " and Lena Söderblom as his wife . A total of 12 episodes were broadcast . 
 In 2006 a Dutch version was made under the title Met één been in het <unk> . It starred Serge Henri Valcke as Victor Monter . The series was directed by Zdenek Kraus , who had directed the highly successful series <unk> Was <unk> Heel <unk> and was adapted for Dutch television by Ger Apeldoorn and Harm Edens , who also wrote Het <unk> in Huis . The series only lasted one season . 
 The American sitcom Cosby starring Bill Cosby , which ran on CBS from 1996 to 2000 , was loosely based on this series . 
 = The White Stripes = 
 The White Stripes were an American rock duo , formed in 1997 in Detroit , Michigan . The group consisted of the couple , married at the time , Jack White ( songwriter , vocals , guitar , bass and keyboards ) and Meg White ( drums and occasional vocals ) . After releasing several singles and three albums within the Detroit music scene , the White Stripes rose to prominence in 2002 , as part of the garage rock revival scene . Their successful and critically acclaimed albums White Blood Cells and Elephant drew attention from a large variety of media outlets in the United States and the United Kingdom , with the single " Seven Nation Army " and its now @-@ iconic guitar line becoming a huge hit . The band recorded two more albums , Get Behind Me Satan in 2005 and Icky Thump in 2007 , and dissolved in 2011 after a lengthy hiatus from performing and recording . 
 The White Stripes used a low @-@ fidelity approach to writing and recording . Their music featured a melding of garage rock and blues influences and a raw simplicity of composition , arrangement , and performance . The duo was also noted for their fashion and design aesthetic which featured a simple color scheme of red , white , and black — which was used on every album and single cover the band released — as well as the band 's fascination with the number three . The band 's discography consists of six studio albums , one live album , two extended plays ( EP ) , one concert film , one tour documentary , twenty @-@ six singles , and fourteen music videos . Their last three albums each won the Grammy Award for Best Alternative Music Album . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early history = = = 
 As a senior in high school , Jack Gillis ( as he was then known ) , met Megan White at the Memphis Smoke — the restaurant where she worked and where he would read his poetry at " open mic " nights . The two became friends , and began to frequent the coffee shops , local music venues , and record stores of the area . By this time , Gillis was already playing drums with musician friends , including his upholstery apprenticeship mentor , Brian Muldoon . However , in 1994 , he got his first professional job as the drummer for the Detroit <unk> band Goober & the Peas . 
 After a courtship , Gillis and White got married on September 21 , 1996 ; contrary to convention , he took his wife 's surname . Shortly after , Goober and the Peas broke up , but Jack continued to play in other bands , such as the garage punk band The Go ( he played lead guitar on their 1999 album Whatcha Doin ' ) , The <unk> , and Two @-@ Star Tabernacle . In 1997 — allegedly on Bastille Day — Meg first began to learn to play the drums . In Jack 's words , " When she started to play drums with me , just on a lark , it felt liberating and refreshing . There was something in it that opened me up . " The couple then became a band and , while they considered calling themselves " Bazooka " and " Soda Powder " , they settled on the name " The White Stripes " . Jack explained the band name 's origin this way : 
 Meg loves <unk> , and we were going to call ourselves The Peppermints . But since our last name was White , we decided to call it " The White Stripes " . It revolved around this childish idea , the ideas kids have — because they are so much better than adult ideas , right ? " 
 From the beginning , they established certain motifs : publicly presenting themselves as brother and sister , outfitting their production in only black , red , and white , and heavily using the number " three " . White has explained that they used these colors to distract from the fact that they were young , white musicians playing " black music " . They were also noted for their lack of a bass player , and their general refusal to be interviewed separately . 
 The White Stripes had their first live performance on August 14 , 1997 , at the Gold Dollar bar in Detroit . They began their career as part of the Michigan underground garage rock scene , playing with local bands such as The <unk> , The Dirtbombs , The Gories , and Rocket 455 . In 1998 , Dave Buick — owner of an independent , Detroit @-@ based , garage @-@ punk label called Italy Records — approached the band at a bar and asked if they would like to record a single . Jack initially declined , believing it would be too expensive , but he eventually reconsidered when he realized that Buick was offering to pay for it . Their debut single , " Let 's Shake Hands , " was released on vinyl in February 1998 with an initial pressing of 1 @,@ 000 copies . This was followed in October 1998 by the single " Lafayette Blues " which , again , was only released on vinyl with 1 @,@ 000 copies . 
 = = = The White Stripes ( 1999 ) = = = 
 In 1999 , the White Stripes signed with the label Sympathy for the Record Industry . In March 1999 , they released the single " The Big Three Killed My Baby " , followed by their debut album , The White Stripes , which was released on June 15 , 1999 . 
 The self @-@ titled debut was produced by Jack and engineered by Jim Diamond at his Ghetto Recorders studio in Detroit . The album was dedicated to the seminal Mississippi Delta blues musician , Son House — an artist who greatly influenced Jack . The track " Cannon " from The White Stripes contains part of an a cappella version , as performed by House , of the traditional American gospel blues song " John the Revelator " . The White Stripes also covered House 's song " Death Letter " on their follow @-@ up album De Stijl . 
 Looking back on their debut during a 2003 interview with Guitar Player , Jack said , " I still feel we 've never topped our first album . It 's the most raw , the most powerful , and the most Detroit @-@ sounding record we 've made . " 
 Allmusic said of the album : 
 Jack White 's voice is a singular , evocative combination of punk , metal , blues , and backwoods while his guitar work is grand and banging with just enough lyrical touches of slide and subtle solo work ... Meg White balances out the fretwork and the fretting with methodical , spare , and booming cymbal , bass drum , and snare ... All D.I.Y. punk @-@ country @-@ blues @-@ metal singer / songwriting duos should sound this good . 
 At the end of 1999 , the White Stripes released " Hand Springs " as a 7 " split single with fellow Detroit band The Dirtbombs on the B @-@ side . 2 @,@ 000 copies came free with the pinball fanzine <unk> . The record is currently — like the majority of vinyl records by the White Stripes — out of print and difficult to find . 
 = = = De Stijl ( 2000 ) = = = 
 the White Stripes ' second album , De Stijl ( Dutch for " The Style " ) , was released on the Sympathy for the Record Industry label on June 20 , 2000 . Considered a cult classic and self @-@ recorded on an 8 @-@ track analog tape in Jack 's living room , De Stijl displays the simplicity of the band 's blues and " scuzzy garage rock " fusion prior to their breakthrough success . 
 The album title derives from the Dutch art movement of the same name ; common elements of the De Stijl aesthetic are demonstrated on the album cover , which sets the band members against an abstract background of rectangles and lines in red , black and white . The White Stripes have cited the minimalist and deconstructionist aspects of De Stijl design as a source of inspiration for their own musical image and presentation . The album was dedicated to furniture designer and architect Gerrit Rietveld of the De Stijl movement , as well as to the influential Georgia bluesman Blind Willie McTell . 
 Party of Special Things to Do was released as a 7 " on Sub @-@ Pop in December 2000 . It comprised three songs originally performed by Captain Beefheart , an experimental blues rock musician . 
 De Stijl eventually reached number 38 on Billboard Magazine 's Independent Albums chart in 2002 , around the time the White Stripes ' popularity began establishing itself . One New York Times critic at the time said that the Stripes typified " what many hip rock fans consider real music . " The song " Why Can 't You Be <unk> To Me " was used in The Simpsons episode " Judge Me Tender " . 
 = = = White Blood Cells ( 2001 ) = = = 
 The White Stripes ' third album , White Blood Cells , was released on July 3 , 2001 on Sympathy for the Record Industry . The band enjoyed its first significant success the following year with the major label re @-@ release of the album on V2 Records . Its stripped @-@ down garage rock sound drew critical acclaim in the UK , and in the US soon afterward , making the White Stripes one of the most acclaimed bands of 2002 . 
 Several outlets praised their " back to basics " approach , with Daily Mirror calling them " the greatest band since The Sex Pistols . " In 2002 , Q magazine listed the White Stripes as one of " 50 Bands to See Before You Die " . After their first appearance on network TV ( a live set on The Late Late Show With Craig Kilborn ) , Joe Hagan of the New York Times declared , " They have made rock rock again by returning to its origins as a simple , primitive sound full of unfettered zeal . " White Blood Cells peaked at number 61 on the Billboard 200 , reaching Gold record status by selling over 500 @,@ 000 albums . It reached number 55 in the United Kingdom , being bolstered in both countries by the single " Fell in Love with a Girl " and its accompanying Lego @-@ animation music video directed by Michel Gondry . The video won three awards at the 2002 MTV Video Music Awards : Breakthrough Video , Best Special Effects , and Best Editing , and the band played the song live at the event . It was also nominated for Video of the Year , but fell short of winning . Stylus Magazine rated White Blood Cells as the fourteenth greatest album of 2000 – 2005 , while Pitchfork Media ranked it eighth on their list of the top 100 albums from 2000 – 2004 . 
 In 2002 , George Roca produced and directed a concert film about the band titled Nobody Knows How to Talk to Children . It chronicles the White Stripes ' four @-@ night stand at New York City 's Bowery Ballroom in 2002 , and contains live performances and behind @-@ the @-@ scenes footage . Its 2004 release was suppressed by the band 's management , however , after they discovered that Roca had been showing it at the Seattle Film Festival without permission . According to the band , the film was " not up to the standards our fans have come to expect " ; even so , it remains a highly prized bootleg . 
 = = = Elephant ( 2003 ) = = = 
 The White Stripes ' fourth album , Elephant , was released in 2003 on V2 . It marked the band 's major label debut and was their first UK chart @-@ topping album , as well as their first US Top 10 album . The album eventually reached double platinum certification in Britain , and platinum certification in the United States . 
 Elephant was recorded in 2002 over the span of two weeks with British recording engineer Liam Watson at his Toe Rag Studios in London . Jack self @-@ produced the album with antiquated equipment , including a duct @-@ taped 8 @-@ track tape machine and pre @-@ 1960s recording gear . 
 Elephant garnered much critical acclaim upon its release . It received a perfect 5 out of 5 star rating from Rolling Stone magazine , and enjoys a near @-@ unanimous 92 % positive rating on Metacritic . Despite the band 's increased fame , Allmusic believed the album " sounds even more pissed @-@ off , paranoid , and stunning than its predecessor ... Darker and more difficult than White Blood Cells . " Elephant was additionally notable for premiering Jack 's first formal use of guitar soloing , and Rolling Stone placed him at No. 17 on its list of " 100 Greatest Guitarists of All Time " . That same year , Elephant was ranked number 390 on the magazine 's list of the " 500 Greatest Albums of All Time " . In 2009 , the album came in at No. 18 in NME 's " Top 100 Greatest Albums of the decade " . 
 The album 's first single , " Seven Nation Army " , was the band 's most successful . Its success was followed with a cover of Burt Bacharach 's " I Just Don 't Know What to Do with Myself " . The album 's third single was the successful " The Hardest Button to Button " . " There 's No Home for You Here " was the fourth single . In 2004 , the album won a Grammy for Best Alternative Music Album , while " Seven Nation Army " won a Grammy for Best Rock Song . 
 = = = Get Behind Me Satan ( 2005 ) = = = 
 In 2005 , Jack began working on songs for the band 's next album at his home . He played with different techniques than in past albums , trading in his electric guitar for an acoustic on all but a few of tracks , as his trademark riff @-@ based lead guitar style is overtaken by a predominantly rhythmic approach . The White Stripes ' fifth album , Get Behind Me Satan , was released in 2005 on the V2 label . The title is an allusion to a Biblical quotation Jesus made to the Apostle Simon Peter from the Gospel of Matthew 16 : 23 of the New Testament ( in the King James Version , the quotation is slightly different : " Get thee behind me , Satan " ) . Jack has said it has a double meaning : that Satan should physically be behind him or that Satan should support him . Another theory about this title is that Jack and Meg White read James Joyce 's story collection " Dubliners " ( published 1914 ) and used a line from the final story , " The Dead , " to title this album . 
 With its reliance on piano @-@ driven melodies and experimentation with marimba on " The Nurse " and " Forever For Her ( Is Over For Me ) " , Get Behind Me Satan didn 't feature the explicit blues and punk styles that dominated earlier White Stripes albums . However , despite this , the band was critically lauded for their " fresh , arty reinterpretations of their classic inspirations . " It has garnered positive reactions from fans , as well as critical acclaim . Rolling Stone ranked it the third best album of the year and it received the Grammy for Best Alternative Music Album in 2006 . 
 Three singles were released from the album , the first being " Blue Orchid " , a popular song on satellite radio and some FM stations . The second and third singles were " My Doorbell " and " The Denial Twist " , respectively , and music videos were made for each of the three singles . " My Doorbell " was nominated for Best Pop Performance by a Duo or Group with Vocal . 
 The White Stripes postponed the Japanese leg of their world tour after Jack strained his vocal cords , with doctors recommending that Jack not sing or talk for two weeks . After a full recovery , he returned to the stage in Auckland , New Zealand to headline the Big Day Out tour . 
 The White Stripes released a cover version of Tegan and Sara 's song " Walking with a Ghost " on iTunes in November 2005 . The song was later released in December as the Walking with a Ghost EP featuring four other live tracks . 
 In October 2006 , it was announced on the official White Stripes website that there would be an album of avant @-@ garde orchestral recordings consisting of past music written by Jack called Aluminium . The album was made available for pre @-@ order on November 6 , 2006 to great demand from the band 's fans ; the LP version of the project sold out in a little under a day . The project was conceived by Richard Russell , founder of XL Recordings , who co @-@ produced the album with Joby Talbot . It was recorded between August 2005 and February 2006 at Intimate Studios in Wapping , London using an orchestra . Before the album went out of print , it was available exclusively through the Aluminium website in a numbered limited edition of 3 @,@ 333 CDs with 999 LPs . 
 On January 12 , 2007 , V2 Records announced that , due to being under the process of reconstruction , it would no longer release new White Stripes material , leaving the band without a label . However , as the band 's contract with V2 had already expired , on February 12 , 2007 , it was confirmed that the band had signed a single album deal with Warner Bros. Records . 
 = = = Icky Thump ( 2007 ) = = = 
 The White Stripes ' sixth album , Icky Thump , was released on June 19 , 2007 on Warner Bros. Records . This was their first record with Warner Bros. , since V2 closed in 2006 , and it was released on a one @-@ album contract . Icky Thump entered the UK Albums Chart at number one , and debuted at number two on the Billboard 200 with 223 @,@ 000 copies sold . By late July , Icky Thump was certified gold in the United States . As of March 8 , 2008 , the album has sold 725 @,@ 125 copies in the US . On February 10 , 2008 , the album won a Grammy for Best Alternative Music Album . 
 Following the well @-@ received Get Behind Me Satan , Icky Thump marked a return to the punk , garage rock and blues influences for which the band is known . It was recorded at Nashville 's Blackbird Studio and took almost three weeks to record — the longest of any White Stripes album . It would also be their first album with a title track . The album 's release came on the heels of a series of concerts in Europe and one in North America at Bonnaroo . 
 Prior to the album 's release , three tracks were previewed to NME : " Icky Thump " , " You Don 't Know What Love Is ( You Just Do as You 're Told ) " and " Conquest " . NME described the tracks as " an experimental , heavy sounding 70s riff , " " a strong , melodic love song " and " an unexpected mix of big guitars and a bold horn section , " respectively . On the US Billboard Charts dated May 12 , 2007 , " Icky Thump " — the first single — became the band 's first Top 40 single , charting at No. 26 , and later charted at No. 2 in the UK charts . 
 On April 25 , 2007 , the duo announced that they would embark on a tour of Canada performing in all 10 provinces , plus Yukon , Nunavut and Northwest Territories . In the words of Jack : " Having never done a tour of Canada , Meg and I thought it was high time to go whole hog . We want to take this tour to the far reaches of the Canadian landscape . From the ocean to the permafrost . The best way for us to do that is ensure that we perform in every province and territory in the country , from the Yukon to Prince Edward Island . Another special moment of this tour is the show which will occur in Glace Bay , Nova Scotia on July 14 , The White Stripes ' Tenth Anniversary . " Canadian fiddler Ashley MacIsaac opened for the band at the Glace Bay show ; earlier in 2007 , MacIsaac and Jack had discovered that they were distantly related . It was also at this time that White learned he was related to Canadian fiddle player Natalie <unk> . 
 On June 24 , 2007 , just a few hours before their concert at Deer Lake Park , the White Stripes kicked off their cross @-@ Canada tour by playing a 40 @-@ minute set for a group of 30 kids at the Creekside Youth Centre in Burnaby . The Canadian tour was also marked by concerts in small markets , such as Glace Bay , Whitehorse and Iqaluit , as well as by frequent " secret shows " publicized mainly by posts on The Little Room , a White Stripes fan messageboard . Gigs included performances at a bowling alley in Saskatoon , a youth center in Edmonton , a Winnipeg Transit bus and The Forks park in Winnipeg , a park in Whitehorse , the YMCA in downtown Toronto , the Arva Flour Mill in Arva , Ontario , <unk> on Salter ( a pool hall ) in Halifax , Nova Scotia , and a famous one @-@ note show on George Street in St. John 's , Newfoundland . They played a full show later that night at the Mile One Centre in downtown St. John 's . Video clips from several of the secret shows have been posted to YouTube . As well , the band filmed its video for " You Don 't Know What Love Is ( You Just Do as You 're Told ) " in Iqaluit . 
 After the conclusion of the Canadian dates , they embarked on a brief U.S. leg of their tour , which was to be followed by a break before more shows in the fall . But before their last show — in Southaven , Mississippi — Ben Blackwell ( Jack 's nephew and the group 's archivist ) says that Meg approached him and said , " This is the last White Stripes show " . He asked if she meant of the tour , but she responded , " No . I think this is the last show , period . " On September 11 , 2007 , the band announced the cancellation of 18 tour dates due to Meg 's struggle with acute anxiety . A few days later , the duo cancelled the remainder of their 2007 UK tour dates as well . 
 = = = Later work and breakup ( 2008 – 2011 ) = = = 
 While on hiatus , Jack formed a group called The Dead Weather ( featuring himself , Jack Lawrence , Dean Fertita , and Alison Mosshart ) , although he insisted that the White Stripes remained his top priority . The White Stripes performed live for the first time since September 2007 on the final episode of Late Night with Conan O 'Brien on February 20 , 2009 , where they performed an alternate version of " We 're Going to Be Friends " . 
 In 2009 he reported that the White Stripes were working on their seventh album . In an article dated May 6 , 2009 with <unk> , Jack mentioned recording songs with Meg before the Conan gig had taken place , saying , " We had recorded a couple of songs at the new studio . " About a new White Stripes album , Jack said , " It won 't be too far off . Maybe next year . " Jack also explained Meg 's acute anxiety during the Stripes ' last tour , saying , " I just came from a Raconteurs tour and went right into that , so I was already full @-@ speed . Meg had come from a dead @-@ halt for a year and went right back into that madness . Meg is a very shy girl , a very quiet and shy person . To go full @-@ speed from a dead @-@ halt is overwhelming , and we had to take a break . " 
 A concert film , Under Great White Northern Lights premiered at the Toronto International Film Festival on September 18 , 2009 . The film , directed by Emmett Malloy , documents the band 's summer 2007 tour across Canada and contains live concert and off @-@ stage footage . Jack and Meg White appeared at the premiere and made a short speech before the movie started about their love of Canada and why they chose to debut their movie in Toronto . The tour was in support of the album Icky Thump , and they performed in every province . Jack conceived the idea of touring Canada after learning that Scottish relatives on his father 's side had lived for a few generations in Nova Scotia before relocating to Detroit to work in the car factories . Additionally , their 10th anniversary occurred during the tour on the day of their show in Glace Bay , Nova Scotia , and in this shot , Jack and Meg are dancing at the conclusion of the concert . The film was directed by a friend of the duo , Emmett Malloy . A second feature , titled Under Nova Scotian Lights , was prepared for the DVD release . 
 In an interview with Self Titled , Jack alluded to the creation of a White Stripes film to be released later in 2009 . 
 In an interview with <unk> Jack claimed that working with the White Stripes would be " strange " . " It would definitely be strange to go into the White Stripes again and have to rethink my game , " adding " But that would be the best thing about it , because it would be a whole new White Stripes . " 
 In November 2010 , the White Stripes contributed a previously released cover version of the song " Rated X " to the compilation album Coal Miner 's Daughter : A Tribute To Loretta Lynn . 
 In late 2010 , the White Stripes reissued their first three albums on Third Man Records on a 180 @-@ gram vinyl along with 500 limited edition , " split @-@ colored " records to accompany it . Jack hinted at a possible White Stripes reunion in a 2010 interview with Vanity Fair . He said , " We thought we 'd do a lot of things that we 'd never done : a full tour of Canada , a documentary , coffee @-@ table book , live album , a boxed set ... Now that we 've gotten a lot of that out of our system , Meg and I can get back in the studio and start fresh . " 
 On February 2 , 2011 , the duo announced that they had officially ceased recording and performing music as the White Stripes . The announcement specifically denied any artistic differences or health issues , but cited " a myriad of reasons ... mostly to preserve what is beautiful and special about the band " . 
 In a 2014 interview , Jack said that Meg 's lack of enthusiasm for the project contributed to the band 's breakup . White told Rolling Stone that " she viewed me that way of ' Oh , big deal , you did it , so what ? ' Almost every single moment of the White Stripes was like that . We 'd be working in the studio and something amazing would happen : I 'm like , ' Damn , we just broke into a new world right there ! ' And Meg 's sitting in silence . " 
 = = Music = = 
 = = = Musical style = = = 
 The musical and stylistic elements of the White Stripes were grounded and rooted in blues , garage rock , and early punk . They emerged from Detroit 's active garage rock revival scene of the late 1990s and early 2000s . Their contemporaries included bands such as The Von Bondies , The Dirtbombs , The Detroit Cobras , and other bands that Jack included on a compilation album called Sympathetic Sounds of Detroit , which was recorded in his living room . 
 Specifically , the band 's most prominent influences include blues musicians such as Son House , Blind Willie McTell and Robert Johnson , garage rock bands such as The Gories and The Sonics , the Detroit protopunk sound of bands like the MC5 and The Stooges , in addition to groups like The Cramps , The Velvet Underground , and the early Los Angeles punk blues band The Gun Club . Jack has stated on numerous occasions that the blues is the dominant influence on his songwriting and the roots of the band 's music , stating that he feels it is so sacred that playing it does not do it justice . Of The Gun Club 's music in particular , Jack said , " ' Sex Beat ' , ' She 's Like Heroin To Me ' , and ' For The Love Of Ivy ' ... why are these songs not taught in schools ? " Heavy blues rock bands such as the Rolling Stones and AC / DC have also influenced the band , particularly Led Zeppelin , as Jack has claimed that he " can 't trust anybody who doesn 't like Led Zeppelin . " 
 Traditional country music such as Hank Williams and Loretta Lynn , rockabilly acts like the Flat Duo Jets , Wanda Jackson and Gene Vincent , the surf rock of Dick Dale , and folk music like Lead Belly and Bob Dylan have also influenced the band 's sound . Meg has said one of her all @-@ time favorite musicians is Bob Dylan ; Jack has performed live with him , and has claimed " I 've got three fathers — my biological dad , God and Bob Dylan " . 
 In his introduction in the documentary film , It Might Get Loud , Jack showcases his minimalist style and ingenuity by constructing a rudimentary guitar in a pastoral setting . The " guitar " was built out of a plank of wood , two nails , a glass Coke bottle , a guitar string , and a pickup . He ends the demonstration with the memorable quote , " Who says you need to buy a guitar ? " 
 = = = Instruments and equipment = = = 
 Main articles : Jack White 's musical equipment and Meg White 's musical equipment . 
 The White Stripes were notable for having only two musicians , limiting the instruments they could play live . Jack , the principal writer , said that this was not a problem , and that he " always centered the band around the number three . Everything was vocals , guitar and drums or vocals , piano and drums . " Fans and critics drew comparisons between Jack 's prowess on the guitar and Meg 's simplistic , reserved drumming . 
 Early on , the band drew attention for their preference for antiquated recording equipment . In a 2001 New York Times concert reviews , Ann Powers noted that Jack 's " ingenious " playing was " constrained by [ Meg 's ] deliberately undeveloped approach , " and that " he created more challenges by playing an acoustic guitar with paper taped over the hole and a less @-@ than @-@ high @-@ quality solid body electric . " 
 With few exceptions , Jack displayed a continued partiality towards amps and pedals from the 1960s . Jack used a number of effects to create his sound , such as a <unk> Whammy IV to reach pitches that would be otherwise impossible with a regular guitar . When performing live , Jack used a Randy Parsons custom guitar , a 1964 JB Hutto Montgomery Airline , a Harmony Rocket , a 1970s Crestwood Astral II , and a 1950s Kay <unk> . Also , while playing live , he used an MXR Micro @-@ Amp , Electro @-@ Harmonix Big Muff Pi distortion / sustainer , and an Electro @-@ Harmonix <unk> ( a polyphonic octave generator ) . He also used a Boss TU @-@ 2 tuner pedal . He plugged this setup into a 1970s Fender Twin Reverb , and two 100 @-@ Watt Sears Silvertone 1485 amplifiers paired with two <unk> Silvertone cabinets . In addition to standard guitar tuning , Jack also used several open tunings . 
 White also played other instruments such as a black F @-@ Style Gibson mandolin , Rhodes bass keys , and a Steinway piano . He played a custom @-@ made red and white marimba on " The Nurse " , " Forever for Her ( Is Over for Me ) " as well as on the non @-@ album tracks " Who 's A Big Baby " and " Top Special " . 
 Meg 's minimalistic drumming style was a prominent part of the band 's sound . Meg never had formal drum lessons . She played Ludwig Drums with Paiste cymbals , and says her pre @-@ show warm @-@ up consisted of " whiskey and Red Bull . " Jack downplayed criticisms of her style , insisting : 
 " I never thought ' God , I wish Neil Peart was in this band . ' It 's kind of funny : When people critique hip hop , they 're scared to open up , for fear of being called racist . But they 're not scared to open up on female musicians , out of pure sexism . Meg is the best part of this band . It never would have worked with anybody else , because it would have been too complicated ... It was my doorway to playing the blues . " 
 Of her playing style , Meg herself said : 
 " I appreciate other kinds of drummers who play differently , but it 's not my style or what works for this band . I get [ criticism ] sometimes , and I go through periods where it really bothers me . But then I think about it , and I realize that this is what is really needed for this band . And I just try to have as much fun with it as possible ... I just know the way [ Jack ] plays so well at this point that I always know kind of what he 's going to do . I can always sense where he 's going with things just by the mood he 's in or the attitude or how the song is going . Once in a while , he throws me for a loop , but I can usually keep him where I want him . " 
 While Jack was the lead vocalist , Meg did sing lead vocals on four of the band 's songs : " In the Cold , Cold Night " ( from Elephant ) , " Passive Manipulation " ( from Get Behind Me Satan ) , " Who 's a Big Baby ? " ( released on the " Blue Orchid " single ) , and " St. Andrew ( This Battle Is in the Air ) " ( from Icky Thump ) . She also accompanied Jack on the songs " Your Southern Can Is Mine " from their album De Stijl , " Hotel Yorba " and " This Protector " from their album White Blood Cells , on " You Don 't Know What Love Is " ( You Just Do as You 're Told ) " and " Rag & Bone " from their album Icky Thump , " Rated X " and also sang alongside Jack and Holly Golightly on the song " It 's True That We Love One Another " , from the album Elephant . 
 = = = Recording sessions and live performances = = = 
 Several White Stripes recordings were completed rapidly . For example , Elephant was recorded in about two weeks in London 's Toe Rag Studio . Their 2005 follow @-@ up , Get Behind Me Satan , was likewise recorded in just two weeks . 
 For live shows , the White Stripes were known for Jack 's employment of heavy distortion , as well as audio feedback and overdrive . The duo performed considerably more recklessly and unstructured live , never preparing set lists for their shows , believing that planning too closely would ruin the spontaneity of their performances . 
 = = = Ballet production = = = 
 In 2007 , British choreographer Wayne McGregor used music by the White Stripes for his production Chroma , a piece he created for The Royal Ballet in London , England . The orchestral arrangements for Chroma were commissioned by Richard Russell , head of XL Recordings , as a gift to the White Stripes and were produced by the British classical composer Joby Talbot . Three of these songs , " The Hardest Button To Button " , " Aluminium " and " Blue Orchid " , were first played to the band as a surprise in Cincinnati Music Hall , Ohio . McGregor heard the orchestral versions and decided to create a ballet using the music . Talbot re @-@ orchestrated the music for the Royal Opera House orchestra , also writing three additional pieces of his own composition . The world premiere of the ballet took place on November 16 , 2006 at the Royal Opera House in Covent Garden , London . The ballet subsequently won the 2007 Laurence Olivier Award for Best New Dance Production . 
 = = = Aesthetics and presentation = = = 
 The White Stripes had a carefully constructed image built around lore they created for themselves and visual motifs . Early in their history , they turned down a potential deal with Chicago label Bobsled , because the label wanted to put its green logo on the CD . Their presentation was a subject of intrigue among the public and in the media . 
 Early in their career , the band provided various descriptions of their relationship . Jack claimed that he and Meg were siblings , the youngest two of ten . As they story went , they became a band when , on Bastille Day 1997 , Meg went to the attic of their parents ' home and began to play on Jack 's drum kit . This claim was widely believed and repeated despite rumors that they were , or had been , husband and wife . In 2001 , proof of their 1996 marriage emerged , as well as evidence that the couple had divorced in March 2000 , just before the band gained widespread attention . Even so , they continued to insist publicly that they were brother and sister . In a 2005 interview with Rolling Stone magazine , Jack claimed that this open secret was intended to keep the focus on the music rather than the couple 's relationship : 
 " When you see a band that is two pieces , husband and wife , boyfriend and girlfriend , you think , ' Oh , I see ... ' When they 're brother and sister , you go , ' Oh , that 's interesting . ' You care more about the music , not the relationship — whether they 're trying to save their relationship by being in a band . " 
 The White Stripes made exclusive use of a red , white and black color scheme when conducting virtually all professional duties , from album art to the clothes worn during live performances ; Meg said that " like a uniform at school , you can just focus on what you 're doing because everybody 's wearing the same thing . " Jack also explained that they aspired to invoke an innocent childishness without any intention of irony or humor . Spin magazine commented that " his songs — about getting married in cathedrals , walking to kindergarten , and guileless companionship — are performed with an almost naive certitude . " Other affectations included Jack using two microphones onstage . 
 The media and fans alike varied between intrigue and skepticism at the band 's appearance and presentation . Andy Gershon , president of the V2 label at the time of their signing , was reluctant to sign them , saying , " They need a bass player , they 've got this red @-@ and @-@ white gimmick , and the songs are fantastic , but they 've recorded very raw ... how is this going to be on radio ? " In a 2002 Spin magazine article , Chuck Klosterman wondered , " how can two media @-@ savvy kids posing as brother and sister , wearing Dr. Seuss clothes , represent blood @-@ and @-@ bones Detroit , a city whose greatest resource is asphalt ? " However , in 2001 , Benjamin Nugent with TIME magazine commented that " it 's hard to begrudge [ Jack ] his right to nudge the spotlight toward his band , and away from his private life , by any means available . Even at the expense of the truth . " 
 = = Controversy = = 
 On October 2 , 2005 , Jim Diamond — the owner and operator of Ghetto Recorders recording studio — filed a lawsuit against the band and Third Man Records for " breach of contract . " In the suit , he claimed that as the co @-@ producer , mixer , and editor on the band 's debut album , and mixer and engineer on De Stijl , he was due royalties for " mechanical rights . " The band filed a counterclaim on May 16 of that year , requesting damages against Diamond and an official court declaration denying him rights to the material . Diamond lost the suit , with the jury determining that he was not instrumental in crafting the band 's sound . 
 Dominique Payette , a <unk> radio host , sued the band for $ 70 @,@ 000 in 2008 for sampling 10 seconds of her radio show in the song " Jumble Jumble " without permission . The matter was ultimately settled out of court . 
 In 2010 a Super Bowl ad by the U.S. Air Force Reserve caused the White Stripes to " take strong insult and objection to the Air Force Reserve presenting this advertisement with the implication that we licensed one of our songs to encourage recruitment during a war that we do not support . " The Air Force Reserve denied that the song was from the White Stripes and the music was scored by an advertising agency for the commercial . 
 = = Appearances in other media = = 
 Jack and Meg White appeared in Jim Jarmusch 's film Coffee and Cigarettes in 2003 , in a segment entitled " Jack Shows Meg His Tesla Coil " . This particular segment contains extensions of White Stripes motifs such as childhood innocence and Nikola Tesla . In 2004 , the band released its first music film Under Blackpool Lights , which was filmed entirely using 16 mm film and was directed by Dick Carruthers . 
 The band also appeared as themselves in The Simpsons episode " Jazzy and the Pussycats " in 2006 . Jack is one of three guitarists featured in the 2009 documentary It Might Get Loud , and Meg appears in segments that include the White Stripes . 
 = = Members = = 
 Jack White – vocals , guitars , bass , piano , keyboards , synthesizer , tambourine , marimba ( 1997 – 2011 ) 
 Meg White – vocals , drums , percussion , tambourine , timpani , triangle , bells ( 1997 – 2011 ) 
 = = Discography = = 
 Studio albums 
 The White Stripes ( 1999 ) 
 De Stijl ( 2000 ) 
 White Blood Cells ( 2001 ) 
 Elephant ( 2003 ) 
 Get Behind Me Satan ( 2005 ) 
 Icky Thump ( 2007 ) 
 = Ode to a Nightingale = 
 " Ode to a Nightingale " is a poem by John Keats written either in the garden of the Spaniards Inn , Hampstead , London or , according to Keats ' friend Charles Armitage Brown , under a plum tree in the garden of Keats ' house at Wentworth Place , also in Hampstead . According to Brown , a nightingale had built its nest near the house Keats and Brown shared in the spring of 1819 . Inspired by the bird 's song , Keats composed the poem in one day . It soon became one of his 1819 odes and was first published in Annals of the Fine Arts the following July . 
 " Ode to a Nightingale " is a personal poem that describes Keats 's journey into the state of negative capability . The tone of the poem rejects the optimistic pursuit of pleasure found within Keats 's earlier poems and , rather , explores the themes of nature , transience and mortality , the latter being particularly personal to Keats . 
 The nightingale described within the poem experiences a type of death but does not actually die . Instead , the songbird is capable of living through its song , which is a fate that humans cannot expect . The poem ends with an acceptance that pleasure cannot last and that death is an inevitable part of life . In the poem , Keats imagines the loss of the physical world and sees himself dead — as a " sod " over which the nightingale sings . The contrast between the immortal nightingale and mortal man sitting in his garden , is made all the more acute by an effort of the imagination . The presence of weather is noticeable in the poem , as spring came early in 1819 , bringing nightingales all over the heath . 
 = = Background = = 
 Of Keats 's six major odes of 1819 , " Ode to Psyche " , was probably written first and " To Autumn " written last . Sometime between these two , he wrote " Ode to a Nightingale " . It is possible that " Ode to a Nightingale " was written between 26 April and 18 May 1819 , based on weather conditions and similarities between images in the poem and those in a letter sent to Fanny Keats on May Day . The poem was composed at the Hampstead house Keats shared with Brown , possibly while sitting beneath a plum tree in the garden . According to Keats ' friend Brown , Keats finished the ode in just one morning : " In the spring of 1819 a nightingale had built her nest near my house . Keats felt a tranquil and continual joy in her song ; and one morning he took his chair from the breakfast @-@ table to the grass @-@ plot under a plum @-@ tree , where he sat for two or three hours . When he came into the house , I perceived he had some scraps of paper in his hand , and these he was quietly thrusting behind the books . On inquiry , I found those scraps , four or five in number , contained his poetic feelings on the song of the nightingale . " Brown 's account is personal , as he claimed the poem was directly influenced by his house and preserved by his own doing . However , Keats relied on both his own imagination and other literature as sources for his depiction of the nightingale . 
 The exact date of " Ode to a Nightingale " , as well as " Ode on Indolence " , " Ode on Melancholy " , and " Ode on a Grecian Urn " , is unknown , as Keats dated all as ' May 1819 ' . However , he worked on the four poems together , and there is a unity in both their stanza forms and their themes . The exact order the poems were written in is also unknown , but they form a sequence within their structures . While Keats was writing " Ode on a Grecian Urn " and the other poems , Brown transcribed copies of the poems and submitted them to Richard Woodhouse . During this time , Benjamin Haydon , Keats ' friend , was given a copy of " Ode to a Nightingale " , and he shared the poem with the editor of the Annals of the Fine Arts , James Elmes . Elmes paid Keats a small sum of money , and the poem was published in the July issue . The poem was later included in Keats ' 1820 collection of poems , Lamia , Isabella , The Eve of St Agnes , and Other written by <unk> Kumar 
 Poems . 
 = = Structure = = 
 " Ode to a Nightingale " was probably the first of the middle set of four odes that Keats wrote following " Ode to Psyche " , according to Brown . There is further evidence of this in the structure of the poems because Keats combines two different types of lyrical poetry in an experimental way : the odal hymn and the lyric of questioning voice that responds to the odal hymn . This combination of structures is similar to that in " Ode on a Grecian Urn " . In both poems the dual form creates a sort of dramatic element within the poem . The stanza forms of the poem is a combination of elements from Petrarchan sonnets and Shakespearean sonnets . 
 When it came to vowel forms , Keats incorporated a pattern of alternating historically " short " and " long " vowel sounds in his ode . In particular , line 18 ( " And purple @-@ stained mouth " ) has the historical pattern of " short " followed by " long " followed by " short " and followed by " long " . This alteration is continued in longer lines , including line 31 ( " Away ! away ! for I will fly to thee " ) which contains five pairs of alternations . However , other lines , such as line 3 ( " Or emptied some dull opiate to the drains " ) rely on a pattern of five " short " vowels followed by " long " and " short " vowel pairings until they end with a " long " vowel . These are not the only combination patterns present , and there are patterns of two " short " vowels followed by a " long " vowel in other lines , including 12 , 22 , and 59 , which are repeated twice and then followed up with two sets of " short " and then " long " vowel pairs . This reliance on vowel sounds is not unique to this ode , but is common to Keats 's other 1819 odes and his Eve of St. Agnes . 
 The poem incorporates a complex reliance on assonance — the repetition of vowel sounds — in a conscious pattern , as found in many of his poems . Such a reliance on assonance is found in very few English poems . Within " Ode to a Nightingale " , an example of this pattern can be found in line 35 ( " Already with thee ! tender is the night " ) , where the " ea " of " Already " connects with the " e " of " tender " and the " i " of " with " connects with the " i " of " is " . This same pattern is found again in line 41 ( " I cannot see what flowers are at my feet " ) with the " a " of " cannot " linking with the " a " of " at " and the " ee " of " see " linking with the " ee " of " feet " . This system of assonance can be found in approximately a tenth of the lines of Keats 's later poetry . 
 When it came to other sound patterns , Keats relied on double or triple caesuras in approximately 6 % of lines throughout the 1819 odes . An example from " Ode to a Nightingale " can be found within line 45 ( " The grass , the thicket , and the fruit @-@ tree wild " ) as the pauses after the commas are a " masculine " pause . Furthermore , Keats began to reduce the amount of Latin @-@ based words and syntax that he relied on in his poetry , which in turn shortened the length of the words that dominate the poem . There is also an emphasis on words beginning with consonants , especially those that begin with " b " , " p " or " v " . These three consonants are relied on heavily in the first stanza , and they are used <unk> to add a musical tone within the poem . 
 In terms of poetic meter , Keats relies on spondee throughout his 1819 odes and in just over 8 % of his lines within " Ode to a Nightingale " , including line 12 : 
 and line 25 : 
 To Walter Jackson Bate , the use of spondees in lines 31 – 34 creates a feeling of slow flight , and " in the final stanza . . . the distinctive use of scattered spondees , together with initial inversion , lend [ s ] an approximate phonetic suggestion of the peculiar spring and bounce of the bird in its flight . " 
 = = Poem = = 
 My heart aches , and a drowsy numbness pains 
 My sense , as though of hemlock I had drunk , 
 Or emptied some dull opiate to the drains 
 One minute past , and Lethe @-@ wards had sunk : 
 'Tis not through envy of thy happy lot , 5 
 But being too happy in thine happiness , 
 That thou , light @-@ wingèd Dryad of the trees , 
 In some melodious plot 
 Of <unk> green , and shadows numberless , 
 <unk> of summer in full @-@ throated ease . 10 
 O for a draught of vintage ! that hath been 
 Cool 'd a long age in the deep @-@ <unk> earth , 
 Tasting of Flora and the country @-@ green , 
 Dance , and Provençal song , and sunburnt mirth ! 
 O for a beaker full of the warm South ! 15 
 Full of the true , the <unk> Hippocrene , 
 With beaded bubbles winking at the brim , 
 And purple @-@ <unk> mouth ; 
 That I might drink , and leave the world unseen , 
 And with thee fade away into the forest dim : 20 
 Fade far away , dissolve , and quite forget 
 What thou among the leaves hast never known , 
 The weariness , the fever , and the fret 
 Here , where men sit and hear each other groan ; 
 Where palsy shakes a few , sad , last grey hairs , 25 
 Where youth grows pale , and spectre @-@ thin , and dies ; 
 Where but to think is to be full of sorrow 
 And leaden @-@ eyed despairs ; 
 Where beauty cannot keep her lustrous eyes , 
 Or new Love pine at them beyond to @-@ morrow . 30 
 Away ! away ! for I will fly to thee , 
 Not <unk> by Bacchus and his <unk> , 
 But on the <unk> wings of Poesy , 
 Though the dull brain perplexes and retards : 
 Already with thee ! tender is the night , 35 
 And <unk> the Queen @-@ Moon is on her throne , 
 Cluster 'd around by all her starry <unk> 
 But here there is no light , 
 Save what from heaven is with the breezes blown 
 Through <unk> <unk> and winding mossy ways . 40 
 I cannot see what flowers are at my feet , 
 Nor what soft incense hangs upon the boughs , 
 But , in <unk> darkness , guess each sweet 
 <unk> the seasonable month endows 
 The grass , the thicket , and the fruit @-@ tree wild ; 45 
 White hawthorn , and the pastoral eglantine ; 
 Fast @-@ fading violets cover 'd up in leaves ; 
 And mid @-@ May 's eldest child , 
 The coming musk @-@ rose , full of dewy wine , 
 The murmurous haunt of flies on summer eves . 50 
 Darkling I listen ; and , for many a time 
 I have been half in love with <unk> Death , 
 Call 'd him soft names in many a <unk> rhyme , 
 To take into the air my quiet breath ; 
 Now more than ever seems it rich to die , 55 
 To cease upon the midnight with no pain , 
 While thou art pouring forth thy soul abroad 
 In such an ecstasy ! 
 Still wouldst thou sing , and I have ears in vain — 
 To thy high requiem become a sod . 60 
 Thou wast not born for death , immortal Bird ! 
 No hungry generations tread thee down ; 
 The voice I hear this passing night was heard 
 In ancient days by emperor and clown : 
 Perhaps the self @-@ same song that found a path 65 
 Through the sad heart of Ruth , when , sick for home , 
 She stood in tears amid the alien corn ; 
 The same that ofttimes hath 
 Charm 'd magic casements , opening on the foam 
 Of perilous seas , in faery lands forlorn . 70 
 Forlorn ! the very word is like a bell 
 To toll me back from thee to my sole self ! 
 Adieu ! the fancy cannot cheat so well 
 As she is famed to do , deceiving elf . 
 Adieu ! adieu ! thy plaintive anthem fades 75 
 Past the near meadows , over the still stream , 
 Up the hill @-@ side ; and now ' tis buried deep 
 In the next valley @-@ glades : 
 Was it a vision , or a waking dream ? 
 Fled is that music : — do I wake or sleep ? 80 
 = = Themes = = 
 " Ode to a Nightingale " describes a series of conflicts between reality and the Romantic ideal of uniting with nature . In the words of Richard Fogle , " The principal stress of the poem is a struggle between ideal and actual : inclusive terms which , however , contain more particular antitheses of pleasure and pain , of imagination and common sense reason , of fullness and privation , of permanence and change , of nature and the human , of art and life , freedom and bondage , waking and dream . " Of course , the nightingale 's song is the dominant image and dominant " voice " within the ode . The nightingale is also the object of empathy and praise within the poem . However , the nightingale and the discussion of the nightingale is not simply about the bird or the song , but about human experience in general . This is not to say that the song is a simple metaphor , but it is a complex image that is formed through the interaction of the conflicting voices of praise and questioning . On this theme , David Perkins summarizes the way " Ode to a Nightingale " and " Ode on a Grecian Urn " perform this when he says , " we are dealing with a talent , indeed an entire approach to poetry , in which symbol , however necessary , may possibly not satisfy as the principal concern of poetry , any more than it could with Shakespeare , but is rather an element in the poetry and drama of human reactions " . However , there is a difference between an urn and a nightingale in that the nightingale is not an eternal entity . Furthermore , in creating any aspect of the nightingale immortal during the poem the narrator separates any union that he can have with the nightingale . 
 The nightingale 's song within the poem is connected to the art of music in a way that the urn in " Ode on a Grecian Urn " is connected to the art of sculpture . As such , the nightingale would represent an enchanting presence and , unlike the urn , is directly connected to nature . As natural music , the song is for beauty and lacks a message of truth . Keats follows Coleridge 's belief , as found in " The Nightingale " , in separating from the world by losing himself in the bird 's song . Although Keats favours a female nightingale over Coleridge 's masculine bird , both reject the traditional depiction of the nightingale as related to the tragedy of Philomela . Their songbird is a happy nightingale that lacks the melancholic feel of previous poetic depictions . The bird is only a voice within the poem , but it is a voice that compels the narrator to join with in and forget the sorrows of the world . However , there is tension in that the narrator holds Keats 's guilt regarding the death of Tom Keats , his brother . The song 's conclusion represents the result of trying to escape into the realm of fancy . 
 Like Percy Bysshe Shelley ’ s " To a Skylark " , Keats ’ s narrator listens to a bird song , but listening to the song within “ Ode to a Nightingale ” is almost painful and similar to death . The narrator seeks to be with the nightingale and abandons his sense of vision in order to embrace the sound in an attempt to share in the darkness with the bird . As the poem ends , the trance caused by the nightingale is broken and the narrator is left wondering if it was a real vision or just a dream . The poem reliance on the process of sleeping common to Keats 's poems , and " Ode to a Nightingale " shares many of the same themes as Keats 's Sleep and Poetry and Eve of St. Agnes . This further separates the image of the nightingale 's song from its closest comparative image , the urn as represented in " Ode on a Grecian Urn " . The nightingale is distant and mysterious , and even disappears at the end of the poem . The dream image emphasizes the <unk> and elusiveness of the poem . These elements make it impossible for there to be a complete self @-@ identification with the nightingale , but it also allows for self @-@ awareness to permeate throughout the poem , albeit in an altered state . 
 Midway through the poem , there is a split between the two actions of the poem : the first attempts to identify with the nightingale and its song , and the second discusses the convergence of the past with the future while experiencing the present . This second theme is reminiscent of Keats 's view of human progression through the Mansion of Many Apartments and how man develops from experiencing and wanting only pleasure to understanding truth as a mixture of both pleasure and pain . The Elysian fields and the nightingale 's song in the first half of the poem represent the pleasurable moments that overwhelm the individual like a drug . However , the experience does not last forever , and the body is left desiring it until the narrator feels helpless without the pleasure . Instead of embracing the coming truth , the narrator clings to poetry to hide from the loss of pleasure . Poetry does not bring about the pleasure that the narrator original asks for , but it does liberate him from his desire for only pleasure . 
 Responding to this emphasis on pleasure , Albert Guerard , Jr. argues that the poem contains a " longing not for art but a free reverie of any kind . The form of the poem is that of progression by association , so that the movement of feeling is at the mercy of words evoked by chance , such words as fade and forlorn , the very words that , like a bell , toll the dreamer back to his sole self . " However , Fogle points out that the terms Guerard emphasizes are " associational translations " and that Guerard misunderstands Keats 's aesthetic . After all , the acceptance of the loss of pleasure by the end of the poem is an acceptance of life and , in turn , of death . Death was a constant theme that permeated aspects of Keats poetry because he was exposed to death of his family members throughout his life . Within the poem , there are many images of death . The nightingale experiences a sort of death and even the god Apollo experiences death , but his death reveals his own divine state . As Perkins explains , " But , of course , the nightingale is not thought to be literally dying . The point is that the deity or the nightingale can sing without dying . But , as the ode makes clear , man cannot — or at least not in a visionary way . " 
 With this theme of a loss of pleasure and inevitable death , the poem , according to Claude Finney , describes " the inadequacy of the romantic escape from the world of reality to the world of ideal beauty " . Earl Wasserman essentially agrees with Finney , but he extended his summation of the poem to incorporate the themes of Keats 's Mansion of Many Apartments when he says , " the core of the poem is the search for the mystery , the unsuccessful quest for light within its darkness " and this " leads only to an increasing darkness , or a growing recognition of how impenetrable the mystery is to mortals . " With these views in mind , the poem recalls Keats 's earlier view of pleasure and an optimistic view of poetry found within his earlier poems , especially Sleep and Poetry , and rejects them . This loss of pleasure and incorporation of death imagery lends the poem a dark air , which connects " Ode to a Nightingale " with Keats ' other poems that discuss the demonic nature of poetic imagination , including Lamia . In the poem , Keats imagines the loss of the physical world and sees himself dead — he uses an abrupt , almost brutal word for it — as a " sod " over which the nightingale sings . The contrast between the immortal nightingale and mortal man , sitting in his garden , is made all the more acute by an effort of the imagination . 
 = = Keats 's reception = = 
 Contemporary critics of Keats enjoyed the poem , and it was heavily quoted in their reviews . An anonymous review of Keats 's poetry that ran in the August and October 1820 Scots Magazine stated : " Amongst the minor poems we prefer the ' Ode to the Nightingale . ' Indeed , we are inclined to prefer it beyond every other poem in the book ; but let the reader judge . The third and seventh stanzas have a charm for us which we should find it difficult to explain . We have read this ode over and over again , and every time with increased delight . " At the same time , Leigh Hunt wrote a review of Keats 's poem for the 2 August and 9 August 1820 The Indicator : " As a specimen of the Poems , which are all lyrical , we must indulge ourselves in quoting entire the ' Ode to a Nightingale ' . There is that mixture in it of real melancholy and imaginative relief , which poetry alone presents us in her ' charmed cup , ' and which some over @-@ rational critics have undertaken to find wrong because it is not true . It does not follow that what is not true to them , is not true to others . If the relief is real , the mixture is good and sufficing . " 
 John Scott , in an anonymous review for the September 1820 edition of The London Magazine , argued for the greatness of Keats 's poetry as exemplified by poems including " Ode to a Nightingale " : 
 The injustice which has been done to our author 's works , in estimating their poetical merit , rendered us doubly anxious , on opening his last volume , to find it likely to seize fast hold of general sympathy , and thus turn an overwhelming power against the paltry traducers of talent , more eminently promising in many respects , than any the present age has been called upon to encourage . We have not found it to be quite all that we wished in this <unk> it would have been very extraordinary if we had , for our wishes went far beyond reasonable expectations . But we have found it of a nature to present to common understandings the poetical power with which the author 's mind is gifted , in a more tangible and intelligible shape than that in which it has appeared in any of his former compositions . It is , therefore , calculated to throw shame on the lying , vulgar spirit , in which this young worshipper in the temple of the Muses has been cried @-@ down ; whatever questions may still leave to be settled as to the kind and degree of his poetical merits . Take for instance , as proof of the justice of our praise , the following passage from an Ode to the Nightingale : <unk> is distinct , noble , pathetic , and true : the thoughts have all chords of direct communication with naturally @-@ constituted hearts : the echoes of the strain linger bout the depths of human bosoms . 
 In a review for the 21 January 1835 London Journal , Hunt claimed that while Keats wrote the poem , " The poet had then his mortal illness upon him , and knew it . Never was the voice of death sweeter . " David Moir , in 1851 , used The Even of St Agnes to claim , " We have here a specimen of descriptive power luxuriously rich and original ; but the following lines , from the ' Ode to a Nightingale , ' flow from a far more profound fountain of inspiration . " 
 At the end of the 19th century , Robert Bridges 's analysis of the poem became a dominant view and would influence later interpretations of the poem . Bridges , in 1895 , declared that the poem was the best of Keats 's odes but he thought that the poem contained too much artificial language . In particular , he emphasised the use of the word " forlorn " and the last stanza as being examples of Keats 's artificial language . In " Two odes of Keats 's " ( 1897 ) , William C Wilkinson suggested that " Ode to a Nightingale " is deeply flawed because it contains too many " incoherent musings " that failed to supply a standard of logic that would allow the reader to understand the relationship between the poet and the bird . However , Herbert Grierson , arguing in 1928 , believed Nightingale to be superior to " Ode on a Grecian Urn " , " Ode on Melancholy " , and " Ode to Psyche " , arguing the exact opposite of Wilkinson as he stated that " Nightingale " , along with " To Autumn " , showed a greater amount of logical thought and more aptly presented the cases they were intended to make . 
 = = = 20th @-@ century criticism = = = 
 At the beginning of the 20th century , Rudyard Kipling referred to lines 69 and 70 , alongside three lines from Samuel Taylor Coleridge 's Kubla Khan , when he claimed of poetry : " In all the millions permitted there are no more than five — five little lines — of which one can say , ' These are the magic . These are the vision . The rest is only Poetry . ' " In 1906 , Alexander Mackie argued : " The nightingale and the lark for long monopolised poetic <unk> privilege they enjoyed solely on account of their pre @-@ eminence as song birds . Keats 's Ode to a Nightingale and Shelley 's Ode to a Skylark are two of the glories of English literature ; but both were written by men who had no claim to special or exact knowledge of ornithology as such . " Sidney Colvin , in 1920 , argued , " Throughout this ode Keats ’ s genius is at its height . Imagination cannot be more rich and satisfying , felicity of phrase and cadence cannot be more absolute , than in the several contrasted stanzas calling for the draft of southern vintage [ … ] To praise the art of a passage like that in the fourth stanza [ … ] to praise or comment on a stroke of art like this is to throw doubt on the reader ’ s power to perceive it for himself . " 
 Bridge 's view of " Ode to a Nightingale " was taken up by H. W. Garrod in his 1926 analysis of Keats 's poems . Like Albert Gerard would argue later in 1944 , Garrod believed that the problem within Keats 's poem was his emphasis on the rhythm and the language instead of the main ideas of the poem . When describing the fourth stanza of the poem , Maurice Ridley , in 1933 , claimed , " And so comes the stanza , with that remarkable piece of imagination at the end which feels the light as blown by the breezes , one of those characteristic sudden flashes with which Keats fires the most ordinary material . " He later declared of the seventh stanza : " And now for the great stanza in which the imagination is fanned to yet whiter heat , the stanza that would , I suppose , by common consent be taken , along with Kubla Khan , as offering us the distilled sorceries of ' Romanticism ' " . He concluded on the stanza that " I do not believe that any reader who has watched Keats at work on the more exquisitely finished of the stanzas in The Eve of St. Agnes , and seen this craftsman slowly elaborating and refining , will ever believe that this perfect stanza was achieved with the easy fluency with which , in the draft we have , it was obviously written down . " In 1936 , F. R. Leavis wrote , " One remembers the poem both as recording , and as being for the reader , an indulgence . " Following Leavis , Cleanth Brooks and Robert Penn Warren , in a 1938 essay , saw the poem as " a very rich poem . It contains some complications which we must not gloss over if we are to appreciate the depth and significance of the issues engaged . " Brooks would later argue in The Well @-@ Wrought Urn ( 1947 ) that the poem was thematically unified while contradicting many of the negative criticisms lodged against the poem . 
 Richard Fogle responded to the critical attack on Keats 's emphasis on rhyme and language put forth by Garrod , Gerard , and others in 1953 . His argument was similar to Brooks : that the poem was thematically coherent and that there is a poet within the poem that is different from Keats the writer of the poem . As such , Keats consciously chose the shift in the themes of the poem and the contrasts within the poem represent the pain felt when comparing the real world to an ideal world found within the imagination . Fogle also responded directly to the claims made by Leavis : " I find Mr. Leavis too austere , but he points out a quality which Keats plainly sought for . His profusion and prodigality is , however , modified by a principle of sobriety . " It is possible that Fogle 's statements were a defense of Romanticism as a group that was both respectable in terms of thought and poetic ability . Wasserman , following in 1953 , claimed that " Of all Keats ' poems , it is probably the ' Ode to a Nightingale ' that has most tormented the critic [ ... ] in any reading of the ' Ode to a Nightingale ' the turmoil will not down . Forces contend wildly within the poem , not only without resolution , but without possibility of resolution ; and the reader comes away from his experience with the sense that he has been in ' a wild Abyss ' " . He then explained , " It is this turbulence , I suspect , that has led Allen Tate to believe the ode ' at least tries to say everything that poetry an say . ' But I propose it is the ' Ode on a Grecian Urn ' that succeeds in saying what poetry can say , and that the other ode attempts to say all that the poet can . " 
 = = = Later critical responses = = = 
 Although the poem was defended by a few critics , E. C. Pettet returned to the argument that the poem lacked a structure and emphasized the word " forlorn " as evidence of his view . In his 1957 work , Pettet did praise the poem as he declared , " The Ode to a Nightingale has a special interest in that most of us would probably regard it as the most richly representative of all Keats ’ s poems . Two reasons for this quality are immediately apparent : there is its matchless evocation of that late spring and early summer season [ … ] and there is its exceptional degree of ' distillation ' , of concentrated recollection " . David Perkins felt the need to defend the use of the word " forlorn " and claimed that it described the feeling from the impossibility of not being able to live in the world of the imagination . When praising the poem in 1959 , Perkins claimed , " Although the " Ode to a Nightingale " ranges more widely than the " Ode on a Grecian Urn , " the poem can also be regarded as the exploration or testing out of a symbol , and , compared with the urn as a symbol , the nightingale would seem to have both limitations and advantages . " Walter Jackson Bate also made a similar defense of the word " forlorn " by claiming that the world described by describing the impossibility of reaching that land . When describing the poem compared to the rest of English poetry , Bate argued in 1963 , " Ode to a Nightingale " is among " the greatest lyrics in English " and the only one written with such speed : " We are free to doubt whether any poem in English of comparable length and quality has been composed so quickly . " In 1968 , Robert Gittins stated , " It may not be wrong to regard [ Ode on Indolence and Ode on Melancholy ] as Keats 's earlier essays in this [ ode ] form , and the great Nightingale and Grecian Urn as his more finished and later works . " 
 From the late 1960s onward , many of the Yale School of critics describe the poem as a reworking of John Milton 's poetic diction , but they argued that poem revealed that Keats lacked the ability of Milton as a poet . The critics , Harold Bloom ( 1965 ) , Leslie <unk> ( 1973 ) , Paul Fry ( 1980 ) , John Hollander ( 1981 ) and Cynthia Chase ( 1985 ) , all focused on the poem with Milton as a progenitor to " Ode to a Nightingale " while ignoring other possibilities , including Shakespeare who was emphasised as being the source of many of Keats 's phrases . Responding to the claims about Milton and Keats 's shortcomings , critics like R. S. White ( 1981 ) and Willard Spiegelman ( 1983 ) used the Shakespearean echoes to argue for a multiplicity of sources for the poem to claim that Keats was not trying to respond just Milton or escape from his shadow . Instead , " Ode to a Nightingale " was an original poem , as White claimed , " The poem is richly saturated in Shakespeare , yet the assimilations are so profound that the Ode is finally original , and wholly Keatsian " . Similarly , Spiegelman claimed that Shakespeare 's A Midsummer Night 's Dream had " flavored and ripened the later poem " . This was followed in 1986 by Jonathan Bate claiming that Keats was " left enriched by the voice of Shakespeare , the ' immortal bird ' " . 
 Focusing on the quality of the poem , Stuart Sperry , argued in 1973 , " ' Ode to a Nightingale ' is the supreme expression in all Keats 's poetry of the impulse to imaginative escape that flies in the face of the knowledge of human limitation , the impulse fully expressed in ' Away ! away ! for I will fly to thee . ' " Wolf Hirst , in 1981 , described the poem as " justly celebrated " and claimed that " Since this movement into an eternal realm of song is one of the most magnificent in literature , the poet 's return to actuality is all the more shattering . " Helen Vendler continued the earlier view that the poem was artificial but added that the poem was an attempt to be aesthetic and spontaneous that was later dropped . In 1983 , she argued , " In its absence of conclusiveness and its abandonment to reverie , the poem appeals to readers who prize it as the most personal , the most apparently spontaneous , the most immediately beautiful , and the most confessional of Keats 's odes . I believe that the ' events ' of the ode , as it unfolds in time , have more logic , however , than is usually granted them , and that they are best seen in relation to Keats 's pursuit of the idea of music as a <unk> art . " 
 In a review of contemporary criticism of " Ode to a Nightingale " in 1998 , James O 'Rouke claimed that " To judge from the volume , the variety , and the polemical force of the modern critical responses engendered , there have been few moments in English poetic history as baffling as Keats 's repetition of the word ' forlorn ' " . When referring to the reliance of the ideas of John Dryden and William Hazlitt within the poem , Poet Laureate Andrew Motion , in 1999 , argued " whose notion of poetry as a ' movement ' from personal consciousness to an awareness of suffering humanity it perfectly illustrates . " 
 = = In fiction = = 
 F. Scott Fitzgerald took the title of his novel Tender is the Night from the 35th line of the ode . 
 According to Ildikó de Papp Carrington , Keats ' wording , " when , sick for home , / She stood in tears amid the alien corn " , seems to be echoed in by Alice Munro 's Save the Reaper ( 1998 ) , the end of which reads : " Eve would lie down [ ... ] with nothing in her head but the rustle of the deep tall corn which might have stopped growing now but still made its live noise after dark " ( book version ) . 
 The poem is quoted in Chapter 1 of P. G. Wodehouse 's novel Full Moon ( 1947 ) : " ' Coming here ? Freddie ? ' .A numbness seemed to be paining his sense , as though of hemlock he had drunk . " 
 = Fungus = 
 A fungus ( / <unk> / ; plural : fungi or <unk> ) is any member of the group of eukaryotic organisms that includes unicellular microorganisms such as yeasts and molds , as well as multicellular fungi that produce familiar fruiting forms known as mushrooms . These organisms are classified as a kingdom , Fungi , which is separate from the other eukaryotic life kingdoms of plants and animals . 
 One difference that places fungi in a different kingdom is that its cell walls contain chitin , unlike the cell walls of plants , bacteria and some protists . Similar to animals , fungi are heterotrophs , that is , they acquire their food by absorbing dissolved molecules , typically by secreting digestive enzymes into their environment . Growth is their means of mobility , except for spores , which may travel through the air or water ( a few of which are flagellated ) . Fungi are the principal decomposers in ecological systems . These and other differences place fungi in a single group of related organisms , named the <unk> ( true fungi or <unk> ) , that share a common ancestor ( is a monophyletic group ) , an interpretation that is also strongly supported by molecular phylogenetics . This fungal group is distinct from the structurally similar myxomycetes ( slime molds ) and oomycetes ( water molds ) . The discipline of biology devoted to the study of fungi is known as mycology ( from the Greek μύκης , <unk> , meaning " fungus " ) . In the past , mycology was regarded as a branch of botany ; today it is a separate kingdom in biological taxonomy . Fungi are genetically more closely related to animals than to plants . 
 Abundant worldwide , most fungi are inconspicuous because of the small size of their structures , and their cryptic lifestyles in soil , on dead matter . They are both symbionts of plants , animals , or other fungi and also parasites . They may become noticeable when fruiting , either as mushrooms or as molds . Fungi perform an essential role in the decomposition of organic matter and have fundamental roles in nutrient cycling and exchange in the environment . They have long been used as a direct source of food , in the form of mushrooms and truffles ; as a leavening agent for bread ; and in the fermentation of various food products , such as wine , beer , and soy sauce . Since the 1940s , fungi have been used for the production of antibiotics , and , more recently , various enzymes produced by fungi are used industrially and in detergents . Fungi are also used as biological pesticides to control weeds , plant diseases and insect pests . Many species produce bioactive compounds called mycotoxins , such as alkaloids and polyketides , that are toxic to animals including humans . The fruiting structures of a few species contain psychotropic compounds and are consumed recreationally or in traditional spiritual ceremonies . Fungi can break down manufactured materials and buildings , and become significant pathogens of humans and other animals . Losses of crops due to fungal diseases ( e.g. , rice blast disease ) or food spoilage can have a large impact on human food supplies and local economies . 
 The fungus kingdom encompasses an enormous diversity of taxa with varied ecologies , life cycle strategies , and morphologies ranging from unicellular aquatic chytrids to large mushrooms . However , little is known of the true biodiversity of Kingdom Fungi , which has been estimated at 1 @.@ 5 million to 5 million species , with about 5 % of these having been formally classified . Ever since the pioneering 18th and 19th century taxonomical works of Carl Linnaeus , Christian Hendrik Persoon , and Elias Magnus Fries , fungi have been classified according to their morphology ( e.g. , characteristics such as spore color or microscopic features ) or physiology . Advances in molecular genetics have opened the way for DNA analysis to be incorporated into taxonomy , which has sometimes challenged the historical groupings based on morphology and other traits . Phylogenetic studies published in the last decade have helped reshape the classification within Kingdom Fungi , which is divided into one subkingdom , seven phyla , and ten subphyla . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 The English word fungus is directly adopted from the Latin fungus ( mushroom ) , used in the writings of Horace and Pliny . This in turn is derived from the Greek word <unk> ( <unk> " sponge " ) , which refers to the macroscopic structures and morphology of mushrooms and molds ; the root is also used in other languages , such as the German <unk> ( " sponge " ) and Schimmel ( " mold " ) . The use of the word mycology , which is derived from the Greek <unk> ( μύκης " mushroom " ) and logos ( λόγος " discourse " ) , to denote the scientific study of fungi is thought to have originated in 1836 with English naturalist Miles Joseph Berkeley 's publication The English Flora of Sir James Edward Smith , Vol . 5 . A group of all the fungi present in a particular area or geographic region is known as <unk> ( plural noun , no singular ) , e.g. , " the <unk> of Ireland " . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 Before the introduction of molecular methods for phylogenetic analysis , taxonomists considered fungi to be members of the plant kingdom because of similarities in lifestyle : both fungi and plants are mainly immobile , and have similarities in general morphology and growth habitat . Like plants , fungi often grow in soil and , in the case of mushrooms , form conspicuous fruit bodies , which sometimes resemble plants , such as mosses . The fungi are now considered a separate kingdom , distinct from both plants and animals , from which they appear to have diverged around one billion years ago . Some morphological , biochemical , and genetic features are shared with other organisms , while others are unique to the fungi , clearly separating them from the other kingdoms : 
 Shared features : 
 With other eukaryotes : Fungal cells contain membrane @-@ bound nuclei with chromosomes that contain DNA with noncoding regions called introns and coding regions called exons . Fungi have membrane @-@ bound cytoplasmic organelles such as mitochondria , sterol @-@ containing membranes , and ribosomes of the 80S type . They have a characteristic range of soluble carbohydrates and storage compounds , including sugar alcohols ( e.g. , mannitol ) , disaccharides , ( e.g. , trehalose ) , and polysaccharides ( e.g. , glycogen , which is also found in animals ) . 
 With animals : Fungi lack chloroplasts and are heterotrophic organisms and so require preformed organic compounds as energy sources . 
 With plants : Fungi have a cell wall and vacuoles . They reproduce by both sexual and asexual means , and like basal plant groups ( such as ferns and mosses ) produce spores . Similar to mosses and algae , fungi typically have haploid nuclei . 
 With <unk> and bacteria : Higher fungi , <unk> , and some bacteria produce the amino acid L @-@ lysine in specific biosynthesis steps , called the α @-@ <unk> pathway . 
 The cells of most fungi grow as tubular , elongated , and thread @-@ like ( filamentous ) structures called hyphae , which may contain multiple nuclei and extend by growing at their tips . Each tip contains a set of aggregated vesicles — cellular structures consisting of proteins , lipids , and other organic molecules — called the Spitzenkörper . Both fungi and oomycetes grow as filamentous hyphal cells . In contrast , similar @-@ looking organisms , such as filamentous green algae , grow by repeated cell division within a chain of cells . There are also single @-@ celled fungi ( yeasts ) that do not form hyphae , and fungi with both hyphal and yeast forms . 
 In common with some plant and animal species , more than 70 fungal species display bioluminescence . 
 Unique features : 
 Some species grow as unicellular yeasts that reproduce by budding or binary fission . <unk> fungi can switch between a yeast phase and a hyphal phase in response to environmental conditions . 
 The fungal cell wall is composed of glucans and chitin ; while glucans are also found in plants and chitin in the exoskeleton of arthropods , fungi are the only organisms that combine these two structural molecules in their cell wall . Unlike those of plants and oomycetes , fungal cell walls do not contain cellulose . 
 Most fungi lack an efficient system for the long @-@ distance transport of water and nutrients , such as the xylem and phloem in many plants . To overcome this limitation , some fungi , such as Armillaria , form rhizomorphs , which resemble and perform functions similar to the roots of plants . As eukaryotes , fungi possess a biosynthetic pathway for producing terpenes that uses mevalonic acid and pyrophosphate as chemical building blocks . Plants and some other organisms have an additional terpene biosynthesis pathway in their chloroplasts , a structure fungi and animals do not have . Fungi produce several secondary metabolites that are similar or identical in structure to those made by plants . Many of the plant and fungal enzymes that make these compounds differ from each other in sequence and other characteristics , which indicates separate origins and evolution of these enzymes in the fungi and plants . 
 = = Diversity = = 
 Fungi have a worldwide distribution , and grow in a wide range of habitats , including extreme environments such as deserts or areas with high salt concentrations or ionizing radiation , as well as in deep sea sediments . Some can survive the intense UV and cosmic radiation encountered during space travel . Most grow in terrestrial environments , though several species live partly or solely in aquatic habitats , such as the chytrid fungus Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis , a parasite that has been responsible for a worldwide decline in amphibian populations . This organism spends part of its life cycle as a motile <unk> , enabling it to propel itself through water and enter its amphibian host . Other examples of aquatic fungi include those living in hydrothermal areas of the ocean . 
 Around 100 @,@ 000 species of fungi have been formally described by taxonomists , but the global biodiversity of the fungus kingdom is not fully understood . On the basis of observations of the ratio of the number of fungal species to the number of plant species in selected environments , the fungal kingdom has been estimated to contain about 1 @.@ 5 million species . A recent ( 2011 ) estimate suggests there may be over 5 million species . In mycology , species have historically been distinguished by a variety of methods and concepts . Classification based on morphological characteristics , such as the size and shape of spores or fruiting structures , has traditionally dominated fungal taxonomy . Species may also be distinguished by their biochemical and physiological characteristics , such as their ability to metabolize certain biochemicals , or their reaction to chemical tests . The biological species concept discriminates species based on their ability to mate . The application of molecular tools , such as DNA sequencing and phylogenetic analysis , to study diversity has greatly enhanced the resolution and added robustness to estimates of genetic diversity within various taxonomic groups . 
 = = Mycology = = 
 Mycology is the branch of biology concerned with the systematic study of fungi , including their genetic and biochemical properties , their taxonomy , and their use to humans as a source of medicine , food , and psychotropic substances consumed for religious purposes , as well as their dangers , such as poisoning or infection . The field of <unk> , the study of plant diseases , is closely related because many plant pathogens are fungi . 
 The use of fungi by humans dates back to prehistory ; Ötzi the Iceman , a well @-@ preserved mummy of a 5 @,@ 300 @-@ year @-@ old Neolithic man found frozen in the Austrian Alps , carried two species of polypore mushrooms that may have been used as tinder ( Fomes <unk> ) , or for medicinal purposes ( <unk> <unk> ) . Ancient peoples have used fungi as food sources – often unknowingly – for millennia , in the preparation of leavened bread and fermented juices . Some of the oldest written records contain references to the destruction of crops that were probably caused by pathogenic fungi . 
 = = = History = = = 
 Mycology is a relatively new science that became systematic after the development of the microscope in the 16th century . Although fungal spores were first observed by Giambattista della Porta in 1588 , the seminal work in the development of mycology is considered to be the publication of Pier Antonio Micheli 's 1729 work Nova plantarum genera . Micheli not only observed spores but also showed that , under the proper conditions , they could be induced into growing into the same species of fungi from which they originated . Extending the use of the binomial system of nomenclature introduced by Carl Linnaeus in his Species plantarum ( 1753 ) , the Dutch Christian Hendrik Persoon ( 1761 – 1836 ) established the first classification of mushrooms with such skill so as to be considered a founder of modern mycology . Later , Elias Magnus Fries ( 1794 – 1878 ) further elaborated the classification of fungi , using spore color and various microscopic characteristics , methods still used by taxonomists today . Other notable early contributors to mycology in the 17th – 19th and early 20th centuries include Miles Joseph Berkeley , August Carl Joseph Corda , Anton de Bary , the brothers Louis René and Charles Tulasne , Arthur H. R. Buller , Curtis G. Lloyd , and Pier Andrea Saccardo . The 20th century has seen a modernization of mycology that has come from advances in biochemistry , genetics , molecular biology , and biotechnology . The use of DNA sequencing technologies and phylogenetic analysis has provided new insights into fungal relationships and biodiversity , and has challenged traditional morphology @-@ based groupings in fungal taxonomy . 
 = = Morphology = = 
 = = = Microscopic structures = = = 
 Most fungi grow as hyphae , which are cylindrical , thread @-@ like structures 2 – 10 µm in diameter and up to several centimeters in length . Hyphae grow at their tips ( apices ) ; new hyphae are typically formed by emergence of new tips along existing hyphae by a process called branching , or occasionally growing hyphal tips fork , giving rise to two parallel @-@ growing hyphae . The combination of apical growth and branching / forking leads to the development of a mycelium , an interconnected network of hyphae . Hyphae can be either septate or <unk> . <unk> hyphae are divided into compartments separated by cross walls ( internal cell walls , called septa , that are formed at right angles to the cell wall giving the hypha its shape ) , with each compartment containing one or more nuclei ; <unk> hyphae are not compartmentalized . Septa have pores that allow cytoplasm , organelles , and sometimes nuclei to pass through ; an example is the <unk> septum in fungi of the phylum Basidiomycota . <unk> hyphae are in essence <unk> supercells . 
 Many species have developed specialized hyphal structures for nutrient uptake from living hosts ; examples include <unk> in plant @-@ parasitic species of most fungal phyla , and <unk> of several mycorrhizal fungi , which penetrate into the host cells to consume nutrients . 
 Although fungi are <unk> — a grouping of evolutionarily related organisms broadly characterized by a single posterior flagellum — all phyla except for the chytrids have lost their posterior flagella . Fungi are unusual among the eukaryotes in having a cell wall that , in addition to glucans ( e.g. , β @-@ 1 @,@ 3 @-@ glucan ) and other typical components , also contains the biopolymer chitin . 
 = = = Macroscopic structures = = = 
 Fungal mycelia can become visible to the naked eye , for example , on various surfaces and substrates , such as damp walls and spoiled food , where they are commonly called molds . Mycelia grown on solid agar media in laboratory petri dishes are usually referred to as colonies . These colonies can exhibit growth shapes and colors ( due to spores or pigmentation ) that can be used as diagnostic features in the identification of species or groups . Some individual fungal colonies can reach extraordinary dimensions and ages as in the case of a clonal colony of Armillaria solidipes , which extends over an area of more than 900 ha ( 3 @.@ 5 square miles ) , with an estimated age of nearly 9 @,@ 000 years . 
 The apothecium — a specialized structure important in sexual reproduction in the ascomycetes — is a cup @-@ shaped fruit body that holds the hymenium , a layer of tissue containing the spore @-@ bearing cells . The fruit bodies of the basidiomycetes ( basidiocarps ) and some ascomycetes can sometimes grow very large , and many are well known as mushrooms . 
 = = Growth and physiology = = 
 The growth of fungi as hyphae on or in solid substrates or as single cells in aquatic environments is adapted for the efficient extraction of nutrients , because these growth forms have high surface area to volume ratios . Hyphae are specifically adapted for growth on solid surfaces , and to invade substrates and tissues . They can exert large penetrative mechanical forces ; for example , the plant pathogen Magnaporthe <unk> forms a structure called an appressorium that evolved to puncture plant tissues . The pressure generated by the appressorium , directed against the plant epidermis , can exceed 8 megapascals ( 1 @,@ 200 psi ) . The filamentous fungus Paecilomyces lilacinus uses a similar structure to penetrate the eggs of nematodes . 
 The mechanical pressure exerted by the appressorium is generated from physiological processes that increase intracellular turgor by producing <unk> such as glycerol . Adaptations such as these are complemented by hydrolytic enzymes secreted into the environment to digest large organic molecules — such as polysaccharides , proteins , and lipids — into smaller molecules that may then be absorbed as nutrients . The vast majority of filamentous fungi grow in a polar fashion — i.e. , by extension into one direction — by elongation at the tip ( apex ) of the hypha . Other forms of fungal growth include intercalary extension ( longitudinal expansion of hyphal compartments that are below the apex ) as in the case of some endophytic fungi , or growth by volume expansion during the development of mushroom stipes and other large organs . Growth of fungi as multicellular structures consisting of somatic and reproductive cells — a feature independently evolved in animals and plants — has several functions , including the development of fruit bodies for dissemination of sexual spores ( see above ) and biofilms for substrate colonization and intercellular communication . 
 The fungi are traditionally considered heterotrophs , organisms that rely solely on carbon fixed by other organisms for metabolism . Fungi have evolved a high degree of metabolic versatility that allows them to use a diverse range of organic substrates for growth , including simple compounds such as nitrate , ammonia , acetate , or ethanol . In some species the pigment melanin may play a role in extracting energy from ionizing radiation , such as gamma radiation . This form of " <unk> " growth has been described for only a few species , the effects on growth rates are small , and the underlying biophysical and biochemical processes are not well known . This process might bear similarity to CO2 fixation via visible light , but instead uses ionizing radiation as a source of energy . 
 = = Reproduction = = 
 Fungal reproduction is complex , reflecting the differences in lifestyles and genetic makeup within this diverse kingdom of organisms . It is estimated that a third of all fungi reproduce using more than one method of propagation ; for example , reproduction may occur in two well @-@ differentiated stages within the life cycle of a species , the teleomorph and the anamorph . Environmental conditions trigger genetically determined developmental states that lead to the creation of specialized structures for sexual or asexual reproduction . These structures aid reproduction by efficiently dispersing spores or spore @-@ containing propagules . 
 = = = Asexual reproduction = = = 
 Asexual reproduction occurs via vegetative spores ( conidia ) or through mycelial fragmentation . Mycelial fragmentation occurs when a fungal mycelium separates into pieces , and each component grows into a separate mycelium . Mycelial fragmentation and vegetative spores maintain clonal populations adapted to a specific niche , and allow more rapid dispersal than sexual reproduction . The " Fungi <unk> " ( fungi lacking the perfect or sexual stage ) or <unk> comprise all the species that lack an observable sexual cycle . 
 = = = Sexual reproduction = = = 
 Sexual reproduction with meiosis exists in all fungal phyla except Glomeromycota . It differs in many aspects from sexual reproduction in animals or plants . Differences also exist between fungal groups and can be used to discriminate species by morphological differences in sexual structures and reproductive strategies . Mating experiments between fungal isolates may identify species on the basis of biological species concepts . The major fungal groupings have initially been delineated based on the morphology of their sexual structures and spores ; for example , the spore @-@ containing structures , asci and basidia , can be used in the identification of ascomycetes and basidiomycetes , respectively . Some species may allow mating only between individuals of opposite mating type , whereas others can mate and sexually reproduce with any other individual or itself . Species of the former mating system are called heterothallic , and of the latter <unk> . 
 Most fungi have both a haploid and a diploid stage in their life cycles . In sexually reproducing fungi , compatible individuals may combine by fusing their hyphae together into an interconnected network ; this process , anastomosis , is required for the initiation of the sexual cycle . Ascomycetes and basidiomycetes go through a dikaryotic stage , in which the nuclei inherited from the two parents do not combine immediately after cell fusion , but remain separate in the hyphal cells ( see <unk> ) . 
 In ascomycetes , dikaryotic hyphae of the hymenium ( the spore @-@ bearing tissue layer ) form a characteristic hook at the hyphal septum . During cell division , formation of the hook ensures proper distribution of the newly divided nuclei into the apical and basal hyphal compartments . An ascus ( plural asci ) is then formed , in which <unk> ( nuclear fusion ) occurs . Asci are embedded in an ascocarp , or fruiting body . <unk> in the asci is followed immediately by meiosis and the production of ascospores . After dispersal , the ascospores may germinate and form a new haploid mycelium . 
 Sexual reproduction in basidiomycetes is similar to that of the ascomycetes . Compatible haploid hyphae fuse to produce a dikaryotic mycelium . However , the dikaryotic phase is more extensive in the basidiomycetes , often also present in the vegetatively growing mycelium . A specialized anatomical structure , called a clamp connection , is formed at each hyphal septum . As with the structurally similar hook in the ascomycetes , the clamp connection in the basidiomycetes is required for controlled transfer of nuclei during cell division , to maintain the dikaryotic stage with two genetically different nuclei in each hyphal compartment . A basidiocarp is formed in which club @-@ like structures known as basidia generate haploid basidiospores after <unk> and meiosis . The most commonly known basidiocarps are mushrooms , but they may also take other forms ( see Morphology section ) . 
 In <unk> ( formerly <unk> ) , haploid hyphae of two individuals fuse , forming a <unk> , a specialized cell structure that becomes a fertile gamete @-@ producing cell . The <unk> develops into a <unk> , a thick @-@ walled spore formed by the union of gametes . When the <unk> germinates , it undergoes meiosis , generating new haploid hyphae , which may then form asexual sporangiospores . These sporangiospores allow the fungus to rapidly disperse and germinate into new genetically identical haploid fungal mycelia . 
 = = = Spore dispersal = = = 
 Both asexual and sexual spores or sporangiospores are often actively dispersed by forcible ejection from their reproductive structures . This ejection ensures exit of the spores from the reproductive structures as well as traveling through the air over long distances . 
 Specialized mechanical and physiological mechanisms , as well as spore surface structures ( such as <unk> ) , enable efficient spore ejection . For example , the structure of the spore @-@ bearing cells in some ascomycete species is such that the buildup of substances affecting cell volume and fluid balance enables the explosive discharge of spores into the air . The forcible discharge of single spores termed <unk> involves formation of a small drop of water ( Buller 's drop ) , which upon contact with the spore leads to its projectile release with an initial acceleration of more than 10 @,@ 000 g ; the net result is that the spore is ejected 0 @.@ 01 – 0 @.@ 02 cm , sufficient distance for it to fall through the gills or pores into the air below . Other fungi , like the puffballs , rely on alternative mechanisms for spore release , such as external mechanical forces . The bird 's nest fungi use the force of falling water drops to liberate the spores from cup @-@ shaped fruiting bodies . Another strategy is seen in the stinkhorns , a group of fungi with lively colors and putrid odor that attract insects to disperse their spores . 
 = = = Other sexual processes = = = 
 Besides regular sexual reproduction with meiosis , certain fungi , such as those in the genera Penicillium and Aspergillus , may exchange genetic material via <unk> processes , initiated by anastomosis between hyphae and plasmogamy of fungal cells . The frequency and relative importance of <unk> events is unclear and may be lower than other sexual processes . It is known to play a role in intraspecific hybridization and is likely required for hybridization between species , which has been associated with major events in fungal evolution . 
 = = Evolution = = 
 In contrast to plants and animals , the early fossil record of the fungi is meager . Factors that likely contribute to the under @-@ representation of fungal species among fossils include the nature of fungal fruiting bodies , which are soft , fleshy , and easily degradable tissues and the microscopic dimensions of most fungal structures , which therefore are not readily evident . Fungal fossils are difficult to distinguish from those of other microbes , and are most easily identified when they resemble extant fungi . Often recovered from a permineralized plant or animal host , these samples are typically studied by making thin @-@ section preparations that can be examined with light microscopy or transmission electron microscopy . Researchers study compression fossils by dissolving the surrounding matrix with acid and then using light or scanning electron microscopy to examine surface details . 
 The earliest fossils possessing features typical of fungi date to the Proterozoic eon , some 1 @,@ 430 million years ago ( Ma ) ; these multicellular benthic organisms had filamentous structures with septa , and were capable of anastomosis . More recent studies ( 2009 ) estimate the arrival of fungal organisms at about 760 – 1060 Ma on the basis of comparisons of the rate of evolution in closely related groups . For much of the Paleozoic Era ( 542 – 251 Ma ) , the fungi appear to have been aquatic and consisted of organisms similar to the extant chytrids in having flagellum @-@ bearing spores . The evolutionary adaptation from an aquatic to a terrestrial lifestyle necessitated a diversification of ecological strategies for obtaining nutrients , including parasitism , <unk> , and the development of mutualistic relationships such as mycorrhiza and <unk> . Recent ( 2009 ) studies suggest that the ancestral ecological state of the Ascomycota was <unk> , and that independent <unk> events have occurred multiple times . 
 It is presumed that the fungi colonized the land during the Cambrian ( 542 – 488 @.@ 3 Ma ) , long before land plants . Fossilized hyphae and spores recovered from the Ordovician of Wisconsin ( 460 Ma ) resemble modern @-@ day <unk> , and existed at a time when the land flora likely consisted of only non @-@ vascular bryophyte @-@ like plants . <unk> , which was probably a fungus or lichen , would have been the tallest organism of the late Silurian . Fungal fossils do not become common and uncontroversial until the early Devonian ( 416 – 359 @.@ 2 Ma ) , when they occur abundantly in the Rhynie chert , mostly as Zygomycota and Chytridiomycota . At about this same time , approximately 400 Ma , the Ascomycota and Basidiomycota diverged , and all modern classes of fungi were present by the Late Carboniferous ( Pennsylvanian , 318 @.@ 1 – 299 Ma ) . 
 Lichen @-@ like fossils have been found in the Doushantuo Formation in southern China dating back to 635 – 551 Ma . Lichens formed a component of the early terrestrial ecosystems , and the estimated age of the oldest terrestrial lichen fossil is 400 Ma ; this date corresponds to the age of the oldest known sporocarp fossil , a <unk> species found in the Rhynie Chert . The oldest fossil with microscopic features resembling modern @-@ day basidiomycetes is <unk> , found permineralized with a fern from the Pennsylvanian . Rare in the fossil record are the <unk> ( a taxon roughly equivalent to the mushroom @-@ producing species of the Agaricomycetes ) . Two amber @-@ preserved specimens provide evidence that the earliest known mushroom @-@ forming fungi ( the extinct species Archaeomarasmius leggetti ) appeared during the late Cretaceous , 90 Ma . 
 Some time after the Permian – Triassic extinction event ( 251 @.@ 4 Ma ) , a fungal spike ( originally thought to be an extraordinary abundance of fungal spores in sediments ) formed , suggesting that fungi were the dominant life form at this time , representing nearly 100 % of the available fossil record for this period . However , the relative proportion of fungal spores relative to spores formed by algal species is difficult to assess , the spike did not appear worldwide , and in many places it did not fall on the Permian – Triassic boundary . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 Although commonly included in botany curricula and textbooks , fungi are more closely related to animals than to plants and are placed with the animals in the monophyletic group of <unk> . Analyses using molecular phylogenetics support a monophyletic origin of the Fungi . The taxonomy of the Fungi is in a state of constant flux , especially due to recent research based on DNA comparisons . These current phylogenetic analyses often overturn classifications based on older and sometimes less discriminative methods based on morphological features and biological species concepts obtained from experimental matings . 
 There is no unique generally accepted system at the higher taxonomic levels and there are frequent name changes at every level , from species upwards . Efforts among researchers are now underway to establish and encourage usage of a unified and more consistent nomenclature . Fungal species can also have multiple scientific names depending on their life cycle and mode ( sexual or asexual ) of reproduction . Web sites such as Index Fungorum and ITIS list current names of fungal species ( with cross @-@ references to older synonyms ) . 
 The 2007 classification of Kingdom Fungi is the result of a large @-@ scale collaborative research effort involving dozens of mycologists and other scientists working on fungal taxonomy . It recognizes seven phyla , two of which — the Ascomycota and the Basidiomycota — are contained within a branch representing subkingdom <unk> . The accompanying cladogram depicts the major fungal taxa and their relationship to <unk> and <unk> organisms , based on the work of Philippe <unk> and " The <unk> : A Comprehensive Treatise on Fungi as Experimental Systems for Basic and Applied Research " . The lengths of the branches are not proportional to evolutionary distances . 
 = = = Taxonomic groups = = = 
 The major phyla ( sometimes called divisions ) of fungi have been classified mainly on the basis of characteristics of their sexual reproductive structures . Currently , seven phyla are proposed : Microsporidia , Chytridiomycota , Blastocladiomycota , <unk> , Glomeromycota , Ascomycota , and Basidiomycota . 
 Phylogenetic analysis has demonstrated that the Microsporidia , unicellular parasites of animals and protists , are fairly recent and highly derived <unk> fungi ( living within the tissue of another species ) . One 2006 study concludes that the Microsporidia are a sister group to the true fungi ; that is , they are each other 's closest evolutionary relative . Hibbett and colleagues suggest that this analysis does not clash with their classification of the Fungi , and although the Microsporidia are elevated to phylum status , it is acknowledged that further analysis is required to clarify evolutionary relationships within this group . 
 The Chytridiomycota are commonly known as chytrids . These fungi are distributed worldwide . <unk> produce <unk> that are capable of active movement through aqueous phases with a single flagellum , leading early taxonomists to classify them as protists . Molecular phylogenies , inferred from rRNA sequences in ribosomes , suggest that the <unk> are a basal group divergent from the other fungal phyla , consisting of four major clades with suggestive evidence for paraphyly or possibly polyphyly . 
 The Blastocladiomycota were previously considered a taxonomic clade within the Chytridiomycota . Recent molecular data and ultrastructural characteristics , however , place the Blastocladiomycota as a sister clade to the Zygomycota , Glomeromycota , and <unk> ( Ascomycota and Basidiomycota ) . The <unk> are saprotrophs , feeding on decomposing organic matter , and they are parasites of all eukaryotic groups . Unlike their close relatives , the chytrids , most of which exhibit <unk> meiosis , the <unk> undergo <unk> meiosis . 
 The <unk> were earlier placed in the phylum <unk> . Members of this small phylum are anaerobic organisms , living in the digestive system of larger herbivorous mammals and in other terrestrial and aquatic environments enriched in cellulose ( e.g. , domestic waste landfill sites ) . They lack mitochondria but contain hydrogenosomes of mitochondrial origin . As the related <unk> , <unk> form <unk> that are posteriorly <unk> or <unk> . 
 Members of the Glomeromycota form arbuscular mycorrhizae , a form of symbiosis wherein fungal hyphae invade plant root cells and both species benefit from the resulting increased supply of nutrients . All known Glomeromycota species reproduce asexually . The symbiotic association between the Glomeromycota and plants is ancient , with evidence dating to 400 million years ago . Formerly part of the Zygomycota ( commonly known as ' sugar ' and ' pin ' molds ) , the Glomeromycota were elevated to phylum status in 2001 and now replace the older phylum Zygomycota . Fungi that were placed in the Zygomycota are now being reassigned to the Glomeromycota , or the subphyla incertae sedis <unk> , <unk> , the <unk> and the <unk> . Some well @-@ known examples of fungi formerly in the Zygomycota include black bread mold ( Rhizopus <unk> ) , and Pilobolus species , capable of ejecting spores several meters through the air . Medically relevant genera include Mucor , <unk> , and Rhizopus . 
 The Ascomycota , commonly known as sac fungi or ascomycetes , constitute the largest taxonomic group within the <unk> . These fungi form meiotic spores called ascospores , which are enclosed in a special sac @-@ like structure called an ascus . This phylum includes morels , a few mushrooms and truffles , unicellular yeasts ( e.g. , of the genera Saccharomyces , <unk> , <unk> , and Candida ) , and many filamentous fungi living as saprotrophs , parasites , and mutualistic symbionts . Prominent and important genera of filamentous ascomycetes include Aspergillus , Penicillium , Fusarium , and Claviceps . Many ascomycete species have only been observed undergoing asexual reproduction ( called anamorphic species ) , but analysis of molecular data has often been able to identify their closest <unk> in the Ascomycota . Because the products of meiosis are retained within the sac @-@ like ascus , ascomycetes have been used for elucidating principles of genetics and heredity ( e.g. , Neurospora crassa ) . 
 Members of the Basidiomycota , commonly known as the club fungi or basidiomycetes , produce <unk> called basidiospores on club @-@ like stalks called basidia . Most common mushrooms belong to this group , as well as rust and smut fungi , which are major pathogens of grains . Other important basidiomycetes include the maize pathogen Ustilago maydis , human commensal species of the genus Malassezia , and the opportunistic human pathogen , Cryptococcus neoformans . 
 = = = Fungus @-@ like organisms = = = 
 Because of similarities in morphology and lifestyle , the slime molds ( <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> and labyrinthulids , now in <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , Opisthokonta and Stramenopiles , respectively ) , water molds ( oomycetes ) and <unk> ( both Stramenopiles ) were formerly classified in the kingdom Fungi , in groups like <unk> , <unk> and <unk> . The slime molds were studied also as protozoans , leading to a <unk> , duplicated taxonomy . 
 Unlike true fungi , the cell walls of oomycetes contain cellulose and lack chitin . <unk> have both chitin and cellulose . Slime molds lack a cell wall during the assimilative phase ( except labyrinthulids , which have a wall of scales ) , and ingest nutrients by ingestion ( phagocytosis , except labyrinthulids ) rather than absorption ( <unk> , as fungi , labyrinthulids , oomycetes and <unk> ) . Neither water molds nor slime molds are closely related to the true fungi , and , therefore , taxonomists no longer group them in the kingdom Fungi . Nonetheless , studies of the oomycetes and myxomycetes are still often included in mycology textbooks and primary research literature . 
 The <unk> and <unk> are <unk> protists , previously thought to be <unk> fungi . Other groups now in Opisthokonta ( e.g. , <unk> , <unk> ) were also at given time classified as fungi . The genus <unk> , now in Stramenopiles , was originally classified as a yeast . <unk> , now in <unk> , was considered a chytrid . The bacteria were also included in fungi in some classifications , as the group <unk> . 
 The <unk> clade , including the " ex @-@ chytrid " <unk> , is a genetically disparate group known mostly from environmental DNA sequences that is a sister group to fungi . Members of the group that have been isolated lack the chitinous cell wall that is characteristic of fungi . 
 The <unk> , protists currently grouped in the <unk> ( Opisthokonta ) , may be the next sister group to the <unk> clade , and as such could be included in an expanded fungal kingdom . 
 = = Ecology = = 
 Although often inconspicuous , fungi occur in every environment on Earth and play very important roles in most ecosystems . Along with bacteria , fungi are the major decomposers in most terrestrial ( and some aquatic ) ecosystems , and therefore play a critical role in biogeochemical cycles and in many food webs . As decomposers , they play an essential role in nutrient cycling , especially as saprotrophs and symbionts , degrading organic matter to inorganic molecules , which can then re @-@ enter anabolic metabolic pathways in plants or other organisms . 
 = = = Symbiosis = = = 
 Many fungi have important symbiotic relationships with organisms from most if not all Kingdoms . These interactions can be mutualistic or antagonistic in nature , or in the case of commensal fungi are of no apparent benefit or detriment to the host . 
 = = = = With plants = = = = 
 Mycorrhizal symbiosis between plants and fungi is one of the most well @-@ known plant – fungus associations and is of significant importance for plant growth and persistence in many ecosystems ; over 90 % of all plant species engage in mycorrhizal relationships with fungi and are dependent upon this relationship for survival . 
 The mycorrhizal symbiosis is ancient , dating to at least 400 million years ago . It often increases the plant 's uptake of inorganic compounds , such as nitrate and phosphate from soils having low concentrations of these key plant nutrients . The fungal partners may also mediate plant @-@ to @-@ plant transfer of carbohydrates and other nutrients . Such mycorrhizal communities are called " common mycorrhizal networks " . A special case of mycorrhiza is myco @-@ heterotrophy , whereby the plant parasitizes the fungus , obtaining all of its nutrients from its fungal symbiont . Some fungal species inhabit the tissues inside roots , stems , and leaves , in which case they are called endophytes . Similar to mycorrhiza , endophytic colonization by fungi may benefit both symbionts ; for example , endophytes of grasses impart to their host increased resistance to herbivores and other environmental stresses and receive food and shelter from the plant in return . 
 = = = = With algae and cyanobacteria = = = = 
 Lichens are a symbiotic relationship between fungi and algae or cyanobacteria . The algae partner in the relationship is referred to in lichen terminology as a " photobiont " . The fungi part of the relationship are composed mostly of various species of ascomycetes and a few basidiomycetes . Lichens occur in every ecosystem on all continents , play a key role in soil formation and the initiation of biological succession , and are the dominating life forms in extreme environments , including polar , alpine , and semiarid desert regions . They are able to grow on inhospitable surfaces , including bare soil , rocks , tree bark , wood , shells , barnacles and leaves . As in <unk> , the photobiont provides sugars and other carbohydrates via photosynthesis to the fungus , while the fungus provides minerals and water to the photobiont . The functions of both symbiotic organisms are so closely intertwined that they function almost as a single organism ; in most cases the resulting organism differs greatly from the individual components . <unk> is a common mode of nutrition for fungi ; around 20 % of fungi — between 17 @,@ 500 and 20 @,@ 000 described species — are lichenized . Characteristics common to most lichens include obtaining organic carbon by photosynthesis , slow growth , small size , long life , long @-@ lasting ( seasonal ) vegetative reproductive structures , mineral nutrition obtained largely from airborne sources , and greater tolerance of desiccation than most other photosynthetic organisms in the same habitat . 
 = = = = With insects = = = = 
 Many insects also engage in mutualistic relationships with fungi . Several groups of ants cultivate fungi in the order Agaricales as their primary food source , while ambrosia beetles cultivate various species of fungi in the bark of trees that they infest . Likewise , females of several wood wasp species ( genus Sirex ) inject their eggs together with spores of the wood @-@ rotting fungus Amylostereum areolatum into the sapwood of pine trees ; the growth of the fungus provides ideal nutritional conditions for the development of the wasp larvae . At least one species of stingless bee has a relationship with a fungus in the genus <unk> , where the larvae consume and depend on fungus transferred from old to new nests . Termites on the African savannah are also known to cultivate fungi , and yeasts of the genera Candida and <unk> inhabit the gut of a wide range of insects , including neuropterans , beetles , and cockroaches ; it is not known whether these fungi benefit their hosts . The larvae of many families of <unk> flies , particularly those within the superfamily <unk> such as the Mycetophilidae and some <unk> feed on fungal fruiting bodies and sterile mycorrhizae . 
 = = = = As pathogens and parasites = = = = 
 Many fungi are parasites on plants , animals ( including humans ) , and other fungi . Serious pathogens of many cultivated plants causing extensive damage and losses to agriculture and forestry include the rice blast fungus Magnaporthe oryzae , tree pathogens such as Ophiostoma ulmi and Ophiostoma novo @-@ ulmi causing Dutch elm disease , and <unk> parasitica responsible for chestnut blight , and plant pathogens in the genera Fusarium , Ustilago , Alternaria , and Cochliobolus . Some carnivorous fungi , like Paecilomyces lilacinus , are predators of nematodes , which they capture using an array of specialized structures such as constricting rings or adhesive nets . 
 Some fungi can cause serious diseases in humans , several of which may be fatal if untreated . These include aspergillosis , candidiasis , coccidioidomycosis , <unk> , histoplasmosis , <unk> , and <unk> . Furthermore , persons with immuno @-@ deficiencies are particularly susceptible to disease by genera such as Aspergillus , Candida , <unk> , Histoplasma , and Pneumocystis . Other fungi can attack eyes , nails , hair , and especially skin , the so @-@ called <unk> and <unk> fungi , and cause local infections such as ringworm and athlete 's foot . Fungal spores are also a cause of allergies , and fungi from different taxonomic groups can evoke allergic reactions . 
 = = Mycotoxins = = 
 Many fungi produce biologically active compounds , several of which are toxic to animals or plants and are therefore called mycotoxins . Of particular relevance to humans are mycotoxins produced by molds causing food spoilage , and poisonous mushrooms ( see above ) . Particularly infamous are the lethal amatoxins in some Amanita mushrooms , and ergot alkaloids , which have a long history of causing serious epidemics of ergotism ( St Anthony 's Fire ) in people consuming rye or related cereals contaminated with sclerotia of the ergot fungus , Claviceps purpurea . Other notable mycotoxins include the <unk> , which are insidious liver toxins and highly carcinogenic metabolites produced by certain Aspergillus species often growing in or on grains and nuts consumed by humans , <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> ( e.g. , T @-@ 2 mycotoxin ) and <unk> , which have significant impact on human food supplies or animal livestock . 
 Mycotoxins are secondary metabolites ( or natural products ) , and research has established the existence of biochemical pathways solely for the purpose of producing mycotoxins and other natural products in fungi . Mycotoxins may provide fitness benefits in terms of physiological adaptation , competition with other microbes and fungi , and protection from consumption ( <unk> ) . 
 = = Pathogenic mechanisms = = 
 Ustilago maydis is a pathogenic plant fungus that causes smut disease in maize and <unk> . Plants have evolved efficient defense systems against pathogenic microbes such as U. maydis . A rapid defense reaction after pathogen attack is the oxidative burst where the plant produces reactive oxygen species at the site of the attempted invasion . U. maydis can respond to the oxidative burst with an oxidative stress response , regulated by the gene <unk> . The response protects U. maydis from the host defense , and is necessary for the pathogen ’ s virulence . Furthermore , U. maydis has a well @-@ established recombinational DNA repair system which acts during mitosis and meiosis . The system may assist the pathogen in surviving DNA damage arising from the host plant ’ s oxidative defensive response to infection . 
 Cryptococcus neoformans is an encapsulated yeast that can live in both plants and animals . C. neoformans usually infects the lungs , where it is phagocytosed by alveolar macrophages . Some C. neoformans can survive inside macrophages , which appears to be the basis for latency , disseminated disease , and resistance to antifungal agents . One mechanism by which C. neoformans survives the hostile macrophage environment is by up @-@ regulating the expression of genes involved in the oxidative stress response . Another mechanism involves meiosis . The majority of C. neoformans are mating " type a " . <unk> of mating " type a " ordinarily have haploid nuclei , but they can become diploid ( perhaps by <unk> or by stimulated nuclear fusion ) to form <unk> . The diploid nuclei of <unk> can undergo meiosis , including recombination , to form haploid basidiospores that can be dispersed . This process is referred to as monokaryotic <unk> this process requires a gene called DMC1 , which is a conserved homologue of genes recA in bacteria and RAD51 in eukaryotes , that mediates homologous chromosome pairing during meiosis and repair of DNA double @-@ strand breaks . Thus , C. neoformans can undergo a meiosis , monokaryotic fruiting , that promotes recombinational repair in the oxidative , DNA damaging environment of the host macrophage , and the repair capability may contribute to its virulence . 
 = = Human use = = 
 The human use of fungi for food preparation or preservation and other purposes is extensive and has a long history . Mushroom farming and mushroom gathering are large industries in many countries . The study of the historical uses and sociological impact of fungi is known as <unk> . Because of the capacity of this group to produce an enormous range of natural products with antimicrobial or other biological activities , many species have long been used or are being developed for industrial production of antibiotics , vitamins , and anti @-@ cancer and cholesterol @-@ lowering drugs . More recently , methods have been developed for genetic engineering of fungi , enabling metabolic engineering of fungal species . For example , genetic modification of yeast species — which are easy to grow at fast rates in large fermentation vessels — has opened up ways of pharmaceutical production that are potentially more efficient than production by the original source organisms . 
 = = = Therapeutic uses = = = 
 = = = = Modern <unk> = = = = 
 Many species produce metabolites that are major sources of pharmacologically active drugs . Particularly important are the antibiotics , including the penicillins , a structurally related group of β @-@ lactam antibiotics that are synthesized from small peptides . Although naturally occurring penicillins such as penicillin G ( produced by Penicillium <unk> ) have a relatively narrow spectrum of biological activity , a wide range of other penicillins can be produced by chemical modification of the natural penicillins . Modern penicillins are semisynthetic compounds , obtained initially from fermentation cultures , but then structurally altered for specific desirable properties . Other antibiotics produced by fungi include : ciclosporin , commonly used as an immunosuppressant during transplant surgery ; and <unk> acid , used to help control infection from methicillin @-@ resistant Staphylococcus aureus bacteria . Widespread use of antibiotics for the treatment of bacterial diseases , such as tuberculosis , syphilis , leprosy , and others began in the early 20th century and continues to date . In nature , antibiotics of fungal or bacterial origin appear to play a dual role : at high concentrations they act as chemical defense against competition with other microorganisms in species @-@ rich environments , such as the rhizosphere , and at low concentrations as quorum @-@ sensing molecules for intra- or interspecies signaling . Other drugs produced by fungi include <unk> isolated from Penicillium <unk> , used to treat fungal infections , and statins ( HMG @-@ CoA reductase inhibitors ) , used to inhibit cholesterol synthesis . Examples of statins found in fungi include <unk> from Penicillium citrinum and <unk> from Aspergillus <unk> and the oyster mushroom . 
 = = = = Traditional and folk medicine = = = = 
 Certain mushrooms enjoy usage as therapeutics in folk medicines , such as Traditional Chinese medicine . Notable medicinal mushrooms with a well @-@ documented history of use include Agaricus <unk> , <unk> lucidum , and <unk> sinensis . Research has identified compounds produced by these and other fungi that have inhibitory biological effects against viruses and cancer cells . Specific metabolites , such as polysaccharide @-@ K , ergotamine , and β @-@ lactam antibiotics , are routinely used in clinical medicine . The shiitake mushroom is a source of <unk> , a clinical drug approved for use in cancer treatments in several countries , including Japan . In Europe and Japan , polysaccharide @-@ K ( brand name <unk> ) , a chemical derived from Trametes versicolor , is an approved adjuvant for cancer therapy . 
 = = = Cultured foods = = = 
 Baker 's yeast or Saccharomyces cerevisiae , a unicellular fungus , is used to make bread and other wheat @-@ based products , such as pizza dough and dumplings . Yeast species of the genus Saccharomyces are also used to produce alcoholic beverages through fermentation . <unk> <unk> mold ( Aspergillus oryzae ) is an essential ingredient in brewing <unk> ( soy sauce ) and sake , and the preparation of <unk> , while Rhizopus species are used for making tempeh . Several of these fungi are domesticated species that were bred or selected according to their capacity to ferment food without producing harmful mycotoxins ( see below ) , which are produced by very closely related <unk> . Quorn , a meat substitute , is made from Fusarium venenatum . 
 = = = Edible and poisonous species = = = 
 Edible mushrooms are well @-@ known examples of fungi . Many are commercially raised , but others must be harvested from the wild . Agaricus bisporus , sold as button mushrooms when small or Portobello mushrooms when larger , is a commonly eaten species , used in salads , soups , and many other dishes . Many Asian fungi are commercially grown and have increased in popularity in the West . They are often available fresh in grocery stores and markets , including straw mushrooms ( Volvariella volvacea ) , oyster mushrooms ( Pleurotus ostreatus ) , <unk> ( <unk> <unk> ) , and <unk> ( Flammulina spp . ) . 
 There are many more mushroom species that are harvested from the wild for personal consumption or commercial sale . Milk mushrooms , morels , chanterelles , truffles , black trumpets , and porcini mushrooms ( Boletus edulis ) ( also known as king boletes ) demand a high price on the market . They are often used in gourmet dishes . 
 Certain types of cheeses require inoculation of milk curds with fungal species that impart a unique flavor and texture to the cheese . Examples include the blue color in cheeses such as Stilton or Roquefort , which are made by inoculation with Penicillium <unk> . Molds used in cheese production are non @-@ toxic and are thus safe for human consumption ; however , mycotoxins ( e.g. , <unk> , <unk> C , <unk> , or others ) may accumulate because of growth of other fungi during cheese ripening or storage . 
 Many mushroom species are poisonous to humans , with toxicities ranging from slight digestive problems or allergic reactions as well as hallucinations to severe organ failures and death . Genera with mushrooms containing deadly toxins include Conocybe , Galerina , Lepiota , and , the most infamous , Amanita . The latter genus includes the destroying angel ( A. virosa ) and the death cap ( A. phalloides ) , the most common cause of deadly mushroom poisoning . The false morel ( Gyromitra esculenta ) is occasionally considered a delicacy when cooked , yet can be highly toxic when eaten raw . Tricholoma equestre was considered edible until it was implicated in serious poisonings causing rhabdomyolysis . Fly agaric mushrooms ( Amanita muscaria ) also cause occasional non @-@ fatal poisonings , mostly as a result of ingestion for its hallucinogenic properties . Historically , fly agaric was used by different peoples in Europe and Asia and its present usage for religious or shamanic purposes is reported from some ethnic groups such as the <unk> people of north @-@ eastern Siberia . 
 As it is difficult to accurately identify a safe mushroom without proper training and knowledge , it is often advised to assume that a wild mushroom is poisonous and not to consume it . 
 = = = Pest control = = = 
 In agriculture , fungi may be useful if they actively compete for nutrients and space with pathogenic microorganisms such as bacteria or other fungi via the competitive exclusion principle , or if they are parasites of these pathogens . For example , certain species may be used to eliminate or suppress the growth of harmful plant pathogens , such as insects , mites , weeds , nematodes , and other fungi that cause diseases of important crop plants . This has generated strong interest in practical applications that use these fungi in the biological control of these agricultural pests . <unk> fungi can be used as biopesticides , as they actively kill insects . Examples that have been used as biological insecticides are Beauveria bassiana , Metarhizium spp , <unk> spp , Paecilomyces ( <unk> ) spp , and <unk> <unk> . <unk> fungi of grasses of the genus <unk> , such as N. <unk> , produce alkaloids that are toxic to a range of invertebrate and vertebrate herbivores . These alkaloids protect grass plants from herbivory , but several endophyte alkaloids can poison grazing animals , such as cattle and sheep . <unk> cultivars of pasture or forage grasses with <unk> endophytes is one approach being used in grass breeding programs ; the fungal strains are selected for producing only alkaloids that increase resistance to herbivores such as insects , while being non @-@ toxic to livestock . 
 = = = Bioremediation = = = 
 Certain fungi , in particular " white rot " fungi , can degrade insecticides , herbicides , <unk> , creosote , coal tars , and heavy fuels and turn them into carbon dioxide , water , and basic elements . Fungi have been shown to <unk> uranium oxides , suggesting they may have application in the bioremediation of radioactively polluted sites . 
 = = = Model organisms = = = 
 Several pivotal discoveries in biology were made by researchers using fungi as model organisms , that is , fungi that grow and sexually reproduce rapidly in the laboratory . For example , the one gene @-@ one enzyme hypothesis was formulated by scientists using the bread mold Neurospora crassa to test their biochemical theories . Other important model fungi are Aspergillus nidulans and the yeasts <unk> cerevisiae and <unk> pombe , each of which with a long history of use to investigate issues in eukaryotic cell biology and genetics , such as cell cycle regulation , chromatin structure , and gene regulation . Other fungal models have more recently emerged that address specific biological questions relevant to medicine , plant pathology , and industrial uses ; examples include Candida albicans , a dimorphic , opportunistic human pathogen , Magnaporthe <unk> , a plant pathogen , and <unk> <unk> , a yeast widely used for eukaryotic protein production . 
 = = = Others = = = 
 Fungi are used extensively to produce industrial chemicals like citric , <unk> , lactic , and malic acids , and industrial enzymes , such as lipases used in biological detergents , <unk> used in making cellulosic ethanol and stonewashed jeans , and amylases , <unk> , proteases and <unk> . Several species , most notably Psilocybin mushrooms ( colloquially known as magic mushrooms ) , are ingested for their psychedelic properties , both recreationally and religiously . 
 = = = Cited literature = = = 
 = Devin Hester = 
 Devin <unk> Hester ( born November 4 , 1982 ) is an American football wide receiver and return specialist who is currently a free agent . He was drafted by the Chicago Bears in the second round of the 2006 NFL Draft . He played college football at Miami , where he was the first player in the university ’ s recent history to play in all three phases of American football : offense , defense and special teams . 
 Originally drafted as a cornerback , Hester quickly made an impact as a kick returner , and later became one of the team 's starting wide receivers . Hester holds the NFL record for most all @-@ time return touchdowns ( punt and kick combined ) and most all @-@ time punt return touchdowns . He is widely regarded as one of the best return specialists in the NFL ’ s history . 
 = = Early years = = 
 Devin Hester was born to Juanita Brown and Lenorris Hester , Sr. in Riviera Beach , Florida . His parents separated when he was a toddler . Before he became a teenager , his mother was severely injured in a car accident , while his father died of cancer two years later . His step @-@ father , Derrick Brown , and brother , Lenorris , Jr . , helped Hester escape his depression and rebuild his life by introducing him to football . He soon returned to his normal life and began to excel in sports and academics . 
 During his youth , Hester enjoyed following the Dallas Cowboys . He especially idolized Deion Sanders , Emmitt Smith and Michael Irvin . He was also a fan of the Chicago Bulls during the Michael Jordan and Phil Jackson era . Fred Taylor of the University of Florida was Hester 's favorite athlete . In addition to football , he also enjoyed playing soccer and following baseball . 
 = = High school career = = 
 Hester attended first Palm Beach Gardens High , then on to Suncoast High School , where he played football as a cornerback , wide receiver , return specialist , and running back . He earned recognition from <unk> as the top high school prospect in Florida and Parade , who named Hester onto their All @-@ American team . Hester also participated in the 2002 <unk> Bowl , where he returned a kick for an 80 @-@ yard touchdown . His success prompted his teammates to nickname him " Sugar Foot . " 
 Considered a five @-@ star recruit by Rivals.com , Hester was listed as the No. 2 cornerback in the nation in 2002 . 
 = = = Track and field = = = 
 Hester was also a standout track athlete . While he was at Riviera Beach ( FL ) Suncoast Co . , he received All @-@ America accolades , and he ranked 2nd nationally in the long jump as a junior . He also captured the 2004 Big EAST Indoor long jump title as a member of the University of Miami track and field team , with a leap of 7 @.@ 37 meters . He also competed in the 60 meters and 100 meters , posting personal bests of 6 @.@ 77 seconds and 10 @.@ 62 , <unk> seconds , respectively . 
 = = = = Personal bests = = = = 
 = = College career = = 
 After completing high school , Hester enrolled at the University of Miami , where he played for the Miami Hurricanes football team from 2003 to 2005 . As a sophomore in 2004 , he earned national recognition as a kick returner after being named a first @-@ team All @-@ American by the Walter Camp Football Foundation and The Sporting News ' . His ability to thrust laterally and break away from pursuers made him one of the nation ’ s most dangerous return specialists . During his freshman year , Hester returned an opening kick for a 98 @-@ yard touchdown against the Florida Gators . In a game against Duke in 2005 , Hester broke six tackles while returning an 81 @-@ yard punt . Ultimately , Hester completed his college career with a total of six touchdowns from kick returns , including one blocked field goal return . He also scored one rushing and receiving touchdown and recorded five interceptions as a defensive back . 
 Hester became the first football player in the Miami Hurricanes ' recent history to play as member of the special , offensive , and defensive teams . He was known as " Hurricane Hester " by his fans and teammates . During his productive tenure at the University of Miami , Hester befriended Deion Sanders through Ed Reed , an alumnus of the University of Miami , and friend of Sanders . Sanders counseled , advised , and encouraged Hester . Hester was also known as " Anytime " in college , which is a tribute to Sanders ' nickname , " Prime Time " . He also adopted Sanders ' signature touchdown dance , and showboating maneuvers , which he carried to his future NFL career . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 = = = 2006 NFL Combine = = = 
 = = = Chicago Bears = = = 
 = = = = 2006 = = = = 
 Hester began his professional career in the National Football League with the Chicago Bears , who selected him in the second round of the 2006 NFL Draft . The team originally drafted Hester as a cornerback , but they intended to play him as a return specialist , following the retirement of Jerry <unk> , and departure of Bobby Wade . The team 's decision to draft Hester was initially criticized by fans and sports analysts , who believed the Bears should have spent their early picks on offensive prospects . 
 In his first thirteen weeks as a professional football player , Hester recorded six return touchdowns , including a punt return in his NFL debut , and a then @-@ record tying 108 @-@ yard touchdown from a missed field goal against the New York Giants . He also returned a punt for a clutch 83 @-@ yard game @-@ winning touchdown against the Arizona Cardinals to give the Bears the lead in a comeback win , and two kickoff returns in one game against the St. Louis Rams . Following his record @-@ breaking game during Week 14 , opposing teams exercised additional caution when allowing Hester to return kicks . During the postseason Hester ran back a punt at a critical moment against the Seattle Seahawks , but it was called back on a blocking penalty . Regardless , the Bears won both NFC playoffs rounds , and advanced to Super Bowl XLI to play the Indianapolis Colts . He started the game on a high note for the Bears by returning the game ’ s opening kick for a touchdown . The feat was the first touchdown return of an opening kickoff in Super Bowl history . It also marked the quickest touchdown scored in Super Bowl history as well as the quickest lead ever taken by any team , though the latter record has since been surpassed by the Seahawks in Super Bowl XLVIII . Following the kick , the Colts did not kick the ball directly to Hester , significantly limiting the Bears ’ return efforts . 
 Hester 's feats in 2006 earned him three NFC Special Teams Player of the Week Awards and a trip to the 2007 Pro Bowl . After the 2006 season ended , he was named the NFC Player of the Month for December and was a finalist for 2006 Pepsi NFL Rookie of the Year . He was also voted onto the Associated Press ’ s 2006 All @-@ Pro team with 48 and a half votes , finishing fourth behind LaDainian Tomlinson , Champ Bailey , and Jason Taylor who all received 50 votes . He finished the 2006 season by accumulating three touchdowns for 600 yards on 47 punt returns , and two touchdowns for 528 yards on 20 kick returns , thus making him one of the league ’ s most productive kick and punt returners . Even without taking an offensive snap prior to Week 14 , Hester was the Bears ' second leading scorer , behind kicker Robbie Gould . On a negative note , Hester struggled to control the football at times , having games with multiple fumbles on at least two separate occasions . 
 Many fans speculated that Hester ’ s speed and prior experience as a wide receiver would earn him a spot on the Bears ' offense , similar to teammate Rashied Davis . While Lovie Smith dismissed the speculation , he played Hester as a wide receiver for one play against the Tampa Bay Buccaneers on December 17 , 2006 . Hester attributes his talent to his mentor , Deion Sanders , who Hester claims helped him perfect his return game . Sanders , a former cornerback and kick returner , compliments Hester after every productive performance . However , Sanders also berated Hester for taunting another player en route to his second touchdown return against the St. Louis Rams . His teammates and coaches have also praised Hester . After the 2006 season , he was voted to receive the team 's Brian Piccolo Award , which is given to a player who possesses a good character and work ethic . Bears fans and the local media nicknamed Hester the " Windy City Flyer " during his first year in Chicago . 
 = = = = 2007 = = = = 
 Shortly after losing Super Bowl XLI , Hester and special teams coach Dave Toub spent a significant amount of time working on new return strategies and formations . Ultimately , Lovie Smith converted Hester into a wide receiver in order to increase the number of opportunities he would receive during a game . Hester , who originally played as a wide receiver at the University of Miami , was initially hesitant about making the switch to offense , as he wished to follow in the footsteps of Deion Sanders . However , the Bears ’ coaching staff eventually persuaded Hester to make the transition over the summer . During the 2007 off @-@ season , Hester won the Best Breakthrough Athlete ESPY Award . 
 Although NFL rules generally require wide receivers to wear jersey numbers in the 10 @-@ 19 and 80 @-@ 89 range , players who later change positions are allowed to keep their previous number , as long as it is not within the 50 @-@ 79 range for eligible receiver purposes . Hester was allowed to keep number 23 , a number normally used for cornerbacks , since it sits outside the 50 @-@ 79 range . Along with former Pittsburgh Steelers wide receiver Dwight Stone , who wore number 20 during his eight @-@ year stint in Pittsburgh , Hester was one of two wide receivers to wear a 20 's jersey number since the NFL adopted the current uniform numbering system in 1973 . 
 Hester returned his first touchdown of the season , a 73 @-@ yard punt return , against the Kansas City Chiefs during Week 2 . He nearly recorded a second touchdown return , but the play was negated by a holding penalty . Hester established himself as a threat on offense , when he caught an 81 @-@ yard touchdown pass from Brian Griese against the Minnesota Vikings . He also returned a punt for an 89 @-@ yard touchdown , though the Bears lost the game . In the weeks to come , many opposing special teams began to kick the ball away from Hester , contributing to , according to Mike Pereira , a 132 % increase in kickoffs that went out @-@ of @-@ bounds . Rod Marinelli , the head coach of the Detroit Lions , placed a strong emphasis on kicking the ball away from Hester , saying , " kick the ball into Lake Michigan and make sure it ( sinks ) to the bottom . " 
 Before the Bears ’ Week 12 matchup against the Denver Broncos , Todd Sauerbrun infamously stated that he would kick the ball to Hester . Hester , who had not returned a kick for a touchdown in almost a month , responded by returning a punt and kickoff for touchdowns . Keith Olbermann , a commentator for NBC Sunday Night Football , awarded Sauerbrun with the dubious " Worst Person in the NFL Award " for kicking the ball to Hester and failing to tackle him . The two touchdowns gave Hester the most kick returns for touchdowns in the Bears ’ franchise history . Hester concluded the season with a 64 @-@ yard punt return for a touchdown and a 55 @-@ yard touchdown reception against the New Orleans Saints . He was even given the opportunity to throw a pass on a variation of a wide receiver reverse , but he was sacked while motioning to Bernard Berrian . 
 Hester finished the season with six kicks returned for touchdowns , which set a league record . He finished the season ranking fourth on the League ’ s all @-@ time combined kick return list , behind Brian Mitchell ( 13 ) , Eric Metcalf ( 12 ) , and Dante Hall ( 12 ) . Additionally , he amassed 299 yards on twenty receptions as a receiver , though he was often used as a decoy . His play on offense received mixed commentary . While the Bears ’ coaching staff believed Hester showed enough progress to become one of the team 's top receivers in 2008 , Hester was prone to making small errors , including running routes incorrectly or dropping catches . He drew a fifteen @-@ yard facemask penalty while attempting to fend off a would @-@ be tackler in a game against the Saints , and received a $ 5 @,@ 000 fine . Nevertheless , Hester concluded the season with four Player of the Week Awards , giving him a franchise @-@ high total of seven in his career , and an invitation to the 2008 Pro Bowl . 
 = = = = 2008 = = = = 
 Prior to the beginning of the 2008 season , Hester stated that he would not attend the Bears ' summer camp unless the team offered him a new contract . He further voiced his displeasure with his current contract in a phone interview with the Chicago Tribune , commenting , " I can ’ t go out and play this year making $ 445 @,@ 000 . Come on , man . " Adam <unk> believed that the Bears were puzzled over how Hester should be classified ( as a wide receiver or a return specialist of such a star caliber ) , and be offered a contract accordingly . After receiving a $ 30 @,@ 000 fine for not attending two days of training , Hester returned to the team 's camp . The team later offered him a new four @-@ year contract extension , worth over $ 40 million . 
 Hester missed the third game of the season after tearing cartilage in his ribs during the previous week . He returned to the field in the team 's Week 4 contest against the Philadelphia Eagles , where he caught his first touchdown of the season . Lovie Smith gave Hester his first starting job as a wide receiver the next week , in place of the injured Brandon Lloyd . Hester went on to catch five passes for 66 yards and one touchdown . In the following week , Hester totaled 87 yards on six receptions . 
 After a Week 8 bye , Hester caught four passes for 42 yards and had an 11 @-@ yard run against the Detroit Lions . He eventually lost his kick return duties to <unk> Manning , but began receiving more playing time as a wide receiver . Between Week 12 and 15 , Hester caught 17 passes for 250 yards and one touchdown . David Haugh of the Chicago Tribune regarded Hester as the team 's " biggest threat in the passing game . " He concluded the season by catching 51 passes for a team high 665 yards . Unlike his previous two seasons in the NFL , Hester did not record a single touchdown return and only averaged 6 @.@ 2 yards per punt return . Lovie Smith commented on Hester at the end of the season by saying , " I know his returns dropped off a little bit this year , but his plate was full there for a while . We think we have a happy medium now for him as a punt returner and continuing to develop as a receiver . " Hester was also selected to play in the 2009 Pro Bowl as a third alternate . 
 = = = = 2009 = = = = 
 After the acquisition of Jay Cutler , Hester took on the role as the de facto number one wide receiver . In the first game of the season , Hester caught seven passes from Cutler for 90 yards , including a 36 @-@ yard touchdown reception . In the following weeks Hester began to develop a rapport with Cutler and amassed 634 receiving yards and three touchdowns though the first ten weeks of the season . He played the best game of the season on October 25 , 2009 against the Cincinnati Bengals , catching eight passes for 101 yards and a touchdown . In a game against the St. Louis Rams during the thirteenth week of the season , Hester injured his calf and missed three starts . Hester returned to play in the Bears season finale against the Detroit Lions , catching three passes for 75 yards . Despite missing the three starts , Hester led the team with 757 receiving yards , and finished behind Greg Olsen in receptions . Hester built his reputation around his kick returning abilities , but his kickoff @-@ returning duties decreased significantly following the 2007 season finale . He told the Chicago Tribune that he plans on spending the offseason honing his receiving and returning skills by strengthening in his legs , especially to fully recover from the calf injury he sustained earlier . 
 = = = = 2010 = = = = 
 During the off @-@ season , Hester worked on his speed and conditioning by prioritizing running over weight training . Bears offensive coordinator , Mike Martz , gave Hester the opportunity to work with Isaac Bruce , who was part of Martz 's " Greatest Show on Turf " . Bruce advised Hester on route @-@ running and basic wide receiver fundamentals . Hester appeared in three preseason games , where he recorded five receptions for 64 @-@ yards . 
 On September 19 , the regular season , Hester caught four passes for 77 yards and a one @-@ handed catch for a touchdown against the Dallas Cowboys . The following week , Hester returned a punt for a 62 @-@ yard touchdown in a close game against the Green Bay Packers . This was his first touchdown return since the final week of the 2007 season against the New Orleans Saints . On October 17 , Hester returned 2 punts for 93 yards and an 89 @-@ yard touchdown , in a 23 – 20 loss against the Seattle Seahawks . The touchdown tied the record for most combined kick and punt return touchdowns in a career with Brian Mitchell ( 13 ) . In week 10 of the regular season , Hester caught 4 passes for 38 yards and a 19 @-@ yard touchdown against the Minnesota Vikings . Hester was given back his kick return duties , and returned 2 kicks for 100 yards including a run back of 68 yards . Hester also ran back 2 punts for 47 yards including a return of 42 yards . 2 weeks later , Hester caught 3 balls for 86 yards from Jay Cutler , and returned a kick 46 yards in a 31 – 26 win against the Philadelphia Eagles . On December 20 in a game against the Minnesota Vikings , Hester scored on a 15 @-@ yard touchdown pass from Jay Cutler . Later , Hester returned a Chris <unk> punt 64 yards for a touchdown , which set the all @-@ time NFL record for combined kickoff and punt returns for touchdown with 14 , passing Brian Mitchell . It was the tenth punt return for touchdown of his career , tying Eric Metcalf 's record for the most punt return touchdowns in a career . 
 Hester finished the season with 40 receptions for 475 yards and 4 touchdowns . As a return specialist , he amassed 564 yards on punt returns , while averaging 17 @.@ 1 yards per return and scored 3 touchdowns . Hester was the third leading scorer , behind running back Matt Forte and kicker Robbie Gould . His accomplishments in the 2010 season earned him 2 NFC Special Teams Player of The Week Awards , a trip to the 2011 Pro Bowl , and a selection to the All @-@ Pro Team . Hester was ranked 32nd best player in the League in a poll where active NFL players ranked their top 100 peers . 
 = = = = 2011 = = = = 
 Prior to the 2011 season , the NFL passed a new rule that moved kickoffs to the 35 @-@ yard line from the 30 @-@ yard line . The change was a result of a player safety initiative to reduce the amount of injuries and concussions that would occur during kick @-@ offs . The rule change directly resulted in a higher number of touchbacks and fewer returns . Hester commented on the situation stating , “ They got a couple touchbacks but you ’ ve still got guys bringing it out and at the end of the day that rule is pointless . ” 
 On October 2 , 2011 , Hester became the NFL 's all @-@ time leader in punt return touchdowns with 11 when he returned a punt 69 yards for a touchdown against the Carolina Panthers surpassing Eric Metcalf 's record . On October 16 , Hester returned a kickoff for a 98 @-@ yard TD against the Vikings . On November 13 , Hester returned a punt 82 yards for a touchdown against the Detroit Lions . 
 = = = = 2012 = = = = 
 On April 30 , 2012 , Bears offensive coordinator Mike Tice and general manager Phil Emery announced that Hester 's role would be reduced down to at least 4th @-@ string , and Tice mentioned that the Bears would utilize Hester in a series of plays called the " Hester Package " , instead of an every @-@ down receiver . In the season , Hester caught 23 passes , a career low , while only catching one touchdown in Week 4 against the Dallas Cowboys . He also failed to return a kick / punt for a touchdown , and ranked 22nd in punt return average during 2012 . After Lovie Smith 's firing on December 31 , Hester stated that he considered retirement , though he tweeted that his consideration was not related to Smith . 
 = = = = 2013 = = = = 
 Hester exclusively saw play @-@ time as a return specialist when Marc Trestman became the Bears ’ head coach . In week two against the Minnesota Vikings , Hester broke the team record for most kickoff return yards in a game with 249 . Four weeks later against the New York Giants , Hester passed Glyn Milburn for the most all @-@ time kickoff return yards in franchise history with 4 @,@ 643 yards . Against the Washington Redskins , Hester returned a punt 81 yards for a touchdown for his 19th career return touchdown , tying Deion Sanders ' record . In addition to Hester 's NFL records , he is also the leader in career punt returns ( 264 ) and punt return yards ( 3 @,@ 241 ) among active players . Hester ended the 2013 season having averaged 27 @.@ 7 kickoff return yards and 14 @.@ 2 punt return yards , while also leading the league in kickoff return yards with 1 @,@ 442 . 
 Hester became a free agent on March 11 , 2014 . He released a statement on March 5 , 2014 that the Bears did not intend to re @-@ sign him . Hester thanked the Bears organization and fan base for their support throughout his time in Chicago . Phil Emery , the Bears ' general manager , commented on Hester 's legacy , stating , " While Devin has redefined the pinnacle standard of the return position in the NFL , the memories and contributions he has given us cannot be measured by stats or numbers . " 
 = = = Atlanta Falcons = = = 
 = = = = 2014 = = = = 
 Hester signed a three @-@ year contract with the Atlanta Falcons on March 20 , 2014 . In his debut game with the Falcons , Hester caught 5 passes for 99 yards , helping lead the Falcons to a 37 @-@ 34 overtime victory over the New Orleans Saints . During Week 3 , Hester brought back a 62 @-@ yard punt for his 20th career touchdown return , breaking the record for career non @-@ offensive touchdowns he previously shared with Deion Sanders . Also in the same game , Hester recorded a rushing touchdown , forced fumble and fumble recovery . Hester was named the NFC 's Special Teams Player of the Week for his accomplishments . 
 = = = = 2015 = = = = 
 Hester missed a majority of the 2015 NFL season due to a turf toe injury . The Falcons activated him from the injury reserve for the final five games of the season , but only used Hester on special teams . He tallied 235 yards kick return yards and 34 punt return yards , but failed to record a touchdown . Hester underwent foot surgery in January 2016 to repair the toe injury he sustained earlier in the season . 
 = = = = 2016 = = = = 
 On July 26 , Hester was released by the Atlanta Falcons . 
 = = Statistics and records = = 
 = = = NFL career statistics = = = 
 * Hester returned a Jay Feely missed field goal 108 yards for a touchdown in a game against the Giants . 
 = = = NFL records = = = 
 Combined special teams return touchdowns , career : 20 ( 14 punts , 5 kickoffs , 1 missed field goal ) 
 Most non @-@ offensive touchdowns , career : 20 
 Most kickoff and punt return touchdowns , career : 19 
 Punt return touchdowns , career : 14 
 Punt return touchdowns , season : 4 ( 2007 ) 
 Kickoff return touchdowns , game : 2 ( Chicago Bears at St. Louis Rams , December 11 , 2006 ) 
 tied with many other players 
 Combined return touchdowns , season : 6 ( 2007 ) ( 4 punts , 2 kickoffs ) 
 Combined return touchdowns , rookie , season : 5 ( 2006 ) ( 3 punts , 2 kickoffs ) 
 Combined return touchdowns , game : 2 , twice 
 2 , Chicago Bears at St. Louis Rams , December 11 , 2006 ( 2 kickoffs ) 
 2 , Chicago Bears vs. Denver Broncos , November 25 , 2007 ( 1 punt , 1 kickoff ) 
 Non @-@ offensive touchdowns , season : 6 , twice 
 6 , 2006 ( 3 punts , 2 kickoffs , 1 missed field goal ) 
 6 , 2007 ( 4 punts , 2 kickoffs ) 
 = = = Chicago Bears franchise records = = = 
 Most punt returns , lifetime : 264 
 Most punt return yards , lifetime : 3 @,@ 241 yards 
 Most punt return yards , season : 651 yards ( 2007 ) 
 Most punt return yards , game : 152 yards , at Arizona Cardinals , October 16 , 2006 
 Highest average , yards per punt return , season [ min . 15 returns ] : 17 @.@ 1 ( 2010 ) 
 Hester returned 33 punts for 564 yards . 
 Highest average , yards per punt return , game [ min . 3 returns ] : 40 @.@ 7 , vs. Detroit Lions , November 13 , 2011 
 Hester returned 3 punts for 122 yards . 
 Most punt return touchdowns , lifetime : 13 
 Most punt return touchdowns , season : 4 
 Most punt return touchdowns , game : 1 
 <unk> several times and tied with many players 
 Most punt return fair catches , lifetime : 79 
 Most kickoff returns , lifetime : 222 
 Most kickoff return yards , lifetime : 5 @,@ 510 yards 
 Most kickoff return yards , game : 249 yards , vs. Minnesota Vikings , September 15 , 2013 
 Highest average , yards per kickoff return , game [ min . 3 returns ] : 56 @.@ 3 , at St. Louis Rams , December 11 , 2006 
 Hester returned 4 kickoffs for 225 yards . 
 Most kickoff return touchdowns , game : 2 , at St. Louis Rams , December 11 , 2006 
 Most combined return yards , lifetime : 8 @,@ 751 yards ( p @-@ 3 @,@ 241 , k @-@ 5 @,@ 510 ) 
 Most combined return yards , game : 314 yards , at Detroit Lions , September 30 , 2007 ( p @-@ 95 , k @-@ 219 ) 
 Most combined return touchdowns , lifetime : 18 ( p @-@ 13 , k @-@ 5 ) 
 Most combined return touchdowns , season : 6 in 2007 ( p @-@ 4 , k @-@ 2 ) 
 Most combined return touchdowns , game : 2 , twice 
 2 , at St. Louis Rams , December 11 , 2006 ( 2 kickoffs ) 
 2 , vs. Denver Broncos , November 25 , 2007 ( 1 punt , 1 kickoff ) 
 Longest play : 108 yards , at New York Giants , November 12 , 2006 
 tied with Nathan <unk> 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Hester was in a relationship with Tamara James , a women 's basketball player he met at the University of Miami . James played professionally for the Washington Mystics . Their engagement was later called off . Later , Hester married <unk> Walcott , an elementary school teacher in 2010 . They have two sons . Hester ’ s family lives in Florida and was struck by Hurricane Wilma in 2005 . Hester has assisted his family financially in helping them rebuild their home . His brother Lenorris Jr . , lived with Hester during his tenure with the Bears . Raised in a Christian household , Hester brings a Bible to every game he plays . 
 Hester ’ s successful rookie year drew him much publicity and popularity . Ever since his record @-@ breaking performance against the Rams , Hester has been offered marketing opportunities from Nike , soft drink , and cell phone companies . There has also been a surge in the demand for Hester ’ s jerseys within the Chicago area sporting stores . Also , Hester was invited to throw the ceremonial opening pitch and sing Take Me Out to the Ball Game at the Chicago Cubs ' 2007 home opener . Along with teammates Rex Grossman and Tommie Harris , Hester appeared on the February 2007 issue of Sports Illustrated for Kids . His reputation has also been bolstered by EA Sports ' Madden NFL 08 , where Hester 's perfect 100 speed rating made him the fastest player in the game 's history . Hester also appeared in a promotional video for the game . He appeared in commercials for Under Armour in 2008 and 2009 . In 2013 , Hester outran a cheetah in a race sponsored by National Geographic at Busch Gardens Tampa . The competition consisted of Hester running back and forth on a straight track to simulate laps , while the cheetah ran in a similar but separate track . In 2013 , Hester founded the Anytime 23 Empowerment Center Inc . , a non @-@ profit organization that serves as a positive , nurturing and safe environment for kids ages 6 – 18 . 
 = New Jersey Route 173 = 
 Route 173 is a state highway in New Jersey , United States that is a designation for an old section of U.S. Route 22 . The route runs 14 @.@ 62 mi ( 23 @.@ 53 km ) from Interstate 78 and U.S. Route 22 in Greenwich Township , Warren County to County Route 626 ( Beaver Avenue ) in Clinton Township , Hunterdon County , just east of an interchange with Route 31 . Route 173 parallels Interstate 78 and U.S. Route 22 for its entire length through rural areas of Warren and Hunterdon Counties , passing through the towns of Bloomsbury and Clinton along the way . At one point just to the west of Clinton , Route 173 runs concurrent with Interstate 78 and U.S. Route 22 . 
 The route was originally part of Pre @-@ 1927 Route 9 from 1916 until 1927 , when it became part of U.S. Route 22 and Route 28 . The Route 28 designation was removed from this portion of road in 1953 . When I @-@ 78 was being built between Exits 11 and 13 in the 1950s and 1960s , it was decided that part of U.S. Route 22 would be used for the new highway . The eastbound lanes of US 22 became the westbound lanes of the new highway , the eastbound lanes of the new highway were newly constructed , and the westbound lanes of US 22 were turned into a two @-@ lane road . In 1969 , US 22 was moved to the alignment of Interstate 78 between Greenwich Township and Clinton Township and Route 173 was designated along most of the former alignment of U.S. Route 22 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 = = = Warren County = = = 
 Route 173 begins at an interchange with Interstate 78 and U.S. Route 22 in Greenwich Township , Warren County , where the route continues to the northwest as part of U.S. Route 22 , a six @-@ lane , divided highway that heads towards Phillipsburg . From this interchange , Route 173 heads east on a two @-@ lane , undivided road that parallels Interstate 78 / U.S. Route 22 to the south , passing through farmland and some suburban residential developments . County Route 644 ( Greenwich Church Road ) loops to the north of Route 173 as the route features three crossings of the Pohatcong Creek . Route 173 intersects County Route 637 ( Main Street / Maple Drive ) , County Route 639 ( Warren Glen Road ) , and the northern terminus of County Route 579 ( Church Street ) . Past the County Route 579 intersection , the route parallels the Musconetcong River and intersects County Route 632 ( Asbury Road ) , which provides access to westbound Interstate 78 / U.S. Route 22 . 
 = = = Hunterdon County = = = 
 Route 173 crosses the Musconetcong River into Bloomsbury , Hunterdon County . It comes to another interchange with Interstate 78 / U.S. Route 22 , where Route 173 takes on the name Brunswick Pike and closely parallels the interstate to the north . The route enters Bethlehem Township and passes under a railroad line , continuing east through farmland The route parallels a Norfolk Southern rail line for a short distance , running farther to the north of Interstate 78 / U.S. Route 22 , before intersecting County Route 643 ( West Portal @-@ Asbury Road ) . Past this intersection , Route 173 heads south and then east through the Musconetcong Mountains as a five @-@ lane road with a center left @-@ turn lane . The route crosses into Union Township , where it becomes Old Highway 22 . 
 The route becomes a divided highway and meets County Route 614 ( Little York Road ) at a traffic circle near an interchange with Interstate 78 / U.S. Route 22 . Route 173 has direct ramps to and from the westbound direction of the interstate with access to and from the eastbound direction provided by way of County Route 614 . Route 173 narrows back to a two @-@ lane , undivided road and closely follows Interstate 78 / U.S. Route 22 to the north , meeting County Route 625 ( Mechlin Corner Road ) and County Route 635 ( Charlestown Road ) near another interchange with Interstate 78 / U.S. Route 22 . There is direct access to and from the westbound direction of Interstate 78 / U.S. Route 22 while access to and from the eastbound direction of Interstate 78 / U.S. Route 22 is provided by County Route 625 . The route continues east and splits into a one @-@ way pair . At this point , eastbound Route 173 crosses over Interstate 78 / U.S. Route 22 and makes a left turn to merge onto eastbound Interstate 78 / U.S. Route 22 . The westbound direction of Route 173 splits from Interstate 78 / U.S. Route 22 and continues west to join back with eastbound Route 173 . 
 Route 173 follows Interstate 78 / U.S. Route 22 for a little over a mile in Franklin Township until an interchange County Route 513 ( <unk> Road ) , where the eastbound direction merges onto this route and heads into Clinton . It meets the westbound direction of Route 173 , which splits at this point and heads west on West Main Street to merge into westbound Interstate 78 / U.S. Route 22 in Union Township . In Clinton , Route 173 crosses over the South Branch Raritan River and splits from County Route 513 where that route heads north on Leigh Street . The route crosses into Clinton Township and it features ramps connecting to Interstate 78 / U.S. Route 22 , with access from westbound Route 173 to westbound Interstate 78 / U.S. Route 22 and from eastbound Interstate 78 / U.S. Route 22 to eastbound Route 173 . Route 173 turns north to interchange with Route 31 and end at County Route 626 ( Beaver Avenue ) . 
 = = History = = 
 Prior to 1927 , Route 173 was part of Pre @-@ 1927 Route 9 , which was designated in 1917 to run from Phillipsburg to Elizabeth . In the 1927 New Jersey state highway renumbering , the route became Route 28 . In addition , it was also designated as part of U.S. Route 22 . In the 1953 New Jersey state highway renumbering , which eliminated long concurrencies between U.S. and State Routes , the Route 28 designation was removed along this portion of the route , leaving U.S. Route 22 the sole number along the route . In the late 1950s , construction began on Interstate 78 through the area . Construction of the portion of Interstate 78 built between Exit 11 ( County Route 614 ) and Exit 13 in Union Township , completed in 1962 , modified the alignment of U.S. Route 22 between these two points . It involved the creation of new eastbound lanes for Interstate 78 and conversion of the eastbound lanes of U.S. Route 22 into the westbound lanes of Interstate 78 . The westbound lanes of U.S. Route 22 were turned into a two @-@ lane frontage road . In 1969 , U.S. Route 22 was moved to the Interstate 78 alignment between Exit 3 in Greenwich Township and Exit 18 in Clinton Township . The former U.S. Route 22 became Route 173 between Exit 3 and Route 31 in Clinton Township , with the remainder of the former U.S. Route 22 alignment becoming county @-@ maintained Beaver Avenue ( currently County Route 626 ) . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = Reginald Weaver = 
 Reginald Walter Darcy Weaver ( 18 July 1876 – 12 November 1945 ) was an Australian conservative parliamentarian who served in the New South Wales Legislative Assembly for 28 years . Serving from 1917 in the backbenches , he entered the cabinet of Thomas Bavin in 1929 as Secretary for Mines and Minister for Forests until he returned to opposition in 1930 . Following the success of the United Australia Party in the 1932 election , Weaver returned as the Secretary for Public Works and Minister for Health in the Stevens ministry . 
 In 1935 he was dropped from the ministry but was later elected as the Speaker of the New South Wales Legislative Assembly in 1937 , holding office until the Mair Government lost power in 1941 . Weaver then witnessed the death of the United Australia Party in 1943 and became the leader of the new Democratic Party in 1944 . He was then involved in the negotiations to form the future Liberal Party of Australia , which were ultimately successful , with Weaver becoming the first leader of the Liberal Party in April 1945 . He served only briefly until dying of a heart attack in November 1945 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Reginald Weaver was born at <unk> station , <unk> , New South Wales , on the Liverpool Plains , the twelfth child of English @-@ born parents Richard Weaver and his wife Fanny Seymour Weaver . Weaver was educated at Newington College ( 1890 – 1894 ) in Sydney before joining two of his brothers in a stock and station agency in Forbes and then branching out on his own at Condobolin and Narrandera . A member of the Farmers and Settlers ' Association , Weaver first entered politics when he was elected as an Alderman on Condobolin Municipal Council from 1898 to 1900 and then later as an Alderman on Narrandera Municipal Council in 1902 . On 19 April 1899 he married Gertrude Susan Bond Walker at St Andrew 's Cathedral , Sydney . 
 = = Early political career = = 
 In 1910 , Weaver , now living in Dubbo , contested the seat of Ashburnham for the Liberal Party but was defeated on 46 @-@ 53 % against the Labor Party 's John Lynch . Undeterred , Weaver stood again in 1913 as the Farmers and Settlers Party candidate for the seat of Macquarie but was narrowly defeated with 49 @.@ 61 % against the Labor Party candidate 's 50 @.@ 39 % . Weaver contested the result , accusing the Labor Party of manipulating the rolls . An inquiry found no fault in these accusations against the Labor Party , but instead found Weaver 's own organisers guilty of roll @-@ stuffing . 
 Moving to North Sydney in 1916 , he established a real estate business and on 24 March 1917 entered the New South Wales Legislative Assembly at the 1917 election , as the Nationalist Party candidate for the seat of Willoughby with 51 @.@ 68 % . A fervent Imperialist and pro @-@ <unk> , he was rejected as medically unfit for the Australian Imperial Force in 1916 but eventually enlisted on 23 August 1918 . Raising over £ 25 @,@ 000 in War Loans , Weaver was discharged from the Army on 2 December 1918 . When the Willoughby seat was abolished at the next election , Weaver contested the new multi @-@ member electorate of North Shore , receiving 15 @.@ 31 % and the first seat on the electorate . 
 Suspicious of the Irish Catholic establishment , embodied by the Labor Party , Weaver joined the Protestant Federation in 1921 and became a sympathiser of the right @-@ wing New Guard . At the 1922 election , he was re @-@ elected with an increased margin of 20 @.@ 16 % , gaining first place once again . He served until , citing business reasons , he retired from parliament on 18 April 1925 . 
 = = Minister of the Crown = = 
 Weaver soon returned to politics , when on 8 October 1927 , at the 1927 election , he was elected to the seat of Neutral Bay with 69 @.@ 49 % . Rising to prominence within the party , Weaver gained a reputation as an independent @-@ minded but powerful debater in the House , crossing the floor on many issues . 
 Nevertheless , Weaver was appointed by Premier Thomas Bavin on 16 April 1929 as the Secretary for Mines and Minister for Forests . Taking over the worsening dispute on the northern coalfields , he believed the struggle to be communist @-@ inspired and made possible by unemployment relief and child endowment and attempted to resolve an industrial dispute by supporting the use of non @-@ union labour in the Rothbury coal mine . The resultant protests led to the Rothbury Riot and the death of one miner . His suspension of unemployment relief gained him many enemies from the Labor Party . This promotion proved short @-@ lived however , when the Bavin Government was defeated at the October 1930 election , at which Weaver was returned with 65 @.@ 42 % , by Jack Lang 's Australian Labor Party . 
 In opposition , Weaver witnessed the end of the Nationalist Party and was elected Deputy Leader of the new United Australia Party ( UAP ) in New South Wales in 1931 . When Lang 's Government was dismissed on 13 May 1932 by the Governor of New South Wales , Sir Philip Game , an early election was called by caretaker @-@ Premier and UAP Leader , Bertram Stevens . At the 11 June 1932 election , in which Weaver was returned with 80 @.@ 70 % , Stevens ' UAP / Country Coalition gained 31 seats and won government . Stevens had already appointed Weaver as the Secretary for Public Works and Minister for Health on 16 May 1932 . 
 A competent , if controversial member of the cabinet , Weaver , as Minister for Health , travelled extensively and concentrated on the expansion of hospitals , becoming Director of Royal Prince Alfred Hospital ( 1929 @-@ 1930 ) . His determination to exert more control over hospitals and the banning of honorary doctors from local hospital boards brought him into conflict with the NSW branch of the British Medical Association . His strict control over Hospital administrators brought him into conflict with the medical community and he was eventually dropped from the cabinet on 10 February 1935 by Premier Stevens , who found him " too extreme in personal independence " and possessing a " needlessly sharp tongue . " Weaver returned to the backbenches and won re @-@ election at the 1935 election on 11 May with an increased margin of 88 @.@ 42 % . On 3 July 1935 , King George V , on the advice of the Governor of New South Wales , Lord Gowrie , granted him retention of the title " The Honourable " , for having served more than three years on the Executive Council of New South Wales . 
 = = Later career = = 
 When Sir Daniel Levy retired from parliament , Weaver was elected as the Speaker of the Legislative Assembly on 4 August 1937 . In 1938 , he was cleared by a judicial inquiry , chaired by Sir Percival Halse Rogers , into Jack Lang 's allegations of fraud and corruption in the sale of state enterprises in 1933 when Weaver was the Secretary for Public Works . At the 1939 election Weaver was returned uncontested . He served as Speaker until the succeeding government of Alexander Mair was defeated at the May 1941 election by the Labor Party under William McKell . Weaver was returned in his seat uncontested . 
 However , with the very poor results of the federal United Australia Party under Billy Hughes at the 1943 Federal election , the UAP disintegrated . A large number of former UAP members then formed the Democratic Party in New South Wales , led by Mair , who became Opposition Leader , while others moved into the Commonwealth Party and the Liberal Democratic Party . The Democratic Party then merged with the Commonwealth Party in January 1944 . With the conservative vote split in half , Mair had little chance , and resigned as Democratic Party Leader on 10 February 1944 , to be replaced by Weaver , who then became Party Leader and Leader of the Opposition . Weaver then led the party to the 1944 election where it won 19 % of the vote and 12 of the 90 seats in the Legislative Assembly . Weaver himself retained his seat with 56 @.@ 90 % . 
 Weaver 's efforts to merge the Democratic Party with the Liberal Democratic Party were deadlocked over questions of party organisation and by acrimony between himself and the Party leader , Ernest K White . However , in December 1944 both parties merged to become the New South Wales branch of the newly formed Liberal Party of Australia formed by Robert Menzies . Weaver was elected as the first Leader of the New South Wales Liberal Party on 20 April 1945 . His term as leader of the newly formed party was to prove short @-@ lived , however . After suffering a mild heart attack in the Legislative Assembly chamber on the evening of 7 November 1945 , he drove himself home and died a week later on 12 November 1945 at Hornsby Hospital , survived by his wife , son and three daughters . At the resulting by @-@ election on 15 December , Neutral Bay was retained by the Liberal Party candidate , Ivan Black , against a single Independent candidate with 56 % . 
 = Sde Dov Airport = 
 Sde Dov Airport ( Hebrew : <unk> <unk> , lit . Dov Field , Arabic : مطار <unk> <unk> ) , also known as Dov Hoz Airport ( Hebrew : <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> , <unk> <unk> <unk> Dov Hoz , Arabic : مطار <unk> <unk> ) ( IATA : SDV , ICAO : <unk> ) is an airport located in Tel Aviv , Israel which mainly handles scheduled domestic flights to Eilat and <unk> ( a.k.a. Ovda ) , northern Israel ( Haifa and the Galilee ) , and the Golan Heights . It is the largest airport in Tel Aviv proper , and the second largest in the area , after Ben Gurion International Airport on the outskirts of Lod . The airport is named after Dov Hoz , one of the pioneers of Jewish aviation . The airport is expected to close by the end of 2018 after an agreement was struck re @-@ purposing the land which houses it for residential apartments . Commercial flights will move to Ben Gurion Airport . The airport is a focus city for Arkia Israel Airlines and <unk> Airlines . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early history = = = 
 In 1937 , the mayor of Tel Aviv Israel <unk> asked the British mandate authorities for permission to create an airport in Palestine , promising to solve the transportation problem of Jews during the Arab revolt of 1936 – 39 when travelling from Tel Aviv through Arab territory to the main airport at Lydda , to catch Palestine Airways flights to Haifa , was difficult and dangerous . Works began on a plot of land north of the <unk> River , Tel Aviv and when completed in October 1938 , the airport served regular flights to Haifa , with the option of flights to Beirut . In 1940 , the airport 's name was changed to Sde Dov , in memory of Dov Hoz , one of the pioneers of Jewish aviation . Sde Dov was abandoned after Palestine Airways ceased operations in August 1940 and the site was used as a British Army base until December 1947 when with British permission the runway was reopened by Haganah . 
 In the 1948 Arab @-@ Israeli War , the airport served as a base to the Israeli Air Force . It was a central base , home to 21 aircraft at the time . The first military flight was made in December , 1947 , when Pinchas Ben <unk> flew an RWD @-@ 13 to Beit Eshel to rescue an injured soldier . 
 = = = After the war = = = 
 Following the 1948 war the Arab orchards to the east of Tel Aviv were opened for development , and the military started using the Sde Dov airport on a regular basis . The airport regained its commercial operations , initially serving domestic flights , mostly to single customers , on Piper Cub aircraft . It later expanded operations to scheduled service on larger aircraft to various parts of Israel . As a result of the land availability , an additional , north – south , runway was built with no opposition . By 1960 , land in Tel Aviv became scarce , and the municipality demanded that the airport be relocated northward , so as to allow residential development in its place . However , a committee that investigated in 1961 the options for such a relocation found no feasible site in proximity to Tel Aviv and suggested that flights be moved to Lod airport ( now known as Ben Gurion Airport ) , and that road access from Tel Aviv to Lod be improved . This option , however , was blocked by the Israel Defense Forces . 
 The government set up a second committee in 1968 who suggested that the old east – west runway be closed and the airport 's area reduced , allowing for development to the east of the airport . They suggested that this is replaced by a new runway in the sea , adjacent to the beach . The runway was closed , and a high density upper @-@ middle income neighborhood was built to the east of the airport , although the new runway was never constructed due to the high cost involved . 
 As the new residential area suffered from aircraft noise , residents joined in the demand that the airport be relocated . Despite this , the number of flights to the airport increased as the newly formed Israel Airports Authority strived to reduce congestion at Ben Gurion Airport by shifting all domestic turbo @-@ prop flights to Sde Dov . Once again , the only feasible alternative proposed at this point was to build a runway in the sea and again , the high cost of this project meant that it never happened . This was a large issue in the area during the whole of the 1980s . 
 = = = Recent history and relocation plans = = = 
 The early 1990s saw a rapid rise in land values in the Tel Aviv area following the massive immigration wave from the ex @-@ Soviet Union and the rapid economic growth fueled by the peace prospects in 1993 – 1996 and subsequent hi @-@ tech boom . This brought the issue of relocation back to light . Despite this , however , in 1997 , Sde Dov was declared an International Airport for private flights . In the future , the Main Terminal , the aircraft parking aprons and the aircraft hangars will be transferred to an area near the Tel Baruch Beach which will enable the construction of new traffic routes to North Tel Aviv . 
 The issue remained unresolved until late 2006 when it was announced that the airport would be vacated to make way for residential redevelopment . It is unclear , however , when this will actually take place as the Tel Aviv municipality , the Israeli domestic air carriers and other interests such as the general aviation community oppose closing the airport . Initially the plan was to relocate the entire airport ( runway as well as terminal facilities ) onto an artificial island to be built offshore . 
 When Sde Dov does close , its military terminal would be relocated to the Palmachim Airbase and civilian activities would be relocated to Ben Gurion Airport . With capacity at Ben Gurion projected to reach a maximum over the next few decades however , the concept of building an airport offshore in the Tel Aviv region may yet be revived in the future . Sde Dov itself is operating near to capacity , however , with annual passenger movements around 700 @,@ 000 and a potential capacity of 950 @,@ 000 . 
 = = The airport today = = 
 Today , Sde Dov Airport mostly handles domestic flights within Israel , as well as light @-@ aircraft activity and limited international flights , mostly to nearby Cyprus . The airport has two terminals . The IAF still takes up about 40 % of overall movements ( take @-@ offs and landings ) , and uses the airport as a base for some of its operations , as well as a convenient hub for military and government passenger traffic . Due to its location in the centre of Israel , air @-@ force and civilian pilots alike cross the airspace controlled by Sde Dov 's air traffic control tower from north to south and vice versa in order to reach their destination , without landing at Sde Dov . This increases significantly the air traffic density above and around the airport , and efforts have been made to keep " crossing traffic " away from the approach and departure patterns in order to minimise their effect on air traffic safety at Sde Dov . The airport has seven check @-@ in desks and 45 aircraft stands . 
 = = Airlines and destinations = = 
 = Battle of Arsuf = 
 The Battle of Arsuf was a battle of the Third Crusade in which Richard I of England ( Richard the Lionheart ) defeated Saladin ( <unk> al @-@ Dīn Yūsuf ibn <unk> ) , founder of the Ayyubid dynasty and Sultan of Egypt and Syria , at Arsuf in Palestine . The forces of the Third Crusade had taken the city of Acre after a prolonged siege . The next strategic target for the Christian army was to secure the city of Jaffa , which would facilitate their ultimate goal , the recapture of the city of Jerusalem . 
 Following a series of harassing attacks by Saladin 's forces , battle was joined on the morning of 7 September 1191 . Richard 's army successfully resisted attempts to disrupt its cohesion until the Hospitallers broke ranks and charged ; Richard then committed all his forces to the attack . He regrouped his army after its initial success , and led it to victory . The battle resulted in the coastal area of southern Palestine , including the port of Jaffa , returning to Christian control . This made the capture of Jerusalem feasible . 
 = = <unk> South from Acre = = 
 Following the capture of Acre in 1191 , Richard was aware that he needed to capture the port of Jaffa before making an attempt on Jerusalem , Richard began to march down the coast from Acre towards Jaffa in August 1191 . Saladin , whose main objective was to prevent the recapture of Jerusalem , mobilised his army to attempt to stop the Crusaders ' advance . Richard organized the advance with attention to detail . A large part of the Egyptian fleet had been captured at the fall of Acre , and with no threat from this quarter he could march south along the coast with the sea always protecting his right flank . 
 Mindful of the lessons of the disaster at Hattin , Richard knew that his army 's greatest need was water and that heat exhaustion was its greatest danger . Although pressed for time he proceeded at a relatively slow pace . He marched his army only in the morning before the heat of the day , making frequent rest stops , always beside sources of water . The fleet sailed down the coast in close support , a source of supplies and a refuge for the wounded . Aware of the ever @-@ present danger of enemy raiders and the possibility of hit @-@ and @-@ run attacks , he kept the column in tight formation with a core of twelve mounted regiments , each with a hundred knights . The infantry marched on the landward flank , covering the flanks of the horsemen and affording them some protection from missiles . The outermost ranks of the infantry were composed of crossbowmen . On the seaward side was the baggage and also units of infantry being rested from the continuous harassment inflicted by Saladin 's forces . Richard wisely rotated his infantry units to keep them relatively fresh . 
 Though provoked and tormented by the skirmish tactics of Saladin 's archers , Richard 's generalship ensured that order and discipline were maintained under the most difficult of circumstances . Baha al @-@ Din ibn Shaddad , the Muslim chronicler and eyewitness , describes the march : 
 " The Moslems discharged arrows at them from all sides to annoy them , and force them to charge : but in this they were unsuccessful . These men exercised wonderful self @-@ control ; they went on their way without any hurry , whilst their ships followed their line of march along the coast , and in this manner they reached their halting @-@ place . " 
 Baha al @-@ Din also described the difference in power between the Crusader crossbow and the bows of his own army . He saw Frankish infantrymen with from one to ten arrows sticking from their armoured backs marching along with no apparent hurt , whilst the crossbows struck down both horse and man amongst the Muslims . 
 = = Saladin 's strategy = = 
 The Crusader army 's pace was dictated by the infantry and baggage train ; the Ayyubid army , being largely mounted , had the advantage of superior mobility . Efforts to burn crops and deny the countryside to the Frankish army were largely ineffective as it could be continuously provisioned from the fleet , which moved south parallel with it . On 25 August the Crusader rearguard was crossing a defile when it was almost cut off . However , the Crusaders closed up so speedily that the Muslim soldiery was forced to flee . From 26 to 29 August Richard 's army had a respite from attack because while it hugged the coast and had gone round the shoulder of Mount Carmel , Saladin 's army had struck across country . Saladin arrived in the vicinity of Caesarea before the Crusaders , who were on a longer road . From 30 August to 7 September Saladin was always within striking distance , and waiting for an opportunity to attack if the Crusaders exposed themselves . 
 By early September , Saladin had realised that harassing the Frankish army with a limited portion of his troops was not going to stop its advance . In order to do this he needed to commit his entire army to a serious attack . Fortuitously for Saladin , the Crusaders had to traverse one of the few forested regions of Palestine , the " Wood of Arsuf " , which ran parallel to the sea shore for more than 12 miles ( 19 km ) . The woodland would mask the disposition of his army and allow a sudden attack to be launched . 
 The Crusaders traversed half of the forest with little incident , and they rested on 6 September with their camp protected by the marsh lying inland of the mouth of the river Nahr @-@ el @-@ <unk> ( <unk> ) . To the south of the camp , in the 6 miles ( 9 @.@ 7 km ) the Crusaders needed to march before gaining the ruins of Arsuf , the forest receded inland to create a narrow plain 1 – 2 miles ( 1 @.@ 6 – 3 @.@ 2 km ) wide between wooded hills and the sea . This is where Saladin intended to make his decisive attack . While threatening and skirmishing along the whole length of the Crusader column , Saladin reserved his most sustained direct assault for its rear . His plan appears to have been to allow the Frankish van and centre to proceed , in the hope that a fatal gap might be created between them and the more heavily engaged rearmost units . Into such a gap Saladin would have thrown his reserves in order to defeat the Crusaders in detail . 
 = = Battle = = 
 = = = Organisation and deployment of the opposing armies = = = 
 At dawn on 7 September 1191 , as Richard 's forces began moving out of camp enemy scouts were visible in all directions , hinting that Saladin 's whole army lay hidden in the woodland . King Richard took especial pains over the disposition of his army . The probable posts of greatest danger , at the front and especially the rear of the column , were given to the military orders . They had the most experience of fighting in the East , were arguably the most disciplined , and were the only formations which included <unk> cavalry who fought like the Turkish horse archers of the Ayyubid army . 
 The van of the Crusader army consisted of the Knights Templar under Robert de Sablé . They were followed by three units composed of Richard 's own subjects , the Angevins and Bretons , then the Poitevins including Guy of Lusignan , titular King of Jerusalem , and lastly the English and Normans who had charge of the great standard mounted on its waggon . The next seven corps were made up of the French , the barons of Outremer and small contingents of crusaders from other lands . Forming the rearguard were the Knights Hospitaller led by Fra ' Garnier de Nablus . The twelve corps were organised into five larger formations , though their precise distribution is unknown . Additionally , a small troop , under the leadership of Henry II of Champagne , was detached to scout towards the hills , and a squadron of picked knights under King Richard and Hugh of Burgundy , the leader of the French contingent , was detailed to ride up and down the column checking on Saladin 's movements and ensuring that their own ranks were kept in order . 
 The first Saracen attack did not come until all the crusaders had left their camp and were moving towards Arsuf . The Ayyubid army then burst out of the woodland . The front of the army was composed of dense swarms of skirmishers , both horse and foot , Bedouin , Sudanese archers and the lighter types of Turkish horse archers . Behind these were the ordered squadrons of armoured heavy cavalry : Saladin 's mamluks ( also termed <unk> ) , Kurdish troops , and the contingents of the emirs and princes of Egypt , Syria and Mesopotamia . The army was divided into three parts , left and right wings and centre . Saladin directed his army from beneath his banners , surrounded by his bodyguard and accompanied by his kettle @-@ drummers . 
 The Itinerarium Regis Ricardi implies that the Ayyubid army outnumbered the Crusaders three @-@ to @-@ one . However , unrealistically inflated numbers , of 300 @,@ 000 and 100 @,@ 000 respectively , are described . 
 = = = Saladin 's attack = = = 
 In an attempt to destroy the cohesion of the Crusader army and unsettle their resolve , the Ayyubid onslaught was accompanied by the clashing of cymbals and gongs , trumpets blowing and men screaming war @-@ cries . 
 " In truth , our people , so few in number , were hemmed in by the multitudes of the Saracens , that they had no means of escape , if they tried ; neither did they seem to have valour sufficient to withstand so many foes , nay , they were shut in , like a flock of sheep in the jaws of wolves , with nothing but the sky above , and the enemy all around them . " 
 The repeated Ayyubid harrying attacks followed the same pattern : the Bedouin and Nubians on foot launched arrows and javelins into the enemy lines , before parting to allow the mounted archers to advance , attack and wheel off , a well @-@ practiced technique . Crusader crossbowmen responded , when this was possible , although the chief task among the Crusaders was simply to preserve their ranks in the face of sustained provocation . When the incessant attacks of skirmishers failed to have the desired effect , the weight of the attack was switched to the rear of the Crusader column , with the Hospitallers coming under the greatest pressure . Here the right wing of the Ayyubid army made a desperate attack on the squadron of Hospitaller knights and the infantry corps covering them . The Hospitallers could be attacked from both their rear and flank . Many of the Hospitaller infantry had to walk backwards in order to keep their faces , and shields , to the enemy . Saladin , eager to urge his soldiers into closer combat , personally entered the fray , accompanied by two pages leading spare horses . Sayf al @-@ Din ( <unk> ) , Saladin 's brother , was also engaged in actively encouraging the troops ; both brothers were thus exposing themselves to considerable danger from crossbow fire . 
 = = = Hospitallers break ranks = = = 
 All Saladin 's best efforts could not dislocate the Crusader column , or halt its advance in the direction of Arsuf . Richard was determined to hold his army together , forcing the enemy to exhaust themselves in repeated charges , with the intention of holding his knights for a concentrated counter @-@ attack at just the right moment . There were risks in this , because the army was not only marching under severe enemy provocation , but the troops were suffering from heat and thirst . Just as serious , the Saracens were killing so many horses that some of Richard 's own knights began to wonder if a counter @-@ strike would be possible . Many of the unhorsed knights joined the infantry . 
 Just as the vanguard entered Arsuf in the middle of the afternoon , the Hospitaller crossbowmen to the rear were having to load and fire walking backwards . Inevitably they lost cohesion , and the enemy was quick to take advantage of this opportunity , moving into any gap wielding their swords and maces . For the Crusaders , the Battle of Arsuf had now entered a critical stage . Garnier de Nablus repeatedly pleaded with Richard to be allowed to attack . He was refused , the Master was ordered to maintain position and await the signal for a general assault , six clear trumpet blasts . Richard knew that the charge of his knights needed to be reserved until the Ayyubid army was fully committed , closely engaged , and the Saracens ' horses had begun to tire . Goaded beyond endurance , the Master and another knight , Baldwin de Carron , thrust their way through their own infantry and charged into the Saracen ranks with a cry of “ St. George ! ” ; they were then followed by the rest of the Hospitaller knights . Moved by this example , the French knights of the corps immediately preceding the Hospitallers also charged . 
 = = = Crusader counterattack = = = 
 The precipitate action of the Hospitallers could have caused Richard 's whole strategy to unravel . However , he recognised that the counterattack , once started , had to be supported by all his army and ordered the signal for a general charge to be sounded . Unsupported , the Hospitallers and the other rear units involved in the initial breakout would have been overwhelmed by the superior numbers of the enemy . The Frankish infantry opened gaps in their ranks for the knights to pass through and the attack naturally developed in echelon from the rear to the van . To the soldiers of Saladin 's army , as Baha al @-@ Din noted , the sudden change from passivity to ferocious activity on the part of the Crusaders was disconcerting , and appeared to be the result of a preconceived plan . 
 Having already been engaged in close combat with the rear of the Crusader column , the right wing of the Ayyubid army was in compact formation and too close to their enemy to avoid the full impact of the charge . Indeed , some of the cavalry of this wing had dismounted in order to fire their bows more effectively . As a result , they suffered great numbers of casualties , the knights taking a bloody revenge for all they had had to endure earlier in the battle . Baha al @-@ Din noted that " the rout was complete . " He had been in the centre division of Saladin 's army , when it turned in flight he looked to join the left wing , but found that it also was in rapid flight . Noting the disintegration of the right wing he finally sought Saladin 's personal banners , but found only seventeen members of the bodyguard and a lone drummer still with them . 
 Being aware that an over @-@ rash pursuit was the greatest danger when fighting armies trained in the fluid tactics of the Turks , Richard halted the charge after about 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) had been covered . The right flank Crusader units , which had formed the van of the column , including the English and Normans had not yet been heavily engaged in close combat and they formed a reserve on which the rest regrouped . Freed from the pressure of being actively pursued , many of the Ayyubid troops turned to cut down those of the knights who had unwisely drawn ahead of the rest . James d <unk> , the commander of one of the French units , was the most prominent of those killed in this episode . Amongst the Ayyubid leaders who rallied quickly and returned to the fight was Taqi al @-@ Din , Saladin 's nephew . He led 700 men of the Sultan 's own bodyguard against Richard 's left flank . Once their squadrons were back in order , Richard led his knights in a second charge and the forces of Saladin broke once again . 
 Leading by example , Richard was in the heart of the fighting , as the Itinerarium describes : 
